A LOOKING-GLASS FOR LOYALTY: OR THE SUBJECTS DUTY To his SOVEREIGN.

Being the substance of several Sermons preached by a person who always looked
upon his Allegiance as incorporated into his Religion.

Published to promote that in others which in the worst of times he practiced
himself.

1 PET. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether to the King as supreme.

S. Aug. contra Faust. Manich. A Deo sane sive jubente sive sinente.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1675.

To that unspotted Pattern of Loyalty and true Generosity, GEORGE EVELIN, Sen.
Of WOOTTON In the County of SVRREY Esquire.
Honored Sir,
I Here present you with A Loyal Looking-Glass, which discovers what you and I,
and all good Subjects should be to their Royal Sovereign. I have taken the
boldness to engrave your name on the cover of it, if you please to open it, to
present your self before it, and examine your actions by it, so far as they
relate to what is directed in it; you will see your self the very same what
others, overlooking you, have known and acknowledged you to be a Loyal Subject,
which makes both for your credit and your comfort, although it has bin
heretofore laid in your dish as your crime, by those who maligned you for it,
and sought your ruin by it. But God be thanked, who gave you not over as a
prey unto their teeth; that snare was long since broken, and you happily
delivered.

It is not my intent by the Dedication of this Treatise to court you to its
Patronage, which were in vain, and to no purpose; for if ever a Discourse, for
its subject matter, could promise acceptance to its self, and security to its
Author, this one would think might do it to the highest pitch of confidence, in
that it treats of the Higher Powers, yea the highest both in Heaven and Earth,
God and the King; calling upon us to fear the first for himself, because he is
so; and his Vicegerent (if not for his own personal merits yet) for his sake
that made him so. From the least and lowest of these I might expect in equity
(but in all humility) that while I defend his Royalties with my Pen, he should
protect my person with his Sword: and the rather, Periculosum est in eum
scribere qui potest proscribere.
because whatever blows are made immediately at me, will in some sense reach
himself.

It has been experimented that a Bullet piercing through a solid body, has
made the wound the more dangerous, and its cure the more difficult, by reason
of those ragged pieces, and noxious splinters which it has forced along before
it. I should willingly interpose my carcass between my King and danger, but it
would grieve me more for him then for my self, if it should pass through me and
lodge it self in that Royal Breast; more yet if that wound should prove the
more hazardous, as being made upon Majesty, through the despicable sides of
such an inconsiderable piece of mortality.

But however I may flatter my self, I have cause to fear that these my hopes
may fail me, since neither Majesty nor Innocence it self, can be a sufficient
shield against the envenomed Arrows of malicious Tongues; yet notwithstanding
one would think, that although some may be so foolhardy as not to fear the
King, who may kill the body, but can do no more; yet none could be so sottishly
stupid as to cast off all fear of God, who can kill both body and soul, Mat.
10.28. Job 9.4.
and cast both into Hell; since never any one as yet hardened himself against him
and prospered. In reference to the one I look upon my self as an inferior
Subject; under the other I am employed by virtue of my Calling in a place of no
ordinary trust, being Gods Ambassador; and may expect indemnity by the Law of
Nations. If any daring Hanuns, in the faithful execution of my Office shall
defame me, as he deformed David's servants, shaving off their Beards by halfs,
and curtailing their Garments to expose their nakedness to public view; 2 Samuel
10.4.
they may well expect that God, whose Minister I am, should resent the affront
as offered unto himself, and severely revenge it, by wounding the heads of such
provoking enemies, and the hairy scalp of such incorrigible ones as are
resolved to go on still in their wickedness. So that if the one fail me because
he cannot, I am sure the other can, yea I have it under his hand that he will
protect me; he has made me a firm promise that he will be with me, and having
that, I neither care nor fear who they are that shall appear against me.

And yet for all this, we have lived in an Age in which that corrupt Judge has
some Fellows, and many more Followers; who neither fear God, nor reverence man.
Which gives me a sufficient Item to provide against those storms which others
have met with, who have embarked themselves in the same bottom; who for their
charitable endeavors to cleanse and heal men's festered sores, have received
the common Fee of galled backed Jades, a malicious and ungrateful kick. While
they have sought to reduce unruly Swine into a better order, they have raised a
cry, and brought the whole Herd about their ears which have affronted them with
their stubborn Biristles, and injured them as much as they could with their
mischievous teeth. And have I any hopes of speeding better? Ostendo illi lutum
and aspergit me luto, ostendo illi speculum and allidit parieti.
but that when I hold before them my Glass they should dash it against the
Walls; and when I offer them water to wash their defiled faces, they should
cast dirt into mine. And it is sad to consider what Advocates such find among
men of parts, who might do God and their King better service, then by
palliating other men's guilt, and so consequently hardening them in those sinful
courses, from which they are bound by the Law of Christian Love to do their
utmost to reduce them, which would gain them more of love from God, and of
respect from all good men; whereas they cannot reproach themselves more, then
by raking in the Chanel (as some have done) for the blackest dirt to bespatter
the reputation of pious and well-meaning persons, who have sought to inform
them better.

If any shall have that in design against me, I shall save him the pains of a
private scrutiny by a free and public confession, that I am the greatest of
sinners; and am so far from sheltring my self in the Crowd, or extenuating my
sins with the usual plea, I am not alone, there are as many sinners as men,
because there is no man lives and sins not; that I could heartily more then
hopefully wish, that there were none so beside my self in the world. And if
this will not satisfy, could I in the least think it would conduce to their
good, or prove but a probable means to make them better, I would shame my self
yet more; Fit plerumque ut dum iniqui in se mala defendere nequeaut vitia
contra vitam corripientis exquirunt, and eo se criminosos non existimant si
criminae aliis imponant; qui cum verae invenire nequeant fingunt ut ipsi quoque
habeant, quod non impari justitia increpare videantur. Greg. Mor. 10
make my greatest Adversary my Confessor, and give him an exact Catalogue of
all my particular failings, so far as my frail memory would serve me, and after
all this do Penance in the largest sheet that either Pen can fill, or Penny
purchase. For my part I never durst look on another error as an excuse for my
sin; and if any do upon mine for theirs, I fear they will find themselves
mistaken in that day, when every man shall give an account of himself unto God,
and every individual offender shall be adjudged to bear his own burden. Others
may think my Nails too long, and to deserve a paring to the quick, because I
have made so large an use of them; but these consider not what an old overgrown
thick skined Witch I have to deal with; and if I have scratcht her so deep as
to make her bleed, it is not upon suspicion by way of trial, but upon
sufficient conviction, and in a way of revenge. She stands upon Record for one
of old, 1 Samuel 15.23.
and has given us fresh instances to assure us that she is as deeply in league
with Beelzebub as ever, and is not in the least reformed; but has within these
few years exercised her devilish art in bewitching many thousands of our
fellow subjects. It is her destruction and their cure that put me upon this
project.

But last of all, and that which troubles me not least of all, is the thoughts
that I may hereby expose my self to the censure, if not to the envy of my elder
Brethren; who perhaps will impute it to pride and vainglory, that such a
Stripling as I should conceive any hopes with my sling to prostrate that great
Goliath, who has wrought so strange a consternation in the whole Army of
Israel. But I dare appeal for my integrity to God, the searcher of all hearts,
who is my witness that these Notes had never seen the light, had I in all my
reading met with any Author in so great a surfeit of Books of all sorts, who
has handled this subject in our Native Language so fully as it deserves, and
as that great opposition which this Doctrine has found in a few years both at
home and abroad, has rendered necessary. Neither have I published this as a
Supersedeas to any man's good design and intention; -- Si quid novisti rectius
istis candidus imperti, si non bis utere mecum.
but rather to excite them, being conscious to my self, that there are very
many can do it better few worse.

And so, good Sir, I return to you, whom I have held in a long suspense, as to
the chief ground of this Dedication; which is to revive the memory of your
former favors to the unworthy Author, who owns and honors you as his loving
and most obliging Patron: and has given you this public acknowledgment under
his hand; so that if he should at any time fail to answer them to the utmost of
his power, you may have an ex ore tuo to stop his mouth, while you make use of
this as a rod of his own making to shame him to the world, and to scourge him
the more severely for his ingratitude.

I confess I have exceeded the limits of an Epistle, but by its more then usual
length, I have saved the labor of a Preface. I shall therefore withold you
no longer from the sight of the Glass, wherein you will see Loyalty (so far as
my poor skill would serve me) drawn to the life, and that old deformed Hell-hag
Rebellion arraigned, convicted, cast, and condemned. And while a multitude of
her advocates are crouding about her at the Bar, pleading hard for her pardon
or reprieve, methinks I see you, and all loyal hearts upon the Bench, approving
the sentence, and importuning her speedy execution. I have, I hope, without
offense to the Higher Powers concerned in the Text, taken upon me the Office of
an Ordinary; and if that God who has deservedly the first place in it, shall
so far succeed my endeavors, that in the discharge of it I may see her safely
out of the World, I have attained to the highest step of my ambition. And
believe it, Sir, the very next is to approve my self, what your multiplied
obligations have so highly merited,

Your most obsequious and grateful Beneficiary JOHN HIGHAM.

ERRATA.
Page 11. line 12. read for their. p. 14. l. 4. r. Race. p. 16. l. 19. r.
Emperors. p. 19. l. 7. for sweetly r. seriously. p. 22. l. 8. r. or. l. 10. r.
wills. p. 39. in Marg. r. male, dele se. p. 60. l. 16. r. Gods. p. 67. l. 12.
dele future. l. ult. Shi- p. 87. l. 11. r. had been one. p. 88. l. 17. r. blood
which he never shed. p. 96. l. ult. dele as well as. p. 130. l. 11. r. as
being. p. 140. l. 10. r. actions for those. p. 147. l. 2. r. it. p. 152. l. 20.
r. fathers lands. p. 156. l. 15. for their r. that. l. 25. for him r. others.
p. 158. l. 16. r. hedge Physician.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR LOYALTY.
PROVE. xxiv. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King.


THe Title of this Book suits very well with the Contents of it, being for the
most part made up of Proverbs or Sentences, short and sweet, such as are the
delights of the sons of men. The word from which they are translated signifies
Rule, Superiority, or Excellency; because these of all other Speeches challenge
the pre-eminence. Such as for their brevity may be retained in a shallow
Memory; and for their plainness may be apprehended by a Vulgar capacity. And
without controversy, these are some of those three thousand which Solomon
spoke; the major part whereof (as it is probably conjectured by learned
Authors) perished in the Babylonish Captivity. 1 King. 4.42.


But as a man might judge of the proportion of Hercules his body by the
impression of his foot; Ex pede Herculem.
and as by those lovely Clusters of Grapes which the Spies brought from the
Land of Canaan, the Israelites might satisfy themselves of the fruitfulness of
that Soil from whence they were taken; so by these, as a taste, we ghess at the
excellency of the rest. In the reading whereof, we shall find that verified,
which his Subjects upon his first piece of Justice did acknowledge, that the
Wisdom of God was in him. 1 King. 3.28.
There are enough of them yet left to make up a complete Epitome of the whole
Scripture: So that it is hard to say, whether we ought most to blame the malice
of the Churches Enemies for the loss of the rest, and of other choice pieces;
or to praise and extol the most wise Providence and great love of God, for
reserving a sufficiency in these and the rest of the sacred Canon, to guide his
Elect to their future bliss and happiness.

Among these Proverbs of King Solomon, which are not a few, I have made choice
of one which contains in it a Subjects duty to his Sovereign. A Doctrine which
for some years was too great a Stranger to many of our English Pulpits, and as
great an one to the practice of English Subjects. The one thundering out Curses
against Meroz, for not coming in freely and fully enough to the pretended help
of the Lord against the Mighty. The other thereby either awed, or cheated into
a horrid Rebellion against the Lords Anointed; as if it were a thing
impossible for that man which feared his King to fear his God; whereas this
Text tells us in effect the contrary, and that that Subject whoever he be, or
whatever he pretends to, that has shaken hands with the fear of his King, has
also at the same instant bid farewell to the fear of his God, This Scripture
has joined God and the King together; and I dare boldly proclaim him an enemy
to both, that shall presume to sever or put them asunder.

The Text minds us of three things: Division.
1. Of a Duty that is owing, and that is Fear. 2. Of the Subject, by whom it
must be paid, My Son. 3. Of the Object to whom it is due, and that is twofold,
God and the King. And, which shows that their interests are so interwoven, that
he that fears one fears both, and he that fears not both, fears neither.


When the stately Fabric of our English Monarchy was undermined and blown up
by Anarchy, this Doctrine was buried in the Rubbish of its Ruins.
Before I enter upon the parts, according to that order which I intend, by Gods
assistance to bound my discourse with, I conceive it very requisite to clear
the Text of that Rubbish which the late loose and licentious Times have cast
upon it; that so I may proceed with the less interruption in the erection of
such a structure, as I hope will bear some proportion to this Royal Foundation,
which was laid by him whom Wisdom it self commends for the wisest of Kings.
This cast up in two Heaps, in order to its removal.
In order whereunto, I have thought it the best way for its quickest dispatch
out of the way, to gather it up into two Heaps.

The first heap

Obj.


1. Some there have been in the World possessed with a Spirit of Anarchy, who
have assumed to themselves the boldness to draw up a Charge against this
Charge, or rather against the Author of it, K. Solomon accused of Self Ends.
as that he aimed too much at self; that this Lesson which he would have his
Subjects to learn, savours more of Interest than of Equity: and that little
regard is to be had to what a King shall say in such a case, who if allowed to
be his own Carver, will not fail to cut large Morsels to feed his own
insatiable Prerogative: Let God allow him but an Inch, and he will take an Ell.
God gives him his name, Psalm. 82.6.
(I said ye are Gods) therefore he thinks it no robbery to be equal with God,
or at least to go halfs with him in his Worship. Such black dirt they fear not
to cast in the face of Majesty; as if what he had written had been from his own
private motion, and not from Divine Inspiration; although they cannot but know,
if they know any thing, that this whole Book and every part and parcel thereof,
is of as much Authority with their holy Mother the Church, as any of the other
which are reputed Canonical.

Those who make this Objection, Sol.

The Character of the Objectors, and their design detected.


are such for the most part, whose judgments have been sowred with the Leaven
of Levelling Principles, that would advance the Shrub to the height of the
Cedar, or bring down the loftiest Cedar to the estate of the lowest Shrub: Who
if they may not be all Kings, will allow of no Kings at all. Their endeavors
are to bring all to an Anarchy, and to the end of that Anarchy, viz. a Parity,
which in effect makes a Kingdom a Monster, a Body without a Head: 1 Cor. 14.33.
Opposing therein all Order, and by consequence him, His Right pleaded.
who is the God not of Confusion, but of Order. The same God that made all Men,
made all Degrees and Orders of Men; some high, others low; some Kings to
govern, others Subjects to obey: as he has put a difference in the Celestial
Lights, 1 Cor. 15.41.
so that there is one glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars; and these glorious Stars differ from one another in glory:
so has he put the like among the chiefest of all his subcoelestial Creatures,
Men, both as to their external conditions, and their internal qualifications.
And so I might pass over this without any further trouble, having given this
short Character of these men's Faction, Opinion, and Design; which of themselves
without any further Argument, are a sufficient Confutation. But to convince
such (if possible) of their error, and to confirm others in that Allegiance
which they owe, and desire as good Christians, and good Subjects to pay to Gods
Vicegerent, their Lord and King. It will not be amiss to take a little pains to
discover the ignorance or malice of those that make this Objection.

Certainly they can have no just cause to accuse Solomon of Self Ends, since in
that Precept of his in the Text, he requires no more as a King, then what God
who is the King of Kings gave him, in giving him a Kingdom. And if they think
him, because a Party concerned, no fit Judge in the case, surely we have as
much reason to refuse to admit them, who are Plaintiffs, to the Umpirage. In
all judicial proceedings, especially about meum and tuum, there is a Plaintiff,
a Defendant, and a Judge who has a determining Power, having heard both
Parties; so that neither of them shall be their own Carvers; but are to
acquiesce in the decision of that third person. Here are the Plaintiffs,
namely, these Objectors; and here is the Defendant, viz. Solomon, in the just
defense of his own Rights: the Question is, who shall be the Judge? None so
fit, I conceive, The Decis^on of the Controversy referred to the blessed
Trinity.
to decide this Controversy between the King and his Subjects, as he who made
both King and Subjects: whom the Holy Spirit of God in the mouth of good
Jehoshaphat, 1 Chronicles. 19.7.
proposes as a pattern for all Judges to imitate. Neither need they fear that
in his Court, which is made up altogether of equity, Might will overcome Right,
for with him is no respect of persons; or that a Gift will blind his eyes, and
cause him to pervert Justice: if any were so wicked as to offer it, yet God is
more righteous then to accept it. If you would know his mind in the Case, you
must have recourse to his infallible Oracles the Holy Scriptures; which judge
it for Solomon, condemning the other for injuriously detaining his right. These
will tell you how unanimously the holy, blessed, and undivided Trinity, concur
in that Decision; that God the Father has given us a Law, God the Son has set
us a Pattern, and God the Holy Ghost has inspired the Prophets and Apostles in
the Times of the Old and New Testament, to call upon all Subjects to pay this
duty to their Princes.

I. God the Father.
1. I suppose few, unless they be professed Atheists, will dispute the Divine
Institution of that Law which Moses received on the Mountain to deliver to the
People; but subscribe to its Preface, as a truth which they are very well
satisfied in, that God spoke all those words; and if all, then those, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, which in order in our common account is the fifth,
but in St. Paul's the first with promise; that is, Ephesians. 6.2.
with a particular promise, or promise made to the obedience of that particular
command. The second has a promise annexed, but that is more general, not
restraind to that single precept, but is extended generally to the obedience of
the whole Law, showing mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my
Commandments. We usually reckon it the first of the second, but Philo the Jew
the last of the first Table. Philo Jed.
As though men had never performed their whole duty to their Father in Heaven,
unless they give the honor there required to their Fathers here on Earth,
which bear his Image: therefore he joined them both together in the same Table,
as Solomon does God and the King in the same precept here in the Text.

But some perhaps will be apt to question, Quest.
what a King can challenge from his Subjects, by virtue of that Command now
under consideration; wherein neither King nor Subject are so much as named?
These are to consider, Answ.
that the word Father is not of so narrow a Construction as they would seem to
conceive; yet that (it may be) too large for their duty too; but it is to be
understood of all who are called by that name, Natural Fathers.
or which for their Fatherly care deserve to be so called. Besides Natural
Fathers from whom we have our being of Nature, Spiritual Fathers.
there are which are so called in a Spiritual sense; that is, Ministers; from
whom, under God, we have our being of Grace, without which it would be better
if we had never been at all. Saint Paul tells the Corinthians, which is not a
syllable more then what another Minister may say of any, where his labor has
found the like success, though you have many Instructors, yet ye have not many
Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15.
for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

Oeconom. Fathers.
Moreover there be Oeconomical Fathers, such as are Masters to their Servan^s;
[Father if the Prophet had commanded thee some great thing, 2 Kings 5.15.
would thou not have done it] say Naamans Servants to their Lord, when they
heard him dispute so passionately against the means of his cure.

Fathers by Age. 1 Timothy 5.12.
There are also old men, whom for their Age we ought to reverence as Fathers. In
former Times those persons were looked upon with an eye of respect by all who
pretended to civility, although their outward condition were never so mean; who
had outlived the sight of their eyes, or the taste of their palats, on whose
head the Almond Tree did flourish, and on whose foreheads Age had plowed her
deepest furrows. It was noted as an ill Omen, and a sign of great confusion,
when the Children presumed against the Ancients; Isa. 3.5. Lament. 5.12.
and when the faces of the Elders were not had in honor.

Shall these, and several others be thought for more particular care, Fathers
of their Country.
(the Father of his Children, the Minister of his Flock, the Master of his
Servants, the Tutor of his Pupils, the Schoolmaster of his Scholars, etc.)
worthy; and do not Kings much more deserve it, if faithful in the discharge of
their trust, that have the care of all their Subjects incumbent upon them?
Adrian. Non mihi seit Populo Rex^.
Adrian the Emperor was wont to say he was a King, not for himself, but for
his People; conceiving himself obliged by virtue of his Office, to mind more
the common good of his Subjects then the particular good of himself. Such men's
honors are not (if deserved) without their burdens: Honos Onus.
and though the outsides of their Crowns be set with precious stones, which
make a glorious show, dazzling the eyes of their Spectators, yet they sit very
uneasy upon their heads; being lined with the pricking Thorns of those daily
cares, which do attend them. Neither are their temples so compassed with the
one, as their minds are besieged with the other. That King in Homer, complained
that great Jupiter in that respect, had made but little difference between him
and a Prisoner, accounting his Cares his Prison. Augustus.
And it is storied of Augustus a Roman Emperor, that hearing of a Roman Knight
who was imprisoned for debt, and yet slept as sweetly as if he were at liberty
and owed no man the value of a penny; he sent after his death to buy his Bed,
conceiving there must be something more then ordinary in it. If so, Princes
more then any have need of such Beds; because they of all men have most cares.
And the same Author relates a saying of the same Emperor to his Livia, (...).
Dio. Cass. Numb. 11.12.
Had we not businesses, and cares, and fears, above any private persons, we
should be equal to the gods: their breasts are as the Ocean, whereinto the
cares of private men do empty themselves. And their affection is excellently
expressed by that Phrase of carrying their Subjects in their Bosom: and little
do they know the tender bowels there are in their Governors toward them,
borrowing time from their own rest to plot and contrive for their good; if they
did, they would value them at a higher rate then most of them do.

When Julius Caesar had overcome Pompey, Julius Caesar.
at that fatal Battle fought between them in the Pharsalian Fields, and had
pursued his Victory so far as Egypt, whither he fled, and where he was basely
murdered; his two Sons Sextus and Cneius, heirs of their Fathers Valor and
Misfortunes, one of them being slain at Munda in Spain, the other forced to
shelter himself in Celtiberia; Sextum fortuna in Celtiberia abscondit. Florus
de Gest. Roman.
in so much that an end was generally conceived to be put to those Civil Wars,
which owed its rise and original to the stout Spirit of the one, and the
haughty Courage of the other; or rather to the boundless ambition of both: the
one brooking no Superior, the other no Equal. The Senate at his return, the
better to express their gratitude for their deliverance from the miseries of
that War, welcomed him home with new invented Titles of Honor; stiling him
among others, The Father of his Country, Pater Patriae.
and the same was afterward conferred upon many that succeeded him: yea, Roma
Patrem Patriae Ciceronem libera dixit. Juvenal. Sat. 8.
the Romans thought they could not give an higher to those who deserved the
highest, for their care of the Commonwealth.

Several hundreds of years before this, we find it in use in other Nations.
Orus.
Orus the third of the Pharaohs or Kings of the Egyptian Rule, who swayed the
Scepter of that Kingdom about two thousand and two hundred years after the
Worlds Creation, was that Pharaoh which advanced Joseph to be his Vice Roy,
changing his Iron Fetters into a Chain of Gold, his Rags, into Robes, and his
Stocks into a Chariot, wherein he rid in State, with a multitude of Attendants,
and an Herald proclaimed before him Abrech, Genesis 41.43.
that is, say some, the Kings Father. An interpretation that suits exactly with
his own expression, Genesis 45.8.
when he made himself known to his brethren, God has made me a Father to
Pharaoh, Lord of all his house, and Ruler throughout all the Land of Egypt. But
whether it agrees so well with the Original, I have not skill enough in that
Language to determine. According to St. Jeroms translation, St. Jerome.
it sounds as much as a tender Father, as having a tender care both of his and
his Subjects weal, contriving and advising an effectual way in a tedious
Famine, to supply them with necessaries for the support of their lives; and
when the management of it was committed to his trust, he discharged it with
that prudence and integrity, that he gained the love both of Prince and People.
What respect the first had to him, we may gather from the name which he imposed
on him, viz. Savior of the World. Zaphnathpa^neah. Genesis 41.45. Julius Firmicus.
And what an high veneration the other had for him, an ancient Ecclesiastical
Author informs us, that the Egyptians finding themselves infinitely obliged for
his care and providence, consecrated him under the name of Serapis, that
carried a measure of Corn upon his head, to signify that he was the god who
had given them bread.

Once more, This Title applied as aforesaid, pleads a longer prescription yet
among the Philistines, who were governed at first by one King, sometimes by
five, according to the number of their principal Cities, but always united in
the time of any approaching danger; and whatever was the name of the King his
title was Abimelech. The King of Gerar, when Abraham went to sojourn there,
Genesis 21.1, 2.
is called Abimelech. Chap. 26.26.
So likewise is he that came to Beersheba desiring a League with Isaac,
supposed (by the distance of time) to be another of the same name, it being by
computation fourscore years between his first sojourning there with his Father,
and this which was after his Fathers death; and questionless they kept the same
so long as it was a Kingdom, till they lost both their power and their
reputation too: For that King before whom David, many hundred of years after
that, feigned himself mad, is (in the Inscription of that Psalm, Psalm. 34.
which he penned upon that occasion in testimony of gratitude to the Author of
his deliverance) called Abimelech; 1 Samuel 21.
it is confessed in the History of it, to which that refers us, we find his name
to be Achish: and the reason why Achish in the one should be Abimelech in the
other, is not because he was binominis, Aben Ezra.
as one would have it, but because the first was his Name, the other his Title
of Honor: which was common to all the Philistin Kings, as Pharaoh was to the
Egyptian, and Caesar to the Roman: Quod Achish hoc loco dicitur Abimelech,
Basilius ex traditione majorum and alii existimant nomen illud Regibus
Palaestinae fuisse commune, etc. Mollerus in loc. 1 Samuel 24.11. 2 Chronicles. 29.11.
Job 29.16.
and this in the true signification of it is neither more nor less then My
Father the King. And that they may not think this a Title given only to Heathen
Governors by their Subjects, out of a blind devotion; or that it is a stranger
as to this sense in the Sacred Dialect, unless when they are mentioned; let
them consult these Quotations in the Margent, and that promise made by God
himself to his Church, which has respect to the times of the Gospel, and tends
very much to its propagation and advancement in the accomplishing and
fulfilling thereof, viz. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23.

Quest.


and Queens shall be thy Nursing Mothers. If they desire to be satisfied, why
God uses the names of Father and Mother to signify the rest? Answ.
It is because that Government justly challenges the precedence in respect of
Antiquity; that of Father and Mother over their Children taking place so soon
as they had Children to govern; at least so soon as they were in a capacity to
be governed. And it is from this that all others are to take their rule and
direction.

And it is no difficult matter to give a satisfactory answer to them who will
submit their judgments to Reason, Quest.
why all the above named particular Callings are comprehended under this as the
general?

And that is, Answ.
Because they perform such duties as belong to Parents. It belongs to them to
instruct their Children, therefore Pastors and Teachers are our Fathers, who do
that good Office for us in their stead; in a better manner possibly then they
can do it in their own persons: many Parents being so ignorant, that they have
need to be taught themselves. The Father is to provide for his Child, therefore
Patrons and Benefactors are our Fathers, who take that Fatherly care of us,;
which the other would willingly do, but cannot; having it may be, no more Water
then what will serve to drive their own Mill. It belongs to them to procure the
good of their Children, therefore Kings are called Fathers, because they mind
and endeavor the good of their People. And although the duty owing to each of
these in their respective capacities are comprised under one and the same word
Honor, yet the plus or minus of that honor must be according to the degree
and measure of those benefits that their Relations reap by them. Pharisees.
The Pharisees preferring their spiritual before their natural Parents, had
been the more justifiable, had they not made their pretended respect to the
one, a color for their unnatural neglect of the other. Saint Paul the Doctor
of the Gentiles, Mat. 15.4, 5.
and one of the same Sect (according to his own account which he gives of
himself, while in the state of his unregeneracy) lived a Pharisee. Acts 26.5.
Philemon v. 18.
He, when in his Epistle to Philemon he pleaded for the reception of his
runnagate Servant Onesimus (as light it seems of finger as of foot, as appears
by his expression, where he sweetly mitigates his shameful escape by the name
of wrong, and his theft by that of debt) among other Arguments minds him of the
obligation of his Conversion, which he owed next under God to him, and for
that, himself. Philemon v. 19.
And S. Bernard sweetly contemplating the mercy of God to him, both in respect
of his first and second birth, thankfully acknowledged him as the principal
efficient of both: but withal that his obligation is the greater from the
latter; saying, Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid debeo pro me refecto? nec
enim tam facile refectu quam factu; in primo opere me mihi dedit, in secundo
se. Bernard. de diligendo Deo.
If I owe my self to God for making me, what do I owe to him for renewing me,
or making me a new creature when I had marred my self? there was more
concurring to the work of my Redemption then to that of my Creation; in the one
he gave me to my self, in the other he gave himself to me: therefore I owe my
self for the one, and (if possible) more then my self for the other. Alexander.
Alexander the Great would commonly say he owed more to Aristotle that taught
him, then to Philip that begat him. Gracchus. Tu solum novem mensibus me
gestasti in utero haec vero me tribus annis integris in ulnis and amplexibus
fidelissime nutrivit, negasti id mihi quod Planta ramis, quod Simea catulis non
negavit. Jun. Rusticus, lib de Educatione.
And Gracchus showed more respect to his Nurse that fed him with her breast,
then to his Mother that bare him in her womb; opposing the carefulness of the
one, to the carelessness of the other, who denied him that, that senseless
Plants afforded to their tender branches, and the brute Creatures to their
shiftless young. Is there not then as much or more honor due to Kings, both
for their Government and Protection; without which the one could not do their
duty, nor the other receive the benefit? When Jeremiah in his Lamentations,
Lam. 4.20.
styled Josiah the breath of his Subjects nostrils, he gave them thereby to
understand that they were indebted to him for that common benefit of the Air to
breath in; and that the breath which they drew, they drew in a sense through
and by him.

Except. Ex M^sculo.
But probably these will except against what has been said to clear these
several interests in that precept, and oppose the authority of Musculus, a man
pious in his life, and eminent for his Learning, public Reader of Divinity in
the City of Berne in Helvetia; who in his Common Places treating of the fifth
Commandment, says it needs no declaration who are meant by Father and
Mother, it being known to all men that they be our Parents of whom we are born
and bred; and accounting the including in them the Magistrates and Ministers,
etc. a Vulgar Error, affirming that there is nothing there commanded of them;
and that there are other places in the Scripture which admonish us to honor
our Governors, Civil and Ecclesiastical, Ministers, Tutors, Masters and Elders.

Answ. There are so indeed, Concess.
and withal this liberty granted to prove all things; 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
which implies a Rule by which they are to be tried; To the Law, Isa. 8.20.
and to the Testimony. Whatsoever that commands is a duty, and whatsoever that
forbids is a sin, though never so curiously flourished over by the sleights of
a subtle adversary that lies in wait to deceive us. E contra, Nothing is a sin
but what is there forbidden; nothing is a duty but what either in express
terms, or by direct inference is there commanded; otherwise that Sweet Singer
of Israel had gone a Note above Elah (as the Musicians say) when he gave this
Epithet to this very Law, perfect; Psalm. 19.7.
which it cannot be said to be if any thing be wanting. And it this and those
other several Callings should not in that Precept be understood, the Law should
be defective in omitting many principal duties. David indeed had ground
sufficient for that expression, from those words of that great God who was the
Law giver; Deuteronomy. 12.32.
which requires so exact a compliance to that Law so given, as that a man can
neither fall short nor fold over, do either less or more then it injoins,
without sin. Therefore whatsoever I command you take heed you do it; thou shall
put nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Romans 1.1.
So that if when St. Paul commanded subjection to the Sovereign Powers, giving
to them, those empowered by them, Verse 7.
Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor; when he will to double their honor, to those
that rule well, especially if they labor in the Word and Doctrine; 1 Timothy 5.17.
or that they think them worthy of double honor; when he would have those that
are Servants to obey their Masters according to the flesh, they had asked what
ground he had for so doing? without all question he would have referred them to
this precept, which injoins all to honor their Parents. Concess.
It is confessed a Subject might well dispute his Princes interest in that fear
which the Text calls for, were he bound to look no further then into the Letter
of the Law, where is no mention made either of the one or of the other. But as
he cannot be a good Lawyer who never studied the meaning of the Law in the
Commentaries of such as are learned in the Law, who have taken much pains for
their own satisfaction, and their Readers profit; so that man can be no expert
Christian that does not search the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles,
which are authentic Comments upon that Law, and allowed Interpreters of the
same. So then whatever we read of Fear, etc. it is upon the account of that
command, Honor thy Father. The King is a Father, so called not only by man,
but by God himself, who made him a King; therefore he must be honored, so runs
the Precept; he must be feared, so says the Text. In a word, it is worth your
observation, that this King calling upon his Subject for it, speaks unto him as
a Father to his Child, My Son; as if on purpose by that endearing appellation,
to lead him as it were by the hand to that very commandment, that so he might
convince him of the necessity of the Duty.

2. God the Son, II. God the Son.
when he came out of the bosom of the Father to take man's nature upon him,
Deuteronomy. 18.18.
and to execute the office of a Prophet (under which notion he was promised
long before to his Church) he came not (as he himself says) to destroy, Mat.
5.17.
but to fulfill his Fathers Law; not to confound, but to expound it; not to give
us a new Law, but to instruct us in the meaning of the old. And therefore when
he says, John 13.34.
A new commandment give I unto you; either by novum we are to understand
renovatum; not a new addition, or addition of a new Law to the Old, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
expressly prohibited; but a new edition of a Law which was given of old, or
because it is urged upon a new account, (...).
[as I have loved you] proposing himself as their great Exemplar, in imitation
of whom, and in some cases, if need required, they should die for their
brethren. This is according to the sense judicious Hammond gives of it. Dr.
Hammond in John 13.
Being now to take my last leave, I give you this special new Command, that
from the manner and degree of my love to you expressed, in venturing, nay,
losing my life for you, ye also learn and practice the same degree of loving
one another: that is, that all Christians abound one toward another in all
Charity, and venture their lives for the good of others, especially for the
propagating of the Gospel, doing good to their souls. This is to write after
that matchless Copy which Christ has set us in his own example, Ephesians. 5.2.
who loved us and gave himself for us to be an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor unto God: so that what he did was upon the account of his
free and undeserved love: but what we must do and suffer for one another is
upon the score of bounden duty, 1 John 3.16. (...).
implied by that expression which the Apostle St. John makes use of when he
presses the practice of this very duty to the highest pitch, we ought to lay
down our lives for the Brethren. The manner then, and the degree is all that
can be said to be new in that Commandment.

If you would know what care he had of the Magistrates Interest? Christ his
care of the Magistrates Interest showed.
both his doctrine and his practice which was exactly suitable to it,
sufficiently testify, that he came not to pluck them out of their Thrones, but
to fix them more firmly in them: not to countenance the clamours of the
covetous rabble, who are ready to cry out Tyrant when they call for what they
are loath to part with, though no more then what they may justly challenge as
their own. 1. In his doctrine Matthew. 22.
But to press the Subjects compliance with their Princes in their just claims,
without regret or opposition: we have in the Gospel a case of this nature
brought before him to decide, Question about Tribute.
by some cunning Snaps of two different Sects, and in the matter in question of
different opinions, Pharisees and Herodians. The first looked upon the Romans
as Usurpers, and forcible possessors, the other acknowledged and adhered to it
as a lawful Authority. The question which they propose is, whether it were
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or not? Divided judgments uniting in a design.
these though divided in their judgments, yet can unite in their design, The
Snare laid.
or rather down right flattery; either seeking thereby to work him to a
compliance, and to give in his judgment in favor of their Party, or both, to
draw him into a snare. Which is observed by the Evangelist, Verse 15.
and both discovered and disgusted by our Savior, who perceived their
wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, Verse 18.

Mel in ore verba lactis, Fell in cord, fraus in factis. John 2.24.25.


ye Hypocrites? why endeavor ye to ensnare me, under pretense of reverencing
me? but he was too wise to be surprised with such chaff; for he knew all men,
and had no need that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man:
his all-seeing eye could easily epsy under that alluring bait a deadly hook;
Discovered.
and therefore to that subtle question he returns them a discreet answer,
whereby he secured himself, and astonished his Enemies. Mat. 22.20, 21.
Show me (says he) the tribute money and they brought him a penny; and he
says unto them, whose image and superscription is this? they say unto him,
Caesar's: Then says he unto them, render therefore unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. Their ensnaring question
discreetly stated.
So that he stated their Question by their very Coin, the image on it, and the
inscription about it were records of the Conquest of the Romans over their
Nation. And herein appeared the prudence of our Savior: Christ's Prudence.


1. He might have taken a piece of money of his own, but he rather bids them to
show him a piece of theirs.

2. Not of any of their money neither, but of that of which they paid their
tribute, which was of the Roman Stamp, which for that purpose was the only
money that was accepted for current; the Roman Emperor requiring this at their
hands, as a token of their subjection to his Power and Dominion. The coining of
money has ever since money was first invented, been accounted a part of the
supreme Power, or Regal Prerogative, yea, so properly his, that it is
incommunicable to any other; and their acknowledgment of that to be so current
a Coin, supposes him whose Signature it had, to be their lawful Prince.

3. And therefore as he might justly challenge it upon the score of his just
due; so they ought to pay it upon the account of their bounden duty, the Law of
God requiring that every man should have that which belongs to him, and so
consequently Kings their due acknowledgments. Romans 13.7. (...), significat
debitum quoddam inexcusabile subditis impositum esse. Marlorat.
The word in the Original, is englished in the latest and exactest
Translations, render; which signifies that the payment of it lies as an
inexcusable duty upon the Subject. And where it is in some others rendered Give,
we are not to understand it of a voluntary giving, as of courtesy; but of a
necessary giving or paying of a due debt. As we are said to give our Creditors
their due when we pay what we owe them; or to teach us (in opposition to that
murmuring and repining humor of the most) that it should be as willingly and
readily paid, as if it were a free gift.

Caesar's right vindicated, and their design frustrated
This was the sum and substance of his wary and circumspect answer to that
subtle and ensnaring question; such as they could take no hold of to entrap and
entangle him as they desired. Whereupon St. Luke says, Luke 20.16. Matthew:
22.22. Caution to his Ministers.
they held their peace; St. Matthew, they left him and went their way.
Ministers have need of the Wisdom of the Serpent, when they have to deal with
such subtle Foxes; and if they suspect any of their Auditors to come (as these
did to the best of Teachers) with Nets in their Ears, they should make it no
small part of their care to carry neither Fish nor Fowl in their Tongues,
Fullers Contemplations.
lest they ensnare themselves. A Lesson which the great Prophet of Prophets,
and Teacher of Teachers, has not only commanded us in his preaching, Matthew.
10.16.
but commended to us in his practice, in this very instance.

What issue this answer had in reference to the satisfaction of these that were
employed in this trepanning errand, What to judge of the issue of his Answer.
or to that of those that sent them, the Scripture mentions not, but is as
silent as themselves. Yet if that silence of theirs were an unquestionable
Argument of an implicit consent, according to the old Proverb, we might give a
favorable ghess of a satisfactory issue. But since it appears so plainly by
uncontrollable evidence, that the ones sending and the others coming was to
feed their malice rather then to inform their judgments, both that and their
after practice give us greater grounds to suspect the contrary; Non persuadebis
etiamsi persuaseris.

Simil.


and that they came with a resolution not to be resolved. He that is
prepossessed with that prejudice, is like a man that uses Spectacles made of
green Glass, which represents every object, unless Green, in a false color.
And wherever we find malice to be the Master, we may safely conclude Reason to
be the Slave: and to let us see how sadly the clouds of their passions had
obscured the light of their Reasons, his very prudence not long after was by
some of those very persons improved into a formal accusation against him. We
found (say they) this fellow perverting the Nation, Luke 23.2.
and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar. Then which nothing could be more
notoriously false, or a fuller evidence against them that they sinned against
the light of their Consciences.

Zach.. 11.13.
The Prophet Zachary speaking in a way of prophecy of the thirty pieces of
silver which Judas received as the reward of his treason in the sale of his
Master, personates Christ by an Irony, upbraiding them for the mean esteem they
had of him, a goodly price that I was valued at of them. But whosoever has
read what Christ foretold in the Scripture relating to their punishment for
their barbarous and inhumane usage of him; and how exactly it was accomplished
and in what dreadful manner executed (as it is recorded by their own
Historians, who sealed the truth of his Prophecy by their writings, as
millions of his implacable enemies did with their blood) cannot think that to
be the total sum of what was paid for that bloody purchase. Their low value set
upon Christ punished and retaliated by a far lower set upon themselves.
Hegesip. de excid. Hierosol. p. 680. And yet for the most part accessaries.
And for that low value they set upon him; by the just hand of God who loves to
retaliate, that the guilty offender may see his sin written in his punishment,
they were valued a great deal lower, when thirty of them were bought and sold
for a penny. And if those (for the major part but accessaries) were so severely
handled for abetting the malice of others, who (animated by their superiors,
who should have taught them better) cry in their blind zeal, crucify him,
crucify him; what may we think became of those that were the principal
contrivers who causlesly conceived both the malice and the mischief of it in
their hearts, against that innocent person? who rather then fail to bring their
cursed design to effect, run themselves headlong into the guilt of that
unpardonable sin. Mat. 12.32. The Ringleaders charged higher.
If he that sins against his knowledge has made a considerable step toward
it, he that has added malice to it has completed it.

St. Paul when a Saul, Acts 9.4.
persecuted him in his members, and that maliciously, 1 Timothy 1.13. The
ingredients in the sin against the Holy Ghost, secundum Ja. Armachan.
yet he found mercy, because he did it ignorantly. St. Peter denied him thrice
in the Highpriests Hall successively, and that against his knowledge most
apparently; but though he did it knowingly, Matthew. 26.34.
he did it not maliciously; and being minded by the crowing of the Cock of that
sad foretold issue of his rash confidence, Verse 75.
he went out and wept bitterly; and questionless he that steeped his godly
sorrow in these briny tears, could not fail to reap in joy. Had Paul had Peter's
knowledge joined to his malice, and Peter Paul's malice joined to his knowledge,
both had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. If then these be the
ingredients that make up that sin, and when in sin they are apparently in the
same persons, prosecuting the same design, in persecuting the Professors of the
Truth, how can these be acquitted as not guilty of it, who with such wicked
malice against so clear a knowledge, defame, prosecute, persecute even to the
death, him that was truth it self? who though his answer be so clear as nothing
can be clearer in favor of the Roman Emperor in that Case of Tribute, yet
falsely and most maliciously accuse him as a discountenancer of the Payment of
it.

2. Christ his practice.
But though they would not satisfy them who resolved to be satisfied with
nothing but his blood; yet all that own and honor him truly, cannot upon the
serious consideration thereof, but be thoroughly convinced that the Doctrine of
Christ taught in the Gospel, is no doctrine of Sedition or disobedience to
Princes and other Magistrates; but on the contrary, a doctrine that teaches
obedience, and all other duties due unto them. And what he bids them do, is no
more then he himself did, who being God and Man, subjected himself to the Laws
both of God and man; thereby showing what respect he did bear to Magistracy,
which was his Fathers Ordinance. And that he might avoid offense, and set a
Copy for all Christians to write after him, he wrought but one Money-miracle,
and that was to pay his own and Peter's Head silver, Mat. 17.27.
Go to the Sea, and cast in an hook, and take the first fish that comes up,
and when thou have opened his mouth thou shall find a piece of money, that take
and give unto them for me and thee.

Lastly, The Prophets and Apostles, III. God the Holy Ghost, which will be more
fully cleared in the third part of the Text.
inspired by the Holy Ghost, do in their Writings press this and such like
duties, even in the worst of Times, to be paid to the worst of Kings, because
they were Kings; yea, to some Kings that were the worst of men, as shall be
made more fully to appear in its proper place.

And thus I hope, by what has been already offered, I have sufficiently
cleared the Text of the first heap of Rubbish, and wiped off that aspersion
cast upon the Author thereof of being selfish; because he demands no more then
what God himself commands: and to require less, were to betray that Majesty
which the Most High has placed in him, to the scorn and contempt of the lowest
of men.

The second heap of Rubbish.

Obj. 2.


Others there are that charge this and such like subjects, as useless to
edification; and those Sermons preached upon them, in their best construction,
Court Divinity. There are some yet alive, who preaching upon such Theams in an
Auditory made up of persons of different persuasions; some whereof possessed
with a spirit of Opposition, as well against all Ministers that are not of
their own Faction, as Magistrates that are not of their own Election; have been
much incensed either at the Preachers, at their Texts, or at their Doctrine; at
one or all: and have when opportunity served, accosted them in some such like
language as this; What is all this to edification? ye might have made choice of
Subjects of a more Soul-saving concern, and much more fitter and proper for a
Pulpit discourse, the main design whereof should be to discountenance sin, and
to encourage a holy life. The accosted were not much startled at it, because it
proceeded from the mouths of such as lay under an apparent guilt; and therefore
could expect to be no more grateful to them, then a heavy burden to a galled
back.

Being therefore upon this clearing design, Sol.

First by way of Concession.


I shall spend a little time in examining their pretenses; and do in the first
place ingeniously confess, that had their Objection as much of real ground for
it, as it seems to have of solid weight in it, it were well worth our most
serious thoughts. It is a considerable truth which the Philosopher long since
spoke, Vita brevis ars longa.

Senec.


Man has a great deal of work to do, and but a little time to do it in; and
therefore has all the reason in the World to embrace Solomon's counsel, as of
great concernment, All that thine hand shall find to do, Eccles. 9.10.
do it quickly; for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go: and are not men as much concerned in
the choice of their work? that they spend not that short and precious time of
theirs in picking Rushes; about Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, those low things;
I mean, that merely concern the support of an earthly Cottage: which with our
greatest care cannot long be kept from falling about our ears; and in the mean
time neglect a far more weighty matter. Judgment and Mercy, those things which
concern their precious and Immortal souls which shall live for ever, either in
weal or woe, and must receive their reward hereafter, according to the works
which they have done in their bodies here, whether they have been good or evil.
It concerns them therefore, as to their choice chiefly, though not only, to
apply themselves to, and employ themselves in those things which will bring
most glory to God and benefit to themselves. Inference.


If those are concerned in both these whom God has charged with the care of
their own souls: Serva depositum
can any man think them concerned in neither, who are charged with the souls of
others? Acts 20.28.
Take heed to your selves, and to the flock of which the Holy Ghost has made
you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. Since this is properly their work which they are called to, and set apart
for, (...).
and which their ministerial Commission leaves not as arbitrary to them, Romans
1.14.
but lays as a debt upon them, [I am a debtor to the Graecians, yea a necessity
is laid upon me, 1 Cor. 9.16.
and woe is to me if I preach not the Gospel.] Romans 1.16.
The chief end of their Preaching is the salvation of their Hearers souls; 1
Cor. 1.21.
and the Word preached is the ordinary means that God has appointed for that
end: therefore they must up and be doing, and have a care (as to the choice of
their Work) that they spend not their time, nor abuse their Auditors ears and
patience with unprofitable impertinencies.

The Apostle instructing Titus, and in him all Ministers in the faithful
discharge of their trust, wills them to avoid foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and brawlings about the Law, upon this very
consideration, that they are unprofitable and vain: having little or nothing in
them tending to that, Tit. 3.9.
which he would have such men to drive at as their scope, viz. Edification; 1
Cor. 14.26.
and on the other side is as careful to inform them what doctrines they should
preach, insist, and dwell upon.

1. These things I will thou should affirm, Tit. 3.8.
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth good
works; these things are good and profitable unto men. The Inference is clear,
that though they must teach every truth, and hold nothing from their people
that is profitable for them; yet some truths there are that must be more
inculcated then others, Pro hic and nunc
viz. those that are most necessary, and most opposed, either through the
corruption of the Times, or the malice of Heretical depravers of the truth. As
that which the Apostle gives in charge, was in that Age wherein he lived; which
abounded with men of two contrary Opinions, and neither of them Orthodox,
Nullifidians and Solifidians; the one laying the whole weight of their eternal
salvation upon their own miserably imperfect Works without Faith, and therefore
dead works; these are largely confuted in his Epistle to the Galatians: the
other wholly neglecting works, rely wholly upon their pretended Faith, which
without Work is dead also. This is that which he would have Titus teach,
because so much by those men's principles and practices gainsaid?

2. This being granted, as indeed it cannot be denied; the former Objection
has much, yea, very much of weight in it, in respect of the matter of it. But
what it has of worth, as to the ground of it, comes in the next place to be
considered. The falsehood of this second Objection detected.
Should we gratify their humor so far, as to yield that to them for true,
which they object, which we neither shall, nor safely can; have not we as much
reason to quarrel with the holy Scriptures, (which God forbid) for imposing
this subject on us to preach, as they with us for pressing it on them to
practice? If it be demanded what authority we have to preach such Doctrines now
in the time of the Gospel; since Christ came into the World to purchase
liberty, and to proclaim that liberty so purchased; and the Apostle St. Paul
after his Ascension into Heaven, wills all Christians to stand fast in that
liberty so purchased and proclaimed? We can with as much facility produce, as
they ask it. If they will but take the pains to read what that Chosen Vessel of
the Lord charged on his beloved Son, The Ministers Authority to preach this
Doctrine.

Tit. 3.1.


according to the common Faith, which: is here word for word faithfully
transcribed, Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and
to obey Magistrates: where we are to weigh the manner of delivering, as well as
the matter delivered. (...). Suggere. Piscator. Non mala quidem sed periculosa
quadam ambiguitate se. Beza Annot.
Some render it suggest, to which Beza gives only a negative approbation, that
it was not erroneous, and finds this fault with it, that it carried too much of
ambiguity in it: which is dangerous in respect of the doctrine, which had so
many opposers; and withal subjoins a sufficient reason to justify his
exception; because those things also are said to be suggested, which before
were never heard of. But here the Apostle speaks of that which was no new or
strange doctrine, The reasons which prove it necessary.
but that which they had often heard and well enough understood, but did not so
carefully remember, and therefore as he feared, would not so immoveably adhere
to, Libertines.
when their Loyalty should be assaulted, Commonefacito. Junius in locum.
and themselves tempted to contrary practices by men of contrary principles.

Therefore he and others have commended this as the better, being more
significant, and more agreeable with the mind and meaning of the Author, put
them in mind; thereby manifestly implying, that this was not a new, but an
ancient doctrine, he might say of this to the Cretians, as of Brotherly Love to
the Thessalonians, they had been taught it before. And though it were old, it
was not obsolete, or like an Almanac out of date so soon as the year is done;
The inference from both.
a Doctrine never out of season; and because so much opposed, there was the
more reason it should be the oftener preached.

A twofold account how requisite it is it should be so.
And that, as I apprehend, upon a twofold account.

1. Of Nature; 1. Of Nature. Luke 15.12.
which desires nothing more then liberty, Father give me the portion of good
that falls to me, so says the Prodigal: his desire was to be altogether at
his own disposing; and like a young Horse newly backed, strives hard to get the
reins out of his Riders hands, and would fain be his own guide before he has
been wayed. We are all one man's children, Her Objection or Plea.
why not one as good as another? why must some be Kings to make Laws, and
others Subjects to obey them? this is the language of Nature, and from these
self-flattering premises, it makes this stubborn and rebellious conclusion:
Psalm. 2.3.
Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords from us.

2. 2. From Grace. Romans 6.14. Her Plea.
Upon the account of real or supposed Grace. We are not under the Law, but
under Grace. Under Grace, therefore under no Law: not under the Laws of men, so
the Anabaptists; no, nor under the Law of God himself, so the Antinomians. We
are all the adopted children of one and the same God; all brethren of one and
the same Christ our elder brother, all coheirs with him to one and the same
inheritance; why should we King it one over another here? that distinction
shall cease; yea, it seems already taken away by that levelling position of St.
Paul, We are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; Gal. 3.26, 28.
there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

The antiquity of it.
This objection is no novice, but may plead a very considerable prescription,
bearing date the same day with the Rebellion of Corah and his accomplices, who
gathered them selves together against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.3.
and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you seeing all the Congregation are
holy every one of them; and the Lord is among them, wherefore then lift you up
your selves against the Congregation of the Lord? very requisite therefore it
is in both the aforesaid respects, that this doctrine should be frequently
preached, and the practice of it as earnestly pressed, to pull down the pride
of Nature, and to confine the privileges of Grace within their proper limits.

Solut. 1 Concess. Acts 17.26.
1. True it is that we have all one common Father by creation, viz. God, who
made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell upon the face of the earth, and
has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation,
who did in the beginning create all things, as by an Almighty Power: So also in
a most excellent order he created man in his own image, Genesis 1.27, 28.
in the image of God created he him: male and female created he them, and God
blessed them, and said unto them, be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth. The same God when man by venue of that blessing did multiply, and the
earth by that multiplication was replenished with men and women, to prevent
confusion which inseperably attends multitude without order, placed them under
such and such distinctions. Cujus jussu nascuntur homines ejus jussu
constituuntur Principes. Ireneus.
So that we may say truly both of King and Subject, God which made Kings men,
made men Kings; and God which made Subjects men, made men Subjects.

2. It is as true in the second place, 2 Concess.
that Believers are all one in Christ Jesus, be they for Sex male or female,
for Nation Jew or Greek, for Condition bond or free; all alike dear to him,
being redeemed with the same price, and all equally near to him, as members of
that body of which he himself is the head. From whence we may safely infer,
Inference upon both these Concessions as safe as true.
that we ought not to carry our selves proud and disdainfully one toward
another, upon these outward differences and distinctions, seeing that Cyrus and
Irus, King and Beggar, are made of the same mold, and to God are both alike;
yea, all one in Christ Jesus. And as he has given the King a Kingdom to rule
in, Deuteronomy. 7.18, 19, 20.
so has he given him a Book to read in for this very purpose, that he should
fear his God, and that his heart should not be lifted up above his brethren.
Job who was conceived by some to be a King, from a more inconsiderable Topic,
Jobs Argument.
argues himself into a posture of humility toward the meanest of his menial
servants. If I did despise the cause of my manservant, Chap. 31.13, 14, 15.
or of my maidservant, when they did contend with me, what then shall I do
when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Sol. 2.

By negation. Theirs unsound ad dangerous.


did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one fashion us in
the womb? But because Believers are all one in Christ, therefore either all
must be Kings, or none must be Kings, is a plain wresting, St. Paul's words
wrested, himself grossly abused.
and not the proper meaning of the Apostles words in that place: and a sense
that makes him most absurdly contradict himself in that precept of his now
under consideration, put them in mind that they be subject to principalities
and powers. Indeed it could amount to no less then a very great absurdity to
press that as a duty in one place, if before he took away that distinction that
made it so in another.

One thing more I have yet to offer from the words of the same Apostle in
another place upon the same Subject, A further consideration offered for our
vindication.
though written to another people; and whatsoever was written to either of
them, was written for our learning, Romans 15.4. Chap. 13.1, 2.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of
God, the Powers that be, are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. From whence I infer by the rule of contraries, One
inference A sufficient warrant for us to preach, and as great a danger to them
if they do not practice it.
that Doctrine cannot but tend to edification, whose contrary tends so
certainly to destruction. A sad judgment it draws upon the guilty in their
temporal, in their spiritual, and in their eternal concerns.

First, In their temporal; 1. In their temporal concerns Ezra 7.26, etc.
Their calamity shall arise suddenly, in the very next Verse to the Text, and
whosoever will not do the Law of God and the King, let judgment be executed
speedily upon him, whether it be unto death; or to banishment? or unto
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. A Law not peculiar to the Persians,
but common to all other Nations that are under Kings, whether Christians or
Heathens; without which indeed it were impossible to preserve their Authority
inviolable. How many in our own time, and of our own Nation have been
deservedly ruined, imprisoned, executed, upon this very account. And in the
Scripture, besides particular persons that were contrivers of the Rebellion
against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.32.
which with their Families and goods, were swallowed up of a miraculous and
most remarkable judgment, to the horror and astonishment of all that beheld
it; they and all that appertained to them went down alive into the Pit, and the
earth closed upon them; Verse 35.
two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly are consumed by a fire from the
Lord as they were offering incense: Verse 49.
and fourteen thousand and seven hundred were swept away with the Plague.

2. In their spiritual.

E. g. David.


Secondly, In their spiritual: When David, that man after Gods own heart, had
but cut off the skirt of Saul's garment, his Conscience flies in his face, and
his heart smote him, for that he showed so little reverence and respect to the
Lords Anointed; though he did it not with the least intent to injure his
person, but to testify his own innocence, and to convince him of his error in
causlesly pursuing him from place to place, that he aimed not at his life nor
kingdom; but that notwithstanding God who is the great disposer both of Kings
and Kingdoms had rejected him, and anointed himself, he had been, and was
resolved to be his most loyal Subject. 1 Samuel 24.5.
In clearing his innocence he drew a guilt upon his Conscience, which once
wounded denied him all peace, till he had first made his peace with God. How
many have we read and heard of, whose troubled Consciences have been
instrumental to the discovery of those treasons wherein both themselves and
others have been concerned either as principals or accessaries?

Thirdly, In their eternal concerns: 3. In eternal.
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation; which some understand
of the temporal punishment inflicted by the Magistrate; Peter Martyr, Junius,
and Tremel.
or by God himself punishing the contempt of his own Ordinance on the
contemners thereof. Some of eternal damnation not excluding the other; some
judgment in the general, without specification of any particular kind or sort;
leaving the Reader to his liberty to choose which he pleases: because indeed
this sin exposes those that are guilty of it to all sorts of judgments, both
corporal, spiritual and eternal. The Apostles reason acquits Gods justice.
And the Apostle gives a reason sufficient enough to acquit the justice of God
in the severest punishment he can inflict upon them, because they resist the
Ordinance of God, He that resists the King, resists God.

1 Samuel 8.9. As those that rejected Samuel are said to reject him.


and so consequently God himself. As God sometime told Samuel much troubled at,
and grieved with the peoples base ingratitude, They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

Calvin though different in point of Church Government, yet sides with us in
this point, to clear us, and to confute our Adversaries.
Calvin, whose authority with some is very great in the point of Church
Government, to the disquiet both of Church and State, in his Book of
Institutions places Magistracy under the general head of external means
necessary to salvation; ranking it with the doctrine of the Church, of the
Sacraments, of the Ministry, etc. intimating that it is as necessary in its
kind or way, as any of the other; and by putting it in the last place, as it
were to bring up the Rear, he seems to me to hint thus much to his Readers,
that they cannot be complete Christians, though they are Members of the Church
by outward profession, though admitted her Members by the Sacrament of
Initiation, and may seem to have attained some strength by the often hearing of
the Word, and receiving the Lords Supper, which is the Sacrament of
Confirmation; yet if they fail in their duty to the Magistrate, Simile.
they are but like the sullen Cow that yields a considerable quantity of Milk
into the Pale, but as if the unthankfully grudged it to her deserving owner,
kicks it all down with her unlucky heels; and this one ill Weed like, those
wild Gourds, 2 Kings 4.39.
spoils the whole Pot of Pottage. And thus I have with as much brevity as well
I might, The Text cleared of its Rubbish.
cleared the Text of that rubbish which has been cast upon it; keeping my self
as close as I could to the matter in hand, neither running into extravagances,
nor cloying the Reader with impertinencies, to fill up Paper or spin out a
Discourse; but have offered what I conceive is very useful and necessary both,
to convince the gainsayers, and to prepare attention to what I have further to
impart upon the several parts of the Text in the method before proposed; and
that first of the duty, Fear, Of the Duty Fear, as it relates to the second
Object; with the reason why the first is not insisted on seperatim and per se,
but as implied in the other.
which I shall handle both in its strictest and largest acceptance, as a
particular duty, and as comprehending under it all those other which every man
owes to God and the King upon the same account.

And here I shall bend my discourse chiefly to the last of these; not because
the other is less necessary, but because this is most opposed, and their
interests are so conjunct. Neither will God accept of that Subjects fear as a
discharge of his duty, which does not proceed from the fear of himself, or that
does not fear the King for the Lords sake. That person lies under the repute of
a practical Atheist, that professes there is a God with his lips and yet will
show no reverence to him in his life. But those have passed in these late Times
for the best of Christians, which have shown none to their King; who with their
specious pretenses of Piety and Religion, have staggered some and made others
afraid to fear their King; fearing if they should fear him, they should not
fear their God.

1. Of Fear as a particular duty.

Gods Image. (...). Gave his name to them.

In iis relucet Majestas ejus cujus nomen and vicem gerunt, etc.

The honor of his own Laws to theirs


This Fear in its first acceptance, is that free and voluntary reverence and
respect which Subjects show to their Princes for the Lords sake, as being the
lively Images of his Power and Sovereignty over mankind: therefore he has put
his own name upon them, [I said ye are Gods] his Majesty shines forth in them,
whose name and office they bear and execute: and in that so many millions of
men are subjected to the Power and Government of one, and the good estate of
all his Subjects depends upon him. Yea he has communicated part of the honor
of his own Divine Law to their Civil Laws, in that they do (though not
directly, yet) indirectly bind their Subjects consciences; that is to say, so
far as theirs are agreeable, or not repugnant to his. Who requires them to be
subject, Romans 13.5. Has anointed them. Oleo sanctitatis suae ad designationem
and qualificationem denotat. Mollerus. Put his Spirit into them.
not only for wrath but also for conscience sake; he has anointed them with
his holy oil, or the oil of his holiness, signifying thereby their designation
to, and qualification for their Office. As it is said of Saul, when God made
him a King, he turned him into another man, and gave him another heart, 1 Samuel
10.6, 9. And when upon Moses his complaint God divided his burden among the
seventy Elders, he tells him withal, Numb. 11.17.
that he would take of the spirit which was upon him, and put it upon them:
Crowns on their heads, Robes on their backs, Scepters in their hands. Cultus
magnificus addit hominibus authoritatem. Quintil.
he has set Crowns of gold upon their heads, put Royal Robes upon their backs,
and placed Scepters in their hands, to draw a reverence to their persons, and
to daunt offenders. Magnificent attire works a kind of awe, in the heart of the
inferior toward his superior, and adds in the estimation of the people, both
glory and honor, and majesty to their persons. Dr. Prideaux in orat.
inaugural. de vestibus Aaronis.
Which is one reason of the High Priests costly garments, that they might draw
the greater reverence both to his person and to his Ministry. To this purpose
it is storied of Alexander the Great, Josephus.
that when the High Priest met him in his Pontificalibus, he reverenced him,
and adored the God of Heaven in him, whose Priest he was.

Given them Thrones for judgment, and sits in the Congregation among these Gods.

Psalm. 82.1.


He has given them Thrones for judgment, and though he has Heaven for his
Throne and Earth for his Footstool, yet he vouchsafes to stand in the
Congregation of the mighty, and to judge among these earthly Gods. This
representation of him standing in such a place, among such persons, Sundry
instructions from it.
admonishes us of sundry things worthy of our observation.

1. That Empires and Kingdoms were not constituted at the first, neither are
they since gotten or kept by the strength, prudence, or craft of men; but by
his divine wisdom, and almighty power, who said of himself, Prove. 8.15. Psalm.
82.6.
By me Kings reign; and of them, Ye are Gods.

2. Secondly, That he so judges among these Gods, that if they either through
negligence, or out of favor and affection do not execute justice, in the
relieving the oppressed, and in punishing offenders, he himself will undertake
the execution of it. And when he remembers the guilty Malefactors, he will
hardly forget their corrupt and partial Judges.

3. Thirdly, This well weighed and thoroughly considered, would make even
Princes themselves, afraid to abuse their power and authority to tyranny and
oppression; since they were set in those places for other ends, by that God of
Gods to whom they are accountable: and

4. Fourthly, Did their Subjects believe this to be a truth, they would not
dare to judge those Gods, whom the Great God vouchsafes to judge among: and to
whom alone if belongs to be their Judge.

It is furthermore well worth our notice what course he has taken to secure
Magistracy from contempt. As, The means which God has used to keep them from
contempt.


1. First, By prohibiting such things in them which may occasion it; not
allowing in their Election any thing which might bring the least blemish upon
it. He that was wounded in his stones, Deuteronomy. 23.2, 3. Ne venito, i. e. ne
administrato q.d. munus publicum in populo Dei ne ge^ito. Junius in locum
or had his privy members cut off, was not to enter into the Congregation of
the Lord: such an one was not to be admitted into the place of Government. And
why not? The same Author tells us, such for the most part are slothful, and of
too low a spirit for so high a place, which requires men of courage and
resolution, and such as fear not the face of any.

Hi fere ignavi and fracto animo esse solent.
Also a Bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to his
tenth generation shall he not enter into the Congregation of the Lord; i. e.
neither he nor any descending out of his loins, because he is a Bastard. Nullus
descendentium ex eo quia spurius est propter infamiam.
And why not a Bastard? because such a person is infamous. When the H. G. would
brand the Israelites with a mark of the greatest reproach; he calls them the
seed of the adulterer and the whore. Names given to Bastards.
The Greeks call the children which come of such a sinful copulation (...).
from (...), because they are subject to contumelies. The Hebrews call them
Brambles. Judge 9.14. Abimelech was a right Bramble.
Such an one was Abimelech, who by the assistance of vain and light persons
that he had hired, assassinated his brethren to prevent competitors: resolving
to suffer never a rub in the way to hinder the running of his Bowl to the Jack
which he aimed at. A right Bramble indeed, who grew in the base hedge-row of a
Concubine, and scratched and drew blood to purpose. Mamzerim, spots abroad;
Shatakim, such as must say nothing when others are praising their Parents,
because they are the reproaches of those that begat them, Jeptha an exception
from that general rule.
and the usual objects of other men's reproach also. Jeptha, though otherwise a
very good man, was upbraided with this note of Infamy, Judge. 11.2. Reason of it.
Thou shall not inherit in our fathers house, for thou art the son of a strange
woman, or a harlot; which was all one as if they had called him Bastard. He was
made afterward a Judge, and proved to be a Deliverer of the People. Necessity
has no Law.
But it was in case of necessity, otherwise by the Law he was incapable.
Another end of that Law, beside the former.
A Law not made to punish the guiltless child, who shall never be called to an
account for his Parents sin, as it is their sin, but to secure his own
Ordinance from contempt, and for an admonition of chastity in regard of the
infamy and contempt of such a polluted posterity.

2. Secondly, Requires that from them, as well as puts that into them, which
may be attractives of this from their Subjects.
As they are called to a more eminent place, so their conversation should
exceed the vulgar and common sort. What an undervaluing censure did Michal pass
upon David dancing before the Ark? and with what reproachful language does she
accost him? though he did it to testify his religious joy: the only thing that
could excuse him, and all that he had to say to stop the mouth of Calumny: 2 Samuel 6.20.
How glorious was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself in the eyes
of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelesly
uncovereth himself! Bathshebas advice.
Bathsheba giving good advice to her Lemuel, i. e. her son Solomon, tells him,
Prove. 31.3, 4, 5.
Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways unto that which destroys
Kings. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor
for Princes strong drink; lest they drink and forget the Law, and pervert the
judgment of any of the afflicted. What Gods expectation is from their place and
education.
It is expected from their advantage they have from their place and education,
to transcend all others; that they should live and converse among men like
Angels. If they (as one says) should play the Hogs and Monkeys, abasing
themselves to childishness of spirit, and to a life corrupted with the curious
delights and voluptuousness of the body; this would be a thing as unreasonable
in its nature, Caussin's Holy Court. Chrysostom. in Polycrat. lib. 4. Principatus
non tam sanguine quam meritis debetur and inutiliter regnat, qui Rex nascitur
sed non meretur. Rabanus in Prove. 25.5. Reges a recte agendo vocati sunt
ideoque recte faciendo Regis nomen tenent, peccando amittitur.
as it is prodigious in its effects. Principality is due rather to deserts then
birth; and he raigns unprofitably, who is born, but does not deserve to be a
King. The very derivation of their style, minds them of performing actions that
are suitable, which is, from doing good; and so long as they do so, they keep
up their title: whereas in doing the contrary, in the account of their people
they lose it.

And as God by these and the like provisions, As he would not have them deserve
it, so he will not allow their Subjects to offer it.
has bound Kings from occasioning it from their Subjects, so has he by strict
precepts tied Subjects from offering it to their Kings: imposing a restraint
upon their actions, upon their words, yea upon their very thoughts.

1. First upon their actions; Restriction on their actions. Psalm. 105.15. Dr.
Westfield Bishop of Bristol his Sermon on Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed: which though some are pleased to think mis-applied to
Kings, yet a learned Divine of late Times undertakes to prove, that in that
place and all others, where mention is made of the Lords anointed, it is to be
understood of Kings, and no others; to whose works I refer the Reader for
further satisfaction. This consideration startled David, and makes him stay
Abishai's hand; who tells him that he has his enemy now in his power, and at
his mercy; that God had delivered him up to him by an extraordinary providence,
profers himself freely to be the executioner to give the fatal stroke, which
should put an end to Saul's life and his own troubles. And David said to
Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Destroy him not; for who can stretch out his hand against the Lords Anointed
and be guiltless.

2. Secondly upon their words; Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the gods, not the gods of the Heathens; which were so
only in their own foolish imaginations. God himself has set us a pattern what
we ought to speak and think of such; For all the gods of the Heathens are Idols
of silver and gold, Silver Gods. Psalm. 95.5. and 115.4, 5, 6.
the works of men's hands, which have mouths but they speak not, eyes have they
but they see not, etc. upbraiding them in another place, Wooden gods.
of the goodly matter whereof they are made, and the common use which the
remainder of it was put to. He burns part thereof in the fire, Isa. 44.16, 17.
with part thereof he eats flesh, he roasteth roast and is satisfied: yea, he
warmeth himself; and says, ha, ha, I am warm; (speaking of the Chips that were
hewn from those Blocks which these Blockheads adored.) Had they not been so,
they would never have made gods of the residue, and resolve with as much zeal
as if they had been the God that made them, to fall down before them, and
worship, and pray unto them, and say, Deliver us, for ye are our gods. And when
his own people for their sins in general, but especially for this sin of
Idolatry in particular, had provoked him to wrath, so that he delivered them up
into their enemies hands, and they thereupon implore him as their last refuge
for deliverance; he Ironically bids them go to the gods whom they had chosen,
and cry to them. The most tolerable were the men gods.
It is true, some of their gods were of better rank and quality, viz. their
Men-gods; who had they been immortal or immaculate, without father or mother,
without beginning or end of days, as Melchisedec is described, it had been the
more tolerable: but they were so well known, that one of their own Authors has
written their Genealogy, or a Book of the generation of their gods. Some
whereof were so notoriously wicked, that a good man would have scorned to
accompany them when alive, and spit at the naming of them when dead. And yet
such sots were they to worship these for gods, which scarce deserved the names
of men: and to weep, and lament, and howl for that which others made an
argument to convince them of their folly, and to prove them the greatest Fools
in nature. If they are gods, why do ye weep for them? If they are men, why do
ye worship them? Their mortalities confuted their deities to all but such who
had abandoned both sense and reason. And though in a way of comparison, we
grant these to be better gods then the other, which were worse themselves; yet
they were guilty of worshipping others which were worse then these: The worst
were their stinking Garlic gods. O sanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur in
Hortis.

Numina.


such were there stinking Onion and Garlic, Garden gods. Of which one (by way
of jeer) Holy Nations ye must needs be that have such gods growing in your
Gardens. God by his own practice has taught us that we cannot have too low
thoughts, nor speak too contemptibly of such gods as these. And as it is
related of the Lyndans, Lyndans. Those gods may be reviled.
a People that worshipped Hercules, who thought that then they did their god the
best service, when they railed most against him. So I am confident the more we
slight all false Gods, the more respected we are of the true.

Quest.

What Gods.

Answ.

Ut manifestam faceret dicti vim subjungit, etc. Cyril contra Julian. These
must not.


These are not the God that must not be reviled; the following words in the
former place, explain the first; and that we might understand the true sense
thereof, it is added by way of explanation, neither speak evil of the Ruler of
thy People. When St. Paul was sent by the chief Captain to the Sanhedrim to be
examined about something whereof he was accused, as better understood by them
then himself; declaring the manner of his life, the High Priest commands some
that stood by to smite him on the mouth; whereupon he calls him Whited Wall.
Some whose curiosity had brought them thither to hear his examination, thought
him in an error, and rebuked him for it, Acts 23.1, 2, 3.
Revilest thou Gods High Priest? In his Apology for himself, he pleaded
Ignoramus, I wist it not that it was the High Priest: For it is written, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. Implying a confession that he
had sinned, if he had said it knowingly. Yet it is conceived by some, who give
it as the best answer against those who object his allegation against his own
words, to prove him a transgressor; that he did not revile him, but sharply
reprove him for commanding an unjust act to be done when he sat in the seat of
Justice. Though these gods are not to be reviled, yet they are not to be
flattered; Quasi honor quo praediti sunt esset vitiorum integumentum. Calvin in
loc. The Tongue is not to be set at liberty which God has restrained.
as if their place were a privilege to them to do what they list.

Considering therefore the Subject we are upon, the fear of the King; and what
a restraint God has laid upon his Subjects to bind their tongues to their good
behavior, that they should not transgress by such unbecoming language,
altogether inconsistent with that reverend respect we owe unto them. I cannot
approve of that saying of Augustus, In libera Civitate liberas oportet esse
linguas.
that in a Free City men's tongues ought to be free: nor of that liberty under
Nerva's Government, called, Ubi and sentire quae velint and quae sentiunt loqui
liceat, rara temporum felicitas. Tacitus.
The liberty of every ones thinking what they would, and of speaking what they
thought: which one that wrote of it, calls it a rare felicity of those Times,
but ours have found it otherwise. And as little do I commend of their clemency,
who have proclaimed the like to theirs, though they speak plausibly enough,
Theodosius. Honorius. Arcadius.
and well becoming Christians as they were, who should forgive injuries; Si ex
levitate contemnendum; si ex insania, commiserandum; si ex injuria, remittendum.

Gullas.


saying, if it proceeded from levity, it was to be contemned; if from madness,
it was to be pitied; if of wrong, to be remitted. Yet (as Kings) they ought to
have made better provision for the securing their own rights. For if it behooves
natural Parents to maintain and uphold their authority over their children,
Nimia familiaritas paret contemptum.
and not fool it away by too much indulgency, which marrs many a child, and
does invite them to a slighting, first of their precepts, and then of their
persons: how much more the Fathers of their Country, lest they expose theirs
and themselves to the contempt of their Subjects; whereby they will do a very
ill office both to God and themselves, and to that authority which he has
given them; as undoubtedly they must needs do, who set at liberty those tongues
which God has confined.

Such a melting spirit we find to have been in David toward Shimei, Shimei's
case examined at large, because misunderstood by some, and abused by others.
who little deserved it; a person that by his deportment showed as much of
malice, scorn, and contempt, as ever Rebel could do to a Prince: both in
picking out a time for his mischief, (when his bitter tongue, compared to a
sharp sword, might give him the deeper wound) 'twas when his own son had raised
an unnatural Rebellion against him; which could not but be a great affliction
to such an indulgent father; and so consequently this no small addition to it.
Job 6.14.
To him that is afflicted pity should be shown, but it is clear this miscreant
had forsaken the fear of the Lord in that he showed none to the Lords Anointed;
treating him with language fitter for a Dog then an ordinary Man; Come out,
come out, (being himself more like one in his deportment, who mad with malice,
flies in David's face, and as mad dogs fall upon all in their way, and convey
their venom where ever they fasten their infectious teeth; so he by his
mischievous tongue, the poison of his malice, fetching every word as far as
Hell, from whence 'twas fired. 2 Samuel 16.5, 6.
) He came forth and cursed still as he came, and cast stones at him, and that
which was worse then stones, An high affront.
bitter words, more piercing then the sharpest pointed arrows, Thou bloody man,
thou man of Belial: such an affront as might well provoke the greatest Saint,
try the patience of the meekest man upon earth, and exasperate him to take the
next opportunity of revenge. And how easily might he have done it? it had been
but one word speaking, How resented by Abishai.
Go, and Abishai, whose fingers itched to be doing, would in a trice have taken
his head from off his shoulders; Verse 9.
Why should this dead dog curse my Lord the King? let me go over I pray thee,
and take off his head. Had David been of a revengeful spirit, he would have
readily embraced the motion, and seconded the offer with his Fiat. A matchless
meekness.
But behold! in stead of a Command, a severe check, and a strict prohibition;
What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? uttering words sounding rather
of encouragement then of punishment; as if he had been pleased with it, rather
then provoked to the least displeasure by it; Let him alone, let him curse. O
altitudo prudentiae! O altitudo patientiae! O devorandae contumeliae grande
inventum!

Ambros.


St. Ambrose pondering upon this answer, after a little silence, breaks out
into these words of admiration: O the height and depth of his prudence, and of
his patience! what a grand matchless invention is here to swallow contumely,
and to turn hurtful poison into wholesome nourishment! this is far beyond the
invention of Mithridates, from whom came that Confection that bears his name.

This, Ex Vipera Theriacam.

Piscator.


this is the best receipt to make a sovereign Treacle of this Venomous Viper.
The Lord (either by the secret impulse of some evil spirit says one, or by a
secret command of his most wise providence) has bid him curse David say
others, who shall say then why do thou so? bid him he might, without any
impeachment of his justice, since his will is the rule of right; and his
judgments, though they may be sometimes secret, are always just. Yet this not
so secret neither, but that himself and others might by the punishment easily
discern his sin that caused it. That sin which in the prohibition before
quoted, goes under the name of Reviling, and speaking evil, in another place is
called blaspheming; and as David confesses, it came from the Lord, so he might
well think God permitted Shimei to blaspheme him; because he by committing
those great and scandalous sins of Adultery and Murder, gave an occasion to
others to blaspheme his God. A Copy for the best of men to write after.


A Copy this is, yea, such a Copy that I may safely commend to the greatest and
best of men to write after, which would calm their spirits, and preserve them
in a smooth and even temper; and they would not (as too too many do) when
afronted by the brawling of these dogs in the Metaphor, imitate that foolish
custom of these dogs in the Letter, Vent their anger at the senseless stone,
never regarding the hand that sent it.

Shimeis sin no whit extenuated, either by what David discreetly said, or
meekly suffered.
But was David's patience, or that consideration that caused it, any extenuation
of Shimei's sin? No certainly, his malice was no whit the less against him for
the one, nor his sin against God for the other. He himself not long after
confesses upon his knees, His politic confession, and feigned sorrow.
that he had done wickedly, yea very wickedly; and fearing justly his deserved
vengeance for those monstrous excesses of his intemperate tongue, deprecates
the imputing his iniquity unto him. His Petition was as well timed as worded,
which was a hopeful Omen of a happy success. It was just upon the time of his
new election and inauguration into the Kingdom; which he auspicates with an Act
of Oblivion; of which he as well as others reaped the benefit, which secured
them from the punishment of their former Treasons: There shall not any man be
put to death this day, for do not I know that I am this day King over Israel?
Yes I do, and am resolved to exercise my kingly Prerogative in pardoning whom I
please, and thee in particular, Thou shall not die. He is pardoned.

2 Samuel 19.22, 23.


A pardon to any man's thinking as full as free.

And yet there are some that do limit and qualify it in their Paraphrases upon
it; thereby signifying he intended no more then thus; I pardon thee for my
part, Quod me attingit tibi condono, and facti judicium aliis relinquo, etc.
Piscator.
and leave others to deal with thee as is meet for thy future offenses: thou
shall not die by my command at this time. A sense I cannot disapprove,
considering a passage that fell from his own mouth a little before his death;
who apprehending, as I conceive, the ill use that might be made of such
presidents by men of rugged and perverse dispositions (who presuming of the
like lenity, might when occasion was offered, David on his Deathbed troubled
at it, and the supposed reason of it.
ease their spleen by the like scurrilities) expresses somewhat of trouble and
pressure of spirit, not for his own sins mentioned before; for he had made his
peace with God for those in his life time, and received his pardon from Heaven
by the hand of Nathan his Seer. It was the Cases of those two Capital
Delinquents, whose indemnity lay upon his Conscience, Joab and himei; the
first for the murder of Abner and Amasa; 1 Kings 2.8. Gives his son Solomon a
charge concerning him. He is jealous of him.
the other for cursing himself; Thou have with thee (says he to his son
Solomon that was to succeed him) Shimei the son of Gerah, which cursed me with
a grievous curse, and I swear unto him by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee
to death by the sword; now therefore thou art a wise man, and know what to
do unto him, hold him not guiltless, but bring thou his hoar head to the grave
with blood: i. e. when he shall have added iniquity to iniquity, pay him home
for new and old together. This item made him look more narrowly to his water,
Commands him from Bahurim to Jerusalem, and there to build a house, alias a
Kings Bench, and confines him to it, engages his life for his true
imprisonment, forfeits his bond, is charged with it, minded of his Treason,
justly sentenced, and deservedly executed.
and to prevent any future insurrections through his means against himself, he
confines him upon pain of death to his own house, which he was to build in
Jerusalem, as a suspicious person, no further to be trusted then he might be
seen; and when he had forfeited his life by transgressing his bounds, he is not
only charged with a clausum fregit, a breaking his prison, but thou know all
the wickedness that thine heart is privy to, and what thou did to David my
father; therefore the Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head, and
Benaiah by his command went out and fell upon him that he died. An act he knew
so far from displeasing God, that he confidently promises himself Gods
blessing for such due execution of justice.

Thirdly, God lays a restraint upon the very thoughts of their hearts, Eccles.
10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts; threatening a strange detection,
and by consequence a condign punishment. This difference we ought to observe
between the Laws of God and Men. The difference between the Laws of God and Man.
The first lays an obligation upon the inward man, that hidden man of the
heart, the other only directly upon the outward man.

As for instance, In two instances.
Thou shall not commit adultery is a Law both of God and man; but the question
is, who is an Adulterer? Matthew. 5.28.
whosoever has looked upon a woman to lust after, has committed adultery
already in his heart; so that this brings under the guilt of that sin, not
only him that defiles his neighbors bed; but him also that has eyes, and an
heart full of adultery. But the Law of man calls him only an adulterer that is
convicted of the act, either by his own confession, or other sufficient
evidence, he may look on whom he will, and lust after whomsoever he likes,
that reaches neither the eye nor the heart.

Touch not mine anointed, and thou shall these are Laws of Gods own making, to
secure his Ordinance from injury and contempt. The Laws of men have made a like
provision, though not in those very words; that whosoever shall speak such and
such words, and do so and so, is guilty of high Treason, and upon conviction by
due course of Law, shall suffer as a Traitor. Men may think what they will
notwithstanding these Laws, which lay no hold of thoughts, as to them they are
free enough; but the Law of God tells thee, thou art a Traitor to thy Prince,
and a Rebel to thy God, if thou cursest his Vicegerent in thine heart.

The Doctrine applied, first to confute the old Proverb, and to convince them
who think it true, that thoughts are free.
Thou therefore that art resolved to pay it with thinking, being confident that
these gods by name understand not thy thoughts, which is peculiar to him alone
who is a God indeed; and by nature this God who is the searcher of the heart,
and the trier of the reins, will pay thee one day for thy thinking, when he
shall bring every work into judgment, Eccles. 12.14.
with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. It is an observation of
one, whose rash zeal for the Geneva Discipline, has kindled such a fire of
Contention in the bowels of this Churh and Nation whereof we are members, as is
not yet, and God alone knows when it will be thoroughly quenched; he
endeavoring to suppress all extravagancies of this kind, and to keep men's
thoughts in a due decorum toward those that are set over them; Chap. 12.1.
Chap. 13.1.

Cum de Dei cultu sermonem facit corporis venerationem exigit; ad subjectionem
Principis delapsus animae submissionem postulat, non quod utrique tum Deo tum
Principi utriusque tum corporis tum animae subjectio and obsequium debitum non
sit, etc. Cartwright in Eccles.


takes notice of a remarkable passage of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans
compared with another in the very next Chapter of the same. When in the first
of them he calls for the reverence we owe to himself, he bids us offer our
bodies to him. When for that subjection which is due from us to his
substitutes, he will have every soul to be subject to them; not but that the
reverence and subjection of both is due to both; that of the soul as well as
that of the body, to God; and that of the body as well as that of the soul to
the higher Powers. But to meet with that foolish conceit of some, who think
this a safe Plea, when they go into Idol Temples and perform outward acts of
worship as others do; that when they prostrate their bodies to Idols, they
reserve their hearts to God; and also of those, who because they deny not the
chief Magistrate the service of their bodies, would under that color, exclude
him from that reverence and respect that is due to him in their hearts.

He that hides hatred with lying lips, Prove. 10.18.
is a fool. And what is he better, or how many removes is he from one that
honors his King with his lips, and despises him in his heart? although he
think himself a great deal wiser then those that speak what they think, to the
hazard of their lives and fortunes; whereas he lives without fear of either,
being taken by those who are strangers to his thoughts, for as good a Subject
as the best, yet he is no better then a fool; who in the mean time forgets a
God above him, who understands the most secret thoughts of his heart, and will
manifest his folly to his shame and confusion before Men and Angels, when he
shall be summoned to appear at Gods dreadful Tribunal, where (if he prevent it
not by a true repentance) he shall be impleaded, convicted, sentenced, and
condemned with all that rout of notorious Rebels and Traitors which have been
since the beginning of the World to that day. 2. Against those which slip Gods
bridle, or run away with the bit between their teeth, like those Psalm. 12.4.
Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis?


And since I am entered upon the application, I shall take leave to prosecute it
against those in the next place, who in those times wherein men's tongues were
lawless, took the liberty to spit their venom into the face of Gods Anointed,
our martyred Sovereign; slandering his footsteps, and aspersing the best of
Princes with the worst of crimes; crying out upon him as Shimei did against
David, for a man of Belial, a man of blood, charging all that was shed in our
uncivil Civil Wars upon him, as the Author; this out of the abundance of their
mouths have they spoken. Cor enim fell livoris amarum per linguam instrumentum
spargere nisi amara non potest.

Bernard.


For it is impossible their tongues could vent such loud lies, and such
notorious slanders, were not their hearts overcharged with the gall of envy and
spite.

Others who would be thought more modest, begged of God in their public
devotions, that he would not charge that blood upon his head, but upon his
heart. And these seem to have more of charity, but whether they really had so,
I leave to them to judge, who have so much of discretion, and so little of
prejudice against so deserving a Prince, They charge the War on the King as the
Author.
as to discover in it an implicit concession, if not an apparent charge of a
horrid guilt upon a guiltless person: and whether it had not been more proper
for them, Laid at the right door.
who were the contrivers and promoters of that War which produced those bloody
effects? He vindicates himself:

1. By a serious appeal.


How seriously (in those Meditations and Prayers which he composed in his
solitude and sufferings) did he invoke the great and omniscient God to witness
his endeavors for the diverting of the necessity of that War, which some men's
ambitions first raised, and then falsely fathered upon him? And yet the
confidence of some men's false tongues was such, that they would almost make him
suspect his own innocence: that he could be content (by his silence at least)
to take upon himself so great a guilt before men, 2. By his willingness to
avert the necessity, and redeem his Subjects from the misery of it.

3. By his Speech on the Scaffold.


if that would allay the malice of his enemies, and redeem his people from the
miseries of War, since God knew his Innocence. Follow him to the Scaffold, where
he was brought to take his farewell of the World; and from whence he was within
a few minutes to go to give his account to God (and therefore no fit time nor
place to dissemble with either) how solemnly does he disclaim it? 4. By his
infallible Argument.
And for the fuller satisfaction of all his Subjects, (many whereof had been so
miserably deluded) he referrs them to those Commissions on both sides for
raising their Armies; and wills them to take notice of their several dates,
They proved the aggressors, and what he did to be in his own defense.
and they would find those of his Enemies had the precedence, which animated
and armed so many of his subjects against him. And from thence they might
easily resolve themselves in that question, who were the Aggressors? and that
what he raised was upon the score of self-defence, which the Law of God, of
Nature, and of Nations allows, not only to Princes, but also to their meanest
Subjects. He was brought to a sad Dilemma, A sad Dilemma.
and professes, himself put to a hard choice, (having such a love for his
People, and so earnestly desired theirs) either to kill his Subjects, or to be
killed by them.

If I am violently assaulted, and can apprehend no possibility of saving my own
life but by taking away his, Rather kill then be killed is the Law of Nature,
and is allowed by the Law of Nations.
who otherwise is resolved to deprive me of mine, God discharges me of the
guilt of it, and charge his blood upon his own head. If men will raise an
Army, and therewith hunt after the precious life of their lawful King; and if
they by the just hand of God perish in that rebellious pursuit, where can any
rational man think will that blood lie as to the guilt, or be visited as to the
punishment of it, but on themselves?

Some have proceeded farther yet, 3. Against those who have broken his manacles
with as much ease as Sampson did the 7 green Withs, Judge 16.9.
even to imbrew their hands in the blood of the Lords anointed; who (for the
most part of them) have not been so sensible of cutting off the thread of his
life, as David was for the cutting off the lap of Saul's garment; who was a
Prince that exceeded Saul in his extraction, in his life and conversation, as
much as David's sin fell short of theirs; Their sin considered in the nature of
it, and the most favorable construction put upon it. Clamitat ad coelum vox
sanguinis, etc.

2. In the degrees of it.


who had his own innocence to extenuate it, besides the inconsiderableness of
his crime in comparison of theirs, which by many aggravating circumstances is
so heightened, that all the Records, sacred and profane, from the beginning of
the World to this day, cannot afford its parallel.

It is a fearful, yea a crying sin to shed the blood of any person, and so
tender is God of the precious life of man, that he will not hold those
guiltless that strip him of the comforts of it, which are the very life of that
life; but has prohibited it, and will punish it as a degree of murder. The
life of man in the best sense, is but a dying life, but such a life is so in a
worse: and there is little difference between that and laying violent hands
upon him; only that they grant this favor (it it be a favor) to die by
degrees. If there be any mercy in murder, -- proh saevior ense

Parcendi rabies concessaque vita dolori.

Claud.


I should think it lies in that (supposing his Peace to be made with God) that
gives a man the quickest dispatch, and puts him soonest out of his pain.
Tristior est letho lethi mora.
To grant a man a life to live in misery, is less eligible with some persons
then death: and in some cases, the lingering delay of death is worse then death
it self.

It is a Law long since enacted in the Parliament of Heaven, Genesis 9.6. Exodus
21.28.
that whosoever sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed: yea if an Ox
gore a man or woman that he die, he shall be stoned to death. In which Law God
the Lawgiver discovered such a detestation of that sin, 3. In the subject. The
bruit Beast not exempted, much less man.
that he would not suffer murder to go unpunished, no not in the bruit
Creatures which understood neither precept nor threatening, to show how severely
he would punish it in men that are endued with reason, and know what is good
and evil. And what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of a
sin-revenging God, if they shall break through both of those strong fences to
sacrifice their Brothers blood to their own malice, or to right their injured
Reputation, which would gain more by passing by, then by punishing an offense;
especially, when there is so great a disparity between the satisfaction and the
provocation; and that there will certainly be a day of reckoning, which is most
commonly in this life, when blood will have blood, which is the common price of
blood; The greatest sin we can commit against our brother.
and when for the taking away their Brothers life, they will be enforced by the
hand of Justice to lay down, or rather pay down their own: this therefore must
be a very great sin.

4. In the Object: and aggravated by his innocence, Exodus 22.2. etc. Killing in
some cases, and of some persons, permitted, yea commanded: and the reason why.
And yet to shed the blood of an innocent person, is of the two a far greater,
and cries louder in the ears of God for vengeance then the former. For though
God does prohibit killing, yet in some cases he does permit it, and in others
does command it; Witches, Conjurers, Inchanters, Idolaters, false Prophets,
Sabbath Breakers, disobedient Children, Adulterers, all these have been
sentenced to death by Gods own mouth. And how many have been sent out of the
World before their time (according to the course of Nature) and have come to an
untimely end, guilty of such crimes which makes them liable to death by the
Laws of men? Every part was ordained for the good of the whole, and though God
does not allow any man to macerate, or mutilate his body out of humor or
superstition; yet if any part be mortally infected which threatens the
endangering of the whole, it is then both lawful, and a piece of discretion to
take our Saviors advice according to the letter of it, which he intended in
another sense, If thy right hand offend thee cut it off: with which agrees
that of the Poet.

-- sin immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum ni pars sincera trahatur.
What this or that member is to the body natural, that is such and such a
person to the body politic. Josh. 7.
Achans sin troubled all Israel so that they could not stand before their
enemies. He was by Gods own direction first discovered, and after executed and
cut off like a gangrened member, to prevent the ruin of all the rest. And
without the execution of such severe Laws, no man could be secure either in his
goods or life.

But God does no where allow the slaying of an innocent person. But of innocent
persons never allowed to any. Arguments to prove the exceeding sinfulness of it.
sins more against Charity? because such an one has more of the image of God
in him, which is the chiefest motive to it, against community, to which he is
most profitable: either for his presence the Sun would not shine so merrily on
the Highway, were it not for the bordering Fields sake: neither would God have
so prospered Laban and Potipher, but for good Jacob and Joseph's sake. Or for
his Piety, in which respect he is very beneficial, not only to that Family, or
to that City wherein he lives; but to that whole Kingdom whereof he is a
member; The whole Kingdom at a great loss by it.

Job 22.30.


The innocent shall deliver the Island, and it shall be preserved by the
pureness of his hand. The Kings of Persia, and of other Nations, had their
Mazkirim Remembrancers, They are Gods remembrancers, as the Persian Mazkirim
were to their Kings.
to mind them of those matters that concerned the Weal public. Such are these
to God, and blessed are the people that have such friends of God to befriend
them: but woe be to those that injure them, for he that touches them touches
the apple of his own eye. Argumentum a minori.
Among those many qualifications required of those who desire to dwell in Gods
holy Mountain, Psalm. 15.5.
this is one; he must not take a reward against the innocent, whether it be by
the way of bribery, as Tertullus did against St. Paul; Acts 24.
or to give in false evidence, as those suborned witnesses did against Naboth;
or by way of treachery to betray innocent blood, as Dalilah did her own
husband, for an hundred shekels of silver; Judas, his Lord and Master for
thirty pieces of the same metal; and the Scottish Army their King for two
hundred thousand pound; thinking themselves by so much the wiser Merchants, Dr.
Heylyn's Aerius rediv. p. 468.
by how much more they had made the better Market. Which several sums were the
price of innocent blood, and pity it is that all those purchases which such
Merchants make of all such money, are not called by their proper names,
Acheldama's Fields, or Purchases of Blood.

We may read Gods displeasure against this bloody Sin, written in letters of
Blood, Argumentum ab Exemplis.
in those severe judgments recorded in Sacred Writ, to have been most
impartially executed, even upon Kings themselves, Exemplified upon Kings
punished for killing their guiltless Subjects.
when they have practiced the like upon the lives of their guiltless Subjects.
Two of this nature we find in the Old Testament; The first is the avenging the
innocent blood of Nabaoth, On Ahab for Nabaoth.
when Ahab was going to take possession of his Vineyard, God sent Elijah to him
with this Message, Have thou killed and also taken possession? 1 Kings 21.18,
19, etc.
In the place where the Dogs licked the blood of Nabaoth shall the Dogs lick
thy blood, even thine. I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, as
well him that is shut up, as him that is left in Israel. And also of Jezebel
the contriver of his death spoke he, saying, On Jezebel the contriver.
The Dogs shall eat Jezebel by the Walls of Jezreel. And although God did not
bring all this to effect in Ahabs time, because he had humbled himself, yet if
we compare the several Executions with their Sentences, we shall find them to
accord very exactly. In the very next Chapter Ahab himself is slain as he
fought against the King of Syria, and his blood ran out of his wound into the
Chariot, Chap. 22.
which when one washed in the Pool of Samaria, the Dogs licked his blood.
Jehoram his son was slain by Jehu, On Jehoram. 2 Kings 9.24.
and his body cast out in the open Field. And in the self-same Chapter, Jezabel
was cast out of a Window, V. 32, 33.
and her Carcass devoured by Dogs, excepting only her scul, her Feet, and the
Palms of her hands. Chap. 10.10, And the rest of the children for their Parents
sake.
The next gives you a sad account of the rest; so that there fell nothing to
the earth of the Word of the Lord, spoken concerning Ahab and his house, by his
servant Elijah.

2. On David for Uriah.

2 Samuel 12.


The other concerns that of Vriah whom David is said to have slain with the
Sword of the Children of Ammon; because the design which brought him to his
end, was laid by him, to cover his Adultery committed before with his wife.
Whereupon it follows immediately, Now therefore the Sword shall never depart
from thine house. I will raise up evil against thee, out of thine house, Verse.
10. He is severely punished in his children.
etc. How God punished him in his children, the following Chapter, with several
others, will satisfy any, who have a desire to inform themselves. Though by
repentance he escapes as to his person.
He himself indeed died in peace, because by his unfeigned repentance he had
made his peace with God; in testimony whereof, Psalm. 51.
he has left a Copy of it upon record, that those who stumble at his Fall,
might be directed to rise again by his Example. But whosoever seriously weighs some
of those expressions, intimating the difficult recovery of Gods favor, which
by those sins he had justly forfeited, will think it a point of sound
discretion, rather to take the more diligent heed to their own standing.

If it be so heinous a sin to take away the life of the body, Inference against
Soul-Murderers. Tot occidimus quot ad mortem ire quotidie tepidi and tacentes
videmus. Greg. in Ezech. Homicida dicitur Diabolus non gladio armatus, non
ferro accinctus; ad hominem venit verbum seminavit and occidit, noli ergo
putare te non esse homicidam quando fratri tuo mala persuadeas. Aug. in Joh. 8.
a far greater and more heinous it must needs be to destroy the life of the
soul. When we see men posting to destruction, and endeavor not to stop them by
a seasonable reproof, we are after a sort guilty thereof. The Devil is called a
Murderer from the beginning; not that he set upon our first Parents with a
Sword, or any other murdering weapon; but with seducing words (saying, In the
day that ye eat thereof your eyes shall be open, and ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil) he procured their fall: and questionless he is no less
guilty that lies in wait to deceive and draw others into Schism, Heresy,
Rebellion, and such lik fruits of the Flesh; which had their beginning from
Hell, and will have their end in damnation.

Yet how many have this to answer for, who as yet go as upright under their
guilt as Sampson under the Gates of Gaza? Not that I take upon me peremptorily
to censure, or finally to determine the future estate of any; Inter Pontem and
Fontem.
God might show them mercy between the Bridge and the Water: and with as much
ease save a Soldier gasping upon the ground, as he did the Thief dying upon
the Cross. But suppose (the best) that he did give to many that fell in that
unjust quarrel, that mercy first to see their sin to repentance, and that next
to pardon it; yet, no thanks to those who did engage them: who were so far from
sounding a retreat to countermand their Proselites, that they have given but
small evidence to the World of their own repentance. Yet notwithstanding this,
if we grant (which is too possible) that some of those poor seduced souls did
die in their sin; God will require the blood of the Seduced at the hands of
their Seducers.

Ezekiel. 3.18.


it is easy to read at whose hands God will one day require their blood. The
inference is genuine though somewhat beside my purpose, I shall therefore
insist no further upon it, but leave it with this hearty wish to those, An
Apology for the digression.
for whose sakes I have made this short digression that they may be as sensible
as it self is seasonable.

My business is (as a Solicitor for the King of Kings) to draw up a Charge
against a rebellious Nation, Rebellion arraigned with her chief Actors and
Accessaries.
or rather a rebellious Faction in the Nation; for that (not having the fear of
God before their eyes) have traitorously and wickedly imagined, conspired, and
compassed the death of the Lords Anointed. The charge enforced, and her crime
aggravated from the quality of the Object Regicide. 2 Sum. 18.3.
I have showed already how God detests that crying sin of Murder, and with
what dreadful fury the Avenger of blood did pursue the Murderers. But alas!
those instances fell as far short of this, as there is of difference betwixt
the Objects on whom the murders were perpetrated. Those were Homicides acted
on Subjects, this a Regicide committed upon the person of Gods Vicegerent, and
their lawful King: who in the balance of the Sanctuary, which is exactly even,
outweighs ten thousand of the other. Wherein this resembled those before
mentioned.
Some thing of resemblance to this I find in both the former; namely, in the
close and cunning contrivance; more yet between this and the former of them, in
that both that and this were carried on under the same colors of Religion and
Justice [Proclaim a Fast:] so these under a pretense to seek God, most
blasphemously intitling him to the worst of Villainies. Had they indeed when
first engaged in that design, searched the Scripture, as good Christians should
daily do, which conteins in it the revealed mind or will of God, to which all
are bound to apply themselves for resolution in all their doubts. Their eyes
would have dropped out of their heads, ere they could have found so much as the
least color of a Precept, or warrantable President for their proceedings, had
they consulted the thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 13.
which troubles a Rebel as much to read, as (some say) it does a Witch to say
the Lords Prayer; it would have put a bar to all further attempts, and in stead
of taking away their Sovereigns life, Benhadads Policy if practiced, might have
saved his life, secured their own, and prevented the loss of many thousands of
their fellow Subjects.
would rather (as Benhadads Ambassadors) with badges of their deserts have
implored his pardon to secure their own. And this they might have done upon as
firm a ground of hope to speed; because that King was as merciful as ever was
any of the Kings of Israel.

But that is not the only fence that God has made for the safeguard and
security of Princes. I have before quoted other places which speak their
Authority to be so sacred, that God will not allow their Subjects so much as
the liberty of their thoughts against them.

We read indeed of many Regicides in Sacred Writ and profane Story, Last
Argument aggravating it above all Murders of the same kind as without
parallel. That of our Saviors by the Jews, his own Subjects, came nearest to
it.
but they acted it privately, these in the face of the Sun.

One instance there is indeed in the New Testament, and but that one, the
murdering of a King too, and he higher then the highest Monarch upon Earth, the
Lord Jesus Christ, that Prince of Peace; barbarously crucified between two
Thieves, as if he had been, yea, the greatest of the three: to whom as few
Kings ever came so near in their lives, so none ever did in so many
circumstances of his death. Yet this even this instance of this King, In some
things exceeds it.
though it does even in many things exceed ours as far as Heaven exceeds Earth,
and God exceeds Man, in this one circumstance falls short; that those that were
the Contrivers and Promoters of his death, never did, But in one circumstance
falls short, and that a very material one too.
nor never would, from first to last, own him for their King: but when Pilate
asked that question, Shall I crucify your King? they returned this answer, We
have no King but Caesar; and when he had caused this Superscription to be
written in three several Languages, which sounds thus much in ours, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews; they abhorring to own the crucifying him under that
title, desire him to alter it, Joh. 19.19, 20, 21.
Write not the King of the Jews, but that he said, I am the King of the Jews.

Obj.

The greatest part of the Nation plead Not Guilty to the Indictment.


It may be some will object in the words of the Disciples to the Woman in the
Gospel, pouring that costly ointment upon our Saviors head; What needed this
waste of words, since the greatest part of the Kingdom had neither hands nor
hearts engaged in it? Sol.

Those were guilty that engaged not for him, though not in so high a degree as
they that fought against him.

Hinc illae lachrymae.

He that fights against him with his purse, if a Volunteer, is as bad as he
that fights against him. Our Laws say Rex non moritur, which is always true
quoad jus, not so always quoad potestatem, exemplified in our late Interregnum.


To these I have to answer, that David was at a great distance from Vriah when
he received his deaths wound, and yet he prays apparently in reference unto
that, Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God. Whence I infer that a man may be
guilty of another blood never shed; if so, though but few principals in the
shedding of this, there were very many accessaries; either by actually
opposing, or not personally assisting him according to our bounden duty, either
by their persons, or by their purses.

Moneys are the sinews of War, and had not they so readily sacrificed their
Wealth to the pleasure of their Grandees, their design must have been nipt in
the Bud, and proved rotten ere it had been ripe. This, this is that that
suborned the Witnesses, that feed the Counsel, that bribed the Judge, that paid
the Executioner for striking that fatal stroke which made the body both of our
King and Kingdom headless.

All this that I have said to aggravate the crime, The Authors Apology for his
severe application.
is not (God knows) out of any delight I take to rake in those rotten Ulcers
and festered Sores; but in order to that which follows, and which our sin calls
upon us loudly for out great humiliation. To which purpose our Anniversary Fast
enacted on that sad occasion, renews the memory of our guilt, Infandum -- jubes
renovare dolorem.
and directs us with renewed Repentance to deprecate the punishment; lest we
forgeting it to God, God should remember it to us, in such a way as we would
not willingly hear of it.

The Prophet Jeremiah has written a whole Book of Lamentations for the death
of good Josiah, Judah had great reason to lament the loss of their good Josiah;
but we greater for the death of ours.
which was the forerunner of those many miseries to the Jewish Church: and his
Subjects expressed the sense of their loss by his fall, so deeply and
pathetically, that it was made for an Ordinance unto Israel, and proposed as a
Pattern for future times in their most important occasions. Zech. 12.11.
In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon. Surely it behooves us in our mourning (if
possible) to exceed them. Their King Josiahs fall was an effect of his own
rashness and folly; but the fall of ours was both by, and for our sins. This
(in short) I commend as reflecting upon what is past, Wholesome advice.
and propose this as a proper expedient for the time to come, to break off our
Sins by Righteousness, our former Rebellion by our future Fidelity. And since
all our tears (were every one of our Eyes Fountains) would prove ineffectual to
restore to life, him whom some have been so eminently instrumental, and all
have been one way or other accessory to bring him to his end; what we fell
short in duty to the dead Father, let us make up in love and loyalty to his
living Son, his rightful Heir and Successor; whose unparalled act of Grace
(when we lay under the danger of so great a forfeiture) cannot but indear him
to all his rational Subjects; The benefit whereof I envy to none, but do
heartily wish that some would study better to deserve it. And so I pass from
this fear, here strictly taken, as it signifies a particular duty which every
individual Subject ows to his Prince; and come to consider it in its latitude
as more comprehensive, including all other duties payable to him upon the same
account.

It is not unknown to any that study the Sense as well as the Letter of the
Scripture, that Fear, Fear a very comprehensive Duty.
when it relates to God as its Object (as it does here in the first place)
oftentimes signifies his whole Worship; Deuteronomy. 6.13. Psalm. 112.1, 128.1. Acts
10.35. Qui timet Deum nihil negligit; timere Deum est nulla quae facienda sunt
bona praeterire. Greg. Moral.
as it does in all those places in the Margin. The Fear of the Lord makes a
man very diligent and careful that he leaves no good duty undone which God
would have him do; and it is as common in the Scripture, when he intends to
press the whole duty of Inferiors to their Superiors; to name only some one
leading duty, which being expressed, the rest which are as it were under its
command, must be understood; as honor to Parents, submission to Husbands,
obedience to Masters, as here Fear to Kings and Princes.

This (whether ye refer it to God or the King) is to all other Duties, It is
like the Heart.
as the Heart is to all the other parts of a man; and when God calls for that,
Prove. 23.26.
My Son give me thine heart, he leaves not the rest to our own disposing. He
made man, that is, the whole man, and every part of man for himself, 1 Cor.
6.20.
and purchased both body and Soul at a price: there is great reason that the
Workmanship should serve to the use of the Workman; and that which was bought
at so dear a rate, should be serviceable to him that bought it: in calling for
that, he calls for all; and he that in answer to that call of his, presents him
with that gift, he together with that gives him all. Like the Centurion in the
Gospel, Like the Centurion.

Matthew. 8.8.


it is in great Authority, it has all the rest as Servants at its beck: it
says to one go and it goes, to another come and it comes, to another do this
and he does it. If God have the Heart, the Tongue will show forth his praise,
the Ear will be open to his Word, the Eye will be turned away from Vanity, and
behold the wonderful things contained in his Law; the Hand will do the thing
that is good, and the Feet will run the way of his Commandments. Even as it is
with the great Wheel of a Clock or Watch, Like the great Wheel of a Clock.
if that be at fault, the rest cannot be regular in their motion; if that be
right the rest will answer it: so if God has this, or have it not, he has
either all or none at all. Its Attendants as it refers to the second of these
Objects, the King.
And so it is with this Fear of the King; where this is seated in the heart,
all other duties will accompany it: they will be subject to his Laws, loyal to
his Person, make a charitable construction of his failings and infirmities,
pray for him, and pay unto him what is legally charged upon them for the
support of his Grandeur, and to defray the charges of his Government. Of all
which in their Order.

First, Subjection.
They will submit themselves to those Governors that are set over them in the
Lord, and honor them by performing all dutiful obedience to them, according to
that general rule given by the Apostle to all that are under Government; Romans
13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, the original word signifies an
orderly subjection, or the placing, or setting one thing under another in due
order. As amongst the Elements, the Water under the Earth, the Earth under the
Air, and the Air under the Element of Fire. In the Body Natural, the severai
parts of it under the Head, and each of those parts one under another. In the
Family, the Wife under the Husband, the Children under their Parents, Chrysostom.
in Polycrat. Tunc totum Reipublicae corpus vigebit si singula quaeque loca
teneant, membra si fuerit officiorum non confusio sed distributio.
the Servants under their Masters. In the Commonwealth, which is a Body
Politic, the Subjects under their Princes. The whole Body of that
Commonwealth will then flourish, when every one of its Members acts vigorously
within its proper sphere; when there is an orderly distribution; and not a wild
confusion of Offices.

The Seeds of which Subjection the God of Order has sown among those Creatures
which are without Reason, Bees, Cranes, Fishes, etc. which have one above them,
under whose conduct they go forth to feed, and so return. And although it be no
Miracle, yet it is a wonder which is noted of the Pismire, Prove. 6.6. Chap.
30.27.
which has no Guide nor Governor; and of the Locusts, which have no King, and
yet go forth all by Bands, flying in Troops, some turning one way and some
another, like diverse Squadrons of an Army; and men may be as well sent to them
to learn Concord, as to the Ant for Industry and discreet Providence. Yet this
is no disparagement to Government, which the sad effects of the want of it,
commends and cries up for necessary, and that among rational men, who have
Reason to guide them; yea, among those men which were acted by a higher
principle then that, Judge. 17.6. Chap. 18.1. Chap. 21.25.
viz. Religion. When there was no King in Israel, every one did that which was
good in his own eye. How does Piety and Religion languish, Idolatry and
Profaneness flourish? And if there be confusion, as there must be when there
is no order: The Scripture tells us what will follow upon it, every evil work.

God has ordained Government and Governors as a Hedge, James 3.16. Government
a Hedge.
or Fence to keep men secure in their Religion, Lives, Liberties, Estates, and
Proprieties. And the blessed Apostle exhorting to pray for Kings, gives this as
a chief Argument to enforce it, 1 Timothy 2 1, 2.
that under them we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty. That pulled up, all goes to ruin.
This Hedge being once removed, all goes to rack. It has been sufficiently
observed by several sad experiences, where God has suffered the Enemies of it
so far to prevail; and those who have designed to prey upon either or all of
these, have levelled their Batteries against Magistracy, as the chiefest
fortress of their security.

What a bloody Tragoedy does Germany and some parts of the Netherlands present
us with, Exemplified by the Anabaptists proceedings in Germany, etc.
acted by the Anabaptists in their several Scenes of Mischief? To which this
was preached by their Ringleaders, as the most proper Prologue; and that
pretended as a Revelation from Heaven too; that the Empire and Principalities
of this World, were to be extirpated; and that the Sword of Gideon was put into
their hands to be employed against all Tyrants for the assertion of true
Liberty, and the restoration of the Kingdom of Christ; by whom Religion it
self is brought upon the Stage in a strange disguise, and made to act her part
in what was most contrary to her nature; J. D. his Epistle to his Apocalypsis,
or History of the Anabaptists.
imbruing her white and innocent hands in Blood and Massacres? What strange
pretenses are here? as if those had not been Christians to whom St. Paul gave
that precept; yes certainly they were so; and he in that does as certainly
imply, they being such, that nothing in Christianity ought to be pretended, or
made use of to give any man immunity from his obedience to the Higher Powers.

In the Kingdom of Christ this is wonderful, Their gross Error refuted. Za^ch.
Misc. Epist. Dedic.
says a learned Author, that he wills and commands all Princes and Potentates
to be subject to his Kingdom, and yet he wills and commands likewise, that his
Kingdom, that is, the Subjects of his Kingdom be subject to the Kingdoms of the
World: intimating that their spirirual freedom which they have, and do enjoy
under him, from Sin, Satan, and Damnation is not repugnant to the corporal
subjection due to them: and that the same person may be both a Christian and a
Subject, as well as a Christian; and yet notwithstanding a Wife, and must be
subject to her Husband; a Child, and must obey his Parents; a Servant, and so
consequently must do service to his Master. Yea further, Subjection an
essential part of the Christian Religion.
Their obedience and subjection is a part of their Religion; and so essential a
part, that he that is not a good Subject, cannot be a good Christian.

And however all that go under that name are not subject as they should be, I
must tell them, that neither Christ, neither any good Christians can account
them so; but spots and blemishes of that glorious Profession, exorbitant
persons that make themselves a Dispensation, and take liberty to do what they
list, without any regard to what their Superiors command them; making it only
a matter of complement, and no concern at all of Conscience; Romans 13.5.
though afterward urged by the same Apostolical Authority, upon that very
account.

How loath are some to stoop to Authority, Applicat. 1.

Non est vilis and abjecti animi indicium, sed generosi and a lege Creatoris,
non deviantis prompte and lubenti animo subjici melioribus. B. Davenant in
Coloss. 3.


and to submit to the practice of so indispensable a duty? As it it were in it
self a thing too much beneath a free and ingenious spirit. Whereas in truth it
is rather an argument of a generous mind, not deviating from the Law of
Creation, willingly to subject it self to its betters. Insomuch that the very
Heathens could say, Facile imperium in bonos: pessimus quisque asperime
rectorem patitur.
It is an easy matter to govern such as are good, but a difficult task to
govern such as are bad, who account submission a yoke too strait and uneasy
for their stiffned necks.

2. Non-conformists apparently defective in this duty.
Others, who seem willing to comply with the commands of their Superiors in
matters of civil concernment; yet fain would be their own carvers, and be left
to their own liberty in Ecclesiasticals; especially in those things which are
adiaphorous (i. e.) of a middle and indifferent nature; as if that God who is
the God of Order, and both commands and approves of it in all other Societies
of men, would allow of, or excuse confusion in his own House.

In what the power of Kings chiefly consists.
The power of Kings consists chiefly in things of that quality, which if they
are abridged of, they are in effect but merely titular, and signify as little
as so many Ciphers without a figure. Whatsoever comes within the compass of the
Moral Law, either as a Duty to be done, or as a Vice to be eschewed; the one
must be done, and the other left undone, whether or no the Magistrate second it
with his command or prohibition: What needed then that Precept of obeying
Magistrates? he that will not obey God, will not obey Man commanding the same
thing with God freely and willingly; and he that obeys what God commands, being
awed thereunto by the Precepts of men, Isa. 29.13.
the Prophet has left us ground enough to judge by, what approbation, or
acceptance that obedience is like to find at the hands of God.

Every Duty which falls under a Moral Precept, Circumstances as inseperably
linked to Duty, as those accidents, so called, are to their subjects, which
cannot be parted without the apparent destruction of both, exemplified in the
gesture of Prayer.
has some Ceremony or other necessarily accompanying it, as the Shadow does
the Substance in the clearest day. I instance in a man's gesture in Prayer,
whether it be standing, walking, leaning, kneeling, lying, either upon the
back, sides, or prostrate, or any other way, (if there can be any other) as we
read of several men that have used several of these, which the Scripture rather
describes then prescribes, and it is impossible he should do it but in some of
these, or such like: but in which of these he shall pray, there is not one word
of command for this, or that, or any; yet notwithstanding, it is very requisite
that they which meet together in the same place, to serve the same God, should
be both unanimous and uniform, join together in the same mind, and in the same
form; as it is noted in the people in Ezra's time, when he opened the Books to
read, Nehem. 5.6.
all stood up; but when they praised the Lord, The ill consequences of leaving
every man to his liberty.
they all bowed themselves. Diversities of gestures cause distinction, and
hinder devotion, being usually attended with preposterous censuring one of
another, to prevent which the Apostle has left a standing rule to order all
things of this nature by: Let all things be done decently and in order. A
general Apostolical rule for ordering things of this nature by.
And the next best rule that we can observe to uphold and maintain that order,
is to comply with that Church wherein we live, and whereof we are members, in
such commendable gestures as she prescribes and practices. It cannot but be
looked upon as a thing very indecent and disorderly, when in compliance with
that Catholic and Apostolic Constitution, Who have power to regulate those
things.
the Governors of our Church (among whom we acknowledge the King, next under
Christ, to be Supreme) have ordered this or that, for private men in their
practices to control their public judgment: Besides, what it argues of pride
and singularity, from which their own fairest pretenses cannot clear them; nor
the greatest charity of others excuse them. So heinous a thing in the judgment
of that very Apostle was Violation of Church Orders; that Contumacy therein
deserved a censure little less then Excommunication, commanding to withdraw
from every brother that walks disorderly, 2 Thessalonians 3.6.
and not after the instructions which they had received. What has been said of
Gestures in Prayer, Vestures in the public Administration under the same rule.
might have been said of Vestures in the public Administration: which come
under the same consideration, and belong to the same general Rule.

But what if a lawful Power command an unlawful thing, Quest.
what must the Subject do in such a case? Answ.
The Question carries its answer within it self; the Command is unlawful
therefore it must not be obeyed, i. e. actively:. the Power commanding it, is
lawful, therefore must not be resisted. The common Case falling under this
Head, resolved
Princes have not an absolute and unlimited Authority over their Subjects;
neither must they give an absolute and universal obedience unto their Princes.
We are bound to obey those that are set over us by the Lord, only in the Lord.
He that made such a one a King, Propter quod unumquodque est tale idipsum est
magis tale. Aristotel. Acts 4.29.
is more a King himself, then he is whom he made so; being King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords,: therefore when he shall command contrary things, Whether it be
right in the sight of God, to obey man rather then God, judge ye. Surely, as
Peter and others of the Apostles said in such a case, We ought rather to obey
God then men. Acts 5.29. Ex quo docemur quatenus se extendit officium
Magistratus, deinde quanta obedientia est a nobis colendus idque loco Dei.
Denique quando licitum ab eo discedere. Aretius in Act. Apost. Absolute
obedience not safe either in Kings commanding,
From whence we may learn how far the Office of the Magistrate does extend,
what respect we ought to show toward him, as being in Gods stead: and how far
we must follow his Command with our obedience. No farther then he therein
follows the commands of God; where he leaves God, there we must leave him. Such
an absolute obedience, stretched to things repugnant to the Word of God, can
neither be safe for that King that shall require it, nor for that Subject that
shall give it. Happy had it been for Jeroboam, had not his idolatrous Decree
met with such an easy compliance in his People: their magnifying him above
what was meet, brought destruction upon him and his; and has left such a blot
upon his name, as shall never be taken off so long as the Scripture continues
that records his History, which stigmatized him to all posterity, in this
reproachful character, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, 2 Kings 10.31.
who made Israel to sin. Or in their Subjects obeying.
Neither will the Princes command be of any force to extenuate his Subjects sin
before God; nor take off so much as an unite in the number of his decreed
stripes. Those Executioners of the three Children could have produced
Nebuchadnezzars Commission for casting them into the Fiery Furnace; Dan. 3.19,
20, etc.
and yet within two Verses ye may find them consumed to ashes with the very
flame of that Fire which they had kindled, and into which they cast those
innocent persons. It is the Remarque of a learned Expositor upon the very
instance, Dr. Willet in loc.
because they did yield obedience to the King in so wicked and unjust a Decree;
therefore they were worthily destroyed. Unlawful Commands must not be obeyed

In such a case the Subject must fly to his Arms, such as are Prayers and
Tears; What to do in that case? Ad preces and lachrimas quae sunt arma
Ecclesiae.
which are all the Weapons that his holy Mother the Church will allow him upon
such an account. As to any other, our Savior Christ has given a very strict
inhibition with a menacing sub poena: he that takes up the Sword, Mat. 26.52.
Pugna Petri a Christo reprehansa monet non esse praetextu Evangelii rapiendum
gladium, etc. Chytreus in locum.
shall perish by the Sword. Christ reprehending that rash act of Peter
admonishes us, that we ought not to take up the Sword under pretense of the
Gospel; but in times of Persecution to encounter all difficulties, armed only
with Prayer and Patience. This was the practice of those Primitive Christians,
who lived under the Government of Heathen Emperors, notwithstanding they
wanted not a considerable Party to have made resistance.

Tertull. Apol.
How basely then do they detract from the deserved praise of those glorious
Martyrs, who willingly offered their bodies as a Sacrifice to their Persecutors
rage, rather then to transgress the commands of God. Which some have imputed
rather to their want of Power then Will, that they did not repel one force with
another; Vim vi repellere
as if they had made a Virtue of Necessity: A base construction made of the
patient sufferings of the Primitive Christians.
and that if they had been furnished with men and Arms, they would have
resisted rather then have suffered. A great Promoter of our late Divisions,
pinched as it seems with the force of the forecited allegation out of that
learned Father, Nodus Gordiaanus.
very nimbly cuts asunder that knot which he saw with all his skill he could
not untie; so as to give satisfaction to any ingenious Reader, who was willing
(as all should be in a business of that consequence) to try before he trusted,
1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
censuring the Author of that Apology for a bad Statesman, Tertullians Errors
discovered, to invalidate his Authority.
and a worse Arithmetician; and at length musters up his errors to overthrow
his authority; charging him with Montanism. True it is, he did so strangely
admire that blasphemous Heretic, Nec mihi persuadere potest hominem tam acris
judicii sic in divinis literis exercitatum credidisse Montanum fuisse Sp. Sanct.
that Erasmus could not persuade himself that he was in earnest. As dead Flies
cause the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor, so does a
little Folly him that is in reputation for Wisdom and Honor.

But though this Anti-Tertullianist in his Anti-Cavileerism, A pestilent
Pamphlet Printed in the times of the Rebellion.
is pleased to slight the Works of that Author upon the former, and some few
other considerations; yet as profound Divines as himself have as highly prized
them. In what esteem he was with S. Cyprian. Vincent. Lyran.
Not a day passed Cyprian but he read something of them. Vincent. Lyran.
assigned him the first place among the Latin Fathers; as I think I may safely
do to him among those (if there be any such besides himself) that have ranged
Tertullians Apologetical Orations among his Errors; and may not we with the
same Tool as easily dissolve his Gordian Knot? and answer those Authorities
which he produces in opposition to the former, 1 Samuel 14.43, 44, 45. Chap. 22.
1, 2.
viz. that of the Peoples rescuing Jonathan Saul's son from the destructive
consequence of his Fathers rash Oath: and that of David his raising an Army to
defend himself? A pretty way to evade the force of an Argument, which we cannot
answer.
Since both the one and the other were guilty, questionless, of several
miscarriages, and therefore might possibly err in those, as well as in other of
their actions. But I conceive it may be done in a great deal fairer way, by
making it appear these instances are not so parallel as he would make the World
believe they are to his business there in hand. The first instance misapplied,
as appears by the sense commonly given of it, which has a great deal of
probability to second it.
The first instance is brought (so far as my memory serves me) to justify that
affront put upon the King, when he demanded those impeached Members to be
delivered up to Justice. These agree like Harp and Harrow; if the one were by
Arms, the other only by Arguments. Jonathan's rescue by a disswasive
intercession, theirs by a forcible opposition. The last cannot be denied by
any, the other is affirmed by many; and those of no small esteem in the Church:
whose judgments seem to be very much favored by the Context: And the People
said unto Saul, 1 Samuel 14.45.
shall Jonathan die, who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? 1 Samuel
21.9.
God forbid: as the Lord lives there shall not one hair of his head fall to
the ground, for he has wrought with God this day. Here are words spoken, no
swords drawn: unless as Goliahs sword lay wrapped up in a cloth behind the Ephod,
so these should lie concealed in the word Rescue. But if this rescue might be
made without force, (as it is possible it might) and very probable it was so;
and Charity enjoins us to make the most favorable construction) where then is
the force of this instance? One indeed that sided with the same Party, is of
that mind with himself; but then he is so far from approving it, that he
dislikes and condemns it. They should not have done it by force, but by humble
supplication. Trapp in locum, a facto ad jus non valet argumentum, no more in
that case then this, J. G. was a Rebel therefore, J. H. might be so too.
And if he blame those for doing that, he could not commend these for doing
this.

And for the other, viz. David's raising an Army in his own defense, is no
argument for Subjects to take up Arms against their King; to pursue him from
place to place, to sequester, plunder, imprison, arraign, sentence, and in fine
to murder him. As these were the steps of their March, The second urged to as
little purpose.
or of the March of their Army which were raised (as he pretends) for the
defense of their Country. If he call this a defensive, I confess, I am yet to
learn what an offensive War is. In a sense indeed it may be called so, Scelera
sceleribus tuenda. Tacit. Catalines and their War alike defensive.
as Cataline, so famous in History for Treason and Conspiracy; proceeded still
further, heaping up Treason upon Treason, (the last to defend and secure
himself from the deserved vengeance of the first) whose saying it was, The
mischiefs I have done, cannot be safe, but by attempting greater; so these by
the Conscience of their guilt (which in their conceit was beyond all hope of
pardon) were hurried on from bad to worse; conceiving themselves still unsafe;
so long as there was one alive of that Royal Race, that might bring them to an
account, and adjudg them the reward of their Treason and Rebellion.

One example of more force then all his allegations, had he made use of a
thousand more.
To these examples, which I may justly except against, (as to the purpose for
which they are brought) I shall purpose one which is beyond all exceptions, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ blessed for ever, who submitted to the execution
of a most unjust sentence, without the least opposition or resistance; whereas
he might have commanded more then twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue: Mat.
26.53.
who was oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as
a Lamb to the slaughter, Isay 53.7.
and as a Sheep before the sharer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth, etc.
whose sufferings were not only meritorious, but also exemplary, leaving us an
example thereby, that we that bear his name, should tread in his steps, and
suffer any thing rather then resist Authority. In imitation of whom, and for
whose sake, those good Christians of old were killed all the day long,
Occidebantur sine reluctatione.
and were accounted as sheep for the slaughter, as sheep indeed they were;
because slain without resistance: whose examples, if we oppose in our practice,
Mat. 16.25.
in seeking to save our lives by such unwarrantable ways we may well expect to
lose them. He that resists, Romans 13.2.
resists the Ordinance of God, and shall receive to himself damnation.
Whereas if we lose our lives for his sake, we shall save them; if our temporal
lives, we shall be savers, yea great gainers, we shall have eternal life for
them; which is so far from being a loss, that it will prove an happy exchange.

Where there is this fear, 2. Duty comprehended in this of Fear, Fidelity.
there will be also fidelity, in defending and maintaining the life, state,
dignity, and honor of the King: and in discovering Treasons and Conspiracies
against him. Mordecai a Loyal Subject.
Mordecai was a true pattern of Loyalty, who overhearing Bigthan and Teresh
muttering out some treasonable intentions against Ahasuerus their Liege Lord
and King, incontinently made a discovery of it. Delay he knew well in a
business of that nature, might prove very dangerous, and every minute it had
been concealed, would have administered to the ripening of their design, and the
endangering the Kings life. The thing being known to Mordecai, he told it to
Hester the Queen, and she certified the King; Hester 2.22, etc.
who making inquisition, found it to be true, and gave them the proper reward
of Traitors, hanged them both on a Tree.

So was Abishai when Shemei affronted David.
This made Abishai so ready to revenge Shimei his reproachful language against
his Lord and Master King David, Suffer me to go and take off the head of that
dead dog. And the men of Judah in Sheba's insurrection against him listing
themselves under Joah, and adventuring their lives to bring that Traitor to
Justice.
This made the men of Judah cleave so fast to him, when Sheba the son of Bichri
made an insurrection, headed a Party, and at length drew all Israel after him;
these willingly offer themselves, and are listed under the conduct of Joah his
General: who by their help pursued the Traitor to Abel, sets before it batters
the Walls, and denies all peace to the Inhabitants, till they had taken off his
head, and sent it by him to David for a Present. A man of Mount Ephraim has
lifted up his hand against the King: deliver him only, and I will depart from
the City, etc.

2 Samuel 20. Jehosheba in securing Joash from that Athalian Massacre.
This made Jehosheba to secure Joash the son of King Ahaziah, when Athaliah to
make way to, and confirm her self in the Throne, made away all the rest of his
offspring. This heir apparent he hides six years in the House of the Lord, at
the end of which time (when that she Tyrant thought all had been her own) he
assembles the Governors and Captains, acquaints them with the unexpected news
of a young King, preserved by a strange kind of providence, placed a strong
guard about his person, set the Crown upon his head, and secured him in his
Throne: which when that bloody Hell-hag and Fury saw, she cries out Treason,
Treason; he well knew who was the Traitor, and accordingly gave order to the
Captains and Officers for her execution, who soon put a period both to her
claim and life. Chrysostom sends Rebels to the Bees to learn Loyalty.
Chrysostom tells us no Nation is so careful of their King as are the Bees; if
he be safe they all agree, but if he miscarry they fall all into confusion and
devour their honey: when either Age or Accident has taken him from his wings,
he is carried up by the crowd, and when he dies his Subjects die also.

Fidelity is a duty of that consequence to the safety of a King, A Duty
necessary to the Kings safety.
and so consequently of his whole Kingdom, which is at a great loss in the loss
of a good King; that to ensure it, they used in the times of the Old Testament,
Oath of Allegiance no late invention.
to tie their Subjects with the sacred bond of an Oath; which is at this day in
use both in our own and other Nations: which was thought a sufficient security,
when Oaths were made more conscience of. Ferrum tuetur Principem.
Some have thought potent Arms the best, as Nero in Seneca's Tragedies. But
it is not with men as among Beasts, where the strongest head the Herd, and bear
the sway; it is Virtue not Violence establishes a Princes authority, whose best
and most faithful Guard, are his own Innocence and his Subjects Benevolence;
without which the greatest they can place about their persons, will hardly
exempt them from perpetual fears, and renders them more like Prisoners then
like Princes. As Plato sometime said of Dionisius the Tyrant, Quid tantum mali
fecisti, ut ita a multis custodiaris?
when he saw him environed with his, What evil have thou done, that thou have
so many Keepers?

He that is truly Loyal will not stick to hazard his own, if that he can
preserve his Sovereigns life. Like that noble Hubert of St. Clare mentioned in
our English Chronicles, Hubert of St. Clare.
who at a Siege interposed his own person between his King and danger: and
lodged that deadly Arrow in his own breast, which was levelled at that Royal
mark.

It was our Saviors inference upon that supposition, which both were
occasioned by Pilates question, Art thou the King of the Jews? John 18.33. V.
35. This nulls the pretended Commission of those Millenaries of the last
Edition, who have listed themselves of his Lifeguard, under pretense of
setting him on his Throne, who professes himself no temporal Prince, and
disclaims all title to an earthly Kingdom.
My Kingdom is not of this World: if it were then would my servants fight that
I should not be delivered to mine enemies: which if well weighed, would stop
the mouths, and tie up the hands of those who are so apt to rebel against the
Kings of this World, under pretense of enlarging the Kingdom of Christ, which
is not of this World, and therefore needs none of its weapons, either to
support it, or to augment it. God would not allow David (because a Soldier, a
man of blood, though all that he shed was by virtue of Gods Commission, and in
fighting his battles (except that of Vriah, which he before repented of, and
had received his pardon for it) to build him a Temple, which was but a type of
that spiritual Kingdom. That was a work reserved for Solomon that peaceable
King, and so the fitter to typifie the Prince of Peace. Christ had an Army,
What Army this King had.
but it was made up of Martyrs; Subjects that did strive to defend him and his
Kingdom: but they did this by laying down their own lives, not by taking away
the lives of others; who fought with weapons, not carnal, What weapons they
fought with.
but spiritual; such as were mighty through God for the pulling down the strong
holds that Sin and Satan had erected in the hearts of men.

His Conquest great, and yet without Sword or blood.
It was the singular glory of that Kingdom of his, that it planted it self
without a Sword, and made a conquest of the World without blood. It was his
Fathers promise, that upon his Sons as king, he would give him the Heathen for
his inheritance, and the uttermost parts for his possession. A large proffer of
vast Territories, of a Crown and Kingdom worth the having; but he must win them
before he can wear and enjoy them. How unlikely, when so many opposers.
When he came into the World to take possession of this gift, he found all its
inhabitants ranked under two heads of distinction, Jews and Gentiles. The first
refused him, owning no King but Caesaer, Joh. 19.15.
Joh. 19.15. The other storm and rage at him, The Kings of the Earth set
themselves together, Psalm. 2.2.
and the Rulers take Council together against his anointed: and it was almost
the general cry, We will not have this man to reign over us. So that in the
judgments of men, it was a thing impossible for him to erect such an universal
Monarchy, when there were on all sides such great oppositions; what were his
first followers and afterward co-workers, A short Character of his Lifeguard.
Potius Aratores quam Oratores.
but poor simple illiterate men, fitter for Plough-men then Orators.

When Absolon sought to wrest the Scepter out of his Fathers hands, he depraved
and maligned his Government, Absolons fawning policy.
and with subtle promises, and courteous deportment, insinuated himself into
the affections of his Subjects. O that I were made Judge over Israel, that
every man which has any suit or cause, 2 Samuel 15.3, 4, 5, 6.
might come unto me, and I would do him justice: and when any man came nigh
unto him to do his obeisance, he put forth his hand, took him and kissed him:
so Absalon stole the hearts of the children of Israel. And when Cyrus the
Persian designed to subdue the Lacedaemonians, Cyrus his large promises to his
Soldiers.
he promised large rewards to his Soldiers. He that will serve me in this
expedition, Quicumque mihi militabit, si pedes est faciam equitem, etc.
if he were a Footman I will make him an Horseman; and he that had an Horse,
shall have a Chariot; if he were owner of a Village, I will give him a Town; if
of a Town, I will give him a City, yea a whole Country, besides Gold in
abundance. Plutarchs Apotheg. Christ's to his. Cujus pollicitationes minae,
cujus suasiones dissuasiones.
But what were the Arguments that this King gives to his? They must forsake
Parents and Children, Lands and Livings, Life and all. Who could expect that
ever he should gain a Subject, whose promises were threatenings, and his
persuasions disswasions? What Arguments can we use more effectually terrifying
to a person that values his Friends, his Livelihood or Life? Or what could he
have threatened worse to his greatest enemies? Yet notwithstanding their zeal
was strangely fired by a kind of Antiperistasis, and they boldly set upon the
work, and after they had made some small beginning, their King is betrayed into
the hands of his mortal enemies, arraigned, condemned, crucified, and
themselves dispersed and hid, and scarce any one of his Subjects durst to own
him; so that in all outward appearance his life and kingdom had both the same
period.

Vincendo moriantur, moriendo vicit. Du. Plessis.
Some pay dear for their Victories, purchasing them with the loss of their
lives; but this King conquered by dying: who (maugre the malice of his
adversaries) raises himself from the dead, according to his promise; rallies
his routed Disciples, gives them a new Commission, and within the space of a
few years extends his Dominion from Sea to Sea, He conquered by dying.
and from one end of the Earth unto the other. He did, does, and shall reign,
till he have made all his foes his footstool. That learned Author proving his
Deity against both Jews and Gentiles who opposed it, waving several other
Arguments makes use of this chiefly; so that he being such a King, had no need
of armed Subjects to fight in his defense, who could, and did, without a Sword
drawn, only by a word or two spoken, make his enemies give back, and fall as
dead men on the ground, as if some Thunderbolt from Heaven had smitten them.
Neither was it any terrifying Anathema, but only a short and plain
acknowledgment, I am he. John 18.6.
I cannot well pass by Calvin's application of those his words, and of their
strange effects: Hic colligere oportet quam horrenda and formidabilis futura
sit impiis vox Christi quando tribunal ad judicandum orbem ascenderit. Stabat
tunc agnus paratus ad victimam, etc.
viz. Hence we may collect how horrid and terrible his voice shall be to the
wicked, when he shall ascend his Tribunal to judge the World. He stood then as
a Lamb to be sacrificed, and as to outward appearance had emptied himself of
all his Majesty; and yet with a word speaking, his enemies though many, and
armed with swords and staves, fall to the ground. If so terrible now, how
terrible then, when he shall come again, not to be judged, but to judge! not in
an abject and contemptible manner, but in his heavenly glory, attended with his
holy Angels, when his heartbreaking, Go ye cursed, shall tumble them, not
only to, but also into the Earth, (if Hell be in its center) and that
irrecoverably. Those recovered their fall again, Ab inferno no^ datur redemptio
but when this doleful sentence is once passed, it shall never be revoked. When
once in Hell there is no redemption. What needed either Legions of armed men,
or of Angels to defend such a Kings person; who as he made all, was able to
destroy all with a word. Such a Kingdom (as was his) needed no such means to
support it. A Christian and a Soldier may meet in the same person.
But suppose my Kingdom were as other Kingdoms are, then would my Subjects
fight? They would, not of courtesy, but of bounden duty. It is but equity that
the hand which receives direction from the head, should (if need requires)
yield protection to the head; in the body natural, it is so, and should be so
in the body politic. Yea, how many loyal hearts have hazarded, and some of
them lost their lives and fortunes upon this very account: who though they
succeeded not in their aims, have not failed of their reward.

Anabaptists Arguments against Oaths and Arms overthrown by their own practices.
I shall not waste time in answering their Arguments against the Doctrine of
Oaths and Arms, requisite for the testifying and engaging a Subjects Fidelity
to his Prince, of which he cannot have too great assurance, who have opposed
the pretended unlawfulness of both: because they are sufficiently answered by
more able Pens, but best of all by their own practices; who were very free to
give the best assurance, and to proffer their best assistance for the support
of an usurped Power in liew of that accursed toleration they enjoyed under it;
and questionless would be as free again if occasion served upon the same
account: So that these scruples now appear clearly to proceed rather from
Design then Conscience; Latet anguis in herba.
the pretended tenderness whereof, ought rather to be prudently suspected, then
charitably indulged. Pearls must not be cast before Swine, which prefer husks
to treasure.


Neither shall I spend any upon those, who scrupling neither, and making no
conscience of either, care not to whom they swear, nor for whom they fight: but
will as soon, or sooner engage against their lawful King for half a Crown in
silver, then with him for a whole Crown of Glory. These have little of the fear
of God before their eyes; and there is little hope they will entertain loyal
thoughts in their hearts toward his Vicegerent.

What I have to say more of this Duty, I shall direct to those with whom my
advice may probably find a more effectual acceptance; such as fear both, that
they take care, and make a conscience of their Fidelity. And though some
cannot, others may not (unless upon very urgent necessity) fight for him; yet
all may, yea all ought to be faithful to him in their several and respective
stations. Non licet Ministris Ecclesiae arma gerere; in castris esse possunt
and debent, non ut pugnent sed ut doceant milites, P. Martyr Loc. Com. Pulpits
turned into Canons.
His safety consists as much in a multitude of faithful Counselors, as of
valiant Soldiers; and as much in some men's words as in others swords.

Our late pious King of blessed Memory, was first preached to death in the
Pulpit, before he was put to death on the Scaffold. Had not the tongues of some
Jesuited Incendiaries been so sharply invective, the swords of their Proselites
had not proved so fatally keen, as first to subdue his Power, and afterward to
assassinate and murder his person.

Good Counselors.
Those Counselors that would bring joy to their Prince, Prove. 12.20. Youngsters
too rash for so grave an employment.
themselves, and their Fellow Subjects, must be Counselors of Peace. The
Counsel which those Youngsters gave to Rehoboam when his Subjects petitioned
for a relaxation from his Fathers former heavy impositions: (Thy Father made
our Yoke grievous, 1 Kings 12.3, 4, 9, 10, 11.
now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy Father, and his heavy yoke
which he put upon us lighter, and we will serve thee. The young men which were
brought up with him, spoke unto him, saying, thus shall thou say unto them, My
little finger shall be thicker then my Fathers loins; and whereas my Father did
load you with an heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My Father has chastised
you with whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions.)

Such counsel as this I say might probably fill his own Coffers; but withal
empty his Subjects Purses of their Coin; and, which was worse, their hearts of
all true affection toward him. A sad consequence of evil Counsel.
For the very next piece of news we hear, is of a sad revolt of ten of the
twelve Tribes; who no sooner had received their answer, but they show their
dislike, first by a seditious murmur, and then by a rebellious mutiny, and
lastly by a final resolution to cast off his Government: V. 16.19.
What portion have we in David? neither have we any inheritance in the son of
Jesse. To your Tents, O Israel; so Israel rebelled against the house of Israel
unto this day. A more pernicious piece of Counsel they could not have given,
had they been deliberately resolved upon his ruin.

A like rash piece I have read of, given to Frederick the 2. Emperor of
Germany, when distressed for want of money to pay his Army; Petrus de Vineis
his Counsel to Frederick the Emperor.
who thereupon sends for Petrus de Vineis, an able Statesman, to advise with
him about an expedient to recruit his Treasury. Who counseled him to seize
into his possession the Plate belonging to the Churches and Religious Houses,
to melt it down and coin it into moneys. This he did accordingly, but it proved
very fatal, answerable both to the subtle design and hearty desire of him that
gave it; who studied more his own revenge then his Princes good, as appeared
clearly by his own confession. It seems that this person had been formerly his
Secretary, and for some misdemeanour had his eyes bored out by his command.
This he resolved with himself, Revenge witty.
so soon as opportunity should offer it self to be his Second, effectually to
requite: and meeting with this so fit for his purpose, makes this Devilish use
of it, and returning home to his Wife with a great deal of joy, told her, now I
am even with the Emperor for putting out mine eyes; having put him upon such a
project which I hope he will pursue to his own destruction; he has made me a
spectacle unto men, The fruit of Sacrilege.
but I have made him a Monster unto God. The Treasures of such sacrilegious
wickedness profit nothing: Prove. 10.2. C. 20.25. Dan. 5.25, 30. Acts 5.5, 10 1
Machab. 9. 2 Machab. 3. etc.
and holy things greedily devoured will prove a snare, and those that have made
trial of it, have to their cost found all the properties of a snare in it: It
has surprised suddenly, held them surely, and destroyed them certainly.

The Magistrates, I mean inferior ones, Magistrates.
must execute Justice impartially, lest he that is the chief suffer through
their corruptions: Prove. 16.12.
For the Kings throne is established by righteousness.

The Minister must be a publisher of Peace, and not a Trumpet of Sedition,
Ministers.
a Repairer not a Promoter of the Breaches in his Native Kingdom; a Restorer of
Apostates to, not a Seducer of Loyal Subjects from their Allegiance. And all
his Liege People, All good Subjects, Ittais.
must resolve with faithful Ittai, in what place their Lord and King shall be,
whether in life or death, 2 Samuel 15.21.
there to be also. This is to discharge the duty of faithful Subjects, and no
more then what the Text in effect enjoins, when it calls upon us to fear the
Lord and the King; where there is fear there will be fidelity.

Secondly, There will also be Charity, The second Duty, Charity. Christian and
Charitable are termini convertibiles. Other Duties compared with it, but fall
short of it. An upper garment for largeness.
in extenuating, hiding, and covering their faults and infirmities. And this is
a Duty so essential to Christianity, that a Christian and Charitable are
termini convertibiles. And whereas all other Virtues are compared unto
clothing, this is resembled to the upper garment for its largeness. For others
are not so ample, some concern only our selves, as Faith, etc. The just shall
live by his Faith, (i. e.) his own not by another: they may possibly fare the
better in externals for the righteous man's sake. Christ in his Form of Prayer
has taught us to pray for others. His Apostles in their Symbol or Creed, that
each man must believe for himself. There are some of a larger extent, as
Patience, and Long-suffering, etc. but these relate only to persons injuring
and provoking; this to all persons, of all conditions, ranks, qualities, and
qualifications whatsoever.

For Ornament
Other Garments are used for necessity, to secure the body from parching heat
and piercing cold, some for decency and ornament, to cover the shame of our
nakedness; For distinction.
but oftentimes the uppermost is used for distinction; so this of all other
Graces, distinguishes a Christian from him that is nothing so, or from him
that is so only in profession. Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.
Multa miranda possunt in homine reperiri quae sine charitate similitudinem
pietatis habent, sed non veritatem. Prosper in Epist. lib. de lib. Arbit.
Many admirable things may be found in a man, which without this have only the
shadow, not the substance of Virtue, and make them that have them only
nominally not really such: and so consequently nothing worth in themselves, nor
to them. O how great a Virtue is Charity! whose absence frustrates the presence
of all others; and from whose presence it is that they have the proof of their
truths and substance, as St. Austin excellently. It is that which sets the rest
a working, as the Spring of a Watch sets all the Wheels a going; it will make
men patient and bountiful, 1 Cor. 13. Ut multi arboris rami ab una radice
prodeunt, sic multae virtutes ex una charitate generantur. Greg. Hom.
to bear all things, believe all things, hope all things; and as many branches
proceed from one root, so many Virtues from this one of Charity.

A Garment of that largeness as that it will cover a multitude of sins, and
makes the strong to tolerate the infirmities of the weak, and to bear one
another burdens. Certainly he that laid this precept of Charity upon all, God
has allowed Kings their share of it as men; and their condition requires a
very large one; as Kings they have more temptations.

Simil.


with directions to practice it toward all, without either exception or
distinction; would have them to be free toward those, whose conditions require
the greatest share; such as have most temptations, and fewest restraints. When
our Savior was upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, the Devil tempted him to cast
himself down headlong: and the higher a man's standing is, as to Power and
Authority, the more earnest is that subtle enemy to procure his fall. The Rich
live in continual danger of the Spoiler, whereas the Poor sleep securely.
Princes and Commanders are chiefly aimed at in the Battle, because they yield
the higher ransom; and the loftiest Mountains are most exposed to the violence
of boisterous Winds and Storms. The old Serpents subtilty.
Satan that envious man, as he is styled in the Scripture, lays closest Siege
there, where his hoped for success will yield him the greatest advantage.

Regis ad Exemplum, etc.
The example of a King is of great force to work his Subjects into a compliance
with his practices. Such lofty Cedars fall not usually alone, but drive down
before them such lower, lesser, and weaker Trees as grow up under them. If he
be any ways noted for Vice, they will look upon his example as a license to do
the like. 1 Kings 14.16.
It is said of Jeroboam, that he made Israel to sin, and yet we read of no
Furnace erected, nor of any affrighting torments threatened to make them fall
down and worship the golden Calves which he had set up. Indeed there was no
need of any such; How Jeroboam made Israel to sin. They have fewest remedies of
any men.
his own exemplary practice was as forcible as any poenal Law, to sway them to
the same idolatry. And for remedies, who sees not that their Subjects are
better supplied then themselves, having the benefit of Discipline and wholesome
Laws as a Bridle to keep them from stumbling, and as a Curb to check them when
they are ready to fall: whereas they have riches, and honors, which by one are
very aptly styled faculties of misdoing. And many insnaring Parasites, Many
Parasites.
who like those about Dionysius, will even lick up their spittle, and proclaim
it to be as sweet as Honey. Who for a reward will bestow the guilding of the
rottenest Post: Adulatio blanda omnibus applaudit, omnibus salve dicit:
prodigos vocat liberales, etc. Cassiod. in quadam Epist.
and though wicked Ahabs will make them seem to themselves to be faithful
Abraham's. Fair-spoken Flattery highly applauds, and kindly salutes all, cries
them up for eminently virtuous, that are transcendently vicious; calls prodigal
persons liberal, and covetous sparing and wise; Lascivious, Courtlike, etc.
whose tongues are as charms and chains to bind men in their sins: when they are
so far from being rebuked, that they are praised, and so consequently
encouraged. Few faithful Monitors.
Few there are of that undaunted courage, as to tell Ahab that his sin troubled
Israel; or David, Job 34.18.
Thou art the man. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes,
ye are ungodly? Where the word of a King is, Eccles. 8.4.
there is Power, and who may say, why do thou so? Insomuch that it is a
special mercy of God to many Princes, and to their Subjects in them, that they
do so well, having no more to withstand temptations then the fear of God.

What use Princes should make of this.
The consideration of all which, as it should provoke them to double their
circumspection, because Satan against them doubles his diligence; well knowing
that a single fall may run them into a double guilt, a guilt of sin, and of
evil example; by the first whereof they interrupt their own peace; and by the
other possibly may ruin thousands: so it should teach this charitable Lesson
to the other, What their Subjects.
Christianly to compassionate, and not maliciously to upbraid their
infirmities: weighing their temptations with their conditions.

It is confessed the Law was given to, and has as great an obligation on them,
as on their meanest Vassals; and the swerving from it, either in omitting what
that requires, or in committing what that forbids, is as much, and in some
sense more a sin in such, then in ordinary persons; yet being compared in the
aforesaid respects, their plenty of solicitations and scarcity of restrictions;
we may safely extenuate that in them, which we may freely aggravate in others.
As those that are great in Power shall be greatly tormented, Sicut Potentes
potenter tormenta patientur; sic and justitiae praemiis fruentur before, si
recte exercuerint potestatem and tantam in futuro prae subditis habebunt
gloriam quanta virtute eos in magna delinquendi licentia praecesserunt.
Chrysostom. lib. de Curia. This applied to the shame of Chams black Issue.
especially when they abuse that Power of theirs, to sin with the greater
freedom; so their reward shall be the greater if they rightly use it: and shall
as far excel their Subjects in glory hereafter, as they do in Virtue here,
where (being accountable to none under God) they might take to themselves so
much liberty to sin.

So that I must ingeniously confess, I have scarce charity enough to judge
charitably of those who were so uncharitable to their Sovereign, as we have
lived to see a generation of Chams black Issue, uncovering their Fathers
nakedness. So dealt they with our martyred King, slandering the footsteps of
Gods Anointed, putting the worst construction upon his best actions, turning
every stone almost that lay between his Cradle and his Grave, ransacking all
the transactions of his life, that related to his Government, and blazing them
abroad, exposing his personal infirmities to public view on purpose to render
him odious to his people. He himself full well foresaw whitherto all this
tended, Kings Meditations.
when he tells us it was a necessary preparation to the taking away his life.
For where that is the end which is aimed at, those usually are the means by
which it is brought to pass. And yet for all this, his name lives, and his
memory is precious, when that of his implacable enemies stinks and rots with
their Carcasses.

P. 194.
Noah's infirmity (as he very excellently) was no justification of Chams
impudence. And as that unnatural fact of his rendered him accursed, both in
himself and his posterity; and should terrify all from doing the like, and
being the chief design of Gods recording it in Sacred Writ; Better Patterns for
us to follow, Shem, Japheth, Constantine.
so has he proposed that of his two other sons to our imitation; that when by
any sin (as who lives and sins not) these Fathers of ours expose their
nakedness to public view, to turn away our eyes, and going backward, cover it
with the mantle of Charity. As that good Emperor Constantine sometimes said of
Bishops, the spiritual Fathers of the Church, that if he should find one of
them committing Adultery, he would rather cover that unclean act with his Royal
Robe, then that others should behold it.

The Common practice of some, taxed as unchristian.
How ill becoming is this to confessed Christians, to overlook their Virtues,
and fix their eyes only on their Infirmities; enquiring into, and making so
narrow a search after their failings, and rejoice as much therein, as those
that find the greatest spoil. Thus while they behold the mote that is in their
eye, they consider not the beam that is in their own; and while their Oar is in
another Boat, they run the hazard of splitting their own bottom.

That observation of a learned Father has very much of truth in it: Qui
curiosi sunt ad investigandam vitam alienam plerumque desidiosi sunt ad
corrigendam vitam suam. Austin Confess. lib. 10. c. 3.
They that are still curiously prying into the lives of others, are for the
most part very negligent in reforming their own. How unlike are these men's
actions to Charities description? which neither thinks nor wishes evil. And
had they but the least grain of that which every true Christian ( quatenus he
is a Christian) should be fully fraited with; Psalm. 146.3.
in stead of preying upon the frailties of their Governors (the best whereof
are but men, Humanum est errare.
and therefore subject unto errors, as the best of men are) they would pray
for them, yea and become most importunate suitors at the Throne of Grace, for
Gods continual presence and assistance, without which they cannot stand
upright. Which leads me to the next, which is,

The third Duty, The third Duty.
viz. To pray for them.

In those constant public Offices of Devotion, which St. Paul wills Timothy to
be careful of, and to see all the Clergy under his jurisdiction should be so
too; he puts in his Bill of remembrance, to mind them for whom he would have
them pray.

First, For all men in general, i. e. for all sorts and conditions of men; but
more especially for Kings, and all that are in authority. How we must not pray
for them.
Not in hypocrisy, as the Magicians did for their Nebuchadnezzar, O when
questionless they wished in their hearts that he, and all such Tyrants as he
was, were rooted out of the earth.

Chaldeans that accused Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego, who prayed for the same
King in the same words.

Such Prayers fruitless, as to their matter.
For however to pray for Kings is said to be acceptable to God, yet these are
not the prayers that God will accept of; and that upon this very account,
because they are the prayers of such and such, those of the first; Sinful as to
their subject.
he has professed they are an abomination unto him. And the other there is as
little of probability that he will hear their prayers, Abominable as to God.
when he has threatened to destroy their persons. But such as come from the
heart out of conscience, How we must. Vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum
tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum.

Tertul. Apol. c. 30.

Reasons. Prove. 21.1.


upon the score of Duty: as Daniel prayed for Darius, who but a little before
had cast him into the Den of Lions. So did the Primitive Christians for Heathen
persecuting Emperors; that God would grant them a long life, a firm Empire, a
safe House, strong Armies, a faithful Council, a good People, and a quiet World.

The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns
it whithersoever he will: as men by Art can turn water out of its proper
channel, The Metaphor explained.
and make it run against its ordinary course in nature, so God with ease
through his Almighty power, can incline the hearts of Kings to this or that,
and make them pliable to his pleasure. Exemplified in Esau.
Such a work he wrought upon the heart of Esau, who had vowed the death of his
brother Jacob; insomuch that at their next meeting, his threats are beyond
expectation turned into kind embraces; and in stead of a stab, which he feared,
he received kindnesses, which he admired: confessing freely (as well he might)
that he saw the face of God in his brothers countenance; Genesis 33.10.
owning that happy reconciliation as the work of God alone; and a convincing
Argument of his, as well as of his Brothers favor toward him.

Practiced with good success.
Upon this very account Gods own people, whose lot it was to live sometime under
the Government of Pagan Princes; when they attempted any thing of concernment,
wherein the consent and assistance of the Higher Powers was required,
importuned God to give them flexible hearts, as the only way to make their
designs successful. So did Nehemiah for the repairing of Jerusalem, whose
Prayer is recorded in these words, O Lord I beseech thee let now thine ear be
attentive to the prayer of thy servant, Nehem. 1.11.
and to the prayer of thy servants who desire to fear thy name, and prosper I
pray thee thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.
What wonderful successes have we read of their fervent and effectual prayers,
in their strange escapes from those destructions they have been doomed to, by
such decrees as by custom of that Nation wherein they lived were unalterable.

A wonderful effect of it, in the defeating Hamans Decrees.
The Jews were so by the false and malicious accusation of Haman, in point of
revenge for Mordecai's disrespect; who when he heard of it, applies himself
presently to Hester, who was highly in the King her husbands favor, Mordecai
con^^res Hester.
and conjures her with promises and threats to improve the utmost of her
interest. A business of a high concern it was, and such as carried in it a
great deal both of difficulty and of danger. Of difficulty in it self, Hesters
discouragements from two considerable Topics, difficulty and danger.
in regard of the immutability of that Commission, which under the Royal Signet
was issued out against them; of danger to her, if her endeavors succeeded not;
there being a Law in force to put any to death that should come unto the King,
who was not called. And what ground could he have to build any hopes upon an
apparent hazard, and a very improbable and unlikely means to compass his
project? Yet notwithstanding all this, he knew that nothing was impossible to
God; and that if he pleased, he was able to incline the heart of the King
toward them for good; and to direct him to the use of such means as whereby
they might be delivered, and the bloody design of their enemies frustrated.

Upon this ground questionless it was, that one so earnestly proposed it, and
the other so readily and resolutely undertook it. Her courageous resolution.
Hester 4.11.16.
Only as a preparative she wills him to gather the Jews together, and fast and
pray for her and her good success, and so resolves to go to the King, which was
not according to the Law, and if she perished she perished. The preparative
Prayer, etc.
Which she did accordingly, and finding him in a pleasant humor, she looked
upon it as a good omen, and a fit opportunity to deliver her Petition in behalf
of her distressed People. Which he no sooner read, but granted; (God putting
into his heart) he now passes a Decree for them, as he had done before against
them; and thereby commissioned them, who by the first were designed for ruin,
The happy consequence of it.
to take up Arms in their own defense. So that although the first was not, nor
might not be revoked; yet by granting the latter, it frustrated the execution
of the former; and being published in every Province, their enemies were
possessed with such a Panick fear, that in stead of destroying the Jews, many
of them turned Jews to secure themselves: and others that attempted to slay
them, were in great numbers slain by them, Hest. 8.17. Chap. 9.1.2. This
recorded as other Scripture, for our Learning, and what is the Lesson it
teaches us.
to the great joy of the Jews, and the terror of their Enemies: teaching us
that are Christians, and subject to Christian Magistrates, if at any time we
lie under fears and pressures: not to be our own carvers, or to fly to the use
of unlawful means, but to wait upon God by faith, and ply him with our Prayers,
who has the hearts of Kings in his hands, and will order and dispose them so,
as shall make most for his own glory and our good.

An example that will one day rise up in judgment against the men of this
Generation, and condemn it: What to be expected by them that refuse to learn it.
who like Gunpowder, are ready to take fire from every little spark of
discontent that falls upon their spirits, and to flame out into open Rebellion.
Which it seems has been for many Years, if not Ages, the customary sin of this
Nation. Maximilians censure.
Insomuch that Maximilian the Emperor passing his censure upon four great
Kingdoms, Germany, Spain, France, and England, Rex Regum. Rex Hominum. Rex
Asinorum. Rex Diabolorum.
he styled himself a King of Kings; the King of Spain, a King of Men; the King
of France, a King of Asses; and the King of England, a King of Devils; because
of their readiness to rebel upon the least occasion, which they learned from
the Devil, who was the first Rebel in the World, and the father of all the
rest, which have been since the beginning of it to this very day. The last
which concerns ours the worst, but too true to be denied.
So that were it only to avoid the scandal, and to prevent the dishonor, and
to escape the curse which Rebellion brings with it, and draws after it; an
ingenious people would rather suffer any hardship then take up Arms against
their King.

Prove. 18.10.
The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs to it and is
safe: whereas they that stand upon their own guard, and are resolved to make
their own Swords the only remedy of their conceited grievances: Timidis and
ignavis opus esse auxilio divino.
saying with the Heathen, Cowards and slothful people only need Gods
assistance; may justly expect to perish in their unwarrantable engagements:
especially against such a Prince who was so far from passing a decree for their
ruin, that he gave all the security they could desire (yea much more then what
many of them did deserve) to ensure them the free enjoyment of their Religion,
Lives, Liberties, and Estates.

Besides the ground before mentioned, and upon which the persons aforesaid
acted this duty, and by its Virtue and prevalency so happily succeeded and
prospered; there are several other very material and weighty considerations
which call upon us for the constant and conscionable practice of this duty: as,

2. Reason.
Secondly, The burden that lies upon them in respect of their Calling and
Office. A burden which Jethro saw lay too heavy upon Moses his shoulders,
Exodus 18.18.
Thou will (says he) surely wear away, for this thing is too heavy for thee:
thou art not able to perform it thy self alone: Therefore advises to choose
such and such persons, so and so qualified, V. 20.21.
and place them to be Rulers over thousands, and Rulers of hundreds, and Rulers
of fifties, and Rulers of tens, that they may judge smaller matters, and so
bear the burden with thee. Magnae vires gloriae decorique sunt si illis
salutaris potentia est, nam pestifera vis est valere ad nocendum. Senec. de
Clementia, etc.
A great power and command they have indeed, which is honorable and glorious;
but it is so only, and then, and no otherwise makes them which have that power
so, when they use it to the benefit, safety and welfare of those for whom they
have received it. That is a pernicious power that is only used, or rather
abused for the injury of others; I say abused, (...). Aristot. ad Alexand. M.
for as the Philosopher has it, Government was not ordained for injury, but
for benefit. The cares of Government are so many, great, and weighty, that many
have voluntarily sequestered themselves from those public employments, to enjoy
the quiet of a private life.

Pericles the Athenian, after he had governed forty years, exchanged his Court
for a Cottage: and having obtained his quietus est, he wrote over his Portal
this Distich in the Margin: Inveni portum, spes and fortuna valete, nil mihi
vobiscum, ludite nunc alios.
which sounds thus much in our Language, I have found an harbor, adieu hope
and fortune, I Will have no more to do with you: make your sport now of whom you
please.

Their Titles speak their Cares, viz. Fathers, Shepherds.
Their very Titles hint unto them what they must expect, and what will be
expected from them. Fathers of their Country, which calls upon them for care,
as well as upon their Subjects for respect. Shepherds, to feed, defend, watch
over their Subjects: for these are proper actions that have such under their
charge. In the day the drought consumed me, Genesis 31.40.
in the night the frost; and my sleep departed from mine eyes: so said Jacob
when he kept the sheep of Laban. Agamemnons vigilance. (...). Homer. Iliad. Io.
The very same commendation that Homer gave to Agamemnon for his care of those
rational sheep which he governed, that his sleep was never sweet, pleasant nor
quiet. They are Heads, and we know that the head, as it is the emblem of
Government, so it is the seat of care. Heads of the People. Watchmen. Keepers,
etc.
They are Watchmen, Keepers, etc. all importing the very same, their care
therefore being so great, and their burden so ponderous; they have need of
other shoulders then their own to bear it. yea, all must some way or other put
to their helping hand: Judges and inferior Magistrates by way of participation
upon their authoritative delegation; and every one by way of sympathy, and by
the united strength of their fervent Prayers.

And methinks the common interest that their Subjects have in that care,
Subjects have the benefit of their cares, and are concerned in all those things
which they take the care of.
should enforce this as a common duty incumbent on all who are concerned; as
all are in those things which they are chiefly to take care of.

As first, of Religion, that we may lead godly lives; 1 Timothy 2.3. As first
Religion.

Solomon's Vineyard a type of the Church.

Cant. 8.11.


this is a chief part of the Magistrates care. Solomon had a Vineyard in
Baal-Hamon, which he has let out to husbandmen; among which Kings are the
chief. It Is hedged about by their authority and power, and the strength of
their wholesome Laws; whereby the Evil are awed, the good encouraged, and the
interest of the true Religion promoted, The sad influence our confusions had
upon our Religion, represented by way of allusion.
which suffered sadly in the times of our Confusions, fell into so many pieces,
and those pieces into so much dirt and rubbish, that it requires an industrious
and exquisite Artist, first to gather up each piece, and to join it into one
whole and entire substance. So many Harlots there were that laid claim to that
lovely Babe, each one crying, it is mine, that he had need of the wisdom, as
well as the power of Solomon, to find out the true Mother. Such havoc the wild
Bores and subtle Foxes made in the Vineyard, when God for our Sins was so far
incensed as to remove its Fence, and lay it waste; that it will require a great
deal of time and patience to brink it into its former order, and as much of
pains and care to reduce it into its ancient beauty and fertility. So many
Sanballats and Tobias's, some secretly undermining, others openly opposing the
repairing the Walls of our Jerusalem, that our builders had need be men of
courage, and to hold their Trowel in one hand and their Sword in the other: and
while those who have evil will at Sion, Nehem. 4.2.
are some of them repining, and others scoffing at it, What do those feeble
folk do? will they sacrifice? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of
the rubbish which are burnt? It Is requisite all good Christians and good
Subjects should be upon their knees, praying God to strengthen their hands, and
prosper their work, and turn the reproaches of our enemies upon their own
heads. Except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1.
their labor is but in vain that build it.

Secondly of Justice. Job 29.14, 15, 16, etc.
The second is the care of Justice; He must put on righteousness as a garment,
and judgment must be as his robe and diadem; he must be eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame, a Father to the Poor; must search out the cause that he knows
not, must break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil from between his
teeth. A King compared to Nebuchadnezzars Tree. Dan. 4.11, 12.
He must be like the stately Tree in Nebuchadnezzars dream, the leaves whereof
were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and it was meat for all; the beasts of
the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs
thereof, and all flesh was fed of it. David's Prayer for, and exlent description
of Justice, both as to the efficient cause, and the effects of it.
How heartily does David pray for himself and his son Solomon? that God would
give his judgments to himself, and his righteousness to his son: then shall we
judge the people with righteousness, and the poor with judgment; the Mountains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness; he
shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy,
and break in pieces the oppressors, he shall come down like rain upon the mowen
grass, as the showrs that water the earth. An excellent description of a King,
and an encomium of Justice, Justitia Regis pax est populorum, tutamen patriae,
immunitas plebis, munimentum gentis, cura languorum, gaudium hominum, temperies
aeris, etc.
from the happy fruits of its faithful and impartial administration.

Much like unto it, if not borrowed mostly from it, is that of Cyprian, The
justice of the King is the peace of his Subjects, the safeguard of his Country,
the Franchess of his Cominalty, the rampire of his Kingdom, a sovereign remedy
of all grievances, the joy of men, the temperature of the Air, the serenity of
the Sea, the fertility of the Earth, and the hope of his own future bliss and
happiness.

That Prayer an implicit Confession.
And is not that Prayer of his an implicit confession, that he can neither do
it, nor his Subjects reap the benefit of it, unless God give him his judgments.
This granted, then, and not until then he shall do as he said he would do. So
is his son Solomon's, for Wisdom above all.
And does not Solomon acknowledge as much, when God put him to his choice, and
promised him whatsoever he would ask? if it were long life, riches, or the
lives of his enemies? He waves all these, and pitcheth upon Wisdom; 1 Kings 3.5.
Thou have made thy servant King, and I know not how to go out, or come in, and
thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou have chosen, a great
people which cannot be numbered, nor counted for number; give therefore thy
servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between
good and bad; for who is able to judge so great a people? The ground of that
choice.
The ground of his choice was the difficulty of managing the Regal Power, to
those advantages as would best answer Gods trust, and his Peoples expectations.

It is questionless (as Nazianzen long since observed) an Art of Arts, Revera
mihi videtur esse ars artium, and disciplina disciplinarum regere hominem, qui
certe est inter omnes animantes maxim and moribus varius and voluntate
diversus. M. Apol.
and a Discipline of Disciplines, to govern Mankind; in whom there is such
variety of manners, and diversities of wills above all other creatures in the
World besides. And if justice be not duly administered, what horrid consequences
will there unavoidably follow upon its neglect? Disorders would be countenanced
which should be suppressed, Oppression thrive and prosper, which should be
extirpated; Peace banished, which should be cherished; and Gods judgments
pulled down upon our heads, which might be diverted. Therefore we had need take
to our selves words, and go to God for them: and we cannot make use of more
concise and pithy ones for them, then those of David, wherewith he prayed for
himself in that Psalm before mentioned.

Thirdly, Thirdly, Peace.
The care of their Subjects peace and quiet lies upon them: [That we may lead
quiet and peaceable lives.] End of Civil Government.
Indeed the very end of Civil Government is the peace and prosperity of the
Subject, which is very much secured by their careful endeavors to prevent
inbred tumults and commotions, and foreign incursions and invasions; whereby it
comes to pass many times that their Subjects are enforced to eat the food both
of their souls and bodies, with the peril of their lives. Now as the Pilot
propounds to himself the prosperous course of his Ship, Simil.
the Physician the health of his Patient, the Captain victory over his enemy;
so the good Governor seeks the welfare and prosperous state of those under
his Government: to which that blessing of Peace has such a direct tendency,
that all outward blessings are usually wished under the name of it, as being
virtually comprehended in it. The excellency of that blessing.
Such is the good of Peace, that among all created things, no news is more
pleasing, nothing more desirable, nothing more profitable can be possessed and
enjoyed. And as the soul of man does not enliven the members of the body,
unless they be united to the body; so neither does the spirit of God (which is
the very soul of the Church) enliven any member of it, that is not united to
the rest in the bond of peace and love. A blessing which this Nation for many
years enjoyed under several of her peaceable Princes, That of England the
admiration and envy of other Nations.
even to the admiration and envy of her neighbors, who were forced to cry
Miserere with a doleful voice, when she might sing Te Deum with a cheerful
heart. Which had she done, she might have had continued unto this very day,
without the least interruption. But because she did not, but abused her peace,
by using it as a weapon wherewith to fight against the God of her peace, he
taught her by many years sad experience to know the worth of it by the want of
it, and how for the future to value the mercy of Peace by the misery of War.
She unthankfully bestrid, and unworthily slighted a peaceable Prince, and
therefore deserved to be doomed by an irrevocable decree to the Government of
devouring Storks: Aesops Fable of the Frog morallized. Our Jehovah more
merciful then their Jupiter.
as Jupiter did the Froggs in the Fable. Yet God in mercy has heard her
Petition, and contrary to her deservings, has removed those Birds of prey, and
has sent a Dove, a Solomon to reign over her, who has had just cause to take
up the complaint of David, Psalm. 120.6, 7.
My soul has long dwelt with them that hate peace; I am for peace, but when I
speak they are for war. Let them prosper that love and seek the peace of
Jerusalem: and scatter thou the people that delight in war. These three
blessings are the ground upon which the Apostle presses this duty of Prayer
for those that are in Authority: and if they flow down from Heaven upon us
through their care, as the fruits of our Prayers, and our Prayers be seconded
with a life answerable to those mercies, we may conceive the firmer hopes of
their continuance.

3. Reason from their temptations; wherein their Subjects are concerned either,
Now because these Guardians of our blessings are so liable to so many
temptations, and amongst the rest to those sins whereby they may forfeit these
blessings from us, and to those oppositions and strivings of wicked covetous
and ambitious men, who will not stick to trample all these under their feet to
advantage themselves, and work their own sinful ends and interests; it behooves
us to pray as zealously against these, as for the other.

1. As to their Cause.
Against their temptations, and the rather because we may possibly be concerned
in them, either as to their cause, or as to their effects; Subjects are many
times the causes of their Sovereigns temptations. This is clear in the history
of David's numbering the People, Exemplified in David's sin, 2 Samuel 24.
and the sad consequents of that rash and unadvised act; which was so, in that
he did it without any lawful cause; as two there were, upon which it was
justifiable.

Two cases in which lawful. Exodus 30.12.
First upon an Ecclesiastical account, as that which ye are directed to in the
Margin, which was commanded by God himself in memory of his blessings, and
tended to the redemption of their souls; In memoriam beneficiorum Dei. Gallus
in locum.
as it served for the maintenance of the Tabernacle, and the Ministry thereof,
which was instituted for that very end and purpose.

Secondly Political in a way of preparation to a War offensive or defensive;
that so by numbering those that are fit to bear Arms, Princes may be the better
satisfied of their Subjects strength, and furnish themselves out of those
numbers with such supplies as are suitable to their occasions. A device that
always was, is still, and ever will be lawfully enough made use of upon that
occasion. But David did it upon neither of these accounts; neither for the
glory of God, that seeing his Subjects increase and multiply, and his own
honor thereby advanced, he might give God his due praise, who was the author
of it; nor for the safety of his Kingdom, which was then in no danger, being at
peace both at home and abroad; but rather for ostentation sake, rejoicing, and
which was worse, placing his confidence in them. This sin (whatsoever was the
ground of it) highly offended God, and is severely punished with a sweeping
Plague, which in the space of three days destroyed threescore and ten thousand
people.

He sinned and his Subjects are punished for it.
The sin was the Kings, the punishment falls heavy upon the Subjects, who for
ought we read to the contrary, did not so much as desire it. His General showed
his dislike, and desires him by all means to desist from his purpose. Is not
this according to the Proverb, Ezech. 18.2.
The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and their Childrens teeth are set on
edge, Ezech. 18.2? and to that of the Poet, Quicquid delirant Reges plectuntur
Achivi.
Kings dote and do amiss, and their Subjects suffer for their miscarriages.
David who was eminently (if not solely guilty) is not so much as touched in
that Plague. The sin being his, in equity the punishment should have been so
to. This is according to that ruled case, the soul that sins shall die. V.
12.
Yea, David himself, as conscious to himself, cries, These Sheep, David
excuses them, and takes the blame upon himself.
what have they done? Done! Enough questionless, the most innocent of them, not
only for God to plague him here, but to damn him forever hereafter. Sins though
sometimes they may not be the moving cause, yet they are always a meritorious
cause of judgment. Gods justice acquitted. 1. By a distinction.
No man lives and sins not, and the wages of the least sin is death: if any be
pardoned, it argues the mercy of the forgiver, and not the quality and quantity
of the sin forgiven.

But we need not fly to this distinction in this case; for if we read the
History deliberately, we shall soon be satisfied, 2. By a discovery of the
cause of the sin.
that though David occasioned that Plague by his sin, yet their own sins were
the cause of it. And that according to both these heads of distinction
meritorious and moving too: 2 Samuel 24.1.
the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against
them, to say, go number Israel and Judah. By which it appears clearly that
their sins (whatever they were that provoked God to anger) were the cause why
God permitted Satan to tempt David, and withheld his restraining grace which
should uphold him: so that he was both led into temptation, and left in
temptation upon the account of their sins: and what influence theirs had upon
him, that may the sins of any other Subjects have upon their Princes. Applicat.
Therefore it is equity as well as Piety, that they which lead them into
temptation by their transgressions, should help them out by their supplications.

Secondly as to their effects. 2. As to the effects. 1 Samuel 8.11, 17
Samuel describing the manner of a King to the Israelites, tells them he will
take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his
horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots, some he would have to ear his
ground, and to reap his harvest: their daughters to be confectionaries, and for
cooks, and bakers, and would take their fields, and vineyards, and olive yards,
even the best of them, and give them unto his servants, etc. By which
description he informs them, not what they should do according to their
institution, but what they would, following their own corrupt inclinations. The
Prodigal had several temptations, but the greatest was his youth.
The Prodigal in the Gospel had many temptations to that loose and vicious kind
of life to which he addicted himself, which brought him from his Fathers
plentiful Table, to enter himself, first into the servile employment of a
Swineherd, and at last to enter himself a Fellow-Commoner with the hogs, and to
feed with them upon husks, as this estate he was born to; for though he was not
the heir, yet an expectant, though not of his lands, yet of his goods; whose
share might amount to a considerable value: then his Fathers indulgence, it was
but ask and have: but the greatest of all was his youth. So among all those
that Kings are subject to: this is none of the least, that God has made them
Kings: Kings have many more, but the most powerful is that of their Kings place.
who being subordinate to none other beside themselves, are accountable to none
other but himself. If therefore they should degenerate from Nursing Fathers
into oppressing and cruel Tyrants; Sic valo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione
voluntas.
and make their own Wills their Law to govern by: like Nebuchadnezzar, of whom
it is said, Whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down; whom he
would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive; A supposition grounded upon a
possibility.
If he should apostatize from the true Religion and right Worship of God to
Idolatry, as did the wisest King that ever swayed a Scepter, what a sad
influence would the effects thereof have upon their Subjects Estates, And on
that, sad effects prognosticated.
Liberties, Lives, and what to a good man is more precious then any one of
these singly, yea then all of them jointly, viz. his Religion. And therefore it
behooves them as they tender their own good in the quiet and peaceable enjoyment
of all these, Inference.
to intercede as powerfully as they can for Gods presence with them, and for
his grace which may be sufficient for them, to incline their hearts unto his
testimonies and not unto covetousness: and always to mind them, that as they
received their power from him, so they must assuredly one day give an account
unto him; that so their studies and endeavors may be daily to improve it to
Gods honor, their own comfort, and their Subjects benefit.

Lastly, Consider the perils and dangers their persons are exposed to; upon
whose well-being and well-doing, A reason from external opposition. Omni populo
inest aliquid querulum and malignum in Imperantes. Quamvis id agas Princeps ut
nequis merito te oderit; erunt tamen semper qui te oderint. Sen. ad Neron.
their Subjects depend for all these. Plutarch tells us the People for the most
part are malignant and querulous against their Governors, yea though they carry
themselves never so unblameably, that none can have any just cause to hate
them; yet there are some of that base nature that will do so, resembling the
Dog which barks at the Moon in the clearest night, which proceeds from an
innate enmity against all restraint; and no marvel, since naturally men are very
unwilling that God himself should reign over them. The Lord reigns, says the
Psalmist, Contremiscunt. Calvin. Commoventur. Fl. Jun. and Tremel. Irascuntur,
fremunt.
and what follows? the People are stricken with a fear, (so one) they are moved
with fear, and so by that means are brought to own and acknowledge his power
and sovereignty, (so others.) They are angry, and fret at it, (so Mollerus)
quoting the sense of all the rest before his own, 1. They are in a great deal
of danger from that innate dislike that is naturally in all men against
Government.
and leaving the Reader to take his choice of which of these he likes best: So
that I have liberty to take that which will serve as the best proof of my
present assertion; which is safe enough and sufficiently justified by another
place in the same Book: where we find the very same sort of people raging
against the same thing, viz. Government, against the same Governor the Lord
Jesus Christ. And how do they plot and consult, confederate, and all in
opposition to his Laws, because somewhat harsh to flesh and blood; enjoining
the mortification of all their evil and corrupt affections, newness of life and
conversation, commanding the use of a good conscience in all their actions, and
not allowing them to do the least evil for the greatest good: therefore they
hate them, as men that prize their liberty hate bonds and imprisonment. And how
easily men of this temper are to side with Rebellion, and to promote any
traitorous or mischievous design, experience testifies.

Great danger they are likewise in by reason of the covetousness and
ambitiousness of men, which as a pair of Spurs, 2. From Covetousness.
prick those that are possessed therewith forward against all lets, makes them
leap over all blocks, strain at no guilt, nor dread the threatening of any
punishment. 1 T^m. 6.10.
St. Paul says, The love of money is the root of all evil. And the Poet in his
Satyrs inveighs against the covetous person that respects no Law, Quis metus
aut pudor est unquam properantis avari. Juvenal.
neither is there any fear or shame in him. Those wicked Husbandmen in the
Gospel resolve upon murdering their Masters son, because he was an heir to a
good estate: This is the heir, come let us kill him, Luke 20.14.
and then the inheritance shall be ours.

3. From ambitious men. Potestatis ambitio Angelica felicitate Angelum
privavit. Scientiae appetitus hominem immortalitatis gloria spoliavit.

Evam promissi honoris ambitio illecebrosa decepit. Epist. 116.


The like may be said of Ambition, which is but a furious avarice. Of which St.
Bernard notably, The Angels ambitious of power and sovereignty, deprived
themselves of Angelical felicity. Adam desirous to know more then his Creator
thought good to reveal to him, spoiled himself of the glory of immortality: and
Eve was deceived with the bewitching ambition of promised honor; In the day
that ye eat thereof ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. And all that
they for the most part get for themselves, and the World by them who are
infected with this incurable itch, is lively represented unto us in their
Tragical History of ambitious Phaeton, Phaeton the proper emblem of an
ambitious person.
whom nothing would satisfy but to guide the Chariot of the Sun; the
consequences of whose rash and indiscreet attempt, were the turning of his
brain, the overturning of his Chariot, putting the World into a flame, and was
himself tumbled down headlong by a Thunderbolt into a River to cool his hot
head, and teach him more wit. The common fate of such is, that when the wind of
their ambition has mounted them up to the top of Fortunes Wheel, they never
descend but by a break-neck precipice. Haman.
Haman tried it, and found it true to his cost; in one Chapter we find him
promoted and advanced by his King to great honor, who had set his seat above
all the Princes that were with him; in another he is fallen into his Lord and
Masters displeasure; and at the end of that, we find him at the end of his
ambitious race; fallen from honor to dishonor, from his Princes love into his
hatred, from glory to shame; he lived the life of a Prince, but died the death
of a Dog; being sentenced to be hanged upon that very Gallows which he had
prepared for an honester man then himself; whom he while he was in his Ruff,
deigned not to rank among the number of his Slaves. Thus the righteous is
delivered, Prove. 11.8.
and the wicked brought into his stead, he dug a Pit for his innocent brother,
and is fallen into the midst of it himself. This is called a righteous thing
with God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. Nec lex est justior ulla, Quam necis artificem lege
perire sua.
and is the same in the apprehensions of all rational men. Indeed that
attribute of his is in matters of that natute highly concerned; and rather then
an unnatural, aspiring, Absolon.
ambitious Absolon should escape unpunished (which his Fathers indulgence might
suggest some hopes to him, that after he had played all his mad pranks he might
do so, and from the charge which he gave his General concerning him when he
marched against him to reduce him, deal gently with the lad, together with the
sad Lamentation he made at the news of his death, gives us sufficient cause to
think that he would do so) the divine Nemesis will it self pursue the guilty
Rebel, and make a snare with the hair of his own head in stead of an hempen
halter, to truss him up to the fatal Tree, where he paid down his life for his
ambition, and all its miserable attendants.

Ambition a strange disease.
A strange kind of disease surely this must needs be, whose malignity in some
degree or other, is so epidemically infectious, and whose cure was thought by
no mean or heady Physician, Hippocrates.
to be so difficult, that he projected a consultation of all the Physicians in
the World to advise upon the means thereof; and yet he himself was a man so
famous in his generation for his great skill in that noble Science, that
Artaxerxes hearing of it, His fame.
sent for him, and premised him great honors to live with him in the Persian
Court. He practiced his own skill so successfully upon his own self, Lived to a
great Age. Could not cure this fever by his Physic, nor all the Philosophers
with their Moral Rules.
that he lived to a great age, having passed his hundred and fourth year: yet
neither this Master of his Art, Faculty, or Science, (call it what ye will) no,
nor all the Philosophers 2000 years since him, could by all their learning have
found out an effectual expedient for this pestilential Fever; in all they
prescribed they have but lost their labor. Some diseases Medicorum ludibria.
Some Diseases make mocking-stocks of their Physicians, of which sort this is
undoubtedly one which increases under its prescribed remedies. One would have
thought that if Cambyses had studied all his life time, Cambyses his project.
and called in all the learned Counsel of the Sages then living in the World,
he could never have found by his own reading, nor they have suggested by their
advice, a more effectual means to keep that young President incorrupt in that
very place of Judicature, in the which he before had placed his Father, which
he so lately by his miscarriages had forfeited together with his life then to
keep that sad instance always fresh in his memory, and for this purpose
commanded him to cover his Chair with his Fathers skin; who was executed and
excoriated or flayed, because he was so ill a Judge; that being seated in that
woeful tribunal upon the blood of his Father, might learn more wit and honesty
by a dreadful experience. What influence this politic, more then Christian
project had upon him, my Author mentions not. But this we see too commonly,
that some men's eyes are so blinded, and their hearts so hardened through the
deceitfulness of their sin, Examples of others take so little with some, that
they look on them as inania puerorum terriculamenta. Exemplified in our common
Cutpurses.
that others examples make no impression of terror upon them. Have we not
often heard of Cutpurses and Pickpockets, that have exercised their Art under
the Gallows, where some before their eyes are ending their days for as
inconsiderable a crime? And do we not ever and anon in our reading, both in
Divine and Humane Story, meet with the like? who have had items enough by
others harms to make them cautious, and yet have pursued the same ways, without
fearing the like event: As that in the Book of the Kings, The second Captain of
50. 2 Kings 1.10, 11.
of the second Captain of fifty, sent with his Party to apprehend Elijah, more
impudent and obstinate then the first, who he could not but know had a little
before perished by a dreadful, and miraculous judgment from Heaven by fire
consuming him and his to ashes; and therefore more deservedly underwent the
same fate, and made an example; because he would take none.

In the Annals of our own Kingdom we have the History of Richard 3. Richard 3.
his Character.
who by common report was a Monster in Nature, born with his teeth, and
exceedingly deformed in the composure of his body, which was a prognostic of
what he would prove in his life, a monster in wickedness. And so he did. Into
what a Sea of mischiefs did his boundless ambition carry him? Vilifying the
honor of his own Mother, accusing her as unchaste; and that she prostituted her
body to strangers in the conception of his two elder Brothers, to make himself
more legitimate then they. We find him there stand indicted of several Murders,
Charged with murder.
taking out of the way all that opposed his desires, either by death, or safe
and severe imprisonments. Of Fratricide, With Fratricide.
consenting at least to the death of his elder Brother. Of Regicide, George D.
of Clarence. With Regicide.
stabbing K. Henry 6. when a Prisoner in the Tower. Besides the bastarding,
deposing, murdering his two innocent Nephews, whose Guardian (by wicked Policy)
he had made himself, by the enforced consent of those who were concerned in the
choice (they being in their minority) but durst not oppose him. I call this
Regicide, because the elder was a King in re, the younger in spe, as being heir
apparent to the Crown, had his Brother died without issue male before him. But
this Monster of men had usurped the throne in their life time; and conceiving
he could never be reputed, nor truly honored as a King, so long as these were
in his way, he sent them out of this Kingdom into a better. Conceits himself
firmly established. But is much mistaken. Haunted with the terrors of an
accusing Conscience.
And now he thinks himself firmly seated, but he reckons without his host; and
whoever peruseth the latter part of his History, will find his sin lying at his
door, yea following him at his heels, his Conscience facing him with a fresh
representation of his guilt at every turn; and his disturbed fancy with
terrifying visions and apparitions; so that while he lived he was as it were in
Hell upon Earth. He had shed much blood, and at last his blood was shed in that
Battle fought between him and his Successor, who had more right to the Crown
then himself; wherein he fell a sad victim to his ambition, and a monument of
Gods impartial justice to the World; Slain and his dead Carcass slighted, and
dishonourably interred.
whose Carcass being found naked in the Field, wounded, and filthily polluted
with gory blood, was cast upon a horseback behind a Pursuivant at Arms, with
his hands hanging down on the one side, and his legs on the other, like a Calf,
and interred with as base a Funeral as he had bestowed upon his Nephews.
Martins History.
Yet for all this I suppose none capable to read that History, can be so great
strangers to the late transactions in our Israel, Rich. matched with an Oliv.
both Protectors, and both Usurpers.
but may find his parallel in the bloody Chronicle of our late Usurper; who
though he drank not so large a draught of Royal blood, (no thanks to his want
of will, but opportunity) yet what he fell short in that, he made up as near as
he could in noble and loyal blood. Whom I cannot more fitly compare then to our
desperate Hectors, who meeting with a rich booty, A fit comparison.
resolve to make a full prey; and finding a ring that is unwilling to part with
its right owner, cut off finger and all. So this bloody miscreant aiming at the
Crown, and supposing it impossible by any other means to make a Divorce between
it and its Royal Master, traitorously took off that head that wore it. That
bramble kingdom which he was about to erect, could not (as he supposed) thrive,
unless watered with the Kings blood. He that sometime used that expression, was
not only so, but a Prophet also. And blessed be God that we have lived to that
day, to see that those his following words have proved him so: The Kings
Meditations*
God will not suffer those men long to prosper in their Babel, who build it
with the bones, and cement it with the blood of their Kings. How many upon this
very account have been hurried out of the World by stabbings, poisonings, and
other arts of Murder, both in our own and other Nations? besides those many
Plots and Conspiracies, by the divine providence strangely discovered, and
through his blessing happily prevented, and made abortive; and that against
such a Prince, whom God has so manifestly owned, so miraculously preserved,
and (to the admiration of his Friends, and the envy of his Enemies) settled in
the Throne of his Fathers. This was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in
our eyes. It is he that gives salvation unto Kings, and has delivered his
anointed from the hurtful Sword. Therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but to thine own most glorious Name be all the thanks and praise ascribed. This
very consideration now in hand, Tiberius refused the style of Pater Patriae,
upon this very account.
made Tiberius the Emperor refuse the style of Pater Patriae, saying, all
mortal men's estates are uncertain: and the higher their standings are, the more
slippery and dangerous are their conditions. Infer.
Therefore being so environed and surrounded with dangers, they have the more
need of their Subjects prayers, that God would protect their persons, blast the
designs, discover the Plots, and defeat the attempts of theirs, and therein
their own enemies.

The fourth Duty comprehended in this of fear.

Romans 13.7. Pay him his due.


There is yet a fourth Duty remaining, namely this, To pay readily and
cheerfully what they are legally charged with, [rendring tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom is due.] These are ordinary. Some are called
extraordinary, required upon urgent and pressing necessity. I say necessity,
for good Princes will not impose unnecessary payments upon their Subjects, but
delight to have them rich and wealthy, rather then poor and needy. The
Sovereignty of all appertains to Kings, Distinction.
but the propriety to private men: So that they have no power in justice and
equity, to take away, or to seize any of their Estates, unless justly forfeited
by their Delinquency. Nabaoths case.
As appears clearly in the case of Nabaoth, who refused to part with his
Vineyard. What arts were used to possess Ahab with it, are not unknown to any
that have read the Scriptures; but when God called him to an account, he
reckoned with him not only for a bloody Murder, but also for an unjust
possession: Have thou killed, 1 Kings 21.19.
and also taken possession? Their right of Sovereignty gives them a claim to so
much as will supply their ordinary and extraordinary occasions; what they
require more, is not equity, but exaction. And as on the one side God will not
allow the Subjects upon such occasions to rebel against their Prince; so on the
other, Deuteronomy. 17.17.
he forbids them to enrich themselves by impoverishing their Subjects. Let it
suffice, O Princes, Ezech. 45.9.
remove violence and spoil, take away your exactions from the people. This has
proved the root and fountain of many inconveniences. This made that rent in
Rehoboams Kingdom, which all his policy and strength could never heal again.
God has made them Shepherds not Butchers; and allows them for their care over
his flock to fleece, but not to flay them.

St. Lewis his prudent advice to his son.
St. Lewis that good K. among other grave exhortations to his son a little
before his death, charge him never to crave any Tax or Subsidies from his
Subjects, but upon a very just cause and urgent necessity; and that if he did
otherwise, he would not be reputed a King, but a Tyrant. What is requisite and
necessary upon the former accounts, the Apostle calls their due: and Christ
himself the things that are Caesar's: and Vlpian that famous Lawyer, Ner^i
Reipublicae sine quibus non potest administrari nec consistere. Ulpian.
the sinews of the Commonwealth, without which it cannot be governed, nor
subsist. They are granted to them by the Laws of all Nations, and therefore the
Duty calls more for practice then for proof. For notwithstanding they may
challenge these by their Charter granted to them by the great God and K. of
heaven and earth, Applicat.
yet many there are that part with what is required of them upon that score, as
unwillingly as with their blood: yea, when they were inevitably necessary, and
that too by a necessity of their own creating, to satisfy those debts which
their former Rebellion, and the fruit thereof had contracted upon their
banished Sovereign; yet these were not paid without a great deal of murmuring
and repining. England in the time of the late Usurpation, like Issacher, and he
like an Ass.
Time was when England (like Issacher) was as an Ass couching between two
burdens, and contentedly bore them, plying her provender without noise or
groaning; and seemed willing to purchase her quiet at any rate, under a Tyrant
who made his Lust his Law; but now snuffs at what is imposed, not by a
boundless Prerogative, but by that very authority which was of their own free
election: like an ungrateful Beast, But now like a proud pampered Horse.
which being eased of a great part of his burden by the mercy of his owner,
kicks and lashes to quit himself of the rest, being very willing that he should
bear it himself. All that goes this way is set down upon the account of their
losses, Good Princes like trusty Factors.
whereas good Princes are like skilful and trusty Factors for their Subjects,
expending their moneys to their own best advantage, and returning them trebly
the worth of it in such commodities which most wise men value. Or like the Sun,
Aptly compared to the Sun
which by its attractive heat draws up vapors from the Earth (which may well
be spared) and returns them in fruitful showers: Custom, Tribute, etc. to
Vapors.
So the Tribute and Custom, the Taxes, and Impositions which the Higher Powers
exhale as Vapors, by the force of urgent necessity, are richly exchanged into
the sweet refreshing Rains of Peace and Plenty. And thus I have given an
account of the particular Duties included and implied in this general one of
Fear, as I found dispersed here and there in the holy Scripture. The next piece
of work which I have to do, is to enquire after the subject, by whom it must be
paid; which is every one that comes under the name of a Subject, whom Solomon
here calls his son.

2. Part of the Text, viz. the Subject.
My son fear thou the Lord, and the King; who in a political sense is a Father;
and in the same, his Subjects are his children: So that every one whom the King
in that sense may call his son, he may upon that very account call upon him for
this fear. The Apostles rule is general, Romans 13.1. Qui tentat excipere conatur
decipere.

Origin his strange sense of the word soul.

For what taken in the Scripture.


and admits of no exception. He that goes about to except, endeavors to
deceive; and where there is none excepted, there can be none exempted; unless
that strange sense which is fathered upon Origin, concerning the word Soul, be
Orthodox, namely, a fleshly and carnal person; which is a sense (of which I
think I may safely say) that is never used in Sacred Writ. It is used indeed
properly for the noblest part of man, which is of a divine extraction, and
stamped with the glorious image of him that did infuse it. Sometimes for the
will and affections, by a Synecdoche of the whole for a part; and by the same
figure the Soul, which is a principal part, is put for the whole man. God says
to the Prophet, Ezech. 18.4.
that the soul that sins, that is, that man or woman, whoever it be that
sins (if he repent not) shall die, which includes all; and so it does here
in the Text, Carnal and Spiritual, Saint and Sinner, and never is used to
signify a carnal in opposition to a spiritual person.

We read in one of the Epistles of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.20.
of eight souls that were saved in the Ark which Noah by Gods direction had
provided against that Deluge, which he threatened to bring upon the old World
for its daring impieties. Should we understand by those eight souls, eight
carnal persons, (as we may upon as good a ground as in the other place) we
should make that which was one of the most remarkable pieces of Justice that
ever was executed upon the World, the greatest example of injustice. To destroy
all the righteous, and let such a number of wicked persons escape; to send a
Flood to drown the one, and to provide an Ark to save the other.

Some put that sense upon it here, and offer their reasons.
I know there is a generation of men in the World, that are very willing to
embrace that sense there, where subjection is required so universally without
exception; and offer their ground for the exemption of themselves and others,
which are at least in their own conceits the holy and redeemed of the Lord. 1.
Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
Subjection say they came in by sin, but they are freed from sin, and so
consequently from subjection; take away the cause and the effect must cease:
Christ having freed them from the one, he has freed them from the other also.
Disproved.
By the same Argument they may as well dispute themselves out of the reach of
death; for by one man sin entered into the World, Romans 5.12.
and death by sin; so death has seized on all for that all have sinned. Yet
let them live as blamelesly and as innocently as they can, What man is he that
lives and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the
grave? No man can attain to a life of sinless perfection till he is dead. Velis
nolis intra fines tuos habitabit Jebuseus subjugari potest, exterminari non
potest.
Willing or nilling, this Jebusite will continue within thy borders: thou
may keep it under, but can not root it out. We may give sin its mortal
wound, but its full and final expiration is reserved for the stroke of death.
Religio peperit divitias, and f^lia devoravit matrem.
As it was said of Riches the daughter of Religion; Religion has brought forth
Riches, and the Daughter has destroyed the Mother; so Sin brought forth Death,
and Death destroyed Sin. But although the reign of Death be universal, both
over Saints and Sinners; Distinction of death in reference to the righteous and
wicked.
yet there is a vast difference between death, as a curse, which is properly
the punishment of sin; (and so it is to all impenitent sinners,) and death as
it is by Christ altered, and changed from a curse into a blessing (as it is to
the righteous) being a happy passage from a Vale of tears to a Paradise of joy.
The like of their Subjection. Formidine poenae.
So is there between that servile subjection of the wicked for fear of
punishment, from him who should not bear the Sword in vain, (which is a fruit
of their sin) and that civil subjection of the righteous upon the score of
Conscience, which is a blessing to that King that has such Subjects; and will
draw down the blessings of God upon themselves. Did every Subject carry such a
Conscience in his breast, what quiet and peaceable lives should we live in all
godliness and honesty!

But these men tell us further, Their 2. Reason.
That they are governed by the Spirit of God, therefore they need no other
government; they are a Law to themselves, wherefore then should they be under
the Laws of men? We have a usual saying, Refuted, and the grand cheat
discovered.
All is not Gold that glisters, neither all men what they pretend to be. And
most commonly they that are the readiest to make their claim, are the
backwardest to prove their Title; whereas the greatest Saints have always
acknowledged themselves the greatest Sinners. In the time of our Civil Wars,
when the Canon Law was lowdest, Inter arma silent leges.
and our Common Law was almost silent, these men's actions proclaimed them to
the World, to be far from righteous persons; plundering, or in plain terms
robbing others to enrich themselves: So that none stood more in need of Laws,
then those that styled themselves The Godly Party, and all others Reprobates.
The best that are, or ever were upon the face of the earth since mankind was
multiplied, could not but be sufficiently convinced of the necessity of good
and wholesome Laws, both for themselves and others; for although they for their
own part are guided by the free Spirit of God, and so want not the Laws of Men
to compel them, yet they have need of them to secure them. We may safely
suppose that they would not willingly wrong others; but cannnot but also
imagine that others would wilfully injure them: and whoever he be that wrongs
them, God has tied up their hands fast enough from righting themselves; that
is Gods prerogative, and by his designation the Magistrates office. And surely
they have little reason to expect protection from them, St. Austins censure of
such. Si quis putat quia Christianus est non sibi esse vectigal reddendum aut
tributum, aut non esse exhibendum honorem debitum, de eis quae haec curant
potestatibus in magno errore est. Aust. in loc. Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem
a Deo secundum, and sola Deo minorem.
who will yield no subjection to them. I shall therefore leave these Anarchical
and Antinomian Spirits to the censure of S. Aust. writing upon those very
words. If any man thinks because he is a Christian, that he is not bound to pay
tribute and taxes, and yield due honor to the higher Powers, he is in a great
error. So then by every soul is meant every person. Time was when this
exposition was admitted for Orthodox, and the duty accordingly owned and
practiced. So it was in Tertullians time; We reverence the Emperor as next to
God himself, and inferior to none but himself, there is none above him but he
that made him so. Yea even in Rome it self, by its chief Bishop Agatho, who
wrote in this style to Constantine the then Emperor; Secundum piissimam
jussionem mansuetudinis vestra pro obedientia, quam debuimus dirigimus
presents confamulos nostros.
As your Clemency has godly commanded us, according to the obedience we owe,
we have sent these our fellow servants. But since they have plucked their own
necks out of the yoke, and set their feet upon the necks of Princes; they have
found out a way, not only to exempt themselves, but others also from their due
obedience; pronouncing them excommunicate, and thundering out anathema's against
any that dare to own or assist them; proving himself to be the Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
as S. Paul describes him; who opposes and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God: subjecting all Laws both of God and Man,
of Nature and of Nations, to his own interpretation, dispensation, abrogation,
how, to whom, and when he pleases. The close of this second part.
I shall conclude this with the saying of Frederick the Emperor to that proud
Pope Adrian 4. whom he checks for his insolence, and sends him to Christ (whose
servant he pretends himself to be) to learn him better manners. Cum Christus
noster and vester institutor nihil a Rege accipiens tamen pro se and Petro
censum persolvit exemplum vobis dedit ut vos ita faciatis.
Seeing Christ, both our Founder and yours, did take nothing of the King, but
did pay tribute to Caesar for himself and Peter, he gave you an example to do
the like. Every soul, or every one that has a soul, so long as that soul is in
his body (death only can give him a discharge from that obligation) must be
subject to the higher Powers; so the Apostle. Every soul that is a son, and
every son that is a subject, is the subject of this fear in the Text; he ows
it, and must pay it, both in the strictest and amplest acceptance to the King,
who (next under God) is the object of it, and comes in the next place briefly
to be considered.

My son fear thou the Lord, and the King. The 3. part of the Text, viz. the
Object.
The King without any Epithet, good or bad; implying we must fear him, whether
good or bad. On what his Title grounded, both negatively and affirmatively.
His Title to this fear depends upon no other Title but that which he has to
his Crown. Not because he is religious, wise, just, potent, and formidable, but
because he is a King; which he may be without any of these qualifications: and
if he be so, whether he have any or none, he must be feared. Cogitet quaelibet
uxor viri dignitatem suamque inferioritatem non aestimandam esse ex virtutibus,
forma, nobilitate, divitiis, sed ex sola ordinatione divina, in hac fundatur
mariti authoritas and subjectio uxoris quae abrogari and mutari ex causis istis
accidentalibus nec debet nec potest. Bishop Davenant in Coloss. 3.18.
They that honor him only for his own personal excellencies, honor him
chiefly, not as a King, but as an ordinary person. The foundation of all that
Duty which a Subject owes to his Prince, is not a personal, but a relative
excellency; which is not confined to this or that King so or so qualified; but
essential and common to all Kings, as they are Kings. It is not founded in
themselves, but in the relation they have to God. What a learned Divine said of
the Wives subjection to their Husbands, may be very well applied to the
Subjects subjection to his Prince. She whoever she be, that is a Wife, must
know that her Husbands dignity, and her own inferiority, take not their
estimate from Virtue, Nobility, or Riches, but from the Ordinance of God alone.
The authority of the Husband, and the subjection of the Wife, is founded upon
that, and may not, nay must not be abrogated or changed upon any of those
accidental accounts. There is indeed no other foundation that will support the
honor due unto Kings firm and unshaken: for had it been said Fear the King,
(i. e.) the King so and so qualified; if such qualifications be wanting, or be
supposed to be wanting (as it always will be by some or other that are
disaffected to his Person or Government) they would hereupon cancel all
obligations of duty and respect to him, as we have found by late and sad
experience. Therefore the most wise God foreseeing the mischievous consequences
of such conditional Laws among men (who for the most part make not their own or
others eyes, but their partial affections Judges in the case) has enacted an
absolute Law without any provisoes or exceptions, to prevent all occasions of
public disturbances, St. Paul and St. Peter call for it to all Kings.
and pretenses for rebellion. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers,
so S. Paul: Fear God, honor the King, so S. Peter. And I am confident there is
no other place of Scripture concerning this subject, but what is of the same
nature with those, and this in the Text, which are as absolute and free from
all conditional limitations, or restrictions, as possibly can be.

Neither can it be imagined by any that have read any thing of Ecclesiastical
History, Who reigned when they wrote their Epistles.
that those Governors, whom they themselves, and those to whom they wrote
their Epistles lived under, were every way so well qualified, that such
proviso's were needless. Claudius or Nero, a short Character of both.
They were penned when Claudius or Nero swayed the Scepter; the first of the
two was the best; and that best bad enough: a Pagan, and an enemy to Christ and
all true Christians. The last the Monster of mankind for all manner of
wickedness; who set Rome on fire, and charged it upon the Christians: first
making, and then taking this occasion, he persecuted them, and put them to
sundry kinds of torments, causing some to be covered with Beasts skins, and to
be worried by Dogs, others to be nailed to Crosses, others to be burned in the
night, that the light of of those cruel Bonfires might qualify the darkness
thereof. And so unsatiable was this matchless Tyrants thirst after blood, that
he spared not his nearest relations, but put to death his Sister, his Wife, his
Grandmother, yea his own immediate Mother Agrippina; whom after three several
attempts by poison, proved insuccessful (by reason of her Antidotes and
Preservatives, which continual suspicion caused her to take) he sent Anicetus a
Centurion to murder her; who with his companions brake open first the Gates of
the City, and next the door of her Chamber where she lay. It is reported of
her, that when she saw there was no remedy but death, she presented her belly
to the Murderer, and desired him to kill her in that part which had most
deserved it, by bringing into the World, so vile a Monster. In a word, he was a
professed enemy to God and all goodness, famous for nothing but for infamy. Yet
this one benefit the Christians reaped from this Viper, they looked upon his
cruelty toward the professors of the Gospel, as a strong testimony of the
truth of that Doctrine they professed, and he persecuted: Tertull. in his Apol.
c. 5.
We boast and brag of such a famous persecutor, for they which know him may
easily perceive that this our Doctrine had never been condemned by Nero, had it
not been passing good.

Yet as bad as he was (as worse he could not well be) those blessed Apostles
call upon his Subjects, Christians as well as Infidels, to honor him, and to
be subject unto him. But upon what account? Surely not upon a score of
gratitude for any favor received from him formerly, nor out of policy, hoping
thereby to insinuate themselves and their fellow christians into his favor for
the future; if they did, they fell short of their expectations; receiving from
him a sad requital for so great loyalty, so clearly manifested, not only by
their personal and particular practice; but also by their general precepts,
whereby they endeavored to make all others of his Subjects as loyal to him as
themselves. For not long after, under the self-same Nero, one of them was
beheaded, and the other crucified. Questionless they saw so much of his
wickedness with their own eyes, that they must needs think that God had given
him to a reprobate mind, to commit all iniquity even with greediness, and to
proceed from bad to worse, till he had filled up the measure of his sin: So
that there can be no other reason given, why they should fear such a King, who
was so wicked a King, the worst of Kings, yea the very worst of men, but this,
because he was a King; and the reason of that, Romans 13.1.
because there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God.

Rex semper honorandus est si non propter se, tamen propter ordinem. S. Aust.
de quest. V. and N. Testam. De Civitat. Dei lib. 5. c. 21.
The King is always to be honored, if not for himself, yet for order sake; and
for that Kingly Government is the Ordinance of God, though the Governor be
never so wicked. He that gave a Kingdom to Constantine the Christian, gave a
Kingdom also to Julian the Apostate: If therefore he gave a Kingdom to an
Infidel, his Subjects cannot with any color of reason withdraw their obedience
for his Infidelity. Davenant in Col. 4. v. 5.
Which are the words of the same Father in another Book of his; and the
hypothesis and inference are a deserving Prelates of our own Church. The Duty
applied against Papal Pride.
What a Spirit of Pride then rules in the heart of that man of sin, who
overrules the Princes of the Earth, and takes upon him to excommunicate them
at his pleasure; and to absolve their Subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance to
them; yea, to depose and damn them to the pit of Hell, for pretended heresy.
Who sees not how dissonant their Doctrines and Practices of this kind are to
those Apostolical rules, which were the undoubted offspring of divine
inspiration! which tell us in effect, that no violence is to be used against
the Supreme Power; and that evil Princes are not to be curbed and restrained by
Arms taken up against them, but by Prayers offered up to God for them. And
their Subjects in such cases should arm themselves, not with weapons to oppose
them, but with Arguments (if the will of God be so) to suffer by them; of which
there is a great plenty in the Scripture, which might have been very well
spared, if God had allowed them any other remedies. That tells us if we suffer
in a good cause, we suffer for a Kingdom. And although all the afflictions of
this present life, are not worthy of that glory which shall be revealed (it
were high pride and presumption to lay claim to it upon that account) yet God
is pleased to account such sufferers worthy of that Kingdom for which they
suffer; which is such a Kingdom as will sufficiently countervail all the losses
that we can possibly undergo it. Hic ure, hic seca ut in aeternum parcas.
Let me be hackt and hewed to pieces, burned and consumed to ashes, so that I
may escape suffering hereafter, (said a Martyr.) If for being spared, how much
rather upon condition of being crowned for everwith glory: he would be a gainer
to purpose by his sufferings, if when his Persecutors took away a temporal life
from him, God should give an eternal life unto him. Seneca said, Si longae
leves, si graves breves. Seneca.
Of all that we can suffer here, if they seem long, they are but light; if they
are grievous, they can be but short, since life it self cannot be long. And one
of better principles (that was his contemporary, and as some affirm, of his
acquaintance also) says the same, but with a great deal more of comfort and
encouragement, viz. That our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: while we look not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. 2
Cor. 4.17, 18. S. Paul that once rebuked S. Peter, brought in as questioning
his pretended Successor.
And he that once rebuked Peter to his face, cannot (I conceive) be guilty of
any great presumption, if he question his pretended fuccessor, what he has to
do to judge another servant, since he stands or falls to his own Lord?
especially such a servant as was his rightful Sovereign; servant in a Scripture
sense, only to him who is Lord of Lords. Let him search the whole New Testament
over and over again, and when he has done it twice, let him do it ten times
more; and let him show if he can, where any of that rank and condition have
been excommunicated: they may be admonished, rebuked, advised, and that with
discretion too, observing their distance, not otherwise. And those whom Christ
the King of Kings has placed in his stead on Earth, he has reserved their
final sentence to his own more righteous judgment.

The matter being so clearly stated, by such infallible Authorities as
aforesaid, what may we think of that great Diana of our late Reformers, The
Solemn League and Covenant examined.
the Solemn League and Covenant? one of the chiefest limbs whereof, concerning
the Civil Magistrate, is so down right lame, and so suitable to those Romish
principles, that were we not well satisfied in what part of the World it had
its original, we might sooner have guessed it to have been contrived rather by
a Conclave of Popish Rabbis, then by those who pretended themselves Divines of
the more refined and reformed Religion. It makes provision for the Kings
Person, The Article which concerns the Kings preservation, conditional.
Crown, and Dignity, as to the security thereof; but how, or how far? Quamdiu
been se gesserit; so long as he behaves himself well, and no longer. He must
stand to all intents and purposes in the nature of a Probationer, durante vita;
and if they dislike him, he is a King but durante been placito, during their
pleasure; or at least till they can find an opportunity to unking and dethrone
him. In the defense of the Protestant Religion, there is the condition; so that
if the King be wanting, or be supposed to be wanting in the defense thereof (as
he will always be supposed to be by some Sect or Faction) they then conceive
themselves (as well they may) from that condition, absolved from any obligation
that that Covenant lays upon them (as Subjects) to protect and defend him as
their Sovereign; because it binds them so to do, only upon that condition and
not otherwise. Yea, they will be ready to think themselves thereby firmly
engaged to their utmost to oppose him. To honor him for fear is servility, to
do it for our own benefit, to work our ends upon him, is self-love; and to do
it with a reserve or an implicit condition, is in plain terms, no other then
implicit Rebellion. The Authors actions the best Comment upon their own Act.
The actions of its Authors, were the most authentic Comment upon their own
Act; who had no sooner brought his Subjects into that snare, but they basely
defamed the King as favourer of Popery; and an Army is levied to force him to a
redress of their pretended grievances; which amounted to no less then the
unkinging of himself; the rooting out (so far as they could) that ancient
Government of Episcopacy, and the introducing a Linsey-Woolsey one in its
stead, (as a learned Prelate sometime called it, Bishop King in his Sermon
before King James at Hamton-Court, Cant. 8.11.
) which when he preached that Sermon, had not seen the age of a man, threescore
and ten; and the delivering all those to the spoil, who merely out of
Conscience adhered to him.

From whom they learned this, or what hand guided that pen, or what headpiece
inspired that Party that inserted that Clause, is easy to guess; not Christ
but Antichrist; not Paul one of his Apostles, That clause taken out of
Bellarmin.
but Bellarmine one of the Popes Cardinals; who tells us in plain terms and
down right language; If Princes endeavor to turn their people from the faith,
they may and must be deprived from their Government: and Christians are bound
not to suffer such a King to rule over them. And that his Doctrine might be
swallowed with the more ease, and the less straining, he way-lays that
objection, grounded upon the contrary practice of the Primitive Christians;
telling us (but most falsely) upon what ground they did it; Anticavaleerism.
which the Author of that pestilent Pamphlet (fit only to make Subjects for the
Prince of Darkness) has borrowed from him, and made use of it upon the like
account, viz. If the Christians of old did not depose Nero, Dioclesian, and
others like to them, it is because they wanted power. And this that Author
calls a sufficient answer.

It is a thing more facile then proper for this my purpose, to discover more
then this one flaw in that Politic Engine; which some have chosen rather to
part with their livelihoods then renounce; though enjoined to do it by a more
lawful Authority, and upon far better grounds, then that by which, and those
upon which it was first imposed. It is the joint resolution of all sound
Casuists, The resolution of the best Casuists concerning unlawful Vows, etc.
that sinful vows are more safely broken then kept; and being rashly and
unadvisedly made, they bind to repentance, not to performance: which if our
dissenting Brethren of the Clergy, had well well weighed and considered, the
Church might have received more benefit by their labors, and themselves more
comfort by their obedience. For how much soever they seem by their selected
Texts for their Farewell Sermons, to please and solace themselves in their
sufferings upon such and such accounts (as if they had left all to follow
Christ) yet they cannot but know, that such Texts have no more of comfort in
them (at least will yield no more unto them) then their sufferings have of
compliance with their Texts. What a sad mistake will it be, if it should prove
in the winding up, that in stead of leaving all to follow Christ, they have
left Christ to follow their fancies, or the dictates of an erroneous
Conscience; and have opposed, yea preferred their own private reputations to
the public peace of the Church. For mine own part I do much more commend the
prudence of those Noble Senators, who (in regard it had bewitched so many
Subjects into a Rebellion against their Sovereign) have passed upon it its
proper doom, to be burned to ashes.

But I leave them and come to our selves, This applied to rectify our
judgments.
who are instructed from this part of the Text, that all the forementioned
Duties which Subjects owe to their Princes, are due and payable to them, as
they are so. A Lesson very necessary for us all to learn exactly, to remember
it carefully, and to practice it conscionably. Many are thoroughly convinced
that they are justly due to, and highly deserved by good Princes, that are
tender Fathers of their Country, indulgent Nurses of the Church, faithful
Shepherds of the People, vigilant Keepers of the Peace, careful defenders of
Justice, and impartial protectors of innocence* They readily pay them to the
fruitful Vine that delights them with her lovely clusters, Arbor honoretur
cujus nos umbra tuetur.
to the benefical Olive that enricheth them with its pleasing fatness, to the
spreading Tree that yields them shadow from the heat, and fruit for their
hunger; but to do it to the scratching Bramble, that fleeces and draws blood
from them, to a Tyrant that turns Justice into Wormwood, that persecutes and
dismembers, that pulls down and destroys at pleasure, that makes a Land an
Acheldama, a Field of Blood. This is a hard saying, who can bear it? Malis
dominandi potestas non datur, nisi summi Dei providentia quando subditos
judicat talibus Dominis dignos. De Civit. Dei lib. 5. c. 21.
But what says St. Austin, Government is not put into such men's hands, but by
the providence of the most high God, when he judges them for their great
impieties to deserve such Governors. God has an especial providence in
appointing Kings, and disposing of Kingdoms; Promotion is neither from the
East, nor from the West, nor yet from the South; but God pulls down one, and
sets up another. Psalm. 75.6.
The God of Heaven gave Nebuchadnezzar a Kingdom, Dan. 2.37.
Power and Glory. And what a King that was, I think none can be ignorant that
are not strangers to the holy Scriptures; which describe him to be a cruel
enemy to Gods people, spoiling them of their substance, plucking them out of
their habitations, and carrying them into a miserable and tedious captivity. He
was the rod of Gods anger, wherewith he scourged that sinful People the Jews,
together with their Kings and Princes; commanding them that they should serve
him, and pray for him; and if they did not so, Jer. 27.6.29.7.
he would visit them with Sword, Famine, and Pestilence. He gives good ones in
love, evil ones in anger; they all come under that distinction: if they are of
the first sort, we must honor and obey them cheerfully; if of the worser sort,
we must endure them patiently. Per loci desertionem ab officio defectionem
intelligit. Cartwright in locum.
If the spirit of him that rules rise up against thee (whether thou give him
any just cause for it or not) leave not thy place. By which Phrase we are to
understand defection from the duties of our place; meaning, that Subjects may
not for any injuries received, from him withold any thing that is due unto
him; though he should cease to do the duty of a King, they must not cease to do
the duty of Subjects.

This what I have here imparted with a great deal of weakness (as to the
managing of it) is with as much sincerity as to the truth of it. The conclusion
of the Treatise.
Neither have I herein designed any secular advantage to my self, but have
faithfully revealed what has been taught by Solomon, yea by Christ a greater
then Solomon, viva voce, when he was on Earth; and by his Apostles since his
ascension into Heaven. I know there have been some who have perverted this
piece of Gospel Doctrine, which St. Paul so clearly taught, not dreading in the
least his Apostolical Anathema. I have a great deal of confidence that this may
come into the hands of some that are not otherwise minded. And for those that
are, and seek to pervert others, Gal. 5.10.
they shall bear their judgment whoever they be. And so I shall close with that
caution which the Author gives in the latter part of this, and in the ensuing
Verse; to avoid familiarity with, but more especially, seduction by the
seditious that are given to change; for so they are described by their levity
that makes them so; and with his argument drawn a malo poenae, from the evil of
punishment; which usually attends both the seducers and the seduced, which is
both sudden and severe; it begins in calamity, and ends in the ruin of both:
My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given
to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both?

FINIS.

