Ptro-scholastiko-dikaosi, OR, A JUSTIFICATION OF THE FATHERS and SCHOOLMEN:
Showing, That they are not Self-condemned for denying the Positivity of Sin.

Being an Answer to so much of Mr. THO. PIERCE's Book, called
(...)Autokatkrisi, as does relate to the foresaid Opinion.

By HEN: HICKMAN, Fellow of Magdalene College, Oxon.

Nonnulli citius volunt exagitare quod non intelligunt, quam quaerere ut
intelligant: and non fiunt humiles inquisitores, sed superbi calumniatores.

Aug. de Tem Sermon, ^2. Solent veritatis hosts suis jactantiis etiam de nihilo
theatrum quaerere.

Calv in Mar 9.14. Inclamant Puritanos, Puritanos, sed per Puritanorum latera
Orthodoxam vulnerant veritatem.

D Holland referente M. Bolton. OXFORD, Printed by A. Lichfield, for Joh.
Adams, and Edw. Forest. 1659.

To the reverend and learned the weekly Lecturers at Brackly.
Fathers and Brethren.
YOu will a little wonder to see me in print, more wonder to see me meddling
with a subject somewhat remote from practice, most of all wonder to find me
engaging with an adversary, who drinks up scorning like Water, and knows not
how to mention the worthiest man alive, if of a differing judgment, without
contempt. Nor would you cease wondering, if I should tell you, that the mere
importunity of friends (which is now made the common vouchee for publications)
did put me upon this undertaking, nay, though Solomon has told us that a good
name is better than a precious ointment; yet if Mr. P. had contented himself to
give me alone ill names, you would never think it any part of my duty, to
scribble so many sheets in my own vindication: but when as I have found a
wanton wit doing by all the honest Presbyterians and Puritanes as did the
heathen persecutors by the primitive Christians, putting them into beasts
skins, abusing them with all the odious epithets and aspersions he could scrape
together, the one half whereof if they should deserve, they were not worthy to
live, and when as I have heard that some are too apt to believe those things
real which are the mere chimaera's of his brain, you will not count it an idle
expense of time, if I bestow some pains (and very little will serve) to show
the World that he who is so fierce in charging others with blasphemy, does
maintain an opinion on which necessarily and unavoideably follows the worst of
blasphemies Gods being the Author of sin, and that the privativenesse of moral
evil is not a monster hatched under the wings of a few disciplinarian zealots;
not a perfect fantasy, a mere Scholasticall notion as Dr. Hammond is pleased
to call it, fundam. Page 178. But the undoubted opinion of the Fathers and of
modern Divines as well Lutheran as Calvinistical, yea and that in the way
which some angry Divines now with extreme bitterness call Calvinisme the
ancient Episcopal Divines worshipped the God of their Fathers. Two Artifices I
have observed some violent Spirits of late to make much use of, in order to the
drawing away of persons from the opinions in which they have been educated. 1.
to persuade them that the opinions they have embraced are but the crude
indigested notions of some Presbyterians, so Dr. Jer. Tailor in the book which
should have been called Pelagius, or Socinus Iustificatus, would bear us in
hand that he quarrelleth only with the Presbyterian notion of Original sin;
and yet to that tract the Stationer has unluckily joined another, in which he
labors to give as good an account, and make as fair an Apology for his tenet
as he can, to an Eminent Prelate of our own Nation, who can as little digest
that Chapter in the unum necessarium, as the most rigidly Scotized
Presbyterian. And I hope none of our old Protestants will be caught with such
chafe. A 2. Stratagem is this, after they have fathered the assertions against
which they declaime, upon Mr. Calvin, and his followers, then to Burden them
with such horrible consequences, as cannot by any true rules of reason be
deduced from them, as if they were contrary to the Holiness, Mercy, Justice of
God, as if they introduced fatal necessity, and opened a gap to all manner of
Licentiousness, as in the first design they do unwittingly befriend the
Presbyterians, by giving the people occasion to think that they only are the
men, who will contend for the faith once delivered to the saints; so in the
latter they do (whether wittingly, or unwittingly they best know) befriend the
Synagogue of Rome; for as B. Carleton, says well: Page 62. What greater
pleasure can a man procure to the Enemies of the truth, than to speak evil and
odiously of those men whose service God has used, and made them excellent
instruments to make the truth known unto us? Some take it for a sign of such as
are looking toward Popery, when they offer such a service to the Papists, as
to speak evil of them who have been the greatest Enemies to Popery, the
greatest propagators of the truth. I have took occasion to as far as my
Antagonist offered it to make bare both these two fallacies, and to that end
have scarce made use of any testimony, but such as he dare not call
Presbyterian. If at any time I seem to depart from that meekness of Spirit,
which is required in a Minister, I shall desire it may be considered not only
what is fit for me to speak, but what is meet for him to hear. If I were to
mention their fact, who took the relics of Peter Martyr's wifes carkase out
of the grave, and after buried them in a dunghill, would you not allow me to
call it, unchristian, and inhumane? And shall I be permitted to put no vinegar
in my Pen, when I am to write of one, who has taken the far greater part of
our Protestant writers out of those beds of honor, in which the Church has
laid them, and made their graves amongst blashpemers are the keenest words to
keen for a reformed Bolsec? an English Feuardentius? And has not Mr. P. showed
himself such? Come out of your dust ye ancient records, and show us if you
can, since Mr. Mountagues Appeal, any piece written by a Protestant Divine, so
full of bitter girds, and scurrilous gibes, against the great instruments of
our Reformation, as the late (...) and (...) are: But I know how hard it is for
one who has been so coursely and undecently dealt with as I have been, not to
exceed bounds; if you find me so to have done, be not so cruelly merciful as
not to call me to repentance. And for your selves, Let your moderation be known
to all men, the Lord is at hand. The reproaches where with you are reproached,
are no other than such as the old Puritanes (of whom the world was not worthy)
were exercised with. Let me also mind you of the grave, and seasonable
counsel, which Galba gave to Piso. Nero a pessimo quoque desiderabitur, mihi
and tibi providendum est, ne etiam a bonis desideretur: The Episcopal
government, as it was exercised in your County, will be desired by the bad,
let not the good wish it restored also, for any Church Government is better
than no Church Government, a promiscuous admission to the Sacrament is more
desirable than a total disuse of that most blessed ordinance. If you will but
put in practice the rules you pitched upon when you were first about to enter
into an association with your Brethren, you shall as little need to fear the
spleen of him who calls your ordinations Prankes, as the clamor of those who
call your Churches Antichristian: That the word of the Lord may run and be
glorified among you: That God would open unto you a door of utterance, to speak
the Mystery of Christ, for which you endure contradiction of sinners, and that
when your work is done in this life you may enter into your Masters glory is
the prayers of

The unworthiest of your fellow laborers H. Hickman.
Magd. College. Nov. 22th. 1658.
A Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
ALthough I never saw Mr. Pierce his face, yet so much have I been taken with
that rich vein of Rhetoric, which runs through all his Writings falling
under my eye, that those few friends, in whose common acquaintance we meet,
will testify, I have not mentioned his name without those prefaces of respect
which are due to a Scholar: Nor has his debasing me to the dunghill of
Doltisme, put me under any temptation to detract from the credit and reputation
which he has acquired unto himself among our young Gallants, by putting the
good Greek and Latin of the old Philosophers into as good English, is his
Practicals, by abusing Mr. Bar. with Drollery, as handsome as ever dropped from
the Pen of Ben. Johnson in his Polemicals. But as Bees are sometimes drowned in
their Honey, so is his Logic in his Rhetoric; the body of his Proofs being as
poor, and lean, as the garnish of his words, and margin glorious; his stuff as
mean, as his dressing rich. And therefore I reckon him many ways unfortunate
in choosing the tremendous mystery of Reprobation for his first public Essay.
Eccius indeed in his Chrysopas. where he entreats concerning Reprobation,
says, he did choose it as an idoneous subject, in quo juveniles calores
exerceret. But that Mr. P. a person, professing to be of that party by whose
means a declaration was procured, injoyning silence in these points, to be an
admirer of Bishop Montague, who in his first Visitation made this one Article
of Enquiry; Does your Minister commonly, or on set purpose, in his popular
Sermons, fall upon those much disputed, and little understood Doctrines, of
Gods eternal Predestination, of Election precedaneous, of Reprobation
irrespective without sin foreseen, of Free Will, of Perseverance, and not
falling from Grace, points obscure, unfoldable, unfordable, untractable, at
which that great Apostle stood at gaze, with, O the height, and depth of the
riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments
and his ways past finding out. Romans 11.31. That Mr. P. should sport his fancy
in these troubled waters, wherein so many have made shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience, would seem strange to me: But that I am fallen into an Age in
which I have learned to admire nothing; not so much from any knowledge I have
attained unto of the causes of things, as from the multitude of strange effects.

But, that 2ly; I had long since learned, that the foresaid Declaration was
never intended to be a two edged Sword, was never procured out of any
charitable design, to settle the Peace of the Church, but out of a politic
design, to stop the mouths of the Orthodox, who were sure to be censured, if
they at any time declared their minds, whilst the new upstart Arminians were
suffered to Preach and Print their Heterodox notions with out any control:
lest in this I should be suspected of partiality, or falsehood, I will quote the
words of the most Noble Lord Faulkland, in his Speech to the House of Commons
printed, Anno 1641. For Thom. Walkeley, Page 5, 6. Mr. Speaker in this they
have abused his Majesty as well as his people; for when he had with great
wisdom silenced on both parts those opinions, which have often tormented the
Church, and have, and will all way trouble the Schools, they made use of this
Declaration to tie up one side, and let the other loose; whereas they ought
either in discretion to have been equally restrained, or in justice to have
been equally tolerated, and it is observable, that the party to which they gave
this license was that, whose Doctrine, though it were not contrary to Law, was
contrary to custom, and for a long while in this Kingdom was, no ofter
preached than recanted.

If Mr. P. have for the time past (what he tells us for the future he resolves)
bestowed only his times of Leisure and diversion upon these disputes, he is
the more excuseable: But if whilst he has ^een throwing stones at Mr. Bar.
head, his Children have wanted their bread, or have been fain to take it
divided to them by a more unskillfull hand then his own: Then has he put
something on his doomesday book, which I wish he may have time to take off by
repentance before he go away and shall be seen no more: and let him take this
counsel from one (who though constrained to dissent from his opinion, is a
cordial friend to his Person) quickly to kiss the Son who must needs be
offended with him for his hard speeches used against those precious Divines
beyond the Seas, scarce to be equalled by any now a live, or to be excelled by
those in any Calendar.

So little do I delight to have my fingers in the fire of contention that have
meddled with nothing in his (...). but what I my self am, at least by him
thought, to be concerned in. Whether I be supra, or sublapsarian, or neither in
the Doctrine of reprobation, and the conversies depending thereon no one knows,
or can pretend to know, from any thing they have heard me say in the Pulpit,
and if I have not thought meet to make these things a Pulpit business, why
should I declare my mind about them from the press? If my opinion be in some
particulars singular, then perhaps it may be my duty to have my knowledge to my
self; if in all things I agree with others of the Calvinistical persuasion, I
must then, before I write one, consider twice whether I can say any thing that
others have not said before in most full and ample manner; for he had need be
very prodigal of his credit, who in such a curious and inquisitive age as this
will serve up his Reader with only a dish of twenty times sodden coleworts.
Yet because I am brought upon the stage, and because Mr. P. has thought meet
to blast me with the utmost expression of his hatred, the title of Calvinist
and Puritan, and because I find some to make use of this Jvybush to tole in
customers, that they are obedient Sons of the Chuch of England. I shall beg thy
patience (good Reader) whilst I show that not the Remonstrant, but the
Contra-remonstrant opinion has been the Doctrine of the Reformed Church of
England, and that the Countenancing of Arminianisme with us, is no older than
Bishop Laud, and Bishop Mountague, who are but of yesterday in comparison: But
do not these men much forget themselves whilst they appeal to the Church of
England? Was it not the Church of England that in her 35th. Article did
legitimate the books of homilies, and are not such words to be found in the
homily against the Peril of Idolatry: The image of God Father, Son, or Holy
Ghost, either severally, or the images of the Trinity, be by the Scriptures
expressly forbidden, and condemned, as appears by these places, Deuteronomy. 4. Isa.
40. Acts 17. Romans 1. Vide ibidem plura. How then was the late Arcshbishop an
obedient Son of the Church of England, who put Mr. Sherlfield a Bencher of
Linc. Inn, and Recorder of Sarum to so much cost, and a disgraceful
acknowledgment of his fault, and caused him to be bound to his good behavior,
for taking down a glass Window, in which there were made no less then 7.
pictures of God the Father in form of a little old man, clad in a blew and red
coat, with a Pouch by his side about the bigness of a Puppet. Yea I have heard
it from a Gentleman of good repute that the Archbishop then justified the
Picturing of God the Father, in form of an old man, out of that place of
Daniel, where God is called the ancient of days. Nay Bishop Lindsey, one of
the Archbishops great Creatures was not ashamed to say? That none but ignorant
Calvinist Bishops did put down Altars at the beginning of the Reformation; and
that they were worse then Jesuits: that he was much offended with the Homily's
against the Peril of Idolatry, against setting up of images in Churches; that
he would have these Homilies put out of the Homily book, and wondered why they
were suffered to continue in it so long.

Was it not the Church of Enland, who by her Lords Spiritual in the upper
house, and her whole convocatio^, in the Act for the subsidy of the Clergy? 3o.
Iacobi defined the Pope to be the Antichrist, was it not Bishop Andrews
positive opinion that the Pope is Antichrist? was it not Archbishop Whitgifts,
commencement assertion 1569. Papa est ille Antichristus: was not this also
positively asserted by Archbishop Usher, and proved by King James, and must
they now be called the only obedient Sons of our, Church who study by all
their Learning to take off that ignominious name from the Pope, and fasten it
upon I know not whom?

Was it not the Church of England who in her 9th. Article, speaks so plainly
concerning Original sin, That it stands not in following of Adam, as the
Pelagians do vainly talk, but is the fault and corruption of the nature of
every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, etc. And must
he now that set forth the unum necessarium, then whom Pelagius himself could
not be more Pelagian, be resorted unto and reputed as an Oracle by those who
glory in nothing more then in being old Eliz: Protestants. O that those who
have any zeal for the Religion sealed by the blood of our Martyrs, defended by
the pens of our Divines, the swords of our Soldiers, established by the Law of
our Nation would consider what I write: But these are Parerga'es to our grand
design, which was to find out the opinion of the Church of England in the
matters debated betwixt the Remonstrants, and Contra remonstrants: for the
carrying on whereof, it will not be amiss to consider our Church in a twofold
capacity, before our general Reformation; and after it. Before the general
Reformation in whom should we seek our Church but in our Martyrs and
confessors? who did witness against the Synagogue of Satan, what were the
opinions of Wichlief, we can scarce find but in the History of Papists, who
would be sure to make him as odious as they could tell how to draw him, but by
their laying it to his charge, that he brought in fatal necessity, that he made
God the author of sin, we may make a probable guess that there was no
disagreement betwixt him and Mr. John Calvin. For the days of King Henry the
eight we have through special providence some works of Mr William Tyndall,
Mr, John Frith, Mr. Dr. Barnes preserved, which are all bound up together, and
put forth by John Day: 1563: Mr. John Fox (than whom Magd. Coll. has scarce
ever had, a member, of whom she may more justly boast) putting a large preface,
in which he styles them the chief ringleaders of the Church of England. How
point blank they speak for the things that now are called Calvinistical
errors, may be seen with a little labor, if any one will look upon the index,
though he that will read the book it self once over for my sake, will read it
over twice for his own. Come we to the more conspicuous estate of our Church,
when Kings and Queens have vouchsafed to be nursing Fathers and Mothers to it,
when she has spoken to her members by the 39. Art. Homilies, Liturgies,
Catechismes, these we will consult that we may be sure, if it be possible to
know her mind. The Articles were first agreed upon in the Convocation holden in
the Reign of Edward the sixth 1552. confirmed and repromulgated, Anno 1562.
ratified by King James, 1604. and by King Charles, 1628. Some little variation
there is in the several editions of them, about which I mind not to trouble my
self, seeing the 17th Article is the same in all, the words are as follows:
Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the
foundation of the World laid, he has constantly decreed by his counsel secret
to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ
out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as
vessels made to honor: wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit, working in
due season; they, through grace obey the calling; they be justified freely;
they be made sons of God by adoption; they be made like the image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ; they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity, etc.

Nor can any one that reads the common prayer book with an unprejudiced mind
choose but observe diverse passages that manifestly make for a personal,
eternal election. That which may be collected out of our Homilies I will not
transcribe, seeing the book is commonly to be had: Let me only mind those,
who are not wont much to deal in any books but our new Pamplets, of a
Catechism set forth by Authority for all Schoolemasters to teach in King Edw.
6. days, the very year after the composing of the public Articles, the King
prefixed his royal Epistle, wherein he commands and charge all Schoolmasters
whatsoever within his Dominions, as they did reverence his Authority, and as
they would avoid his royal displeasure, to teach this Catechism diligently and
carefully, etc. In that Catechism, how do Master and Scholar plainly declare
themselves to be no friends to any of the Tenants which Mr. P. contends for?

If this Book be not at hand, let the Bible printed by Rob. Barker, Anno 1607.
be consulted, and at the end of the Old Testament, there will be found certain
Questions and Answers touching the Doctrine of Predestination, which are as
full and punctual against Arminianisme as may be.

But lest all this should not be thought evidence sufficient, we will produce
our Arguments to prove the Church of England not to be Arminian; and if not
Arminian, much less could she account Anti-arminianism Blasphemy.

1. Who were the Composers of our 39 Articles? were they not all the Disciples
and Auditors of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr? or at least such as held
consent with them in Doctrine? Dr. Alexander Nowel was Prolocutor of the
Convocation in the time of Qu. Eliz. And whether he had any Communion with
Arminians, let his Catechism speak, I mean the English one, dedicated to the
two Archbish. To the Church do all they properly belong, as many as do truly
fear, honor, and call upon God, altogether applying their minds to live holily
and godly, and which putting all their trust in God, do most assuredly look for
the blessedness of eternal life, they that be steadfast, stable, and constant
in this faith, were chosen, and appointed, and (as we term it) predestined to
this so great felicity, page 44. and (paulo post) the Chuch is the body of the
Christian Commonweal; i. e. the universal number and fellowship of the
faithful, whom God through Christ, has before all beginning of time appointed
to everlasting life. Shall we think that he, and others engaged with him in the
same Convocation, were so ignorant, that they understood not what they put into
the Articles? or so infatuated by God, as to put in things that were quite
contrary to their own judgment?

2. If the Church of England did consent to the opinions commonly called
Arminian, how came she to dispose of her places of greatest influence and
trust, to such as were of a contrary persuasion? no places in our Church are
more considerable for leavening the Clergy than the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, and the two Chaires in the University, both these have been
occupied by those who detested Arminianisme as the shadow of death. Parker,
Grindall, Whitgift, Bancroft, Abbot, are all known; particularly in the time of
Bishop Bancroft, came forth the book, called, The Faith, Religion, Doctrine
professed in the Realm of England, and Dominions thereof; said in the Title
page to be perused, and by the lawful authority of the Church of England,
allowed to be made public. Let Mr. P. or any one for him name the Dr. of the
Chair in Oxon, that did not totis viribus, oppose such a Platform of Gods
Decrees as men would faign obtrude upon us now. In ^ambridge indeed we may find
one Dr. Overall, who may be suspected a little to Arminianise, but his opinion
is disliked by Mr. Playfer in his Apello Evangelium, and therefore is not that
which Mr. P. stickleth for. In the Conference at Hampton Court, he did declare
himself against the total, or final falling away of Gods elect: And would
Mr. P. but come over to us in the point of Election, and Gods invincible
working on the hearts of his chosen ones, we should soon agree, or else very
easily bear with one another in our differences.

3. If Mr. P. go the way that the Church of England has taught him, how came
it to pass, that as many as trod the Arminian path, were wont to be suppressed
and censured, so soon as they began to discover themselves? Who is such a
stranger in the History of the University, that has not heard of Barrets
Recantation, made in the University Church, 10. of May 1595? And these are the
words of the Order, appointing him that penalty, Habita matura deliberatione,
nec non visis and diligenter examinatis positionibus praedictis, quia manifesto
constabat positiones praedictas errorem and falsitatem in se continere, nec non
aperte repugnare religioni in Ecclesia Anglicana receptae ac stabilitae, ideo
judicaverunt, etc. See more in Mr. Th. Fuller. Peter Baro's Arminianisme cost
him the loss of his place, and which was worst, lost him the Affections of the
University. Mr. Edward Sympson, a fine Critic, preached a Sermon before King
James at Royston, taking for his Text, John 3.6. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh: hence he endeavored to prove, that the Commission of any great
sin does extinguish Grace, and Gods Spirit for the time in man. He added
also, that St. Paul in the seventh Chapter to the Romans, spoke not of himself
as an Apostle and Regenerate, but sub statu legis. Hereat his Majesty took (and
publicly expressed) great distaste; because Arminius had lately been blamed
for extracting the like exposition out of the Works of Faustus Socinus;
whereupon he sent to the two Professors in Cambridge for their judgment
herein, who proved, and subscribed the place, ad Romans 7. to be understood of a
Regenerate man, according to St. Augustine his later opinion In his
Retractations; and the Preacher was enjoined a public recantation before the
King; which was performed accordingly.

Mr. Mountagues Appeal had almost been strangled in the womb by Archbish.
Abbot. When it saw light, how exceedingly it was disliked, may appear by the
several Answers made to it by Bish. Carleton, Dean Sutliffe, Dr. Featly, Mr.
Yates, Mr. Wooton, all Episcopal: Presbyt. Mr. Francis Rouse: Independ. Mr.
Henry Burton. Nor do his Respondents object any thing more than his dissent
from the Doctrine of the Church of England. He was censured for it by the
Parliament: Mr. Rim from the Committee for Religion made this Report to the
House of Commons, April 18. 1626. That he had disturbed the peace of the
Church, by publishing Doctrines contrary to the Articles of the Church of
England, and the Book of Homilies; that the whole frame and scope of the book
was to discourage the well affected in Religion from the true Religion
established in the Church, and to incline them, and as much as in him lay, to
reconcile them to Popery. Let me here insert an Order made by the House of
Commons, 28 Ian. 1628. after a large Debate: We the Commons now assembled in
Parliament, do claim, profess, and avow for truth, the sense of the Articles of
Religion, which were established in Parliament, 13 Eliz. which by the public
Acts of the Church of England, and the general and current exposition of the
Writers of our Church, have been delivered to us; and we reject the sense of
the Jesuits and Arminians, and all others wherein they differ from us. If any
one shall be desirous to know why we meet with no censures of Arminianisme in
Oxon? the answer will be, that thi^ was not because she had less zeal^ against
that error than her Sister^ but because her members either were free from it,
or else kept it to themselves. Yet I could tell him o^ Dr. Howsons suspension
for flurtin^ at Mr. John Calvin.

4. How comes it to pass, tha^ those who now follow Arminius, di^ heretofore
follow Mr. Calvin? D^ Iacksons Questions in vesper: 162^ were, An peccatum
originale liberum arbitrium in Adamo, and ipsius posteris penitus extinxit?
Affirm. An voluntas hominis lapsi sic libera quoad actum conversionis ad Deum?
Neg. And whose these were 1627. An praedestinatio ad salutem sit propter
praevisam fidem? Neg. An praedestinatio ad salutem sit mutabilis? Neg. An
gratia ad salutem sufficiens concedatur omnibus? Neg. Mr. P. knows, if he knows
who admitted him a Demi. Nay he himself confesses, that he holds not the
same opinions that he did when he first commenced Mr. What did not the Parents,
Masters, Tutors of these persons know what the Doctrine of the Church of Engl.
was? or were they some schismatical Puritans who instructed them in a doctrine
contrary to what is established by Law? I hope they will not so blemish their
education; yet do they not strangely blemish the Church her self? For if she
did verily apprehend these Geneva Doctrines to be so contrary to the glory of
God, and the power of godliness, why has she not in some Convocation
declared the mischievousnesse of these tenants, and warned her Sons against
such Catechisms and Systems of Divinity as do contain them? Why has the
Practice of Piety, Perkins his Principles, Balls Catechism, with diverse
others been so often printed?

5. If the Church be so cordially for Arminianisme, how came it to pass that
King James should be so very solicitous to have it weeded out in other
Churches? Did he not put the States upon calling an Assembly to condemn
Episcopius and his party? Did he not send some of his Divines of singular Piety
and parts to sit in that Assembly? charging them not to agree to any thing
contrary to the Church of England, and yet rewarding them at their return,
when they had suffraged to the contra remonstrants. Did not he exclaim against
the impudence of Bertius, for saying that his Doctrine of the Apostasy of
Saints was agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church? Do but observe how Mr. P.
strives to get out of your hand, though you think you have him fast: Div. Puri.
p. 6, 7. Although King James in his younger years had imbibed and sucked in,
even before he was aware, that Presbyterian opinion of the Genevizing, Scottish
Kirk (which no man living will think strange, who knows the place of his birth
and his education) yet in riper and wiser years, he found so great reason to
retract and abjure his former error, that he readily accepted of Bishop
Mountagues Appeal, and commanded it to be printed, and to be dedicated also
unto his royal self, when even this was the Doctrine Appealed for, that the
children of God may fall away, according to the tenor of our sixteenth
Article, which the King perceiving to be the words and mind of the Church of
England, and that Bertius had discerned it a great deal sooner than himself,
he did not think it below him to grow in knowledge and wisdom as well as
years. The very mentioning of B. Mountague makes him talk like a Dictator
rather than an Historian. B. Mountague says in his Appeal, lest the Lambeth
Articles should too much stand in his way, that they were afterward forbidden
by public authority: But Mr. Tho. Fuller, Book 9. p. 231. makes himself a
little merry with the Learned man; When, where, and by whom this prohibition
was made, he is not pleased to tell us: and strange it is, that a public
Prohibition should be whispered so softly, that this author alone should hear
it, and none other to my knowledge take notice thereof. Such another Winter
tale has Mr. Pierce told us: King James changed his judgment: when, or where?
how many months or years before his death? of these not a tittle. Does he
think that so unlikely a change will be believed without very strong proofs? I
can prove that not above a month before he dyed, giving directions and
instructions to two Divines, having occasion to touch upon the treatises of St.
August. that are extant in the 7. Tome, he styled them. S. Augustins Polemical
Tracts against the Heretics that agree with our Arminians, and presently
calling to mind their proper name, termed those Heretics Pelagians. Vid.
Feat. Parallels. Now though some people, who will be prating about what
concerns them not, do talk parilously about some poison given to the King, not
long before his death, yet that the poison was the Arminian errors, I never
heard or dreamed. That the Divines employed at that venerable Synod never
changed their mind, is beyond all doubt. Hear Bishop Hall and Bishop Davenant
in their Letters to one another. Bishop Hall: Yea as if this calumny was not
enough, there want not those whose secret whisperings cast upon me the foul
aspersions of another sect, whose name is as much hated, as little understood.
My Lord, you know I had a place with you (though unworthy) in that famous Synod
of Dort, where (however sickness bereaved me of the honor of a conclusive
subscription) yet your Lordship heard me with equal vehemence to the rest
crying down the unreasonablenesse of that way. I am still the same man, and
shall live and die in the suffrage of that reverend Synod, and do confidently
avow, that those other opposed opinions, cannot stand with the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Bishop Davenant replyeth. As for the aspersion of
Arminianisme, I can testify, that in our joint employment at the Synod of
Dort, you were as far from it as my self. And I know that no man can embrace
it, in the Doctrine of Predestination and grace, but he must first desert the
Articles agreed upon by the Church of England: nor in the point of
perseverance, but he must vary from the common Tenet and received opinion of
our best approved Doctors in the English Church, Mentis aureae verba bracteata.

Obj. Notwithstanding all this, ^t is plainly said that we may fall away from
grace received Article 16. As will appear if we compare the 16th. Article, with
the first part of the homily touching falling away from God, Page 54.57. With
the form of Baptism, with the Catechism, and all with the Conference at
Hampton Court. Page 29, 30, 31.

Answ. All these have been compared by every one of those 7. writers that
undertook the answer to Mr. Mountagues appeal, and yet they never thought it
incumbent upon them to alter their minds Mr. Mountague says both in his Gag
and appeal, that our Church has left this undecided; and in the conference at
Hampton Court, I find Dr. Reynolds moving that the words totally and finally
might be added for explication of the Article, and that the Lambeth Articles
might be in serted. The King then unacquainted with the Lambeth Articles,
thought not meet to put them in: But liked it well enough in his Clergy of
Ireland, that they took them into their confession, Dr. Overall said something
touching an opinion of his, about which he had been questioned by some, but
concluded that the elect do never fall away totally, or finally. The Bishop of
London said he knew, there were some that did make an ill use of the decrees;
But had before the conference agreed to the Lambeth Articles, and after the
conference when he was Archb. his Chaplain with his good liking and approbation
published the exposition, and Analysis of our Articles, in which he gives the
Calvinist as fair quarter as could be wished. And now I would faing know why I
am sent to the conference at Hampton Court? Mr. Hooker, had I warrant you read
Artic. Homilies, form of Baptism, and seeing he could scarce tell how to speak
not judiciously we will consult him, the rather because it seems this Author
was by the late King commended to his Children as an antidote against the
poison of Popery. Disc. of justifi. p. 506. As Christ being raised from the
dead, dies no more, death has no more power over him: So the justified man
being allied to God in Jesus Christ our Lord, does as necessarily from that
time forward always live, as Christ by whom he has life lives allway. I
might if I had not other where largely done it already, show by many and
sundry, manifest and clear proofs, how the motions and operations of this life,
are sometimes so in discerneable, and so secret, that they seem stone dead, who
are notwithstanding still alive unto God in Christ. For as long as that abides
in us, which animateth, quickens, and gives life, so long we live and we
know that the cause of our faith abides in us for ever. If Christ the Fountain
of life, may flit and leave the habitation, where once he dwells, what shall
become of his promise I am with you to the end of the World? If the seed of God
which contains Christ, may be first conceived and then cast out how does St.
Peter term it immortal? How does St. John affirm it abides? If the Spirit,
which is given to cherish, and preserve the seed of life, may be given and
taken away how is it the earnest of our in heritance until redemption. Anno
1625. one Mr. Damport, did answer on this Question, An renati possint totaliter
and finaliter excidere a gratia. His opponent one Mr. Palmer of Lincoln
College urged, out of Mr. Mountagues appeal the Article of our Church, the
Homilies, the book of Common prayer, the Dr. of the Chair handled the
Appellator shrewdly, saying he was Merus Grammaticus, a fellow that studied
Phrases more than Matter. that he understood neither the Articles; nor the
Homilies, or at least perverted both.

And what thinks Mr. P. of the University of Oxon? did not she know the
opinions of the Church of England? or would she countenance any thing that had
so much as the appearance of contrariety to our Church? How came it then to
pass that her congregations appointed questions to be disputed of at the
public acts, in which are the greatest confluence of the of Sons of Levi. That
proceeders maintained in a Calvinistical way? How many are now alive that can
remember this Question, an ex Doctrina reformatoru^ sequatur Deu^ esse autore^
peccati: held Neg. And maintained to the satisfaction of the hearers, the
Arminian Doctors, mean while showing themselves rather angry, than able
opponents. Let any one who questioneth the truth of what I now say, consult the
Act Papers that are printed as often as those Academical solemnities are
celebrated, What should I say more, we know when Arminianisme began, and under
whose wings it was sheltered, viz. the D. of Buck. and Bishop Laud, of whom the
first had so much of an Herod in him, as would not have suffered him so long to
continue friendship with the latter, if he had not had too little of a St. Ioh.
Baptist, whilst they did rule, not before, nor since, passages in books
against Arminianisme, were blotted out, reflections in Sermons upon
Remonstrants were disliked, by Bishop Lauds means, Dr. Downhams book against
the Total and final Apostasy of the saints from grace, was called in, in his
days Mr. Ford of Mag. H. Mr. Thorn of Baliol, Mr. Hodges of Exeter, were
censured; but let it be observed that the ground of the Censure was not their
having preached any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, (which is the
form of the censure possed upon Arminians by the ancient Protestants) but
only their going against the Kings Declaration, which determined nothing, but
only enjoined silence in these points. Now I hope the Church did not live and
dye with B. and C. Nay their flourishing was the decaying and languishing of
Church and State too, nor could either body vell recover but by spewing out
such evil instruments.

Obj. The Church of England is for universal redemption the Calvinists that are
Antiarminian are against it.

Ans. Mr. P. indeed is hugely confident that it we grant him universal
redemption the cause is yielded to him: But I am all most as confident, that to
grant him universal redemption is to grant him just nothing at all, for what
though Christ did so far die for all as to procure a salvation for all, upon
the conditions of faith and repentance, what is this to the absoluteness of
Gods decrees, or to the insuperability of converting grace, or to the certain
infallible perseverance of Gods elect after conversion. King James understood
these controversies far better then either Mr. P. or I. and yet he even at that
very time when he sent his Divines to the Synod of Dort, to determine against
the Arminianisme that was then growing in the Low Countries, gave it them in
charge not to deny that Christ died for all, as I my self was told by Bishop
Usher, the first time I had the happiness to have any personal discourse with
him; who also further then told me, that he gave in his own judgment to Dr.
Davenant for universal redemption, but withal added, that there were a
certain number upon whom God absolutely purposed to bestow his Spirit, taking
away the heart of stone and giving them an heart of flesh, and we know that Dr.
Davenant, in that very dissertation, in which one conclusion is, Mors sive
passio Christi, ut universalis causa salutis humanae deum patrem, ipso facto
oblationis eateuus reddit placatu^ and reconciliatum humano generi, ut vere
nunc dicatur paratus quemvis hominem in gratiam recipere, simulac in Christum
crediderit; neminem tamen saltem ex adultis praedicta Christi mors reponit in
statu^ gratiae actualis reconciliationis, sive salutis, antequam credat. Has
two more extremely opposite to his darling notions, Conc: 4a. Posita Christi
morte omnibus hominibus applicabili sub condition fidei, stat cum bonitate and
justitia Divina suppeditare vel negare, sive nationibus, sive singularibus
hominibus, media applicationis idque pro been placito voluntatis sue, non pro
disparitate voluntatis humanae: and p. 88. Mors Christi, ex speciali intention
Dei patris illud sacrificium ab aeterno ordinantis and acceptantis, Christique
illud idem in plenitudine temporis deo patri offerentis, destinata fuit certis
quibusdam hominibus (quos electos Scriptura vocat) iisdemque solis ut
efficaciter and infallibiliter applicanda ad aeternae vitae consecutionem. The
Comment upon this Thesis he thus begins; Hanc Thesin opponimus Arminiorum
errori, quem Grevinchovius stabilire conatur, disser: de morte Christi, p. 7.
Vbi docet Deum tradentem Filium suum, intendisse impetrationem reconciliationis
omnibus et singulis communem, applicationem vero ejusdem impetratae nemini
mortalium absolute voluisse. If Mr. P. cannot swallow these two last, let him
answer the Doctors arguments, and count me as much engaged to defend them, as
if I my self had made them. If he can digest them, let him know that I have no
quarrel with him about the former, which would never have found so many
adversaries among Calvinists, if the Arminians had stated it so clearly, and
proved it by so good arguments, as the Rev. Professor has don. But what do I
talk of agreeing with such a man as Mr. P? who rather than not fight, will
contend with his own shadow. Dr. P. H. a bird of the same feather, who also
took his flight from the Angel in Ivy-lane, will needs have Bishop Usher to
differ from the Church of England in the point of universal redemption; mark
his proof, p. 102. The Church of England does maintain an universal Redemption
of all mankind, by the death and sufferings of our Savior. Well, and so does
the deceased Primate, p. 103. We think not that all mankind is so perfectly
reconciled to Almighty God, as to be really and actually discharged from all
their sins, before they believe, but that they are so far reconciled unto him,
as to be capable of the remission of their sins, in case they do not want that
faith in their common Savior which is required thereunto. Well, and so thought
the Primate too. It Is a wonder that a Doctor of Divinity should so unvvorthily
handle a Reverend person, and fasten upon him a dissent from the Church of
England, in a matter wherein he does so perfectly agree with her. But he has
received the due desert of his bitterness, his Book being, as I am informed,
burned by the hand of the common Hangman. And now Reader, thou will apply to me
the speech of Diogenes concerning Mindas, but I shall ease thy patience, when I
have only desired thee to resolve this most plain and easy question: Whether
those opinions, which are contrary to the judgment of the Composers of our
Articles, which have been frequently recanted by the divulgers of them, opposed
by our Learned Professors, condemned by our civil authority, the contrary
whereunto have been constantly defended in our Acts, the greatest Academical
solemnities, be the Doctrine of our Church of England.

ERRATA.
Pref. r. that I. r. none know. for one r. once. p. 14. l. penult. r. Mat. 7.3,
4, 5. p. 74. l. 12. r. a Deo. p. 77. l. 24. r. it is p. 96. l. 6. for them r.
his reasons.

Mistakes in spelling, or in accenting Greek words, or in not distinguishing
the members of sentences, if I should note, I should too much distrust the
judgment of the Reader.

(...), OR, A Justification of the Fathers and Schoolmen in their Opinion, That
Sin has not a Positive Being.
EXercising my Ministry at Brackley, I came into acquaintance with Mr. William
Barlee, who upon the publication of his Correptory Correction, was pleased to
bestow one Copy on me, desiring me freely to spend my thoughts upon it: In my
Answer, though I could not but Intimate how much I disliked the sharpnes of his
style, in some passages relating to his adversary, yet I could not but say,
that there was something in the Argumentative part, unto which Mr. Pierce would
scarce be able to return a satisfactory Answer: Which my opinion I yet see no
reason to recant. For notwithstanding all his bustle and ratlings, yet
impartial and judicious men may discern, he is but like that Goth in
Procopius, who, though he fought fiercely, had the mortal arrows sticking in
his helmet, whereof he soon after fell. The Gentleman had some part of his
education among the Oxford Cavaliers, who were wont to outface their defeats
with bone-fires, and to ring their Bells after the greatest routs, and being a
little tainted with that humor, resolves to Triumph who ever gets the victory.
And indeed a Spirit of most childish insultation seems to have possessed as
many, as have lift up an English pen against the Orthodox, in this
quinquarticular controversy. I Will instance only in Mr. John Goodwin, who in
the Preface to his Triumviri, says, that he has not met with any thing in the
writings of any, or of all the three men contesting with him, which had in the
least shaken his confidence concerning the truth of the things by him asserted,
or that, for the least space of time, put him to any stand or loss in his
understanding concerning them, or to seek what to Answer to any thing they
offer or object against any of them? which lines the greatest charity must
needs look upon as so much vapouring Rhetoric dropped from his pen, in the
absence of Judgment and conscience: Or as an essay of the Spartanes valor, who
being struck down by a mortal blow, used to stop their mouths with earth, that
they might not be heard to quetch or groan, thereby to affright their fellows,
or animate their Enemies. The reader has not yet the occasion of my calamity:
Mr. Barlee resolves to undertake the Divine Philanthropie, and writes a second
letter to me, desiring to borrow some books, and withal to know what I thought
of his assailants reply: I had not then perused it, nor have I yet perused it,
nor shall I ever peruse it, except I can find some of the Rabbines hours, which
belong neither to night nor day. But it seems I had espied that his strange and
long since exploded opinion of the positivity of sin, which made me write, that
if he held sin to be positive, he must either hold it to be from God, (which is
the blasphemy he charge upon the Calvinists) or else hold it to be God, which
would be to bestow an Apotheosis on sin. Because whatever positive thing is not
from God, is God. This my friend, without any leave obtained or asked from me,
puts in print under my name: with no ill intent, I hope, but yet some what
against the rule of friendship. But having entitled me to the old, innocent,
Metaphysicall maxim, that omne ens est vel primum vel a primo, how does Mr.
Pierce paratragaediate? How does he tumble in his ugly Tropes, and roll
himself in his railing eloquence? You would think he were some Tertullus,
hired by an angry Parishioner, to accuse me before the Committee for ejection,
of Ignorance, and scandal. I cannot, without perfect affront to my Conscience,
and the rules of Christianity, return him blasphemer for blasphemer: For
though I think the forementioned blasphemy does naturally and lineally descend
from that opinion, which he first vented in his Philanthropy, and now seeks to
maintain; yet I think it no way consistent, with the ingenuity of a Scholar, or
of a man, to charge an adversary with that blasphemy, which he every where
disclaimes, because in my opinion such a blasphemy flows from his principles.
I know that the Lutherans are no better than infidells, if they deny the
resurrection and ascension of Christ, and am pretty confident that their
opinion concerning the ubiquity of the humane nature, cannot consist either
with the one or with the other: shall I therefore say in print, that the
Brethren of that persuasion deny those two fundamental Articles? nay rather
let my right hand forget its skill, than write any thing of that nature
concerning them. And yet this is the case of the Calvinists, they hold an
absolute decree of reprobation, hence it follows, says Mr. Pierce, that God
is the Author of sin, and that man's destruction is not of himself. They deny
any such consequences can be inferred, and write books upon books, to show the
grounds and reasons of their denial, sufficient one would think to stop the
mouths of any calumniator, though as wide as a sepulcher. Withal declaring
that they refuse not to be cursed with the bitterest Anathema's, if they shall
be found to father the least obliquity upon the most holy Lawgiver. And yet
Mr. Pierce finds a forehead to say they make God the Author of Sin. And is
angry with those that will not be as hugely uncharitable as himself. This he
will pretend to do in great affection to the most vulgar and less intelligent
readers, whose deliverance and liberty from the worst kind of thraldom he does
especially aim at in what he publishes; as he tells us Page 5. That the vulgar
may not be in danger to stumble at what was written in Latin, by men some of
whose names they scarce ever heard of, whose Books they to be sure would never
have bought, Mr. P. has in great affection to their souls, translated some of
the worst sayings of transmarine Divines into English. You are indeed obliged
to do good to all, but especially to those vulgar ones of your own persuasion,
and party, who are so exceedingly prejudiced against Mr. Calvin and others,
from whom you pretend to derive your frightfull expressions, that theyl' not be
in any danger of being misled by them. Therefore it would have been your wisest
course to have drawn a Catalogue out of the writings of Bishop Abbot, Dr. John
and Dr. Francis White, Dr. Field, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Featley, Bishop Prideaux,
who were their friends in point of Ceremony, whose Books are most of them in
English, and commonly to be had, and the Authors of them acknowledged to be men
of great desert and piety, and so may be the more apt to do mischief by
instilling these killing Doctrines into the minds of men. But what if the
maintainers of the absolute decree did deserve so severe a condemnation, how
come I to be concerned in it? why, because he cannot conceive how that argument
of mine (If sin is a positive entity, either God is the Author of it, or it is
God,) should flow from any other fountain than my conceit of Gods
predetermination (before his prescience) of all events without exception. and
yet he knows that Jesuits twenty and ten do use this Argument, who yet are the
ablest, acutest, and most malicious opposers of the absolute decree, as stated
by Calvin and others of our reformed writers. I have already secured him that I
study no retaliation, only I will make bold to deal with him as Alexander did
with his Bucephalus, take him a little by the bridle, and turn him to the Sun,
that other men may see how he lays about him, though himself will not.

First, he joins me with that commune dei hominumque odium, Mr. Hobbs, and
when he has called me Hobbist, what can he say more, except he should call me
Devil? But did I give him any reason to join me with that prodigious writer,
or does not Mr. Pierce rather do this on the same account as Ithacius, who
having no other virtue but his hatred to the Priscillianists, became so wise in
the end, that he set down all that differed from him for Priscillianists?
Sulpit. Sev. lib. 2. p. 413. Both Mr. Hobbs, and Mr. Pierce say, that if God be
the Author of the Action, then he is also the Author of the obliquity of the
Action, and that there is no difference betwixt the sinful act, and the sin of
the act, and this he knows I deny. And would the Reader think that I am an
Hobbist for dissenting from Hobbes, and Mr. P. an Anti- Hobbist for agreeing
with him? That Author is known to be one who exceedingly scorns the parts of
all that differ from him, who contradicts the old received Philosophy, who
bitterly inveighs against Presbyterians. And whether these Characters do
better fit me or my adversary let others judge.

Secondly, in his title page he makes me an example of (...), by which if he
could be supposed to mean, that I were one that upon consideration of my many
unworthynesses condemn my self, I must thank him for his commendation, and
pray unro Christ for grace that I may abound in so noble an effect and part of
repentance; but questionless with him I am (...) in the Apostles sense, Tit.
2.11. i. e. (...), says Theophylast, and this is in effect to call to all
people to break of familiar converse with me, and to make me worse then an
Heretic; for he was not thought self condemned till after the first and second
Admonition, and that by a Bishop, says Dr. Hammond; but he for a supposed
oversight in Metaphysics thinks meet to print me such to all the World, though
I be to this day Ignorant whether there be a Bishop in rerum natura, of a
different opinion from me. Pref. that he might slurre me he defiles his own
conscience all over with an untruth; (thou will find men obtruding new Creeds
on the Church, one inserting this Article, that God is no Spirit, another this,
that God is the maker of all things real, and so by consequence unavoideable
of all the wickedness in the World.) I confess I had so much charity as to
think he intended not me, but some other in this so high charge. But that I
find him Chapter 3. p. 163. thus deliver himself. Mr. Hick: builds backward, thus
he lays it down as his principle, that God is the maker of all things that are
real without exception, therefore of David's lying with Bathshebah, therefore
of his adultery. If in that sentence which Mr. Barlee has excerped out of my
letter, he can find the word real, then I must necessarily either explain, or
condemn my self; but having never used it, nor any term synonymous, I might
leave him with those words delivered will thunder and lightning, thou shall not
bear false witness. I say indeed that all things positive are either God, or
from God: But is positive and real all one? The darkness (which he says
improperly enough, was created by God) no wise man will call positive, yet all
will say that it was real: privations are indeed ranked among entia rationis,
but that is not because they do not antecedere operationem intellectus; for the
air would be dark, and Bartimaeus blind, though no one thought so; but they
then become entia rationis when they are conceived of otherwise than they be,
as when darkness is conceived of as if it were some positive blackness. But
what if I had said that God is the Author of all things real, why must this be
called an article of my faith, or an obtruding a new article on the Church?
Does every one that gives his opinion, and brings an argument to confirm it,
make a new Creed? Then shall we have more Creeds than there be sound
believers. These are the two articles of my Creed, God is Holy, God is
omnipotent, if any one do cordialy assent to these, I shall give him the right
hand of fellowship, if in the explication of these two divine attributes he
differ from me, I shall not make him a blasphemer, or expunge him out of the
Catalogue of Christians, but charitably suppose that his error, if not too
gross, proceeds rather from want of Philosophy than from want of piety, and do
here once for all profess before the searcher of hearts, who hates nothing
more than Hypocrisy, and that severe Register within me, to which I owe more
reverence than to affront it with a wilful lie, that I should be the less
zealous in defending the privative nature of sin, if I did not think that this
my assertion were the most probable way of reconciling those two Divine
perfections of purity and omnipotence. I love Philosophy only as an handmaid
to Divinity: as to those Scholasticall speculations in which Theology is not at
all concerned, I matter not much what opinion men be of, nor whether they be of
any opinion at all. But I will not use so great severity, as to aggravate his
so unworthy speeches, take them barely as thou find them: Pref. I have
envenomed Mr. Barlee, and intermedled in his affairs, to such a desperate
degree, that if I preach as is printed, my Disciples of all others have need of
a preservative: Page 11. I am one of the prodigious pair of writers: Page 107.
cap. 3. Mr. B. safest way is to spit in my face, who betrayed him to that
senseless blasphemous inference; Page 154. My argument is the most horrible of
all, hard to say whether more impious or more unscholarlike. Page 156. I must
make some kind of satisfaction for so scandalous an attempt. Ib. my medium is a
crying and a killing Doctrine. I am a malefactor, and fallen headlong into
dangers, nay real mischiefs, by my own wilful precipitation of my self and
others. Page 157. He corrects himself for talking Metaphysics to such a
Scholar as I, who seem so great a stranger to them, that he may very well take
up the Proverbiall verse.

(...).

page 159. The brethrens way of arguing, is the fantastic creature of the
brethren. Page 161. I am a Beetle flying in the face of the Eagle, striking at
God and his purity, by giving sin an (...), and laying my child, when I have so
done, at another man's door. Page 162. My traitorous child has done exactly to
me, as I thought to have done unto my brother. Page 164. I argue like the
Libertines, and as it were out of their mouths, Page 167. Mr. B. is debauched
by me. Page 175. My apprehension is sadder than if I had thought Apotheosis to
be derived from (...) pono. Ib. All I have discovered is my being overflown
with an (...), which could its banks have contained it, would not thus have
gushed over upon no occasion, when it is plain the effect could be no other, but
to drown my credit with a yellow, as well as my cause with a blacker Jaundise.
And for a conclusion I am bid to read, consider, and apply what is spoken in
Mark 3.28, 29, 30. as if I had done something bordering upon the coasts of the
most accursed blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Having with the Badger bitten
till his teeth meet, he lets go; and I trow it was high time: for was there
ever a man, ab orb condito, in whom malice, upon so small, so no reason, raged
at that tedious and importune rate and height? Has this learned Rector been
lately made free of the Cart? Does he think he may rail by authority? Or was
he ambitious to publish a Treatise dirty enough to transform the gilded Angel
in Ivy-lane into a black one, able to justify all the ugly brats of the
wildest Sectaries that G. C. has midwiv'd into the world? I utter not the
words of passion, but sobriety, knowing that many a poor scold has been duckt
in the Gumble-stool, many a deluded Quaker cast into prison, for words
incomparably more civil and tolerable than most of those bestowed on me. Had
my Antagonist been a resident in the University, (...).
Mr. Vicecan. had been bound upon my complaint to have punished him with
banition, or at least with incarceration, or public recantation; and yet Mr.
P. who metes out all this hard measure to me, does every where complain of Mr.
B's foul language against himself; not regarding that of Plutarch, which I have
thrown into the Margin, nor that of the Apo^le, Romans 2.2, 3. nor that of our
Savior, Mat. 7.34, 35. Nay, as if all this were not enough, he makes himself
also guilty of the greatest Hypocrisy, by giving it out to the world, that he
has done no more than he was in conscience and duty bound to. p. 156. and
Pref. he would needs persuade me, That all he has done is in order to my ease
and safety too; and that I ought to be thank full for the diligent and
impartial hand, which for some short time does seem to hurt me. But seeing he
himself had the same Phagedaenous and eating sores which he tells us were cured
by good company, and good books, what necessity was there that mine should be
touched with either the lance or caustic? If he had not delighted in such a
composition, whose every line is gall and wormwood, why did he not before he
thus blur'd me with his blackest ink, First, enquire whether ever I did write
any such thing to Mr. B. or no? For if Mr. B. be such a liar, as he represents
him, why would he believe me the Author of so monstrous an Argument, upon the
bare Authority of his report? 2. How did he know whether I related this
Argument as from my self, and not only as the Argument of others? Or 3. why
did he not by some private letter, endeavor to purge the peccant humor,
before he made the passionate adventure of calling it obstinate? Let Us try
whether we can ghess what might move Mr. P. who says in his Letter to Doctor
Bernard, that in all his dealing with Mr. B. he was not so much as heated, so
to flame against me. First; it was not sure the Argument it self; for that
being used by Fathers, by Schoolmen of all Sects, by Protestant Writers of all
persuasions, particularly by the most judicious Mr. Tho. Barlow (with whom for
Metaphysical Learning Mr. P. will in modesty confess himself not worthy to be
named in the same day) could not deserve so severe a censure. Seeing he tells
us, that he resolves to do nothing until the most sober, unbiassed persons
shall think it publicly useful, I shall make this request to him, that he
would procure any one sober person, to give it under his hand, that it was
publicly useful to call all those foolish and impious, who have used this
Argument; or if such Epithetes belong not unto others, why to me? Others have
de industria printed the Argument, whereas I never thought that any thing which
I wrote should have come to the Press: nay what I did write, was written in
such haste, that I might well say with Jerome, Qui non ignoscit ingenio,
ignoscat tempori: But I believe the sober men of his own persuasion, will be so
far from approving his language, that they will rather let him taste of Memnons
discipline, who hearing a mercenary Soldier, with many bold and impure
reports, exclaim against King Alexander, lent him a blow with his Lance,
saying, That he had hired him to fight against Alexander, and not to rail.

Secondly; though not the Argument in self, yet my party and my Masters, with
whom he does so frequently upbraid me, might justly move his choler: Indeed I
find, Mr. P. guilty of partiality to so desperate a degree, that he makes
Arminianism enough to a man's commendation, but Anti-arminianism a blasting of
all graces, and an alloy to all endowments; as if it might be said of his
Opinion, as Augustine speaks of Discretion, Toll hanc, and virtus vitium
erit. Once I find him acknowledging, that Piety and Learning might be found
among the Absolute Predestinarians, but being now fallen from his first love, he
thinks meet to brand Dr. Reynolds with the suspicion of being an Hypocrite; as
if because he were a man of great parts and worth, he could not be in earnest
of that party whom he has owned in Praying, in Preaching, in Covenanting: Nay
those against whom he writes are the wicked, and so by him not only thought,
but also called in the Adv. to Mr. Bax: But as for those that are for the
respective Decrees, and are no friends to Presbytery, they are, eo nomine,
religious, excellent, renowned, immortal, what not? I will instance in two or
three, upon whom he bestows the greatest commendations, sure not without some
regret and recalcitration of his conscience. First, he blesses the Author of
an unlicensed Pamphlet, called, An Historical relation of the Judgment of some
most worthy Bishops, holy Martyrs, and others, concerning Gods election. Divi.
Phil. p. 93. chapter 3. with the honorable appellation of a most learned Divine
and Confessor, and seems to bewail it, that the book is in so few men's hands;
but I shall let the Reader see, that if this book had had its desert, it must
have been in fewer men's hands than it is. The forementioned scurrilous Pamphlet
was reprinted Anno 1631, and licensed by Mr. Martin, Bishop Laud's Chaplain:
when Sir Humphrey Lind, and Mr. Prynne complained to Archbishop Abbot of this
execrable Imposture, the book was called in, Bishop Laud professing to his
Grace, that he had given to his Chaplain such a rattling, as would make him
never meddle with Arminian books or opinions more; nay at the Lords Bar he
said, that he did put him out of his Chaplains place for licensing that
Pamphlet. The first Author of this book was answered by Mr. Robert Crowly, as
may be seen in our University Library, 4o O 5. This Crowly was a fugitive for
Religion in Queen Mary's days, an eminent laborious Preacher in the time of
Qu. Eliz. He not knowing the name of Mr. P's Confessor, calls him Cerberus;
but Mr. John Veron the Queens Chaplain, who was principally concerned in the
book, found out his name to be Champneys, and in a Tract of his dedicated to
her Majesty, and called a Defense of the Doctrine of Predestination, speaks
thus of him [In this I comfort my self, that his tongue is known to be no
slander: For the like did he most proudly attempt, in your most gracious
Brother good King Edward the sixth's days, against all the godly Preachers of
that time, calling them marked Ministers of Antichrist, and men void of the
Spirit of God (for none, be they never so godly, never so earnest and faithful
laborers in the Lords vineyard, have the Spirit of God, or do know the
efficacy of it but he only) as many godly persons be able to testify to his
face: That he did therefore, and for many other abominable errors, which he
then stoutly maintained, bear at that time a Faggot at Paul's-cross, Father
Coverdale making then the Sermon there. Belike fearing now the like punishment,
and that he should be compelled to revoke his Pelagian-like opinion, he durst
not, for all his proud boast, set his own name to his railing and venomous
books, nor yet suffer them to be sold openly or publicly in the Booksellers
shops, but cowardously suppressing both his own name, and the name of his
unwise and foolish Printer, got the whole Impression into his own hands, that
so he might in huggermugger send them unto his private friends abroad, whom
belike he suspected to be of his affinity and damnable opinion: Howbeit this
could not be wrought so privily, but that within a while, some of his books
came into my hands, whereby shortly after the Printer was known, and brought to
his Answer, whom this stout champion of Pelagius has left in the briars; and
lest himself should be fain to show a reason of his Doctrine, does keep
himself out of the way still, and dares not once show his face: If he be able
to maintain his Doctrine against my Book, let him come forth and play the man,
I am ready at all times to yield to the truth, and unto the sincere teachers
thereof] And does this Gentleman deserve to be saluted a Confessor?

A second Ethiopian, whom he seeks to make white, is the English Tilenus;
he is styled the excellent, and this is said of him; If he be alive to undertake
his own cause against Mr. Baxter, the world will find 'twill be but impar
congressus: Yea he seems to complain, that he has not the happiness to know
him in the least degree. But what is there in this scribler that may deserve
such Elogies? First, he casts the highest scorn upon the Tryers, making them to
ask such questions of those that come before them, as in all probability it
never came into their thoughts to ask, which is such a piece of Impudence, as
no one has ventured to imitate him in, but that Ishmael of Coleman-street,
whose hand being against all men, has provoked all men, even the common
Pamphleter to lift up a hand against himself. Secondly; This poor fellow makes
himself an adversary, out of his own fancy, and driving him before him from one
end of the Book to the other, shootes all his arrows at this man of ugly clouts
of his own framing, as if it were that venerable Synod of Dort: And does he not
deserve to be called excellent? and to be preferred to Mr. Baxter?

But as to my party and Masters, I have some satisfactory things to return in
way of Answer.

First; I have the thousand witnesses to attestate, that the desires of my soul
are, to receive a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, a Prophet in the name of
a Prophet, not as concurring with me in any opinion, concerning the Mint and
Cummin of Church Discipline. My cordial affections to those Episcopal Divines,
whose endeavors are to promote that in which all confess the power of
Godlyness to consist, are as well known, as I my self am. And I challenge all
the world to produce that ear that ever heard me speak the least syllable that
might tend to inodiate the person, or to vilify the parts and pains of any one
Prelatist, because such.

2. Though that little I have read of Mr. Calvin's Institutions which, is not
above the fourth part, makes me fully of Salmasius his mind, who said in
Epistola Verini, he had rather be the Author of that Book, then of all that
ever were made by Grotius; yet so unhappy is Mr. P. in ghessing at my Masters
and the Books in which I converse, that I can safely profess, as a precise and
measured truth, when I sent that letter to Mr. B. I had read more in Doctor
Tailor, and Doctor Hammond, then I had in all those Authors mentioned in his
Title Page, upon whom he pretends to make occasional reflections: And if
Presbytery be a crime, I must needs say that I have learned it from Episcopal
men.

1. Is this Presbytery to say that a Presbyter and a Bishop differ in degree
only, and not in order? that I learn from the late right Reverend the Primate
of Ireland, from Doctor Holland Regius Professor, who so determined in Publicis
Comitiis, in direct contradiction to Dr. Laud.

2. Is this Presbytery to hold that an ordination by Presbyters is valid? That
I learn from Bishop Andrews, who ordained a Scotchman Bishop, never made
Priest but by Presbyters, which he would not have done, had ordination by
Presbyters seemed unto him a nullity. I learn it from Bishop Downam in his
consecration Sermon, Page 43. Who says that the contrary opinion is proper to
Papists: from Doctor Forbs, who in his Irenicum largly proves it. Indeed among
the Episcopal Divines I scarce know any contrary unto me in this, except those
who drew the scheme of their opinions after that Bishop Laud was Lord of the
house. And I think it no uncharitableness to say, that some of later times, in
making their Judgments, had very great respect unto the Stars that were
culminant.

3. Is this Presbytery to assert the sole power of Jurisdiction was not in the
Bishops, and that they had no warrant to delegate their power unto a Lay
Chancellor? This I learn from the judicious Lord Verulam, who says, that the
first was a thing almost without example in good Government, and therefore not
unlikely to have crept in, in the degenerate and corrupt times. As to the 2.
the deputation of their authority. I see no perfect and sure ground for that
neither; being somewhat different from the examples and rules of Government: we
see in all Laws in the World offices of confidence and skill, cannot be put
over, nor exercised by deputies. In his works printed 1657. p. 239. 240.

4. Is this Presbytery to aver that after a great abuse of the Episcopal
power, the civil Magistrate might take it away root and branch, and commit the
whole Government of the Church unto Presbyters, at least for a season? This I
learn from the learned Grotius, at whose name Mr. P. is wont to rise up in an
ecstasy of Admiration, de Imperio Sum. potest. chap. 11. Nay, if this be
Presbytery to maintain the greater antiquity and primitivenesse of Presbytery
then Espiscopacy, for that I need not consult David Blondell, the Lord George
Digby a great stickler for our English prelacy so inform's me in his letter to
Sr. K. D. Page 119. The Presbytery of Scotland in point of Government has a
greater resemblance then either yours or ours to the first age of Christ's
Church.

5. Is this Presbytery and Calvinisme to assert an absolute decree of election
and reprobation, and to manifest the greatest indignation against those who
give it out unto the World, that those opinions either take away the liberty of
the will, or make God the Author of sin, this also I learn from Episcopal
divines of the first magnitude. Reader, peruse their words, and then tell me
whether I mistake their meaning. Dr. Abbot calls Bishop for aspersing the
forementioned tenent, as if it made God the Author of sin, Elymas, and his
fellow Wright on the same score, foul mouthed dog, and a filthy swine, who
wallowing in the muck and dirt of Popish Ignorance, has his eyes so daubed up
therewith, that he sees not his own way. Answer to the Preface. All this in a
book dedicated to King James, who in requital of his pains bestowed on him the
Bishopric of Salisbury. Yea the forementioned Writer in his Defense against
Mr. Higgons says, That if Luther have any where in that lewd and impious
manner calumniated the Church of Rome, he will not deny but that Mr. Higgons
should have cause to style him a foul mouthed dog.

When the Apostate Spalatensis objected this against the same Doctrine, what
words Dr. Crakanthorpe thought meet to use against him, Mr. Barlee has already
told Mr. Pierce: I shall only add the Book was dedicated to King Charles, and
has this title put to it, Defensio Ecclesiae Anglicanae; of which Church Mr.
P. professes himself a dutiful and obedient son; and that Dr. Abbot says of
that Treatise, that it was the most accurate piece of controversy that was
written since the Reformation. Next let us hear the most learned and peaceable
Dr. Sanderson, con. 2. ad Clerum, p. 29, 30. Sundry of the Doctors of our
Church teach truly and agreeably to Scriptures the effectual concurrence of
Gods will and power, with subordinate agents in every, and therefore even in
sinful actions; Gods free election of those whom he purposes to save of his
own grace, without any motives in or from themselves; the immutability of Gods
love and grace toward the Saints Elect, and their certain perseverance
therein to salvation; the justification of sinners by the imputed
righteousness of Christ, apprehended and applied unto them by a lively faith,
without the works of the Law. These are sound and true, and (if rightly
understood) comfortable, and right profitable doctrines; and yet they of the
Church of Rome have the forehead, (I will not say to slander, my Text allows
more,) to blaspheme God and his Truth, and the Ministers thereof, for teaching
them; Bellarm. Gretser, Maldonate, and the Jesuits, but none more than our own
English Fugitives, Bristow, Stapleton, Parsons, Kellison, and all the rabble of
that crew freely spend their mouths in barking against us, as if we made God
the author of sin; as if we would have men sin and be damned by a fatal
necessity; sin whether they will or no; be damned whether they deserve it or
no; as if we opened a gap to all licentiousness and profaneness; let them
believe it is no matter how they live, heaven is their own cock sure; as if we
cried down Good Works, and condemned Charity: Slanders loud and false, yet
easily blown away with one single word, (...); these imputations upon us and
our doctrine are unjust, but (...), let them that misreport us know, that
without repentance their damnation will be just. Dr. Field, B. 3. p. 117. The
next Heresy which they say we are fallen into, is the Heresy of Florinus, who
taught that God is the author and cause of sin; This, says Bellarm. Calvin,
Luth. Martyr have defended in their writings; of this sinful, and wicked, and
lying report, we are sure God is not the author, but the devil. and page 140.
Call. Then is not worse than the Manichees, in making God the author of those
evils which the Manichees attribute to an evil beginning, as Bellarm. is
pleased to pronounce of him; but is farther from that hellish conceit than
Bellarm. is from hell it self, if he repent not of these hellish slanders. Dr.
Ward. prae. de pecca. orig. p. 148. Prodiit non ita pridem clanculum liber,
quem author intitulavit, amor dei erga genus humanum, qui acriter contendit ex
concessis sublap. satis evidenter inferri omnium peccatorum hominum reproborum
deum esse verum and principalem authorem. Audax assertum vel verius impudens
calumnia.

I might mention more, but I forbear, and do earnestly desire those
Episcopal Divines, who close with us in the points of present contest, that
they would bethink themselves and consider, what favor they must expect from
these Arminian Ardelio's, no more than what Polyphemus promised Ulysses, to be
last devoured. If they cannot fall down and worship the Idols which these men
have set up, they must expect to be thrown into the fiery furnace; nay they
are tormented in it already in Augustines sense, who calls the mouth of an
angry adversary by that name; for mark his word, chapter 2. p. 61. Whatever
dishonours have been done unto the Protestant name by those of the Kirk, or
Consistory, or their adherents here in England, yet the dutiful sons of the
Church of England have ever been free from any part of that guilt. This does
expunge Bishop Hall, Bishop Morton, Bishop Brownerig, whom we (as they deserve)
call Fathers, out of the number of the dutiful Sons of the Church of
England: Nay he sticks not in the Preface to the Reader, p. 6. to place them
among the very unsound and unruly members of this Church. Let me take the
boldness to beseech them who are of any authority in that party, as they love
the truth, than which nothing ought to be more precious, as they tender the
welfare and safety of poor souls, for whom Christ dyed, that they would
either plainly say, that they have all this while been mistaken, and through
ignorance Preached and Printed Blasphemy, or else brand this false accuser with
the letter K, which when the I aw I allude to was made, was the first letter of
the word Calumniator.

3. I have spent more time in reading the Authors Pro and Con about these
points, than ever I intend to do, being of opinion that the greatest Scholars
will never be able fully to satisfy their own, or other men's Reasons about
them: Nor should this seem any wonder to us, who cannot be ignorant how many
points there be in Natural Philosophy, in which a man plungeth himself into
inextricable difficulties, whether he affirm or deny them. With what confidence
have I heard one young Sophister maintain, that continuum fit ex
indivisibilibus? and another, that continuum non fit ex indivisibilibus? both
thought themselves in the right; but men of mature judgments standing by,
could easily see, that neither the one, nor the other could free his Assertion
from the common Objections brought against it. I thank God I have not the least
temptation to doubt concerning the Trinity of the Persons, nor the Hypostatical
Union of the two Natures; yet I never thought my self able to vindicate those
mysteries from all the subtle Arguments and niceties of unbelieving
sophisters. The like I think concerning the Doctrine of Gods Decrees, and the
manner of the Spirits working Grace in the hearts of the Elect, these are
matters so very mysterious, and my understanding so dark, that I can scarce
hope ever in this world to be freed from all scruples about them. Would you
therefore know why I hold Absolute, Eternal, Personal Election, Efficacious
determining Grace, and the certain infallible perseverance of all Believers;
Truly because I find these opinions most agreeable to Scripture, to the
communis sensus fidelium, the instinct and impulse of the new creature in all
ages; and, because I find they do most tend to the debasing of sinful man,
and to the exaltation of Christ my Savior, and that free Grace of his, by
which I hope to be acquitted at the last day.

To this end I will relate two Historical passages, with which J have been
much taken; the one from Father Paul (who has filled the Christian world with
his admiration) Hist: of the Counc. of Trent, lib. 2. page 212. he speaking of
the debates in that Assembly concerning these two opinions, thus expresses
himself. The first opinion (which is the opinion Mr. P. so declaimes against)
as it is hidden, and mystical, keeping the mind humble, and relying on God,
without any confidence in it self, knowing the deformity of sin, and the
excellency of divine grace, so the second was plausible and popular,
cherishing humane presumption, and making a great show, it pleased more the
preaching Friars, then the understanding Divines, and the Courtiers thought it
probable as consonant to politic reasons, it was maintained by the Bishop of
Bitonto, and the Bishop of Salpi showed himself very partial, the defenders of
this using humane reason prevailed against the others, but coming to the
testimonies of the Scripture they were manifestly overcome. The other story I
find in the Preface to the Parallells, drawn up, as I suppose, by Doctor
Featly, and Doctor Good. Accacius Baron of Dona, residing some months in
England, to solicit the recovery of the Palatinate, was often set upon, and
much laid at by a stranger there, named Roerghest, a man deeply engaged in the
Arminian party, who though he could not draw him from the truth to that side,
yet cast such mists of doubts before him, that his Lordship, for better
clearing, desired the conference of some English Divines versed in
Controversies of this nature, and opportunely meeting with two at once, he
demanded of them why the Divines of England so generally distasted the Doctrine
broached by Arminians, their answer was, that albeit those tenants were
plausible to corrupt reason, and set out to the best advantage by the wit and
art of the Patrons thereof; yet that the sacred Scriptures, to which natural
reason must bow and stricke sail, thoroughly searched and impartially scanned
gave no support at all to the new model of Gods counsels framed in man's
brains; and that the prime Fathers of most eminent note in the Church, above
twelve hundred years ago, at the first birth of those mishape^ brats dashed
them against the stones, and consequently that by the same Orthodox ancient
Church the new Revivers of those errors at this day were damnati antequam nati,
precondemned in the loins of their parents. The Baron somewhat affected with
this answer, replied, certe si Arminius Pelagium refodit, merito vos Arminium
defoditis. Not long after the said solicitor came to the Baron again, hoping to
make him his Proselite, the Baron acquainting him with the English Divines
answer, he was at first so confident as to say, quid tandem Arminio cum
Pelagio? But when those Divines had exhibited to the Baron a Parallel betwixt
them, since printed, this confident Gentleman, though he undertook to return
forthwith a direct and punctual answer, quitted the field, took Sea and
returned into Holland, and was never heard of more. I know Mr. P. also does
very much fume to be accounted Pelagian, Semi-pelagian, Massillian, etc. But if
his feet were not crooked, how came their shoes to fit him so well? I remember
a saying of Doctor Sanderson, in his fifth Sermon, ad Populumi, that the
Prophesies of saint Paul and saint John make it so unquestionable that Rome is
the seat of Antichrist, that they who will needs be so unreasonably charitable,
as to think the Pope is not Antichrist, may at least wonder by what strange
chance it fell out that these Apostles should draw the picture of Antichrist in
every point and limb so just like the Pope, and yet never think of him; Mr. P.
his quick wit has prevented me in the application, never did the style of an
unfortunate writer belong to man, if not to him, supposing him to have no
communion with those old Heretics, for he has formed no weapon, against which
I cannot furnish my self with armor from the Magazine of Austin and others,
who had to do with Pelagius and his Disciples.

But it may be the party with whom he supposes me to say a confederacy are,
the Puritans, for those he cannot name with any patience or moderation he tells
us (advertisement to Mr. Baxter) that they were defined at Hampton Court, to be
protestants frighted out of their wits, such as are known to be painted
sepulchers, having the form only of godliness, without the power of it:
thought by judicious Hooker to be fit inhabitants for a wilderness, not for a
well ordered City. Such as have ever despised dominion, and spoken ill of
dignities, have been formerly boutefeus, and men of blood, the proverbiall
Authors and Fautors of sedition and violence in Church and state. The words of
the relator of the Hampton Court conference are these: Page 37. This and some
other motions seeming to the King and Lords very idle and frivolous, occasion
was taken in some by-talke, to remember a certain description which Mr. Butler
of Cambridge made of a Puritan, A Puritan is a protestant frayed out of his
wits. And must what is said in some by-talke be called defining? If I were
minded to pay Master P. in his own coin, how easily might I tell him, that the
Arminians were defined by a wise King in a premeditated declaration
Atheistical sectaries, that many of them are known to have neither the form
nor the power of godliness, of whom judicious Amyraldus says, that they can
scarce be supposed ever to have felt the power of the Holy Ghost, concerning
whom the foresaid King said that if they were not with speed rooted out, no
other issue could be expected than the curse of God, infamy throughout all the
reformed Churches, and a perpetual rent and distraction in the whole body of
the State, concerning whom also the States themselves said, that they had
created them more trouble than the King of Spain had by all his wars. And one
would think the King and the States should know better how to set the saddle
upon the right Horse then Master P.

Ob. These were Presbyterated Arminians, our English Episcopal Arminians are
free from any such guilt.

Ans. Concerning them, not I, but the Viscount Falkland shall speak, who as he
had more courage than to be afraid of them, so had he more ingenuity than to
wrong them, in the before commended speech to the house of Commons, Page 3, 4.

Master Speaker, he is a great stranger in Israel who knows not that this
Kingdom has long labored under many and great oppressions, both in Religion
and liberty, and his acquaintance here is not great, or his ingenuity less,
who does not both know and acknowledge that a great, if not a principal, cause
of both these, has been some Bishops and their adherents. Master Speaker, a
little search will serve to find them to have been the destruction of unity,
under pretense of uniformity, to have brought in superstition and scandal
under the titles of reverence and decency; to have defiled our Church, by
adorning our Churches: to have slackned the strictnes of that union which was
formerly between us and those of our Religion beyond the Sea, an action as
unpolitick as ungodly. And because I know the Reader will not account me
tedious whilst I use the words of so eloquent a Lord, I shall recite more
passages from him to the same purpose, Page 9. We shall find of them to have
both kindled and blown the Common fire of both Nations, to have both sent and
maintained that book, of which the Author has no doubt long since wished with
Nero, utinam nefcissem literas, and of which more then one Kingdom has cause
to wish, that when he writ that, he had rather burned a Library, though of the
value of Ptolomies. We shall find them to have been the first and principal
cause of the breach, I will not say of, but since the pacification at Barwick,
we shall find them to have been the almost sole abettors of my Lord of
Strafford, whilst he was practicing upon another kingdom, that manner of
Government which he intended to settle in this, where he committed so many, so
mighty, and so manifest enormities, as the like have not been committed by any
Governor in any Government since Verres left Sicilie. And after they had
called him over from being Deputy of Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of
England (all things here being governed by a Juntillo, and that Juntillo
governed by him) to have assisted him in the giving of such counsels, and the
pursuing of such courses, as it is a hard and measuring cast, whether they were
more unwise, more unjust, or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been
our destruction, if by the grace of God their share had not been as small in
the subtletie of Serpents, as in the innocence of Doves. But in entitling the
honest Puritanes to the manifold violences that have been attempted or
practiced in Church and State, he borrows a piece of policy from the Jesuits,
who if they had prospered in blowing up the Parliament house, had intended to
give it about, that that so horrid and hellish a fact was perpetrated by he
knows whom. Honest Bishop Carleton in his Examination of Mr. Montagues Appeal,
says; That albeit the Puritans disquieted the Church about their conceived
Discipline, yet they never moved any quarrel about the Doctrine of our Church,
and that till Montague there was no Puritan Doctrine known. Mr. Wotton says in
his answer to the Popish Atti: p. 33. He that makes difference between the
Protestants and Puritans in matters of Faith, does it either ignorantly or
maliciously. Mr. T. Fuller 610. p. 99. We must not forget that Spalato (I am
confident I am not mistaken therein) was the first who professing himself a
Protestant, used the word Puritan to signify the defenders of matters
doctrinal in the English Church. Formerly the word was only taken to denote
such as dissented from the Hierarchy in Discipline and Church Government, which
now was extended to brand such as were Anti-arminians in their judgment. So
that by Puritanes, in all probability must be meant non-conformists. And if Mr.
P. dare say, that such men as Mr. Paul Baine, Mr. Arthur Hildersham, Mr. Dod,
and Mr. Cleaver the Decalogists; Mr. Tho. Hooker, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Tho.
Shepherd, were void of the power of godlyness, or that they had not more of it
than had their persecutors, he must either expect not to be believed, or seek
some other place than England to vent his passion in.

If by the Puritanes he means the giddy Brownists, I have not a word to say
in their excuse, but this, that the Prelaticall oppression was such, as might
have made wiser people than they mad. Had they not a colorable pretext to
call some of our Prelates Antichristian, whose Courts vexed sundry laborious
Preachers, because they could not bow at the name of Jesus, when as sundry idle
sots, whom they might frequently observe to stagger in the streets, were never
questioned.

But the most probable ground of his fury is yet behind, my being noted by Mr.
Barlee in the Margin, to be a man of his own College: for do but observe the
phrases and periods of the man upon this occasion. For ought I know he may be
also in possession of mine own Fellowship, and mine own Chamber, and mine own
meat and drink, and those yearly revenues which are mine own too; and for the
which I may the rather expect to have some satisfaction, because it seems the
Visitors made him one of my Receivers and Usufructuaries (for my legitimate
heir or successor they could not make him) And I have reason to be glad that he
is thought such a pious and learned man; because if he is pious, he will the
sooner pay me my Arrears; and if he is learned, he will not object against my
known and indisputable right page 155. and Div. Phil. p. 147. I suffered the
loss of what I thought to be the pleasantest possession on earth; for being
secretly suggested to be the Author of some books, which to this very day I
could never hear named; and though I earnestly desired that I might hear my
self accused, and know distinctly my accusation, and be heard speak for my
self, yet Dr. Reynolds could not obtain that for me. Thus he has thrown his
fiery darts at me, at far the greater part of Heads and Fellows of Colleges
in Oxon: at the Visitors, and at the two Houses of Parliament. But I know not
how I am so little sollicitous concerning the quenching of these Darts, that I
find my self carried away with a very pleasing diversion concerning two
different kinds of sober distraction or melancholy; the one wherein the brain
is generally and equally ill affected to all objects; the other, where the
distemper is confined to some one object or other; the brain being otherwise
very sound and sober upon all other objects and occasions. So Laurentius tells
us of a Noble man, that otherwise had his senses very perfect, and would
discourse of any subject very rationally, but was persuaded that he was glass.
And Huartus tells us of a Noble man's footboy in Italy, that thought himself a
Monarch: And Josephus Acostae tells us a sadder story of a Doctor of Divinity,
who would affirm, that he should be a King and a Pope too; the Apostolical See
being translated to those parts of America: which, together with some other
frantic distempers, made him condemned to the fire for an Heretic. Far be
it from me to wish or presage any such kind of punishment to Mr. P. for his
impudence against the supreme Authority of the Nation; but I am under some
temptation to think, that Mr. P. how discreet and sober soever in other
matters, is fallen into some Hypocondriacall conceits much of that nature; for
what else could make him, after that he has been known for some years, to be
an Husband, and peaceably to have enjoyed the Rectory of Brington, to talk of
an indisputable right to a Fellowship, chamber, meat, and drink, yearly
revenues in Magdalene College? Nay, he prints as if he had right unto two
Fellowships, one for Mr. Thomas, and another for Mr. Pierce, how else am I but
one of his Receivers? Let Us try whether by a few questions we can make him more
sober,

1. What would he have me pay him Arrears for? the usus fructus is mine; why
else am I said to be made usufructuary? An usufructuary wants nothing but the
title; he has jus in re, though not ad rem. Well, since he does so please
himself in a title to yearly revenues at Magd. Coll. I shall desire him to look
over his Post-predicaments once more, and there he shall find, that the modus
habendi uxorem, is by Logicians called pessimus: by which they mean, that it is
the most improper, but to a Fellow of a College it is the worst on another
account, because it does evacuate and nullify his title to all Academical
enjoyments.

2. Had he not better have said nothing, than said any thing, which might look
like an affirmation, that he suffered the loss of his sweetest enjoyment, for
being suspected to be Author of a Libel? When as we all know, that he was
turned out, not by the Visitors, but by the Comittee of Lords and Commons, for
non submission to the Authority of Parliament in visiting the University, for
the doing of which a liberty was reserved in the Articles granted by the Lord
Fairfax at the surrender.

3. Is it not impudence to say, that the Visitors authorized by the two Houses,
under the broad Seal of England, could not make me his legitimate successor?
Let him also say, that the Honorable Judges are Murderers, or else tell us how
the Parliament, which could give them power to take away men's lives, could not
also give power to others to take away his Fellowship. I have all this while
gratified him in his ungrounded supposition, upon which his pen did run riot,
viz. my being in his Chamber, and succeeding him in his Fellowship, but the
truth is (and that Mr. P. had opportunity to know) his place was void before I
was so much as Demi, nor am I in possession of the Chamber which was once his.
For a conclusion, I shall desire this my Adversary to commune with his own
heart, and impartially to enquire whether it be not envy, and not conscience,
which makes him to exclaim with so much bitterness against the late ejections,
sequestrations, deprivations; and whether he was so much offended at those who
enjoyed the places of such Heads, or Fellows of Colleges as were ejected,
whilst Oxon being a Garrison was not Oxon; and whether our late sequestrations
(which yet I undertake not in all things to acquit) were not more justifiable
than those proceedings in the late Archb. times, when men were suspended ab
officio and beneficio, merely for not reading the Book of Sports.

Having removed the rubbish, we may now come at the question, which is, Whether
moral evil, as such, be a privation? Concerning which, the terms being
explained, 'twill be no difficult matter to determine. What evil in general
is, can perhaps scarce be declared by any one common definition, nor has such
a definition been attempted by any but Voetius the son, in his Theol. Not: p.
539. sometimes things very perfect and positive are called evil, as the
venomous qualities in Plants, not that they are evil in themselves, but by
extrinsecall denomination, in regard of their efficiencie, of this kind of
evil we now dispute not. And indeed nothing is properly said to be evil, but
that which is such by intrinsecal denomination, as wanting some either natural,
or moral perfection that it ought to have. The most common division of evil is
into evil of punishment, and evil of sin, called by Tertullian, malum
supplicii, and malum delicti: by Basil, (...). Our debate is of the evil of
sin, which only can be called moral evil. The next term is the restrictive
particle (as) by which we understand malum formaliter sumptum, sin considered
abstractly from that either act, habit, or faculty in which it is, and unto
which it gives denomination. The not distinguishing betwixt the sinful act,
and the sin of the act, is the stone at which Mr. P. has all along stumbled.
He tells me, that sin being a complexum quid in the acknowledgement of all,
cannot admit of an abstraction, and yet remain the complexum that it was before
abstraction, p. 164. very wisely and warily spoken; as who should say, I cannot
abstract, but I must abstract; I cannot indeed abstract sin from a sinful
action, so as it should still remain sinful; nor can I abstract whiteness
from a white wall so as that it should still remain white; for it is constituted
white by whiteness: But though it be the whiteness that makes it white, yet
it is not the whiteness that makes it a wall; and therefore I may consider the
whiteness and the wall apart: The Abstract and Concrete word do both signify
the same form, but not in the same way; because the Concrete does in obliquo
connote that subject unto which the denominating form agrees; but if at any
time the Concrete be used with a reduplication, then it is all one with the
Abstract, says Smiglesius; indeed album qua album, and albedo differ little.
Sinful signifies both the subject that is sinful, and it is sinfulness, sin
or sinfulness, the mere pravity and irregularitie: Bus this will not down with
Mr. P. therefore he tells us, p. 83. 1. That action and quality are both
accidents. 2. That an accident is not the subject of an accident. 3. That some
accidents are separable from their subjects of inhesion, some not, as
risibility from a man. Blush all you that have any respect for Magd. Coll. to
find that one that was for some years Fellow of that Foundation, should be
ignorant of that which Freshmen of two Terms standing commonly know. May not an
Accident be the immediate subject of inhesion to an accident, though only
substance can be the ultimate? If not, then the Question, An fides sit in
Intellectu, an in voluntate, with six hundred more of the like nature, are at
an end. Or what if the Action were but the Subject of Denomination, might not
its evil be distinct from it? Nor would this exact Gentleman, if he had to do
with a Sophister, escape the lash, for calling Risibilitie an Inseparable
Accident, it being the most common instance of a Propriety, betwixt which, and
an Inseparable Accident, there is a most gross difference. But if he think
that the evil quality does as necessarily flow from the Essence of an Action,
as Risibility does from the Essence of a man (which he must think, unless he
has written ridiculous impertinencies) I conceive he has not one man alive of
his judgment. Yet at last, in a lucid intervall, he tells us, p. 84. He can
discern a difference betwixt the Action and its quality, by which it is evil.
Let him but stick to that distinction, and I Will never put him to distinguish
between the same evil action and it self: Nor did any one else; but he has
frequently frightfull apparitions in his own fancy, in the vanquishing whereof
he takes not a little pride. Nor will I offend his terse ears, with such a
barbarous word as pecceity, which he tells us occurs not in any Author sacred or
profane. Only I must observe how variously his pulse beats, p. 13. Sin it
self is a Physical Abstract at the grossest, of which sinfulness at least is
an Abstract Metaphysical, which admitting not any composition, cannot further
be Abstracted, no not so much as in Imagination. p. 78. c. 2. Sin is a Concrete
in respect of sinfulness, and does note the same thing in one word, thot
sinful action does in two, which I will make him to apprehend, do he what he
can to the contrary: besides, not reading what I write, by showing that a sin
and a sinful action, or act, or motion, have the same enunciation in all
propositions imaginable: p. 84. To prevent a (...), I give this notice to to
Mr. W. that if the word wickedness be not always synonymous with sin, yet
it is so often: page 164. Sin is a complexum quid in the acknowledgement of all.

1. That sin is a complexum quid, is not acknowledged by all, or any; except by
complexum you will mean complexum ex genere and differentla; for sin is an
abstract word, and does not in it is signification connote any subject.

2. It has neither truth nor sense in it, that a sin, and a sinful act, or
action, or motion, have the same enunciation in all Propositions Imaginable; I
can say, not to do what a man is bound to do is a sin; but I hope it is not a
sinful act, or action, or motion; sin may be predicated of original and
habitual corruption, so cannot sinful act, or action. Let Mr. P. explain how
sin is a Physical abstract, and how it is synonymous to the word wickedness,
and yet signifies but the same thing in one word, that sinful action does in
two, and he shall reconcile what to me seems not reconcilable. If I had said
albedo is a concrete in respect of albedineitas, and signified that in one
word, which superficies alba does in two, I should be thought at Magd. Coll. to
forget my self extremely. And to prevent a Logomachy, I further add, that sin
and sinfulness are to me synonymous, and therefore perhaps I may use them
promiscuously, meaning by them what the Latins do by peccatum, pravitas,
malitia, and the Greeks by (...), etc. Little probability may the Reader think
we should agree; for he says, p. 150, 151. That sinis so perfectly a
Concrete, that unless it is a Concrete, it cannot be conceived to be a sin, no
more than a concrete can be conceived not to be a concrete; but I say that sin
is so perfectly an abstract, that if we conceive not of it as an abstract, we
conceive not of it as sin; I am to seek what vox Abstracta is, if sin be not
such.

The third term is privation: which I must the rather explain, because he tells
me, Page 162. That I seem to make no difference between a simple Negative, and
a Privative. A Privation with me, (as with all others) is the absence of a
positive form, in a subject capable of such a form: Instances are commonly
given of blindness, deafness, etc. Mr. P. indeed, seems not to know the
difference between a negation, and a privation, as any Sciolist, will gather
from his words, Divin. Phil. p. 111. It cannot so much as be pretended, that
every sin is only privative; for every privation presupposes a habit, which
every sin cannot do: because a man may be covetous, or cruel, who never was
liberal, or compassionate, which rather implies a negation, than a Privation
of those virtues which he has not lost, but never had: This is one of the
convincing demonstrations which he tells me I had not the courage to venture
upon. Must not he be very spleen bound, that would not smile at such stuff?
Did this disputant never peep into a Philosopher, to know the signification of
the word privation? if he did not, why does he venture to use a Philosophical
dialect? If he did, how could he make shift, not to remember, that privation is
as well the absence of a form that should, or might have been in the subject,
as of a form that sometime was in it? One of the three principles of natural
generation, does denote the absence of a form that never was in the subject,
but of which the subject is only capable, and yet sure it was wont to be
called privatio: But the reader has had too too much of these trifles: I had
rather that he would take notice that there is a twofold privation, in respect
of a habit: The one pure, the other not pure, the one in privari, the other in
privatum esse, as Aquinas does express it somewhat more roundly. The privation
also which has respect to an action is twofold, one that altogether takes away
the act, the other that takes away but the rectitude of the act: the question
therefore is; Whether that evil quality, or quasi quality, from which any act,
or habit is denominated evil, be a privation, as I say, or a positive entity as
Mr. P, says. That it is not a positive entity, I prove by good authority, and
better reasons. By authority, 1. of the Fathers and other ancient Christian
writers, who did not write in the Scholasticall style and strain: they with one
mouth assert the mere privative nature of sin. Dionys. Areop. in his book de
Divinis nominibus frequently speaks to this purpose: (...). Let the Reader
peruse the whole discourse of that ancient, in that place, with the two Greek
Scholiasts on him:

Greg. Nyssen. (...). Oratione Catechetica, page mihi 490. Joan. Damascenus:
Orthod. fid. lib. 4. (...). Lib. 2. (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. ad Julianum, is of
the same mind. (...); his Scholiast Nicetas, p. 1045. Neque enim malum
substantia ulla est, sed boni privatio, quemadmodum and tenebrae luminis
recessus: Non enim alia est mali substantia quam virtutis abscessus. Athanasius
I shall commend hereafter. Amongst the Latins Austin and Anselm, (who have
both, not obiter, but data opera, enquired into the formalis ratio of Sin) have
determined it not to be positive: Aug. toto libro de natura boni: Anselm, de
concep. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 4, 5, 6. De casu diaboli, a Cap. 8. ad 11. Now
though I would not err with the Fathers, yet do I less distrust my self to
err, while I keep them company, and do with the more confidence, look an
adversary in the face, when my quiver is full of their Testimonies: and it is in
favor to the Readers purse and patience that I fill it no fuller.

Secondly, I might strengthen my opinion from the Schoolmen, amongst whom I
have an Army to a man: as is confessed even by Arriaga. The first that ever was
against me, as Faventinus thinks, was Cajetan, and those that assert the
positivity of sin are by Rada called Cajetanistae; so that I may say to Mr. P.
where was your opinion before Luther? for Luther and Cajetan are known to be
contemporaries. Yet not to wrong Cajetan, he only holds the essence of the sin
of commission to be positive, but that the sinfullnesse of omission was so, he
never dreamed. Do these authorities signify nothing with Mr. P? hear him: Page
174. If either the Schoolmen err, or were mistaken, or were never read, who
can help it? I see judgment often varieth with interest, and things acquire a
price, not so much for what they are in themselves, as for what they are
relatively to our ends and purposes. The Schoolmen's authority is no good money
when he should take it; is current coin when he should pay it, I must needs
say that the general suffrage of the Schools does signify much to me, in
matters where they are not overawed by a Church Canon. But he has a prettier
evasion than this, Page 170. The Jesuits in waggery did purposely propagate
many blasphemies, arising from the tenet of unconditionall reprobation, in
Protestant parts of the Christian world, that by making them odious, they might
fright men from thence into the Church of Rome. If there be any Jesuits that do
propagate what they apprehend to be blasphemy, I should think a fitter name
might be given to so Devilish a practice than that of waggery. Who betrayed him
into this observation? Dr. Jackson; who yet does not bluntly say, that it is the
design of the Factours for the Church of Rome to have this Doctrine generally
embraced, or acknowledged by us; but inserts these words of Caution, or at
least to have the World believe that it were generally acknowledged by us:
Beshrew Mr. Bar: who put Mr. P. upon a necessity of reading this Author, if he
can make no better use of him. The Jesuits are generally reputed very Politic;
but if this be the best policy they have, I should think we need not much fear
their plots: For what if they should fasten the Doctrine of absolute
reprobation upon the Church of England: Why thence it would follow that the God
of heaven were worse than an incarnate Devil, yea thou any wicked Spirit, or
the Devil himself can without stander be supposed to be: But does he not think
that men would enquire, whether that frightfull conclusion were rightly deduced
from the former principle, would they not tell those Popish factours that their
Pastors teach them to confess their sins, and to take the shame of them to
themselves? Would they not bid them dwell at home, and take notice of their own
Dominicans, who as strenuously assert the Doctrine of absolute reprobation as
any that go by the name of Calvinists: the same Dr. Jackson says, Page 3012.
He that would diligently peruse Aquinas his writings, and in particular his
resolution of that Question, An detur causa praedestinationis, may find him as
strait lace't as Calvin was; one and the same girdle would be an equal and
competent measure for both their errors: Nay the Dr. says the Dominican's and
other Schoolmen were more faulty than Zuinglius, or his followers.

But with Mr. P. Doctor Twisse, is worse than the Jesuit's, though the Jesuit's
and Dominican's are too bad, Page 170. Let me add that two Papists as learned
as ever did engage for upholding the Popish cause, do acquit us of this
imputation the making of God the Author of sin, Suarez opus, lib. 2. cap. 2. p.
111. The Heretics (potestants) know well that God intends not that which is
formal in sin, nor inclines the will of man to intend it. Vasquez, dis. 99.
cap. 4. n. 22. Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, do plainly affirm that sin as sin is
not to be referred to God as the cause thereof, both these Testimonies I take
upon trust from D. F. Wh. P. 145. Having not the books themselves by me at the
present. But to requite him for this observation out of Dr. Jackson, who
attempts not the proof of it by any one example, I shall give him another: That
the Popish Priests will sometimes go over to the Lutherans and pretend a
conversion, whereas their design is only to blow up the coals of contention
betwixt them and the Calvinists: And at the managing of such a design I am
sure Mr. P. has as good a faculty as any man alive. What success can Mr.
Duree, expect in his negociations for peace, when as men of bitter Spirits from
among our selves, do not stick to make the opinions of the Calvinists worse
then those of the Atheists; And that the Arminians are the consin-germanes to
the Jesuits, and do underhand aim at the introducing of Popery, I shall give
him the opinion of the whole house of Commons, whose word's in a Declaration of
theirs to his Majesty, are, The hearts of your subjects are perplexed, when
with sorrow they behold a daily growth and spreading of the faction of the
Ariminians, that being, as your Majesty well knows, but a cunning way to bring
in Popery, and the Professors of those opinions, the common disturbers of the
Protestant Churches, and incendiary's of those states in which they have gotten
any head, being Protestants in show, but Jesuit's in opinion and practice. Vid.
a necessary introduction to the Archbish: trial by Mr. Prinne. If he except
against the house of Commons, let him learn the same from a Jesuit's letter to
the Rector at Bruxells. Father Rector, etc. We have now many strings to our
bows, and have strongly fortified our faction, and have added two Bulwarks
more; for when K. James lived, we know he was very violent against
Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit, and deep learning, our
strong designs in Holland, now we have planted the sovereign drug
Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresy. This
letter was seized in the Archbish: Study, and attested against him at the Lords
bar: If yet there be not witness enough, we will call in the Lord Falklands
speech, p. 7. As Sir Tho. Moor says of the Casuists, their business was not
to keep men from sinning but to inform them quam prope ad peccatum sine peccato
liceat accedere; so it seemed their work was to try how much of a Papist might
be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much as they could of the
Gospel, without bringing themselves into danger of being destroyed by the Law:
Mr. Speaker, to go yet further, some of them have so industriously labored, to
deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion, that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least, to meet it half way: Some
have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery: I
mean not the outside only and dress of it, but equally absolute, a blind
dependence of the people upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon themselves:
And have opposed Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might setle one beyond the
water: Nay common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the opinions of Rome to the preferments of England, be
so absolutely, directly, and cordially Papists, that it is all that 1500. per
annum can do to keep them from confessing it. Dr. Abbot, in a Sermon before the
University preached at St. Peter's, on Easterday, 1615. Men under pretense of
truth, and preaching against the Puritan's, strike at the heart and root of
faith and Religion now established among us. This preaching against the
Puritan's, was but the practice of Parsons and Campian's counsel, when they
came into England to seduce young Students, and when many of them were afraid
to lose their places, if they should professedly be thus, the counsel they
then gave them was, that they should speak freely against the Puritan's, and
that should suffice: And they cannot pretend they are accounted Papists,
because they speak against the Puritan's; but because they are Papists indeed
they speak not against them. If they do at any time speak against the Papists,
they do beat a little upon the bush, and that softly too, for fear of troubling
or disquieting the birds which are in it. They speak of nothing but that in
which one Papist will speak against another; as against aequivocation, the
Popes temporal authority, and the like, and perhaps against some of their
blasphemous speeches; but in the point of free will, justification,
concupiscence being sin after Baptism, inherent righteousness, certainty of
salvation, the Papists beyond the Sea can say they are wholly theirs, and the
Recusants at home make their braggs of them, and in all things they keep
themselves so near the brink, that upon all occasions they may step over to
them.

From the Doctor of the Chair in Oxon I Will lead him to the University of
Cambridge, in which I find a Letter subscribed unanimously by the several
Heads of Colleges, March 8. 1595. to their much honored Chancellor, desiring
from his Lordships hands some effectual remedy for the suppressing of Baro's
opinions; Lest by permitting passage to these errors, the whole Body of Popery
should by little and little break in upon us, to the overthrow of our Religion.
And a little after these words do occur; Vouchsafe your Lordships aid and
advice both to us (wholly consenting, and agreeing in judgment) and all others
of the University soundly affected, and to the suppression in time, not only,
of these errors, but even of gross Popery, like by such means in time easily
to creep in among us, as we find by late experience it has dangerously begun.

The Reader will pardon me (who can scarce pardon my self) for this excursion,
occasioned through a desire to acquaint the world, what our former Worthies did
think concerning the spirit and design of our English Demonstrants.

3. It were no difficult matter to compass about my Thesis, denying the
positivity of sin with a cloud of witnesses, from among our Modern Divines; but
that I have reasons more than enough, to conceive, they stand but for ciphers
in Mr. P's account: Melancthon, it may be shall be regarded; let us hear him;
He wishes that there were some one common definition of sin, unto which all
would stand; and, for his own part, declares in more places than one, that he
well approves the Definition given by Anselm, that Original sin is, privatio
originalis justitiae debitae inesse. Nay, Tom. 1. p. 163. he answers Mr. P's
Argument. If sin be not a positive entity, then God punishes for nothing, by
distinguishing between nihil negativum, and nihil privativum, by the same token
that he calls that convincing demonstration by no better a name than
Cavillatio; hence I hamper him in this Dilemma; either Melancthon's judgment
is somewhat worth, or it is not: if not, why is it made so much use of by Mr.
P? If it be, then down falls the positivity of sin. I confess these horns are
in themselves so blunt, that I am almost ashamed to make any use of them; but
ad hominem they are sharp enough; for with such a pair he fancieth he has
tossed Dr. Reynolds concerning King James, Div. puri. p. 8. And yet this
deplorable Dilemmatist, would needs be dealing again with that incomparable
Doctor, quite and clean forgetting what befell the poor Frogge in Aesops
Fables, that would needs be swelling against the Ox, a second, and third time.
I now inform him, that the Doctor will meddle no more with him; and indeed to
undertake an Answer, would be, intemperanter abuti and otio and literis,
nothing being offered against his Epistle, which has weight enough in it to
turn those Scales at Sedan, of which Capellus says, that they would break
with the four hundredth part of a Grain. After so many testimonies, it may seem
needless to urge reasons unto Mr. P. who professes, Divi. Phil. p. 100. That
none of his principles appeal to reason, against the judgment of the whole
ancient aod modern Church. If by the whole Ancient and Modern Church, he mean
every Learned man that has in any Age been of the Church, I question whether
we can find a consent so unanimous in any point, except the twelve Articles
of the Apostles Creed: But that sin is a privation, has been as generally held
as any one thing of this nature. Among the Fathers, I know none of a contrary
mind: Some few Schoolmen, as also Dr. Field, I grant were, in reference to
sins of commission; as to sins of omission, that they also should be positive
is so strange, that I know not whether ever it were asserted by any, but
Cerberus, alias Champneys, Mr. Dukes the Keeper of the great Ordinary at Hell
in Westminster, Mr. P. and (whom I would not join with such company) the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond: Yet we will also contend by Arguments
artificial.

Mr. B. had used one, p. 112. in which because Mr. P. will have me equally
concerned, I shall suffer it, and his Answer to play a little before us.

If sin, as sin, be a positive entity, then it is a thing in it self good, but
so it is not, therefore neither is it a positive entity. The consequence is
founded upon a very rational, and commonly received Maxim, that Ens and bonum
convertuntur, though Mr. P. be pleased to call this, The printed Article of Mr.
B's unchristian Creed, p. 151. But what does he answer?

1. That all the force of this argument is only to prove that sin is good;
whereas he that has but half an eye may see, that the design of the Argument
is to fright Mr. P. out of his sad opinion concerning the positivity of sin,
by bringing him to the grand absurdity, of saying sin is good.

Secondly, he says, That a thing privative in one respect, is also positive in
another; and every Sciolist can tell, that the corruption of one thing is the
generation of another: Quorsum haec? If he mean, that the corruption of one
thing is formally the generation of another, he falls into so loathsome a
contradiction, as would make any Sciolists stomach rise at the naming of it. If
he understand the Proposition in sensu concomitantiae, then it is true, that in
the ordinary course of nature, the generation of one thing is the corruption of
another, and the corruption of one thing the generation of another; because the
matter cannot exist without a form, nor under two disparate forms: But quid
haec ad Iphicli boves? How that which is properly, and by intrinsecal
denomination privative in one respect, should be positive in another, falls not
as yet under my comprehension. His examples will perhaps clear my
Intellectuals; The darkness which God created, was not more privative of the
day, than it was positive of the night; and that which is privative of life or
sight may be positive of death and blindness. If his meaning be, that from the
want of light in the air we may as truly say it is night, as from the
presence of light we can say it is day, that is a truth but very vulgar, if he
would either hint or hold forth, that the darkness does actuate and inform the
air per modum qualitatis positivae, as the light does, there seems to be such a
darkness upon the face of his own understanding, as I had thought till now had
not been incident to a man of Academical education. If darkness be a Positive
Quality, pray tell us to what species of Quality belongs it? it is not habitus,
nor potentia naturalis, nor yet is it qualitas patibilis, which never was, nor
ever can be seen, felt, heard, smell't, tasted by any one. He has not yet made
himself noisome enough, the peccant humor still operates; A Carneadist will
be glad to introduce an opinion, that Sin is good by calling it bonum
Metaphysicum, or transcendentale: If so, then Mr. P. has deserved his humble
thanks, who bestows a positive Entity on sin. We poor thick-pated Mortals, who
make it but a privation, shall merit none of his favor. Mr. B. must be taught,
that the adequate subject of Metaphysicall science is, Ens quatenus ens, reale
illud, non omnimodo positivum quatenus est positivum. A strange sentence: Can
any thing be directly contained under the subject of Metaphysics, which is not
positive? or can any thing be unum per se (and such is the object of every
science) which is partly positive, and partly privative? but we have more
either of his ignorance, or inadvertencie: Bonum in Metaphysics does no more
signify good in English, than canis the Star does signify the Dog which
walks about with four feet. Bonum ^n English does signify good, as opposed to
e^ill; but in Metaphysics, no more but Ens ^n ordine ad appetitum. How came
English and Metaphysics so to fall out, that ^hey should stand in opposition?
Is it not enough that it is opposed to Greek, and ^atine, and other languages,
but it must so stand as the opposite term to Metaphysics? I see others besides
Presbyterians can sometimes talk nonsense: But does not Bonum, the affection
of Ens, if it were to be rendered in English, signify good as opposed to evil?
Mr. P. sure thinks it does, and therefore in policy he forbears to English it,
only in Latin he gives us this description: Bonum est Ens in ordine ad
appetitum; and that Sin is such, Mr. B. knows by sad and minutely experience.
What uncharitableness is this, to say that Mr. B. has minutely experience,
that sin as sin is the object of his appetite? Malum qua malum is not the
object of any rational creatures appetite; Nor can it be the object of the
rational appetite any more than falsum qua falsum can be the object of the
understandings assent. For a close, he tells us, that malum morale est bonum
Metaphysicum; and if Mr. B. aimed at nothing but this, he has gained nothing.
Yes, he has gained enough: For who would ascribe a transcendental goodness to
moral evil, but one, who has either lost all his Metaphysics, or never had
any to lose. Seeing you have made a shift to swallow such a Camel, we will try
whether we can fetch it up again. May it therefore please yo^ to understand,
that they who describe Metaphysical goodness, per ordinem ad appetitum,
understand it primarily with relation to the Divine will: And will you make sin
the object of the Divine will? But Suarez will tell you, that good is not so
compared to the appetite as truth is to the intellect: for Metaphysical truth,
includes in its formal nature and denomination some conformity to the
understanding, but so does not goodness include a conformity to the appetite,
though such a conformity be a necessary consequent of goodness. A thing is not
therefore good, because desired, but it is therefore desired because good.
Hence they express the nature of good by the word perfectum, and conveniens
alicui; and let Mr. P. if he can, tell me how sin bonificates any subject, or
adds any perfection to that in which it is.

The second Argument used by me in the Letter, was to this effect: If sin be a
positive Entity, then it is either God, or from God; but it can be neither:
ergo, Cajetane found himself so hard beset with this Argument, that he ventured
to say, God was the Author of malum morale, but not of malum simpliciter sic
dictum: For the absurdity of which distinction he is sufficiently schooled by
Suarez in more places than one; but Mr. P. has an art worth twenty of the
Cardinals distinctions, he has always a whole flood of vilifying words at
command; and if he meet with a hard and stubborn Argument, he soakes it in that
liquor so long, till the less understanding Reader forget that ever any such
Argument was used. What Mountains he rolled up together to keep my Argument
from being seen, I before observed: I will now take notice of a relenting pang,
with which he seems to be surprised in the height of his persecutions against
my Argument: Observe how it works, page 156. He must know that there is a
medium betwixt God and his creatures, and I wonder what should aile him, that
he should say there is none. Nay, if I must, there is no remedy; but till he
have more authority over me, than I yet conceive him to have, I shall without
fear give him my reasons, why I neither do, nor can acknowledge any medium.

First, because I find those that had to do with the Manichees, and heathen
Philosophers, building their Argument upon this Basis, that Omne ens est vel
primum, vel a primo; and that malum is therefore not caused by God, because it
is not ens, but non ens, as they commonly call that which is but a privation:
e: g: (...). Orat. contra gentes, p. 6. and De: incar. verbi, p. 37. (...).
Greg. Nys. Tom. 2. 490. (...), etc. Who is such a stranger to St. Augustine,
that has not read such sentences as these from him, de lib. arbit. lib. 1.
Credimus, ex uno Deo, esse omnia quae sunt, and tamen non esse peccatorum
auctorem Deum? in 1 cap. Joh. v. 1. Peccatum quidem non per ipsum factum est,
quia peccatum nihil est. Mali author non est qui omnium quae sunt author est:
quia in quantum sunt, in tantum bon^ sunt: 83 Quaest. It would be endless to
put together all sayings of the Ancients that are of this nature. I shall take
off my Pen when I have only transcribed the remarkable determination of
Aquinas, 1a, 2ae, q. 79. ar. 2. in corpo: actus (says he) peccati and est ens
and est actus, and ex utroque habet quod sit adeo: omne enim ens quocunque mod^
sit oportet quod derivetur a primo ente-omnis autem actio causatur ab aliquo
existente in actu, quia nihil agit, nisi secundum quod est actu; omne autem ens
actu reducitur ad primum actum. sc. Deum sicut in causam qu^ est per suam
essentiam actus: unde relinquitur quod Deus sit causa omnis actionis in quantum
est actio; peccatum nominat ens and actionem cum quodam defectu. Defectus autem
ille est ex causa creata sc: libero arbitrio in quantum deficit ab ordine primi
agentis, i. e. Dei, unde defectus iste non reducitur in Deum sicut in causam;
sed in liberum arbitrium, sicut defectus claudicationis reducitur in tibiam
curvam, sicut in causam, no^ autem in virtutem motiva^: a qua tamen causa tur
quicquid est motionis in claudicatione, and secundum hoc Deus est causa actus
peccati non tamen est causa peccati, quia non est hujus quod actus sit cum
defectu.

Nor secondly, do I know any other way of defining what ens primum is, but this
that it is such a being, which is not from any other being, and which is the
cause of all the beings that are. Thirdly, this positive being of sin is it a
finite and participate being? If not, how is it not God? if? How is it not from
the Fountain of all essences? Fourthly, I am the more confirmed that there is no
medium betwixt Deus and creatura, because Mr. Pierce after all his enquiry has
not been able to find any. For whereas he does tell me that the works of the
Devil are a medium, he could not sure but think that I would distinguish in
blasphemy, lying, etc. Betwixt the vital act and it is deficiency and dissonance
from the Law of God, the act it self I hold to be positive, and from God; the
irregularity of that act from which it is denominated blasphemy, lying, etc. I
would derive only from man's corruption, and the Devils temptation. If he will
not take this from me, let him take it from those Gamaliels, at whose feet
he'el not account it any disparagement to sit as a disciple. Dr. Fr. White,
Page 104. Defense of his Brother, whereas sin is a deficience and aberration
from the rule of justice, it cannot subsist alone; but even as halting must
necessarily be joined with some motion of the body, and hoarsnesse of speech
with the action of speaking, so the evil of sin is conjoined with some action,
or motion of the Soul, or body which has a natural and positive being, and
where unto there happens a going astray from Divine Law, even as it happens to
a lame man's natural motion, to have halting concurring with it. Of that which
is positive and natural in sinful actions Divines acknowledge God to be the
Author both in that he perserveth man's will and faculties, whereby he is
enabled to his operations, and also because as the first cause he produces
together with the 2d. cause all positive motion. Dr. Sand. 1 Timothy 4.4.5. Ser.
Ad pop. there is a natural (or rather transcendentall) goodness, honitas
entis, as they call it, in every action even in that where to the greatest sin
adhereth, and that goodness is from God, as that action is his creature, but
the evil that cleaves unto it is wholly from the default of the person that
commiteth it and not at all from God, Dr. Abbot, answer to Bishop, Page 124. We
say, and you will say no less that God is the Author of all the actions in the
World, yet we say that sin is wholly and only of man himself. distinguish the
accident from the subject, the sin of the action from the action it self, God
in the one shall be glorified and man justly condemned for the other. Nay what
if M. Pierce, himself say that the sinful action, so far as it is an action,
is from God? He says that every good action of man is from the special grace
of God. Now seeing all the good actions that are done per gratiam viatoris be
and must necessarily be on some account sinful; concerning these actions I
demand are they from God? If not, how is every good action from God? If they
be, then he spits in the face of his judicious Dr. Jack. who says exact: Col.
p. 3013. To imagine there should be one cause of the act and another of his
obliquity, or sinfullnesse of the act would be as gross a solaecisme, as to a
assign, or seek after any other cause of the rotundity of a sphere, or bullet
besides him that frames the one, or moulds the other, or else he must say that
the action, and that in perfect moral goodness which is in it are from God
but the sinful imperfection it self is from man through Gods permission, and
this he does say 172. But then he ought not to be offended if we take the same
liberty, Page 158. He says God made idolaters men. And 159. men themselves are
the works of God only, which is to grant more then with truth can be granted.
But thus I argue, if God be the cause of men, than of David's child begotten by
the action of Adultery, for Scripture will allow me to call that child, so soon
as borne, a man, John. 16.21. If the cause of that child, undoubtedly then the
cause of the action of generation by which, as by a causality, that child was
produced. Yet was he not the cause of the adulterious pravity cleaving unto
that action. Quid mirum si dicaemus, deum facere singulas actiones quae fiunt
mala voluntate, cum fate amur eum facere singulas substantias quae fiunt
injusta voluntate and in honest a action, Ans. de casu diab. c. 10. So that we
are but where we were at the first setting out. For the actions in which the
evil of sin is subjected, I Will grant to be positive, but from God as well as
the creature; the evil of sin from which they are denominated sinful, is but
a privation and requires no proper efficient cause at all, such as it has man
is and not God. But I have obstructed his good nature in working, Page 157. He
goes on further to tell me that res in Metaphysics has three acceptions, in
the first of which it comprehends entia rationis, as opposed to nihil. Before
he tell what the other two acceptions are, he corrects himself, my design is to
convert and not confound him, this charity (as is more than probable) did both
begin and end at home had any benefit been intended to me by it, you should
have ceased sooner. For I was confunded before that politic (...) was made.
For let any one tell me how this discourse about ens rationis is here brought
in: First, was it to let the World understand, that our Author knew what ens
rationis meant? That Is but a low design, and yet he cannot accomplish it
neither, for he places the model of an house to be built hereafter among entia
rationis, and yet that is as far from being only objective in intellectu, from
not being longer than it is thought on, as the East is from the West. Secondly,
has he a mind to insinuate that sin is ens rationis, if so, it must either be
privatio, which is that he all along denies, or a negation, against which his
arguments militate with more strength, or a relatio rationis, which is affirmed
by Vasquez, but against all good reasons, as I shall soon show him if forced to
so great severity by his owning such a paradox. Thirdly, was it his business
to intimate that all the entia rationis are so the works of men, as that God
cannot be termed the cause of those actions, by which they are made? I will not
torture his ingeniolum with that perplexed question, whether the Divine
intellect do fabricate ens rationis, but without all peradventure, the action
of the understanding, though not the imperfection is from God, are not all our
notiones: 2ae. in Logic, entia rationis, yet is the act of the understanding,
causing them so far from not being from God, that God has indeed a more than
ordinary and common concourse to it.

The privative nature of sin may be thus further evicted. If a thing be
therefore sinful because it wants some perfection that it ought to have, and
cease to be sinful when it has all the perfection which it ought to have, than
is sin a privation; but a thing is therefore sinful, etc. Ergo, the
consequence of the proposition is as clear as the noone day light, the
assumption also needs rather explication than confirmation, there is not a novice
but knows the old rule, bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu. To
make an action good there must be a concurrence of all the three goods, object,
end, circumstances, the mere want of any of these three makes the action
sinful, because the Law requires that all the three goodnesses should be in
the action, and the want of that which the Law requires to to be in any subject
is a sin: or else we must reject, not only Aristotle, but the Apostle, who
says; (...). This argument is used by Greg. Arim. a noble and ancient
Schoolman, and largely insisted upon by Faventinus, the most acute Scotist.
I Am not ignorant that various replies are made to the argument; but answers
also are commonly given to those replies, which to transcribe would be a matter
of more trouble than profit.

My fourth and last argument against the pretended positivity of sin I dispose
in this enthymem, Original sin is not positive, ergo, sin as sin is not
positive. The consequent (I conceive) will be yielded sine sanguine and sudore,
otherwise the old Canon, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia, would soon
command it, as to the antecedent. I deny not but our Protestant Divines in
their disputes against the Papists, do make a positive, as well as a privative
part of original sin; but how that term may be understood so as not to
prejudice my assertion in the least is largely showed by Gisber. Voetius, in
his accurate discourse de propagatione peccati originalis. He that calls it a
privation of Gods image, says the whole nature of it, is a sentence of Mr.
John Calvin. That I may prove original sin not to be positive in the sense we
now use the word positive, I must lay down this as a postulatum. That the soul
is not by propagation, or ex traduce, (as they speak) but immediately created
by God. If this postulatum should not be granted me, I should not fear the
demonstrating of it by evidence of Scripture, and strength of reason, to any
gain sayer; but such my charity forbids me to think Mr. P. This supposed, I
thus argue. If original sin be a thing positive, it is either the soul it self,
or some of its faculties, or some accident or adiunct agreing immediately to
the faculties, mediatly to the soul it self, but none of all these; ergo. To
say with Flaccius Illyricus, that it is the soul it self, were with more than
heathenish impiety to calumniate the goodness of our Creator, and the like
absurdity will follow if we assert it to be one of the faculties of the soul.
If we say it is an accident inhering in the faculties of the soul, then it was
either put into them by God, which will make God the Author of the worst of
sins, or else it is caused in them by the souls presence in, and union to the
body, or from some action of the soul it self: Not by any action of the soul it
self for it is faculties are sinful before it put forth any one act of reason:
Not from its presence in, or union to the body: for who can imagine how the
soul, which is spiritual and immaterial, should be defiled by being joined to a
body? which thoughfull of natural imperfections is not sinful, and if it were
sinful could nor communicate its sinfullnesse to the soul that informs it.
But now holding original sin to be a privation in an active subject, we do
avoid all these inconveniences, by saying, that Adam by his first transgression
did sin away the image of God from himself, and his posterity, who were in him,
not only as a naiurall, but as a federal head also, and so God creates the
souls of men void of his image, and yet justly looks on them as sinners, for
wanting this image, because they ought to have it, and by their own folly
deprived themselves of it.

As for the reasons Mr. P. has against the privative nature of sin, he has so
slipped and glided them into all the several parts of his book, that it is
almost impossible, to refute them without committing as many tavtologies, as
he uses himself in making them, I must therefore fall a picking of the^ up,
like so many daysies in a bare common, here and there one where I can find
them; but first me thinks it is somewhat strange, that my aggressor should put
forth a discourse tending to prove the positivity of sin, and never consult the
Schoolmen, among whom the question has been for many years agitated, or if he
did consult them, then it is more strange that he should not find ingenuity to
acknowledge whence he borrowed his arguments, and take notice of the solutions,
so commonly and plainly given to them: Yet I confess, sometimes our disputant
has let fall such reasons, as were never thought on by any before him, this is
the happiness, or rather, unhappiness of some, that they can use and urge
such mediums, which those with whom they deal had not wit, great, or little
enough to foresee: so I remember I once heard a fellow with extrea^ confidence
strive to prove, that there was no necessity of repentance in order to
salvation, because the gifts and callings of God are without repentance; an
argument, I dare say, with which the Minister never expected to be encountered:
will it thou see its parallel? look Page 156. unless Mr. Hick. will embrace the
suds of a contradiction, he must confess that to be positive which Christ came
to destroy. The suds of a contradiction! A pretty similitude. But I would feign
know whether Mr. P. will say there be any proper privations? If he say there be
none, he must think of making our freshmen some kind of satisfaction, for
robbing them of one of their post-predicaments; if he say there be any, he must
either let fall this sad loose way of arguing, or else show us some one example
of privation, which Christ either did not, or could not have destroyed, had he
so pleased, by introducing the opposite form into the subject, it is said 1 Cor.
15.26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is death. Will it hence follow,
that death is no proper privation? The best crowers are not always the best
fighters.

A 2. argument is from habitual sins, which I confess were a good one had it
been well managed; but Mr. P. can no more use it than young David could Saul's
armor; for mark the letters and syllables of the man, Page 161. Sins of
commission being riveted in a man by long custom and continuance, are commonly
called habitual sins, so then Mr. H. cannot but confess that vices are habits,
as well as virtues (there is an habit of drunkenness as well as of so briety)
and that habits are qualities he cannot be ignorant if he is but able to tell
his fingers; and that a habit is a thing positive his post predicaments have
taught him, where a habit and a privation are set as opposite terms such as do
mutually necessitate each others absence.

1. What consequence is this, if I can tell my fingers I can not be ignorant
that habits are qualities? Did not Mr. P. know how to tell his fingers before
he knew that habits were species of quality? Well, but grant him (which is
denied by learned Piccolominee) that habits are qualities, what is gained? Just
nothing: he makes a face as if he had intended a So^es but has so miscarried
in the pursuance of his medium, that I cannot with all my skill mould his words
either into a Sorites, or any other good form of argumentation. I suppose the
proposition habits are qualities is redundant, and that the thing he aims at
is this, that which is an habit is positive, some sins, as drunk. are habits.
Ergo, the proof of the Major, because habit in the postpredicaments is set as
an opposite term to privation. This would almost make a man think, that he
took the word habitus to be of as limited a signification in the
postpredicaments as it is in the 4th. predicament, but that is too sad a
failing to charge a Scholar with, yet he falls into one as sad; for, by making
the habit of drunkenness a fit example of habit in the postpredicament, he
must set the habit of sobriety as its opposite term, and make it a privation,
which is to cut his own throat: but had his hand been sosteddy as that he had
hit the mark at which he shot, I think he did not take his aim aright; for I
doubt not whether the habit be positive, but whether that vitiosity from which
it is called an habit of drunknesse be a positive entity. How evil actions may
be said to produce evil habits, evil habits produce evil actions, and yet
sin not be positive, see Baro. met. de not. mali. And to remove prejudice,
though he were a Scotchman, yet he was no Puritan. Ibid. There must be
something positive to make a man positively foul, which foulness suffers a
privation when the man is cleansed of his filth. Would not one think that all
things conspire to make the good Rector ridiculous? It must indeed be some
thing positive that renders the sinner positively foul: But how will he prove
the filth of sin to be positive? Not from the Romans 22.11. For there be not so
many Chapters in that Epistle; Nor does he offer any other proof: Therefore we
may make the spiritual filth to consist in the want of that nitor gratiae,
which either was, or should have been in the soul.

His main argument is from actual sins as lying, and blaspheming, and believing
that there is no God, even in the prosecution of this argument, he shows more
of the Palm than of the fifth. But that he may not have the same quarrel with
me that Fimbria had with Scaevola, who appointed him a day, because he did not
totum telum in se recipere I would give his argument the best advantage I can,
by supposing his instance to be made in the very worst, and most intrinsecaly
evil of all actions; that of hating God, and will show. 1. Why such acts, are
called intrinsecaly and essentialy evil. 2. What others have answered to this
objection. 3. What I conceive is to be answered according to truth. Such
actions are called intrinsecally evil, both because they are evil
antecedently to any positive Law, and because they are evil ex genere, and
objecto, and not merely through the want of some circumstance: for a Scholar to
walk in the night season, when by the statutes he is bound to be within his
College walls, is sinful, to walk at a time allowed, in a convenient place,
and to a good end, is not sinful: but the hating of God is such an action, as
no circumstance of time, or place can make lawful.

Some to answer the objection, do make the totum complexum, odisse Deum, the
very determination of the hatred to God, to be the material part of that sin,
and then the formal part, they make to be the want of conformity in this action
to the Law of God, and so they labor to show, or rather to feign, some
conditions in the concurrence whereof, such an act is separated from it is
pravity: Let the Reader, if he please to satisfy his curiosity, consult, Greg.
valent. 2. Tom. in Tho. dis. 6. q. 9. puncto 1. Or, Bradwardine lib. 1. cap.
26. I recite not their words, because I need not their help, and because they
seem to make impossible hypotheses, as if the hatred of God were produced by
God in a stone, whereas it cannot be that there should be the hatred of God in
a stone, which neither has nor can have any knowledge; nay the beasts, though
they have love and hatred, yet cannot be said to hate God, of whom they have no
knowledge, or representation. I say therefore, that the hating of God is
complexum quid, and must not be spoken of, as if it were one, the vital action
of hatred, is a thing positive, but the undue referring, or terminating of that
act to such an object which is altogether lovely, that is the sinfulness of the
action, and not positive but privative: indeed omne esse morale est valde
jejunum and diminutum, moral goodness and evil are rather modi entium than
entia, which made Vasquez, though otherwise a very acute Doctor, place them, as
I noted before, among entia rationis. Yet because it belongs to the
Universality of the first cause to produce not only every real being, but
also the real positive modifications of beings. Therefore we say, that in good
works, both the works themselves, and their rectitude are positive, and are
from God; in evil works there are also two things considerable, the works
themselves, and their pravity; the works themselves we doubt not are positive,
and from God, as all other positive things; but their pravities add no new
entities to them, but consist in a mere privation; in those things which are to
be done according to a rule, good consists in a conformity to, and convenience
with the rule, but evil in a difformity, or discrepance from the rule;
conformity is positive, difformity is privative. And in this Answer I am very
much confirmed, by the sayings of Anselm, and Twisse: Thus Anselm, deconc.
Praedest. and liberi arbitrii cap. 1. God caused all things which are done,
either with a just, or injust will, that is, good works, and evil: in good
works he both causes, that they be, and that they be good; in evil, he only
causes that they be, not that they be evil, adding this reason of the
difference, because to be evil is to be nothing: Dr. Twisse, vind. lib. 2.
There is a twofold actual concourse of God, one of General influence, the
other of special grace; the concourse of general influence is necessarily
required to every action, whether good, or evil; but the concourse of special
grace, is only required to a work thoroughly good: every good work therefore
needs a twofold help, one of general influence as it is a work, another of
special grace as good; but an evil work requires only the concourse of
general influence, as it is a work, but that it be evil, no more is required
than the denial of special grace: Thomas speak to the same purpose, 2 Senten.
did. 37. art. 2. p. 2.

A 5. thing which Mr. P. would fain have to do the office of an argument is
this, if every sin be privative, than there will be no difference betwixt sins
of omission and sins of commission, but a difference there is betwixt them,
therefore, etc. I suppose those words, Page 167. Would if reduced to mood and
Figure appear before us in such a form, as I have now represented, he makes no
difference betwixt not blessing and cursing God, betwixt ceaseing to give alms
and grinding the faces of the poor, betwixt not saving and killing another man:
Answ. Sins of omission and commission are sufficiently distinguished,
notwithstanding they be both made to consist in privation: Omission will be the
transgressio^ of an affirmative precept, commission the trangression of a
Negative precept. 2ly. They differ in respect of their immediate foundation,
the fundamentum proximum of a sin of commission is some act or habit; but these
are not the fundamenta proxima of a sin of omission: it vexes me, that I am
forced to inculcate these so vulgar and obvious things, which none are ignorant
of, but those who never learned the A, B, C. of Philosophy. To the same Cluster
I may reduce what he has, P. 146. Murder must have something in it of positive
to distinguish it in specie from all other sins: But Scotus in 2. dis. 35. will
tell him that the specifical distinction of sin is taken from the different
privation of different rectitude, and Joh. Rada, will tell him that there is no
real difference betwixt Thom. and him in this: deafness and blindness are
privations, yet speeifically distinct, because one is the privation of the
power of seeing, the other of the power of hearing: But how then are the two
extreme vices distinguished. e. g. Covetousness and prodigality seeing? they are
privations but of the same habit of liberality. Answ. Because covetousness is
a privation of liberality, as it puts a man upon honest spending, prodigality
is a privation of liberality as it does incline a man to avoid superfluous
spending. Thus I have eked out my adversaries argument, which was somewhat
short and scanty, this made him seek to piece it with a patch of Grammar, for
so it follows, some are not only positively but superlatively evil: the jest
lies in positive and superlative I am content he should thus use his wit with
out any rival: But I have been told that some years since there was one T. P.
lived near the Schools, who would have made such clenches with him and given
him 3. for one.

A 6. argument that he will needs press to fight for the positivity of sin is
taken from those Scriptures, which do speak of greater and lesser sins, Page
163. At this I would strike with my Answer, if I could find where the vein of
proof did lie; if I may guess it lies in this, that there can be no degrees in
a privation, but this is a mere mistake: Among privations some are greater,
some less, with relation to that form unto which they are opposed: if the
form have degrees of intention, that may Physically be accounted the greater
privation which removes more degrees of the Form from the Subject; that the
less which removes fewer: if we reckon morally, then we may also calculate the
degrees of privation from the greater or less obligation, that the subject is
under, to have that form, which for the present he wants.

A. 7. If sin be a privation, how are actions and operations ascribed to it?
How does the Apostle say sin wrought in him all manner of concupiscence? Romans
7.8.

Answ. In such speeches sin signifies not abstractly and formally; but it
signifies our nature and its faculties as under corruption. The faculties in
which the sinful privations are, by reason of those privations do lust
against the working of the Spirit.

And now I might take my leave of Mr. P. but that I am told of no less than 17
cogent Arguments used by him in his Divine Philanthropie, which I had not the
courage to venture on. When Mr. B. told him, that he durst not quote the
Assemblies Confession, he is made a liar for that speech: If he deserve such a
censure, so I am sure does Mr. P. How could I be said to want courage to meddle
with that which I had never read over? And which now that I have been forced to
read over, has rather exercised my patience than my courage; so far am I from
looking upon them as convincing Demonstrations, that I think I should honor
them sufficiently, if I but say that they are good enough for a Sophister to
use when he is put to course in the Horse-fair, ex tempore. He ptetends to have
proved in ample manner, That sin has an efficient cause, properly so called,
being angry it seems with the saying of Augustine, that makes it to have a
deficient, rather than an efficient, properly so called. Page 145. If man be
not the efficient cause (says our doughty Disputant) then he is either the
material, or formal, or final. Rather than we will seem to be too much
frighted, we will say that man is the material, or subjective cause of the
action; such a material or subjective cause as evil can have: And he is the
efficient cause too of the evil of the action, if by an efficicient he mean no
more than that unto which it may be ascribed. But he and I both were best not
to make too much noise, least we should awaken the youngsters to fall aboard
us with such an Argument as this. If man be the efficient cause either of a
good action or a bad action, then he does effect it by another action, and so
we may proceed in infinitum. To let that pass: the deficient cause is
reduceable to the efficient; and this is to be said; Suppose the first sin of
Angels to have been a proud desire to be equal unto God; the cause of this
proud desire was the will of the Angel; but it was the cause of the action (in
such a sense as a causality may be said to have a cause) per se, of the
vitiosity of the action, it was only the cause per accidens, and per
concomitantiam; nor does the vitiotsiy of the effect always suppose a vitiosity
in the cause; though it always pre-supposeth an imperfection in the cause; and
where the cause it self is vicious, its vitiosity is not the cause of the
vitiosity of the effect; for vitiosity of it self, neither can effect, nor be
effected; but the vicious cause, taking together the being, and the
supervenient privation, is the cause of the vicious effect, taking it in like
manner for the being, and the superadded privation. But if we contradict him,
we must say, that God damns men for nothing. Anselm, in the place I before
referred my Reader to, makes this objection, and laugheth at its, weakness, De
Con. vir. c. 6. Quidam cum audiunt peccatum nihil esse solent dicere: si
peccatum nihil est, cur punit Deus hominem pro peccato, cum pro nihilo puniri
nemo debeat; quibus quamvis humilis sit quaestio, tamen quia quod quaerunt,
ignorant, aliquid respondendum est. What does he mean when he says, that God
then must punish men for nothing? If he mean that God would punish men because
they have not that in their faculties, habits, actions which should be in them
what absurdity is there in that? Is not the punishment just, except it be for
positive entities? How many men have been imprisoned for not paying sums of
money which they did owe? Yea I believe Mr. P. could well enough bear my being
punished for not paying him his Arrears which he (vainly enough) fancyeth to
be due to him, and yet non-payment cannot be accounted a positive entity; nor
does Mr. P. know how to place it in any predicament of Beeings. Siu is a
punishment, but punishment is a positive entity. erg. There is a punishment of
loss, which scarce ever any man said was positive: There is a punishment of
sense, and this we say is no other way an evil or a punishment unto us than as
it does deprive us of some perfection of which we are capable. The punishment
of sense may be said to be positive as to its foundation, not in its formality;
that is, it is not positive, if we consider that in which the very evil of
that punishment formally consists. As to the rest of his Arguments, they are
partly such as I have met with before, and partly such as others upon whose
expressions they are grounded, are more concerned in than my self. When Mr. P.
will undertake to vindicate every expression that has been used in the
managing of these controversies by men of his opinion, then may I perhaps sense
some kind of obligation, to try whether I can justify every thing that has
fell from Mr. W. and Mr. B. in the mean time they are of age, let them speak
for themselves, if they count it needful: if they count it not needful, why
should I spend labor about that, ^n the doing of which I cannot take any great
pleasure, and for the doing of which ^hey will con me no great thanks. This I
cannot but observe, that though none durst undertake Dr. Twisse in the Arminian
Con^roversies, whilst he was alive, yet since his death every puny will be
nibling at him upon all occasions, which puts me in mind of that paltry fellow
in Pausanias, who being never able to get the mastery in his life time of one
Theagenes a famous Wrestler, came many a night after he was dead and scourged
his Statue, which was erected in the honor of him. Paus. in Attic.

If Mr. T. P. or Mr. I. G. do verily believe Dr. Twisse to be an enemy of that
Divine grace, which he pretends to have maintained, let them follow him (...),
as he did those with whom he took occasion to deal; and when they shall have
so done, Mr. Jeanes, a person of a very scholastical head, will not long let
them be without an answer. And so I leave my Combatant, resolving, if it may
be, never more to come so near him, till I am told by others, that his breath
smells sweeter.

Upon the review of my book J cannot but recall what I have often read from
Gilbertus Cognatus, of a man with an ulcer in his face, who passing over a
Bridge where the passengers were to pay a certain piece of money for every
malady of body found upon them, was required to pay the accustomed tribute for
the ulcer in his face; but he refusing to pay it, the Officer pulls off his
hat, intending to keep it for a pawn; his hat being taken off, another malady
appears in his bald head. Now Sir (says the Officer) I must have a double
tribute of you; Nay (says the Traveller) that you shall not, and begins to
strugle with the Officer; who being too strong for him, gave him a foyl, by
means whereof there was a rupture perceived under his coat: Now (says the
Officer to him again) I must have a treble tribute of you. The more Mr. P.
does struggle, the more does he discover his infirmities; yet I believe he will
not be quiet; for they that have a bad cause will always have the last word, if
death do not stop their mouths. But as to my self, I think we had both been
held wiser men if we had held our peace, especially seeing the heat of these
Epidemical controversies has produced more Writers then (to use Plautus his
similitude) an hot summer brings forth buzzing flies; and therefore, though Mr.
P. through his provoking language, has made a coward to fight for once, yet
will he scarce draw me into the field again; for neither can I undergo the
judicious trial of the Learned, nor am I willing to hazard the passionate
censures of the ignorant; nor have I observed, that many have been healed by
going into the troubled waters, though moved by the best Angels of the Church.
Truth is so lovely, and beautiful, that they who embrace Falsehood, will needs
have it to be Truth; and because they are unwilling to be deceived, they will
not be convinced that they have been deceived. If Mr. P. do reply seriously
and judiciously, so as that I be convinced, it will be sufficient, that in a
private Letter I thank him for undeceiving me, and authorize him to publish to
the world, that I am his Proselyte. But if his Reply shall be seasoned with the
salt of Momus, not of Mercury; or if it be stuffed and colored only with an
ignorantia elenchi, defending that which is not impugned; or if he shall like
the flies, seek for, and stick only upon a sore place, fall on the sick and
weak parts of my discourse, and never attempt to charge through the main body,
I shall vindicate my self only with contempt and silence. When a Nobleman of
this Nation had a controversy in Law with a Brewer, who had a Garden and
dwelling house bordering upon his: The Brewer gave it in charge to his servant
to put in so many hogsheads of water more into all his Brewings, than he was
wont to do, telling him that such a supply would bear the charge of his suit
with his adversary; which being overheard by the Nobleman, he sent presently to
the Brewer, resolving he would no longer go to Law with him, who upon such
ease and cheap terms could manage his part of the suit. I neither make my self
the Nobleman, nor Mr. P. the Brewer, but yet seeing he suffers his fancy to
fly abroad so fast, seeing he has a fluid ink-pot, as ready at hand as the
Thames to the Brewer; seeing he can print more Books in two years, than a wiser
man would undertake to print in all his life; nay, seeing rather than not be a
good customer to Mercurius Politicus, he will clap a new Title to his old
Works. I may well be excused if I have no mind to meddle further with him. Of
all distempers I hope I shall keep my self free from the itch of disputing and
writing many books: And I doubt not but wise men will count it more commendable
to stand out, than to play at small games.

The God of Truth and Love, teach us to follow the truth in love, that we may
grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ.

FINIS.

