From NEWGATE, A PRISONERS Just Cause PLEADED, Against all his PERSECUTORS.
And let the Witness of God in all consciences be judge in this matter.
First, BE it known unto you all, that I with many more of the people of God
(called Quakers) are not here upon the Fact of Felony, or Murder, or Whoredom,
or Drunkenness, or for Swearing, etc. but for the freedom of our consciences
in denying to Swear, according to Christ's Doctrine: and now whether we are
guilty or not guilty in this matter of the breach of a righteous Law, and so
deserving imprisonment or bonds, let the Witness of God in the conscience be
judge even in this matter.

Again, be it known unto you all, that I with many more of the People of God
before mentioned, did never Act, Plot or Agitate mischief against the KING, or
any other Person within his Dominion; but we are peaceable men, and only desire
and require our just Freedom in the Nation of our nativity, and also the
exercise of our consciences toward God without molestation, and for to be
preserved in peace, as we are peaceable Subjects of the Nation; We in our
several places pay Custom and Tribute to those in Authority, that violence may
not be done unto us; yet, behold, what havoc is made of us? how are our goods
spoiled, and our bodies imprisoned, and many sick and weak amongst us, and some
families hereby exposed to poverty and want, if God take not a special care for
them? And now whether we or our persecutors are guilty of sin and wickedness
against God (in this matter) let his witness in the conscience be judge even
in this our cause.

Again, it is well known (to almost all) that the KING before his coming into
England, whilst he was yet at Breda, that he gave forth a Declaration there,
promising free liberty to tender consciences in matters of Religion, etc.
provided they live peaceably in the Kingdom, and this Declaration is revived
since his coming to England. But surely this is made of none effect, for we can
plead guiltless, both before God, Angels and men, that we have not forfeited
our liberty therein mentioned, by any Act, Plot or agitation against the KING,
or any other Person within the Dominion of England; yet nevertheless let the
Goals in England testify what heaps are cast into them, and what havoc is
made of the Innocent that make conscience of an oath. And indeed it is true,
besides all this (before mentioned) in the Declaration promising liberty, that
we had the word of a King, even from his own mouth, that we should not suffer
for the exercise of our consciences in matters of Religion, etc. But alas,
alas, what does this word avail us now, whilst the rude multitude are let loose
upon us, yea insomuch that it may be truly said, if God were not on our side,
they would swallow us up through their unsatiable desires. On this may be taken
up as a lamentation over England at this day, that her Rulers should make no
more conscience of their promises and engagements, surely the guilt hereof
cannot but lie heavy upon their consciences: and so let the witness of God in
all consciences arise, and judge for us in this matter.

And again consider, what a lingering Imprisonment we are in, men and women cast
in by heaps together, and through the straitness of room, they are much
thronged together, both in this Goal and others; and sundry Persons of us are
weak and sickly, and by all outward appearance, if we are thus continued in
such straitness, weaknesses and sickness may much more abound. And alas, what
commiseration is there in the hearts of men in Authority toward us; do we not
see mercy (as it were) turned into cruelty, even toward them that never
deserved wrath at their hands? and may we not hereby in truth conclude with the
Prophet of old, that the best of them is as a briar, and the most upright as a
thorn hedge, Mic. 7. 4. Oh that the witness of God in our enemies and
persecutors might be awakened to plead our innocent cause! and this is that
which we wait for, and suffer in patience to see, even the wicked smitten and
wounded in their own hearts, that their wickedness, curelty and persecution may
come to an end; and Truth, and Equity and Righteousness to be exalted, even to
bear rule in the hearts of both Kings and Princes: Then, O then rejoice ye that
love righteousness, when our Lord and King reigns in righteousness in the
Kingdoms of men: Oh blessed day shall that be called, when Kings reign in the
Dominion of Gods pure, righteous, holy Spirit, then shall the meek of the earth
inherit their freedom, and he that is a peaceable man shall have the praise,
and the terror shall be to the evil doer, which never shall be renowned. O
sink down, sink down to Gods witness in your own hearts, which will bring you
into a sense of your own conditions, and also break the bonds of oppression. Oh
let not the cry of the oppressed be always against you, for our God is mighty
to save his people, and to destroy his enemies: but if he will not take
vengeance, we shall freely forgive them; for the Lord our God has given us of
his Spirit, to bear the contradiction of sinners, yea all their hard speeches
and cruelties, and to suffer long in patience, until the measure of their
iniquity be fully finished. And hereby know we, that we are of God, because he
has given us of his Spirit, which leads into unity and peace with himself, and
one with another, out of the enmity, wrath, malice, hatred, revenge and
persecution, which are all works of darkness, and brought forth by the children
of darkness; for we know such as live in these things, are not led by Christ's
spirit, and so are none of his, but against him in the enmity; no true
Christians, but of Antichrist and in the Heathenish nature; and these make war
against the Saints, who follow the Lamb, who cannot lift up a carnal weapon
against any man; yet in the patient suffering under the persecutor shall our
victory be obtained. But this may be a mystery to the children of darkness; yet
hear a little further, and I shall show you, thus it is, the innocent suffering
of Gods people shall reach to the witness of God even in their persecutors;
and when they smite and wound the innocent, God shall smite and wound them,
even the wicked in their own hearts; and thus the Lord will fight our battles,
and work freedom and redemption to his people. Therefore hear, hear and fear
the living God of the whole earth, who is a Spirit, and will judge the wicked
in their own hearts; yea, that is he that convinces the Transgressor for the
evil of his ways, and he it is that will make himself manifest to be a God
near at hand, though men have been looking, and seeking of him as one afar off,
yet our God is drawing near unto judgment, and the wicked shall know it, and
feel the rod of his wrath, even in their own hearts; this is the true and
living God, whom the Nations, in the ignorance of their minds make mention of,
but are estranged from him; and therefore does iniquity, transgression,
abomination, false worship, and idolatry abound in this Generation; and this
has grieved the Spirit of the Lord, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped,
reverenced, served, and submitted unto in the Spirit; and people being out of
this, all their outward observations and gatherings of assemblies, and talking
of Church and Church-worship is a practice not acceptable with the Lord, whilst
man is found out of the subjection to him in the Spirit; therefore let none
deceive themselves, the Lord our God will indeed not be mocked; but search your
selves, and see whom you yield subjection unto within, whether it be unto him
that reprove for sin, or unto him that leads into sin? and so he unto whom
obedience is yielded, the same is thy God; and the day is come that people are
to be tried and searched within, for the Lord requires obedience there, even in
the heart, that so man may be brought by the leading of his eternal power and
Spirit, out of the darkness, out of the spiritual wickedness, out of the
house of bondage, yea, to be quickened and made alive unto God again, and here
is the new man brought forth in Gods image, to glorify his Maker, to live unto
him and to serve him, yea to delight in the way of his Commandments: But all
that are out of this, are excluded out of the Kingdom, all wicked and envious
ones, persecuters and murderers, swearers and liars, and all that are in the
transgression of the pure Law written in the heart, these are shut out of Gods
Kingdom, whatever their professions are, names, and words, and fair professions
in outward appearance, cannot administer an entrance into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore now come to that which is more
excellent and acceptable with God, even the Light and Spirit in the inward
parts, thereby to be led out of sin, and transgression, and all the works of
darkness, out of wrath, malice, envy, persecution, and oppression; for the
Light and Spirit of the Lord leads out of these things, into truth and
righteousness, meekness and patience, into unity and peace with God, and one
with another; and these are the true Christians that are thus led, and thus
purified from uncleanness, by the Spirit and power of God in the inward parts;
and here is the true worship of God in the Spirit, and here have the children of
light that walk in the light, fellowship with God, and one with another, in the
light, and in the Spirit; and unto this must the gathering of the Nations be,
for all the Nations of them that are saved, must walk in the light of the Lord,
which leads out of the separation, uncleanness, and deeds of darkness, and
brings back again unto God, into the new and everlasting Covenant; and here is
the new and living way, wherein acceptance with God is found.

And now to conclude, This does the Lord require from you all, grieve not his
Spirit, provoke him not to wrath by persecuting of his Servants, do them no
harm; they are as dear to him as the apple of his eye; therefore oh take heed,
let not the guilt of these things lie upon your Consciences; for we testify of
a truth, whether you will hear or forbear, that our God will visit for these
things; and behold, this is the crying sin that draws down Gods judgment upon
a people, as in the days of old, was it not so with the Sodomites, who lived
in pride and fullness of bread? This God suffered long, but when they
persecuted righteous Lot, this brought his long-suffering to an end, and
judgment from heaven was revealed upon them; and this was an example for all
that might follow after, living in their ungodly conversation that they might
take warning not to persecute the righteous, least they perish by the same
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Oh that men would consider of the
things which belong unto their peace, before the decree of God be sealed
against them unto eternal condemnation.

And as for us, who are at this day a persecuted people* for Righteousness
sake, for the Name of Christ, we have received the Testimony of his Eternal
Spirit, that wrath is not in him against us, though he may suffer the enemy to
exercise cruelty upon us for a season, yet behold the Lot of our inheritance
shall not be always here: Therefore look above all these things, ye children
of the Light, ye Sons of Sions King, and Daughters of new Jerusalem, which
shall be gloriously situated, even upon the Holy Mountain, where none shall
make afraid, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon his people, and with his
Righteousness as with a garment shall they be covered. Oh the infiniteness of
that invisible glory and eternal inheritance of the Saints, which no mortal eye
can behold! Yet great things has God revealed unto us by his Spirit, and he
has sealed us for his own; Therefore let all the Saints rejoice in heart, and
bless, and praise, and magnify his Name, who lives for ever.

And what if the wicked will be wicked still, and the unrighteous hate to be
reformed, let us leave them to the execution of the eternal judgment from the
Lord our God; yet as we are moved in tender love to their souls, let us warn
them to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; and such as reject our message,
which is the message of the Lord, their blood be upon their own heads; and the
day comes, when this woeful lamentation shall be taken up by them, How have we
hated instruction and despised the day of healing?

Here follows some examples of Gods righteous judgment upon them that
persecuted his people in former generations.
CAin that old Persecutor about Religion, was banished and termed a fugative
and a vagabond in the earth, because of his persecuting of his brother about
Religion; for Cain envied and slew his brother, and wherefore was it? because
his brothers sacrifice was accepted, and his was not.

And read the 19th chapter of Genesis, and see and take notice what became of
the persecuting Sodomites, who beset Lots house where the Servants of God were,
and demanded them out of his house, for to do unto them even as their wicked
hearts were bent; but the Angel of God smote these persecutors with blindness,
verse. 11. and moreover the Angel said unto Lot, Take thy Wife and thy Daughters
etc. and go forth of the City, for the wickedness thereof is full, and it
shall be destroyed: and Lot did accordingly; and Gods judgment was revealed
from heaven in flames of fire upon the Sodomites, verse. 24, 25.

And consider King Pharaoh, that great persecutor and oppressor of Gods people,
how God plagued him, and his hosts of mighty men, because of their grievous
oppression of the seed that God had chosen and blessed; therefore was Pharaoh
and his mighty men plagued seven times, and at last an utter destruction came
upon them, and Pharaoh and his host with all the Egyptians were drowned in the
Red sea, Exodus 14. 27.

And consider what became of envious Haman, who prepared a gallows for
Mordecai, who was more righteous then himself. And Haman incensed the King
against Mordecai and the Jews, and gained an order to destroy the Jews
throughout all his dominion; but the God of heaven gave not license to this,
but confounded their conspiracies, and turned their determination backward; and
Haman was hanged upon the gallows which he built for Mordecai, Esth. 5. 14. And
thus Gods judgment was revealed upon him, and them that persecuted those that
were more righteous then themselves, read Ester 3. 4. and 5. Chapters.

And in the days of the Prophets amongst the Jews, God revealed his righteous
judgment upon them that persecuted about Religion, because they persecuted the
Prophets, and just men whom God sent unto them, therefore Gods wrath was
kindled against them, and the judgments written in the Book came upon them;
destruction upon destruction, they were driven out of their Country, and were
captives in a strange land, their Temple was destroyed, and desolation came
upon their Princely places, and a voice of woe, and misery, and great
lamentation was heard in all their borders; and this people God often warned by
his Prophets and Servants (as this generation has been) before his irrevocable
decree came upon them to utter destruction.

And take notice of Gods judgment upon Herod, for persecuting and murdering
of the people of God, read Acts 12. And it came to pass that the Angel of God
smote him, and he was eaten up of worms. This happened unto a persecuting King,
Acts 12. 13.

These examples of Gods judgment may serve to warn this generation, least by
their persecuting of Gods people they draw down the same judgments upon them;
for this is that crying sin which fills up the measure of iniquity, and draws
down Gods righteous judgment upon a rebellious people. Pharaoh had a day, and
the Jews of old had a day of visitation, before destruction came upon them; but
Gods love was not regarded and his judgment broke forth upon them: And now
England has a day, or a little time before Gods judgment be revealed unto
destruction upon all his enemies, except they repent.

The 25. of the 12. month, 166^ In Newgate, which has been often termed a Den
of Thieves, but may be called now an House of Prayer. John Higgins.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1661.


