A Satyr against Brandy.
Farewell damned Stygian Juice, that do bewitch,
From the Court Bawd, down to the Country Bitch;
Thou Liquid Flame, by whom each fiery Face
Lives without Meat, and blushes without Grace,
Sink to thy Native Hell to mend the Fire,
Or if it please thee to ascend yet higher,
To the dull Climate go, from whence you came,
Where Wit and Courage do require your Flame;
Where they Carouse it in Vesuvian Bowls,
To crust the Quagmire of their spungy Souls:
Had Dives for thy schorching Liquor cried;
Abraham in Mercy had his suit denied;
Had Bonner known thy force, the Martyrs Blood
Had hissed in thee, and saved the Nations Wood:
Essence of Ember, scum of melting flint,
With all the Native sparkles floating in it;
Sure the Hack-Chymist with his Cloveh foot,
All AEtna's simples in one Lymbeck put,
And double stilled, nay quintescenc'd thy Juice,
To charcoal Mortals for his future use.
Fire-ship of Nature, thou do doubly wound,
For they that graple thee, are burnt and drowned:
Gods past and future Anger breath in you
A Deluge and a Conflagration too.
View yonder Sott, I do not mean Sh --
Grilled all over, by thee, from head to foot,
His greasy Eyelids shoar'd above their pitch,
His Face with Carbuncles, and Rubies rich,
His Scull instead of Brains supplied with Cinder,
His Nose turns all his Handkerchiefs to Tinder;
His Stomach don't concoct, but bake his Food,
His Liver even vitrefies his Blood;
His trembling hand scarce heaves his Liquor in,
His Nerves all cracle under's Parchment Skin;
His Guts from Natures drudgery are freed,
And in his Bowels Salamanders breed.
The moveing Glass-house lightens with his Eyes,
Singes his Clothes, and all his Marrow frys,
Glows for a while, and then in Ashes dies.
Thus like a sham Promethius we find,
Thou stol'st a Fire from Hell, to kill Mankind.
But stay, least I the Saints dire Anger merit,
By stinting their Auxilliary Spirit.
I am informed, whatever we wicked think,
Brandy's reformed, and turned a godly Drink
Thou'st left thy old bad Company of Vermin,
The swearing Porters, and the drunken Carmen;
And the new drivers of the Hackney Coaches,
And now takst up with fage discreet debauches;
Thou freely dropst upon Gold Chains, and Furr,
And Sots of Quality thy Minions are.
No more shall thou foment an Alehouse brawl,
But the more sober Riots of Guild Hall;
Where by the Spirits fallible Direction,
We Reprobates once pol'd for an Election:
If this trade hold, what shall we Mortals do,
The Saints Sequester even our Vices too.
For since the Art of Whoring's grown precise,
And Perjury has got demurer Eyes,
It Is time, high time to circumcise the Gill,
And not let Brandy be Philistian still.

