THE STRENGTH OF THE SAINTS TO MAKE JESUS CHRIST Their STRENGTH. Which Heavenly
Skill was briefly Commended and Prescribed in a Morning Exercise in WESTMINSTER
ABBEY. the xixth. of April, 1648.

By THOMAS HILL D, D. and Master of Trinity College in CAMBRIDGE.

1 COR. 15. 7, 10. By the Grace of God I am that I am.

Gratia ipsa est boni in nobis creatrix.

Prosper de lib. Arb. Hanc abundantiorem Gratiam ita credimus potentem, ut
negemus vl^lentam.

Prosper de Vocat. Gent. lib. 2. c. 26. LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole at the
Printing-Presse in Cornhill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1648.

To The Right Honorable the Lords, the Noble Knights, and other Honored
Gentlemen of the Committee for the Managing the Affairs at WESTMINSTER.
E. Northumberl. E. Pembrook. E. Nottingham. E. Denbigh. E. Manchester, L.
Visc, Say and Seal, L. North. L. Mountague. L. Roberts. L. Howard. S. Gilbert
Gerard. S. John Dreydon. S. Robert Harley. S. Will. Strickland. S. Hen. Vane,
jun. S. Walt. Earl. S. Will. Massam. S. Robert Pie. S. John Trevor. S. Anth.
Irby. M. Solicitor. M. Rous. M. Ashurst. M. Reynolds. Denis Bond. Bolstred
Whitlock M. Guorden. M. Maynard. M. Lisle. M. Salwey. M. Wheeler. M. Hoyle
All Fidelity and happy Success in your High and Honorable Trusts, and the
discharge of your manifold Stewardships.

WHen I read over in my thoughts the pleasing story of Divine Providence, in
guiding the Honorable Houses of Parliament, in committing to you the Managing
of Westminster Affairs, both in reference to the Abbey and School, and observe
the happy fruits of your care (by Gods good hand upon you therein) in both
which I (though most unworthy) have been employed and entrusted by the favor
of those who had power; I think it my duty to take the first opportunity
publicly to acknowledge the mercy of God to many in your prudent Zeal for the
good of those Places, and with all thankfulness your most respective
acceptance of my poor endeavors therein. O how many do bless God for the
sweet change they find in their Morning Exercises; now they have rather the
means of a heart and life Religion amongst them. Not Pompous Altars only to
humor the Eyes, and taking Music to please their Ears. All such Let the
Bishops take care quod in Divino servitionon tam onerosa prolixitas quam devota
and integra brevitas servetur says Petrus de Alliaco consid. 3. v. Fast. Rerum
206. p.
tedious Ecclesia non assumit Musica instrumenta, sicut Cytharas and Psalteria,
indivinasliudes ne vidiatur I^dizar^. Aq. secunda secundae. 9 21. Art. 2.
Chauntings with Music and multiplied repetitions did little Edify the mind
of Hearers; had little saving influence upon their Hearts; which many will tell
you to the Praise of God in these Morning Exercises they have found. Neither
has your industrious Love of Westminster School been fruitless, which is an
high point of Wisdom in seeking the regulating and furnishing Schools with
able Masters (which will never be done without more encouraging Salaries) Good
Ministers, good Magistrates, and good Schoolmasters, are like to make that
place happy where they meet. And what School calls for more vigilant
superintendency than this of Westminster it being a most famous Nursery,
subservient to Innes of Court where many Parliament men, Nobles and Gentry in
their tender years, may be either seasoned with good, or desperately leavened
with evil, and not only supplying other Colleges, but having a special
subordinate reference to the two great Colleges of both Universities. (if they
come there with a Canker at the Root, they are not easiely recovered. There is
a sensible alteration Trinity Coll. in Cambridge. Christ's Church in Oxford.
which two Col. ordinarily receive more scholars yearly from Westmin. ni
fallor, than are sent from Eaton and Winchester. Pueri Ingenui. Pueri Ingeniosi.
(blessed be God) much more civility in the Schools than formerly: (the care
of Mr. Buzby in instructing the Scholars, he being both very able and
industrious, deserves encouragement) yet nonnulla desiderantur. I will
confidently express my thoughts, were the Moralls, and Spiritualls in
Westminster-Schoole answerable to the Intellectualls, it would be inferior (to
say no more) to none in England. Any that knows it will acknowledge that there
is a kind of hereditary raised genius, entayled upon them: and were the
Scholars always as ingenuous, at they are ingenious, we should much more
rejoice in their transplanting to us.

Your Noble Candor will allow me a wonted (...) and encourage me to speak out,
especially the Election being at hand Be pleased to accept of what plain hints
follow from him who desires faithfully Humble Desires tendered to the
Honorable Committee for Westmin. school.
to serve you in your advancing the Public.

In your Elections its good to beware of Error in the first Concoction, I mean
in your choice of youths into Kings Scholars places; it is expected then, that
in time they should be elected to one of the Colleges (for ordinarily the
whole seventh Form, have been by desert or favor removed; if so, you will send
some Droans amongst us, which will hinder the Bees, or if they stay in the
School still, they will be there as Slugs and Pull-back examples to others;
they being habituated in After 18. years of age by Statute they should be
turned out of the Schools.
infectious courses: And if you omit to elect them, they must (being
superannuated) be most disgracefully thrown off, unless you will please to
raise Means to dispose of them in some other good callings; which were
honorable indeed.

2. That there may be a Godly able Catechist to instruct them in the Principles
of Religion, (such a one the Statutes of the College allowed and appointed an
honorable yearly stipend for him) frequently, And withal that they (though
but circularly by 3, or 4 in a morning) may have leave to come to the Morning
Sermon in the Note.
Abbey. I know one of the Scholars of singular hopes now in the University,
who has punctually discovered unto me, how God was pleased powerfully to open
his eyes, and to turn him from darkness to light in one of those Morning
Sermons.

3. I humbly conceive the Statutes of Westminster Coll. need reveiwing; there
is such a form of Grace (as it is vulgarly called) before and after Meat
prescribed therein, as at the first sight you will conclude savoures very much
of the darkness of those Popish times wherein they were first penned.

4. If there were now and then an inspection, examination, and trial of their
Scholars progress in Piety and Learning, with a visible encouragement of such
as do well, it would be in stead of many Spurs, to such as are ingenious. Mr.
Buzby has often assured me, that any one coming in there, and putting them to
versify, does incredibly whet up, and raise their Phansies, which would be much
more prevailing if Persons of Quality would honor them with their presence.

5. There is I fear some corner in the School full of Leaven which spreals
most unhappily: Your inquisition after, purgation of it, likewise Exodus 12. 7
Electors by Statute the Dean of Westminster and his Assistant: M. of Trin. Col.
came. and his Assistant; Dean of Christ's church. Oxf. with his Assistant, and
the School Master.
the removing it utterly, (as the Jews were wont to do all Leaven out of their
honses, with burning and execration of it, would he of singular use. I take the
boldness to tender this to all the other Electers, and would charge it
conscientiously upon my self. I doubt there is much of this Leaven lurks
amongst youths in the seventh Form, (let the most vigilant Master do what he
can.

1. When they are advanced thither, they are all (I think) Monitors, wherein
diverse of them show most Tyranni^^^ ^ride, making inferiors sell their Books
sometimes to serve their Lusts, and humor their prodigality, (whch they will
not forget at the University) else they must expect to be in the Black Bill.

2. The aull slugs stay longest there, and they being radicated in Evil like
rotten Apples upon an heap, too often make others putrid, remiss, negligent,
learn to Swear. Lie, etc.

3. There are others, being emproved in their Intellectuals, grow so full of
Selfe-confidence, that they shamefully degenerate when they come to the
University. Hence ( Monacho tepido Abbati calido Episcopo tepido Archiepiscopo
pergidis
as once the Pope wrote to Baldwin) when at Westminster, Golden Scholars,
afterward when in the University, Leaden Sophisters, and most drossie
Batchelors, unprofitable Burdens in the place suckirg the fatness of the soil
etc.

4. Their long continuance at School, especially of after elected to Cambridge
or Oxford, makes them grow headstreng too often and (...)
rebellious against the Master, and steel others as well as themselves, with
impudence, which we find after by sad experience.

In the lact place, unless there be much circumspection in the choice of their
Tutors, especially in these times when they come to the Universityes, all your
former care may be lost. It is a lamentable spectacle to see goodly ships
miscarry in the Haven for want of an able and vigilant Pilot. Many very
hopeful youths miserably undone for want of learned, godly, grave, and prudent
Tutors, and such as are hearty friends to a through Reformation, which makes
many tender hearted Parents bleed with perpetual sorrow.

I hope the Lord, who has already done much by you, will make you yet more
renowned Instruments of his service, as in many other things, so in your
encouraging and promoting Piety and Learning in Westminster; If he please to
honor you to purge Schools and Universities, you may with more encouragement
raise Feoffces to buy in Above 9000. Churches and Chapels in England and
Wales. J wish half so many Godly, Learned Ministers for the present.
impropriations, you will soon (by Gods blessing) have able men to send abroad
as Evangelicall Preachers till you have enough to fix in all places, and good
lustices of Peace, as also solid, able, Parliament men all which my Lords and
Gentlemen, is the earnest Prayer of

Your most unworthy and humble Servant THOMAS HILL.
Westminster, May, 3. 164^
To the Right Reverend, Doct Stanton, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Herles, Mr. Nie, Mr.
Whitaker, and Mr. Strong. Morning Lecturers in Westminster Abbey, by the
appointment of the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, Abundance of the Spirit of
JESUS CHRIST.
YOu may justly wonder (and it may be will blameme) that I should be so forward
to appear (especially at this time being weakened by a quartane Ague of above
seven Months continuance) in so Dedecus Medicorum.
public a Dress, which, (what ever little warmth of Spirit may (by the good
hand of God arise to my self in the preparation of it) yet will have very
little beauty in the eyes of others, when it comes abroad. But (so far as I
understand my own deceitful heart) I can truly say, I have reckoned this one
of the most smarting twigges in this Rod, They only live to the public who
can act for the public.
that by my long sickness, I have been so much dead to the public; and
therefore whereas I might have preached many Sermons (had the Lord been pleased
to continue my health, to one Congregation, I may now in this way communicate
one plain Sermon to many Congregations.

And withal I can ingeniously say, I have watched for an opportunity publicly
to congratulate your most advantageous improvement for the Churches service, in
the continuance of your peaceable Gospel employment so happily begun in these
Morning Exercises in Westminster Alii dolant lapides vos vero Architectos. Acts
19. 23, 26.
Abbey where you preach to Builders of Church and State, and the rather because
I believe at first we all thought who were designed to that service, there
would be no small stir about this way, as Paul said in the Acts, being
Demetrius and his Company were like to have their Trade marred in preparing for
their great Diana, by the light and power of Gospel Truth. But I hope we shall
all the more confidently trust God whilst we live for the subduing of opposite
Spirits, in the midst of any threatening Difficulties, when he leads us forth
into his work, b^y the experience of his good hand upon us here.

And I conceive I have as much reason with humble thankfulness to the God of
Peace to congratulate that sweet, harmonious (I had almost From March 1643.
till Febr. 1645, when I left it being sent down to Cambridge. 3 John 9.
said unparalleld) Union amongst you, of which I was a joyful witness for
well nigh two years together, whereas so many other Lectures have been
shattered by Envy, and the spirit of Diotrephes some one amongst them affecting
the pre-eminence. As also that visible success in the fruit of your pains,
and the general acceptance you have, manifested by the numerous and almost
uniforme frequency of the Auditors in Winter as well as Summer, whereas the
Peoples coming with respect of persons has broken the neck of many other
good Lectures. Only herein my joy is somewhat damped, that I was not more
useful a (...) when I was engaged in that honorable service with you: blessed
be the Lord of the Harvest, who has in mercy thrust forth such a faithful
Labourer into this large Field, who may supply Mr. Strong.
my defects in being more helpful unto you. The Lord Jesus who has promised
not only to drop but power out his Spirit as a precious fruit of his
ascension, give you as able a Teacher in the place of that Man of God, Mr.
Palmer, who now in Heaven inherits the sweet fruit of his sincere and
indefatigable pains in the work of the Lord, whose Name will (I hope) be
precious in Westminster for ever.

The mighty Spirit of the Lord Jesus work in you, for you, and by you
powerfully, and grant you may go forth conquering to conquer, rescuing many
poor captive souls from under the power of the Devil: Be faithful in his
service unto the death, and he will give you the Crown of life. Rev. 2. 10.
Farewell in Him.

Entertain this with your wonted candor from your weak Fellow Soldier, for
Christ, and most unworthy Brother in Him. Thomas Hill.
From my lodging in Westminster, May. 1. 1648.
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength.
2 Timothy 2. 1. Thou therefore my son be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus.
O Blessed Paul, what an happy improvement did thou make of all thy glorious
visions of Christ, and of thine heavenly rapture into such near communion with
thy Savior. Thereby thou did gain such transcendent opinions of him, that as
a man top-full of him thou did speak the greatest things of him. Witness the
vast differeence between Saul and Paul. Act. 9. 1. 2. There Saul like a furious
Apparritor to the Jewish high Commission, breaths out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord. And then Paul after Jesus Christ had met him
so effectually, verse. 20 straight way Called Paul after his converting Sergiua
Paulus.
he preached Christ in the Synagogues, that he is the son of God.

O admirable power of grace! straightway after, being a persecuting Saul, is
now become a gracious preaching Paul. He felt the happy influence of this
grace in the Text.

Its observed that you have Christ mentioned in Paul's Epistles 223 times, and
Jesus at least 233 times. To make up this number, Paul contributes very much in
his Epistles; His spirit was so brimfull of Christ, that his Pen overflowes
with his Name; whom several times he mentions Christ in 10 verses in the
beginning of the first Chapter of the first Epistle Note.
to the Corinthians. Upon very good reason might Paul thank Christ that enabled
him and counted him faithful, putting him into the Ministry. Fidelity and
ability two great mercies when bestowed on a Minister Upon this stock of grace
in Christ Non significat imbecillas vires a ugere, vel quasi collapsas
sustinere, sed vire^ ei induere cui ne voluntas quidem in sit, into vero qui in
contrariam partem totus feratur Beza in lo cum.
did the Martyrs spend when so victorious. Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35. Who through
faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the
mouths of Lions, qnenchea the violence of fire, cscaped the edge of the sword,
(a) out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to slight
the Armies of aliens, women received their dead raised to life again; and
others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better resurrection. What a full and rich expression is this, Out of weakness
were made strong, nothing previously preparatory in them toward this strength,
out of weakness made strong, they were first receptive of strength from
Christ, before they could be active for Christ; This leads me to the second
observation, the former having been handled in the foregoing Sermon, which was
this,

1. There is a spring of strengthening Grace in Christ Jesus, for the advantage
of Saints.

The second observation, which is this follows, naturally arising out of the
words.

It is the strength of Christians, their only strength, to learn Doct. 2.
how to make the Lord Jesus their strength;

You have an excellent place to confirm it in Ephesians. 6. 10. Finally my Brethren,
be strong in the Lord and in the power of hus might: Be strong, good reason for
it: but where lies the strength? in the Lord, that is the former point, and in
the power of his might; Go not out in any strength of your own, any confidence
of it, for all is but impotency; but in the power of his might: This is very
significantly in the Text by the Apostle Paul: Possibly there may be such an
Emphasis in the composition, some (...).
intention; he does not say, there is a strength within thee: Three things for
the explication.
But where shall I have it? from Christ; it is the strength of Christ Jesus; in
him is all thy strength: I shall branch this before I come to the Application,
to three heads: First, I will endeavor as God shall please to enable, to
demonstrate the wisdom of this course the wisdom of it, for a Christian to
learn this heavenly skill, how to make the Lord Jesus his strength;

2. To show you the effectual purposes of it, what good ends it serves to:

3. The possibility of it;

1. The wisdom of it; and that will appear upon these 1. The wisdom of
Saints making Christ their strength.
four considerations.

1. If you do but think upon your own impotency, reflect upon your selves
when you have been at the best, when you have thought your mountain has been
immovable, and you have stood most sure, have not you sometimes soon after
driven 1. Consider.
very heavily in duties, as if your chariot wheels had been knocked off, and
when you have thought to have done best, you come off most dryly? yea I am
confident that diverse Ministers understand this, and it may be others in part
Est spiritualis ariditas.
too, they have been preparing a sermon, and thought, O certainly, this passage
will take, and it may be win souls, and when they in preaching or in praying
have had some proud reflections upon such expressions, enlargements or hints
from heaven, a little weed of pride has begun to spring up, and Note.
(men love to much to look upon their own seeming beauty, and their own
flashes,) has provoked God suddenly to withdraw his spirit, presently thy
strength has failed, and thou art at a loss; what does this argue there is an
impotency in thy 2. Consider.
self.

As there is an impotency in thy self, and therefore it is thy wisdom to
make Jesus Christ thy strength, so there is an insufficiency in all the best of
Ordinances, they are but created means at the most, and further then the
Creator continues to be a Preserver, and a Governor, and an Actor of his own
workmanship, it can do nothing: many that lived under the most pure and
precious Ordinances, where Paul was a Preacher, yea where Jesus Christ preached
so many powerful sermons upon earth, yet you know there were Scribes and
Pharisees still that did imprison those precious Gospel truths, that not only
for the excellency, but for the novelty of them, should have been entertained,
(Men use to bid welcome new things;) yet all would not do, (not as to the
Ordinances themselves for then all would have been converted) only as Jesus
Christ came in and seized upon such a soul, so many and no more werewon upon
to embrace him; but self and Ordinances, as is spoken as I remember in that of
Job: the latter end, Job. 28, 12, 14. etc.
concerning wisdom: c. 28. v. 12, 14. etc. depth says it is not in me and
earth and sea, and all disclame wisdom, it is not in me, we have heard of the
fame thereof, but it is not in us; and so indeed may all the Ordinances say
strength is not in me; and Ordinances indeed will speak great things of the
strength of grace in Christ Jesus; but they will tell you, though it be set
forth, it is not to be had in us, it is to be had only in Jesus Christ himself.

3. You may please to consider this, that Jesus Christ has strength confined
to him has an office to that purpose, a commission 3. Consider.
under the broad seal of Heaven; all things are put into his hand the Spirit of
strength and all; God the Father loved him and has put all things into his
hand, He being Immanuel God man, and the only mediator to bring sinful man
into a capacity to Joh. 3 34.
receive grace and glory from God 2 Pet. 1. 3. And thus all this strength is
concenterd in Jesus Christ, and so confined to him that there is not the least
drop or dram of spiritual strength, but what comes derivatively and
redundantly from him: Trust in the Lord Jehovah, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength; he was Abraham's Rock to anchor upon, and though many
waves may have beat upon it since, Isa 26. 4.
yet it is not wasted; the same Rock in David's time, the same Rock in Paul's
time, the same Rock for his poor Saints in (...) In Jehovah petra seculorum.
this time; blessed be his name, he is the Rock of Ages, and therefore
everlasting strength always to overflow to his people.

Fourthly and lastly, It is a high point of wisdom, because a Christian will
have so much need of this strengthening grace from Christ there is an hint to
this purpose in, the 6. Ephesians. 10. 4. Consider.
a place I named before; there is a (...): Finally my Brethren, as if Paul
should have said, I have been leading you through the great and mysterious
depths of the Gospel matters of speculation, in the Chap. 1, 2, and 3. I have
been leading you through the practicals of Christianity; in the fourth I have
been putting you upon the exercise of relative graces, in the fifth and sixth
telling you what husbands should do to their wives, and wives to their
husbands; parents to their children, and children to their parents: But there
is another piece behind that must not be forgotten, you must make account to
conflict with temptations, and therefore endeavor after conflicting graces; you
must wrestle many a fall with the Devil, before you go to heaven; a you must
wrestle with God, so Conflicting graces very necessary to enable us to out
wrestle the Devils temptation. Luke 18 21, 22.
you must wrestle against the Devil; you will not be able to do this by any
strength of your own, the Devil is a strong man, and there must be one that is
stronger then he, that must be able to bind him, and take away his armor from
him, and that is only Jesus Christ; therefore a high point of wisdom it will
be for all the Saints to learn this heavenly skill, how to make Jesus Christ
their strength; the next thing I proposed was this.

To what effectual purpose is this, for the Saints to be at cost and charges
to learn this skill? 2. To what good purposes Saints should learn to make
Christ their strength.


1. Hereby their spiritual and eternal estate will be much more confirmed and
settled, being established in the faith, being rooted and grounded in Christ,
in t e 2 Coloss. 6, 7. and you shall find all this is by being in Christ, for
he wishes them in the 8. verse. take heed of vain Philosophy, or any thing
which is not after Christ, any thing which should draw you from Christ; your
rooting, your establishing lies in Christ, he is the root of your strength,
and he it the foundation of your ability.

2. It will conduce to this purpose to enable you to perform good duties, and
that with life and power; it is not enough for Christians to have a formality
of godliness, an outward form, that is a pretty step, and very desirable;
but you should have truth of godliness, that is a better step; and I will add
this, there is a best step, not only truth, but strength; you must not have a
form of godliness and deny the power thereof; in the 2. of Timoth. 3, 5. such
persons are one of the Catalogue that shall help to make the last days
perilous 2 Timothy 3. 1, 5.
, and indeed the more dangerous, because the less discernable.

3. It will conduce much to this happy purpose, to fit you for variety of
conditions; you may be led forth to prosperity, you may have sudden removes
and changes from advesiry to prosperity, and from prosperity to adversity, and
therein many loose themselves; It is clean water indeed, that when the glass
is shaked, there is no filth appears: O they are rooted Christians in Christ,
and have a great deal of strength, that walk unchangeably with God in
changes, that are the same in all varieties; (...).
(Solomon and Ezekiah lost themselves therein;) this you cannot do but through
Christ; Paul had learned particular lessons for particular estates, I have
learned to want, I have learned to abound, and whence? I can do all things
through Christ enabling me; Phil. 4. 12. And from the grace of Christ enabling
him. You may be led forth to searching temptations; and then you will be at great
losses, and plunges, without this strengthening grace of Christ; A little
temptation will prostrate a strong Saint, if he be left to himself; it must be
the issuing So Moses (...), when a train for his Court preferment had been
laying 40. years Heb. 11. 25. 26 Mal. 2. 4.
of continual supplies, from the Lord Jesus Christ that must animate; As
constancy of supply from the Sun, does quicken the plants here; when he
withdrawes the sap retires into the root, and trees look as if they were
almust dead, when he returns, he brings a spring with him; so indeed does the
Sun of righteousness, into poor and (seemingly at least) withered or dying
souls: Fifthly and lastly, and that may add a very great Emphasis to all the
rest.

It will conduce much to this purpose; To have anhappy return of their prayers.
If his words abide in you, and you abide in him in the 15 John 8. Ask what you
will and it shall be done unto you; Ask what you will, there is none in the
world but are desirous, in some degree and often moved very inordinatly, to
have their wills the great controversy on foot upon earth from time to time Note
and that that has cost so much bloodshed in England, and in other placesis
this, Who should have their will; now if you would have your will, I mean here
a rectified will, a holy, a gratcious will, if you would have it fulfilled and
gratifyed, let the words of Christ abide in you, and do you abide in him; get
that strength from him, from his quickening word and quickening spirit that
hereby you may be fruitful in the strength of his grace, and you shall have
your wills, the third thing proposed, for explication follows. 3. possibility
of obtaining this skill to make christ our strength.


The possibility of this; how is it possible that Jesus Christ's strength should
be conveyed to us, that we should make another strength, our strength? The
Papists have a great quarrel against justification by imputed righteousness,
and they call it putative, and take upon them (at least) that they do not, or
will not understand, how it is possible for a man to be justified by another
righteousness; Can a man be warmed by another clothes, (say they) can a man
be wise by another wisdom? Note
I answer, it is very easily possible, if that another man's wisdom be made
ours, or another man's clothes be put upon us; so this is possible, if Jesus
Christ's strength be made ours; that is the thing, the Apostle presses it here,
be strong in the Grace in Jesus Christ, let this be your care, how to make the
strength of Christ yours; and therefore (I say) this possibility will be
reduced to act in these three particulars;

First, by our Union with Christ, when once you are united unto Jesus Christ,
what is Christ is yours, for union makes way Its possible upon a threesold
account.
to communion; If there be a Union with him, there is a Communion with him, and
a Communication of what he has to us; 1. By our union with Christ.
As he communicates his righteousness for our justification, communicates his
glory for our glorification so he communicates his spirit for our strength and
holiness, and also conveyes quickening grace to us first by our union with him.

2. By impressions from him; for when ever Jesus Christ draws us to union with
him, he then draws us to communion with him in By impressions from his spirit.
his Ordinances; If we indeed have communion with him, we go away with an
Ordinance tincture, a Gospel impression upon our spirits, in some degree molded
into that word, that was made known 2 Cor. 2. 18.
to us, and delivered to us, that you think, and speak, and act, in some
conformity to that word that was delivered to you; and this is the blessed
advantage of this mornings exercise, if people have hearts to make use of them,
that before the Devil has Romans 6. 17.
taken possession, of your souls, the spirit of God shall prevent him, and
here you shall have the Gospel, come warm next your hearts, and that you may
have something there, that may leave such a tincture that may fortify you
against the incursions of temptations, and the ordinary invasions of the devil,
O that Westminster Citizens would consider it, and know the day of their
visitation.
here is strengthening grace conveyed by these impressions: as when a man
throws a stone out of his hands, Philosophers have very great disputes how it
is possible that a stone should move, they tell you there is an impression of
something upon it vis impressa. I am sure, here is an impression, when Jesus
Christ comes into the soul, and draws nigh to it, and puts Fortit^r and
suaviter movet.
somewhat into it, and by a sweet and a loving violence, carries on the soul
in duty.

Thirdly, As by a union with him, as by an impression made 3. By influence from
Christ.
upon us, by him, so by a continued influence from him; It is not enough to
have unio^ with him, it is not enough to have an impression made upon our
spirits from him, bulit is his continued influence that does it; when there is
an obstruction in the passages, either betwixt the Liver, and Heart, and the
Vitals and other parts, or betwixt the head, and the parts whence sense and
motion should be conveyed; in any of those passages when there is any
obstruction, at what a loss are we presently because the continual influence
is hindered when there is no such thing that does obstruct, and hinder the sweet
intercourse betwixt the soul and Christ, and illapses from the spirit of
Christ into our spirits; O it is that that does indeed strengthen and animate
them; and so you see the possibility: Here is some seasonable use in the first
place.

I hope therefore, if it be so, you that are standers by (as Use
I doubt there may be some here are still unacquainted with Jesus Christ, and
at an unhappy distance from him, all this while (the Lord if it be his will
discover so much of his goodness to you, that you may long after intimacy with
him,) no such friend on this side heaven unto you) I say if there be such
strength in him, and it be such a high point of wisdom for Christians to make
him their strength, for all supplies, O think the better of him, I beseech you
do not entertain any hard thoughts of Jesus Christ; let not either the
weaknesses or impotencies of Gods people, nor their failings, nor any
prejudicate opinions that carnal men would scatter amongst you, any of your
fellow drunkards, or Atheists, or Formalists, or what ever they are concerning
Jesus Christ, let not them nourish in you a low opinion, it is the way to undo
you; for all your strength lies in Him, you will never be able to overcome the
least sin, or passion nor the least temptation without the powerful grace of
Jesus him; (and then indeed you are everlastingly undone, if you cannot
overcome the least evil;)

Alas what will become of poor souls? it would grieve one to think of it, that
it may be are under the greatest snares, as of bad company for 20 years
together, so hedged in with carnal friends and acquaintance, poor children
with carnal fathers and mothers, and it may be a very carnal wife, sometimes
a most carnal husband, and here she is entangled, tyrannized over etc.
Brethren, I beseeh you consider it well, and you that have got any acquaintance
with Jesus Christ already, O pity poor souls that do not know where their
strength lies, nor have learned how to make use of him, and use all the Art you
can, how to breed such opinions in them, of Jesus Christ, and his grace, that
they may fall in love with him; It may be when they come to die, then they will
send for their Minister, and then they would hear something of Christ. O but
there is a sad story of a mean person that made love to one that had some kind
of height of Condition, who would not; when he was grown great, then she would
have had him, then he would not, he returned her this Very dangerous to put off
Christ.
answer, you were wise, I am wise, you woul not before, now I will not; what if
Jesus Christ should return you this answer, when you are upon your fick beds,
and you send for your Ministers, and nothing will satisfy you, but the
Communion then, though Contemnere Sacramenta, damat non illa non babere.
you cared not for Communion with Christ in your health neither can you make
out upon any clear grounds of Scripture, why you should then so much desire it;
and you would then it (may be) be absolved though you have no evidence at al in
scripture for it, but what if Jesus Christ should return you this answer? I
will lock up my Ministers Spirit, that it may be he shall not be able to pray
for you, or at least lock up Heaven gates against Jer. 11. 14. and 14. 11.
his prayers, that he will not hear; and so upon this ground you are for ever
undone, if millions of Angels, if all the glorified Saints and Angels in
Heaven, should join their prayers together, to beseige the Throne of grace for
you, they could not prevail; and therefore let that be your care, I beseech
you, to labor to gain good opinions of Jesus Christ, in them that they may
heartily embrace him.

If this be so, that it is the only strength of Christians, to make Jesus
Christ their strength, give me leave to commend a friendly, Use 2.
a brotherly caution to you at this time, Take heed of resting Caution.
upon any thing below Jesus Christ, for so far as you fall short of Him, so far
you fall short of strength; when you would attempt any thing, and you think to
catch hold of such a rope, or lay hold of such a pole, if you be to go over a
bridge, and you come short of it, down you may fall off the bridge, and break
your neck; and truly so it is, with many thousand souls, they have wishings and
wouldings, and some dull vellieties, some lazy purposes, and promises,
sick-bed-vows they have, but alas, all this false short of Christ, and so far
they shall fall short of heaven, and roar eternally in hellish torments, in a
remediless estate, bewailing themselves, that they have no better improved
Jesus Christ in the day of their Visitation, when He did with so much loving
importunity and with so much unwearied patience stand Rev. 3. 20.
and knock at the door, Oh then it will be too late, it may be then you will weep
over your selves, as Jesus Christ did over Jerusalem, Oh that I had known the
day of my Visitation, but now I see these things are hid from my eyes, and now
eternal desolation in the depth of hellish torments will be my remediless
portion; Oh! how sad will this be; therefore accept of this Caution, and these
are four friendly Items under it.

First, I beseech you beware, that you do not rest upon your own preparations
for Ordinances: It is a very commendable thing, I 1. Friendly Item.

1 Rest not upon your own Preparations for ordinances


would have you pray that you may pray, and I would have you draw nigh, and
make use of secret Communion with God, before you are to come to a Communion,
and when you come to seek Communion with Him in a Sermon, let that be your
great care, but take heed you do not rest upon your own preparation when you
have prepared; for if you advance them into the Throne of Jesus Christ, and
rest upon them, when you should rest only upon Him, truly it is the way to make
all your preparations miscarry, and in stead of fruit, you will have dry breasts,
and a miscarrying womb; you will have nothing at all come to any perfection; let
the Saints that are acquainted with such trading at the Throne of grace, (as I
hope diverse of you are) reflect and consult sometimes with their own
experience, if it has not bin so; Have not you when you have prayed very much
before a Sermon, (it may be) got little by the Sermon, though it was a very
wholesome one? Have not you many times when you thought you had bin prepared,
and having kept a secret day of humiliation, (if there were no public
opportunities) before a Communion, have not you found that sometimes you have
had even then lesser comfort at communion? what is the reason of this? Though
God does ordinarily dispense mercy, according to our care to prepare, yet
sometimes he will not do it, and then especially, when there is any little
carnal dependence Note.
upon what we have done, for we may be carnally dependant upon Spiritual
preparations for Spiritual duties: when there is the least degree of carnal
dependence upon our preparations, he will not bear any thing, to be a Corrival
with Jesus Christ, and therefore he will let us see, that we shall fall short
for that time of what we expected, and so do us good, and make us more fit
another time.

Secondly. As I would have you beware of resting in your preparations for an
Ordinance, so do not rest upon your enlargments 2. Friendly Item.

Rest not upon your enlargements in duty Jude 10. 20.


in an Ordinance; It may be you have a Springtide of assistance comes in, a
Minister preaches with great presence of the Spirit of God, and a Saint prays
(as we find it) in the Holy Ghost, finds the holy Spirit of God leading him
from Petition to Petition, and melting him with brokenness, when he is
confessing sin, and filling him with rejoicing, when he is remembering mercy,
and raising him with a high wing (as it were) of importunity, when he is
begging of favor; as it was an admirable temper in holy Bradford, that he was
not content, till he found God coming in to his spirit, with several
dispensations, according to the several parts of his Prayer? Sometimes a
Minister, and a Saint finds it thus: And so in other holy Ordinances, if you go
away as soon as ever Duty is done, and stroke your selves, Oh! what an admirable
prayer was here: and surely I shall do well this day, now, and I shall be able
to wrestle with all temptations, I have prayed well in the morning, and I have
felt God with me; this is the way to miscarry, thousands have found it, and I
am sure some Note.
of us can seal to it, when they have thought they have prayed with most
assistance from God, and have bin warmed in the morning; but the weeds spring
up even when the weather is dry, you that converse with gardens know it, you
need never sow weeds; no more need you in your hearts, they will come up fast
enough, an evil weed called Pride comes up, which grieves the Spirit of God,
that when we come to pray next, it may be we pray most dully, and flatly, and
can say little or nothing; and when we come to preach next, yea sometimes when
we come to preach the same Sermon again; this is certain, Ministers find they
have preached such a Sermon in such a place with very much enlargment, it may
be God gave in some soul, and quickn'd some others by Mr. Richard Rogers of
Weathers field in Essex, the Author of that admirable Book of 7. Treatises.
it, and they hearing of it, do grow proud of it, come to preach the same
Sermon and think this will do as much again, no such matter, they draw it out
so heavily, and so dully as if it were not the same Sermon. As I could name you
a most famous man, as any of his time in England (no dishonor to him) who
having preached the same Sermon at his own Church with very much assistance,
and going abroad, and one of his neighbors with him, hearing from him the same
Sermon, saw him at some loss, coming home, talked together, Sir (says he) did
you find Gods assistance this day as you were wont? I never heard you in my
poor conceit so much out as to day; O it is true, (brother, says he) yet I
hope, though it were one of the worst Sermons I ever preached for others, God
may make it one of the best Sermons that ever I preached for my self; and truly
God does so, often there is a wonderful wisdom in it: let every one of us take
heed of resting upon any enlargements in Duties.

Thirdly, Do not rest upon the Comforts you have in a Duty, or 3. Friendly Item.

Rest not upon your comforts in or after Duty.


after a Duty; It may be, when you have bin at a Duty, and have had soul
Ravishments, O now you think, my nest is built very high, and my rock is firm,
and I shall go on vigorously: Chrysostom has a good saying, Me thinks (says
he) a Saint, when he comes from a Sacrament, should be able to fly in the face
of the Devil, and in every Temptation, and though he walk in the midst of
snares, he will be able to encounter with them all. Comforts (...).
are very sweet things, and indeed strengthenning things, The joy of the Lord,
is our strength, says Nehemiah; nothing more animates souls than joy, and when
they are in the most cheerful frame, Neh. 8. 10.
then in the most praying frame; only here is the danger, If we rest upon those
joys and comforts, we provoke God to withdraw them; for delicatissima, I Will
not say only dilicata, but delicatissima, res est Spiritus sanctus, the most
choice and tender thing in the world, you must deal most tenderly with it; it
is the holy Spirit, the holy Ghost, and it delights to dwell in none but a
clean, pure Temple, most cleanly swept: Christians should Note.
not only have neat houses, but neat hearts, if they will delight to have the
Spirit of God dwell in them; and therefore not any pride spring up even when
they have most ravishing comforts.

Fourthly. If we would have much strength of grace from 4. Friendly Item.

Rest not upon your Grace received from an Ordinance


Christ (the Lord set it upon us all, I desire to preach to my self in it as
well as to you) As we should not rest upon Preparations for Ordinances,
Enlargements in Ordinances, nor Comforts by Ordinances; so not in Grace
received from Ordinance. You will say; This is a strange thing, Not in Grace
received! What shall we rest upon then? What, the Text will tell you, not in
Grace received, not in your habitual grace, you have intrinsecally in your
selves, but (...), in that grace that is in Christ Jesus; there you must rest;
And why so? because indeed that Grace is in him, not only Originally from him,
but it is dependantly Note.
upon him, and by a voluntary communication from him: It is true, he is a fire
that warmes you, but it is not by any natural necessity, though he has
promised to Baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire, yet it is by way of free
promise, Mat. 3. 11.
though he be a Sun, a Sun of righteousness, yet he does not issue forth his
beams naturally, but spontaneously, he can Eclipse himself, Mal. 4. 2.
as to us, when he pleases; though he be a Fountain, a full Fountain, enough
for Judah and Jerusalem, and for all the sinners in the world to bathe in, yet
he is a Fountain that can lock Zach. 13. 1.
up himself when he pleases, and with hold his own streams and choose whether
he will overflow or no; therefore remember this still, you must not rest upon
the grace received; It was Peter's case, and that exposed him to that danger, he
was full of conciet, and self-confidence, and he had grace; Lord, Though all
forsake thee, yet I will not, and soon after did Peter forsake, and deny Mat.
26. 33.
his Master, forsake and deny him, yea and forsware him, though still there was
so much grace in Jesus Christ as to pity him, and you do not find Perter so
confident afterward, when Christ said to him, in John, Peter, do thou love
me more then all these? No comparative words now, not a tittle, no more, then,
Lord, Joh. 21. 15. 16. 17.
thou know I love thee, Peter, do thou love me? Lord thou know I love
thee; Peter do thou love me more then all these? still, Lord Peter
confidently appeals to Christ, but no self confidence stirring.
thou know all things, thou know I love thee; he had denied him thrice,
Christ would put questions proportionably to him, but no such answers stirring,
Peter was whipped with his self-confidence, and the woeful fruits of it, and in
a good degree it was purged out of him; It was a lesson well worth the
learning, though it cost the whipping, it made amends abundantly by the grace
of Christ overflowing. It is observable amongst the Eclesiastical stories, that
the primirive Christians were so Heavenly, so Spiritual, that when they met
together, they would salute one another; Christ is risen from the dead; I would
and were it the Lords (...): Some add (...).
will, we were more acquainted with it, one would reply again, of a truth he is
risen, of a truth he is risen; Oh that we were better practiced in this also,
it may be when we meet, we say, Good Morrow, how do your wife and children? how
do all at home? Come, shall we go drink our mornings draught? What will the
Parliament do to day? What will the Army do? what will they disband? what shall
we have Wars? And it may be such and such a question, till they do both talk
one another into a passion, or into a prejudice, crying up this Party, or
crying down another, and disparaging of one or the other, what then?

And he was seen of Simon; here was the grace of Christ, he was seen of Simon;
why, seen of Simon? I confess it is not in some that do relate that story, but
others add this, seen of Simon, because Simon was weak, and Simon denied him,
Simon was discouraged at it, and others prejudiced, yet as weak as he was,
Christ would appear to him, and show him the glory of his strengthening grace;
here was wonderful mercy, here was confirming grace: Oh therefore do not rest
upon grace received, but on that fullness that redundancy of Grace, that is in
Christ Jesus:

A word of Exhortation, and I hope you will welcome it, Who Use 3. Exhortation.
would not embrace him who comes to tell people that are weak, how they should
be strong, and where their strength lies? and all I add further is only this,
How this strength may be made yours, Am I weak and impotent, and have I had so
many falls, has Satan out -wrestled me, and thrown me upon my back in the dirt,
and broken my bones, and shattered my graces, and my hopes by temptation,
tempting me to sin, one while Directions how to make Christ's strength yours
by despair, and one while by presumption to sin? shall I have strength against
all this? whence is it to be had? whence? I Will tell you (my brethren) as God
shall enable me, First.

1. Keep one eye upon this, that you are weak, and need a strength, 1 Eye your
own impotency.
and that you must go out of your self, for your strength, wholly out of your
selves; make account strength lies not within, but without you; He is made of
God, to all those that are in him; wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness, holiness, and redemption; 1 Cor. 1. 30. made al these glorious
privileges, and advantages to whom? to those that are in him and only to them,
not to those that have not these things in themselves; Says Paul, when I am
weak, I am strong; I do not so much bring it by way of confirmation, as by way
of allusion: 2 Cor. 12. 10.
though possibly there may be enough for confirmation in it, when I am weak, I
am strong, how so? not only by an intrinsecall disposition, that we are more
inclined, to seek strength, but indeed by a Spiritual capacity Jesus Christ is
more prepared, to bestow strength, when we are sensible of our own weakness, He
fills the hungry with good things, and the rich be sends empty away. It is true
in Philosophy, and as tiue in Divinity, A full vessel power In^^^ existons
prohibet alien^^
the best wine in the world upon it, none will enter; but Secondly,

2. Learn to maintain believing apprehensions of Jesus Christ, 2 Maintain
believing apprehensions of Christ your strength.
get such a piercing eye, look up to the Lord for such a degree of irradation
from heaven; (whatsoever it was) that Stephen had, wc did uphold him when there
was a volly of stones (as it were) about his ears, and when they ran upon him,
and every way they were ready to stone him; Oh! he beheld Jesus Christ, sitting
Act. 7. 55, 56, 57.
at the right hand of God; nothing could so much cheer him. Heb. 11. 27.
Moses saw him that was invisible? and Paul saw those things that were eternal,
and saw them in the hands of Jesus Christ, and 2 Cor. 4. 18. 19.
this did uphold him: maintain (therefore) believing apprehensions of the Lord
Jesus Christ your Head, the Spring of your grace, sitting at the right hand of
his Father, having taken up a heavenly Mansion there for you, and acting there
for you.

3. Come to the Ordinances with desire, and Expectation of 3. Come to
Ordinances with desires and expectations of grace from Christ.
grace, as indeed they are the Canales gratiae; and to that end, do use them,
(Brethren) Do not come to the Word of God with respect of persons, I bless the
Lord, that I observed it to be so, some years together, when I had that happy
opportunity to be one, (though the most unworthy) of the Preachers here, that
the Auditory met so constantly with a great degree of Uniformity, (for ought I
know, it is so still) I rejoice in it; O do not say, I Will go hear this man, and
that man etc. I know there is an Inequalittie of gifts, and people may
sometimes be edified more, by one than another, and may have occasion sometimes
to bless God more for one than another, yet sometimes for the Meanest as well as
for the Greatest, and God will do so, because he will take us off Note.
from dependancy upon men and means; Yet (I say) it is good to come not with
respect of persons, disrespecting any faithful Minister, but to say, I Will go to
an Ordinance of Christ, I Will go to seek Jesus Christ, and his strengthening
grace. If one should come and ask you, Wither are you going this morning,
brother, or sister? I am going to a Sermon, Who preaches? it is no matter, I am
going to an Ordinance of Christ, where grace and strength is offered, I Will go
to seek that, I care not if I were blindfold, if I might hear the Voice of
Christ: Oh this were an excellent temper: I am persuaded we should speed
better, if we did come thus prepared and disposed.

3. As you should come first with an eye upon your own weakness. 2. With
another eye upon Jesus Christ, where your strengt 3 Come to Ordinances to seek
Grace from Christ in strength of a promise.
lies: And then with your judgment rightly set, what to seek and expect, as
you should come to Jesus Chrst, and to the Ordinances to seek the grace of
Christ, so withal to come in the strength of the Promises of Christ, and by
prayer put that bond in suit for grace at the Throne of Grace. The Promises,
for there Deus sc debitorem ferit promi crudo. Aug.
lies our strength, whereby are given unto us, those exceeding great and
precious Promises, that we might be partakers of the Divine Nature: In 2 Pet.
1. 4. It is a blessed thing, when we come in the Authority of a Command to an
Ordinance, and in the strength of a Promise, when we come Conscionably to
comply with a Command, and when we come fiducially to close with a promise,
what a sweet thing would this be, if a Gospel-promise should fall upon any of
our hearts (God over-looking the unworthiness of the Preacher, and the
unpreparedness of the Hearers,) and one beam of light fall upon your Spirits,
and leave a heavenly tincture, that Parliament Men might go hence fitted for
their work, more prepared for the service of Jesus Christ in all their Public
Transactions; and Ministers of the Assembly, more fit for their holy, and
humble, and serious, and brotherly Debates, and with the Spirit of meekness,
and calmnesse, and publicknesse of heart; and all private Christians in their
places, in their several Spheres, and to say now, O blessed be the Lord, for
this mornings opportunity next our hearts, that we might hear first of Jesus
Christ, and get something upon our spirits that might habituate us to walk with
Him all the day, yea in Him as we have received Him: And then let me add this
in the next place; Col. 2. 6.


4. Beware (and I beseech you do not forget this, the want of which may mar all
the rest) of Soul obstructions, of an afterclap, 4 Be Frequent in the actings
of Faith, for the prevention of growing obstructions.
and of a back-blow from the Devil, who will endeavor to take you on the blind
side, to surprise you with Incogitancie, or transport you with Passion:
Remember what has been said, do not applaud your selfs that you have heard
such a Sermon, you had some delight in it, and may bless God for it; Oh but
take heed now the Devil get not between you and your Sermon, by such or such a
temptation; take heed of Pride, or any Carnal weeds, take heed of resting upon
any thing on this side Jesus Christ, but be often putting forth new actings of
Faith in Him and His Covenant sealed with His Blood; remember this, to act this
Truth: God grant, you and I may never forget this Gospellesson: It is a good
Truth, let us learn to begin to make Jesus Christ our strength, in every duty,
in little as well as in great.

In the last place, I will be so bold with your patience, as to ad a word by
way of Expostulation, which I heartily desire may 4. Use. Expostulatio^.
be as pleasing to you, as it is seasonable for you.

Why are you not more vigilantly jealous over any such things as would 1. Quere.
draw you from intimate communion with Christ, and close dependence upon him;
whether they be creature comforts, or any other vain inventions of men; will
you prefer those perishing things which are Isa. 55. 1. 2.
not bread, before water, wine, and milk; It Is good counsel the Lord gives by
his Prophet. Remember the admirable caveat Paul gives to the Colossians: Beware
lest any man spoil you through Philosophy Col. 2. 8. (...). Hostium more
praedas abducere, Aret.
and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, according to the world and not
after Christ; spoil you putting you upon any thing which is not after Christ is
to rob and undo you: Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or drink, or in
respect of an holy day, Col. 2. 16, 17.
or of the new moon, or of the Sabbaths, (as it is expressed in the Original)
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. Mind not their
judging or condemning of you, who would bring from Christ to Moses, care not to
approve your selves to them who will set up any thing against your Head, Why
will you comply with any such carnal Politicians, who cry down such a
Reformation as Christ Jesus expects, and say, Let us make us a Captain and
return back into Egypt; so that we may have our fleshpots there, let us have
our old Prelacy, and Service Book; we like Egyptian fare, though but garlike
and onions. Let no man beguile ver. 18. Debito bravio tamquam injustus iudex
vos privet. Steph. Col. 2. 4. Ne quis vos falso ratio cinando sallet.
you by a voluntary humility not holding the Head; Abhor all such Opinions and
Practices be they never so pompous and specious, that will take you off from
your Head Christ; and forget not Paul's faithful intimation, And this I say,
lest any man should beguile you with enticing words; But let Jonahs Oracle,
Chap. 3. 8. ever live in peace though they who wait upon lying vanities forsake
their own mercy: They which gain Him have something, they may call their own
humane inventions, and creatures will deceive, Christ is the True Treasure and
everliving Spring. Whether have you made any 2. Quere.
proportionable returns of thankefulness to God for your intrest in (...) full
and overflowing Spring of Grace? Where are your ingenuous reciprocations. It Is
Gods highest Gospel design to display the freeness and fullness of his Grace;
hence expressions to this purpose frequently, often in Ephe. 1. 6. To the
praise of the glory of his grace v. 12. 14. Act, act rigorously I beseech you
in a happy concurrence with God to magnify Jesus Christ; The more rich you are
in faith, and all other Graces of his Spirit, Iam. 2. 5. the more rich in good
works: 16. 18. The greater riches of assurance you may hope for, as Col. 2. 2.
and that Arich entrance shall be ministered into the Kingdom of your Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: the great Gate of Heaven shall be set open to entertain
you, where after you have here lived unto the praise of his Grace in a fruitful
expression of the Graces of the Gospel, you shall eternally live with him, and
enjoy the sweet comfort of the Gospel of Grace through the rich Grace that is
in him. Amen Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

