TRVTH and LOVE Happily married in the SAINTS, And in the Churches of Christ.
The Contract drawn in one of the Spittle Sermons, Preached April 3. 1648.

By Thomas Hill D. D. Master of Trinity College in Cambridge.

PROVE. 23. 23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not.

JOH. 13. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love
one another.

Graviter peccant qui propter indifferentes ceremonias turbant Ecclesias,
damnant alios principes and magistratus haeccine pietas quam jactamus, haeccine
charitas quam debemus fratribus, and Ecclestiis? Zanch. 1. de Redemp. page 765.
LONDON: Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, 1648.

TO The Right Honorable, Alderman Warner, Lord Major of the Famous City of
LONDON; The worthy Sheriffs, Aldermen and Common Counsel, All the sweet fruits
of Truth and Love through CHRIST JESUS.
AS when King Solomon built his Temple, which was Typical to Christ and his
Church, 1 King. 7. 21.
there were two Pillars which did both adorn and strengthen it: Jachin and Boaz.
When Zachary speaks Prophetically of the Government of that Church, he tells
you of two Staves, Beauty and Bands: Zach. 11. 10, 14.
And when Paul writes Apostolically of the building up, and beautifying the
Churches of Christ, he commends to you Truth and Love. And if an Apocryphal
Book may be heard (as why not, in the instruction of manners, and things of this
nature) amongst three things of strength, Wine, Women and Truth, Truth carries
it away as most potent.

And as for the power of Love, Cant. 8. 6.
Solomon will tell you it is as strong as death; the powerful workings whereof,
are most emphatically represented by Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5,
6, 7.
Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up; does not behave her self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity,
but rejoices in the truth; (...) omnia tegit. Beza.
covers all (so I am bold to render the Greek word, rather then bears,
because you have even the same in the end of that verse, endures all things.

And surely never was there more need of such an union in England, as Truth and
Love would make up amongst Saints, then now, when the disaffected in all the
Three Kingdoms are like to make a Prey upon the people, by reason of their
unkind and most unbrotherly Divisions. This is like to be our sad Motto,
Whilst we dash one against another, Dum collidimur frangimur.
we are both like to be broken in pieces.

If these differences were about Fundamentals, or any matters of Faith, God
forbid but we should zealously, and resolutely appear in it: even they who are
most moderate in their Opinions about externals and circumstantials (I speak
knowingly, for my self and many of my moderate Brethren) when it comes to
Subsatials of Faith and Worship, will answer as B. Andrews did, being asked at
the first coming over of the Archbishop of Spalato, Whether he though the were
a Protestant, or no? he answered, Truly, Fr. L. Verulam. Apotheg. 241.
I know not; but he is a detestant of diverse Opinions of Rome: So I am
confident do we abhor, not only Romish, Arminian, and Socinian Opinions, and
whatever is unsound, and contrary to the Doctrine according unto godliness; 1 Timothy 6. 3.
Only we believe about all matters of Church Government, which are neither so
clear in Scripture, nor of such concernment to salvation, there had need be
some Melancthons as well as Luthers; there must be mortar to bind the bricks
together, some soft Spirits; if all be rugged, we shall have no Spiritual
building.

This is the scope of this plain Sermon, which now you have been pleased to
make more yours, by your order for the publishing of it, intending (I hope) by
your desires to have it repeated to your eyes, that you may the better repeat
it in your practices.

Durandus tells us Paul was pictured with a Sword, Paulus eum ense and libro
pingitur, mucro furor Pauli, liber est conversio Sauli. Dur. l. 1. C. 3.
and with a Book; intimating by the sword, what he was before his Conversion;
by the Book, what after, when he so much minded the edification of the Churches
of Christ.

O that we Ministers and Brethren who differ, Potest mibi atiquid videri alteri
aliud, sed neq ego quod dixero praescribo alteri, nee ille mihi. Aug. in Psalm.
16.
might lay aside our swords, and seriously try what faith and love will do to
compose our unhappy and most unseasonable Controversies, which doubtless need
not so divide us, neither should we in things of this nature, prescribe or
impose one upon another.

There were three Fellows of Merton College in Oxford, the one a Thomist, the
other a Scotist, the third an Occamist, This learned Bishop Morton applies to
the Papists, who all concur in having Transubstantiation, but whether per
productionem or per eductionem, etc. cannot agree.
that going to Woodstock to petition the King that they might have a door out
of Merton College for their convenience; they all agreed to desire to have a
door, but could not agree upon the manner of the Petition; one was for Habeamus
ostium, the other thought that too general, and therefore would have it Ostium
fieri, but then the question was, Who should make it, or where; the third Vt
ostium factum sit, yet that pleased not. We all would have a Government, but
cannot agree upon the manner, diverse forms being in view: O that Truth and Love
might be the Vmpire!

This I have for diverse years endeavored, according to my measure, and still
shall, what ever others say of me, as being confident, Moderate Counsels
conduce much more to an happy settlement, then such as are high and rigid; And
I rest assured, that sober moderate Spirits are much better friends to
Presbyterial Government (which I desire may besettled here) then they who drive
so furiously. Its true, I believe the abounding of Heretical Opinions, and
Schismatical Practices, have begotten many Malignants amongst us, but withal I
fear, the severity of some Presbyterians gives too much advantage to Heterodox
and Schismatical spirits. I cannot believe it, though I have often heard, That
some of my Brethren were angry at this Discourse, because so moderate; surely,
it is either because they are guilty, and too much engaged in a party, whereas
I being uningaged, can with freedom of spirit (which liberty, I highly value)
unpartially oppose what is amiss in any, and embrace what is good where ever I
find it. Solomon says, A man of understanding is of a cool spirit: Prove. 17.
27.
The Lord make us such, which will express a more full conformity to Christ,
and a sweet resemblance of his spirit, which will be the beauty of Ministers
and other Saints.

My Lord, Be pleased with my humble and hearty acknowledgement of the many
Respects of this Renowned City to me, to accept my Desires and Endeavors, to
approve my self,

From my Lodging in Westminster, May 8. 1648. Your most faithful Servant for
your Salvation, Thomas Hill.

TRVTH and LOVE Happily Married in the SAINTS, And in the Churches of Christ.
Ephesians 4. 15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ.
Paul's chains and tears have had a prevailing rethorique; he has wept as well
as swet over his hearers with good success: Acts 24, 25.
when he was to preach to Felix, though a Prisoner, though with a Chain, he
made him tremble; and here in the first Verse, he comes as a Prisoner for their
sakes to beseech them; The Apostle uses four Arguments to Unity. Endeavoring
to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace
and a further and special Emphasis, he comes to persuade them to that which is
most pleasing, namely, To Unity; to which purpose he uses four several
Arguments;

First, There is a common engagement of all Saints to Unity: I beseech you walk
worthy of your Vocation, whereu to you are called, with all lovliness and
meekness, forbearing one another in love; there is one body, one spirit, even
as you are all called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all; here is a whole bundle of Arguments, in this first consider your
Vocation, those Privileges to which you are advanced thereby; and they leave a
very great obligation upon you, as Saints to study Unity.

Equity of the thing, in the 7. Verse. Verse 7.
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ: unto every one of us; every one has some gift, as it pleases Jesus
Christ to proportion out such a measure to this Saint, and such a measure to
that Saint; the little finger in the mystical body, so much as is fit for him,
in the hand, so much as is fit for him, and this with a common respect, that
there might be a mutual use of all those, with subserviency to the whole; in
reference to the mystical body of Christ, there is an equity in it.

great congruity; and that argument you shall find in the 8, 9, and 11,
Verses: Verse. 11, 12.
Jesus Christ when he did ascend, he gave gifts to men; all the gifts that are
in the Churches, and graces, they are derived from the same efficient cause,
and therefore it is most incongruous, that they should be distracted and
divided, so as to reflect dishonorably upon him that is the sole efficient
cause of them, and that with common intents and purposes, for good of the
mystical body.

necessity of it, Verse. 13, 14.
till we all come to the Unity of Faith, and that we be no more tossed to and
fro as children, and carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine; but that
we speak the truth in love, and so grow up into Jesus Christ in all things, who
is the head; here is the necessity of it, you will never grow up to intimate
communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ, you will never make a wise improvement
of him, as members of the mystical body, unless you learn this heavenly skill,
namely, How to advance Unity; and so I come to show you what propositions this
last Argument, drawn from the necessity of the thing, will afford us; in the
15. Verse, Verse 15.
which by Gods assistance, according as the weak measure of strength I have
will bear, I shall insist upon at this time, But speaking or following the
Truth in Love, grow up into Christ in all things, which is the head: where
first, its clear,





I Will begin with the first,

Christ is the head of particular Saints, and the head of the Church: In the
state of innocence, Adam was the head of the great family of the world, when he
forfeited his headship, and all that he did enjoy, by eating the forbidden
fruit, that family was dissolved, he was turned out of Paradise, all was
scattered abroad, and we with him, were then cast into a desperate condition,
unless God would be pleased to find out a second Head; and to that purpose,
out of the riches of his Grace, and the infiniteness of his Wisdom, that which
Angels could not reach, which men had not so much as any thoughts of, or
desires after, God pitched upon, namely, Christ, and designed him the Head of
the Corporation of his Church, of a certain number given unto him in his
eternal Counsel, for whom he should undertake; and this learned Expositors
conceive to be the meaning of that place, where he speaks of (...) there in
Ephesians 1. 10. That he might gather together all things, (...).
that all things might be headed under one; headed under Jesus Christ: Now
before the fall, all were headed under the old Adam; now when they were in a
shattered condition, they should be reconciled and collected, headed under
Jesus Christ; for the better opening of this, you may be pleased to take notice
of three particulars:

Headship it self.

Appropriation of this Headship, to whom he is Head.

The Headship it self of Christ.
Here is the Title to this Headship.

First, For the Headship it self; he is Head,

1. 1. Respectu Dignitatis.
In regard of his pre-eminence; it is an expression in 1 Col. 17. 18. In all
things having the pre-eminence, he is the Head; every member in the mystical
body has a Dignity, and is advanced to an excellency, to some degree of it,
but he that is (...) that has the preheminency, he is the Head, that is
Christ; but this is not all, if you look upon a Picture, there the head of a
man has a pre-eminence, therefore we must have more then this: He is head,

2. 2. Respectu Regiminis.
In regard of Direction, and in regard of Power, being a wise head, able to
advice, and guide, and govern the body; as the Apostle Peter speaks of him in 1
Pet, 3. 22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
Authorities and Powers being made subject to him; he has a universal, and
absolute regiment over all things in heaven and earth, over men and Devils: but
then

3. 3. Respectu Influxus.
In regard of that Influence that he does convey to the bodies: Sense and
Motion is derived from Christ as the spring; it is true, that in the natural
body, there the heart is primum vivens, but in the mystical body, the head is
primum vivens, and he gives life to us, and we derive our life from Jesus
Christ, the head; he has life, and he has it abundantly in himself, and he
lives, that we may live; as I remember there is such an expression in John 10.
10.

4. 4. Respectu Vnionis.
In regard of Union, he does tie altogether; the nerves and sinews would not
unite the members of the mystical body, unless Jesus Christ were the Head; As
he is the Foundation stone, and so supports the building, so he is the Corner
stone, both the beauty, and strength, and union of the building, Fundatio
fundatissima, as Junius renders it, in Isa. 28. 16. a most sure foundation, and
the Corner stone, as Peter has it, in 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. with reference to that
place; and so in these four particulars Jesus Christ has a Headship: The
appropriation of Christ's Headship.
the next thing is now, The appropriation of this Headship, to whom is he a
head? He is an external Head to all the members of the visible Church, to all
professors as he is a vine, and does communicate some sap to those that are in
him, no way but by an external profession, as you have it intimated in John 15.
2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, shall be cut down and cast into the
fire; and therefore there are some branches in him externally, as he is an
external Head to the Church, as he is a vine; but indeed, he is properly the
Head of his body, the Savior of his body; he is a Head to those, to whom he is
a Savior, in Ephesians 5. 23. As the King has a common relation to all his
Subjects, but a more pecular relation to the Queen, who is a Subject and a
Spouse, has Jesus Christ to his Church; and the reason is this, because there
is a full commensuration betwixt all the three glorious persons in the
Trinity; they are grossly mistaken that will make Jesus Christ to dye for all,
and yet will not in their sense, so as to make them Salvabiles if they will,
and yet cannot say, That either God has given Christ to all, or given all to
Christ, or that the Spirit of God will apply that Redemption to all, for there
is a commensuration, there is an adaequation, betwixt the three glorious
Persons in the Trinity, and their workings for the Salvation of the Saints:
Jesus Christ dies for those whom God has given to him, with purposes of
Salvation; I do not deny, but all the wicked in the world, may have some
benefit by the death of Christ, as all have some common pledges of the bounty
of God, and all may have some common operations of the Spirit of God; but if
you will speak of any thing as to Salvation, there is a commensuration betwixt the
three persons in the Trinity, and their workings; Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, Sanctification of the Spirit, and the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, in 1 Pet. 1. 2. indeed in 1 John 2. 2. He is
a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world: to whom did John write that Epistle? to the Jews; and therefore to
show that they had not all Religion now engrossed amongst them, and that the
Election of God did not still run amongst them, only he speaks in that dialect,
he did not intend every particular man in the world, for then he must intend
men that sin against the Holy Ghost, which is impossible that they should be
saved: No man will say that understands any thing, even in Catechistical
Divinity, that Jesus Christ dyed to save them, which he must do, if he dyed for
every man in the world, with such purposes to save them; and so in 1 Timothy 1. 4,
5, 6. He is given a ransom for all; why all? There is one God, and one
Mediator, now Jews and Gentiles; as Jesus Christ did take our nature upon him,
both Jews and Gentiles, all estates shall have the common privilege, and
benefit, and advantage of being in a capacity to receive blessings from him,
spiritual saving blessings, that is, all conditions, whether Kings, and all in
Authority, or Servants, or others, not every particular person, but as in one
place Jews or Gentiles, so in another place, not this or that condition, but
all estates, and all relations, and all conditions; but still the Appropriation
is to the Church, as here he says, from whom the whole body is joined together
in the 16. Verse. from whom, from Christ the whole body is joined together, so
it is the body that has this influence from him; but then

3. What is his Title to his Headship? Christ's Title to this Headship of his
Church.
it is threefold;

The designation of God and the Father: God the Father has sealed him, he gave
him to be a Head to the Church over all things, in Ephe. 1. 22, 23. and then

His personal fitness: Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, In him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom; and then

His own propitious readiness: We were not in any degree so willing to be
saved, as he is to save us; He came down to seek, Luke 19. 10
and to save that which is lost; the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and
anointed him to preach the Gospel, it was his business; and as he had a
Commission from his Father, and came under the Broad-Seal of Heaven, so he had
a strong inclination from his own bowels, to engage him to it; there is his
Title: the use of this,

Pope no vicarious Head of the Church. v. Polau Sputag. p. 3351.
1. To try the title of the Popes Headship to the Church; how comes he by it?
for a Church to have two Heads, one body to have two heads, it is a Monster,
you will make it Monstrous; we do allow in a good sense, That the Supreme
Magistrate is, Caput politicum in the Church, to command good things according
to the Word of God, and to restrain evil according to that Word; we hold forth
confidently, that Jesus Christ, he is the only proper Head of the Church, that
does convey all saving spiritual blessings; life, nourishment, direction, and
all those admirable advantages to the body; v. Bedel.
we cannot allow a Caput Vicarium, a Ministerial Head, there is no need of
that; Jesus Christ is the (...) the Head; here is an Article that gives an
Emphasis, what needs it any other? Jesus Christ is present always in his
Church; when he withdrew his Corporal presence, he would then requite his
Church with his Spiritual presence; and that presence of his Spirit, it should
accompany them to the end of the world: But the Pope as great as he is, cannot
be present in every place; we need not spend any more time in crying down that
that is so prodigious: so many several Saints, and so many several Churches, in
several parts of the world, how is it possible that a Pope can be Head of them
all? but then

injurious to the least member of Jesus Christ: Caution, Its dangerous to be
injurious to any of Christ's members.
If Christ be the Head of the body, surely his body is dear to him; never think
to ruin the body, or to drown the body, as long as the Head is able to keep it
self above water; never think to hurt the body, as long as the head is able to
secure it, and protect it, and defend it; there are very notable expressions in
several of the Prophets, as in Daniel, There are four great Monarchies, Dan. 2.
45.
then came a little stone hewn out of the mountain, and breaks them all, one
after another; All opposite powers to the Kingdom, and Headship of Jesus
Christ, shall be confounded, in despite of the Pope, and Turks, and Devil and
all: All the Kingdoms of the earth shall at last become the Lords, and his
Christ's, and then in the 12. of Zachary, you shall find there in the 5. Verse,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls numerously, for I, says
the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in
the midst of her; a wall of fire to burn up the Enemy, and I will be the
glory in the amidst of her, for the comfort of his people, the presence of God
is the glory of any place, and therefore he says, He will create a defense
upon the glory; an admirable place in the 4. of Isaiah, Verse 4, 5.
Pour upon them a Spirit of burning and judgment, to direct them, and consume
the Enemies, and he will create a defense upon all the glory, upon his Saints
which are the glory, so he is pleased to count them, though there be no
preparations in them to raise a defense, he will create it; yea in Zach. 12. 2.
Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all people round about: And
in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all that
burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the
earth shall be gathered together against it; Strong encouragement for all
Christ's members.
O what encouragement is here for the poor Saints, the Citizens of Jerusalem!
let all the desperate Atheists, and profane opposites, combine against the
people of God and plot, although they may have it may be some particular
advantages, as it is said of the Romans, they were Praelio victi, but not
Bello, it may be now and then they may get an advantage in this combat against
the Church, but yet they shall never totally and finally overcome them, though
they be all gathered together; God will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to
all that burden themselves with it: There will a time come, when the Lord will
grind to pieces, all those that have any Antipathy against Jerusalem, when God
will trample Satan and all other Enemies under the feet of his Jerusalem, Romans
16. 28.
when God will call for all them forth, that would not have him to rule over
them, Bring forth mine Enemies that would not I should reign over them, and
slay them before me, in Luke 19. 27. there is the second Use.

must have a body; an head without a body were prodigious, and therefore that
Doctrine of the Arminians must needs prove false, That would have Jesus Christ
come into the world upon these terms, and to dye upon such considerations, that
all things should be left so far to man's Free Will, that it was in their power,
unless they would be so good natured as to believe, when Jesus Christ called
upon them, that he should not have one Member, Contrary to Paul's Doctrine.
Phil. 2. 13.
no body at all: This is the erroneous Doctrine of Arminius and his Followers,
that go upon his principles; is it impossible that Jesus Christ should not have
one Member, for he gives only posse, he gives not velle, if you will not
believe, and improve your Free Will, you may choose whether ever you will
believe or no; they will not allow, that Jesus Christ by an invinciable, by an
almighty power, shall carry men, and overcome men so far, as to make them of
unwilling, to be willing to believe; yea, where Arminius has four decrees
concerning the Salvation of men, you may be within the compass of all those
four decrees, that all who believe shall be preserved and saved, but he tells
you not that he has decreed to give faith and repentance to any one man, To
believe is man's act, but faith is Gods gift.
to enable him to believe, and therefore it is a most dishonorable Doctrine to
the Headship of Christ; blessed be God that it so much discovered, and we are
so far delivered from it, though it is most unhappily of late in some parts of
it, got into too many Popular hands. But then

Caution.
4. Take heed (I beseech you) of any obstructions that might hinder a sweet
communion betwixt the Head and the Members, that might hinder an intercourse
betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls; let this rather be your care, to gain that
heavenly skill, how you may make use of Jesus Christ as the Head.

Sovereignty, let him be all in all; the Sovereignty of his Grace, and the
Sovereignty of his Independency, to save whom he pleases, and to do what he
pleases with men, Romans 9. 15.
to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and because he will have mercy.

Wisdom as a Prophet, seek wisdom from God, and it shall be given you, in James
1. 5. as you should give him the honor of his Sovereignty, allowing him this,
2. Tim. 2. 20.
that as the Potter, he may make some vessels to honor, and some to dishonor,
as he pleases.

of his Riches and Fullness, seek supplies from him, do not live upon your
selves, nor upon your duties, nor upon ordinances only, but live upon Jesus
Christ in all, so give Christ the honor of being the spring of your Supplies;
in him are fresh springs.

best friend in the world, and labor for such an intimacy with him, that he and
you may be acquainted, for he says, If ye love him, and keep his commandments,
he and his Father will come and take up his abode with you, and he will
manifest himself to you, in John 14. 23. O how much of heaven will that soul
have upon earth, that he should have Jesus Christ come and dwell with him! and
when he goes to Prayer, manifest himself, when he goes to read the Scriptures,
paraphrase upon the Bible, and suggest sweet hints to him; when he is in any
straights, overpower him with a Divine instinct, though he has not an express
revealed will to walk with, as we have not in every particular circumstance of
an action; O that then Jesus Christ should particularize some general Scripture
to you, or bring something to your mind that you have heard in a Sermon, it
may be a dozen years ago; give him the glory of this, and improve him to this
blessed purpose.

The Lord Jesus Christ did intend, and does expect, that upon his ascension and
giving gifts, there should be such an entertainment of the Gospel, that we
might grow up into him in all things, who is the Head: It is the perfection of
a Christian, to improve all the three Persons in the Trinity; when you look
upon God and his attributes, to find proportionable impressions upon your
souls, by his greatness, to learn to fear him, by his godness to love him; when
you look upon the Spirit of God, and his working, then likewise to feel some
stamps answerable thereunto, that you may have an inclination to comply with
him in all things; so likewise when ye behold Jesus Christ in the passages of
his redemption, to make use of all, that there may be some proportionable
correspondency betwixt his dispensations toward you, and your improvement of
them. And here I shall briefly desire you to consider under this point, these
three particulars:

intention it self, and the expectation of Jesus Christ.

grounds of it: and

ends of it.

1. Christ's intention and expectation in giving gifts.
For the intention and expectation of Jesus Christ himself, when he did ascend
and gave gifts, it is this, in three particulars:

1. That there should be a growth.

That there should be a growing up into Christ.

in all things:

there should be a growth; how a growth? so as to complete the number of all
the Saints, That there should be a growth.
that not one of them be lost: Jesus Christ has undertaken, that he will not
lose one that God the Father has given him, and therefore all those must be
called in; and it is conceived by learned Expositors, that that is the meaning
of this place, Christ has given gifts, for the perfecting of the Saints; that
is, for the completing the number;

To fill up the number of persons, that so many as were elected from eternity,
so many might be called in: and then

graces of those Saints, both in the degrees, and in the activity of them, for
Jesus Christ (it is an admirable condescending expression) reckons not
himself complete, till all his members be complete; I beseech you take notice
of that first Chap. and the last verse of the Ephesians, Which is his body,
Ephesians. 1. last.
the fullness of him that fills all in all: Jesus Christ fills all in all, and
yet (he says) his body is the fullness of him; he is pleased not to account
himself complete as head of the Church, till his members be completed, as to
the number of them, and till their graces likewise be complete to such a degree
as he intended: but then

Secondly, There must be a growing up, there must be the manner, grow up into
Christ; 2. A growing up. (...).
not only a concorporating with Jews, as the Gentile Churches did, in the 3.
of the Ephesians, not only an incorporating into Jesus Christ, though that is
very much, into the body of Christ, but a transforming into Christ, that you
may be molded in Christ; I would not be too bold with those expressions of
Nazianzen, because I see they are abused, (...) It is an admirable one that
Athanasius has, That Jesus Christ took the nature of man upon him, that so we
might have the nature of God conveyed to us, the divine nature; there is a
ground for that expression, in 2 Pet. 1. 4. and a delivering up into Christ,
into his word, in Romans 6. 17. the form of doctrine into which you were
delivered; here is an admirable improvement of Christ, when a Sermon is
delivered to you, the mind of Jesus Christ discovered, for you to be delivered
up to it, that you may go out of the assembly under the power of that truth,
and molded in it; and then withal, that Christ might be in you, and you might
be in Christ, that there might be a mutual in-dwelling, as in that place in
John, yea, that we may come to live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, in
Gal. 5. 25. yea, and that the very life of Faith, the life that we live, may be
by faith in the Son of God, in Gal. 2. 20. not only now and then to pray in
faith, but to live by faith, to act all in faith; here is a growing up into
Christ, not only a growing to some knowledge of Christ, or to some profession
of Christ, or to make toward Christ, but to be molded, to be transformed into
Christ; here is the entertainment and improvement of the Gospel that Christ
expects: but then

Thirdly, 3 Growing up to Christ in all things.
Growing up in all things unto Christ; There is the proportion, or the
dimension, as a Head, Our growth must be as large as his Headship; now as he is
a Prophet, so we must grow up into him, that we may have wisdom, and all those
supplies from him; as he is a Priest grow up in him, that we may have
Righteousness from him, for the covering of all our sins; as he is a King grow
up in him, that we may have a Redemption from all our snares, bondages and
enthralments; for our being and well being, having our subsistence in him, in
God the Father, and in Christ Jesus, as in 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. when we are
converted, we come to have a new subsistence in Christ: for Truth, and for
Degrees of Grace grow up into him, for habits and acts, for the velle, as well
as for the posse, for converting and renewing grace, for it is he that works in
you the will and the deed, of his own good pleasure, as in Phil. 2. 13. for
comforts, and for hopes, in 1 Pet. 1. 8. That you may have joy through
believing, and the God of peace fill you with hope, in Romans 15. 13. all our
strength and comfort lies in union with Christ, and influence from him:

The ground, The grounds
why Jesus Christ expects this; for very good reasons,

purpose and effect of Christ's ascension; he did ascend to give gifts, he did
ascend to give his Spirit, and that is the great promise of the New Testament;
he promised to give his Spirit, and shall he give his Spirit which he purchased
at so dear a rate, and shall the Spirit give gifts to men, and those gifts be
actuated, and exercised, and prepared for you, and shall not we improve them? O
what an ill requital is here!

vehement desire of union and communion with all those that God the Father has
given to him, Behold I stand and knock at the door, if any will hear my voice,
then I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me; that is a melting
place, a winning place, in Rev. 3. 20. Jesus Christ is impatient (as it were, I
may speak it with reverence) to want communion with them who are his in Gods
eternal counsels. But then thirdly, Christ may well expect this,

intended stature and measure of the fullness of Christ, we are fit for heaven,
as in Ephe. 4. 13. Till we all come to the unity of faith, and to the perfect
stature of the fullness of the age in Christ, therefore there is such a pitch,
and Jesus Christ expects it; you will never be fit for him, till you come to
your pitch: there is a minimum quod sic, as Philosophers speak about natural
bodies, so about every member of the mystical body, you must come to such a
degree of grace before you are fit for heaven; now God has designed you that,
that you may be meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in
light: Lord have mercy on me. No; thou have been a drunkard and an Atheist all
thy days, thou art not meet to go to heaven; Paul blesses God that has made
him meet: Heaven is a holy place, and God is a holy God, and thou have a very
cursed sinful nature, very unfit for heaven, till thou be pollished, fashioned
and framed; now Jesus Christ expects this: The third particular follows; I
shall not dispatch all, you will give me leave to consult for my own health. As
you have had the expectation it self, and the grounds of it, so you shall have

The end: The end.
Now the ends of it are two, why Christ intended this, and expects this:

stability in Christ: and

improvement of Christ.



Stability in judgment; O that is an admirable thing: Health of body is a
great matter, The stability in Christ.
but truly soundness of faith, especially in these unstable times, Stability in
judgment.
is much greater: It is a good thing to have the heart established with grace;
that is, with the doctrine of grace, and not with meats, not to be carried up
and down with this wanton opinion, and that wanton opinion, in Heb. 13. 9. A
good thing to have the heart established in grace.

To have a stability in affection; Stability of affection.
that thy affections may center upon Christ, as thy love, and thy desire, and
thy hope, and thy joy; thou may desire other things, yet thou may be able
to say, I have none in heaven but thee, and none in earth that I desire in
comparison of thee; Psalm. 73. 25.
you may love other things, but you may be able to say, I love Jesus Christ for
himself, and love my self and all other things in reference to him; I value
power, and estate, learning, and all outward thing, nothing, but with reference
and subservience to Jesus Christ: O here is a sweet stability of affection! and
that Jesus Christ may not only be thy joy, but the exceeding gladness of thy
joy, Psalm. 11.
a triumph of joy, to joy more in knowledge of Christ, and communion with
Christ, then you do in all outward comforts and advantages whatsoever: here is
a sweet stability of affection; these people will not be carried up and down so
much with either crosses or comforts, as very many are. But then

There is a stability of conversation, Stability of conversation.
that is, a blessed stability, in James 1. 8. A double minded man is unconstant
in all his ways; as long as you have an end and an end, a heart and a heart, a
mind and a mind, you will never be constant; you know not where to find any
men in the world, but godly men, because they have fixed principles, they make
conscience; but come to a covetous man, when you speak of his covetousness,
there you have him, when you speak against his earthliness, there you lose him;
he has a double mind, something for God, and something for the world, has no
more Religion then suits with his worldly designs; he will hear a Sermon
because it is cheap, yet he will (it may be) deceive you in his shop, because
there is his interest; and he will (it may be) be jolly and frollick, and scoff
over a cup of sack at the people of God soon after Sermon, though he has
expressed (it may be) a great deal of zeal to the Minister; why, there lies his
interest, he is a jolly man, a professor at large, and he must be bold; O here
is no stability. It is a blessed thing, and a sweet advantage, and Jesus Christ
intends this, that you should be grounded in Christ, being rooted, and
grounded, and stablished in the faith, in Colosians 2. 7. Now the next end is
this,

Your improvement of Christ: Improvement of Christ.
An improvement of him, for what purpose?

Why, for all necessary gifts; as a Magistrate, as a Minister in any place of
trust, he has variety of gifts, in 1 Cor. 12.

For all graces; he has variety of graces, he has abundance of Spirit, that
you may be filled with all the fullness of God, as I remember in Ephesians. 3. 19.

In all conditions and relations; In all conditions and relations.
that you may know how to be sick, and how to be poor; how to be Magistrates,
how to be Ministers; I have learned to want and abound, I can do all things
through Christ enabling me (says Paul) in Philippians 4. 13. And then,

In all duties; In all duties.
you can do nothing without Christ, but as he gives in, as he communicates
himself, and vouchsafes to assist you; when he withdraws, you flag, you wither.

I Will be bold to say a word to my Brethren of the Ministry: O that Ministers
would chiefly study and mind this work, this is proper Pulpit-work, to put
people upon such an entertainment of the Gospel, that they might improve Jesus
Christ, and grow up to a stability in him; Paul was sent, had a Commission,
according to the faith of Gods elect, That is, to preach the Gospel for the
working faith in Gods elect.
in Tit. 1. 1. and Gal. 4. 19. I travel in birth with you ( says Paul) till
Christ be formed in you: O what pain it cost him every Sermon. It was a great
speech, yet I have heard it as a certain truth concerning Reverend Mr. Bains,
That every Sermon cost him as much in his sense (as he thought) as it did
ordinarily cost a woman to bring a child into the world; I travel in birth,
till I see Jesus Christ formed in you;

For Citizens chiefly, who enjoy such rich Gospel-advantage.
that we may grow up into him in all things; then I beseech you give me leave
to call upon you, and I do not know where I could speak more fitly in any place
of the world, then in this famous City, and never more seasonably, then when
the Representative of the City is met, namely, that you would consider, What
means you enjoy, what Gospel Light the Lord has entrusted you with, Mat. 11.
22.
and what he expects from you; will it not be much easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah, then for London another day? you that have been lifted up with
Capernaum to heaven, if you improve not the means, make account, if one place
in hell be hotter then another, to be thrown down into it: And all I have to
say, is this, Let it be your care so to improve the Gospel, that you may derive
more from Christ, and live more in Christ, and express more of Christ, that you
may be inclined and enabled to do more for Christ: Here accept these two short
hints;

1. Growth must be proportionable to the means you enjoy.
Growth must be proportionable to the means you do enjoy: Brethren, let me
confidently say it, That measure of growth that might please God in some parts
of England, will not satisfy God from you that live in London; why? because as
you have higher food, and more spiritual and more glorious Gospel-discoveries,
the Lord expects proportionable improvements: And let me say this,

2. Growth must be of all parts.
There must be a growth of all the members of the body; that is a rule
Philosophers give, Augmentation is of all the parts, and therefore to grow
upwards and downwards; to grow more humble, more in faith, more in love to the
Saints, more in activity for God; this it is the Lord expects, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

our judgments concerning the Ministry of the Gospel, and that in two great
points:

First, For information concerning the Ministry* Consider the Original of the
Ministry.
Behold it in its Original, it is the Ordinance of Christ, and it is the fruit
of the ascension of Jesus Christ; they are to be instructed and pitied (I
believe many of them may go according to their present apprehensions, and
therefore it were happy if they might be with a spirit of meakness reduced)
that will cry down all our Ministry as Antichristian; why? because there were
or are some defects in Ordination by Bishops, or whoever; admit that to be
true, but I beseech you, what is the Original? from Christ; and if any man will
ask an able godly Minister in England, where had you your Ministry? you will say
from the Prelates, he will say from Jesus Christ, though it is true, the manner
of conveying the power of exercising the Ministry be by men, Gal. 1. 1.
for Paul says, He was an Apostle neither of men, nor by men; not of men, so
he differed from false Apostles, not by men, so he differed from ordinary
Ministers: Now suppose I, Doubtless it is a great and provoking evil, to cry
down the whole Ministry, because some seek themselves, or others of the
Ministers affect too much power, hereby the devil carries on his design
destroys the thing? I think not any body would say, the Marriage was null,
because they were not so rightly married in every particular, as to the manner,
or to say, that a Magistrate is no Magistrate, because in every particular, it
may be he received not his Magistracy, in the due form according to the
Statutes, etc. there is a great deal of difference (my brethren) betwixt the
grounds of nullifying, and reforming a thing; we are all sensible of it, and
desire God to pardon what has been amiss, and to heal what is still out of
frame; there has been defects in the manner of conveying our Ministry, or else
why do we desire to reform it, but we confidently affirm our Ministry is from
Jesus Christ; Christ gave gifts, with the office and Authority, but what? not
only Prophets and Apostles, but Pastors and Teachers: then

2. Behold the Ministry, in Christ's intention in the giving of it.
Behold the Ministry, in Christ's intention in giving it: Why did he give it? it
were a sweet thing to consider, and I am persuaded it were a good method to
cure some of London distempers; no marvel, if you that have such admirable
gifts, be still so lean and crazy in spirit: what will cure that distemper?
look at the Ministry of the Gospel, as the Ordinance of Christ, and the fruit
of the ascension of Christ; therefore when you go to a Sermon, say not, I Will
not hear this man or that man, because he is a fierce Independent, I Will not
hear that man, because he is a rigid Presbyterian, nor such a man, because he
is a vehement Independent, away with all such unseasonable words; but say this,
I Will go and attend upon the Ordinance of of Christ, and I Will go and attend upon
that which is a fruit of the ascension of Christ; and withal let me add this,
and I desire it may be remembered, That Ordinances and Ministry now cease, and
we are under another new Administration. A most dangerous and most unsound
opinion.
I wish I had more strength to insist upon it, because it is a most dangerous
opinion, and does undermine the very foundation of the Gospel, namely, to hold
as some do, and vent it with much boldness, That the Ordinances and the
Ministry cease, and because that Popery did once overspread the world; now we
have no Ordinances, and now we have no Ministry: and what place do they bring,
it is a most strange confidence, and it is in Print, and many of you know the
Book, it is cried up sufficiently: One interprets this place of Scripture (I
beseech you let us consider it in the fear of God, and with the spirit of
meekness) Christ promises he will be with them, he gives his Apostles
commission to go abroad, and says, He will be with them to the end of the
world, Mat. 28. 20. (the Lord pardon and heal all wresting of Scripture, if it
be his will, and prevent it for time to come) To the end of the world, See Mr.
Saltmarsh his Book called, Beams of the bright morning Star. p. 134 etc.
says he in print, that is, to the end of this age of Ministration, they are
his own words, to the end of this dispensation: Now he makes account that this
Gospel Dispensation is ended, and now we are come under a third Dispensation or
Administration; we were all under low Administrations, the Gospel is in a manner
at an end, and God is all in all immediately in his Saints. O that Scripture
should be made to serve our purposes! What another Administration then that of
the Father through the Son by the Spirit.
weigh the place meekly, I desire not to meddle with men's persons, but I must
be faithful to Jesus Christ, and the souls of his people; and according to the
light he has given me, I shall endeavor to make it appear, that Interpretation
is not consistent with the Text:

Jesus Christ in the 18. Reasons against this Interpretation of Mat. 28 20. for
his third Administration. (...)*
Verse of the 28. of Matthew says, All power is given to me in heaven and
earth, go therefore and teach all nations.

Teach all nations; surely if this Dispensation be now ended, if the Ministry
be at an end, all nations cannot be taught, and so Jesus Christ will lose some
of his elect, for they cannot be called in, for there must be no Teaching (it
seems) no Ministry.

2. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I commanded you: All
nations will never be taught all things, whatsoever Jesus Christ commands them,
and the Apostles and Misters cannot fulfill their commission if the Ministry be
ceased, and we must have no Ministry, (...).
and no Ordinances to instruct them in all these things.

And lo ( lo, Christ would have you take notice of it) I am with you, not only
I will be with you, but am with you, and that every day, he is with you always,
always even to the end of the world.

4. The end of the world: What, to the end of this Dispensation, and for the
age of this Ministration only? brethren, I could fetch it out of the very
Original it self; (...).
whereas he says, (...) Signifies an Age, I grant it does, but it signifies
Eternity many times in Scripture, For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory,
for ever and ever, I am sure of it, there it is not a Dispensation only. And
then for the end,

I could fetch it not only out of Plato, but also out of the Septuagint, (...).
and out of other places, where that Greek word signifies Consummation,
therefore there must be an end; but let us go on further.

I Will ask any man that will say these words, that I am with you to the end of
the World, That is, to the end of this Dispensation; When did this Dispensation
begin? in what year did it begin? Let any man tell me that Jesus Christ will be
with his Disciples or Ministers, to this hundred year, or to this age, and then
he forbears: Is it to all persons, or to these persons only? then who are
they? I would very fain have these plain Questions resolved: O you will say, it is
till the Spirit comes; the Spirit comes! Why, the Spirit was coming ever since
Jesus Christ ascended, and does come with new lights daily, and the Spirit will
be coming, till Jesus Christ come again the second time.

6. And I would ask further, I beseech you, unless there be a Ministry, how
shall we have Popery confuted? You say, because Popery has defiled the
Ministry, there is no Ministry; I say, Popery must be confuted by the
Ministry: you may burn an Arrian on the head, but Arrianism must be confounded
by the Ministry; you may hang a Papist, but we know that you can never confute
Popery, but by the light of the Ministry; and Paul has said this, The Pope
shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming, 2 Thessalonians. 8. 9.
viz. in the ministry of the Gospel.

7. I would know this also, If the faith were once delivered to the Saints,
that is, Once for all, as Interpreters have expounded it; Jude ver. 3.
What, shall we have a new Edition, or a new Gospel? had we not an everlasting
Gospel before? Nay further, Jesus Christ will give up all things to the Father,
When? when he has conquered all his Enemies, and after the Resurrection, and
then God will be all in all: 1 Cor. 15. 9, 24, 28.
Well, they say, they are Goded and Christed, and God is immediately in them,
and they are under the third Dispensation, and we are still under these low
Administrations, then they must make us believe, the Resurrection is past; for
God shall never come to be all in all, and Jesus Christ never give up his
Kingdom, till the Resurrection be past; and then further, go now to the
neighbor words of my Text, He gave gifts to men, that all might come to the
Unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4. 11.
and to a perfect stature. All come, and therefore be confident, I dare venture
my soul upon it (which is a great word) that Jesus Christ will have a Ministry
more or less, till he have brought in all the Elect, and I have this ground for
it out of the word, He gave gifts, Pastors and Teachers, till all come to the
Unity of the faith, and to the acknowledgement of the Son of God, and to a
perfect stature: Now if they say there is no Ministry, then they must make us
believe, that all the Saints are come in, and that there is a perfect number,
etc. and their graces completed; but I must spare my self, the time is past, I
have had late and sad experience, what it is to spend too much upon weak
Spirits, not recovered; though I confess I intended most upon the third point,
Following the truth i^ love.

What is this Truth? 1. What is Truth?
Why, as Gods glory is the Constellation of his Attributes, as Gods happiness
is the absoluteness of his self-sufficiency, as Gods holiness is the impression
of his image, as comfort from God is the glimpse of his loving countenance, as
the learning we receive, is a beam of his wisdom falling upon us, so indeed
Truth is the issue, the representation, and the discovery of his revealed will,
and of his mind to us concerning Doctrine and Worship, What we should know,
and what we should practice.

What is Love? 2. What is this love?
not only a Love to the Truth, that is good, not only a love to Christ the
head, that is as good, and the proper genius of Saints, (...).
carries them to both these, but indeed a love to the Saints, to the Members,
love the brethren, love the corporation of Saints, in 1 Pet. 2. v. 7.

What is it to follow or speak the Truth here? 3. What is it to speak or follow
the Truth in the Text.


For Explication, where three things considerable; The Greek word here
signifies, sometimes,

To speak the Truth, in Gal. 4. 16.

To do the Truth, (...)
in John 3. 21. and in Ephesians. 4. 24.

To follow the Truth with a sincere constancy; so learned men interpret it,
(...) does answer to an Hebrew word, (...) in Niphal, that signifies to be
firm, and to be constant; and so doubtless it is a great part of the meaning
here, by the opposition, That you may be no more as children tossed to and fro,
Verse. 14.
but following the Truth in Love, that is, following it with constancy, and
firmness, and cleaving to it.

I humbly conceive, To speak the Truth here, is too straight, as will appear,
if you please to compare the Context. Scripturae plenitudinem adoro.
I choose rather to take the largest sense (adoring the deep and mysterious
fullness of holy Scripture) so to seek, follow and embrace the Truth with that
firm constancy, that we should be ready to speak and do the Truth upon all
occasions. Indeed, Truthing it in Love, a good motto for Saints.
Truthing it in love, which were an admirable Motto for Saints, and most
seasonable in these unsound and censorious times, Truthing it in love.

Truthing it in love, Doctr. 3.
seeking and following the Truth with constancy, is the Gospel method of our
spiritual welfare; This was John's counsel to the Elect, 2 Ioh. 2. 4, 5.
and his comfort concerning the Lady (a practice worthy it seems of great
persons:) This was John's joy concerning her and her children, and concerning
his Gaius too, in the beginning of his third Epistle, That they walked in the
Truth, Verse 2, 3.
and the Truth dwelt in them, and they in Truth, loving one another; Here is
Truthing it in Love: now in short, what reasons why this is the Gospel method
to our welfare; Reasons, why Truthing it in love so useful.
first, considered,

Singly, Truth and Love, as they are in themselves, contribute much.

Secondly, What Truth and Love do to prevent evils, singly considered.
Jointly, consider the happy marriage of Truth and Love, they operate much to
advance this Gospel-design.

First, For Truth, It has a sovereign virtue to prevent and to cure those
spiritual maladies, which are most obstructive to the good of Persons and
Churches: Truth keeps from Ignorance, from Superstition, from Errors, from
Heresies, yea from profaneness.

Love keeps from Strife, from Schism (although there be some differences
amongst Saints, all men see not by the same Light) if there be Love, it will
keep them from making a difference in affection, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4 1 Cor. 10. 28,
29, 30.
or keep them from all unwarrantableness, disclayming communion with their
Brethren; It is want of Love that does that.

Secondly, Truth, if there be differences in judgment (as there may be) yet it
has this power, that it will teach men to hold their Christian liberty, by
satisfying their conscienees in the lawful use of it.

Love will teach them not to use their Liberty unseasonably to the offense of
their Brethren; the Truth makes you free, if you know the Truth, in John 8. 32.
Truth will give us a Freedom, that we shall not suffer our selves to be under
unnecessary and unwarrantable humane impositions, but shall see our Freedom; 1
Cor. 8. 13.
and in the use of indifferent things, Love will make me so tender, and so
Indulgent to the Conscience of my Brother, that I Will rather deny my self, then
offend him; here is Love and Truth singly, as to the preventing of evil. And
then

Secondly, What Truth and Love do to promote the best good of Saints, being
jointly considered.
Here is Truth and Love, that have a direct Subservience to promote the best
good of Saints in their Communion with Christ; now Truth enlightens the mind
concerning the whole Council of God, concerning agenda, and credenda; teaching
us, that like as Usurpers, not as Libertines, we encroach upon the Headship of
Christ; and Love enflames us, and enclines to embrace Truth, and reject
Falsehood, and what ever is profane, Psalm. 119. 127, 128. I hate every false
way, I love thy statutes, etc. Truth will not only inform us, but engage us to
inform others, to teach and instruct them, that they should know what they
should do, and Love will teach us to do it with Meekness; 2 Timothy 2. 25.
Exhort them that are contrary minded with meekness; oftentimes we preach smart
Sermons, give hot reproofs, like as when Physicians give Potions scalding hot,
they will spit them out again, and cannot endure them, and they go away
prejudiced; I cannot endure to hear such a man, he is so hot and furious, and
vents his own spirit: O it is Love and meekness causes us to deal tenderly, and
softly, meekly with our Brother, and this is indeed the Spirit of the Gospel;
There is no more diabolical Spirit, then a furious Spirit, and no more Gospel
Spirit, then a meek and calm Spirit: But I must contract. The next thing is,

Love and Truth jointly, What Truth and Love being jointly considered.
when they are married jointly together, and go hand in hand, and Saints by
them join heads and hearts, O then, and then only then operate fruitfully:
Truth without Love, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
breeds only empty dry Speculations, which puff up; Love without Truth, is a
blind, if not a Popish, yet an unwarrantable devotion amongst formal
Protestants; Christmas day, then the Lords day, about hearing a Passion Sermon
upon that they call Good Friday, then upon any other day: Here is Love without
Truth, now Truth and Love joined together, would keep the people from being too
fond about these unwarrantable practices; But will some say, what, do ye blame
us about Easter, and a Communion at Easter? etc. Have we it not in Scripture?
See what Scripture they have for it, I would this secret were declared to all
the world, it would break many snares with which diverse are entangled:

In the Acts, there is the word Easter indeed, in the twelfth Chapter, (...)
after the Passover, not after Easter, if truly translated, Acts 12. 4. vid.
Minshuls Dict.
When he had apprehended him, he put him in Prison, and delivered him to four
quaternions of Soldiers to keep him, intending after Easter to bring him forth
to the people: There is Easter, but will you hear now, how it came in first?
You Will easily believe that it must be jumbled in one way or other, if you
understand the Original; There was the word Passover, but no Easter, the word
Easter was not found out in many hundred years after this was spoken of Peter:
But here was a secret.

It was a glorious work of King James, he set diverse Oxford men, and Cambridge
men, and City Ministers, with others to Translate the Bible, a glorious work,
how ever Translations may be slighted amongst us, yet Bugenhagius and other
Divines, when they had the Bible Translated into the Dutch language, for the
Translation of the Bible, they were so affected with the mercy, but it is a
great unhappiness, when the Translation of the Bible shall be brought to serve
our purposes.

I have it from certain hands, such as lived in those times, that when the
Bible had been Translated by the Translators appointed, the New Testament was
looked over by some of the great Prelates, (men I could name some of their
persons) to bring it to speak Prelatical Language, and they did alter (as I am
informed by the means of one that was a great observer in those times, and
lived them) Fourteen places in the New Testament, to make them speak the
Language of the Church of England, that was so cried up: and I Will tell you some
of them.

First, (...), Acts 1. 20.
In the first of the Acts, speaking of Judas, Let another man take his
Bishopric; it is forced, it signifies Charge or Inspection: but that you may
believe that the Bishops are the Apostles Successors, let another man take his
Bishopric.

Again, In the second of the Acts, it is Not suffer my Soul to lie in Hell;
this is clear, Former Translations have it, not suffer my Soul to lie in the
Grave; But it was learned Bilsons Opinion, and thrust into the Thirty nine
Articles, that Christ did Locally descend into hell; and to make that
Translation agree with the Articles, they must change Grave into Hell.

Also the Fourteenth of the Acts, Acts 2. 27. (...).
They ordained them Elders, they loved to cry up Consecration of Churches, and
Dedication, and such kind of things, and Episcopal Ordination too (for these
all advanced the power of the Priests and the Bishops, which brought in
Transubstantiation amongst Papists) and therefore in the Geneva Translation,
There was both (...) and (...), yet sometime the former included in the latter.
that was rendered, chosen by suffrages, by lifting up of hands, the word
Primarily imports that, it may be in some of the Fathers it includes both, they
will tell you, because afterward having chosen Elders by Suffrages or Voices,
they did Ordain them.

Next, I come to the first of the Corinthians, 12. 28. An abominable violence
offered to the Original, God has set in the Church, Apostles, Teachers, Helps,
Governments, and you shall find here a great imposture, it may be now altered,
appearing so gross, but I have seen it, and read it in some Translations, Helps
in Government; (...), Helps, Deacons, Governments, Elders.
which is a most horrible prodigious violence to the Greek words, for they are
both the Accusative case, Helps; there are Elders, Government, there are
Deacons; now to obscure these, you must put it, helps in Government.

I had it related since the delivery of this plain Sermon, by one who most
confidently affirmed it, Note this grand Imposture.
That the learned man to whom it belonged to Translate the first Book of
Samuel, having rendered that which Samuel from God spoke concerning Saul, 1 Samuel
8. 11. This shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, He will
take your sons, etc. He was sent for to Lambeth, and there persuaded to make
the words Will take your sons, etc. Shall take; which he conscienciously
refused, well knowing it was not spoken by Samuel to Saul, by way of direction
for duty what he should do, but Prophetically and Eventually what he would do.

And then lastly, for Easter; this was another place that was altered (as you
have heard) to keep up that holy time of Easter, as they would think it, for
herein was the innocence (though unhappiness unto us) of the Primitive
Worthies, and other Christians; these had fair intentions in bringing in many
things, they thought to win upon the Heathen, and therefore would not wholly
anull, but change things, change some of their great Feasts into
Christmas-time, change now (it may be) Pentecost into Whitsomide, and the
Passover into Easter; it had a good intent: but minding their own intentions,
more then Gods Word, their Rule, you see how these constitutions of men are
degenerated. Now I beseech you, let us not suffer our selves to be abused, when
a word Easter shall be thrust in (for it was diverse hundred years after Peter,
that the word Easter came in) shall we therefore go and keep up an Easter
Communion above all times else, for such pretenses as these are? Brethren, the
more you join Truth and Love together, the more you will be free from these fond
kind of Devotions: And let me say this, It is Blind Devotion indeed; and many
men that are so zealous for these, and women too, they think to get protection
for other courses.

It may be many a Lady that paints and spots, and trifles away precious time,
if she be but zealous at an Easter Communion, she thinks to get a protection
for all vanities else: A Citizen, if he be a Patron to such a Minister,
frequent Lectures, then he may be frollick, and vain, and loose, etc. Here is
Love without Truth.

Let me add this, Truth without Love makes many swell, and contemn others; and
Love without Truth edifies to Superstition and to Idolatry sometimes: What
brought in Praying to Saints, but Love without Truth? But you will allow me to be
so indulgent to my self, as that if either the ordinary place, or the ordinary
time be not observed, to pity a man that has seven months labored under a
quartane Ague, and had a fit late last night. I might make three Uses: and the
first should have been this,

To show you, 1. Use of Instruction.
why many Professors are so barren, and many Christians so dry, and unstable
amongst you, because they have not minded this conjunction of Truth and Love;
which is the Gospel method to grow up into Christ, and so to our Spiritual
thriving: For upon him all our fruit is found, Hos. 14. 8.

Take this as a Use of Caution, 2. Use of Caution.
I beseech you, would to God I knew what language to speak to win upon you: I
would beseech you, this Honorable Representative City, who have so great an
influence, have been so much concerned, and are still so much interested, to
beware that you suffer not your selves, by any policies of men, or cunning
undermining whatsoever, to be cheated of your Truth and Love, left you lose
your selves, and Religion, and City, and Estates, and indeed the Kingdom.
Brethren, there are desperate Designs on foot; and as so much good has been
brought to this Kingdom heretofore by the City, and their Zeal, and their
Purses, and their Courage, and their Fidelity; so now there has been of late
great tryings of conclusions, how to work upon the City so fat, to make them
instrumental for the destruction of all, and the Devil has many active
Soldiers abroad.

Two dangerous Regiments.
There is indeed one unhappy Regiment of those that are Erroneous, though
diverse of them very honest-hearted, and of those that are not such friends to
love as they should be; and certainly, much has been our misery, by reason of
uncharitable mistakes, of Errors in matter of Faith, and Schisms in point of
Love.

Jesuitical, Atheistical, Profane Party, that take advantage of these Errors,
and these Divisions, as he says, Captare impacata and inquieta tempora.
They do fish in troubled waters, that know how to improve all these Errors and
Divisions, to drive on their own Design; and nothing more ordinary then for
some Malignants (though I love not names) or disaffected persons, call them
what you will, those that are no friends to Truth and Love, nor Parliament, nor
Army, nor any Scripture-Reformation, they will come in one company, and
aggravate the Miscarriages of the Parliament and Army, Now what is their plot?
to keep open the Breach, that so at last Episcopacy and the old
Common-Service-Book may come in again: Who sees not this? And I confidently
say, and pray God it may be considered in time, that you, out of any
Discontent, or out of any passionate Animosities (I hope the Lord will keep so
wise a City from it) suffer not your selves to be ridden by them: Do you not
remember first they would have divided Army and Parliament? there was a time
God prevented that: Do you not remember there was a time they would have
divided City and Army? the Lord keep you from that evil: And now their last
conclusion is, to divide those that are Friends, and engaged in one Covenant,
to try if they can set England and Scotland at variance, and engage them in
Blood again: And this is their Plot, and how shall they bring this about? O, by
that malignant Jesuit Contzens Rules (there is a little Book called Look about
you, Translated out of his Works) and he gives you Eight Rules to cheat people
of their Religion, and to serve in Popery by Art: I would you could all get
that little Book, A little book in quarto, called Look about you.
and you should see that very Contzens Spirit is amongst Malignants, and they
walk by the same Rule, Come by Degrees, and come by Compulsions, and such
politic strains he has there: Take notice of your ways; and (my Brethren)
it is most clear, your Friends grieve for it, your Enemies begin to triumph in
it, that they can have such a Power in the City, and with several well-affected
people in the Land, who are friends to Truth, to Peace, and to the Government
of Christ: They will come and tell you, What, no Government; Can ye believe
they are friends to Government? personal Reformation, would they have an
Ecclesiastical Reformation? Will you trust them with a Government? and a
Government of their own settling? what Government think you we should have? Now
so many of the well-affected both of Ministers, and Gentlemen, and Noblemen in
Scotland are against an Engagement in War, and so are they in England, who are
they that are forward to engage? I Will put no Character upon them, you know who
in England are, and you have heard who in Scotland, and what Government think
you they would settle? God keep us from a Government of such men's settling; for
we should have Profaneness, and looseness, they would make such a latitude in
Government, that all should return to the old track again; We must have as
grossly mixed Communions as ever, and their old Ceremonies, their zeal for
Christmas Day, and their Good Friday (more zeal this year then last, for these
things, and more last then before) And what do these men aim at, I beseech you?
The Lord God of Heaven inform us aright, if I be mistaken, I wish I might see
my Error; If any of you may through discontent, be transported, the Lord
discover it to you; And let us take heed of this, that while we are jarring one
with another, we do not betray our selves and all to a third Party, to a Common
Party, that would destroy both: It may be here may be the advantage, which is
but a poor one, first destroy Independents, and then destroy Presbyterians, and
set up Profaneness and Looseness as much as ever. Now the Lord cause you to
join Faith, and Love, and Truth so together, that you may not be cheated by
such men. The third Use* And truly, I have one word more to say, and if I
thought I should dye the next Fit, I should desire to speak to this City, and
that is this*

I come hither this day, 3 Use of Exhortation.
(and though I do it cheerfully to observe your pleasures, yet not without some
hazard to my health) that I may say a few things to you, and the Lord help me,
that I may deliver what I did intend, and that you may entertain it with the
same affection I tender it to you: My business should be, if I had power this
day, as a poor unworthy friend to the Bridegroom, to draw a Contract between
Truth and Love, in all you Citizens of London, that all you, though you may
have some different Opinions, yet I would have Truth and Love matched and
married happily together in you. Brethren, I confess that there are many
Errors, but take heed you be not more offended then needs, politic Designs of
those that serve themselves in these Divisions, and upon you.

First, Some Errors are 1. Contrafidem. 2. Infide. 3. Praeterfidem.
I do not think all Opinions are Errors, that some men call Errors.

Secondly, All Errors are not alike, not equally opposite to the Faith.

Thirdly, Clubbing, and Imprisoning, and Compelling, is not the proper way to
cure Errors, though there may be some course taken to restrain erroneous
persons, when they are opposite to the peace and welfare of the State, etc. But
that I would say, is this, That Errors, they must be reduced and confuted by
Truth; and then withal, it is most certain, That Errors abound not by reason of
a Reformation (and therefore to charge it upon a Reformation, is very gross)
but there is a defect in our Reformation which gives occasion to them.

And as for Love, they cry for Love, for Love, and it is a wonder, men that are
against the very Substantials of the Gospel, yet they will cry out against any
little Heterodox Opinion, and for Love: How can they ever expect that godly and
wicked men should join together in Love? What Churches then should we have?
indeed we will love the most carnal men in the world with a love of pity, but
not with a love of complacency and delight: And Jesus Christ expects it not,
but that we should love as he loves. But then further, what love should we
have? such a love as indeed does tend to Edification, and does tend to
Reformation, and such a love as is Soul-love, and such a love as is a love to
the Head, as well as to the Members; such love as is not complemental, and
frothy, and flattering. O therefore let it be your care still, not to suffer
your selves to be any ways misled, because there are some defects, and want of
Truth and Love, it has always been so: In Origens time and Chrysostoms, they
came to them, complaining, that there are Divisions amongst Saints; they
answered, And Divisions will be: Are all Philosophers of a mind? Are all
Physicians of a mind? and if all Saints be not of a mind, it is no marvel;
only let them have a care to preserve Affection, though they differ in
Opinion. But to close up all.

That great Oracle of the Law, learned Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes, gives
five properties of a Parliament Man, and I think they will as well agree to an
Alderman, to a Common-Councel-man: I desire they may be considered;

First, says he, He must be wise, and constant, so able to discern and know
things a right, persons, circumstances, that he be inflexible.

Secondly, He should have a good Memory, so to remember past evils, that he
labor to prevent future dangers. The other three he takes from the Elephant:
First, says he,

Thirdly, An Elephant is without gall, that gall that he has does transire in
nutrimentum corporis; In Elephante melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis.
if he have heat he will use it, not out of a selfish passionate respect, but
rather guide and direct it to a zeal for the good of the whole Body the
Commonwealth. And then secondly, for that too he draws from the Elephants;

Fourthly, Though the Elephants be maximae virtutis and maximi intellectus, yet
gregatim semper in cedunt, and so not nociva as solivaga are. Homini erranti
viam ostendit.
The Elephants they never go alone, but they go gregatim; and those creatures
that go alone, Bears and Foxes, they are hurtful; those creatures that are most
innocent, they go together: If you will show you are most useful, and innocent
creatures, like sheep, O keep together. And then the third is,

Fifthly, The Elephant is (...), he says, that the Elephant loves men: I would
have all these properties meet in every one of these Worthy Citizens, that are
any way betrusted with the Government of the City: The God of Heaven give you
wisdom, and give you to remember all Providential Dispensations that are past,
and deliver you from passion, and gall, and make you flock together, and head
together, and teach you to love men; All this would still engage you against a
common Enemy: Love men as men, love the bodies of men; and you have given a
most glorious account of that this year, to your praise I must report it, here
is this year, etc. why, here is a glorious proof of your love to men; Love
their bodies, love their souls, love them as Christians, especially love them
as Saints, have a care to breed them up in Callings, train them up in some
degree of learning; this is most honorable, and, I hope, being done with an
honest heart, it will further your account at the great Day.

I yet dare take the boldness to add the Rules, Rules concerning Truth, and
the pursuance of it.
I chiefly intended: Some Rules now for your pursuance of Truth, and some for
the pursuance of Love, that they may be happily married this day.

For Truth, 1. Rule about Truth. Ezekiel. 13. 2.
let the Word of God be Rule and Judge; when you enquire after Truth, study the
revealed will of God, and make use of revelations in concurrence with the Word
of God; but do not set up revelations against the Word of God. It was a
desperate expression from Valde, in a Book of his in great request now adays;
it is true, he had many things good in him, considering the darkness of the
times wherein he lived, a Spaniard; says he, We must use the Scriptures, as we
use Pictures (he was a Papist) use Pictures for a while, till we get
apprehension of the thing or person realized to us, then throw them away,
because now we can pray without Pictures: So, use the Scriptures till we have
got our minds raised and elevated, and then we need no Scriptures. The Lord
deliver us from this Opinion, which tends to undermine the very Word of Christ.

Far be it from me to say any thing against New-Light, properly so called,
though there is some so called, which is, I doubt, Darkness; nor against all
Revelations, for there is a Spirit of Revelation: but I desire it may be wisely
considered, how the Spirit of Revelation discovers it self; Thus chiefly, not
in bringing in a New Gospel, and such New Dispensations to us, as many talk of;
but in Discovering that Word which he has revealed, and we have by us, in
raising our minds to understand that word more fully, and those works of God
that are in it more clearly: I would heartily bless God for it in my self, or
in others, if it were such a Spirit of Revelation, as should help me to see any
Word of God, or any Work of God in me more clearly: Ephesians. 4. 17.
This is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation the Apostle to the Ephesians
speaks of; but if you will talk of Revelations, that you have Revelations beyond
the Word, and it may be sometimes in a manner contrary to the Word; surely this
is not the way of truth. Cassainus his Collat. 2. de discretione, cap 5.
There is a poor old man Hero in Cassianus, that thought he had a Revelation,
that when he was in the bottom of ae pit, he should get out; but for all his
Revelation, he was deceived. I desire such things may be considered. The next
thing is this,

Mind Truth wisely: 2. Rule about Truth.
I would say under this head,

1. Be sure it be Truth that you contend for; not for unwarranted Ceremonies,
not for trifles, for those things that deserve not the name of Divine Truth:
And then

2. Proportion your zeal to the nature of Truth: There are some Truths de fide,
circa fidem, and in some sense praeter fidem; I must not allow the like zeal
for all; I will have the Substantial part of my zeal for Substantial Truths,
and for other Truths, so much zeal as the nature of them calls for: This is to
mind Truth wisely, this is that that becomes you. And then withal,

Mind Truths according to the directions of Truth: 3. Rule about Truth. (...).


1. Meddle not with things too high, be sober; A Spirit of Sobriety in Divine
things, and Modesty in Secret things, is most suitable to a Saint, Romans 12. 3.

2. Mind not Curiosities, with neglect of those things that are necessary:
Affirm constantly ( says Paul to Titus) that those that are believers maintain
good works, but as for fables, let them go, Tit. 3. 8.

3. If you will do what becomes you concerning Truth, Do not clap a Jus Divinum
rashly upon every one of your Opinions: O that brings us into a great deal of
bondage; diverse things may be very good, and yet better, and more safely
settled is Prudentials, as Humane Constitutions, then as Divine Constitutions,
unless we be sure we are upon Scripture-grounds, then I say nothing against it.
What is the reason now that the Pope cannot alter? Jus Divinum nititur verbo
Divino. Ames.
I have heard it from some that have spoke with learned sober Papists, asking
them, What think you of Transubstantiation, or the like Opinions? they profess,
Though we would, yet we cannot alter them, the Pope having asserted them, who
is infallible; so that if we change one Point of our Religion, we spoil all.
Jus Divinum, we cannot alter it, for we are engaged to hold it, though we were
mistaken: I had rather settle too little, then too much, then we leave room for
New Discoveries; We may better add then diminish: I cannot take away a Jus
Divinum, without a great deal of disparagement.

Do not presently obtrude with confidence your own conceits upon others, 4.
Rule about Truth.
but rather mistrust them: Learned men have had their Errors, the wisest men
have been deceived; and do not rashly run from one Extremity to another.
Chrysostom he would, and others they would run from the Manichees so far, that
they went too far toward Pelagius: Many of us run so far from Popery and
Prelacy, Extremities, very dangerous and unhappy. O take heed, let me add this
further, as you would be friends to truth,

Know that you have to deal with those men, 5. Rule about Truth.
that will bring in Errors, sensim sine sensu; as the Devil dealt with Adam and
Eve at first, how did he beguile them? he corrupted their minds by degrees
(take heed of his methods) from the simplicity that is in Christ: 2 Cor. 11. 3.
You shall first have a little step, and something like a Truth, and that may
be disputed at first, then comes another, and then comes another, and so at
last you are involved in inextricable Errors. But the sixth and last thing I
shall say under this head;

Take heed of being too far engaged in a party; 6. Rule about Truth.
it is the way to sell a man's judgment: for if I be one of a party, I must
strain hard to say as they say, and subscribe as they subscribe, else I shall
be an Apostate; this is dangerous, then all must be proclaimed Heretical that
differ. Many a man has broke his Conscience, violated his peace, by this
Engagement, because he must not break with his Party.

It is a notable rule Politicians have, He that inclines to neither Party,
Inclinans ad neutram partem fit Dominis utriusque.
is master of both: And I profess, I know not any generation in England that
sleep so quietly, as those that are unengaged to this or that Party: What there
is good in Episcopacy, they will not decline it, because the Bishops had it;
What there is good amongst the Independents, they will close with it; What
there is good in Presbytery, they will entertain that: And these are the men
that Preach with Freedom, that converse with Freedom. I do desire and hope
there may be a good Moderate Presbytery settled amongst us; yet I Will profess to
the world, I Will not be so engaged to own every thing in it, that I will not
embrace any thing that is good in another way: The Lord keep us from being
engaged to such Parties, that will make us slaves in our Consciences to them.

In your contending for Truth, 1. Rule about Love.
let there not be an abatement of Love: Think it not enough to be an Orthodox,
unless you be a loving christian too, 1 Cor. 16. 14.
that all things may be done in love, Ephesians. 5. 2.
that there you may walk in love, Col. 3. 12, 13.
and be clothed with love; three places are to that purpose. Let me add this
then further, that you may advance this happy Union and Marriage betwixt Truth
and Love,

Love men more for the work of God you see in them, 2. Rule about Love.
then you slight them for any such defects or mistakes, as are consistent with
godliness and with Saintship, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Do not think ever to recover men with passionate invectives; 3. Rule about
Love.
Do not think to confute their Opinions with vehement reproachful speeches: It
is Love that melts, that wins upon them: And I desire that you, and I, and all
Ministers might practice this, That when we deliver the most sharp reproofs, it
might be Scripture Language, and with a Scripture-Spirit, that may be the way
to recover them; whereas the other hardens them it may be they will never hear
you more, and then what have you got by it? you may preach against them absent,
and that prejudices them still, till at last it may be you have preached away
almost all your hearens. Further, that you may advance this happy Union of
Truth and Love,

Study to please, 4. Rule about Love.
every one your godly Neighbor, for his good to edification; and such as are
strong, must bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 5. 1, 2.
and not to please our selves, says Paul. It argues a great deal of proud
fondness of thy own conceit, and want of love to thy Brother, (...).
when thou will contemn every one who attains not thy measure. There must be a
Christian personal Toleration, forbearing one another in love; Basil.
though there may not be a State- Toleration of all Religions. Ephesians. 5. 2.


Do not delight in affixing reproachful Names; 5. Rule about Love.
to cry down people under this or that Name, never any good comes by it: for
there is this inconvenience, You wrap in all, that it may be do not deserve it,
not going so far as others: As to cry down all men under the name of
Anabaptists, though it may be some of them do only scruple about the Baptizing
of Infants, and are far from the opinions of the German Anabaptists, who deny
Magistracy, etc. and so, many such like instances I might give. Let meadde
this: If you would indeed get a Spirit of love, and advance it, let this be
your care,

That in the midst of all differences of Judgment, 6. Rule about Love.
you maintain a sweet harmony of affection, and labor to study a sweet
compliance: What if thy Brother be not come up to thy Light, will thou
therefore renounce him, and reject him? It may be God intends not to all men
the same proportion: Shall I contemn my Brother, because I have more grace? If
another man should renounce me, Phil 1. 27. and 3. 15, 16.
that has more grace then I, what would become of me: These and many such
Rules I might give. I have but this one word, and that is as a means by way of
direction, how to marry these, Truth and Love together: O that the Lord would
help us to enter into Covenant to complete the Marriage, seriously to resolve
now, That for time to come we labor more to Truth it in love, and more to love
with Truth; labor lovingly to embrace the Truth, and sincerely to pursue Love:
The very Heathen could say this, Concordia^ communae periculum tollitur.
and it is a good Rule, I wish we Christians might learn it too. If you would
be too hard for the common Enemy, and not suffer him to gain advantage against
you, agree, otherwise he will prevail over both Parties of honest-hearted
Christians (for so I am confident there are amongst those that differ in
Church Matters) God forbid either of them should be destroyed: I say, if you
would keep a third Party from destroying both, let there be Concord; your union
will be strength, it will engage the presence of God; whereas your Divisions
ali^nate and estrange God from you. And here let me tell you a Story out of
Livy, Livy. 1. 28.
There was one Packuvius, that if he had not been so vicious, had been happy,
and more worthy of our imitation, but his practice herein is commodious for
you, There being a great difference betwixt the Commons and the Senators* and
nothing would satisfy the Commons, but the Senators death; he gets all the
Senators once by a stratagem into the Senate house, and locks them in, and
comes to the Commons, Well, (...) have now got them at your mercy; and then
they were frollick, and would be revenged; he resolves to give them out one by
one: and they had the first out: But I pray you Gentlemen, said he* let us
consider, if we destroy all the Senators, who shall we have in the place of
them to govern the City? Who shall come in the stead of them to rule? Why, one
man would have this Governor, another man would have that; so at last they fell
all to pieces, and they were glad to let the Senators alone: then he quieted
the Commoners, and fetched off the Senators, because they could not agree upon a
Successo; you have discontents in the City and Country too too many, and if it
be the Lords blessed will* I would they might be healed: and some would have
the Army destroyed, and a great many care not what becomes of the Parliament,
and I fear, many care not what becomes of the City; but suppose this, That
either Parliament or Army should for prese^^ be destroyed (I speak to wise
Citizens) before you would have either of them destroyed, consider who should
come in their places: Malignants should come into their Power, and destroy you
and the Kingdom too, better the Commons had spared the lives of the Senators.
Remember this Story, and make this use of it. I have said enough to wise men,
and I Will end all with that Prayer of John in his second Epistle to the elect
Lady* and her Children, Grace be with you, mercy and peace from God the Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love: And
hope you will all say Amen to it.

FINIS.

