A SHORT, But Clear, DISCOVRSE, Of the Institution, Dignity, and End of the
Lord's Day.

Upon Occasion of those words of St. JOHN. I was in the spirit on the Lord's Day.

Written by George Hakewill, Doctor in Divinity, and Archdeacon of Surrey.

LONDON,

Printed by John Raworth, for George Thomason and Octavian Pullen, MDCXLI.

REVEL. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day.
THey are the words as ye see of Saint John the holy Evangelist, the blessed
Apostle, the beloved Disciple, the glorious Confessor, the soaring Eagle, the
Son of Thunder, the Divine by an Excellency, and the Penman of this most
Divine and excellent Book of the Revelation: And here he makes known unto us
the place where, the time when, the state in which he was, when the high and
deep mysteries of this Book were made known unto him: The place where it was,
in the Isle of Patmos, whither by Domitian the Emperor, he was banished for
the Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, as it is in the verse going
before my Text: The time when, on the Lords Day, the best Day of the week,
shining among the other days vel^t inter ignes Luna minores, as the brightest
Moon, when she fills-her circle with light, among the other Stars: The state in
which himself then was, in the Spirit, in Spiritual exercises, in Spiritual
meditations, and, by means thereof, in Spiritual raptures and elevations, in
Spiritual ex^asies of the soul, above the ordinary pitch of humane condition.

We have here presented to our consideration these four things. First, That
there is a certain time, a certain day, which may deservedly be called, and is
indeed the Lords day. The second, That the d^y here spoken of, is that
particular day, and why it is ^o c^lled. The third, Is the great privileges,
and special prerogatives of this day, beyond, and above all other. The fourth,
Is the duties which belong to us upon this day; it is to be in the Spirit, as
St. John was; though not in Spiritual Trances, yet in Spiritual Exercises and
Meditations.

For the first of these, it is certain, most certain, That there is not, nor
ever was any Nation under the Cope of Heaven since the first Creation, which
acknowledged a Deity, but withal it acknowledged a Divine Worship and Service
due to this Deity; and that not only inward in the mind, but outward, in
sacred and solemn Rites and Observances, as being both the kindly effects, and
lively characters of ^he in bred Notions and Motions of the Soul: And to this
purpose they had not only Temples, and Altars, and Sacrifices, and forms of
Invocation, but Festival days, set days, or days set apart; as for the
public and Civil affairs, so likewise for the religious Rites and
Ceremonies. And this they had partly from the dictate of reason, which tells
us, That every action requires, as a place, so a time suitable thereunto,
partly from experience, which teaches us, That that which is left at random,
and has no day prefixed, is seldom performed as it should be on any day; and
partly from those broken remainders of the Image of God left in them, and an
imitation of the Church of God, though from it, in the main points of his
Worship, they had much degenerated.

It may be well thought, that the first man created immediately by God himself,
even in the state of Innocence, had both a certain place and time for the
Worship of his Maker; Howsoever sure it is, that before we read of the fall of
man, we read of a Seventh day, blessed and sanctified by God himself, Genesis 2.
3. sanctified, that by man it might be kept holy to his glory; and blessed,
that man by keeping of it holy, might receive a blessing from God. When Enos
was born of Seth, the son of Adam, it is said, That men then began to call
upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4. at the last verse: that is (as I take it) to
call upon his Name in Public Assemblies; for which, no doubt but they had a
certain place appointed, lest otherwise men might be disappointed in their
meetings: And most like it is that it was the same day which Abell, and Seth,
and Adam observed before them, and the rest of the Patriachs after them, that
day in which God himself rested, having fully finished the great work of the
worlds Creation. Etiam ante legem non dubito primis illis patribus doctore Deo,
diem hunc solennem, augustum and sacrum fuisse, says the learned Mercerus.
Even before in Genesis 2. 3.
the Law I doubt not but this Day by Gods teaching, was solemn and sacred to
those primitive Fathers. And Peter Martyr, Nec ejus observatio coepit lege Loc.
Com. c^s 2. c. p 7.
data in Sina, sed ante celebrabatur; Neither did the observation thereof begin
with the giving of the Law in Sinai, but it was celebrated before. Of the same
opinion is Rivet, who likewise answers all the In 2 ^ Genesis exerci^. 13.
arguments brought to the contrary, which together with them I the rather
embrace, for that before the giving of the Law in Mount Sinai, we have an
express and severe charge for the keeping of it in gathering Manna, Exodus 16.
and upon that occasion two such miracles showed to ratify and magnify that
day, as seldom shall ye read of more remarkable through the book of God;
whereof the one was, that the Manna fell in great plenty upon all the other
days of the week, but upon the Seventh none at all; The other, That being
gathered on the Sixth day, it remained sweet till the Seventh, and not so on
any other day of the week besides: Either of which miracles were doubtless as
great or greater than that fabulous one of Pliny, seconded by some of the
Jewish Rabbis, of a River in Judea, which is said to run the six first
days of the week, and on the seventh to dry up; so as we shall not need go
seek out that River to authorize that day.

Yet after all this was this very day again for the better observation of it,
proclai^ed in Mount Sinai, and that in a dreadful and glorious manner, Exodus
20. having a more solemn entrance into it, and more weighty reasons to hedge it
in and confirm it, than any other of the Commandments. And besides, all the
rest are negative only, the first of the second Table, and this last of the
first Table are affirmative, nay this only is both affirmative and negative,
standing in the midst of the two Tables, to show that they both depend upon the
observation of it; which I conceive to be the reason that in some passages of
Scripture the keeping of the Sabbath day is put for the whole body of Gods
Worship, and pressed with more earnestness both in the following Chapters of
the same book, and in the books following of Moses and the Prophets, than any
of the other Precepts; so as till the coming of Christ, and at his coming too,
nay, for a while after his death and passion, resurrection and ascension (that
the mother Synagogue (as St. Augustine speaks) might be buried with the greater
honor) it was d^ely and constantly observed by the Church of God. But when the
fullness of time was come for the abrogation of it, yet the equity of the
Commandment (which Divines do call the moral part thereof) remaining still in
its full strength and vigor, required not only some certain time to be set
apart for the public Worship of God, but at least one day in Seven: which is
not only the judgment of In Genesis 2. Hom. 18.
Chrysostom, and Loc. Com. Class. 2. cap. 7.
Peter Martyr, and De cult. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 11. His accedt Robertus Loeus
in effigiatione ^ua very Sabbatismi, page 48.
Bellarmine, and Doctor Fulke, in his answer to the Rhemtsts, commenting upon
the words of my Text, and other grave Divines; but of our profound and
judicious Hooker, writing purposely against the Schismatics of our time, so as
we need not suspect him of Puritanisme: We are bound (says he in the 5th Book
of his Ecclesiastical policy, and seventeenth Paragraph, Touching the manner
of celebrating Festival days) We are bound to account the sanctification of
one day in seven, a duty which Gods immutable law does exact for ever, although
with us the day be changed, in regard of a new revolution, begun by our Savior
Christ, yet the same proportion of time, the same proportion of time
continues, which was before by way of a perpetutuall homage, a perpetual
h^age, never to be dispensed withal, nor remitted. Then which, I see not what
can be spoken more plainly or more punctually; which is the rather to be
marked, for that the Author being a man of admirable learning, and of a deep
judgment, and by reason thereof making many doubts to himself, (which the
ignorant by reason of their shallow and narrow capacities, hardly discern, and
easily swallow) is notwithstanding in the point so positive and peremptory as
you see. Whereunto we may add the testimony of our Homilies, allowed to be
read in our Churches by public authority, making also one day in the week by
the moral part of the Commandment to be consecrated; and that not in Of the
(...) and time of prayer. part. 1a.
part, but wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. And
truly this our Churches resolution therein to me weighs more than the opinions
of many others to the contrary, though I will not censure, much less
absolutely condemn them.

My conclusion shall be, That as the tenth part, ad minimum is Gods portion for
the fruits of the earth, so the seventh part of his proportion for time: and
both of them not only under the Leviticall Law but under the Gospel; the
number of seven is sacred, as Philo in his book de opificio mundi has
learnedly showed; but for proof thereof I will go no further then this very
book of the Revelation, wherein we read of Seven Angels, and Seven Trumpets,
and Seven Vialls, and Seven Seals and Seven Stars, and Seven Candlesticks, and
Seven Churches, and Seven Spirits before the throne of God; all which seems to
imply the number to be Mystical and sacred, and consequently most properly due
to religious exercises in public, consisting in the sacred Service of
allmighty God.

All which notwithstanding, some such are found professi^g themselves
Christians, as Anabaptists and (...), who not only deny any set time to be
appropriated to Gods service, by the law of Christ; but further affirm, that
no such time is now by Christians living under the Gospel in any sort to be
observed: And to this end they wrest those passages of the Apostle Gal. 4. 10.
Romans 14. 5. Col. 2. 16. they wrest them I say, the only scope of the Apostle in
those passages being to cry down the Ceremomall use, or Superstitious abuse of
days, as well among the Jews as the Gentiles; not to make holy days set
apart for Gods Service unlawful; nay, it is certain that in other places he
m^kes the^ lawf^ll, and this day here spoken of in my Text in pa^ticular,
as well by his practice as his precept: which will appear in my second general
part which offers it self in the next place; namely, that the day here spoken
of in my Text is that particular day, which is now by us Christians in a
speci^ll manner set apart for the service of God: In the handling whereof we
have two things to be considered: first the several names of this day, and
then why it is termed the Lords day.

This day is sometimes called the Sabbath, sometimes Sunday, sometimes the
first day of the week, sometimes the Eighth day, and sometimes the Lords day,
as here in my Text.

The name of the Sabbath (I must confess) in the ancient Councels or Fathers
we shall hardly find applied to this day, unless withal they add Sabbathum
Christianorum the S^bboth of Christians; For when they speak of the Sabbath
absolutely, without any addition, they always understand the Saturday the
Seventh day, the Sabbath day of the J^wes, which except it be heedfully
observed of those who are conversant in their writings, it may be an occasion
of much error and mistake. Which notwithstanding I make no question, but this
day may without any just suspicion of Iudaisme be called the Sabbath: and that
for these Reasons. First, because our Savior himself (as I conceive) has so
called it: pray that your flight be not in the winter, nor Man. 24. 20.
on the Sabbath day; where he speaks of the destruction of Hierusilem, which
fell out about forty years after his Ascension, whereas the Sabbath of the
Jews was abrogated by his resurrection, and consequently it cannot well be
understood, but of the Sabbath of Christians, the day here spoken of. My second
Reason is, for that Sabbath signifying Rest, the word in regard of that
signification is appliable to our day, as well as to theirs, it being a day of
Rest to us, as well a^ to them: True indeed it is that the Sabbath was so
called a day of rest, in a double respect: First because God him^e upon that
day rested from the works of the Creation; and then because they in imitation
of God, and by commandment from God were likewise to rest upon the same day;
whereas ours cannot be called a Sabbath in respect of the first, that is Gods
rest; but only in respect of the second, that is our rest. My third reason is,
for that our Lords day succeeded in the place of the Sabbath, and was ordained
to the same general end; as our spiritual exercises are called Sacrifices,
because they succeed in the place of their Sacrifices, so may our Lords day not
unfitly be termed the Sabbath, because it succeeds in the place of t^eir
Sabbath.

Secondly, this day here spoken of in my Text is sometimes called Sunday, which
though it be a name imposed by the Gentiles, who knew not the true God, giving
the names of the seven Planets to the seven days of the week; yet for
distinctions s^ke I see not, but we Christians may without superstition or
relation to them call the days of the week by the same names that they did,
as well as we do the Planets; or as God himself calls the stars by ^eathenish
names, Ple^ades, Orion, and Arcturus with ^is son^es, Job 38. or as S. L^ke
Acts 28. ^ells us that the ship of Alexandria in which S. Paul ^ailed had the
sign of Castor and Pol^ux, heathenish Gods: yet it may not be denied, but the
primitive Christians who daily conversed among those i^olatrous Gentil^s, in
de^station of their Idolatry, for the most part forbore those profane
heathenish names; the first day they usually called the Lords day, and the last
Vide Hieron. Epist. H^bid. quest. 4. and Ambros. S^ 61.
the Sabbath, and those between the first and the last, feria sec^nda, tertia,
qu^rta, quinta, sexta, the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days of the
week; though they were not so scupulous, but sometimes they were content to use
the names of Sunday too, as witnesses Eusebi^s in his fourth book of the life
of Cap. 19.
Constantine, Hunc salutarem di^m (says he, speaking of the Lords day) quem
lucis vel Solis appellamus, and so it is called more then once by Justinius
Martyr, in his second Apology: And truly considering that upon this day the
light was made, which being first dispersed was afterward gathered into the
body of the Sun, and withal that Christ the Sun of righteousness (as he
is called Mal. 4. 2.) rose again upon this day, I see not but that we
Christians may without any just offense name it Sunday.

Thirdly, it is sometimes called the first day of the week, thus was it
constantly called by the Jews, as being the beginning both of the week and of
the world; thus by Moses Genesis 1. 5. thus by all the four Evangelists Math. 28.
1. Mark 16. 2. Luke 24. 1. Io. 20. 1. and again by St. Luke Acts 20. 7. and by
St. Paul 1 Cor. 16. 2. nay more then so, amongst all nations, that keep any
account of weeks, and months and years, this day is accounted the first day of
the week; which without doubt they borrowed either by tradition from the
Patriarchs, and so from Adam, or from the writings of Mos^s, which many of them
read. But by the way we are here to observe, that this being the first day of
the week cannot possibly be the seventh; one of the seven and the first and
chief of the seven it is, but the seventh (if we will follow Gods account) it
is not, nor cannot be so called: so that what is spoken in the fourth
Commandment of the Sabbath as the seventh day, I s^y as it is the seventh day,
cannot be appliable to this day of ours, except we should make the first and
the seventh all one.

Fourthly, it i^ sometimes called the eighth day; for as it is the first in
regard of the week following, so is it the eighth in regard of that going
before. Sufficient war^a^: we have for this name Ioh. 20. 26. where though we
read after eight days, yet by the consent of all Divines it is to be
understood of the eigh^h day after Christ's Resurrection, which must needs be
the same day of the week with the first day of the week going before: Nos in
octava die, quae et prima In prolog. in Psalm. expla.
est perfecti Sabbathi, festivitate laetamur, says S. Hillarie: and St.
Augustine, Dies octavus qui and primus, speaking of this day in his Epistle to
Ianuarius, the Epist. 119.
the same is both the first day and the eighth day; where he likewise tells us,
that this day was not unknown to the holy Fathers and Prophets, before the
Incarnation of Christ; nam and pro octava Psalmus Idem habet Cypri. Epist. 8.
Lib. 3.
inscribitur, and octavo die circumcid^bantur Infantes, says he; for both a
Psalm is entitled for the eighth, and the eighth day after their b^rth were
children circumcised. And again in his Enarration upon Psalm. 89. (or the 90. as
we reckon) speaking of the number of Fifteen made up of seven and eight; Quorum
primus (says he) insinuat propter Sabbathi observationem Testam. vetus,
secundus Testam. novum propter Domini resurrectionem; whereof the first by
reason of the observation of the Sabbath signifies the old Testament; the
second the ^ew Testament, by reason of our Lords Resurrection: Hinc sunt in
Templo quinde. Idem habet Hilar. in praefat in ^salmos salmos.
cim gradus, hence it is that the ascent to the Temple was by fiftee^e steps,
that there are fifteen psalms of degrees, that the Flood rose above the
highest mount^ins fift^en cubits, and si qui^us aliis locis sacratus
comme^datur hic numerus, and hence it is if this (...) number be recommended
unto us, in any other places. Whereunto he might have added, that eight
persons were saved in the Arc, as Saint Peter has piecisely observed in his
first Epistle and 3. cap. and in that respect, in the second chapter of his
second Epistle, does he call N^h the eighth person.

Fifthly and lastly, and chiefly, it is called the Lords day, as here in my
Text, and ag^in, 1 Cor. 16. 1. as Beza in his Annotations on that place tells
us, according to an ancient ^anuscript which himsel^e both saw and read: where,
by the Lord no doubt is understood the Lord Jesus, which was the usual name
given him by the Apostles, both whiles he lived, and after his death, all other
Lords bein bu^ Underlings, and all Kings but vassals in regard of him; from him
they hold their Crown^, and ^o him they m^st bend their knees, and give an
account of their kingdoms; To him I s^y who h^th on his Revel. 19.
fest^re and on his thigh a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
being in his power and Majesty, as far above the greatest Lords on earth, as
they are above the meanest of their Subjects.

Now this day is called the Lords day, or this Lords day, because to the honor
and service of the Lord it was both observed, and enjoined by his Apostles
specially in memory of his resurrection, and that by special order from
himself; of three of these, namely that to the honor of the Lord it was
observed by his Apostles, and specially in memory of his resurrection, no
Christian I think makes any doubt; so as neither of them will need any further
proof: two things then remain only to be proved: the one, that this day was not
only observed by the Apostles, but by them also enjoined to be observed by the
Church: the other, that both this observation and injunction were by special
order from the Lord himself.

To prove that it was by the Apostles themselves enjoined to be observed by the
Church, it shall not be requisi^e to vouch any express precept of theirs; it
will be sufficient if by necessary deduction from any such precept it be made
clear; neither can we otherwise prove many doctrinall points in controversy,
between us and the Church of Rome. Now for such a kind of proof I would go no
further then that precept of the Apostle 1 Cor. 16. 1. Concerning the
Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of G^latia,
even so do ye, upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God has prospered him. That the Collection for the poor is here
enjoined; it cannot be denied, the words themselves proclaim it; and that this
Collection was inseparably annexed to the Lords Day, because on it the
Congregation was assembled; not only this Text, but the Ecclesiastical
Writers give plentiful testimony: from whence the conclusion in my judgment
is clear and fair, That the Lords Day it self, in which such Collections were
made, was consequently by them enjoined; for where two things are inseparably
united, he who enjoins the on^, cannot, but by consequent likewise, enjoin the
other: As when God said, Let there be light, if light cannot be ^ep from heat,
it was in effect as much as if he had said, Let there be heat. Thus much does
Doctor Rivet collect from in 2^ Genesis ever cit. 13 versus finem.
these words of the Apostle. And thus much, it should seem. Saint Augustine, in
his 251 Sermon, de tempore, gathered either (...) this, or some other passage
of this kind; where he teaches us, That the Apostles not only obs^ved this
day, but religiosa solennitate habendum sanxerunt, decreed it to be (...) (...)
(...) Lo^us in (...) Sab^mi page 47. His c^usis (...) Apo stol^, (...) ex (...)
domin^um (...) randum statuerent.
kept in a solemn religious manner: from whence we may safely concl^de, That at
leastwise, in his judgment, it was not only their practice, but their precept.

The other point remaining to be proved, is, That both this p^actice and
precept of theirs, was by order from the Lord himself, and that not only by
secret inspiration, but by overt Acts. As the Sacrament is c^lled the Lords
Supper, because it was instituted by the Lord, and that excellent Form of
Prayer which he has left us, the Lords Prayer, beca^se it was composed by the
Lord; so is this Day called the Lords, because it was ordained by him. He is
that Son of man, who is Lord even of the Sabbat^; Mar. 2 27.
As he dissolved the Sabbath of the Jews, so he appointed the Lords day of the
Christians to succeed it. New Lords they say, new laws, which in him was
verified; new Sacraments, new sacrifices, a new Priesthood, a new Pentecost, a
new Sabbath. Thus old things passed away, and al^ things by him became new; and
if all other things belonging to his service, then surely the day too, in which
this service is solemnly to be performed, that so it might be suitable to his
service.

This blessed day was not only foreseen, and foretold by the Psalmist, but the
making of it, by the Lord. This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118. 24. where no doubt he prophecies of this
very Lords day here mentioned in my Text; and so have many of the Fathers
rightly applied it: and among the rest Hom^l. in hoc dictum, Omnia mihi tradita
sunt a patre.
Athana^ius, and Epist. 83.
Ambrose, and De resurrect. sermon. 5.
Chrysostom; this is the day says the great S^. Sermon. de tempo. 15 ^.
Augustine; in which our Lord was baptized in Jordan; in which he turned water
into wine at a wedding feast; in which he blessed five loaves, wherewith he
satisfied five thousand men; in which he rose again from the dead; In which he
entered into the house where the Apostles were assembled, the doors being shut;
in which he sent down the holy Ghost upon them; finally, in which we expect his
coming to judgment. Besides all which, Bellarmine in his third Book de cultu
Sanctorum, and eleventh Chapter, is confident, that he was also born on the
same day, which he proves by the Dominicall letter of that year, falling just
upon the 25th of December. And shall we imagine that on this day he was born,
on this day baptized, To these Prerogatives, some (...), that our Savior was
likewise circum^i sed on the Lords day, and that on the same day the star first
appeared to the Wisemen. See (...) r^lig. 2. 4.
on this day wrought his first and greatest miracles, on this day rose again,
on this day appeared to his Apostles; and lastly, on this day sent down the
holy Ghost upon them (the three last of which are most evident in holy
Scripture) and yet had no special design for the sanctifying of this day in a
special manner.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, that upon this day his Apostles, and in
them their successors received from him their Benediction, their Mission, and
Commission; Peace be unto you, there is the Benediction, John 20. 19. As my
Father has sent me, so I send you, there is their Mission, verse. 21. And when
he had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive the holy
Ghost; whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they
are retained, there is their Commission, verse. 22. 23. And again, his disciples
being assembled as before (in all likelihood by his Commandment) for the
exercise of religious duties, upon the very same day of the week following, he
appears to them again; as for the imparting of other mysteries unto them, so in
particular for the ^rengthning of Thomas his faith, who at his former
apparition was absent from that assembly: yea, after this again, before his
Ascension he appeared unto them sundry times, by the space of forty days, Acts
1 3.
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; and good Divines are
of opinion that he still appeared upon the same day; as it is certain that ten
days after his Ascension, he sent down the Acts 2. 1.
holy Ghost the same day upon his Apostles, being then again assembled, being
the first day of the week, and the day of his Resurrection, or the Lord's Day;
on which he also by the Ministry of an Angel imparted these most divine
Revelations to St. John; All which should argue, that this indeed was the day,
which he had selected and sealed for the religious Assemblies of his Church, in
all future ages, even to the worlds end. Neither is this my opinion alone, but
Saint Cyrill in his Exposition upon Lib. 12. c. 58.
Saint John's Gospel, is of the same mind; and Maldonate the Jesuit freely
confesses, that some In Ioh. 20. v. 26.
Conjecture may from thence be made, Diem Dominicum aliquam ex Christi
voluntate originem habuisse, That the Lords day had some kind of rise, from
the will of the Lord himself: yet because he sees the Schoolmen take another
way, he professes himself unwilling to forsake their Company: But had he been
free to take his own course, no doubt he would easily have found therein
somewhat more, then a bare Conjecture.

Which I am the rather induced to believe, for that Ribera a Bird of the same
Feather and Nest, in his Commentaries upon the words of my Text, tells us that
Justin Martyr in his second Apology to Antoninus the Emperor teaches,
Apostolos a Christo hujus diei celebritatem accepisse, That the Apostles
received the celebrity of this day from the Lord himself; which he disproves
not, but rather allows; and withal adds, that the Apostles themselves
delivered it over, and recommended it to the Church in their Constitutions, as
witnesses Clemens, Lib. 2. cap. 59. and lib. 5. cap. 9. and lib. 7. cap. 31.
37. And herewith accords the great Athanasius in the very entrance of his
Homily De Semente; Anciently says he, the Sabbath was in greatest request;
Sed eam solennitatem Dominus in diem Dominicum transtulit, but the solemnity
thereof, the Lord himself has now put over, and conferred upon the Lord's Day;
and again, in another place, Octavo Sabbathum dissolvit: In hoc dictum. Om^ia
mibi, etc. ^ist, 119.
And to me Saint Augustine in his Epistle to Ianuarius seems to fall in the
same way: The Lords day, says he, was declared by the Resurrection of the
Lord, Et ab illo coepit habere festivitatem suam, not ab illa, but ab illo,
from him it began to be made Festival.

To these Ancients might be added, of our own Divines, Doctor Fulk in his
answer to the Rhemists on the words of my Text; and Master Perkins not Lib. 2.
cap. 17.
only in his Exposition of these words, But in his Cases of Conscience; And
among foreign Divines, the learned Iunius as well in his Lectures upon Genesis 2.
3. as his notes upon Tertullian; in the former of which he says, that this day
was set apart for holy uses, Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius
observatione and instituto, Not by any humane tradition, but by the observation
and institution of Christ In cap 16. Apol. Piscator eti^m, Dominicum diem ab
ipso Domi^o insti^utum, and ad sanctific^dum m^ndatum esse affim^t. in A^o. 1.
10.
himself; in the latter, Vt quem Dominus tum resurrectione sui corporis, tum
ordinaria Ecclesiae suae synaxi sanctificaverat, ut Cyrillus in Johan.
annotavit: As being the day which the Lord has consecrated, not only by the
Resurrection of his Body, but by the ordinary Assemblies of his Church, as
Cyrillus upon Io^n has observed.

The sum of all is this, That the Apostles had not a freedom of choice left
to themselves, what day they would set apart for the public exercises of
Religion, but what was foretold by the Prophets, what was shaddowed before, and
under the Law; what they practiced, and delivered herein, they received from
the Lord: As one of them speaks for 1 Cor. 11. 23.
all, in another case indeed, yet not improperly appliable to our present
purpose: which being so, they doubtless derogate much, both from the honor of
the Lord's Day, and from the Lord himself, the Author thereof, who would make it
no better then an humane ordination, or at best an Ecclesiastical
Constitution, framed according to the pattern of the Apostles; and consequently
changeable either by the Civil Magistrate, as some, or by the Church as
others: Whereas the Primitive Christians were so constantly resolved of the
immutable fixednesse thereof, that they expected his return, to the general
judgment upon the same Lact. 7. ^.
day, which himself had ordained in all succeeding ages to be kept holy: And
therefore they thought they could never sufficiently grace it with the highest
titles of pre-eminence, they could possibly devise: which is my third general
part, and now presents it self to our view: the notable prerogatives I mean,
and special privileges of this day beyond, and above all other.

As all time, so all days which are a part of time are of the Lords making:
and as a part of time, so are they equal among themselves, as well in Dignity
as Duration; but in regard of the end to which, and the use for which they are
set apart; so are they distinguished each from the other; which by Syracides
Ca^. 33. ^ 78, 79.
is well and truly expressed: why says he, does one day excel another, when as
all the light of every day in the year is from the Sun? whereunto he makes
answer, By the knowledge of the Lord, they were distinguished, and he altered
seasons and feasts; some of them has he made high-dayes, and hallowed them;
and some of them, has he made ordinary days: And surely, if any day be an
high-day, it should in reason be the Lord's Day. The eminency whereof, it shall
not be amiss to consider comparatively in relation to other days: First to
the Jewish Sabbath; and then to other days of the week, specially other
Holidayes of the Christians.

For the first of these, as by the Gentiles the Lords day was usually called
Dies Solis, Sunday; So was the Jewish Sabbath Dies Saturni, Saturns-day, or
Saturday; and how much the Sun in bigness exceeds, and excells in brightness
and influence, the star by them named Saturn, so much does the Lord's Day
exceed, and excel the Jewish Sabbath. Their Sabbath was instituted in memory
of the Creation; our Lord's Day of the Redemption of the world: Now for the
Creation of the world, God only spoke the word, and it was made; but for the
Redemption thereof, the Eternal Word, the Son of God himself must become
incarnate; and by the space of many years, both do, and suffer many things: by
means of the Creation, man was entitled to the earthly paradise; by means of
the Redemption, to the heavenly: by the Creation he was made a Companion of the
Angels; by redemption they are made in some sort his inferiors, being sent
forth to minister for their sakes, that shall be heirs of salvation: In the
Creation all the other Creatures have their interest together with man; the
work of Redemption is proper to him alone: Again, the Jewish Sabbath was
renewed in memory of their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt; but our
Lord's Day ordained to be kept holy, in memory of our deliverance from the
bondage of Sin and Satan, who held us under in a far more miserable slavery
then that of Egypt. Moreover it is by Saint Augustine observed, that the
Israelites passed Sermon. de temp. 154.
safely through the read Sea, not on the Sabbath, but on our Lord's Day; and
both by him and Origin, Super ex Hom. 7.
That the Manna fell first, on the first day of the week, but none on the
Seventh: where by the Manna, Origin after his allegorizing manner, understands
the sweet dew of heavenly Doctrine, and from thence inferres, Intelligant
Iudaei jam tunc praelatam esse dominicam nostram Iudaico Sabbatho, Let the Jews
know that even then our Lord's Day was preferred before their Sabbath.

Now in relation to the other days of the week, and to other holy days; This
Lords day shines among them, as does the Dominicall Letter clod in Scarlet
among the other Letters in the Calendar; or as the Sun imparts light to all
the other Stars; so does this day, bearing the name thereof, both Light and
Life to all the other days of the week. This day says Eusebius is, tum vere
praecipuus, tum haud Devi^a Con^tan. p. 4. 18,
dubie primus, of all other days, as truly the principal, as it is
undoubtedly the first. Athanasius calls In epist. ad ubique Orthodox. in Hom in
hoc dillum, om nia mihi tradita sunt.
it Diem sanctissimum, and sanctissimum festum, the most holy day, the most
holy festival, attributing unto it both the initiation of the world, and man's
regeneration. Ig^atius in his Epist. to the Magnesians styles it, Reginam and
Princ^m dierum, the Queen and Princess of days; Chrysostom, drem r^galem, a
royal Sermon. 5. ^e resurrect.
day; Leo has written purposely in commendation of it, in his 81. Epistle to
Dioscorus. Saint Augustine in sundry Treatises of his, takes occasion highly to
extol it; as namely, in his 251. Sermon de tempore, having spoken of some of
the most remarkable things which fell out upon this day, His and talibus
indic^is, says he, Dominica dies extat insignis, By these and such like
Characters is the Lord's Day become renowned: And again, in his 154. Sermon of
the same Book, Venerabilis est hic dies qui domin cus dies, and dies primus
atque perfectus est, and dies clarus in quo visa est prima lux, This Lords day
is a venerable day, The first day, a perfect and shining day, in which the
light was first seen. Nay, Pererius the J^suite in his Commentaries upon the
work of the first day, having recounted no less then thirteen special
Prerogatives thereof; at last he thus concludes, Haec sunt primi illius diei
insignia atque ornamenta, quibus ea dies mirabiliter nobilitatur atque
decoratur, These are the ensigns and ornaments of this first day, wherewith it
is wonderfully ennobled, and garnished: Likewise the Hebrew Author of the Book
called Sedar, Olam, Rabba, cap. 7. Records many memorable Ex H. Wolphii
(...). de Temp. lib. 1. cap. 2.
things which were done upon the first day of the week: as so many types that
the chief worship of God should (under the new Testament) be celebrated upon
this day. As that on this day the cloud of Gods Majesty first sat upon his
people. Aaron and his children first executed their Priesthood. God first
solemnly blessed his people. The Princes of his people first offered publicly
unto God. The first day wherein fire descended from heaven. The certainty of
these, I leave to the Author to prove; but sure I am, that the Primitive
Church, for more than a thousand years after Christ, to express the greatness
of their joy upon this day, neither fasted nor kneeled: Nay, Tertullian goes
further, in his Book de corona militis, cap. 3. Die dominico jejunare nefas
ducimus, and de geniculis adorare, We hold it unlawful upon the Lords Day,
either to fast or to pray kneeling. And Saint Hilary in his Prologue set before
his explanation of the Psalms, gives the reason thereof; ne festivitatem
spiritualis hujus ^eatudinis impedirit, lest it might hinder the joy of our
Spiritual happiness on that day. Look then what the fire is among the
Elements, the Eagle among the Fowls, the Whale among the fishes, the Lion among
the Beasts, Gold among the other Metalls, and Wheat among the other Grains; the
same is the Lords Day among all the days of the week; this Day differing as
much from the rest as does that Wax to which the Kings great Seal is put, from
ordinary Wax, or that Silver upon which the Kings Arms and Image ^re stamped,
from Silver unrefined, or in Bullion.

And for other holy days, it is as far transcendent above them too, as they
are beyoud other ordinary days: the other holy days, consecrated by the
authority of the Church, and amongst us religiously observed, may not unfitly
be resembled to those honorable women spoken of in the 45 Psalm, Kings
daughters were among thy honorable women, but the Lords Day ordained by the
Lord himself, and from him derived unto us by his Apostles, is as the Queen
here standing at the Kings right hand in Gold of Ophir, gloriously apparelled;
the rest are as waiting-Ladies, she as the Empress, gradiensque Deas superem
net omnes: and were they all brought into one Chain, the Medale of this Chain
could be no other than the Lords Day. This was, doubtless, the general and
constant opinion of antiquity touching th^s Day but I know not how it came to
pass, that after ages, by insensible degrees, much degenerating from the
simplicity of those primitive times, so infinitely multiplied and magnified
their holy days beyond all measure and reason, that the Lords Day began to be
fleighted, and at last, with many, to be accounted a common holy day, nay,
perchance, inferior to some of the Saints; insomuch that with us it had lost,
not only the honor due unto it, but the name, by the Apostles imposed upon
it. Which, no doubt, a special occasion of that thick cloud of superstition
which afterward over shadowed the face of the Church; and in appearance, the
reducing of this day to its original honor and name, would prove the readiest
means to restore the Church again to her original luster and beauty, even in
those parts where that cloud is not yet dispelled; as in all likelihood the
preserving of that name and honor with us, would likewise serve to preserve
that soundness of religion which now by Gods blessing we have long enjoyed
under three such Princes, as the world in their several kinds, and in
succession, cannot show the like. And so I pass to my fourth and last general
part, The duties of the Lords Day, which, in a word, is to be in the Spirit,
that is in Sptrituall exercises, as Saint John upon this day was. Though he
were then banished into the solitary Isle of Patmos, where he had no means to
converse with any Christian, much less to communicate with their Assemblies in
religious duties, yet was he present with them in spirit, as Saint Paul was
with the Colossians, 2. 5.
though absent in body, much desiring to be present with them, and joining with
them, even in his private devotions. A good lesson for such as cannot have
access to the public Congregation, considering they cannot do what they
would, yet to do what they may, which is religiously to observe the Lords Day
in their private houses or chambers, in the ship or in the prison, if their
condition be such as they cannot come to the Lords House. This is it which
Saint Augustine advises, discoursing of the Sermon. 251.
duties of this day, veniat cuique possibile est and oret in conventu Ecclesiae
pro peccatis suis Deum, He who possibly can come, let him come, and in the
Church, let him there pray to God for the pardon of his sins; Qui vero hoc
non possit saltem in domo sua oret, and non negligat Deo solvere votum and
reddere pensum servitutis, but he who cannot come to the Church, let him pray
in his house, and let him not neglect the paying of his Vows to God, and the
rendering of that service which is exacted.

Now for such as have free access to the Congregation, these spiritual
exercises are either public or private; public, in the Lords House; private,
in our own houses with our families, or in our chambers and closets, in our
Gardens, or in the Fields. The exercises to be performed, are confession of our
faith and our faults, absolution, thanksgiving, humble and hearty prayer,
reading and expounding the sacred Oracles of God, the private readi^g of the
Scriptures or other godly books, the administration and participation of the
holy Sacraments, the singing of Divine Hymns, meditation and conference, as
well touching those things we have read and heard, as touching the wonderful
works of God in the Creation, and Government of the world: This is to be in the
Spirit, specially if these dutiesbe practiced by us in a Spiritual manner,
that is, if we perform them not faintly or formally, but attentively and
devoutly, as knowing that God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped by us in
Spirit and Truth, with Io. 4. 24.
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, as the good King David taught his
Son Solomon: Withal 2 Chronicles. 28. 9.
we must remember, that works of charity are not to be neglected on this day,
they being the marks and effects of the Spirit.

And that we may the better intend these Spiritual works in a Spiritual
manner, we are still to carry in our minds that this Day is the Lords Day, and
not the devils or ours; and that not a part only, but the whole day is his,
the devils day we make it, if we employ it in sinful acts; our own, if in the
servile works of our particular callings, or in bodily recreations, which
further not, but hinder the practice of our Spiritual duties: For sinful
acts, we must be careful that we incur not justly the censure of Tertullian,
Siccine exprimitur per publicum A^ol. 35.
gaudium publicum dedecus? Haeccine solennes dies decent quae alios non decent?
Malorum licentia pietas erit? Occasio luxur^ae religio deputabitur? Is our
public joy thus expressed by the public disgrace? Shall that be thought to
become an holy Day, which does not become any day? Shall wicked licentiousness
be accounted Piety? and occasions of luxury, Religion? If wantonness, if
drunkenness, if fighting, if railing, if reviling, if swearing, if cursing be
sins on every day, surely much more on the Lords Day. Saint Hierome likewise
in his Epistle to Eustochium, seems much to mislike excessive Feasting and
feeding upon these days, as being the occasions of luxury, and consequently of
quarrelling and wantonness; Valde absurdum est nimia saturitate velle honorare
Martyrem quem scias Deo placuisse jejuniis, It is most absurd to in^end the
honor of that Martyr with excessive Feasting, whom we know to have pleased God
with Fasting; and if it can be no honor to the Martyr who lost his blood for
the Lords sake, much lesle to the Lord, who redeemed the Martyr by his blood.

Of servile works is that noble Constitution of Leo Leo Constit. 54.
the Empe. to be understood. We ordain, according. to the true meaning of the
holy Ghost, and of the Apostles thereby directed, that on the sacred Day
wherein our own integrity was restored, all do rest and surcease labor; that
neither Husbandman nor other, on that day, put their hands to forbidden works;
for if the Jews did so much reverence their Sabbath, which was but a shadow of
ours, are not we which inhabit the light and truth of grace, bound to honor
that day which the Lord himself has honored, and has therein both delivered
us from dishonor, and from death? Are not we bound to keep it singular and
inviolable, well contenting our selves with so liberal a grant of the rest,
and not incroaching upon that one which God has chosen to his own honor? Were
it not wretchlesse neglect of religion to make that very day common, and to
think we may do with it as with the rest.

Which religious Edict of his, though it were indeed chiefly bent against
bodily labor, yet may it well be extended against such pastimes and
recreations on that Day, as cannot but withdraw us from the keeping of it
inviolable. That unlawful recreations may not be used on that day, no
Christian, I think, will deny, since they may not be used on any days; so as
all the doubt is touching lawful recreations, whereof some also there are,
which I think no man will affirm to be lawf^lly used on the Lords Day, as
Hawking, Hunting, and the like, which are not unlawful in themselves, but
unlawful on that Day because it is the Lords D^y: And for other recreations,
if bodily labor, which on other days is not only lawfnll, but necessary, be
forbidden because it is the Lords Day, methinks by the same reason, even
lawful recreations should be forbidden on the same day, as tending no less to
the violating of that Day than bodily labor; If on that Day I may nor sow nor
reap, nor carry my Corn, no, not in the most uncertain and catching weather,
though it carries a fair show of keeping those precious fruits of the earth
from spoiling which God of his goodness has sent me, shall I presume to use
those recreations on that Day, which commonly end in the abuse of those good
bl^ssings? Manlike exercises are, doubtless, very requisite, but considering
the number of other holy days in our Church (under favor be it spoken) I see
no necessity of putting them in practice on the Lords Day, nor of ranking the
Lords Day with-other holy days.

Some reformed Churches in other parts may perchance give way to the use of
them on the Lords Day, which in them is somewhat the more excusable, because
they have none other holy days, though for mine own part I think it better if
they had, yet that the very same Pastors of those Churches who admitted or
connived at the use of such manlike exercises, as severely cried down
effeminate sports on that Day, let one speak for all: If we employ the Sunday,
says Calvin, to make In Deuteronomy. 5. Sermon. 34.
good cheer, to sport our selves, to go to games and pastimes, shall God in
this be honored, is it not a mockery? Is not this an unhallowing of his Name?
And if you please, to Calvin we may add Bellarmin, the great Champion of the
Romish Church; who in his explanation of the title of the 91. Psalm, according
to their account; which is a Psalm or song for the Sabbath Day thus writes,
Errant Iudaei qui otium Sabbati sibi datum esse existimant ad vacandum
convivi^s and deambulationi; The Jews err in thinking, that the rest of the
Sabbath was given them for feasting and walking abroad: wherein he seems to
have followed Saint Augustine in his Enarration upon the same passage; who in
particular there censureth them for their dancing, holding it more allowable to
plough, then to dance upon the Sabbath; Melius est arare quam saltarc, these be
his very The same in effect he has in his Book, De d^cem Chordis, cap. 3.
words; and then goes on, Illi a bono opere Vacant, ab opere nugatorio non
vacant, they rest from honest works, from vain works they rest not: Et Iudaeos
imitantur Christiani, says Bellarmine; and those Christians imitate the ^ews,
who do the like.

Nay Saint Augustine in another place comes fully De tem^. Scrm. 251.
home to the same point; where speaking of the Lords day, Ideo Dominicus
appellatur, says he, ut in eo a terrenis operibus, vel mundi illecebris
abstinentes, tantum divinis cultibus serviamus; therefore it is called the
Lords day, that abstaining from earthly labors and worldly pleasures, we may
wholly intend Gods service: And again, in several places of that Sermon, The
holy Doctors of the Church decreed, to transfer all the glory of the Jewish
Sabbath upon this day; That what they in figure, the same we might celebrate in
Truth; Let us therefore, my brethren, observe the Lords day, and sanctify it,
as to them of old, it was given in charge, touching the Sabbath; From evening
to evening ye shall keep my Sabbaths. Let us take care that our rest be not
vain, but from the evening of the Sabbath, to the evening of the Lords Day,
being free from all worldly business, Soli divino cultui vacemus, let us only
intend the service of God; non foris fabulis, sed intu^ psalmodiae and
orationibus studete, Do not spend your time in trifles, and telling of tales
abroad, but in singing of Psalms and prayers at home; and do not think unus
punctus diei ad Dei officium, etc. only one little part of the day is
consecrated to Gods Service, and the residue of the day, together with the
night, to your own pleasures: Thus Saint Augustine, and with him does Saint
Gregory accord, Dominico Epistol. Lib. 11. Ep 3.
die a labor terreno cessandum est, atque omnimodo orationibus insistendum,
upon the Lords Day we are to rest from earthly labor, and wholly apply our
selves to our devotions, that if any sins of negligence have escaped in the
six days, they may be done away by our prayers on the day of the Lords
Resurrection. Somewhat more punctual is Ephraim Syrus, Festivitates dominicas
honorare studiose contendite, celebrantes Sermon. de festis, page 10. Edit.
Colon. an 1604.
eas non panegyrice sed divine; non mundane sed spiritualiter; non instar
gentilium sed Christianorum. Quare non poetarum frontes coronemus, non choraeas
ducamus, non chorum exornemus: non tib^is and cytharis auditum effoeminemus,
non mollibus vestibus induamur, nec cingulis undique auro radiantibus cingamur,
non commessationibus and ebrietatibus dediti simus, verum i^ta relinquamus iis,
quorum Deus venture est, and gloria in confusione ipsorum, Earnestly endeavor
to honor the Lords holy Day, solemnizing it not in a pompous, but in a Divine;
not in a worldly, but in a Spiritual manner; not as the Gentiles, but as
Christians: let us not hang up Garlands before our doors; let us not be
exercised in dancing, or in the setting forth of plays; let us not effeminate
our hearing with piping and harping; let us not be clad with eff^minate
apparel, nor be girt with Girdles shining about with gold; let us not be given
to gluttony and drunkenness, but let us leave these things to them, whose God
is their belly, and their glory to their shame.

In the same path with these great Lights of the Church, does Peter Martyr
walk, Vnum in hebdomada Lo^. com. ^lass 2. cap. 7.
requisivit in quo reliquis oper^bus valedicentes uni illi tantum incumberemus,
he required one day in the week, in which, bidding adieu to all other works, we
should only intend his service. He who gave unto Adam a free liberty to eat of
all the other trees in Paradise, r^served to himself the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil: which served much to aggravate Adams offense, that having so
large a scope to content himself withal, he would, notwithstanding, fall upon
the forbidden fruit; which is our case; if having all the days of the week
save one granted to our use, we presume to intrude upon that which the Lord
has reserved to himself, for his own use. It is to this purpose worth the
observing, that our Savior, on the very Day of his Resurrection, which was the
first day of the week, and ^ow the Lords Day, appeared sundry times; in the
morning, at noon, and at night, thereby to show, That not a part only, but the
whole Day was his; And again on the eighth day following, which was likewise
the Lords Day, he appeared to his Apostles at night, to instruct them, and
confirm their faith, thereby to teach us, that even then it cease not to be
the Lords Day. And truly I see not how men can effectually profit by public
hearing, who neglect private conference, and meditation after they have heard:
Meditation being the concoction of our Spiritual Food, without which the soul
cannot well be nourished. They who bought and sold in atrio Templi, in the
porch, or utmost part of the Temple, thereby profaned the Temple it self and
made it a den of thieves, as our Savior censures them; and I doubt not but he
is as tender of this Day, and every part thereof, as of his House, or rather
more tender; his House being consecarted to him by men, but his Day, by
Himself, to Himself; and besides, in the Primitive Church he was long without
an House, but not without a Day from the very first infancy thereof: which has
made me to wonder, that they who are so zealous for the Lords House, and the
Lords Portion, received by the hand of his Ministers, should not likewise be as
zealous for the religious observation of his Day, especially considering that
it may give men occasion to suspect, though perchance unjustly, that they
pursue their own pomp and profit, in being so hot for the one, and their own
ease and pleasure in being so cold for the other. He who stands for the Lords
House, and the Lords Portion, because it is the Lords, cannot but stand
likewise for the Lords Day, because it is his, his Day, doubtless having as
strong a relation to him, as either his House or his Portion, if not a
stronger: He who lays sacrilegious hands upon a part of that which is
consecrated to the Lord, thereby violates the whole; and therefore were Ananias
and his wife stricken with sudden death, because the^ kept back, not the whole,
but a part of that money they had received for their Land, and was entirely d^e
to the Lord and his Church; and if we per^it men to detain from the Lord a part
of his Day, let us take heed lest thereby they be the more emboldened to detain
part of his Portion, both from him and us.

The people, God knows, for the most part, are of themselves apt enough to take
more liberty than is fit, to take an Ell, where there is but an Inch allowed
them; and having once gotten the rains loose, to run away in a full carreer.
And if it be observed, it will appear that more mischiefs have ensued upon
public Games on the Lords Day, than on any other day of the week; nay my self
have observed more to have been drowned, who went into the River only to wash
their bodies, on the Lords D^y, than any other day beside. In Cornwall, not
far from Saint Germans, are in a fairplain, certain stones to be seen, which
the neighboring people call the Hurlers, because they stand in that order and
distance each from other, as Hurlers use to do; and the current tradition among
the inhabitants there, is, that certain Hurlers, for the profanation of the
Lords Day in that exercise, were, by Gods Judgment, turned into those stones:
which Camden calls a pious error, and so I believe it to be: yet withal from
thence I observe the respect, which even in regard of manlike exercises, was
born to that Day, and that in the depth of popery, for otherwise such a
tradition could not have gotten foot and prevailed among them. Neither do I
allege this for want of true examples in this kind, there being many and me
norable, which are recorded by others, as well of foreign parts, as our own
Country, in which (to the honor be it spoken of the reformed Religion, and our
Sovereign Princes, the protectors thereof) our Reverend Judges have restrained
themselves, and our ordinary Carryers have, by public Authority, been
restrained from traveling on the Lords Day, (though both carry with them the
advantage of the public good) to the great comfort of such as without all
schismatic humor or peevish affectation of singularity, heartily embrace
both the Doctrine professed, and discipline practiced in the Church of England;
and their hope is that other abuses yet remaining and tending to the
profanation of that Day may in good time likewise be reformed, as in some
foreign reformed Churches they have lately been.

Lastly, for our instruction and imitation against the profanation of this
Day, as well General Counsels, and Provincial Synods have bent their Canons,
as Emperors, and Kings, and Commonweals their Laws: Such were Con^tine the
Great (...) de vita Constable. lib 4. c. 18. 19 23.
(the first Christian Emperor, born in this Island) and Charles the Great,
Canutus the Dane, Henry the 6th, and Edward the 6th, three of our most pious
Princes, who zealously stood for the religious observation of this Day, as
Nehemiah did for the sanctifying of the Jewish Sabbath.

My Conclusion shall be, That if some bodily recreations on the Lords Day, for
the better sanctifying thereof, be thought requisite, yet under correction, I
should conceive them more tolerable in the Pa^or, who that Day has spent his
spirits in a faithful discharge of his Ministerial Function, than in the
people; and among the people, rather in Tradesmen and Husband men, than in
Gentlemen, who for the most part, make every day holyday in following their
sports; and in all with these limitations.

First, That they be in their conscience fully persuaded that the games which
they use be not only lawful in themselves, but also in regard of the Day; for
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; that which I Romans ^4. 23.
think unlawful, or am not persuaded in my self that it is lawful, though in
it self it be so, yet to me it is sin; so as it is a safe rule in Divinity,
Quod dubitas ne feceris, that which thou doubtest of, do not. The second
limitation is, That our Recreations do not tend to the scandal of others; If
meat make my 1 Cor. 8. 13.
brother offend, says the Apostle, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my brother to offend; and yet may public Recreations
one day in the week be more easily be forborne, than meat whiles the world
stands. My third limitation is, That these Recreations tend to the better
sanctification of the Lords Day, in the refreshing of men's spirits,
Sanctification being by all Divines confessed to be the principal end thereof,
which being laid for a ground, the consequence in my judgment, is unavoidable,
That all our actions on that day ought more or less to be directed and squared
thereunto, according to that approved rule of the Schools, Tantum destinati
s^mendum, quantum ad finem prodest, so much of the means as conduces to the
end, is to be taken, and no more. I will shut up all with that of the
Evangelicall Prophet Esaias, only changing the cap 48. v. 3, 14.
Jewish Sabbath into the Lords Day, the Sabbath of the Christians; If thou turn
away thy foot from doing thy pleasure on my holy Day, and call it a delight,
the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own
ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thi^e own words: Then shall
thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high
places of the earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy father; For
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

God grant that we may so truly serve the Lord by a due observation of his Day
h^re, that we may eternal reign with him hereafter.
Part of a Speech delivered in the Star Chamber, against the opinion of Mr.
Traske; By the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot, Bishop of Winchester,
deceased.
IT has ever been the Churches Doctrine, that Christ made an end of all
Sabboths, by his Sabbath in the Grave, that Sabbath was the last of them. And
that the Lords Day presently came in place of it: Dominicus dies Christi
resurrectione declaratus est Christianis, and ex illo coepit habere
festivitatem suam, says Augustine; The Lords Day was by the resurrection of
Christ declared to be the Christians Day; and from that very time (of Christ's
Resurrection) it began to be celebrated, as the Christian m^ns festival.

These two, the Day and the Supper, have the Epithet of (...) Dominicum in the
Scriptures, to show Dominicum is a^ike to be taken in both.

This for the practice.

If you will have it in precept, the Apostle gives it, (and in the same word
still) that against (...) the day of their Assem^ly; Every one should lay apart
what God should move him to offer to the Collection for the Saints, and then
offer it: which was so ever in use. That, the day of oblations. So have you it
in practice and in precept both.

FINIS.

