ENGLANDS Prospective-Glasse: A SERMON AT A Metropolical Visitation HELD AT The
Cathedral Church of CHRIST in CANTERBVRY, on the 29th of April 1663.

PREACHED Before the Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of
Chichester, the then Representative of the Most Reverend Father in God,
WILLIAM, by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury His Grace, and of
all England Primate and Metropolitan, Our Most Worthy Diocesan.

By Sam. Hind, one of His Majesty's Chaplains, and present Incumbent of St
Mary's Church in Dover, then called to attend that Service for the Three
Deaneries of Dover, Bridge and Elam.

IEHOVA NISSI. Write this for a Memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the ears
of Joshua: For I will utterly put out the Remembrance of Amalek from under
Heaven.

Ex. 17.14. LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne for John Crook at the Sign of the
Ship in St Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Stradling S.T.P.Rev. in Gilb. Episc. a Sac. Domestic.
Ex Aed. Sabaud. Maii 14.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.
MY LORD,
YOur Lordship was then in the Archi-Episcopal Throne when I was in the Pulpit
preaching the following Sermon, and became the Grand Exemplar of Attention to
that great Confluence both of Clergy and Laity then present; What was then
(though with much weakness) offered to Your Ear, is now with all becoming and
imaginable Humility presented to Your Eye. I make my Address to Your Lordship
at this time Instar Omnium, because at that time Your Lordship was more then
Your Self, and in all Capacities fitter to Patronize what now flies to Your
Vmbrage for Shelter.

In the ensuing Tract, Your Lordship will find I have ransack't Gods dreadful
Artillery, and planted many rending and roaring Cannons against spiritual
Wickedness then reigning and raging in High Places. None I hope will say, (as
Laertius of the Writings of Chrysippus) I have taken up all that came in my
way, since the Margin is able to make good the Text, and declare I have meddled
with nothing but what was Analogical and Suitable to it; and yet with so much,
that as Apollodorus the Athenian said of the same Chrysippus his Writings, If
(the (...)) all were taken out that was not mine own, there would be much
blanck in this little Sermon.

If the good People of the Land shall be bettered in their Devotion by the
perusal of it, O well is me and happy shall I be! If any shall shuffle
themselves out, because I have left them out in the Application, as unwilling
either Pulpit or Press should remonstrate (I hope) their Forgiven Crimes both
in Religion and Loyalty, I have but the same success the Prophet Isaiah
compained of, Domine quis credidit Auditui nostro? Lord, who has believed our
Report, or to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? But, did I say Forgiven
Crimes? I could wish it were so, even now when I labor under a godly Jealousy
that it may be otherwise; Because the Whoredoms of their Mother Jezabel and
their Witchcrafts are yet so many, The Lowing of the Oxen and the the Bleating
of the Sheep is as loud as ever, Their Murmurings and Complottings against
David on the Throne, and Abiathar at the Altar declare it; The very show of
their Countenances witness against them, Their Illegal and Schismatical
Conventions publish it; Yea, their public and professed Disobedience to most
Laws and Sanctions, holy and humane, do proclaim a Nolumus hunc regnare against
their King, and a Nolumus scientiam Viarum tuarum against their God. We
endeavor to draw them (as the Prophet Hosea says) with the Cords of a man,
and the bands of Love, but our Cords are to weak, they snap them in pieces, as
Sampson did the Cords of the Philistims; nor must we ever exspect a better
return from the best of them, then Olympias had for Eurydice, who presented her
with a Treble choice of a Sword, a Haltar, or a Cup of Poison. By Your
Lordships leave, I declare to the world a known Truth, that I can show under
the hand of a great Sectarie, in a Letter written to my self, then going
Commissioner to the Isle of Man; Anno 1661.
in the behalf of some of them in that Island, that they call themselves, The
elect and precious People of God, The Stone cut out of the Mountains, The same
Stone which the Builders refused, with many such blasphemous Interjections in
that Paper. Yet three of these were then presented in the Ecclesiastical Court
(I being then Judge) two for Adultery, and one for Fornication. When Democritus
had declared his opinion of a sort of men, that they were Good, and Just, and
Sober, a By-stander said, Heu me miserum, quod nec uno quidem adhuc sum
potitus! So for my part I could never find wherein lay the excellency of these
People that so much and so loudly sound forth their own praises. This I do,
that no Obligation will bind, no Friendship oblige them: The Friendship of
Zenocrates was not to be purchased by Alexander; Amicitiam emere vero voluit,
Philosophus vendere noluit. They are not unlike Phaonius in Plutarch, Bold and
Barbarous. Take measure of them by their Loyalty to their KING their
Nursing-Father, and among thousands you will not find a Craterus, or an
Hephaestion, (...), that loves either the King in His Person, or the King in
His Government, but are as ready as ever to slander the Footsteps of the Lords
Anointed. And if you measure them by their Obedience to the CHVRCH their Aged
Mother, Malitia eorum excaecavit eos; their Hatred toward Her is like the
Vestal Fires, inexstinguishable: For to set up a Capitol of their own
Imaginations, they would destroy all the Churches of God in the Land.

Inter haec quid agamus? Among all these Revolted Schismatics, what can the
poor Ministers do, whose Flocks are (like Adonis Gardens) beset and hedged with
these Thorns and Briars of Contention? Only pray, That God would still the
rageing of this Sea and madness of this People; and in the mean time fly as I
do now to a Gospel Remedy, Dic Ecclesiae.

The Great and Good God put it into the hearts of that Great Renowned Assembly
to provide some seasonable Remedy against the growth of this pestilent
Contagion, -- Ne pars sincera trahatur. And the same God subdue these
incorrigible People to himself in Obedience, to themselves in Humility, to their
King (Our Most Gracious Sovereign) in Loyalty, to the Church in Duty, to the
World in Peace and Unity; that that may be true of them which Livy says of
Val.Flaccus, Quantum prius Luxuriae exemplum fuerat, tantum postea Modestiae
and Sanctitatis specimen evasit: And as they have given up their members
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; so they may give up themselves
instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness.

My LORD, I have transgrest the Rule of Phocion's Orator Verborum paucitate,
being carried away (as with a violent and rapid Tide) Rerum magnitudine. Much
being said in a little room, as to the Thing; and too much (I fear) only as to
Your Lordships Concerns: For which (as before I craved Your Patronage, so now)
I most humbly crave Your Lordships Pardon; and (forasmuch as the Less is
blessed of the Greater) Your Blessing and Benediction upon

(My LORD) A true Son of the Church,
From my Study in May 8.
England's Prospective-Glasse: being a Sermon at a Metropolitical Visitation,
held at the Cathedral Church of Christ in Canterbury, on the 29th. of April
1663.
Hosea ix. 7. The days of Visitation are come; The days of Recompense are
come; Israel shall know it. The Prophet is a Fool; the Spiritual man is mad;
For the multitude of thine Iniquity, Great is the Hatred.


RIght Reverend; Reverend and Beloved; Men, Brethren and Fathers; For the hope
of Israel 's sake I stand here this day; Acts. 22.1.
And as Saint Paul said to his Agrippa, Act. 28.20. Act. 26.2.
I think my self happy to stand here before you in this Metropolitical Church;
which, among other Churches, Act. 26.2. Psalm. 54.13. Jude 5.20. Act. 13.44.
is like the Kings Daughter among other Women, more Glorious. In this Assembly,
composed of so many Glorious Stars, that each in their order fight against
Cicera; In this City, where there are Some of many, though not of every Nation
under Heaven; and especially upon this occasion, which I may call the Churches
Resurrection after a tedious Ilyad of affliction, her glorious Triumphs after
her bloody Vespers; Isai. 60.1.
when the Sons of them that have afflicted her do come bending unto her, and
they that despised her fall down at the soales of her feet.

She that was afflicted and tossed with Tempests, Isai. 54.11. Act. 27.8. Isai.
60.
is now arrived at the fair Havens; She that was forsaken and hated, is made an
Eternal Glory, and the joy, I hope, of many Generations.

It was not long since we might have complained with the Church of old, Lam.
4.3.
Nudaverunt Lamiae mammas, We had no suck but of the breasts of Dragons: But
now, blessed be God, we suck the breasts of Kings; Isai. 60.16.
The Lord is our Savior; and our Redeemer, the mighty God of Jacob.

It was not above a few years since Those, Acts. 27.6.
that with Jason and his Confederates turned the World upside down, had dealt
with our Religion as Licurgus did with his Country Coins; Plutarch.
or as Rehoboam did with his Fathers shields; 1 Chro. 12.10.
Turned our Gold to Brass, our Religion to Rebellion, our Faith to Faction:
But now our Brass is turned to Gold, Isai. 60.17, 18, etc.
our Iron to Silver, and our Stones to Iron. Instead of Violence and
Desolation, we have now Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks.

It is not many Months since the Lying Spirit in the mouth of some of
England's Prophets, 1 Kings 22.22.
and Spiritual men, told the Nation, Isai. 28.15. Psalm. 126.1
That these days of Visitation would never come, That these days of
Recompense should not come nigh them: To them and to the amazed World, (in this
miraculous and stupendous change) I bring my Text to speak, and speak in
Thunder.

THe Days of Visitation Are come, Text.
The Days of Recompense are come: Israel shall know it, and know withal,
Those Prophets were Fools, and those Spiritual men were mad. First to deceive
Themselves, and then the People, and in the end to Destroy both; like Dragons
sucking the blood of Elephants, Plin. lib. 7.
which Pliny says, bring ruin to both the Dragon and the Elephant.

Rebellion is ever of the nature of the Aspigo-Gorgon, a Serpent in Egypt, that
when it has lived a while on the destruction of others, at last it destroys
it self. For this the Floodgates of Gods indignation were opened upon them,
and it burst out in a full Torrent in these words of my Text: The days of
Visitation are come, etc.

Three things I humbly offer to your Consideration, from the Text.

1. To look upon it in reference to the Context; That Is our Retrospect. 2. To
take a view of the words themselves; That Is our Prospect. 3. To apply the
Historical and Doctrinal part thereof to our present Purpose, which is the End
of all Sermons, and the Queen of all Ends: Herein Gods glory is most concerned,
Because hereby Gods People are best edified.
I begin with the First General, 1 Retrospection.
and take up the Particulars in our passage through the Whole. 1 Cor. 15.23.
They will arise to us this day, as we our selves shall at the last day, every
one in his Order.

Aaron was distinguished from other Men by his Apparel, Ex. 28.4.
and therefore called, Merubba Begadim, Multiplicatus Vestibus, the man with
many Clothes; he had his Ephod, his Brestplate, Mitre, Girdle, his Pallium, his
Plate of Gold. Philc. Iud.
The Ephod was made up of variety of Colors; in which Aaron represented the
whole World, all States and Conditions of Men, all Variety and Sorts of Sins:
(...) All are represented in this Text as it stands in reference to the Context.

In contemplation of their number I may say of them as Lea said of Gad, Behold
a Troop comes. Gen 30.11.
In every Chapter you have a black and dreadful Catalogue; and in this Text
you have the several parcels summed up to a multitude: For the Multitude of
thine Iniquity, Great is the Hatred.

God had drawn them with the cords of a Man, Hof. 11.4.
and with the bands of Love; He had miraculously preserved them, Psalm. 78.13.
with the Rocks of Water in the Sea, and with the Seas of Water from the Flinty
Rocks; He made the Sun to stand still in his course, that they might go on with
Theirs; He multiplied Visions and Similitudes, Hos. 12.10. Neh. 9.26. Ps.
107.11. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Hosea 9.1. Psalm. 78.8. 2. Chron. 11.1. Ier. 7.9. Amos
3.10. Romans 3.2. 1. King 12.31. Hos. 8.12. Mich. 6.16. 1 King. 15.34. 1 King.
12.29. 1 King. 12.16. Amos 4.4. Hos. 12.11. Hos 9.9.
tried all ways, easy and difficult, by his own Prophets; But yet for all
this they rebelled against him; and instead of being a Jesurun, a Righteous
people, They, like to Jesurun in the worst sense, lightly esteemed of the God
of their Salvation: and preferred Fools and Mad men, such as led them into
Idolatry, Rebellion, Treason, Murders, Rapine, Robbery, Schism, Heresy,
Apostasy, before Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, Joel, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, who were
entrusted, and to whom was concredited the Oracular Truhs of Heaven, and
preached and prophesied to them at the samettimes; and then when they made to
themselves Priests, of the lowest of the People, the Law of God was accounted
to them as a strange thing; The Statutes of Omri, which taught them to work
Mischief by a Law, were preferred before the Statutes and the Hests of Heaven;
And Jeroboam the Son of Nebat that made Israel to sin, and set up his Calves
in Dan and Bethel, before Rehoboam their native King and Sovereign. Thus they
multiplied their Transgressions at Gilgal, and their Altars as the Furrows of
the Field. Profunde peccaverunt sient in diebus Gibeah: They have deeply sinned
as in the days of Gibeah. Why, what days were those? Answ. Those very days
when there was no King in Israel, when Fecit quisque, Judges 17.6.
when every Man did what seemed good in his own eyes; and when every thing that
was Bad seemed Good; whole Floods of Disorder, and Seas of Confusion in Church
and State, had now deluged all the Territories of Israel.

The Idolatries of Micah, Bishop An.
the Burglaries and Robberies of Dan, the Adulteries and Murders of Gibeah,
Micah a private Man, Judge. 17.1.
Ephraim a public Court, Gibeah a thronged City, Judge. 20.4.
and Dan a glorious Tribe. Micah at Mount Ephraim at the middle of the Land,
Gibeah at one end, and Dan at the other, all wrapped up in the same disorder and
confusion. 2 Samuel 20.1.
And who were the Sheba's that blew these Trumpets of Rebellion; Genesis 38.29.
who the Pharez that made such wide and rude Breaches in the Churches sides.
But the great pretender to Prophecy, the only Spirit-Mongers, Text. Hos.
13.16. Haba. 1.11.
the Spiritual Men of time, such as endeavored to bring even God himself into
their Conspiracies. It was those days of Confusion that brought in these days
of Visitation. It was those Men of whom my Text declares; The Prophet is a
Fool, the Spiritual Man is mad. Jer. 5.9.
And now shall not God visit for these things, shall not his soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this; yea, he takes the Rod in his Hand, Psalm. 89.32. Isa.
28.18. Isa. 28.14.
and Catechises them. What? did your Prophets covenant with Death and Hell? did
they make a scorn of my Judgments, and bear you in hand, that the days of
Visitation should never come? that Prophet is a Fool. Jer. 5.12, 13.
Did your Spiritual Men tell you the days of recompense would not come nigh in
your days and time: I tell you, Ezekiel. 13.10.
your Spiritual Men are mad: For both Deus and Dies visitationis, the God of
vengeance for which you never cared, and the Day of vengeance which you never
feared, are come upon you as a Thief in the night; 1 These. 5.2. Luke 4.21. Text.
and this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, The days of visitation
are come, the days of recompense are come, and Israel shall know it both by
their own and Prophets ruin. Verse. 1.2, 3, 4, 6, 7, etc.
What it is to change Joy into Mourning, Abundance into Scarcity, Cleaness to
Filthiness, Religion to Idolatry, numerous Armies into a Kibroth-hattaavah,
Graves of Lust, days of Triumph to days of Vengeance, days of Sinning to
days of Recompense, of Knowledge to Ignorance, Wise Men to Fools, sober Men to
mad Men, and Purity and Goodness to Iniquity and Hatred. For this ten fold
prevarication they stand indicted in this Chapter and Text, sins which I do but
touch I cannot stand to handle. And so from the sins committed by them, I come
to the judgments inflicted on them; from the Retrospect to the Prospect: 2.
Part.
The days of visitation are come, etc.

The visitations of Heaven are multifarious; and our God sometimes visits in
Person, Hab. 3.3. Mat. 25.36.
sometimes by Proxy: In Heaven he overlooks the Royal Orders and Armies of
those Lights and Lamps of Glory, in their great and numberless variety: Psalm.
65, 9.
In Earth he visits several Persons, Parishes, Provinces, Kingdoms, Nations.

He visits the Sons of Men, Psalm. 106.4.
sometime in mercy, to deliver them from their Vassalage and Slavery, from
their Bondage and Captivity; So he visited Israel, Visitans Visitars, when he
delivered them from the Amonite, ^o^d.3.16.
etc. whose height was as the height of Cedars, Amos 2.9.
and the strength as the strength of Oaks.

He visits the souls of Men by his Spirit, conveying through the Conduits of
his mercy a thousand sweet influences of Gace and Piety, Acts 15.14.
of Peace and Pardon in Christ Jesus Oriens ex alto, Zach. 3.8. Luke 1.78. ib.
ver. 68. By his word.
the dayspring from on high visits us, and gives a rice to that gratulatory
Song of Zachary, Blessed be the Lord of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people. 1 Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.19 1 Samuel 9.9.
2. By his Word and Sacraments in the Persons of those he calls Seers in the
old Testament, and Overseers in the New. To these he gives a Faculty to cure
the Blind, those that are born and bred in Blindness, Ignorance, and
Superstition, and to open their Eyes with their Spiritual Eye Salve; Acts
20.28. Luke 14.13. Rev.3.18. Acts 3.21, 22. 1 King. 18.21. By his Sacraments.
D.D. Mat. 28.19.24. Psalm. 80.14. 1 Cor. 11.
to make the Deaf to hear, by thundering out the terrors of his Law, and the
Dumb to speak, and speak loud and plain of the Gracious Promises of his Gospel;
the Lame to walk, those that halt between two Opinions, are set right and
straight by application of this Balm; he visits the hereditary Leper by our
ministration in Baptism, the customary Leper in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, washing us from Original, and cleansing us from our actual
transgression. And all these are merciful and gracious visitations. But if
these will not prevail, he knows how to shift Scenes, to turn over another
Leaf, and to visit us after another manner. First our sins in Anger, and call
us to account for all our licentious backslidings, as holy Job speaks, Job
35.15. Secondly, Job 35.15.
our selves in Thunder, as the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 29.6.
Thou shall be visited of the Lord with thunder, and shaking and a great noise,
a whirlwind, and a tempest, and a devouring fire. But alas! we are never able
to stand out such a terrible visitation as this is. For as the same Prophet,
Isa. 33.14.
Who can stand before the devouring fire, and dwell before everlasting burning?

Thirdly, Our posterity in punishment. Exodus 20.5.
Now every punishment is a visitation, and the grievousness of a punishment is
measured out by the greatness and extent of it; as here where God visits the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth Generation,
etc. But this is still with temporal punishments: OBS.!
For as no Child can be saved by his Fathers goodness, so shall never any be
damned for his Fathers wickedness. And now I see not why the Prophet might not
take in all these three visitations, (those of mercy being neglected) and by
conference of Scripture with Scripture, of Prophet with Prophet. It is very
clear that God visits their sins in Anger, for they provoked him to anger with
their Images, and in the furiousness of his anger he sent evil Angels among
them. Psalm. 78.50. and 58.1 Sam. 7.10.1 Sam. 12.18.
Secondly, Themselves in thunder; So says Samnel, The Lord thundered with a
great thunder: And the Lord sent thunder and rain; so that their Cattle were
destroyed with Hail, and their Flocks with hot thunderbolts. Thirdly, Their
posterity in punishment; so in the Verse before my Text, for those that were
already born, Hos. 9.6.
Egypt shall gather them, and Memphis shall bury them: And for the hopes of a
future Progeny, that they may be wholly defeated of that; Give them: What will thou give them? Verse. 12.
A miscarrying Womb, and dry Breasts, Verse 14. Verse. 14.
Though they bring up Children, I will deprive them from being Men, woe unto
them when I depart from them, Verse 12. I and woe when I come near them in any
of these visitations, upon their sins themselves and their Posterity. And under
All these dreadful Visitations did Israel groan and grieve, All those made up
one Woe; a Bitter Pill for Israel to swallow, how fair soever it may seem to be
Gilded under The Days of Visitation.

That one Woe being past, Rev. 9.12.
but Behold another is at hand; The days of Recompense are come; which is the
second Branch of the Text, and which, though I sever from the other in the
Paraphrase, I shall unite them in the Doctrinal and Applicatory part. The
Prophet Jeremiah styles God the God of Recompense, Ier. 51.36.
one that will maintain his Cause with vengeance; and proportion that vengeance
and recompense, to sins of his Adversaries.

Eastern and Western Babylon, Real and Mystical, That of Caldea, and that of
Italy shall find that true; That God shall reward her as she has served us.
Rev. 18.5, 6.
Hosea in the Person of Christ, and Hosea signifies a Savior, complains that
they had forsaken him, Ier. 2.13. Ier. 9, 13, 14.
the Foountain of living Waters; and now he will make them drink of those
Waters that are more bitter then the waters of Mara, more venomous then the
waters of Nonacridis.

Be pleased to see in these days of Recompense, Observe.
How the God of all Justice does proportion their punishments according to
their sins.

As their sins exceeded the sins of other People, so shall their sorrows,
Hos. 9.1. Hos. 9.2. ibid.
v. 1. The baynes of all public Joy and Exultation are forbidden, v. 1. They
have surfeited with abundance of Corn and Wine, and now God in Justice says,
The Floor and Wine Press shall not feed them, verse 2. Hos. 11.12. Hos. 12.1.
Verse 3.
Ephraim had compassed God about with Lies in their Sin, and now God
compasses them with Lies in their punishment. For Mentietur Vinum, the Wine
shall lie under her; she shall be Vitis Foliata, a Vine full of Leaves,
promising fair, performing nothing, serving but for a Flourish in This life,
and a Flame in the Next; According to their own ways does he recompense them,
Now Israel is an empty Vine, Hos. 10.^.
bringing forth Fruit to himself, etc. God looked for Grapes, Hos. 12.2. Isa.
5.2.
and behold wild Grapes. Now Israel and Ephraim may look for Grapes, and
behold no Grapes.

They would not dwell in the Lords Land; They thought scorn of that pleasant
Land, Now they shall not; Ps. 106.4.
for Ephraim shall return to Egypt: And they that would not eat clean things in
the Land of Palastine, Verse 3.
shall eat unclean in the Land of Ashur.

They drank the Wine of their Condemned in the House of their God, Amos 2.8.
and now they shall not offer Wine to the Lord; Verse 4. Ier. 44.19. Verse 4.
Psalm. 78.30.
They offered Cakes in sacrifice to the Queen of Heaven; and now the Sacrifices
they offer to the Lord of Heaven shall be as the Bread of Mourners, v. 4. They
have too long and too often Belched forth their Lies and Blasphemies in the
House of the Lord. Now God will cut off all occasions of serving him or his
People so any longer; for their Souls shall not come into the House of the
Lord, verse 4. They did too Little like Fools, Ib. ver. 4.
and too Much like Madmen, in the day of their Trial; and now they shall do
Nothing in the day of their Trouble, verse 5. Verse 5.
What will ye do in the solemn day? To others it shall be a Festival, to you a
Funeral.

They have set up Kings, but not by me; Hos. 8.4.
But now instead of Kings, Tyrants shall rule over them.

They prided themselves in the strength of Ephraim; the strength and number of
the revolted Tribes; Now Ne glorientur in multitudine Filiorum. Egypt shall
gather them, Memphis shall-bury them, Verse 13.
and Ephraim shall bring forth Children for the Murderer.

They had contributed their Jewels and Earrings of Gold to the setting up of
their Golden Calfe, Ex. 32.2, 3.
and now Desiderabile Argentum, Hos. 9.6.
Vrtica haereditabit Lappa in Tabernaculis eorum; The Nettle, that That shall
sting and trouble, they shall possess the pleasant Places, Vita Ciceronis.
and the Thorn shall be in their Tabernacles. So that now Israel is like
Archimides Tomb visited by Cicero, which he found overgrown with Thorns and
Nettles: And as they have done, so God has rewarded them, Judges 1.7.
as Adonibezeck said; All these Instances you have in the Verses before my
Text. To them I could add, as belonging to the same Story too, That as they
have sown Wind, they have reaped the Whirlewind. At Best Ephraim was but as a
Cake half baked, Hos. 7.8. Hos. 8.7. Hos. 8.9. Rev. 3.16. Ier. 13.27.
and at Last God spued them out of his mouth. As Before they neighed (like
pampered Horses) after forbidden beds: so Now they walk like solitary Asses in
the Wilderness, Onager sibi Ephraim solitarius; nor is it the first time a
Simple Ass has been brought in to upbraid a false or forbidden Prophet. Their
Abominations were as that that they most Ioved, 2 Pet. 2.16. Verse 10.
Verse 10. And their Punishment shall be as that that they most hated. Text.
For the multitude of their Iniquity, great is the Hatred; Verse 15.
and Verse 15. of this Chapter, I hate them for their Inventions; Josh. 4.19,
20. Josh. 5.1, to 15. Josh. 10.6, 7. Amos 5.5. Josh. 22.^.8
I will cast them out of my House, I will love them no more, All their Princes
are Rebels; What would no place but Gilgal and Bethel, where I have given them
so many signal Favors, serve them to multiply their Idolatry, to vent they r
Foolery, to Act their mad Pranks in? why now Gilgal shall go into Captivity,
and Bethel shall come to naught. What would no Iniquity but that of Peor serve
them for a President? And could they find none so fit Panders for their Impiety
as the Prophet, and the Spiritualman? Go tell that Prophet He is a Fool, and
Those Spiritual men that pretend so much of the Spirit, they are Mad men; For
none but Bedlamers would ever have ravell'd a People so in their Religion to
their God, or shaken them in their Loyalty to their King; and he that to set up
a false God instead of a true, and a barbarous and bloody Tyrant, 1 King. 12.10.
whose Little finger was heavier then other King's Loins, before their just
and right and Lawful King and Sovereign. You counted my Prophet (says God)
that was filled with my Spirit at Ramath Gilead no better Man than a Fool and a
Mad man: But who is the Fool now? and who the Mad men? Let me tell you, 2 King.
9.11.
and let the 16. Verse speak loud and home to those that would have an
Eradication of the true Prophets, and pronounce their Neck-Verse that were for
a Root and Branch-Ordinance, That they be also punished both in Root and
Branch, Hos. 9.16.
as V. 16. Their Root is dried up, and I will yet slay the dearest of their
body. And thus the days of Recompense are come.

Thus God does Culpae paenam coaptare; And those Priests and Prophets, Hos. 6.8.
that preached up Murder in Gilead a City of Blood, shall perish in Gilead, And
bring forth Children to the Sword and Slaughter; Hos. 8.11.
And as Ephraim had made many Altars to sin, so Altars shall be made to him
to sin.

The Scripture is full of Paradigms and Examples of this way of Proceeding, of
proportioning men's punishment according to their Sin: and History abounds.

The Egyptians drowned the Children in the Rivers, Ex. 1.22. Ex. 15.10. Levit.
10.1.
and themselves were drowned in the Sea; They sunk like Lead in the midst of
the mighty Waters.

Nadab and Abihu offered a strange Fire before the Lord, Ib. ver. 2.
and a strange Fire did consume those Sons of Aaron.

Elimas the Sorcerer seeks to blind the eyes of Sergins Paulus, Act. 13.8, 12.
and God does blind the eyes of Elimas the Sorcerer. The like of Haman and his
Gallows.

Portia begged that the cruelty of Cataline might (Crudelissimo suppliciorum
genere expiari) be expiated by some of the most cruel punishments or exquisite
torments that could be invented. Hist, Romans


Olympus Bishop of Carthage blaspheming the Trinity was struck dead with a
Triple Thunderbolt. Gabellicus.


Maxentius was drowned by the Treachery of that Bridge which he had made to
destroy Constantine and his Army: Eusebius.
Pontibus devolutus est quos ad religiosi Principi paraverat exitium, Eusebius.
Hist.

Alexander the Sixth was poisoned by a Mistake with the same Cup he prepared to
have poisoned his Favorite Cardinal Adrianus. Card. Baron. An. Act. 12.1, 23.


But to return to Scripture, Herod's cruel Life was punished with a cruel Death;
He was smitten with an Angel, and he was eaten up with Worms.

Judas at first had no bowels for his Master, Act. 1.18.
at last he had none for himself: Viscera Pietatis non habuit, and effusa sunt
omnia Viscera ejus, Carthusianus.
says Carthusianus.

Israel had deeply sinned as in the days of Gibeah, and Israel must be deeply
punished and spoiled in the days of Recompense.

Ephraim had lived upon Rapine and Spoil and Plunder; Hos. 5.1. Prove. 5.22.
Hos. 10.14.
They were as a Snare upon Mizpah; and spread their Nets upon Mount Tabor, Now
they are taken in their own Snare, caught in their own Net, and utterly
spoiled, as when Shalman spoiled Beth-Arbel; the Mother with the Children.

Thus they plow Wickedness, Hos. 10.13. Ez. 22.31. Ps. 50.21. Hos. 9.7. 1 Cor.
10.6.
and reaped Iniquity; Eat the fruit of their Lies, and were recompensed
according to the works of their own hands.

Thus has God set their sins in order, before Himself in point of
Indignation, before Them in point of Punishment, before Hs in point of
President, that We lust not after evil things as they also lusted; and be
destroyed as they also were destroyed. These things were done and written for
our Example, Lego Historiam, ne fiam Historia. And God proceeds in this way of
Recompense:

1. For his Justice-sake; Ps. 58.11. Ier. 51.36.
to manifest his righteous dealing and proceedings, that at one time or another
He will surely requite. 2. For his Servants sake; Ier. 7.12. 1 Cor. 10.12.
who he would have warned by other men's Woes, and have them learn to stand by
others Falls, and learn and remember what others have forgot, to walk according
to the golden Rule, and do no more to others, Matt. 7.12.
then we would others should do to them. 3. For his Enemies sake; Psalm. 9.16.
that in their punishment they may reflect upon their sin; and while the
Chancery is open, they may sue their Pardon. Exodus 14.4.
God can get honor by Pharaoh and all his Host, much more from Israel, Prove.
5.22.
while he takes them in their own iniquities, and binds them with the Cords of
their own sin; as Jupiter bound Eyson the Greekish Pyrat in the same Chains
wherewith he had bound his Captives. And so I pass forward to the next Stage.
Israel shall know it, the Prophet is a fool, the Spiritual Man is mad.

According to the Hebrew reading the words run thus: Hebr. Lectie.
Know thou, O Israel, that thy Prophets have fooled thee into these days of
Visitation, and thy spiritual Men have run thee up to this height of lewdness.
They told thee they were far off, or would not come in your anger; and thou
shall know that by thy punishment which thou would not know in thy prosperity
and fullness: Gloss. ord. Nich. Ly.
so the Ord. Gloss, and Nich. Lyra. The Septuagint reads it thus; Israel sicut
vates insaniens, or homo habens spiritum malo spirtu and maligno agitatus, Sept.
(...)

Saint Hierom. Affligetur Israel, Hierom.
Israel. shall be afflicted for neglecting the true Prophets, and adhering to
the false.

Mercer. thus, Mercerus.
thus, Dies poenae abest, somniant impij Deum caecum ut cupidimem nunquam
puniturum. But those false or foolish Prophets that could not find a place for
penitence, shall find a place for penance, and then let them thank their
Prophets and Pretenders to the Spirit.

OEcolampadius thus, Nec te vana jactes spe, OEcolampadius.
quasi diu proroganda poena; En adsunt dies. Scies te seductum a falsis
Prophetis, stultum, i.e. ex cord suo stulta loquutum; arreptitios Actos
maligno spiritu tuos Prophetas i. e. fanaticum vertiginosum, Led on by the
Spirit that rules in, Ephesians. 2.2.
etc.

The Hebrew Doctors thus. R. Selomo Jarchi says, Some that at first were true
Prophets, after proved false, and deserved this reproach, R. Selomo Iarchi.
Jer. 28.1. R. Aben Ezra.
as Ananias the son of Azur, that they closed rather with the false Prophets,
and laid snares and traps for the true. Rependet-vobis Dominus, the Lord will
be avenged on you for esteeming his Prophets Fools and Madmen, and preferring
your own that were so indeed before them. Your own Prophets were they that
spread the snare of the Fowler. Hos. 5.1.


Scient Israelitae and confitebuntur de pseudoprophetis a quibus seducti, R.
David Kimchi.
fuerunt; and dicebant illis, Pax Pax, Israel shall say that Prophet is a Fool,
and that the multitude of their iniquity brought the hatred of God upon them;
and the hatred of God was seen in permitting such Prophets and Spiritual Men to
seduce the People.

Agnoscent Israelitae stultus fuit Propheta cui aurem praebuimus.

Agnoscent Prophetas stultos and furibundos fuisse non a Deo missos. Put all
these together, and then as Israel shall know from God, so we shall know from
Israel.

That Sin finds no shelter, Romans 8.31. Romans 11.21 2 Pet. 2.4, 5 Hos. 2.23.
That no external privilege can free us from the Arrest of vengeance, That
days of Sin and provocation are the forerunners of days of visitation, and
days of recompense, That no Sin, be it never so sweet in the Commission, will
quit Cost in the Conclusion, Acts 8.23. Matthew. 7.2.
That with what measure we meet to others, the same shall be measured to us
again, That God does not only bring wicked Men to confusion, but to shameful
confusion. Psalm. 44.1. 1 Kin. 9.7.
Israel by listening to her false Prophets, has brought themselves under the
prediction of the true Proverb, Israel shall be a proverb, and a common talk
among all people: and this we learn from the first part of the Text, The days
of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come. From the second,
Prove. 7.27. Hos. 9 6. Ibid. 13. 1 John 4.6.
these, Isreal's new lights have lodged their People in the Chambers of death
and darkness, and made God weary of them and their posterity; Egypt shall
gather them, etc. It is no new thing to pretend to the Spirit, when Men are
altogether intending the works of the flesh.

They that will not adhere to the God of Truth, 2 These. 2.12. Jer. 14.14.
are in Justice given over to believe lies. Ahab will not believe Micaiah,
therefore a lying Spirit in the mouth of his Prophet shall deceive Ahab: and he
had no less then Four hundred after his own heart. 2 Chr. 18.5.
No less then ten Tribes fall off from their Religion and Loyalty: the major
part is not always the better part in these general defections. Ier. 31.7.
Joel 2.32.
And yet there is no defection so general, but there is a remnant that retain
both Religion and Loyalty untainted. Romans 9.27. By Ephraim is mea^ ten tribes.
Isai. 7.2. and 9.8, 9. Hos. 5.3.9.7.
Ephraim may compass God about with lies, but Judah is faithful. Lastly, Upon
which I shall enlarge my self more fully, I shall commend two Doctrinal
observations to your memories, and they are these.

That false and faithless Teachers, whether Prophets or Priests being weight in
the Balances of the Sanctuary differ nothing from Fools and Madmen. Such
Teachers, Ier. 50.38. 1 Samuel 12.25.
such Leaders as these bring inevitable ruin to themselves, their Prince, and
to their People; they render all odious and hateful to God and Man. For the
multitude of thine iniquity great is the hatred. Hos. 4.9. Isa. 9.16. Prove.
26.6, 7.
The leaders of my people cause them to err, and they that are led of them are
destroyed. But to the first.

That of Solomon must be allowed of all; He that sends a message by the hand
of a Fool, is as one that cutteth off the legs. The legs of the lame are not
equal, so is a parable in the hand of Fools.

But these in the Text were not sent, Ier. 23.21. Hos. 5.4. Sine Principali
mandato.
and yet they ran; they made themselves Amb assadors, but without any
Credentials; they made themselves Priests without any Aaronical call; they went
like Ahimaaz the son of Zadock without their message, 2 Samuel 18.23.
and therefore a Fool upon record; they left their errand and their wits behind
them, August.
Facti sunt fugitivi a cordibus suis.

Every such Leader is a Magor-missa-bid, Ier. 20.3.
a terror to himself, and a terror to all that are about him; and according
to our Saviors decision, such soul-murthering Prophets are but (...) ravening
Wolves, Matthew. 7.45.
and therefore he gives you a caution against them, (...), Beware of these
false Prophets. For all these false Prophets are foolish Prophets; Prove. 17.21.
and as the Father of a Fool, so the Follower of a Fool has no joy.

All Graces in holy lines are ever numbered under the name of Wisdom, Prove. 1.7.
and all Impieties and Profaneness under the name of Folly, which in my Text,
like those of God and Elam, Eze. 32.24.
are mustered by multitudes. For the multitude of thine iniquity, etc. And as I
said before, A multitude of iniquity ever brings with it a multitude of sorrow,
as the Prophet Jeremiah alleges; Ier. 30.15.
For the multitude of thine iniquity thy sorrow is incurable: In short, in
Heaven there is no room for Fools, Prove. 1.32.
and how can they bring others there, that cannot find the way themselves? And
yet this is the first part of Isreal's woe and misery in the day of her
visitation: The Prophet is a Fool.

The second is like unto it, widens it and worsens it, The Spiritual man is
mad, That is the Man of the Spirit, that pretends so much to the Spirit, that
Fathers all upon the Spirit; and which is worse, upon the Spirit of God, when
he is malo and maligno spiritu arreptus, And which is worst of all, Gloss. Or.
He brings in the Spirit of God to own things contrary to the word of God, to
abett his Treason against his King and subvert the Religion of his God, to sow
Rebellion in the State and Sedition in the Church; He will find Gospel
Arguments against Gospel Principles; This is the highest of this Spiritual
man's frenzy; and of Isreal's misery, to have Fools, and Mad men for their
Leaders.

Folly and Madness do hang at the Duo ubera Sponsae, two Breasts of Christ's
Spouse, and are as dangerou's as those Serpents at the Breasts of Cleopatra,
and worse; Those could but kill the Body, These both Body and Soul.

Hanibal was ill perplexed, Magis se a non pagnante Fabie, quam a pugnante
Marcello timeri. Plutarch. Ez. 13.10.
as well with his Non pugnante Fabio, as this Pugnante Marcello. So Israel,
between Fools that could do no good and Mad men that did much harm us (as
between the upper and neither Millstone) was ground to Powder.

They preached Peace, when there was an Vlscisci in Promptu; when Vengeance
hovered over them, and like an unlucky Faulcon, had nothing but Destruction and
Ruin engraven upon her Varvels; Ier. 7.4. 1 King. 9.22. Hos. 5.1.
They cried up the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and yet the
Whoredom of Iezabel and her Witchcrafts lodged within them; and when the
Trumpets of Peace were at their Mouths, Murders and Slaughters were in their
Hearts; for they were profound to make Slaughter. They were a Snare in Mezpah,
and spread their Nets upon Mount Tabor. When they should have preached the
Oracular truths of Heaven, Mica 2.11. Ier. 5.31. Isa. 1.23. Lam. 4.16. 1 King.
16.21. Mat. 11.17. Lam. 5.15. Psalm. 78.31.
they preached of Wine and strong drink, and my People loved to have it so; They
had preached their Princes into Rebellion, and their People into Schism and
Confusion. Isreal's Priests were now like Athanaeus his Papers, Omnes Tibicines
insaniunt, cum semel efflant, avolat illico men's, and all Israel and Ephraim
danced after their Pipes. Rebellion is like a Sewer or Common Shore in a City;
it gathers all the filth and rabble to it; Mill Puellarum, Puerorum, mill
Furores, as if every one of the chosen men of Israel, had been a Hercules
Furens, or a Corybantes; Madness among the Spiritual men was like a Torrent
among the People, Velut aggere rupto Sternit agros, Sternit sata laeta, etc. or
like the inchaunted Horn of Astolphe, made all that heard it mad; Insanire
parant certa ratione, etc.

It was not doubtless too much Learning that made them madd; Acts 26.24.
or if they were endowed with Abilities, allow them to have Magnas vires, and
Cursum celerrimum; yet they were Extra viam, August.
as Saint Augustine.

Ulysses had all the winds given him but one, Ulysses.
which was that that should have brought him to his Ithaca. By Aeolus. Pentheus.


Pentheus was Sapiens in omnibus, praeterquam in iis in auibus sapientem esse
convenit; He was wise in every thing, but wherein his wisdom might advantage
him: whatever other Eminencies were in them, they were possessed with Seneca 's
insanam Libidinem, Seneca. Tullius.
and with Tally 's insana Jurgia. The Spiritual man is mad; and like Priest,
like People, whole Acres of Ellebore will not purge them. In Tyberim defluxis
Oronces.
They have infected the Age they lived in with Sin, and the World with Shame
and Infamy, and stand in the Text, as Pontius Pilate in the Creed, to transfer
their Obloquy to all Posterity; Omnia Pontus; Ovid.
Ten Tribes revolted of Twelve, Ten Tribes infected. Schism and Rebellion (like
Acefta's Arrows) have caught fire flying; Josh. 7.9.
And now as ( Joshua said) Quid facies magno Nomini two? What will thou do with
thy glorious Name, if these Cananites come in and destroy us? If they destroy a
famous and a glorious Church, so richly endowed, so miraculously preserved, so
strangely restored, what will become of thy Glorious name?

Will it not be time for the Great Bishop of our Soul to set a Day, 2 Pet. 2.5.
or appoint days of Visitation and days of Recompense, to put a stop to every
Jannes and Iambres, that resist the Truth? First that they proceed no farther;
and secondly, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9.
that their Folly be made manifest, that future Ages may take warning by their
example, as the Apostle writes. Yes! God himself thinks it high time to have
mercy upon Sion. Patesacta estinsania little. Ps. 102.13. Ps. 74.6.
It pityes him to see the Church so long in her Dust and Rubbish, and the
Carved work of his Temples spoiled with Axes and Hammers; and therefore, as
they have had their time, God now takes his, and Brandishes his Sword, Isa.
52.10.
and makes bare his Arm, to be avenged on his Enemies, and take vengeance of
his Adversaries. And in order to this, Text.
our Prophet speaks in the Text, The days of Visitation are come, the days of
Recompense are come; Israel shall know it; The Prophet is a Fool, the Spiritual
man is mad For the multitude of thine Iniquity; Great is the hatred.

And so I proceed to the Applicatory and Conclusive part both of the Text and
Sermon. 3d. Part.
And here I intend not to trouble my self or you with those lising Ephraimites
that have started aside, like broken Bows, Judges 12.6. Psalm 78.9, 57.
that have warpt and shrunk either in their Religion or Loyalty; nor, as the
Text would bear it, to run a Parallel between England and Israel. The Crimes of
our Nation, as they are wrapped up in the Act, so may they for ever be buried in
the Grave of Oblivion, as in the valley of Hamon-Gog. Ez. 39 11.
Only a word or two to you, my Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, and you of the
Laity, and I have done. Be pleased to divide among you these Apples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver, Pro. 25.11.
and may they be like Manna, as that that is best pleasing to every Palate.

You have heard something of the Son, Psalm. 78.3. Genesis 15.19, 20.
and something of the Sorrows of Israel, what Havoc and Destruction they have
made in former and latter Ages; Oh let this deluge of Sin, these overflowings
of other men's Ungodliness raise up the Ark of our Devotion so many Cubits
nearer Heaven!

And now, O ye Priests, Mal. 2.1. Hag. 2.7. Mar. 11.15 1 Timothy 6.19. Ps. 118.22.
Ephesians. 2.20. Mat. 7.24, 26.
this Commandment is for you.

God is about to rebuild his Temple, and Christ our Savior to purge it; you
are his Master builders; lay a good Foundation, let that stone which others
have refused, be by you made the Head-stone in the Corner; Fundamentum aliud
nemo. Other foundation can no man lay, etc. We are denominated to be wise or
foolish, according to our Carriage in this point, and let the Superstructure be
answerable. We are not sent to build Lamiae's Turrets, Ier. 9.14. Tit. 2.1.
Castles in the Air (your own Imaginations,) but the Oracles of God in Truth,
and sound Doctrine to your Congregations.

As we are Spiritual men, Psalm 23.3.
let us suffer our selves to be guided by that Good Spirit that leads us and
your Flocks into the Land of Righteousness. The spirit of God will never
dictate any thing against the word of God; As many as walk according to this
Rule, Gal. 6.16.
Mercy shall be upon them and Peace, as upon the Israel of God. We cannot
miscarry, if we take in the Council of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 6.10, 11, 12, 13.
who (having told us, That they that err from the Faith, pierce themselves
through with many sorrows) said, But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and
follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness. And
again, Verse 13. I charge thee in the sight of God, who quickneth all things,
and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession,
That thou keep this Commandment without spot, unblameable, until the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the Close; 1 Timothy 6.20. Lev. 22.4, 1 Pet. 1.15.
O Timothy, Depositum custode, etc. It is a sin that any of the seed of Aaron
should be a Leper.

Together with this of Saint Paul, take in also that of Saint Peter; As he that
has called you is Holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. 1. He
calls for an Illustrative Holiness. In the utmost extent in all manner of
Conversation. In all the windings and changings, and turnings of divine
providence. Luke 9.62.
He that sets his Hand to this Plow, and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom
of Heaven, not Fit Himself, less Fit to be a Guide or Conduct to Others. 2. He
presses it by the best of Paterns, and the most probable Arguments.


1. As he that has called you is Holy. Caesar said not Ite; but V^i^e to his
Soldiers.
God that requires Holiness from us, is a President of Holiness unto us. So
should we be in our selves, and to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made us Overseers; least whilst we preach to others should be Anathema. 1 Pet.
2.15. 1 Cor. 6.27. Ez. 34.19.
Worse was not said of the Sheepherd of Babylon, then, that they trampled upon
that wherewith they fed their Flock. We have a better President, to be Holy as
he that has called us is Holy, and to write after that Copy; though there be
many Blots, yet we must do it as well as we can. 1 Samuel 2.2.
But as Hanna in her Song: There is none Holy but the Lord!

Essentially there is not: Representatively there is.
Efficiently there is not: Instrumentally there is.
Eminently there is not: Demonstratively there is.
Though we cannot be Almighty as He is, Ez. 1.24. 1 Timothy 1.17.
nor All-wise as He is, yet we may in some measure be Holy as he is, though not
transcendently.

3ly. He calls for it for your Calling-sake; 1 Pet. 1.15.
in common with all Christians, but in special being called to the high est
form, the greatest Honor. Tribul. Plut.
Kings and Princes have Gloried in it, Accessit titulis Pontificalis honos. The
Ancient Romans chose their Priests out of their Philosophers, and their Kings
out of their Priests. Bar. An.
Constantine the Great refused to receive precedence of the Prelates and
Bishops: Ita veneratus est, acsi divinam in ipsis Majestatem vidisset, Cassaneus
says Cassaneus; he would not meddle with their Ecclesiastical affairs, Vos
vestras Causas judicate, and disponite. In short, What we have upon the account
of the Common salvation, Jud. 3. Ob. ult.
what upon the Supernumerary to be accounted Saviors our selves, lays all
manner of Obligation to Holiness upon us; and we are no better then Fools and
Mad men, Deu. 32.29.
if we consider it not.

But to conclude.

Peace is not so firmly settled in our Borders, Ps. 147.14. 2 Samuel 20.1.
but the Trumpet of Rebellion may sound again; and who knows from whence,
whether from Mount Ephraim, or from Mount Gilead; whether the Lord would not
strengthen the hands of Eglon against Israel, Isa. 10 12. Ex. 17.8.
or Amalek against Israel? We want no Enemies as we are; Let not us make our
selves more; Let nothing be done of strife and vain glory. The Canaanite and
Perizite is yet in the Land; Genesis 13.7.
After all this is come upon us, and thou have given us such a Deliverance as
this, Restored our King and Judges as at the first, If. 1.26.
and our Counselors as at the beginning, Cemented the veil of the Temple; If
we should again break thy Commandment, would thou not be angry with us, Ezra
9.13.
till thou had destroyed us? said Ezra in his Prayer to God.

Forget not then that you are the Lords Remembrancers; Give him no rest night
nor day, Is. 62.1. Genesis 6.27.
till he persuade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem; that till he have in
some measure made the Priest as holy as he that has called him, and till he
have made the People as holy as the Priest, that Zacharie's Prophecy may take
hold of us, Zach. 12.6.
That he that is feeble may be like unto David, and David the while be like an
Angel of God; That the advice and counsel of him that is the Great Sheepherd,
the (...), may sink into our Hearts and Souls. C^rat Oves, Oviumque ^agistres.
1 Pet. 5.4.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, etc. Your Reward is before you, That
ye may Receive a Crown of Glory which fades not away; Which, God of his mercy
Grant unto us all, for his Son Christ Jesus sake: To whom, with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be all Honor and Glory, Now and Ever. Amen.

FINIS.
TESTIMONIES CONCERNING The Renowned Dr. SANDERSON.
Dr. Prideaux. NOne States a Question more punctually, Resolves it more
satisfactorily, Answers all Objections more fully, then that clear and solid
man Mr. Sanderson. Bishop Usher. And I Proposed the Case to the Judicious Dr.
Sanderson, who Grasped all the Circumstances of it, and Returned that happy
Answer that met with all my Thoughts, satisfied all my Scruples, and cleared up
all my Doubts. Dr. Hammond. That staid and well-weighed man Dr. Sanderson,
conceives all Things deliberately, dwells upon them discreetly, discerns Things
that differ exactly, passes his Judgment rationally, and expresses it aptly,
clearly and honestly. Mr. Baxter. -- I do not intend by this Character such
Episcopal Divines as the Reverend Dr. Sanderson, whom I honor for his
Learning, Judgment, Moderation and Piety. Dr. Fuller. Amongst the Modern
Worthies of this College still surviving, Dr. Robert Sanderson, late Regius
Professor, moves in the highest Sphere, a no less plain and profitable then
able and profound Casuist, (a Learning almost lost amongst Protestants.) Bishop
Reynolds. -- There is no mention of it in that Table of the several Opinions
drawn up by a Learned man of our Church, Dr. Sanderson. Bishop Hall. Alas, why
do I wade further into the deep and large search of Cases of Conscience,
wherein I hear so far a progress is made by the excellent Dr. Sanderson, the
most exact and faithful Casuist living?

