THE POOR Widows Mite, Cast into the LORD'S TREASURY. Wherein are contained
Some Reasons in the Justification of the Meetings of the People of God called
QUAKERS with an Approbation of several Truths held by them, and the ground of
Dark Persecution Discussed.

Written by a Woman of the South, who came from the ends of the Earth to hear
the Wisdom of him that is greater than Solomon, and does a far off behold the
happy Estate of his Friends and Servants who stand continually before him, to
hear and receive Wisdom from him; who is the true Emanuel.

Now lest it should be counted a Libel, or any should think we dare not own it
in the World, I have subscribed my Name.

A MITE, if ALL, is more than ALL,
Than they Abundance have,
That have not FAITH to give up ALL,
Their ALL will not them Save.
Printed for the use and benefit of such Bees as suck their Honey from the
Flowers and Blossoms that God makes to spring; that they may have to keep
themselves alive in the dark stormy Winter, 1671

THE Widows Suite TO Her FRIEND T. S. whom she desires to be IMPRIMATOR to her
Small Mite.
My Friend,
THese Lines to thee are sent that thou may them review,
Because I know thou do Believe and See in things are True.
So that if ought be Unsav'ry, and thou do know the Fault,
Thou having in thy House Seas'ning, put thereto the Earths Salt.
Moreover I not willing am, that Truth at all be Blamed,
Nor would I do or give out ought that any should be shamed.
Therefore unto the Sanctu'ry I do my Weights forth bring
The Balance thereof them to try, this is the only thing.
To have all right and made good weight, Infirmities to heal,
And what Weights equal are and just, on them to strike the Seal.
Which when they have Truths Seal on them Oh! then none will question:
Let the Noble Bereans search, they will find the Weights all one.
The Poor WIDOWS MITE Cast into the LORDS TREASURY.
Where in are contained in short, some reasons in the Justification of the
Meetings of the People of God called QUAKERS, etc.
NO Prologue, Preface, Frontispice, nor no Epistle have,
To Usher in this little Mite, that long has lain in Grave.
But now a Resurrection has, and from the Grave is come,
And in the Holy City walks, though before deaf and dumb.
Nor did it see at all, for that, in's very Birth 'twas blind,
Nor taste the goodness of his God, nor could him feel or find.
Now Praises, praises unto him, that quickened has dry Bones,
By breathing makes the senses live, to Abraham's Seed of Stones.
This is the mighty Power of God, on us that blind were born,
His giving forth his Light, his Christ, his Everlasting ^orn
His Gospel, Grace and Righteousness, his Joy, his Peace, his Strength,
His mighty Arm Salvation brings, unto us now at length.
With Wisdom, Truth and Holiness, which is to Sanctify,
And cleanse this little Newborn Babe, which long in sin did lie.
This is the true Emanuel, that does his People save,
From all the sins that they have done, that kept their Souls in Grav^
This is the Spirit that quickens us, this is the time of Love,
When in our Blood we wallowing were, Oh then! What did (...)
Our Father could not, seeing he, by birth an Am'rite was.
Nor Mother either, cause that she came of the Hittits
These fleshly, earthly Canaanites, could not help in that day.
Of the Souls great calamity, God only is its stay.
For Pity, pity no Eye had, on it, for to help when
It was cast out, and loathed of all, Love to it God had then.
He then did purge and purify that Birth that is his own,
The which is born of the Spirit, by a new Name is known.
And He it is deliverance brings, from Satan's Power and Might.
And has translated us into his Sons marvelous Light.
Whereby we wonder and admire, his Mercies manifold.
And from his Truth cannot retire, his Truth does make us bold,
And valiant for it upon Earth, for which we All have lost,
For in our Building we sat down, and did cast up the Cost.
And by the same our Souls have gained, let the world go as it will,
Let Life, or Death, or Sufferings come, so God be with us still.
This is the Test we have for God, in this we all agree,
That of our selves no help we have; All is of Grace, and Free.
For Obligations we have none wherewith the Lord to tie.
But the Free Promises he makes, on them we do rely.
So those that true experience have, pray tell it to each other,
What for their Souls the Lord has done, be it Sister or Brother.
This is the Cause that we do Meet, together, it is Gods due,
That we may serve and witness Him, by his Word, which is true.
For in the mouth of two or three, when they witness Allone,
Gods Word it is established, and Truth prevails upon
The Hearts and Souls of them that hear, both IN and OVT also,
Whereby they the same Spirit know that is in many MO.
This was the Order Paul did give the Co-rin-thi-ans to
That to one place the Church should come, and this also should do.
The Prophet or to Prophecy, to Judge the others were,
By the same Spirit which they spoke, that to them Truths did clear.
And if amongst them there did come, one that believed not,
Convicted then he is of all, and Judgment is his Lot.
And thus the secrets of his heart, all manifested be,
So falling down upon his Face, then worship God will he;
And of a truth report that God it is that lives in you.
This way th'unlearned come to know the Way of God that is true.
Here one by one may Prophecy, that all may hear and learn,
And also may be comforted that to Gods Spirit turn.
We Members of each others are, being Christ's Body dear,
Which he has purchased with his Blood, and placed in us his Fear.
For we be they the which are built on the Foundation:
Of Prophets and Apostles to, Jesus Christ's Cornerstone;
In whom also the Building is fitly framed together:
Grown unto an holy Temple, from which God will not sever;
For being Built together are, through the Almighty Spirit,
An Habitation of God, the which he will Inherit.
And so the Head it cannot say to the Foot, I need not thee;
Nor eke the Eye unto the Ear, O be thou gone from me:
For that the Body is but One, yet Members has it Many;
Apeare there would Deformity, if lack there were of Any:
This Body God has tempered so, the Members each with other
That all should have the self same care, Uncomely parts to cover;
Not to Rejoice at Nakedness, as did that cursed Cham;
But as Japhet and blessed Shem, going backwards covered shame.
So what is wanting in each one, a supply others have;
To Minister unto each wants, by it their Souls to save.
And this all is by the same Spirit diversities of Gifts,
With different Ministrations, which Operate as thrifts;
And yet it is but the same Lord, on whom we only call,
And the same God that Operates, and Works all in all.
To own the Word of Wisdom's given, the Word of Knowledge to,
By the same Spirit another has both Faith and Power to do;
And heal infirmities of Souls by working Miracl's many;
And Prophecy and Descerning of Spirits where there is any.
All this the one and self-same Spirit, which does his members fill
Dividing unto every man severally as it will.
If this Church Figure be too bright for worldlings for to see,
The use we make of our Meetings, in one Body to be,
Take your own Body-figure-world the Countries Members are,
And each Comodity there grows, which are brought from on far;
These outward things the spirit are, of the world that is complete,
And every place where each does go, are members of the great:
And now God he has placed things so, in the whole there is no want;
Neither can any Country say, I Have all, here is nothing scant.
And so each Country his Offering to each other sends;
Then these these gifts when they receive with others making mends,
This order the worlds members have their wants for to supply;
By sending their abounding fruits for things they on rely;
And where most trading there is used, Oh there they rich do grew,
In gold, silver and precious stones, this Babylon does know.
By Schism, War, if Trading fail, Oh! then they do grow poor,
By wanting of Commerce and Trade when they have spent their store:
This being true why shall not we, as Members each of other,
Bring forth our Offerings to the Lord, these may comfort another.
Object.
Me thinks I hear some Critic say, O this is cunning made;
For to compare Conventicles, to our great World and Trade:
You count your selves so heavenly me thinks that you should not,
So paraphrase on this fowl World lest you receive a blot.
Answer.
My Answer is, it is for thy sake thy hearing being but dull;
That I speak after the manner, of men, to thee in full.
Moreover this Worlds Children are more wiser much by far,
In their own generation, then Lights own Children are.
So to this generation, who mock, and scorn and fain,
And for thy sake I have digrest, but now let me return,
Unto Gods order in his Church, that all may hear and learn.
This favor and incoragment it is held forth to all,
That what of God revealed is to any, other shall
Have liberty to speak it forth, the Prophet which must hold,
Their spirits being subject to the Prophet which is bold.
So it the bruised reed breaks not, nor smoking flax does quench,
Till Judgment unto Victory comes, and Truth sits on the Bench.
For that the knowledge of the Truth does bring us all together;
And from this Truth we cannot swerve, nor from each other sever.
For the profession of our Faith together must hold fast,
For this our hope, our stay, our strength, that must help us at last.
For whether shall we go but there, where words of Life do spring,
And from the roots does honey drop, that makes poor Souls to sing?
Oh these Assemblies we may not at all, as some, forsake;
Least fiery indignation upon us God does take.
For that it is a wilful sin, not to profess Gods Name;
When before men we be brought forth, to suffer for the same.
For where that two or three be come together in his Name,
If the midst of them he will be, who can keep from the same?
For that in him the Treasures be, of Wisdom Knowledge to;
Which he gives to his Children dear whose hearts to him are true.
In him's the Oracle of God, who does his People teach,
In their hearts how to worship him, so they it forth do preach.
And not Meeting it was the cause of Hearing some were dull,
Which made things hard for to be said or uttered to the full.
For there were some that for their time, ought Teachers for to be;
And yet have need one teach again first Principles to see;
And were become such as had need of Milk and not strong Meat;
For every one that uses Milk unskilful is to Eat.
Or feed upon the Righteous Word, for that a Babe is he;
To him strong Meat does not belong, with him it will not agree.
But those that are of riper age, to them it does belong;
Even those that by reason of use, have their senses made strong;
Being exercised do deserne between both good and evil
So in Gods Truth we are kept from, the lying, murdering Devil.
Job that was just and perfect both, such Meetings did come to,
With other of the sons of God, as Gods sons now do do;
And though Satan did also come, 'twas for advantage sake,
To be Informer, and accuse, that he their goods might take,
And though that he Commission got to take all in his power,
By Sabins and Caldeans to, as he does at this hour,
Persuading God they him would Curse, if he will but let him tuch
Their goods, or ought else that they have, no Meetings would be such.
And yet again there was a day when the Sons of God Came
For to present themselves before the Lord, they are the same,
Who still hold fast Integrity, although that he does move
Against him, and us, both to destroy yet we'll not Curse our Love.
Yea Skin for Skin, and all we have, yea Bone and Flesh also
We hope we shall to him give up, rather then Curse him mo.
For how can we commit this sin, not to walk in Gods way,
When we such large experience have of him our strength and stay
But I shall rather here break forth, it being now the Spring,
By Chirping praise our Gad of Love, Who can but to him sing
And in my song I shall you show, What these our Meetings be,
I figured have in many things, yet all in Truth agree.
We are the Tabernacle of the Con-gre-ga-ti-on,
The which the Lord in Earth reserves to call his Name upon;
In us the Ark and Covenant is and Mercy-seat we see,
With Pot of Heavenly Manna to, to us the Cher'bims flee;
With us also there is the Rod, that buddeth and is green,
Of the High Priest from Judah came, as plainly may be seen:
Here is the Golden Censer to, in which is heavenly fire,
And here is the Table of Shewbread, What can you more desire
And here is the Cap of Blessing to, in our Communion,
This Blood our Souls must also purge, for other help we have none.
And if that you Baptized would be, oh here are Baptim's many,
Here Is Water, Fire, Sufferings, Death; here you cant miss of any.
With us there is the Laver of Re-ge-ne-ra-ti-on.
For Juda and Jerusalem, it cleanses Mount Sion.
And Fire-Baptism's also here, the Holy Ghost, Gods Word,
A Suffering-Baptism does appear, proceeding from the Sword.
A more secret Baptism there is, cannot be spoke with breath,
And this is that Baptism of Christ, Baptized into his Death.
This is no Outward visible Sign, not signified so,
But separates man from his Lusts that always stood his foe.
Thus in his flesh Christ he took up, the Comforts of Man's Life,
And laid them down at Gods own Will, to reconcile the Strife;
For God it was that was in Christ, the World to reconcile,
Now in his stead Ambassadors, has sent to us the vile:
Though 'twas not him did the Offense, but was the Offended,
Yet his Ambassadors pray us to be re-con-ci-led.
Here Is Grace indeed! not only free, but does a begging come,
And Messengers t'intreat the World to accept this Ransom.
The which none could lay down for it, but He of's own accord
Did purchas't with his precious Blood, and so of right is Lord.
Yet does not use Commanding Power, but Love is his own way;
And those that will not this shall Rule, as Enemies he will slay.
But this last Baptism does set the True Baptismes on
The answer of a good Conscience, by Christ's Resurrection.
For as Christ's flesh it suffered, the same mind we must have,
No longer in our sins to live, which to our Soul's a Grave,
But now the Gospel it is preached, the dead sleeper's awake,
Yea he is come to Judgment to, God Life to him does make.
For that he would no longer have our Souls in Prison lie,
But by his quickening Spirit preach, and free-ed us thereby,
Who sometime disobedient were, yet God did suffer long,
Waiting as in the days of Noa (who grieved his Spirit strong.)
And now unto the Will of God he does subjection give,
No more unto the Gentiles Will resolves he to live.
This is that Tabernacle which, down nere shall any take,
Nor Cord thereof shall broken be, removd shall be no Stake.
For here the Glorious Lord will be, Rivers and Streams whereon,
No Gally nor no gallant Ship at all shall pass upon
For that men's Tacklings loosed are, their strength at Ours does fall,
They cannot well strengthen their Mast, or spread abroad their Sail,
For it is the Lord that is our King, and our Lawgiver to,
How can we then lack any thing for ought he bids us do.
Oh this also is Wisdoms Gate, Why he you then so mad?
If ever that your Souls be saved, to's Church God must you add.
Wisdom cried has without, and uttered voice in street,
Yea in the Market place she calls, where Pharisees do greet;
In the chief Places of Concorse, the opening of the Gate,
Yea in their great Assemblies to, where multitudes were sat;
How long, ye simple ones will ye, love your simplicity?
Turn ye unto this Church that ye may eat and live thereby.
And Scorners, Why do ye delight in this your scorning Trade,
You being Fools, Knowledge do hate, it is sin thus has you made.
At Gods reproof if now you will turn, he will pour on you his Spirit,
His words unto you he will make known, that you may Life inherit.
But this much know, if you refuse, and do not him regard,
But do his Council set at naught, with this he will you reward;
For mocking he will mock again at your Calamity,
And laugh when as your fear does come, it is desolation nigh,
Then you may call, but God will now to answer give at all,
Because you did not answer him, when he to you did call.
For you none of his Counsel would, Reproof's you did despite,
And would not choose the Fear of God, but hated Knowledge wise;
Therefore the fruit of your own way is meat for you to eat,
Your own devices you shall fill, who shut out Wisdom great.
In Us the Time is come to pass, last days pro-phe-si-ed,
That the Mountain of the Lords House should be established;
And on the Top exalted is, above all barren Hills,
And many People to us flow, thus God his House now fills,
And we his People bid you come, to this the Lords Mountain.
It is the House of Jacobs God, it is he over it does Reign.
Here he does teach us his own Way, the Paths that we should walk,
From out of Sion flows that Law whereof we joy to talk,
This is the Word which God the Lord sends from Jerusalem,
That does among the Nations Judge, rebuking much of them.
So that they have their Swords now beat into Plow, shares we see.
And their Spears into Pruning Hooks, this LOVE makes all agree.
So Nation does not lift up Sword, for Esau does embrace
His Brother Jacob in his Arms, this makes War cease. It Is Grace,
So we with Isay bid you come, to this house with accord,
Desiring you to walk with us, in the Light of the Lord.
We are the City on a Hill, there set that all may see,
Therefore always in Cottages, still this we cannot be;
For that we are not to be hid, but set there to be shown,
And that through the Power of God to others should be known:
Which is the Light, the Christ in us, the Hope of Glory to;
And does cast out the Reprobate, this work he is to do,
The Blind make see, and Deaf to hear, tho Mountebancks do rage,
Leapers are cleans'd, and Dumb do speak, this throws them off the stage
And this also is freely to, we witness it truly,
And if that we should hold our peace stones would against us cry.
For what are we more then wrought stone, it is God that does us raise
To he the seed of Abraham, for to show forth his Praise:
Tho in the Wilderness we are squard, and now appear but loose,
Yet being brought together all, we do make God a House;
Whereby the Workemans Work is seen for that he has them tried,
And made them like the Cornerstone, to answer every side;
Yea Judgment to the Plumet hangs, and Righteousness to the Line,
For to make all upright and true, according to his mine.
These living stones together set, may plainly see each other
The Mighty workmanship of God, in Sister and in Brother,
Yea it is the Standard of the Lord, the Ensign he has ser,
For all Nations to flock unto, tho Small things day is yet.
And though that we be Quakers called, by most people in scorn,
Yet we the true Assembly be, and Church of the Firstborn.
For in our heart God he does dwell, whose Spirit is a Sword,
Which was the cause that we were made to tremble at his Word.
And when the Lord with Odours sweet does this his own House fill,
Oh then all others that pass by, its sweetness favor will.
And if that any Lydia come, that is to God so dear,
Whose heart the Lord has o-pen-ed, she will feed upon our cheer.
For in these public Mountains God to all will make his Feast,
And Messengers to the high way send, for to invite his Guests.
These are the Feasts of Charity, made by the God of Love,
On Heavenly Manna here we feed, which comes from God above.
We being many are one Bread, of which we partake all,
And when we are hungry does us feed, both now, and ever shall.
This also is Gods Candlestick, in which his Candle's set,
And lights those be in the House, and is for others yet.
The Woman having lost her piece of silver, sought with pain,
And when that she had found it out, t'her Neighbors cries amain;
Contented not within her self these favors up to frowl,
But she must tell to others to, what is done for her Soul.
This was the Sheep that went astray into the Wilderness,
But the good Shepherd he is come, and brought it to the rest.
Oh therefore Neighbors, neighbors come, let us rejoice together,
And praises in his House let us sing, for ever, and for ever.
This is the HIVE also to which the BEES do honey bring,
Which they do gather from God's Flowers; there they together sing,
Which is to him a savory thing, and pleasant to his Heart,
Because it is what comes from himself, in us he does it dart:
This is the Sacrifice of god, which in them does arise.
Being from broken contrite hearts, God will it not despise.
Hither the Virgins Wise also, are altogether come,
Each having Oil in his Vessel, tho in their Lamps burns some.
These Lamps being altogether trimmed, they do make a great Light,
Which is the brightness of Gods Love, held forth to Peoples sight,
To this bright rising all must come, which is as Heavens Gate,
And with Oil in their Vessels wait, lest they do come too late.
This is the place that is dreadful, in which Gods presence is,
Were two or three together be, to praise the Name that is his.
This needs must be the House of God, where Angels do descend,
And those that meet in Gods pure fear, he doubtless will defend.
This is not any New thing now, as if it had never been,
But this has been in in Ages past, as plainly has been seen.
This is the House that David loved, even the dwelling place,
Wherein Gods honor still remains, in hearts full fraught with Grace,
And David bud all here to come, and that with one accord.
Who God did fear, to them he will tell, the goodness of the Lord.
What for his Soul the Lord had done, which he for him did save,
Which was the Branch of Jesse Stem, and raised him from the Grave,
Because he would not suffer him, being his holy One,
That ought to him belonging should, ere see corruption.
Therefore for this does David's Preach, and to the living tell,
In the great Congregation of Saints that do excel,
In whom was only his delight, which faithful were and true
And that in Virtue did excel, whose hearts God had made New.
These are the Living Waters which, are both the last and first,
Therefore must all that seek for Life come here to quench their thirst.
Without money, and without price, Come ye, do buy, and eat,
Both Wine and Milk, Why do you spend money for that is no meat?
And your Labor also for that which does not satisfy,
For it is not the Bread of Life; therefore you eat and dye.
But hark with diligence to God, oat ye that which is good,
And let your Soul delight it self in fatness, its own food.
Incline your ear, yea come and hear, and then your Souls shall live.
The Covenant sure of Mercy pure, of David he will give.
Our Meetings they do witness Him, that must the People lead,
And he is our Commander to, our Peace, Light, Life and Bread.
Thus being met in Gods pure fear, we then the Cysterns are
Which he of living water clear, does send to us from far.
And therefore from this evil to, when that it does appear,
All People we advise to come, from Cysterns are not clear:
For these be such, Men to themselves, who have forsook the Lord,
Hewed, the which no Water will, of Life to them afford.
These Meetings also Malachy did speak of in his time,
Wherein they that did fear the Lord, and were all of one mine
Unto each other often did speak, to which the the Lord gave ear,
And then a Book of remembrance, he wrote, as does appear;
For that they are and shall be his, for ever he will them spare,
As Man does spare his serving Son, for they are Jewels rare.
These Meetings then were also kept in such an evil time
When none but the wicked were set up, for goodness was a crime:
The Proud were then the Happy oalld, wicked workers set up,
Yet then Gods People they did Meet, tho Sufferings were their Cup.
Bethesdas Pool a figure was, of this our Meeting Place,
Whereas both Lame and Blind must wait, for Gods descending Grace
And in much patience wait his Will, till that the Angel move,
And the Waters with virtue fill, to heal, this is Gods Love.
And therefore be not too hasty, but wait upon Gods leisure,
For all Infirmities he heals, and therein takes pleasure.
Samarias Mountain it is likewise, wherein is Jacobs Well;
Which springs forth to (...) Life, of this many can tell.
Here is the true Ho-ly Water, of Life, both pure and clear,
This is not that the Pope does make, wherewith he men does jear;
But this is that that God does give, whereof when men do drink,
Out of their Belly Rivers flow, much more than they can think.
Here when Gods People they do Meet, whose zeal is as a flame,
Which makes often their hearts to burn, wh^ declares his Fame.
Of which the Scripture it is full, yet is a Book that is sealed,
Which neither learnt nor unlearned, to any has reveald.
For the Veil being over their heart, when Moses he is read,
How then can they know Christ's own day though it be prophesi'd?
Though precept upon precept be, yet they are nere the near,
And Line upon line, they see not, being without Gods Fear.
Of this Isaiah did complain and grievd for in his time,
This was the cause of Ignorance, and darkness of the mine,
A sinful Nation he them called, a seed of evildoers,
Who had the Lord forsaken, and in corrupt ways were goers;
So laden with iniquity, those things they did not know,
Which daily unto them was read, their Veil did blind them so.
For Rulers they of Sodom were, which is the Earthly Power,
Inhabitants of Gomorrah, which cloggs them every hour.
So all these wicked worldly things that are set in the heart,
Must all with Gods pure fire be burnt, though man do feel the smart;
Yea be moved out of its place, by Gods Almighty Power,
For this same power of God alone, will all of it devour.
And this Word-fire, the virtue has, not only for to burn,
But give Light, Life, yea Heat and Power, to them that of it learn,
And therefore tho dark, cold and dead, without power or strength,
Yet come to this Light, Living-Word, 'twill raise you all at length.
We therefore in our Meetings have known this Refiners fire,
Which is to take off all the dross; from it do not retire.
For as in outward fire we see, when coals abroad be spread,
The Light, the Life, and Heat goes out, and all comes to be dead;
But when again together brought, and kindled fresh anew,
Oh then each coal rejoices much, when fire is put thereto.
Which is the end for which they are created of the Lord,
That Light, Life, Heat and Comfort to, each other may afford.
And if our Candles, being Light, we can by no means hide,
But must come to our Candlestick, what ever does betide;
Because that we know it is night, in which many do grope,
Therefore we do bring forth our Light, to give to them some hope:
Which is the Gospel-power of God, that Satan cannot abide,
But seeks our Candle to put out, that he Gods power may hide.
For he the Prince of darkness is, and would have all be so,
And if it be asked, Where Light may shine? He present cries, No, no.
Then seen his wicked works would be, that to them are the Gate,
Of their Destruction, therefore he, of all things it does hate.
When first in flesh Christ did appear, though in a Child young born,
He musters then up all his power, for to destroy the Form;
And led them then to Bethlehem, with this his false intent,
By which dark Power he did devour many poor Innocent.
Herod he then troubled full sore, with all Jerusalem,
Persuading him the Child was born should Rule both him and them,
But this was then another thing, than Worldly Rule to have,
For if that he would be a King, the People he must save.
But his Kingdom it is not here, nor do his Servants fight,
But in men's hearts it does appear, and guides them to the Right:
From whence all wrath, strife and envy, are shut out, with all Wars,
And all in Peace and Love do Live without hatred or Jars.
So that the ground and cause of Fear, we may from men remove,
No other Principle we have, but unto all men Love.
And therefore are our Meetings now, not kept in any spite,
Of King, or Law, or Parliament, but purely in Gods sight.
For shall not Sions Daughter shine, now that her Light is come,
Or can her Glory once be hid, that is radiant as the Sun?
For that she has her Pride cast off, in this the Lords own Day,
(Her haughty Looks, and stretched out Neck, with wanton Eyes do stay;
Her walking, mincing, twinkling Feet, her Bravery full soon,
Her Chains, her Braslets, and Mufflers, Round tyers like the Moon;
Her Bonnets and Leg-ornaments, her Head-band and Earrings,
Changable Suits of Apparel, her Wimples, Crisping-pins:
Also her Glasses, Hoods and Veils, these Burdens God endures,
And all her Heavenly outward shows, which seen pleasant Pictures.
These her own righteous filthy Rags, her Covering and Garment,)
And the Meek, and quiet Spirit has, took for her Ornament.
Though Captive she was to those things, she has shook off the dust,
And put on beautiful Garments, the which she wore at first.
This is the Bride that bids you Come, the Spirit says the same,
And whosoever thirsts, and will, may come unto this Name.
The which we are gathered unto in all the Peoples sight,
Being Christ's Bride and Body too, and for the World a Light.]
So under Bed nor Bushel nere must we at all be hid,
But on the Table must be set, a Light for the Blinded.
For this worlds god men's minds does blind, with riches, cares and fears,
He would not have this Gospel shine, that these foggs all would clear;
But would have all in darkness dwell, this is his Ellement,
For with this Light he angry is, and with us discontent.
Something about SPEAKING, Who is to Speak, or What to be spoken?
Object.
BUT some may say, You many times sit silent we do see,
And there is no speaking at all, with us this don't agree.
Answ.
My Answer is, If any have Gods Oracle we'll hear,
For that is it expells all Mists, and makes the Air clear.
For this does first the Vessel cleanse from whence it does proceed,
That first believes, and therefore speaks, to this we are all agreed.
Faiths work is first to cleanse the heart from all hypocrisies,
Than may it help for to pluck out, Motes from their Brothers eyes;
For how the unconverted shall at all strengthen his Brother,
For then they do condemn themselves, by teaching of another,
How shall the Thief at all exhort another not to steal,
Or the diseased Physician tell others he will them heal?
Or how can any teach the Law, who yet the Law do break,
Such Teachers make Gods Name blasphemd when they presume to speak
Or how blind Guides can lead the way in which others should go,
Or any free out of the Pit, themselves do stumble so?
So what authority have these at all others to Teach,
When still the Law does them condemn, how can they Gospel Preach?
Moreover they say, None from sin, are free here, thus they tell,
So prove themselves false-witnesses of True Emanuel.
And this also does testify, their labor's all in vain,
So they do give themselves the lie, yet they must preach for gain;
Because they have their time all spent, and thus been exercised,
Yea this good Doctrine counted was, till Quakers them surprised.
But if there be a David here, whose Table's richly spread,
Whose Cup does overflow, he may speak with a holy dread,
The things he has so learned of God, and preach his holy Word;
But no Dreamers we can allow, for them's prepared the Sword.
Their Father and their Mother both, the which did them beget,
While they prophecy shall run through, this Sword against them's set.
Oh this is the commanding Power does flesh in silence keep,
Their glorious Dreams we'll nor admire which are products of sleep.
For now that blessed hour is come, The dead Gods Voice do hear,
And many that did sleep awak: For Christ he does appear,
Yea from the dead they risen are, and Christ has gi'n them Light,
And sin reproved, in which we walked in darkness of the Night;
And unto Judgment we are come, which Sion does redeem,
With Righteousness his Converts he, does bring unto esteem.
For that all Judgment to the Son, the Father does commit,
And now to Judgment he is come, and in men's hearts does sit;
And all his Enemies that will not have the Lord to reign,
Before his face they are brought forth, with order to be slain.
The strong man he does also bind, that did his own House keep,
And spoil of all his Goods has made, now the Soul's wake from sleep.
For now our God he does arise, his enemies to scatter,
Which are these dreaming Prophets that, do thus fawn, lie and flatter,
And being in his own House does his Oracles speak now,
So this same sense of Spirit in all, cannot but it allow.
For he that to the Lord is joynd, is with him one in Spirit,
And to this Truth he sets his Seal, This gift is no man's Merit.
So by the mouth of such a man, the Lord this use does make,
His holy Word still to declare, as he by Prophets spoke.
For such a man, he can declare the things that he has seen,
And ears have heard, for with his hands Gods Word has handled been.
Yea this is he can truly tell you things of admiration,
What for his Soul the Lord has done in his Regeneration.
So he is gatherd up into the Cloud of Witnesses,
Which here alone did serve the Lord, yea him did fear and please.
And these are they that do not preach at any time for Hire,
But having Gods Word in their heart, cannot contain; It Is fire.
And if the Holy Ghost could not for money then he bought,
And Simon Magus was condemned for having such a thought,
What is the Ghost that is in men, that money out do reach,
And what is that which it receives with condition to preach?
It seems then, that they have not of God this self-same Gift,
Since that they can contain themselves, till we for money shift
For them, their lips can knowledge keep, there is none that they will cherish
For if People no money have, they all are like to perish:
For freely they received have not, the Gospel they do preach.
And therefore freely cannot it give, so for rewards do Teach.
That these men truly you may know, they tell you what was said
By Prophets, Christ, and Apostels, these are their only aid.
And thus like to the wandering Jews, in their Names would cast out
The unclean spirit that is in men, but it gives them the rout;
And so upon them it does fall, that they do quarter crave,
And do return and tell men that, him out there is none can have:
For that they know they Power have, both in and over them to,
Though they use Paul and Jesus words, for money this they do.
For Satan's Kingdom's not so weak, he should himself out cast,
But this same preaching Policy, makes it the longer last.
And so he sets them for to steal, the Saints and Prophets Words.
And bids them hear the Word of God, thus much he them affords:
But yet with this Proviso to, That none the same can keep,
Or any now has the same Spirit, but that it still does sleep:
And therefore must not now look for any such Miracle,
For the power and work is lost, this is Satan's Oracle.
For he has now changed his Form, to keep from Peoples sight,
Though he the Prince of darkness be, yet seems Angel of Light.
These Priests and Curats that do take upon them Souls to cure,
Physicians are of no value, that God's fire cannot endure.
But here you see they have but what they from their Neighbors steal
They having not set Seal to God, he naught to them reveals.
And though they say, Hear you Gods Word, spoken to Jeremy,
Or unto some other Prophet, yet in their mouth's a lie.
And so tho they do say or swear, that the Lord he does (...)
Yea then they do false witness bear, this Test they cannot give.
Whereas those that do dwell in God, and He dwells in them,
The Prophets and Apostles know, yea David's (...) and Stone.
B^ing in the Path they walked, do see, their footsteps every one,
And know their Light and Lanthorn to, which unto them has shown,
And therefore can in truth repeat, what they to all do tell,
That God also their Souls has brought from the dark pit of Hell
This Spirit it may Preach and Teach, Gods wonders manifold,
The which can speak Gods Word in truth, being right, a Lyin bol^
Here you may see we do not quench Gods Spirit he affords,
That in the least measure does speak, rejoice we at those words.
Something about SILENCE.
Object.
BUT some do say, We marvel much, that you can sit Silent,
We do conceive it no profit, nor are with it content;
For if that we should sit a while, silent from hearing breath,
Our mind a wandering then would be up and down in the Earth:
And so contriving in our hearts, what is to be done, we plot
Till there be someting we know not that on our heart does smote:
And if this earthly spirit act ^n, for which we feel this smart,
Some former evil we have done, lies gnawing of our heart.
So to this outward Ear we must have Objects that do sound,
That the inward Intelect may, thereby be wholly drowned:
For that which does us thus reprove, and on our hearts does smite,
Does silence make our burden, 'cause it brings that to our sight:
For this is that to us does show, the evils we have done,
In silence we are made to know, therefore we silence shun.
And so among the trees do run, our selves there for to hide,
For this same small still Voice, at all, by no means we abide.
Answer.
All this we must confess also, for we the same have felt,
Gods Loving Kindness we do know, thus he with us have dealt;
For it is the Lord the which does wound, and he does also heal,
It Is he does kill and make alive, thus with us he does deal:
All the Satanick thoughts which thus wandered within our hearts,
His Light and Power did reprove; he cast at them his Darts.
For this is the true Prophet which Ahab cannot abide,
That Prophesies not well of him, that from the Lord does slide;
And this is the Prophet also, that the Samarians knew,
Which told them all they ever did; they said 'Twas Christ the true:
Though he at that time was in Fesh, when he their thoughts did show,
But now in Spirit again is come, by these things we him know.
The Word which in beginning was made Fesh, Christ, yesterday,
The same is now, and e're shall be, true Souls Eternal stay.
And this is that must humble all, it is Gods mighty hand,
Before that ye exalted be his Power must make you stand.
And therefore now to Silence come, Chastisement do'nt refuse,
For it is Gods Love unto you all, his Sons hereby does choose.
And therefore now with David pray the Lord your hearts to search,
To find out all Iniquity, and in his fire it parch.
Yea with thy Candle do thou Lord, search thy Jerusalem,
Tha it thy Holy City may, be when thou turn'st out them,
That have kept and defiled thy House, the Temple that is thine,
Which unto thee should holy be; Destroy them all in time
That are not Children of thy House, but came in by the Fall:
This Heathen Babylonish brood, dash them against the Wall.
This Enemy which in thy Field, when men slept there did Sow,
His Legions of Tares, O Lord, let them thy fire know.
This Man of sin in thy Temple, presumptuously does sit,
Exalting of himself above all that is called God yet;
And showing of himself to be, the God of all the Earth,
Giving forth Laws of sin and death, to all that here have breath.
And by those Laws in Members war, and does us captive lead,
Therefore for us, O mighty God, our Cause now do thou plead.
For in Hea'n we have none but Thee, nor in Earth do we seek;
For any other helper but Thou Lamb of God, the Meek.
For this same mighty Man of sin, sends Ministers to praech,
None can be freed from sin or death, this Doctrine they do preach.
Whereby we all our Lifetime have, been kept in misery,
They also boldly do affirm, that Paul he then did lie;
When unto God he did give thanks, which was his strength and stay,
For that he had deliverance, through Jesus Christ, the Way.
And though Paul in his Agony, did ask the question so,
From this Body of sin and death, Who shall deliver? Who?
This question it was only writ 'cause he would answer make,
Who was the alone Deliverance, and for whose only sake.
For none such tender pity had to the poor wretched man,
To bind his wounds, and's wants supply, but the good Samaritan;
Who poured oil into his wounds, set him on his own Beast,
And brought him unto Christ's own Inn, the place of all Souls Rest;
With Wounds bound up, and Charges paid, this Love the Lord does send
With Stock laid in for future time, what the poor Soul should spend.
Now shall not Paul when he is cleans'd, and other Leapers to,
Return and give to God the thanks, to whom alone it is due.
With David also come and tell, what for his soul is done,
And that no Condemnation is, in Jesus Christ, Gods Son.
For they now walk not after flesh, another Law they have,
The which of Spirit is and Life, that does their poor Souls save;
And this does also set them free, from Flesh, Law, Sin and Death,
And makes dry Bones together come, for God sends for his Breath.
Which is the Gospel-Power of God, which those Ministers hide,
Whose minds the God of this World blinds, lest he should be espide.
Thus they go forth and People tell, from sin they cannot be freed,
Whilst on this side the Grave we are; So their Lord's Lord indeed.
So making void the mighty Power, of the Emanuel,
Who came to save People from sin, Lies of him they do tell:
As if his Hand were shortened, and weakened were his Power.
Or that the World the Devils were, for to rule every hour.
Whereas all Power in Heaven and Earth unto the Son is given,
And he must surely Reign on Earth, though's Enemies have striven,
Him to oppose; yet, if not here, Oh where shall Gods Son Reign?
For all his Enemies, Death and Hell, shall every one be slain:
For he must Rule till these be brought under his feet, then shall,
The Son his Kingdom re-assigne, and God be all in all.
So stop your mouths you Messengers that are Satanical,
For the Lords Christ is come to Reign, his Rule must be your Fall;
And all your mighty Captains to, which are of his Empire,
For Dragon, Beast, False Prophet to, shall be cast in the fire.
For the Lords Christ came to destroy all the works of the Devil,
That Righteousness E'relasting may, be brought from all that is evil,
And if he were not to destroy his works in this world wrought,
What other World does he work in, that any out have sought?
When he his Messengers and Works, are all cast in the fire,
What Works can he, or they then do, that any can desire?
It Is also in this wicked World, Gods Grace Salvation brings,
Teaching us worldly Lusts to shun, and each ungoly thing.
And in this present world to live godly and soberly,
And to relieve in Righteousness the fatherless thereby.
The Widow likewise to visit, this is Religion pure,
From the Worlds spots thus to keep clear, the Devil cannot endure.
And if all this you cannot believe, take your own evidence,
Of your own Doctrine the result, and Catachistick sense.
Whereby this Truth it is confirmed, against all to be the same,
Where Children they are taught to say, what is promised in their name
That the Devil and AL his works, they must and will forsake,
And ALL the Pomps and Vanities of this world leave to take;
And ALL the sinful Lusts also, of the Flesh, which do rise,
ALL these they must be now forsook, that did their hearts surprise,
And these not only to be left, but they Gods Word must keep,
And his holy Commandments, all their Life, not in sleep
This Christian Article of Faith, they must fully believe,
Though they themselves their works destroy, yet this to learn they give
Oh is no here Babel built now, anon pulled down again,
This is the Dialect they speal, of Sounds this is the strain.
Object.
But some may say, For all this yet, Paul in his flesh did feel,
A Prick Buffeting of Satan, and this God did not heal.
Answ.
All this is true in his Warfare, Pricks in the flesh he may,
And Buffetings of Satan to, who sought him to destroy.
For when that ^e a Soldier was, of Satan, on his side,
He then with might did Persecute, Christians could not abide.
And like his Master went about, roaring for to devour,
And Letters had from the High Priest, to take all in his Power.
And said himself, He was even mad, against all on God did call,
He went from house to house and did, them unto Prison hall.
Now all this time there was no cause Satan should buffet Saul,
Till that he had his Champion lost, and was convert to Paul.
And now who otherwise can think, but Paul bufft'ed must be,
by his old Master that he served, now they do not agree.
Moreover must not Paul now have the measure he hid give,
And now the Wheel's upon him turned, till the Lord him relieve.
So this no evil was in Paul, nor ought that was unjust,
Though to the Lord he three times sought, 'cause he did on him trust.
This seeking to the Lord did show, who had the power and might,
And that himself was but weakness, 'twas God must for him fight.
The Answer was he should not Fear, sufficient was his Grace,
Him to defend, and Courage give, his Enemies to face.
He now must be a Soldier for, his new Master, it is right,
Therefore with Pricks and Buffets to, his old Master does fight,
Against him in temptation, in raising of his mind,
To glory in the things he saw, to which before he is blind.
But by the Shield of Faith he did defend himself from evil,
And quenched has the fiery darts, cast at him from the Devil.
And Gods Light Armor on he put, with the Sword of the Spirit,
The Helmet of Salvation to, all is Free, here is no Merit.
So with this Armor and Weapon, Paul did fight a good fight,
Against the Devil, kept the Faith, by Gods Pow-er and Might.
And by this Faith he did resist the Devil and made him fly,
And in this Faith the Victory got, also a Crown thereby.
The which the Righteous God will give unto his Soldiers all,
That under this his Banner fight, and on his Name do call.
So all may see that this was not an evil then in Paul,
But Soldiers marks of Jesus Christ, the which we must bear all.
And his seeking thus unto God, is as a sucking Child,
That seeks for its Mothers Breast, that is tender and mild.
And when the Child had sucked its fill, the Breast likewise is eased,
The Child then it is satisfied, and Mother also pleased.
This figure God made use of when, to Israel he did say,
Her Child, can a Mother forget, that sucks on her each day?
This is the Faith that sucks the Breast of Consolation,
By which the Just shall ever live if they feed thereupon.
For in the World we are but sent, this plainly does appear,
Which shows our Father is alive, in whose House is our cheer,
In which is Bread of Life enough, and Mansions there are many,
So Prodigals must come thereto, if they mean to have any.
And this may well observed be, what does the Father move,
No sooner sees his Son to come, but RVNS to meet his Love.
Oh here is Love, Love, Love indeed, Who can such Love er'e shun,
For when poor Souls begin to move, the Father he does RVN;
Yea not away, but toward him, as if it were a Bliss,
With arms spread out does it receive, and gives to it a Kiss.
And is not only here content, with joy his House does sound,
Because the dead is made alive, his lost Son now is found.
And seems to be servile to, beset with cares and fears,
Waiting for to be garcious, on Israel forty years,
And when that we did wallow in the blood that was our own,
Unsalted, washed or pitied, then was his strong Arm known.
Oh this was Gods own only Power, that did Salvation bring,
Oh this was then a time of Love, which makes us now to sing;
Salvation, Glory and Power, unto our God for ever,
Who is our present help at hand, his Promise faild us never.
So all may see the groundwork then that solely does us move
In our affections to Love him, 'cause first he did us Love,
For when that we ungodly were, then he his own Son sent,
From sin and Satan us to free, this was his true intent.
From Egypts darkness, and Deaths bonds, poor Souls he did set free,
This was Gods Love, and the Sons Word, in this both did agree.
This Truth also in many things, illustrated may be,
That we no Independants are, alone on God live we.
Though we as strong as Sampson were, who the Philistines killd,
And heaps on heaps of them did bear, yet he to Death must yield,
Till the Lord cleave a hollow place, where water did spring out,
In the same Jaw Bone of the Ass, wherewith he made the Rout,
And when that he had drank thereof his Spirit came again,
And he revived also was, though given himself as slain;
So of our selves no strength we have, it is in God we must host,
Who is our Captain, Strength and Stay, the only Lord of Hoasts.
Now by experience David may, (yet in Gods strength alone)
Declare how he by it had killd, the great Philistian;
The Lion, Bear, and through an Host gone by this strength he has,
And he over a Wall has lept, that stood a cross his Path.
This is the way that he did go, and therefore Courage took,
'Cause formerly God did him help, and never him forsook.
Though then were some, as there be now, which unto him did say,
That in his God no help there was, whereon his soul to stay.
This plainly then, you now may see, these cause men's hearts to faint,
Denying of Gods strength, which he does work in every Saint.
So putting them quite out of heart, for ever to attain,
Over their hearts-lusts Victory or Ground on them to gain
This Spirit you may also see, in Israel of old,
Which did not the true Spies believe, though they God; Truth b^ told
For they the Sons of Anack feared, that mighty were and tall,
So did not in Gods Power trust, but fell a murmuring all;
And their false Spies to help forward their unbelief and spite,
Said, They appeared like Grasshoppers in the Anakims sight.
None doubted then, nor do they now, but the Land it is good,
But how't could then, or now can be attaind, the Question stood?
And notwithstanding God to them such Miracles did show,
And wonderfully brought them out of Egypt, they did know,
Yet those false Spies did them persuade, as Ministers do now,
(Of Satan which do make a trade against God to avow)
That from their Masters Kingdom he, poor Souls cannot set free,
Or that his Kingdom in this World, diminished shall be.
Which is the cause of Unbelief, amongst us now at length,
But those that unto Sion come, do grow from strength to strength.
And now, as then, the true Caleb, do still the People tell,
The Land is good, and to Conquer, they able are full well.
And that the People should not fear, unto them thus he sed,
Their Defense does from them depart, they are to us for Bread:
And that the Lord he was with them, there was no cause to fear,
Yet they for all this did rebel, for their words did not care.
For many false Spies still they had, which brought an ill report,
So that the Congregation, bad stone them with stones for it.
Now if there be a Caleb that, God follow fully will
With other Spirit than they do, they cry, him stone, or kill.
And yet for all this God will bring his Calebs to this Land,
They and their Seed shall it possess, which to his Truth do stand,
Who do believe and so confess, God by his Power can,
Bring his People out of Egypt, to heavenly Canaan.
From this it may observed be, The false spies they are many,
From which the ground of Unbelief does spring: Truth scarce has any.
Though in this work it is their share, to suffer, as men think,
Yet unto us it is our Joy, of Christ's own Cup to drink.
Even as it was then, so it is now, Destructions way is wide,
And many follow in the same, few from it turn aside.
These men that did Gods glory see, and miracles also.
In Egypt and in the Wilderness, do tempt him ten times mo
Than those that never yet did see, Gods Power, that is Divine,
More tolerable it shall be, for such who have no Sign,
These Miracles and Wonders great, Advantages should be,
And in our hearts such Courage raise, that we no fear should see.
This is the way David did go with confidence to Saul,
He took up Courage in his heart, and told Israel all,
That in Gods strength, a Lion he had killed, and a Bear,
And therefore this Physician bold knew no such thing as Fear.
This Plea we against all those have that unto People preach,
Let God or man do what they can, Man Canaan Land cannot reach.
Something of the Cause of DARKNESS, IGNORANCE and PERSECUTION.
AS the dark Body of the Moon, which in the Night is Light,
That it receives from the Sun, by standing in its sight;
And then again by Reflection on us this Light does cast,
While it thus governs the Night, (no longer does it last)
For when the Daylight does appear, it wan does wax and fade,
'Cause it retains no Life, or Power, nor has it any Shade;
For that the brightness of the Sun with its most glorious beams,
In its large Womb has swallowed up her pale and glimmering Streams
By which he Body is made dark, this all may plainly see;
And when it gets before the Sun, then an Eclipse will be,
Yea this also may be minded, because it is most clear,
The Sun is never Eclipsed but, when the Moon is in its Sphere.
And the Earths Body also is as dark as is the Moon,
For when it gets before the Sun, the Moon's Eclipsed full soon.
Thus Nature has these outward Signs that in their Spears do run,
For the Earths Body does Eclipse the Moon, and She the Sun.
These outward Signs of Heaven were discerned by men of old,
Who yet the Mystery did not see being all led blindfold;
Because the God of this World had their minds wholly blinded,
Lest that the Gospel Light should shine, and they by it be led,
And though the Hypocrites of old Heavens outward could discern,
Yet did not know true Bethlehem, where Gods own Seed was born,
Of these Figures the Prophets did, of old make use, you see,
When they told where the World was set, in man's heart there to be.
So he that to God is a Friend, must have the World cast out,
From this same place where it is set, else Truth it will not sprout.
And this the cause of the Eclipse, that man comes not to know,
Neither beginning nor the end, of him God does not show;
The works that he at all times does, they being heavenly,
Because of this total Eclipse, that on his heart does lie.
So that the Moons dark Body's of, to us, no use at all,
The Sun reflecting not thereon, by the Earths Interval,
This made the Seers which of old, with shame confounded were,
For they no Answer of God had, because they Preached for hire,
Yea for money they did Devine, and Judged for reward,
Thus building up Sion with blood, no sight had of the Lord.
The dark Moon here is turned to BLOOD, tho it pretend to build,
The glorious Mountain of the Lord, have hereby Saints blood spilled.
And yet for all this seem to lean themselves upon the Lord,
As if no evil she had done, but in heart did accord.
This hard-heart Earth was still the same, of which the Lord so long
Complained of in the Wilderness, it grieved him so strong.
To day, to day, for forty years, oh this was all the noise,
But their hard hearts they could not hear the sounding of his voice?
This Earth, this Lust, this Will, this Fesh, they being of one nature,
Are those that keep the glorious beams from shining on the Creature.
But now the Day of God is come, expel those Mists he will,
Which do his Sunbeams over-cast, that shine would on his still.
For though a man have outward eyes, be they never so clear,
Yet if that Night do him oretake, he is little the near.
And as it is in outward Earth, this is the cause of Night,
Having a Body thick and gross, its self hinders the Light.
This Judgment was on the Prophets which with their keen Teeth did bite,
Against those that put not in their mouths, in War prepare to fight.
Therefore Night should be unto them, they shall no Vision have,
Not so much Light as to devine how they themselves may save,
And down over them the Sun shall go, are Prophets of that day,
Yea darkness shall oretake them all, who make not God their stay.
They therefore shall cover their Lips, for tho they call and cry,
They shall no answer have from God, 'cause in the earth they lie.
These were also the Belly-gods, whose glory was their shame,
For that they Earthly things did mind, and therefore were to blame.
And this likewise was that also, which Demas did embrace,
Who for this present world did, forsake both Truth and Grace.
These were the false Teachers of which Peter did so foretell,
Should Heresies damnable bring; that swift destruction fell
Upon them in their great glory, for that they should deny,
The Lord, Light, Life, that thus bought them, so in dark Death shall lie.
Yea these are they through Avarice, and fained words should make
Merchandise of the People too, this darkness they did take.
And following these pernicious ways is the sole reason why
Truths way is evil spoken off, to the Light they will not come nigh.
So this is Moon Eclipsed you see, the Earth, and the hard Heart,
And now before this Cloud be gone, these things must feel the smart.
For that the World and things therein must all be burnt with fire,
And be removed from his place, in the Day of Gods ire.
But what is that which does Eclipse the Sun? The Moon (I Have said)
When it is turned into Blood, then does it the Sun shade,
And makes his Body to look black and shine, as if it were
For all its great and glorious beams, but a Sackcloth of hair.
This was the time that Joel did prophecy of, and say,
When Sun was dark, then Moon was blood, this should precede Gods day.
And 'twas fulfilled when the sixth-Seal was opened, for lo
A mighty Earthquake then was seen, which many well do know,
For then the Stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth their place,
Because they were untimely Figgs, they staid there but a space,
For by this mighty Wind and Storm, which God among them sent,
He shook off what untimely was, tho glorious things were meant.
And now the Earth not only does, but also Heavens, shake,
Because Gods Day is at the door, they tremble do and quake.
For this first Earth and Heaven too, which Man could not sustain,
Are both together shaken now, their Form does not remain.
Therefore this Heaven departed is even as it were a Scrole,
For all their glorious fained words, together when it is rolled.
And every Mountain and Island, which glory in their graces,
Are by this Storm and mighty Wind, removed out of their places.
And they that were Kings of the Earth, Great and Rich Men also,
With chief Captains and mighty Men, with Bond and Freemen go,
And hide themselves within the Dens, yea on the Mountains call,
And on the Rocks for to hide them, or upon them to fall.
These are the Presbyterian Moon, which in the Night was Light,
But when to Persecution fell, then all was Blood and spite;
But now their Kingdom shaken is, and they are made to quake,
Having their Measure measured back, this makes their own hearts ak^.
This makes their Stars, their mighty Men, down from their heaven fall,
Rather than they will drink this Cup, that is mixed with gall,
And so what Antichristian was in Way and Form before,
And Covenanted then against, the same they now Adore.
Thus now their Valiant Captains do from Heaven daily slide,
Their Rich and mighty Men also, in Rocks and Mountains hide,
From the Light Face of him that sits upon his Fathers Throne,
And from the Wrath of the Lamb which, they often made to groan.
Object.
But some may now Object and say, This is not fairly done,
To rip up this our misery, in the sight of the Sun,
And as it were for to rejoice, over us in this our fall,
Nor do you put a helping hand to any of us all.
Answ.
To this I Answer, It is just, the measure is your own,
For the Saints blood some of you drank, as lately has been shown;
Your mighty men but lately were Merchants of Babylon,
And dealt in Slaves and Souls of men, Alas! your City's gone.
For tho in Scarlet decked with Gold, with precious Stones, and Pearls,
And in Fine Linen clothed were, and lived then like Earls,
Yet now your Ships and Companies, of Sailers which did Trade.
Within the Sea of Babylon, did weep, and wail, and said,
Alas! alas! that great City, wherein we rich were made,
Is like a Millstone cast in the Sea, thus God does us degrade.
Wherefore, O Heaven, over her rejoice, ye Prophets also too,
With the Apostels, for God has, on her revenged you.
And your Crafts men with all their Craft, no more in her be found,
Nor yet at all shall there be heard, a Millstone for to sound.
Thy Candlelight for evermore, exstinguished shall be,
The voice of Bridegroom and of Bride, be heard no more in thee.
For that thy Merchants they still were, the Great Men of the Earth
Which by their Sorceries deceived all Nations of their Breath.
For that in her was found the Blood, of Prophets and of Saints,
And all that were slain on the Earth, which brings on her heart-faints.
Therefore we which in Heaven dwell, with voice, and one accord,
Continual Halilujas sing, Salvation to the Lord.
With Glory, Honor, and Power let us praise the Lord of Heaven,
Whose Judgments just and righteous be, he to the Whore has given;
For why, she did corrupt the Earth with her vile Fornication,
Gods Servants blood for Vengeance cries on her abomination.
Now blood unto her God has given, for that it is her share,
Yea she is worthy of the same, 'cause Saints blood she would not spare.
Object.
But some may say, Why do you thus apply these things to them,
When you also now Sufferers are which come of Jesses Stem?
Answ.
For Answer, though we may be slain, for the good Word of God,
And for the Testimony held which we have from the Lord,
As those Souls under the Altar which, unto the Lord did cry,
For Vengance on those dwelt on Earth: and answered, Ye must lie
Until the rest of your fellow servants and Brethren to,
Which witness bear unto my Name, be killed as well as you.
For thus 'twas under the fifth Seal, the Angel opened when
The Moon was blood, the Stars did fall, and Sun was hid from men.
What from the Earth can we expect, when Blood's the light of heaven,
But Persecution with effect, when Stars to it fall even.
But by the way Observe, under the Altar Souls do lie,
The which the Sacrificer kills, and there he does them tie.
And so Obedience was lost, which was better than any
Of all the Sacrifice they made, though offer they did many.
For their Oblations they were vain, Incense abomination,
Nor did God this require of them, they being Sodoms Nation.
When they spread forth their hands to God, he fast did close his eyes,
And though they many Prayers made, God did them all despise.
Their New Moons and their solemn Feasts, Assemblies like a flood,
The Lord had no regard to 'cause their hands were full of Blood.
It was Jerusalem also, that did the Prophets kill,
And stoned those to them were sent, and with blood did fulfill.
And though they said, they would not be partakers with their Fathers,
In this same bloody Tragedy, yet Saints blood they still gather.
But desolate there House is left, Gods Glory from it is gone,
For that they have contemnd the Sun which on their Moon has shone.
Wherefore they shall not henceforth see the true Light till they say,
Blessed is he that comes in the Lord Gods Name always.
Object.
But some of these Objected have against us, saying, we
Have not so much gainsaid, opposed, those in our places be,
So that we cannot choose but think you very flatterers are,
And as the common Proverb is, Your Friends at Court you spare;
For that it has observed been, the men most godly were,
Their Congregations you did haunt, and against them rave and tear.
As then, so now, those that are bad, against them no word does spring,
But those that zealous were and good, you made their Churches ring.
So that we cannot but suppose, the Bottom does design,
Some Machavillian Policy, to be acted in time.
And if that this be nothing so, why do you not still go
Into those great Assemblies now, the Reason let us know.
Answer.
For Answer hereunto I say, What man is there so mad
To spend his time in the threshing of Bushes? They Are as bad.
For if one would go vilify, the worst of men there is naught
In them (to use the Proverb old) that worth a Rush is thought.
Or who is he that will look for, Grapes on the thorny Twiggs,
Or is there any one that does of Thistles gather Figgs?
So that they have no cause to say, That we against them were,
When as that we a threshing went, we did not rave or tear.
For certainly, you may suppose, we did judge there was Corn
Which prompted us to come and thresh, and winnow in your Barn.
And if the grain it did cling fast, the chafe and straw unto,
The Threshers do not discommend, tho they did it undo.
And though at first the best Corn's made out of the Straw to spring
Yet do not you the Thresher blame, if it to the rest they fling.
For good full Corn it does rejoice, when Threshers come thereto,
'Cause then it knows it shall be put Gods own will for to do.
And though it be but Oxen which this Corn out do tread,
Yet by the same they food must have, and not be muzzelled.
It is because Corn's hard and tough, that Instruments made be,
With sharp hard Teeth, because plain Tools from the Straw cannot it free
So those that good and godly were, we did them not contemn,
But what was done, was Gods visit, did you to us commend.
For you were counted the lost Sheep, of the House Israel,
Therefore count us not Enemies because Gods Truth we tell.
And by enquiry you did find, of Gods Message worthy,
Though still we see you hardened be, and us reproach daily.
In the time of Elias though there Widows were a many,
He to Sareptha's Widow's sent, of others, not to any.
Also in Israel there was much Leprosy on man,
Yet none at all were cleansed but Naaman the Syrian.
So that if God did send to cleanse you of your Leprosy,
Then charge not the Messenger with Machivel-Policy.
Nor with the Prophet do find fault, that does preserve your store,
When in great Famine that you were, he showed you where was more.
Moreover you may see those men that zealous were indeed,
At the first threshing did spring forth, and are reserved for Seed.
The which the Promise is unto, and it inherit shall,
Because in him they did believe, and answered his Call.
And they will testify also, the Threshers they did well,
Though they sharp Instruments did use, 'twas good to them befell.
For seeing they were hungry Souls, Heavens Bread, tho it be bitter,
Now they were just a coming forth of Egypt, was the fitter.
And as for being Flatterers, or that at Court have favor,
Our Sufferings they will testify, in Court we have no savor,
Nor ought on Earth to appeal to, but that we lie down still,
And suffer all for Christ his sake, for this we know's Gods will.
Also in this we do rejoice, that we with him partake,
Both in his Sufferings and his Death, this Baptim's for his sake.
And as for your Idol flattring, with us there is no such thing,
As Cap, or Knee, or Worship, which makes Courts against us ring.
And cause we cannot it to them give, no favor they do show,
Yea unto us they do not right, as most of you do know.
And as for our not going now, oh that would you disgrace,
Should we cry out on Antichrist, who you says in your Place.
No, no, if that Antichrist does this your Church now possess,
Against him then you should declare, it is your part now, we guess.
And that he might not never more arise, much less to stand,
You made the People Covenant, against him through the Land,
With Hands lift up to Heaven high, that God he would record,
This Solemn League and Covenant, you have made to the Lord.
And yet are picking upon us to do your drugery,
Must we fulfill your Covenant, and for it in Prison lie?
Then may you say we are Fools indeed, and Busybodies too,
To meddle in others matters where, so little thanks is due.
But if that you have vowed a Vow, defer it not to pay,
For God in Fools no pleasure takes, it is true what I do say.
But from us this Proviso take, With no Weapons contend,
But Heart and Tongue, with Gods own Breath, and Spirit he does send.
For Creature-killing-Weapons they, are Antichrists own Arms,
And you will never overcome by any such like Charms.
But now with us Gods Standard's set, and Goshans Land is known
Where Light to Israel does shine, as I before have shown.
Sor if inward Egyptians will, true Is-ra-el-ites turn,
This House of God still open stands for them to come and Learn.
More than all Egypts Sorcerers, or her Magicians,
Can teach, because it is very clear, Gods Power transcendeth Man's.
Now the Lord has deliverance sent to his Daughter SION,
That dwells with the Daughter of MYSTERY Babylon.
For among natural bruit Beasts there is no Mystery,
With outward Sheep and inward Wolves, the Mystery here does ly.
For Foxes, Lions, Wolves and Bears, there shape does them discover,
What spirit it is does lodge in them, so does their Voice, moreover
Show forth and also warning give to Man and Beast, beware
Lest on them they do make their prey, being caught in their Snare.
These Beasts in their earthly Nature, act right within their Sphere,
Though tyrannizing over the rest, keeping them all in fear.
But when these alter Voice and Shape, what sphere run in they then,
Having Sheeps-cloathing with Lambs voice, they then devour Men.
'Twas the strict Sect of Pharisees and Writing Scribes also,
That Jesus Christ called Hypocrites, against them denounst his woe.
Calling them Fools, Serpents, Blind-guides, and Vipers Children to,
And also Painted Sepulchers, such names he counts their due.
The reason often if you would know, Matthew does it repeat,
Their Burdens, Scourgings, Devourings, tho they got Moses Seat,
Their C^ing and Pretenses too, Long Prayers they did make,
And (...) Tombs and Sepulchers, these courses they did take.
(...) Sons and Fathers Prophets killed, Wise Men and Christ also,
(...) scourged in their Synagogues, and much Blood spite from mo.
Something as to the ORDER in our Meetings, wherein we do not Respect Persons,
for which the Spirit stirs up to Persecution.
THese Meetings and Assemblies are such as James does us tell,
Where Gay-cloathing had no respect, nor did Gold-rings excel.
For in our Meeting Place there is no chief seats kept, but those
That do the vilest raiment wear, may sit as does gay clothes.
For we dare not commit this sin, Men's persons to respect,
Lest while before him we appear, our Service he reject.
Advantages we do not seek, that we may men admire,
Nor can we fawn on them for ought, or bid them sit up higher;
For we be those that do believe, no honor do receive,
Nor dare we ought to others give, God never gave us leave.
But honor do we in the Lord, all men it is their due,
But when men seek it to themselves, we give it not thereto.
For no man has that which is good, or ought that's honorable,
It is no more than Crumbs that fall from Gods Almighty Table.
Why should the Riv'let boast it self, which by the Fountain's fed,
And what has Man to glory in, who beggs his daily Bread?
For it is of Grace all that we have, his Gifts we live upon,
Therefore to him let us Praises give, yea unto him alone.
Moreover should we honor give, to men, which they count civil,
We know'ts a snare, and we must shun, appearances of evil.
Did not this vanity help much, to hasten Herod's doom,
When the People cried The voice of God, and not of man, is come?
This honor to himself he took, 'twas a temptation,
And sought the glory to himself, the which was Gods alone.
So with an Angel he was smote, God vengeance on him took,
And with Worms then he eaten was, on this to us is spoke.
For he a Persecutor was, this only does afford,
With hands stretched out to vex the Church, he killd James with the Sword,
And because he did see it pleased the Jews; he did proceed
And apprehended Peter too, all Truth thus out (...) weed,
But when to God Prayer was made for Peter, God did hear,
And by his Angel did him from Blood-sucking Herod clear.
And for his Pride and Cruelty in recompense God paid,
And brought his Judgments upon him, as I before have said.
These are the Hamonites of old, which in themselves do say,
Who shall the King, or the People honor, but us always,
But see what he unto himself, as honor thus did crave,
Was given unto Mordecay, whom he ordained his Slave.
The Gallows-measure he had made, for to hang Mordecay,
Was measured unto himself, for thus the King did say;
For when the King once knew the thing, h'said, Hang him thereupon,
Thus on proud wicked men's Heads fall, Gods Judgments many a one
This was the man that thought it scorn, Ones blood to seek alone,
But all his Brethren the Jews, must be killed every one.
And though but one commit the Offense, not to his Pride to bow,
Yet all the rest must suffer for it, so it is decreed now.
So Hamon is the first of all, that ever yet I Have read,
Who got forth such a cruel Law, yet we find of his Seed.
Thus also Nebuchadnezzar, who in his Palace walked,
Said, Is not this Great Babylon (with much such glorying talked)
That I have built, for the House of the Kingdom, that is mine,
And by the might of my Power, (thus slighting Gods Divine)
And also for the honor of alone my Majesty,
As if at all there had not been, a Power that is on high.
While these words were in the Kings mouth, there fell a voice from heaven,
The Kingdom is departed now, that unto thee was given.
This was the Image-making man, and Persecutor too,
That cast in the fire who would not to's Image Worship do.
Therefore let none think that we do it through peevishness of mind,
For we for it good Reason have, and Precepts too Divine,
Examples too, you see we have, recorded in Scripture.
Of Gods Judgments, that on men fell, which were both just and sure,
As hard-hearted Pharaoh did keep Israel in Bondage great,
And when Liberty it was sought, with God he would not treat:
But said, Who is the Lord, that he, at all should him obey?
With such presumptuous words as these from his proud heart did say,
And in the stead of Liberty, did make their Burdens more,
For which upon his Head God did, full many Judgments pour.
Bloody waters, Froggs, Lice and Flies, with Boyles and Blanches many,
Hail, Locusts, Darkness, and Firstborn, were slain, he left not any.
And yet for all those Judgments which fell on him as his due,
So hard-hearted he yet still was, that Israel he would pursue.
So Gods People in a great strait, being thus surrounded,
By standing kill Salvation saw, of God, and Pharaoh drounded,
This is for you a warning then, that follow step by step,
That regard not Fire, War, or Plague, but over these things lep,
Tho you count those things Accidents, which unto you are given,
But that you should no Covers have, God shows you signs from heaven:
Yea, and such signs all your Wise men, with their Egyptian Art,
Could tell the coming of the same, which made them all to start.
Nor what the effect or influence these Blasing-Stars would be,
That in one year did show themselves not one, or two, but three.
Thus Pharaohs drowned, and Hamons hanged, Nebuchadnezzar's due.
To lose his Kingdom, and Herod, eaten with worms was to,
So all proud persecuting Spirits, Examples here is for you,
For God is now the same, also, his Judgments just and true.
For his Hand is not shortened, but can help, it is our stay,
Nor is his power now weakend, more than 'twas yesterday.
For all the Honor and Glory, of Man is but a lie,
And if there were no Worshippers of Idols they would dye.
This Honor God he will not give to graven Images,
Nor his Glory to mortal men, tho they him near so please,
For that the Kingdom it is his, the Power and Glory too,
And Honor for ever and e're, to him alone it is due.
For if the Angel which to John, showed Mysteries manifold,
Would not be bowed to or worshipped, how dare man be so bold?
For he our Fellow Servants was, and of our Brethren to,
Which Jesus Testimony had, and Prophesying Spirit true.
These are the highest seize of Angels and of Men,
That makes them honorable, yet are they but Brethren.
And so they dare not now to bow, or worship give each other,
Or glory in ought that they have, for it comes from another.
And now all earthly Images, you all must now be dumb,
And speak no more for your glory, now Gods Kingdom is come.
And his Almighty Power shall you altogether grind,
And in the Sea your Ashes cast, that henceforth none you find.
This is the little Stone the which out of the Mountain's cut,
Though without hands, your Images shall break, as a small Nut.
These Idols of Silver and Gold, they shall to Moles be given,
The which blind Vermin in Earth creep, shut up from the Light of heaven.
And the blind Bats must have a part, that are Birds of the night,
The which cannot abide the Day, to fly in peoples sight.
Therefore alone to God we will bow, and worship him always,
Who is our Fountain, Treasure, Stock, our Light, Life, Bread and Stay,
And therefore now, Man speak no more for to be bowed unto,
For Gods Prerogative it is, and he must have his due.
If Saints and Angels they would not at all be bowed to, then
What spirit have all those that do, seek worship now from men?
For if Gods Messengers and Gifts we must not once admire,
Oh then! Whose Messengers are they, that Glory do desire?
For all the Gifts and Graces w^ch God he does to us send,
That him alone we should praise, which, is both Author and End.
For we the Israel of God are, while we walk in this sphere,
So no Weapon against us formd shall prosper, Sword or Spear.
If in the Fire we are cast, oh there is the Son of God,
Or through the Water made to pass, oh there is also the Lord.
So to be burnt or over-flowd, no cause we have to fear,
For Angels Lions mouths do stop, of's Daniels he has care.
If Oxen must not muzzeld be, that do tread out the Corn,
Oh then what care will he have of his Babes that are new born?
But if that yet we do please men, Gods Servants we are not,
And when men worldly honor seek, it signifies a Blot.
That they from God departed are in whom men honor have,
And gone into the World from him, who do its honor crave.
Saul is a figure unto such, who Gods Word disobeyd,
And God from him departed was, oh then he cried, and said
Before the People honor me, oh this was all his cry,
For those that have forsaken God, on this alone rely.
But this is sad and desmal to, Worlds glory for to gain,
Out of Gods presence to be cast into eternal pain.
In this Doctrine it is observed, the Persecutors proud,
Which will not to this Image bow, Life hardly is allowed.
And God he is so just and true, in Judgment he will not act,
Till plainly the notoriousness appear does of the Fact.
Cain he cannot at all be cast out of Gods presence till,
The Blood of Abel he has spilt, then Judgment on him fell.
So you that offer unto God, the Sacrifice of Praise,
Which Offering he does respect, and also did always.
Thus to the Will of God you must your selves and all commit,
Tho Caldees and Sabeans too, themselves against you set.
For the Chastisements of the Lord, we never must refuse,
'Cause ye no Bastards are but Sons, he to himself does choose.
And when that you corrected are, Obedience thereby learn,
You shall not need to fear but God, the Rod forthwith will burn.
Now if the groundwork you would know, in fine, of all this evil,
From the Dragon and old Serpent it is, or spirit of the Devil.
The which, besides Old Adam, did set on to tempt the Lord,
And in's temptations offered, what the World could afford.
The Kingdom, power, and glory, to him he would allow,
And said it was his, to give to those, that unto him would bow.
Though he himself a wandrer were up and down in the Earth,
Our adversary does appear, to devour Spiritual birth.
This Spirit you shall see in them that do worlds glory seek,
And such as flatter, fawn and bow, to them they will appear meek,
But any one that fears the Lord, and cant to proud flesh bow,
No favor, love, or courtesy, to such he does allow.
Though his necessities be great, as Christ's were also, when,
He fasted forty nights and days, a hungry he was then.
And this the Devil he did know, to him it did appear,
Because Christ would not bow to him, he therefore did him jear,
To satisfy his own hunger, Bids him with stones make bread.
His own necessities to help if he meant to be fed.
And further mischiefs he contrived, and dangers what he could,
When put upon the Pinnacle himself cast from he should;
For if thou be Gods Son, he said, the Angels they have Charge,
And in their hands they should bear up and keep thy feet at large;
Lest thou at any time should dash thy foot against a stone,
These were the snares, affronts and jears, our Lord he put upon.
But in Gods Power he did them bear, of him we are to learn,
And to suffer all for his sake, tho brought we are to burn.
Object.
But some may say, That thou do treat, against Gods Commandment,
Which bids us honor our Parents, this is the true Intent.
Answ.
For Answer hereunto, I say, This honor do we give,
There wants and their necessities, we always do relieve.
This is the true Honor the which Christ he himself did say,
Though Jews Traditions made it void, and Gods Law disobey.
For what profit our Parents do receive from us at all,
Is but returning of their own, Corban, we don't it call.
If in the Lord our Parents be, we honor them also,
And if the Lord do honor them, How can we then say no?
This is as it is in Marriages, are only in the Lord,
Where only is the Unity, and the alone Accord.
For here is no caring for the World, the Husband for to please,
The Husband being in the Lord, they both are served with ease.
When Wife and Husband both do seek, the Lord for to obey,
What can the Wife or Husband do, that either will gainsay?
For please the Lord, the Wife is pleased, if in the Lord she be,
And please the Lord, the Husband's pleased, if in the Lord be he.
And if at all a jar arise, they shall each other heal,
Till the thing plain be signified, and God does it reveal.
Yea this will be to Parents to, when in the Lord they be,
We honor do and please them both, when that they do agree.
This is the double honor too the Elder is to have,
That in the World and Doctrine both do labor souls to save.
And this is not before People, that we do them admire,
They being in the Lord, do not at all such things desire.
The Grand SCRUPLE and OBJECTION ANSWERED.
Object.
BUT some may say, You fickle are, and know not where to fix,
And you in many Forms have been, in seven, or at least six.
When you from us at first did go, Puritans you would be,
But when the Scotish-Broiles began, you cried, Presbyter^e.
And so in War you would fight for it, in it some Blood you spent,
Yet here you could not fix at all, but turn Independent.
And so you several Churches were, with Power severally,
And then you broke up Churches to, and did them all deny.
Because you said, They were not built on the Foundation,
And all the Ordinances lost, for Pope was Cornerstone.
Oh then did you bethink your selves, what then was best to do,
To Bail these Churches, and to get more Ordinances New.
For that this Antichristian Pope, the former he had spoild,
And now they must have all anew, the others being defild.
And then a great Contention rose, who should this same begin,
And who should John the Baptist be, since none were free from sin.
And all had need to be washed, because that there was none
The which had Gods Word come to him, as it did come to John.
Neither that Power nor Spirit which could bring such things to pass,
By turning hearts to God as did the Prophet E-li-as.
At last this work it was begun, there is very few know how,
And many this Tradition took, to it did many flow,
And so in many Bodies grew, yet here were not content,
Which shows that you are wavering, being Incontinent.
For here you did not tarry long, but anon presently,
So great was your Ambition grown, must be a Monarchy
And that not only a small one, (you count your selves to thrive)
The World contains but four great ones, and you must make them five.
So when that this great power came forth, your building that was ^igh,
You said your selves, 'twas but rotten, and Foundation sandy,
For that as soon as any storm, on this your house did blow,
Your Monarchy came tumbling down; into the dust full-^ow.
And then when in the dust you were, not knowing what to do,
When all your heavenly Building fell, you went a seeking to.
And by that name you did confess, still that there is a want,
Your Souls not being satisfied, for that they still do pant.
So what shall we that do stand by, of ye now for to make,
Who Valliant Famous Builders were, but now are made to Quake;
And now for it are Quakers called, your Laborinth is such;
So many means, and ways you have tried we dare not with you tuch.
Answ.
For Answer hereunto I say, these things do not despise,
For when the Lord did Samuel call, he presently did rise,
And ran forthwith to Old Ely, and said, lo here am I,
For that thou now did call me, and I came by and by:
Then Ely bid him go to rest, and ly him down again,
But the Lord called Samuel before he long had layn;
Then Samuel rose the second time, and to Ely did say,
Here I am for thou did call me; he Answered, nay, nay,
But the Lord still calls Samuel again the third time to,
Who forth with went to Ely then, to know what he should do;
And that with this great confidence and said he did him call,
That it was the Lord Ely perceived that called these times all:
Samuel did not yet know the Lord, nor ought by him was sed;
Gods Word to him was not showen, nor yet was re-ve-led.
But Samuel, Samuel called is still, and a fourth time also;
Before he knows it is the Lord, then here is thy Servant lo.
Then do not you condemn us when 'twas God who still did call,
Though we run to the Outward Priest and Ordinances all,
And second, third, and forth way, God calling of us still,
We could not rest, but we must rise till we did know his will.
If for our zeal you us condemn, Samuel must stand our Friend,
To speak for us when that God will to Jesses house him send.
Who there, for us, will make excuse, for this our Ignorance,
When he did judge God anointed with his outward eyes glance.
For the Lord said, he should not look on outward countenance,
Nor on the height of the stature, though it was Jesses Branch,
For by that way, God does not look, neither by it does choose,
For what accords not with his heart, that still he does refuse.
Here Samuel took the firstborn Son, for Gods Anointed sure,
But Countenance nor Stature does answer to God the pure.
So second, third, and all seven, past before Samuel,
But no answer from God he had of them as he could tell.
So being at a stand he said, are here all thy Children?
David unworthy counted was to be with his Brethren;
Yet by the Lord anointed is, whatere of him is sed,
For Gods Spirit on him is pourd, Sure mercies of David.
Thus you see all the seven Sons, disowned by their Maker,
But this same last Sheep-keeping lad, because he was a Quaker.
All here may see that God does choose the heart that is upright,
Which tremble does at his own Word, is pleasant in his sight.
So we can say in truth of heart, when God did first us call,
And we ran in the several ways (yea, some have run them all)
In something we did answer him, that pleased him, we do know,
That he never left calling us, till his Truth us did show.
So the Last way some did profess was no Form but Seeking,
By Babylons fall they all did cease, but now is found the thing.
The MESSIAH that does restore Israel that was lost
The which has suffered much Shipwreck is cast upon our coast.
So the sure Mercies we have found, the Christ, the first, the last,
The Spirit of the Living God, which was in Ages past.
Christ by the flesh was David's Son, he being his Offspring,
But yet in Spirit was David's Root, for David calls him King.
Here answered is the great Question that does with Truth accord,
How Jesus Christ not only was David's own Son, but Lord?
This is the King that, God has set upon his holy Hill,
That shall the Pot-shards of Earth break, that bow not to his Will.
God being a Spirit, his Son is so, and so of right is Lord.
Who was, and is, and ever shall be King, with one accord,
His Day Christ said, Abram did see, tho some him for it did scorn,
The Everlasting Father was, though Isays Child newborn,
This was the Scepter which was not from Israel to depart,
The inward Israel indeed, who are Circumcised in heart.
This Law giver 'tween Judas feet, yea nearer, in his womb,
Who never shall from his depart, until that SHILO come.
This was the Spiritual meat and drink, this was the store the stock,
Of Israel, that followed them to drink, it is Christ the Rock,
Yea this the Rock of Ages is, it was, and shall be so,
Generations Foundation, no other shall they know,
So now that former fickle State, in which we wore wavering
Being wholly unsatisfied, until we had our King.
But now our Lord and King is come, and in our hearts does reign,
And has our Enemies, Sin and Death, in (...)eat measure slain,
So I again to you do say, do not upbraid us more,
With such a fickle wavering state, as you have done before.
When in dead Forms, and outward Priests, which perish with using,
We neither handle, touch or taste with you any such thing.
Wherefore your outward visible Signs, must all of them give place,
According to your Liturgy, it is inward spiritual Grace,
The which now in the heart does reign, of many in this Nation,
For outward Shaddows were but till the time of Reformation.
But now the good things they are come, Christ Body is discerned,
And Gods Kingdom of Righteousness, of Joy and Peace is learned.
The which in Meats and Drinks does not consist as many think,
For in this Kingdom we afresh with Christ this fruit do drink.
And therefore all your Washings then, that diverse were and many.
With all your worldly Elements that does not perfect any:
For the Body Christ has prepared, to do thy will, O God,
For that thy People willing be in this days Power, O Lord.
And now may not I say, Glory to (as well as Englands Form)
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in it I see no harm.
And that in the beginning 'twas (I also say the same)
So it shall be world without end, Praise to his Holy NAME.
His Name's but one, and yet to him there many Names are given,
According as he Ministers to us here under Heaven,
And here on Earth Three record bear (tho Three) in ONE agree,
And answer Heavens record to, as Branches of ONE Tree.
Some more SCRUPLES cleared.
NOW for the opening of the Truth, which is our strength etc stay.
In answering of Objections to this same some may say.
Object.
Oh! here is a Table richly decked, Oh here are dishes store,
Oh! is all this but one Small Mite, and from a Widow poor:
Though here are many good Dishes, they have not the right place,
Nor in good Order Vsherd in, oh this does spoil the Grace;
For there are sometimes Dishes come, the which should last be brought,
And this Course will not it admit, of this some will find fault,
Though we confess the meat be good, and on the Table store,
But Sauce here is not suitable, to sight it is but poor.
Answ.
My Answer this no^ ^nquet is, for them full Stomach have,
But bitter things for hungry Souls, which newly come from grave.
But yet in it ought sweetness find, O this is all my aim,
To praise the goodness of our God, for his Love in the same.
And seeing meat is on the Board, if it be'nt rightly set,
Let others take the pains that can the Dishes places ^it.
Now for my part when I did taste any dish that was good,
I presently brought him to board, to others, for their food.
If in Feasts they first best Wine bring, and after that that is worst,
Yet Christ when he makes Water Wine, the last's as good as first.
So these Traditions we do not, in our minds much admire,
So hungry Souls with Righthousness be fed, is our desire.
Object.
Tautologies, O some may say, be here, I do them find,
Which are Dishes of one like meat, this does not please the mind.
Answ.
My Answer is, 'twas meat I loved, that I often did eat,
And so for it should not be reproved, for giving of my meat,
This way Prophets and Apostles, did use, with Line on Line,
Thus putting Saints in remembrance by stirring their pure mine,
And that 'twas not grievous to them the same thing for to write,
Yea those things which they did believe, and had thereof the sight.
Object.
But now again for to return, and wonder at this Mite,
Which is come forth in many words, this Title is (...)ight.
Answ.
When I at first my Mite had cast into Gods Treasury.
The more I cast the more I had, how could this Miracle be?
My Sister of Sareptha was, also a Widow poor,
A little meal and oil she had, oh this was all her store:
And this was but to serve one time, oh! Death it was so nigh,
And she was gone to dress the same, to eat, and so to dye,
But when as that the Prophet came, and first desired a Cake.
Her Faith was such to give him some, forthwith the same did bake;
By giving of the Prophet so^e, her Meal it did not waste,
Nor did the (...) of Oil her fail, but increased as fast.
For where Gods Word and Prophet is, there Mercies do not cease,
And when the Mite is spent thereon, it does hold forth increase.
For when my All is given up, God then is my All still,
Then who can want that has this All, it is He does all things fill,
Then it is but giving unto God that ALL that we call our,
In Faith, and he upon us will for it his Mercies pour.
King Solomon the same did see, the Scatterer did increase.
And that which holds more thans meet, from Poverty did not cease,
Yea he that waters shall be watered himself also,
And that the Liberal shall be made fat as is a Do.
So he that gives of his store, oh he shall not be poor,
But Truth and Knowledge shall increase, and fill him more and more.
POSTSCRIPT.
POET I Am not nor Poets Son, at all that I should rhyme,
However this same does come to pass, thus Echo did my mind,
Object.
On this way some may evil think because it is in Verse,
And sacred things they solid are, Meeter's not to rehearse.
Answ.
Though for this much may spoken be, yet this I say to those,
That they that do not like the Verse may read the same in Prose.
And yet the Sacred solid Truth, will be the self-same thing,
Tho Joys surround did make me sound Praises to Sions King.
And though I clap my hands for Joy, O who will angry be,
Raptures of Love does my Soul move, Oh it is my Love, it is he!
That does redeem poor Souls from Death, their Feet from falling to,
And makes the Desolate to sing, Praises to him as due.
And why may no^ I sing that New Song, as David formerly;
And as the Redeemed of God; that do Praise him thereby.
And shall not I in heart rejoice, in God that is my strength,
And is become Salvation unto me now at length.
Object.
But some may say, Thou crafty art in Verse to bring this thing,
That they that love not solid Truth, may hereby catch feeding.
In this same way thinking there is meat fit for their minds then,
They come to savor this your way, then you have caught those men.
Answ.
If that the World it be the Sea, and men the Fishes be,
And if this Bait does catch them out, they will praise the Bait, and he
Who is the Founder of this Love, them from this world to snatch,
By giving forth this mighty Power, that Fishes Fishes catch.
In Heavens Net if men be caught; and from their element took,
No cause they will have to repent, the Sea and World forsook.
When the Angler to the River comes, and does him there sit down
Minding the Water and the Fish, and Plumbing of the Ground,
He then considers the Region, in which the Fish do swim,
Where high, or low, or middle way, he may put Bait therein.
So sits still expecting when some pleasure he shall see,
How that his Bait does please the Fish, that catched they may be,
And though Men may but nibble at this Bait it is good meat,
For it is made of Bread of Life, and fit for men to eat,
This was the guise that Paul did use, when he Corinthians took,
By meeting of them in their way, they swallowed Bait and Hook.
And so he to each Region went with this his Gospel clear,
Which is the mighty Power of God, and serves every where;
From Christ when Peter had this Power his Net in Sea to cast,
What multitudes of Fish were caught, tho none all the Night past.
It Is this Days Pawer makes Fish to come, it multitudes does bring,
Without it Peter all night Fisht, and yet he caught nothing
This is th'encrease that God does give, with it when Paul does plant,
Apollo's watering with the same refreshes many a Saint.
Now for the present to conclude my Mite, my Cud that's good,
Whereby the clean Beasts they were known, that fit were for man's food.
So blessed Mary she laid up all Christ's words in her heart,
And so she chewd and ponderd them, lest from her they should start,
So of my Cud I do give forth, that others it may chew,
For this may help to raise their own; Country people thus do,
And as it is with leaking Pumps, ( loose water, is the phraise)
To put water into their Heads, their own water to raise
For if the dead it does not raise, then is my writing vain,
However it does witness for Gods Talent, and the Gain.
Melchisedeck's our King and Friend,
His Priesthood never will have END.
E. Hincks.

END.

