A Faithful Remonstrance OF The Holy Life and Happy Death, OF JOHN BRUEN of
Bruen-Stapleford, in the County of Chester, Esquire.

(Brother to that Mirror of Piety; Mistress Katherin BRETTERGH.)

Exhibiting variety of many Memorable and Exemplary passages of his Life, and
at his Death, useful for all sorts and Sexes, but principally intended, as a
Path and President of Piety and Charity for the Inhabitants of the Famous
County PALATINE of CHESTER.

By the late reverend Divine WILLIAM HIND, sometimes fellow of Queens
College in Oxon, and Preacher of Gods Word at Bunb, in Cheshire Published
since his Death.

The Memory of the Just shall be blessed, but the name of the Wicked shall rot,
LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Philemon Stephens, and Christopher Meredith, and
are to be sold at their Shop at the Golden Lion in Saint Paul's Church yard,
1641.

To the Right Honorable Sir James Stanley of the honorable order of the Bath
Knight, Lord Stanley and Strange, Lord of Man, and of the Isles, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Palatines of Lancaster, and Chester, of the City
Chester and County of the same, Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester
aforesaid, Son and Heir apparent of the Right Honorable William Earl of
DERBIE, And my very Honorable good Lord and Patron, Honor and Glory.
Right Honorable,
HE that was both an Eccl. 1.1.
Ecclesiastes, and a King ( Solomon) both in the Pulpet and the Throne, as
Preacher and a King preferres Eccl. 7.1.
a good name to precious Ointment, and holds it Pro. 22.1.
rather to be Chosen then the greatest riches: the foundation of which
structure (as appears by several Histories, both Holy and Humane) is not laid
in greatness, but in goodness. For by this the He. 11.2.39.
Elders both of former and latter times, obtained a good report: hence came 1
Chro. 49.8, 9:
labez to be more honorable than his brethren, because he called upon the God
of Israel. The Bereans to be more noble than those of Thessalonica, Acts 17.11
because they were more ready in hearing, more diligent in examining the
Scriptures, than the others were: And from hence was this of the Agesilaus.
Spartan King to one that extold the magnificence of the Persian, wherein (says
he) is he greater than I, except he be more just than I? But there are too
many that like 1 Samuel 15 24
Saul and 2 Samuel 15.6
Absolon, do float upon another Rev. 4.6
glassie Sea, and fill their sails with the wind of vanity, and being
regardlesse of true honor, hunt too eagerly after popular applause, to make
their names great, only in the eyes and mouths of men; forgetting that precept
and principle of our Savior, to Luke 10.20
Rejoice rather that their names are written in Heaven, where only both names
and Honors are out of danger of defacing; but 1 Samuel 15 28.
these like those, what they least fear they soonest feel: and which they most
seek they seldom'st find. For as their Fraught is but Folly, and their
TRAFICKE in this Voyage is but 2 Samuel 18 14.
Pride and Vanity: So is their gain nothing but shame, sorrow and infamy, a
Return in Saint Paul's To. 2.8, 0 Romans 6.23 Heb. 2.2.
opinion very suitable to such an adventure, wages and recompenses very
answerable to such services. The way amongst the Ancient Plutarch.
Romans to the Temple of Honor, was through the Temple of Virtue; and that
hangs upon the File of 1 Samuel 2.30
Eternity, would be remembered in every House as well as in Elies House; that
those that honor God, God will honor them, when such as do despise Him by
preferring the John 12.43
praise of men before the praise of God, shall be despised.

And now who knows said Mordecay to Esther, Esther. 4.7
nay who knows not (my much honored Lord) that knows your Lordship; But
that you have come to this height of Honor and have advanced your name and
Family, that you have (as the Prophet of ^say ^2.23
Eliakim) been for a glorious Throne to the house of your Fathers; and all
this, and more then this, by the better and more excellent way, by adding
goodness to Greatness; to Highness Holiness; by adding knowledge to your
years, Grace to your knowledge, (Practice to both,) by 1 chr. 17.8 25.
building and beautifying of Gods House, who both has and will build and
beautify yours. For the furtherance of which I shall not only with Zach. 4.7.
Zacharies Angel, Bring forth the head Wherein is engraven in golden
Charactors(...) Ego Tibi, tu mihi Domu^.
Stone, and cry Grace Grace unto it; But as that other to Gideon [shall wish
you the wishes of your dedication, and say] Judge. 6.12.
Iehova est tecum, valentissime robore, The Lord be with thee thou mighty man
of Valor. And for the continuance of which Exemplary acts and fruits of Piety
and honor, I do offer here to your Lordships protection and acceptance these
following Lines and Labors, which contain the Holy Life and happy Death of
One who in his time was one of the vid. title page,
Lords worthies, one who had attaind to this honor to be a blessing to
himself and to others also, to be a good man, and to have a Psa. 32.10. prove.
10.7.
good name well worthy that honorable mention and Elogie wherewith the Jewish
Rabbis were wont to speak of their best and chiefest Authors, (...)
A man of blessed memory, whole blessed and Sacred memorial, I humbly crave
(right Honorable) may find a Shield and shelter under your Wings; so shall it
be borne from the Egypt of detraction and calumny, (as once was Gods Israel,
quasi sub alis aquilarum) as upon Exo. 19.4
Eagles wings.

My Lord, he is in some sort Luke 7, 4.5.
worthy for whom you should do this, for he has loved (while he lived) our
nation, and has built though not a material, yet a Spiritual House of God,
amongst them with whom he lived, and that in such a way as may multiply honor
to your Lordship, by manifesting your good affection to his virtues and your
resolution to preserve his memory. The book has need of a high Patronage, and
flies to Alterius sic altera poscitopem, Hor:
yours. Vouchsafe it then Right Honorable, though you need not it, yet (as the
Reverend Bishop Histeward complaining of extraordinary expnces occasioned
through multitude of servants, he calls for a catalogue of their names and
seeing who were serviceable, and who useless, said, these I will keep because
Inced them, and those because they need me.
Alonso Cartilio to his servant) because it needs you.

I know there is no analogy in state or place, in employments, or indowments,
betwixt your Lordship and this Gentleman, who was Inferioris Subsellij, of a
far inferior rank and quality: yet may your Honor, if you please to
stoop so 1 Samuel: 25 30 31, 32, 33, 34 2 King 5.13.14. Job 31.13, 14
low as to look to his example, find many things worthy of your observation,
and not a few worthy of imitation also.

But I fear that like the Ambassadors of Samos, I shall offend in Prolixitie.
I will therefore now with Plutarchs Cranes in their flight over mount In Sicily
where they stop their mouths with stones. V.M.A.p.H, O.
Taurus, stop my mouth, lest by too much noise I awaken and disturb the Eagle
(I fly to) and so become a prey: to prevent which, I love only the posture
and Language of the Getulian captive to the Lion, Indigna sum ejus gloria
Apuila hon capit muscas.
praeda, I am not worthy of your anger, yet fear to provoke it, but shall not
need while I become as best becomes me, an Corporamagna nimo fatis est
protrasse Leoni.
humble suppliant to your Lordship as well for pardon, as for Patronage, and to
the Protector of Princes for his Pro. 3.16.
right and left hand blessings, to be ever multiplied upon you and yours, that
your honor may long continue like Eliakim, Velut. Esa. 22.23.
Paxillum in loco firmo, that you may live in your self, your illustrious
Lady, your numerous and their honored offspring, and in all that have
relation to your Lordship in the direct line or collateral; to emulate and
outstrip the best and bravest of your glorious Ancestors, that succeeding Ages
may never close the Annalls of your Princely Family with a Hift. chro.
Degeneremque, Neoptolemum.

But with that rather wherewith the Delphick Pl. cher.
O racle honored that King of Sparta, Ultimus heroum Cleomenes Astypalaeus. The
God of all happiness and blessing multiply all 38 graces and honors to you
and yours, Ios. 19.15
in this life, by guiding you with his counsel, and in the next by receiving
you all into His Glory, which shall be the continued prayer of him who by many
Obligations stands bound to acknowledge and subscribe himself in all humility
and observance,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and thankful Servant and Chaplain. S.
HIND.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THe Book I here present unto thy view is Opus posthumum, an Orphane, Hosea
14.3.
long since left fatherless, and kept under Hatches, but now by his assistance
in whom the Fatherless find mercy, is brought to open view. It was the rule
of Pythagoras, to have his Scholars five years in his School before they
should be suffered to speak. But this work has lain above twice five,
suffering more then an Ostracisme, before it could be admitted to speak in the
Language of the Press. In so much that if I should have said to thee as he in
leremy, Read this I pray thee, I^r: 29.11
thou might have answered (as he) in the same verse, I cannot, for it is
Sealed. Genesis 29.3.
But the stone that made the stoppage at the Well of Haran, is now removed and
the Flocks of Laban may drink freely.

I dare not recommend it to thy view with that confidence that Antiphon did
those statua's to Dionysius, who demanding of him what was the best Brass he
ever saw? Replied, that whereof were made the Statua's of Armodius and
Aristogiton. But this book ( aere perennior) as that Brass presents to thy
view, and represents to thy memory, though not the Effigy, yet the Lively and
fresh memorial of such a one as makes even the Paper more precious for such
employment.

Now that both the Author and the Subject of this book may like the Statua's
of Demetrius remain free from the sullage of Envy, and detraction, I desire
thus to inform and satisfy thee concerning both; and first for the Subject,
he was a man so famous for Piety, that even the mouths of the most Learned,
Pious and Prudent men in their times have blessed him, and God for him. Famous
Master Perkins Heb. 11.4. vid. cap. 41.
being dead yet speaks of him in the following tract, that surely his house
was none other but the very house of God, and for Religion, he carried the Top
sail of England.

To this I add the Testimony of the now living and Learned, the Right Reverend
Father in God the Lord Primate of all Ireland, his Grace, A man equally Eminent
for Learning and Piety, from whose mouth speaking of this Gentleman in my
hearing, did fall this great and gracious Testimony, that there was in him the
very Beauty of holiness, and that he was of so amiable and cheerful a
countenance, that when he looked on him, he was put in mind of Moses whose very
face shined; Exo 34.29 Index animi vultus.
As honoring some more then ordinary eminency of grace in his heart, which was
discoverable in the sweetness and cheerfulness of his Countenance. And to
this I may add, his often encouragements to me in the publication of this
Book, were sufficient, I thought, both to provoke my pains, and to prevent
the Readers envy, unless they be such as are of the nature of the Basiliske
that would blast or kill all they breath on; and if any such, I wish rather
they would learn of the Scorpions of Mesopotamia, Plin, not. Hist.
not to bite, or harm Strangers, and when their own reaches not, to subscribe
to better judgments. Now for the Author; the neerenesse of relation forbids me
to say much: I shall leave his own works, and amongst many this, to publish
his abilities, as the Shield of Idem quod Minerva.
Pallas did the effigy of Phydias who was the Author and maker of it.

I have seen some works of this nature, of which it might be said, materiam
superabat opus, the work exceeded the subject, but here it cannot: for as the
subject is grave and gracious, so is the method, Style, and Language of the
Author. Expect not here, Verba Phalaris nitentia, a Pomp of words or
Rhetoric: that were with the Suitors of Penelope, to forsake the Mistress,
Tiro. 30 23
and to court the handmaid, or as Solomon says, to make the Handmaid heir to
her mistress.

I dare be bold to say (and produce many evidences) that it was neither that
Insanabile scribendi cacoethes, nor ad Ostentationem eruditionis, Bucan in lo.
as Bucan: observes of some, nor that effascination of popular applause,
Baronius.
as Baronius observes of others, that engaged the Author to undertake it. But
only to perpetuate the memorial of this worthy Gentleman, in such a way as
may make best for thy Example, and the Creators glory. Math. 5.16.
Distemper and prejudice being then laid aside, read it, and be pleased
thoroughly to peruse it before in part thou censure it; and if any with
Praxiteles viewing their face and deformities in this glass shall therefore
break or blemish it, let them know the disadvantage is their own, not the
Authors, and (as he) for one foul face they saw before, may see twenty then.

I would send such to be disciplined by Erasmus, Eras. Epist. ad Dorp.
who writes thus to Dorpius concerning the Readers of others writings. (
Siquispiam offendatur et sibi vindicet, non habet quod expostulet cum eo qui
scripsit; ipse si volet secum agat injuriam utpote sui proditor, qui declaravit
hoc ad se pertinere.) He that quarrels at others works, betraies his own
folly, not their Authors: to prevent which, if you in this shall meet with any
errors of Pen or Press, do not for those, slight all the rest, but remember
the rule of the Naturallist, Hor. in loc.
(Vbi multa nitent in carmine, non ego paucis offender maculis.)

Where many things are good, shall I for but some trivial all let fly?
If the Zeal either of the Author or Subject, outgoe thy expectation, or
Practice, blame them not, since as there is no aiming at any man's person, so
there is no favoring of any man's sin, according to the rule of the Poet.

It is but just and as has bin, to spare the man and speak his sin.
(Licuit, semperque Licebit
Parcere Personis, dicere de vitiis)
If the Style prove not so plausible as thy curiosity may expect, or if in the
discountenancing or battering down of any error, in Life or judgment, thou
think it mingled with too much bitter Hierapicra, Remember then the
Physicians rule,

Sharp sauces best become the meat, and move the appetite to eat.
(Acriora Orexim Excitant Embammata) But if all this will not do it, like
Gallio you care for none of these things, yet at least, and at last remember
the rule of our Savior. Do to others, as you would that others should do to
you. Mat. 7.12.
Deal not with their good names as Lycurgus did with his Country Coins, or as
Rehoboam with his Fathers Shields, which they found of beaten gold, but left of
Brass: rather as Augustus did with the walls of Rome, Juveni lateritiam,
reliqui Marmoream.
which he found of Brick, but left of Marble. And whatsoever in them is
virtuous, Honest, Just, Lawful, Laudible, and of Good report, Phil. 4.8.
that follow, and the while thy Charity is thus to them, the blessing of God be
with thee.

So prays the Subjects Kinsman, the Authors Son, and thy Servant in CHRIST.
Samuel Hind.
From Prescot, this 20th of May. 1641.
A Table of the Contents.
Chapter I.
John Bruen. His birth and Blood, from Father and Mother well descended.
Cap. 2.
His education free in good measure from Popery, and profanesse also. His
childhood. His Prayer. Children may have good motions. Some seeds of grace in
his childhood.
Cap. 3.
His youth. His dancing.
Cap. 4.
His going to Oxford about 1577. His Fathers care and cost, Like Saint Austines
Fathers for him. He went up about 17 years old. Few Gentlemen like minded, The
cause hereof their own ignorance and profanesse.
Cap. 5.
At his coming to Oxford somewhat popish: But the Lord did reclaim him.
Means of his reclaiming from popish errors, By his companion Master
Brerewood, By the Scripture urged, Applied. Private persons may sometimes help
one another for Conversion. A worthy example for young Gentlemen.
Cap. 6.
He was much like Galeacius: His proficiency at Oxford but small The causes of
it. Some unfitness for learning, His sufficiency not great for great
employment; yet such as God chose to show his power in, as in Galeacius, a
young Christian, and great Champion; very like unto him in many things.
Cap. 7.
His coming from Oxford 1459. His Father bestows him in marriage-1580. In a
godly Family, with a godly young Gentlewoman with mutuy all consent: otherwise
then manr. Parents do, where lust, and lucre makes the motion, and the Fathers
dropsy, and the Sons frenzy make up the match. They live together in love:
Cap. 8.
His recreation of Hunting in some abuses reproved: Some inconveniences of
Hunting.
Cap. 9.
The estate of the Creatures since the fall and before: Their enmity a fruit of
our sin. Unlawful to take pleasure in it.
Cap. 10.
Neither in the emnity nor Cruelty of, or toward the Creatures may we take
pleasure. An example of cruelty to the Creature.
Cap. 11.
A good man is merciful to his Beast not only in the taking care for the
preservation of his being, but of his wel-being also. Giving him due allowance
of pasture, and moderating hi^ labor.
Cap. 12.
The lawfullnesse or unlawfulness of Hunting laid down in nine particulars.
Cap. 13.
His more effectual conversion and the fruits thereof upon his Fathers death,
by Gods good means, not very violent, likeunto Saint Austines in many
particulars.
Cap. 14,
The fruits of his conversion. First, As Heir of the Family in Civil matters.
His reformation; removing impediments: Renouncing his pleasures; His frugality.
His fidelity. A rebuke to others Prodigality, and Infidelity: and a check to
some others obstinacy in their old sins. Secondly, other fruits of their
conversion in matter of religion as Governor of his Family?
Cap. 15.
In setting up Religion in his Family. Laid down first in the Generals
Cap. 16
And then in the specialties and particulars, First In his Family, and secondly
In the assembly. In his Family, First in dwelling with his wife as a man of
knowledge in peace and love, as equal yoke fellows: A good example to
husbands and Wives. A discovery of the misery of unequal yoke fellows,
manifested in 4 instances. Secondly, In the godly education of their Children,
first by instruction, secondly by correction, wherein if his passions exceeded,
he was humbled, healed and bettered in four particulars Thirdly, In governing
of his Servants.
Cap. 18.
First, in choosing, Secondly, In the using of his servants, some of special
note, as old Robert, Old Robert his Girdle for the help of his memory, A
rebuke to mindelesse and careless Persons. And to such as use not their skill
and other faculties aright.
Cap. 19
His familiar conversing with old Robert; both gainers by it, others dealing
otherwise are loosers by their stateliness: His kind usage of him in his old
age. Until the day and hour of his death. To the reproof of merciless
masters.
Cap. 20.
His due regard to the rest of his servants, Some attending upon him, Some
laboring for him. His Family a Religious Nursery by disposing or dispersing
his servants.
Cap. 21.
His course in Family duties toward God. The necessity and excellency of
family Duties. First, His preparation in four things First, In his vigilance,
Secondly in his Private prayer, Thirdly Meditation, Fourthly Industry in
writing.

Cap. 22.
Secondly, His execution and performance of his Family exercise. First A little
short prayer in a set form A set form of prayer justified by our Saviors
institution of the Lords prayer, and by his own practice. None precisely bound
to the letter of the Lords prayer; but to the matter all. Set prayer a help.
Heart-prayer best of all.
Cap. 23.
Secondly His singing of Psalms. His delight in singing of Psalms. Thirdly
His reading of the Scriptures. Fourthly, His humble and holy prayer with
thankesgiving; Having always matter of praise, as well as cause of prayer.
Cap. 24.
His Evenings exercise, in opening and applying the word, for the use of his
Family, Crowned with a blessing from God: Opposed much by some men of the
world: His fortification against such assaults For justifying of his judgment
and practice in thus teaching of his family, By his collections and
observations out of Godly and good Authors.
Cap. 25.
And yet not usurping upon the ministry, nor by any private spirit. But by
Godly and good means, providing as Joseph for himself and for his Family.
Cap. 26.
Thus far of his religious government of his own house in his private
Family: Now of his zeal to Gods house, in the public Assembly: First In
abolishing means and instruments of false worship. His inducements thereunto.
Authority of the Magistrate, and example of good, and great men which made him
proceed from the Chapel to the Church. This act censured by Papists.
Justified by themselves against themselves.
Cap. 27.
Secondly, In establishing Gods true Word, and worship, by procuring godly
ministers to preach of his own Cost and change, Little regarded, yet he not
discouraged, because the word of God prospered. Many virtues of his to be
observed, and imitated. For Gentlemen to be rich in good works. For Patrons
not to spoil the Church being bound to provide for it. For profane Gentlemen
bestowing much on their lusts, nothing on Gods service, Neither maintaining any
Levite at home, nor seeking after the word abroad.
Cap. 28.
Upon their neglect of the public ministry, he maintained the Preacher in his
own house: But after a while restored him to the public Assembly; The cause
and occasion thereof. And so continued to maintain the Minister both by his
own, and Master Clerks testimony.
Cap, 29,
Popish and profane wakes His godly care and labor to suppress them. By a
more plentiful and powerful use of the word preached Whereby he prevailed
and blessed God. With rejoicing, and Feasting of Gods people, Renouncing all
fellowship with sin and sinners, And herein following the example of Christ.
Cap. 30.
Nine reasons against popish and profane Wakes.
Cap. 31.
Being still more religious, he grew ^ore famous Many desire to sojourne with
him. Sir Ric^ard Grosvenor in his tender years b^ought up in his house. Master
Hardware and his Family also tabled with him. His wise and gracious dealing
with him and his, And the good effect and fruit thereof, Both in his family,
and in the city. Thus to season others, and to build up Gods house in his own
was his labor of love, and joy of his heart.
Cap. 32.
The good success whereof made him like David. To make greater provision by
public exercises which he frequented and by which he became better furnished,
In which his course diverse things to be commended, First, His cherfulness.
Secondly, His painfullnesse, First, In seeking Secondly, In gathering Manna and
other provision.
Thirdly, His attentive diligence First, In hearing. Secondly, In writing.
Thirdly, In repeating. Fourthly in recording the sum and substance of all the
exercises: In many manuscripts commended to the heirs of his family. Fourthly,
His kind usage of Gods ministers. First, Love to their persons. Secondly,
Reverence to their callings. Fifthly His good affection to professors.

Cap. 33.
The exercises of Religion great helps unto godliness. A motion for exchange
with other exercises of profanesse. Difference great, Company contrary. Holy
exercises acceptable to God: Profitable unto men: yet will none make an
exchange, but such as are changed themselves.
Cap. 34.
He was otherwise exercised also by affliction. In the death of his Wife.
Sudden death a fearful Judgment to some; Sudden Death upon a wicked life
fearful; Yet all that dye suddenly, do not dye fearfully: but many otherwise,
as this Gentlewoman very hopefully. No death sudden to a sound Christian His
afflictions sanctified, and passions moderated.
Cap. 35.
Standing in need of marriage he sought and found a prudent wife, by good
opportunity, and by good means of his trusty servant, declaring unto him her
Parents; Her Father, her mother, and her parts worthy due Commendation, So he
made motion for marriage, Prevailed in it, and took her to wife, He set up and
renewed the exercises of Religion in that Family: The good success thereof, by
his own testimony,
Cap. 36,
His return home to Stapleford, bringing his wife along with him, Diverse
Gentlemen desire to sojourne with him, His Family a famous nursery for
Religion, Master Wilbraham places his Sonne-inlaw, and his daughter with him.
Cap. 37.
His desire to give him contentment, and to do them good, To try their
dispositions he observed their words, and works, They were teachable and
tractable, Touching the Lords day, Concerning Cardeplay, His Wife converted,
Himself convinced, Al witnesses of his faithfulness,
Cap. 38.
His burning of Tables, Cards and Dice as malefactors, An attestation of the
Fathers with him against them.
Cap. 39.
His collections against Cards and Dice.
Cap. 40.
Instead of Tables, Cards and Dice, he set up two Bibles, one in the Parlour,
another in the Hall: Answerable to our Church Canons. Bibles for Bs. servants,
and for strangers: This neglected. A remedy for recovery to take heed of evil
and provide good servants. Our Canons against Cards and Dice, and all unlawful
games; Some of our Divines in the Country make little Conscience of these
Canons.
Cap. 41.
Some defects in the public ministry. He procured Master A. St. for supply,
whom he maintained for the most part, His worthy testimony concerning Master
Bruen, Being an eye and care witness. Master Perkins hearing of him did much
admire, and commend him. Many Gentlemen desire to sojourne with him, His own
relation.
Cap. 42.
A sudden Storm upon the death of his dear wife: A great affliction to the
whole Family Her virtues and due praises. The heavy parting of his Tablers, All
full of grief, Master Bruen himself exceeded. Time and reason strengthened
with grace, will moderate passions.
Cap. 43.
Master Bruen's own relation touching his more private course of life: Seven
things remarkable therein.
Cap. 44.
All to be said may be drawn to three heads. First, His conversing with God.
Secondly, His conversation in the world. Thirdly, His departure out of the
world.
God gave him wisdom and understanding, Also courage and strength, as he did
to Joshua. His conversing with God in four Spiritual Duties.
Cap. 45.
First His meditation. The necessity and excellency of Meditation. Means and
helps which he used, Reading of the word and of godly men's writings. his
following the rules of direction for meditation; The gain Godliness, many
benefits and sweet fruits of it: Great difference. Many Enemies unto it. Many
of the better sort fail in it.
Cap. 46.
Secondly, Observation of Gods judgments and mercies. A Book of remembrance.
Cap. 47.
The hand of God upon the Boy of the Northwich, Satan's malice, Gods mercy,
First his fits and passions, Secondly his gestures and actions, he was brought
unto the Bishops, The Bishops License for a private fast for his release.
Thirdly, his Speeches,
Cap. 48.
his private Invocation, Not confined to one place, his time for Private
prayers, Seven times in a day, Powerful in prayer, his private fasting, Tender
prayers and hard knee, The matter of his private prayers Sins of Sion, Sins
of the time, Praise and thanksgiving,
Cap. 49
his imitation of his heavenly Father every day.
Cap. 50.
his conversation in the world, First, A resolution against the world,
Secondly, Gods presence, Thirdly, Striving against sin, Fourthly, Desiring to
do good, Fifthly, lust dealing, Sixthly, Take all to the best, Seventhly
watchfulness, Eighthly To be sparing in speech, Ninthly, Renouncing all worldly
fashions and humors, Tenthly, Peaceable, Eleventhly, Contentedness,
Twelfthly, To keep our peace with God,
Cap. 51.
First he endeavored to be pure, First, pure in heart, Secondly, Pure in hand.
Thirdly Pure in tongue.
Cap. 52.
Secondly, peaceable, A Peacemaker,
Cap. 53.
Thirdly Gentle: not by nature, but by grace, Many of the Fathers very
Passionate, Yet well accepted of God, and good men, his bearing and forbearing.
In meekness like Moses, In mildness like his Master Christ, Many of a cruel
and bloody disposition.
Cap. 54.
Fourthly, Easy to be entreated, Judge W, his testimony of Master Bruen, We
easily entreated to his Cost: But some so hard they will give nothing no nor
pay their own duties,
Cap. 55
A Branch of the crew vine: A Tree of Righteousness, full of good fruits
toward all, he did mourn for sinners, he did contemn contemners, his bounty
to poor Christians for supply of their wants.
Cap. 56.
he was rich in good works, his hospitality for Gods Children, his Provision
for his table in plenty and variety. He would not endure any riot or excess,
No quaffing, no drunkenness, nor healthing in his house, His charity to his
poor neighbors, First for their bellies: His Dole days twice a weeks, In the
time of dearth almost every day, his bounty in giving and lending money, or
Corn, Secondly merciful: to the poor in clothing their bodies also, Thirdly
provision, he provides for them out of his own Purse yearly. Fourthly
Protection: he pratects and defends them, Fifthly Advice, and as he is able
does plead for them,
Cap 57.
His fruits of faith and love to others also; In his harmony in judgment with
the best. In his sympathy with the godly in every condition. Heavy news of
the Church did (...) affect him, and afflict him also. In his compassion in
visiting the sick. His antipathy against profaneness. In garish fashions. In
profane customs, as in drinking of healths. The Policy, and power of Satan in
healthing.
Cap 58.
It is Antipathy against profane Customs and corruptions of great houses. He
offers a remedy. His godly letter for Christian Admonition and reformation.
His good opinion and estimony of Tho-Wilbraham Es^ his indignation against sin.
His love and care to reclaim the sinners. His joy in such as were converted.
Cap. 59.
Fruits of mercy toward his Tenants. He was a merciful Landlord.
Cap. 60.
He departs out of this world. 1. Preparation. 2. Resolution. 3. Confidence.
4. Constancy.
1. His preparation for death. His more special preparation in ten special
duties. 2. His resolution to bear the sharp occurrents of it.
Cap. 61.
His graces much increased in his old age. His last days his best days. His
resolution and courage against all assaults. His hope and expectation.
Cap. 62.
His first sickness and visitation. 3. His confidence of an happy exchange. 1.
His evidence. 2. His assurance for it:
His confidence cause of his comfort.
Cap. 63.
His diligence and conscience in frequenting Gods house. His cheerful going
to Church. Singing of Psalms by the way: Some much delighted, and some much
bettered by this melody. His early coming to Church. His reverend and holy
carriage in it. His dinner time he bestowed well in the Church. The evening
sacrifice he performed in like manner. Their return homewards, and mutual
care to do good.
Cap. 64.
His private evening exercise full of life. The great joy he had in the
Sabbath and fasts. His thankfulness for one Sabbath more Weary of the world. He
makes his Will, So he was more free, and more fit for heavenly things.
Cap 65.
He had Milk for Babes that came to visit him, and stronger meat for strong
men. His godly admonitions to both, he commends unto them his own experience
and example.
Cap. 66.
Fourth Head. His constancy in Religion even unto the end. Great strength in
great weakness. His comfortable and savory speeches. His consolations exceeding
his afflictions. S. H. B. came to visit him. His gracious words and
exhortations unto him. His son and heir came unto him: His good counsel
unto him. His desire to have his heirs follow his steps. That being dead he
might as it were live in them again, And that Religion might never die not
decay in that Family.
Cap 67.
Mr. L. And my self came to visit him January 16. 1625. His patient waiting
for release, His consolations still abound, without all trouble of mind or
conscience. We rejoiced in his joy, prayed with him, and for him. His care for
prayer in the Family. Mindful of M. L. A heavy parting.
Cap. 68.
Some ever ready to pray with him. Diverse desire a blessing from him. He
prays secretly himself, other gracious people pray with him. His last
prayer. His last end.
A FAITHFUL Remonstrance of the holy Life and happy Death of JOHN BRUEN, of
BRUEN-STAPLEFORD in the County of Chester, Esquire.
CHAP. 1.
JOHN BRUEN of Bruen-Stapleford, in the County Palatin of Chester, Esquire, was
either by consanguinity or affinity linked and allied to many of the most
ancient and worshipful Houses and Families of that Country. His Father a
worthy Gentleman of his time; descended of many worthy Ancestors. The Lord
having continued their Race, His birth and blood from father.
and established that Family in their own Ancient Name, Place, House and State
for many Generations. A blessing (I confess) of no extraordinary note, yet the
more remarkable, because, even in these parts, many Families that have
flourished in great pomp and pride for a season, and have thought that their
houses should continue for ever, Psalm. 49.11, 12, 13.
and their dwelling places to all Generations, and for this end called their
Lands by their own names, have yet been cut short of their hopes, and their
lives both together, had their posterity swept away as dung, and their names
overwhelmed with the ruins of their houses, their root being rottenness, and
their blossom vanishing into dust, Isal. 5.24.
as the Prophet speaks to the same purpose.

This Gentleman's father was first married to a sister of Sir John Dones, of the
house of Vtkinton, from whom the Lord withheld the fruit of the womb, His
mother.
as sometimes he did from Rachel, so that by her he had no issue. After her
decease he took to wife the daughter of Thomas Holford, of Holford Esquire; by
whom the Lord gave him 14 children sons and daughters: So did the Lord trust
him with a large portion of his own Inheritance, and recompense the former
barrenness with a plentiful increase of his Family; For children are the
inheritance of the Lord, Psalm. 127.
and the fruit of the womb his exceeding rich reward. Of these 14 children,
which God of his mercy had given his servant. This John Bru^n (the object of my
thoughts, and subject of my speech at this time) was the first bomb of the male
children the beginning of his Fathers strength and heir of his Family. Many of
his brethren and sisters were holymen, and holy women, of pecially that rate
Gentlewoman Mistress Katherine Brettergh his own dear sister, whose pray so
is in print, had whose name and same has been founded out, Deaths advantage.
M. Leig^. M. Haris. Prove. 21.29.
and proclaimed to the Churches of Christ above twenty years aged by two
Silver Trumpets of the Gospel. Of whom as it may truly be said among her
sisters, many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all: 1
Chro 4.9.10:
So may that as truly be said of him amongst his brethren, which is recorded of
Ja^^^ amongst his, because of his greater acquaintance and acceptance with God,
Ja^^^ was more humnable than his brethren; because he called on the God of
Israel, and God granted his that which he requested. Well descended.


It was not his double portion the privilege of the first borne, nor his birth
and blood to be so worshipfully descended, nor his gentry and dignity, to be so
honorably allied, nor his Inheritance and possessions, to be heir of such an
estate and family: It was not I say, Icr. 9.23. 1 Cor. 1.13. 2 Cor. 10.17. 1
Cor. 12.29.
either any or all of these, that either he did or we do reckon or esteem the
ground of his true praise and honor, or the staff of his comfort and
rejoicing in this World. He was otherwise taught of God, and had otherwise
learned Christ. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might. Let not the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows me, says the Lord, and
let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord, Inter Christianum and Gentilem non
fides tantum debet, sed and vita distinguers, Hieron. ad Celgutia^. Heb. 11.25,
26. Psa. 84.10 Heb. 11.24.
that every soul may be humbled, and no flesh may glory in his presence. A
lesson of great importance and use for many of our Gentry, which seeing the
Lord is pleased both by precept and by pattern, so often to teach the^, they
should therefore learn at length less to admire themselves for their birth and
blood, or any outward pomp and power in the World, and to esteem the reproach
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: And to be a doore-keeper
in the house of God, a greater honor than to dwell in the. Tents of
wickedness, yea than to be the son of Pharaoh's daughter: Quid est dignit as
in indigno nisi ornamentu^ in luto? Sal. lib. 4. Pro. 26.23.
For what is the flower of Nature without grace, but a stinking weed of a fair
color? What is Nobility without Religion and Piety, but an earthen pitcher
covered with silver dross? And what is he that is rich in the world and is not
rich toward God but a branded fool, even by Gods own Sentence, though he have
goods laid up for many years, and say unto his soul as if he had spoke unto a
swine, Soul take thine ease, eat, Luke 12.19, 20, 21 Sub Christiano nomine
Gentilem vitam agunt, Hieron. ad Celant.
drink, and be merry? And what is a Gentleman without the true Faith of Christ
in his heart, Ephesians. 2.15.12. Gal 2.15.
and the holy fruits thereof in his life, but a mere Gentileman without
Christ, an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger from the
Covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
without hope and without God, A very Atheist (as the Greek word imports) in
the World? Such gentilemen Atheists we have too many, both younger and elder,
which walk inordinatly, not as they have this gentleman and many others for
example, Ephesians. 2.2, 3 1 ^et. 4.2, 3:
but after the will of the Gentiles, not after the Word of God, but after the
course and custom of the world, and the brutish and base lusts of men, and
that in all lasciviousness, excess of wine, drunkenness, revellings,
banquetings and other abominable villainies.

CHAP. 2.
BUt to proceed further, and to bring this Gentleman from his birth to his
childhood and youth, and from his youth to his riperage. 2 Timothy 1.5. His
education in his Infancy.
Albeit he wanted Timothy's education, who through the care and pains which
his grandmother Lois, and his moher Eunice bestowed upon him, and the blessing
of God upon their labors, was well acquainted and instruction in the
Scriptures from a child. Yet have I heard well of his Parents both care and
course in bringing up him and the rest of their children, orderly and civilly,
and as those times were religiously also. And although childhood and youth be
vanity, Free in some good me^sure from Popery.
and prone enough to Popery and profaneness, which as the Oak and the Ivy
grow up together, and with love and good likeing embrace one another: Yet did
the Lord so preserve him in his childhood and youth from the poison of Popish
superstition, and the contagion of those common and grosser sins, which for
want of the light and life of the Ministry of the Gospel reigned then in those
parts, as if he had a purpose to reserve him as a vessel of honor, and for his
own house; and so by little and little, to fit him and prepare him for his
masters use and service; which I speak not to this end, as if his vessel then
were altogether free from al savor and smell of Popish lees and lies, or as if
his heart in the heat of youth, had been altogether clean from the lusts of
youth, but to magnify Gods mercy and grace, in his Parents care and his own
carriage, that he was not settled upon any Popish dregs, nor addicted unto, on
polluted with any of those common and cursed sins of the time, And
profaneness also.
as base lying, wanton, and wicked swearing, rioting and revelling, drinking
and gaming, or the fleshly sin of fornication, with which many of our young
Gentlemen have now blasted the beauty, and glory of their youth blemished their
names, polluted their souls and defiled their bodies. To the rebuke of profane
Parents. Libidini froena permittentes and naturalem cordis ardorem, qui in
adoles entia plerunque forvescit, suis horrattbus duplicante, Hieron. adver.
Vigla^t His childhood.
. The greater must needs be both the sin and shame of many of our Gentlemen,
who are so far from repressing such corruptions, or restrayning such lusts and
lewd courses in their children, that they do not only lead and draw them by
their countenance and example, but hale and force them by their commands and
threats into the base fellowship of such sins and sinners: Bis peccat qui
exemple peccat, his offense is double, that offends himself and by his bad
example causes others to offend also.

When he was about the age of six or seven years, his Father for some offense
or fault, did rebuke him sharply and correct him soundly, and being then in
much grief of heart for his Fathers displeasure, and desiring to see some
means of comfort, and relief; took unto him a little prayer book, which at
that time he had learned, and went apart into his Fathers Chapel, and there
by reading and praying as well as he could, was comforted with unexpressible
joys. His Prayers.
These be his own words; and he adds. But being but a child, I knew not what
they meant; And the next day I went to the same place, using the like means,
but found not the like comfort. What I should think upon a child's Prayers, and
such unexpressible joys upon the same, I cannot well tell, yet do I remember
what Austine reports of himself, being but a child, that observing others to
pray unto God, he learned to think and conceive of God, as some great and
mighty one, Like Austins,
who though he were not known by sight, Aug. confess. lib. 1^.9. and lib. 3.4.
yet could both hear us and help us at his pleasure. Nam puer coepi rogare
te, auxilium and refugium meum, and rogabam te parvus, non parvo affect^, ne in
Schola vapularem, For being but a child, says he, I began to pray unto thee,
my help and my refuge, and I prayed a little one, with no little affection,
that I might not be beaten at School. He that out of the mouth of babes, and
sucklings has ordained himself praise, may also put some good motions of his
Spirit even upon the hearts of children, and cause them to open their lips in
prayer, which he that works in them, knows how to accept from them, and
what answer to make unto them, according to his wisdom and good pleasure. And
if we acknowledge that the elect of God, in the Sacrament of their new birth,
being but infants, may and do receive the seal of Gods Spirit in their souls,
which works in them, though secretly and strangely, yet effectually, and
truly some measure of saving Grace and Faith in Christ Jesus: Why may we not
think that some sparkles of this holy and heavenly fire, Children may have
good motions.
may upon occasion no wand then break out from the hearts and lips of young
children (being the elect of God) though by reason of their weakness of
understanding and wan^ of judgment, they neither know whence they are, nor what
they mean? Samuel being but a child, ministered unto the Lord before Eli, when
as yet he knew not the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.1.7.
neither was the Word of the Lord revealed unto him. Yea he had communion and
conference with the Lord, when the Lord called, Samuel, Samuel, and he
answered, Speak Lord for thy servant hears. We are not (I know) to look for
such revelations in these days, yet seeing the Lord is Liberrimum Agens, not
bound himself, though he bind us to the use of his ordinary means, he may at
his pleasure make sweet impressions of his Spirit and Truth, even upon the
minds and hearts of young children. As I make no doubt but he might do upon
the heart of this his servant, being yet a child, when first he was so
sensible of his fault before his father, that he was much displeased with
himself, because he had displeased him: Secondly, in filial obedience and
patience submitted himself quietly to his fathers sharp rebuke and severe
correction: And lastly, when he had recourse unto the Lord, by such means and
helps of prayer as he had, both for pardon of his sin, and comfort of his
soul in that affliction. Some seeds of grace in his childhood.
Which now I am the rather induced to think of him, because it is well known,
that being often asked in his riper age, of the time of his calling, and of his
conversion, when it first began, his usual answer was, Even of a child,
little. Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 4. Hoc nomen Chri. etc.
The seeds of grace in some measure might then be sown, which until they were
farther increased by knowledge and judgment, watered by the Word, and warmed
by the Spirit, lay hid under the corruptions of nature, and lusts of youth (as
under clods of earth, for a time) but afterward brake out in the fruits of an
effectual Calling and Conversion in due season.

CHAPTER III.
ANd so indeed (or not much otherwise) it fared, His youth.
and fell out with this Gentleman in his tender years, who for want of a
Schoolmasters at home, was sent by his parents to his Uncle Dutton of Dutton,
there to be taught and trained up under one James Roe, who kept School there
at that time, where he continued a Scholar and Tabler for the space of three
years. A great family and of great liberty: Something he got for Grammar
learning, a little it may be for civil education, but nothing at all for
nurture and information in true Religion.

There, His dancing.
and then, by occasion of Musicians and a chest of Viols kept in the house, he
was drawn by desire and delight into the Dancing-schoole, where he profited so
well in that kind of youthful activity, that he did not only please himself
too much, but his parents also much more than was meet, with those tricks of
vanity. Isucrat. Oral. Areopag. Hieron. ad Laetam.
So he terms those exercises himself, and yet (says he) they were held
commendable in those days of ignorance. Venena non dantur, nisi melle
circumlita, and vitia non decipiunt, nisi sub specie umbr aque virtutum,
Poisons are not given, but sweetened with honey, and vices do not deceive, but
under the show and shadow of virtue. Sober and single dancing of men apart, and
women apart, has had his use, and praise also, not only among the Heathen, but
amongst the people of God, when by the nimble motions and gestures of the body,
Ambr. in Luc. lib. 6. cap. 7. Tertul de. Spectac. cap. 21. Origin. in cap. 14.
Matthew. and in cap. 12. ad Romans Amb. in 1 Cor. cap. 10. and in Luc. lib. 6. cap.
7. and de Virgin. lib. 3.
they have expressed the great joys of their hearts, for some good of their
own, or to set forth Gods glory. But mixed dancing of men and women, with light
and lascivious gestures and actions, framed in number and measure to please a
wanton eye, and provoke one another lust, or to serve the humor of some
wicked Herod, has ever been held, both of the ancient Fathers within the
Church, and of the best Authors that ever wrote amongst the Heathen without, to
be utterly unlawful, sinful, shameful, carnal, sensual, and divellish, as
hateful unto God, as hurtful unto men.

The greater was Gods mercy to preserve this young Gentleman, Aug. de december
cho. cap. 3. and contra lit. Petil. cap. 6. Arnob. l. 7. Chrys^hom. 48. in Genesis
and in Mat. 14.
inter tot illecebras peccandi a contagione peccati, amidst so many allurements
and provocations to wantonness, from the stain and pollution of gross
uncleanness: and that having now both feet (as it were) in the river of such
pleasures already, he was not violently carried away in the current and stream
of them. And the greater is the misery of many hundreds, young men and young
women, Hieron. in Zach. 8. Pro. 14.13 Eccl. 2.12. Luc. 16.25.
that run and rush into the danger of lascivious and wanton dalliance and
dancing, with such as have their hearts set on fire with burning lust, and
never consider that the beginning of such mirth is foolishness; the
continuing, madness; and the end, bastardy and beggary: and (without
repentance) the very curse of God, which is the greatest misery. Prona potestas
in vitium ferebatur, and more pecudum vaga seselibidine polluebat. Ambr. de
obitu Theod.


The principal occasion of his parents error, and his own vanity, taking
such and so great pleasure in these pleasures of sin, was (as he himself
has since observed and acknowledged under his hand) the popish and profane
estate and condition of the people and country round about them in those
days, for at that time (says he) The holy Sabbaths of the Lord were wholly
spent, in all places about us, in May-poles and May-games, Pipings and
Dancings, for it was a rare thing to hear of a Preacher, or to have one Sermon
in a year, all living profanely in ignorance and in error. A lamentable
time, Asperam nobis and insuavem virtutum viam, nimia facit vitiorum
consuetudo. Hier. ad Cleantiam.
and a miserable people of such a time; when men being without Guide, or
Governor, without Magistrate, or Minister, were left unto their own lusts, to
do what seemed good in their own eyes. Such as were those days of the
children of Israel, when Micah may have his house of Gods, his Ephod and
Teraphim, if he will be at the cost of them, and may consecrate a Priest also
for his purpose, to maintain all his idolatry, and vanity that he will set up:
When the Levites wife may be abused as a whore, Judge. 19.2 25. Judge. 20.
the men of Gibeah, the sons of Belial (breaking out into outrageous villainies)
and the children of Benjamin arise to maintain them all, in all their
wickedness, which they have committed.

Our eyes God be blessed have seen better days, because of the day of Grace,
and our ears have heard of better things by the Gospel of Grace: And shall we
then that are called to be children of the light, 1 These. 5.5. Ephesians. 5.8 11.
Ioh. 3.19. Hos. 14.8.
be yet in league or fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, as
if we still did love darkness more than light? God forbid. Let Ephraim now
say, What have I to do any more with idols, I have heard him and observed him:
I am like a green Firr-tree, from me is thy fruit found. And let us take up
that of the Apostle also, Romans 6.2.
How shall we that are dead to such sins, live yet therein?

CHAPTER IV.
IN a common contagion, where every place is infected, and every person may be
endangered (if Pomanders and Preservatives will not serve the turn) men are
wont to provide for their health by removal from such places, and betaking
themselves to some better and fresher air. If our Vineyards be overgrowne with
Brambles and Briars, though we cannot rid them out or remove them, yet will we
remove the best plants to some better soil from them: So did the Lord put it
into the heart of the Parents of this young Gentleman to deal with him: who
having spent his childhood and some part of his youth, at, and about home,
according to the custom and course of the country; for his better
preservation from the sins of the time, and his more Christian education in the
grounds of Learning and Religion, His going to Oxford about 1577. His fathers
care and cost like S. Augustines fathers for him.
was thence removed and transplanted into Oxford (that Vineyard of the Lord,
and famous University) where, so far as I can find, he first received the
love of the truth, with any knowledge and understanding. S. Augustine being
sixteen years old, was sent unto Carthage by his father, whom he much
commends for his care and cost in sending him so far, and maintaining him
there at his charge, Vltra vires rei familiaris suae, beyond and above the
ability of his estate, Aug. confess. lib. 2. cap. 3
and all for the furtherance of his learning and studies, and that because
there were many Citizens much wealthier than his father, that would not bestow
any such labor, He went up about 17. years old.
or cost upon their children for that end. This Gentleman was much about the
same age which Augustine, when his father sent him, and his brother Thomas with
him, to the University: who being of better means than Augustines father was,
maintained them both for the space of two years in Albane Hall, as Gentlemen
Commoners, very orderly and sufficiently. A thing as much to be commended in
him, Few Gentlemen like minded.
as in Augustines father; inasmuch as very few Gentlemen then, and not many now
(though of greater means by much than he) do take that care to bring up one,
much less will be at the cost to breed up two in the University, for any love
of learning, or desire of their childrens ingenuous and religious education.

A special cause hereof I conceive to be this, The cause hereof.
in many Gentlemen in these parts, because being for University learning of the
Arts and Tongues, Oratory and History, Logic and Philosophy.
very ignorant themselves, they cannot esteem nor affect so much that which
they know not, nor will ever be induced to purchase that, at any great price,
which they so much undervalue, and disregard, Their own ignorance.
by reason of the ignorande that is in them, concerning these things. And so it
comes to pass, that they are well contented, that their children prove no
wiser nor better than themselves, nor have any more tongues than their mothers
taught them, nor any skill in any arts but of Gaming, and Gaying, Dicing and
Carding, bowzing and drinking, renting and racking, and other such faculties
for pleasure or profit, And Prophannesse.
vain applause, or worldly credit, which are held in these days to make an
accomplished Gentleman: As if great men, did take great delight, Egregie de
Caesare Tullius, Cum quosdam, ait, ornare voluit, non illos honestavit, sed
ornamanta ipsa turpavit. Hieron. ad Pammachium.
to make their children heirs of their ignorance and propnanenesse, as well as
of their houses and families, lands and livings.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse reselli.
We are ashamed that so base things
may justly be imputed,
To Gentlemen, and cannot well
as justly be refuted.
CHAPTER V.
AT his coming to Oxford it is apparent, At his coming to Oxford somewhat Po
pish. Possid. in vita August. Cap 1. Omnes nos qui in Christo evedimus, de
Jdololatriae errore venimus. Non eaim nascimur, sed renascinur Christiani.
Hieron. adv. Vigilant.
that he brought up with him some seeds, and weeds also of Popish errors,
which had been either scattered by others, or gathered by himself by that
which he did hear and see in the country before his coming. So much he does
acknowledge himself, that he was then, as Paul said of the men of Athens, very
superstitious. Angustine confesses of himself, he was first a Manachy before
he was a Preacher or professor of the true Religion, And Paul himself
acknowledges he was first a Pharisie, before he was called and entrusted in
Christ's service. Every man indeed by nature is a Pharisie, and more or less a
friend to Popery, there being no religion so agreeable to carnal reason, and
fleshly wisdom, nor so pleasing and plausible to natural affection, as
pharisaicall devotion and hypocrisy, and popish superstition and idolatry.
Which is not spoken to this end, to lessen his fault, or to blaunch over the
errors of his youth; but to magnify the goodness and grace of God toward
him, that, finding him wandering and going astray as a lost sheep, But the Lord
did reclaim him.
he was pleased to reclaim him, and reduce him unto the flock and fold of
Christ Jesus. And seeing he was in danger to make but sorry proceedings of
such bad beginnings, and like enough to reap but a poor harvest, after such a
spring; it seemed good unto the Lord, not only to blast those weeds in the bud,
and to rid up by the roots those Popish errors, but to furnish his head and
heart, with such plants and seeds of grace and truth, as did bring forth their
fruits of righteousness and holiness, in due season. The special instrument
wherewith the Lord did work, Vide Aug. con. l. 8. c. 2 De Victorino.
was his own Word, first opened to his eye, and applied to his ear by a
companion of his, a towardly young Gentleman; and then accompanied by the
Spirit unto his mind and heart, for his father conviction and conversion. The
name of this his companion, Means of his reclaiming from popish errors by his
companion master Breerwood.
was John Breerwood an Aldermans son of the City of Chester, who being then
well grounded in the truth, and seeing Master Bruen infected with some popish
errors and lies, as the forbearing of meats and drinks for religion and
conscience sake, upon Friday, and other days, and the forbidding of Marriage
to Ministers, as unlawful by the Popes Canons and Constitutions, and diverse
other erroneous opinions of the like nature; was as willing to show himself
and adversary to his errors, as a friend unto his person, and began to make
an assault against his little Babble, and mounted Gods great Ordinance, against
the Popish Canons, and taking (as it were) his Powder and Shot from the
Scripture, and fire from the Altar, he battered and beat down the strong hold
of Satan, and laid level with the ground every popish opinion, and every high
thing that had exalted tt self against the true knowledge of God, and so
brought every thought into captivity, to the obedience of Christ. By the
Scripture urged.
The Scripture which he principally pressed him withal, was that I Tim. 4.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. against the Popish doctrine of forbidding of meats and marriage,
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils, and
speaking lies through hypocrisy, and having their conscience seared with a hot
Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know
the truth: for every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it
be received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and
Prayer. A blessed Scripture, mavelous plentiful for the truth, and powerful
against a lie. A word spoken in season (says Solomon) is like appels of gold,
with pictures of silver; giving great contentment, both for profit and delight,
to those that have the grace to receive it. Of such fruit and effect, was this
portion of Gods Word at that time, to this young Gentleman, which he does thus
ingenuously acknowledge in his own words. This when I saw, Applied.
and considered that this was a doctrine of devils, taught and delivered by
seducing spirits, and such as speak lies through hypocrisy, etc. I was then
inflamed with zeal against that profane beast of Rome, and all Popery, both
persons and things, with all their Monuments, Rites and Ceremonies, etc. This
was the Lords doing, and it was mavelous in his, and so it is in our eyes:
that of two friends and companions (both of them but young and tender) one
should thus be stirred up and strengthened by Gods Word and Spirit, to draw
out his fellow from such blindness and darkness, and to bring him into the
light and liberty of the Sons of God The ordinary public means of effectual
calling and conversion, is (I confess) the Ministry of reconciliation, in, 2
Cor. 5.18.19. Private persons may sometimes help one another for conversion.
and by the preaching of the Gospel: yet can it not (I think) be denied, but
that the Lord does sometimes furnish and employ some private persons, in this
work of winning souls, either by enlightening their minds, or convincing
their judgments, or smighting their consciences, or drawing them from the
fellowship of sin and sinners, unto the use of Gods Ordinances, and the
fellowship of Gods servants. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life,
Prove. 11.30. Dan. 12.3
and he that wins fowls is wise, says Solomon. Daniel also has the like
saying, They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many unto righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. And
Saint James speaks yet more plainly and effectual to this purpose; Brethren,
if any of dou do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that
he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. So Abigail may draw David by
her wisdom and wholesome counsel, from his bloody passion, and intended
cruelty, and cause him to repent, and refrain, yea, to bless the Lord for her
coming, and counsel too. So was Monica, Augustines mother, humbled and
reclaimed by her maid, So Monica vid. Aug lib. Conf. l. 9. cap. 8.
calling her Meribibulam. So did Augustine in a Rhetoric Lecture convert
Alipius, by a similitude taken from the vain games wherein he immoderately
delighted; Alipius thinking that Augustine aimed at him, whereas Augustine then
did not so much as think of him: which made Augustine to admire the wisdom
and goodness of God, who was working graciously, though secretly, for Alipius
his correction, and reformation, when neither of them had any thought of it.
August confess. l. 6. cap. 7.
Vt aperte tibi, Domine, tribueretur ejus correctio, per me quidem illam, sed
nescientem, operatus es: That his conversion or reformation, might evidently be
ascribed unto thee, O Lord, Thou did work it indeed by me, but by me, not
knowing what I did at that time, either for him, or from thee. To which purpose
he adds this also a little after, Vtens tu, Domine, scientibus, etc
nescientibus, Possidon in vi^^ Aug. cap. 15.
ordine quo nosti, and ille ordo justus est, de cord and lingua mea carbones
ardentes operatus es, quibus mentem spei bonae adduceres tabescentem and
sanares. Thou O Lord, using men both witting and unwitting, in what order thou
know, and that order is just, did raise up out of my heart and my tongue
burning coals, wherein thou might so scorch the mind of good hope, that
thou might heal it. And so did the Lord inflame the heart of this young
Gentleman, with burning coals of his Word and Spirit, which he raised and
reached out unto him, from the heart and mouth of his companion and friend,
that the dross of Popish errors was consumed, and his soul so healed, that
the treasure of Gods Word, was ever after better esteemed and entertained by
him. And here I could wish with all my heart, A worthy example for young
Gentlemen.
that our young Gentlemen (following the good example of these two) both in the
University and Country, would have more care, and make more conscience of
their company, and so frame their studies and courses, that, either by doing
good upon their fellow students and companions, or receiving good from them; by
converting some from their errors, and confirming others in the truth; See
Aschams Schoolmaster, p. 21.
by causing some to return from their wicked way, and others to turn unto
God, and walk in his ways, they might show forth better fruits of love one to
another, and reap sweeter comforts in their happy fellowship and society one
with another. Examp. sir John Cheke, and D. Redman.
But I will turn my wishes into prayers unto God for them, and for their Tutors
and Governors that have charge, and should have care to look unto them, and
this is all the good that I can do them, Aug. ad Festum Ep. 167.
Nam and phrenetici nolunt ligari, and lethargici nolunt excitari. Sed
perseveret, etc.

CHAP. VI.
He was much like Galeacius, cap. 7. His proficiency at Oxford but small.
WHat and how great his proficiency was in learning, during his abode in
Oxford, I cannot well tell: only I conjecture it could not be much, because the
time was but short, the means but small for his help, and impediments many to
his hurt, and hinderance in his studies: especially those two, which are blocks
in the way, and great ones too, and do dull the edge of many young Gentlemen's
desire, and delight in Universitie studies; namely, idleness, The causes of it.
and remissness at home in their fathers houses, and ignorance of the true
grounds of Grammar, which they should have been thoroughly acquainted withal,
in the country, before they had been sent up to the University.

Of this mind was Master Ascham, Aschams Schoolmaster, li. 2, in fine.
sometimes Schoolmaster to Queen Elizabeth, who in his book of training up
of youth in the Country to make them fit for the University, has this saying
to the same purpose. As I began plainly and simply with my young Scholar, So
will I not leave him (God willing) until I have brought him a perfect Scholar
out of the School, and placed him in the University, to become a fit Student
for Logic and Rhetoric, and so after to Physic, Law, or Divinity, as
aptness of nature, advice of friends, and Gods disposition shall lead him.

Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, Some unfitness for learning. Plato lib. 3.
de Repub. p. 425. Edit. Steph. 1578. His sufficiency not great for great
employment.
cannot be made of every piece of timber, neither is every man's metal of gold,
but some of silver, some of brass, etc. as Plato has observed in setting
forth the variety of men's natures and dispositions, as they are fitted for
diverse studies and employments. I will not say that this young Gentleman, of
whom we speak, was in his natural disposition of the best timber and temper
to make a Scholar, nor of the best metal to make a man of the best rank for
great employments: but I am well assured, that the Lord was pleased upon such
grounds of nature, and learning as he had given him, to lay a good foundation
of a better building (begun in his youth, and reared up in his riper age) than
all the gold and silver, either of nature or of art, could otherwise have
purchased or provided for him. It is the wisdom and goodness of our God,
when he will furnish men with his graces, and employ them in his service,
sometimes to neglect, and pass by such as are noble by birth, Yet such as God
chose to show his power in.
comely for their person, excellent for parts both of nature and of learning,
and otherwise (in man's judgment) very accomplished persons for such and such
places, and to make choice of some other of a middle, or a mean estate, of
inferior parts and gifts, and very unlikely in the eye of reason, to compass
any great matters, or perform any good services, either to God or man. And
this he has done formerly, Calv. in Act. 1, 26.
and daily does, both in public and in private persons, and callings, that all
might know their sufficiency to be of God, and the efficacy and fruit of all
their desires and endeavors, not of themselves, but from him also, that so (as
good reason is) he that works all might have the glory of all both now and
ever.

I have read of that admirable man Galeacius Caracciolus, As in Galeacius.
Marquess of Vice in Italy, that being but a youth and a mean Scholar, and
little studied, and but lately entered into the School of Christian Religion,
he was much assailed by the Arians and Anabaptists in those parts, that they
might seduce him from the truth, A young Christian, and a great champion.
and entangle him in their gross errors and blasphemous fancies. Who could
have thought, says my Author, that ever he could have resisted, and escaped
the snares of those Heretics, many of them being great and grounded Scholars,
and thoroughly studied in the Scriptures? Notwithstanding by the sincere
simplicity and plainness of the truth of God, and the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, he not only descried the fondness of their heresies, but even untied
the knots, and brake their nets, and delivered himself, and mightily confuted
them.

A rare example, I confess, of Gods power in man's weakness, of his wisdom in
our foolishness, of his bringing to pass great matters by weak means, for
the good of his children, Cic. Acad. g.l. 4. p. 16, 17.
and confusion of his enemies. In which properties and passages, for the most
part, Very like unto him in such things.
Non ovum ovo similius, quano Servilius Servilio: One egg is not more like
another, than this Gentleman of our Country to that Nobleman of Italy. As face
answers to face in the glass (the image expressing the likeness and
lineaments of the visage) so does this example of noble Galeacius reflect and
represent unto us a fair image of this young Gentleman's both wants and
weaknesses, disposition and affection, virtues and graces, power of God in him,
and works of God done by him, as the sequel of this story will make good unto
us.

CHAP. VII.
IT is now time that we bring him down from the University into the Country
His coming from Oxford, 01579.
with such provision as he has both of learning and religion, especially
seeing his careful and provident Father now calls for him home, otherwise to
dispose of him. For being now for ripeness of years and maturity of age fit
for marriage; his Father considering he was the first borne of his strength,
the choicest plant of his stock, and chiefest branch of his vine, began to
cast about where he might bestow him, seat him and set him in the inheritance
of the Lord. After a while, by godly, and good means, a daughter of one
M.Hardware, a worthy and wise Gentleman, having been twice Major of the city of
Chester, His father bestows him in marriage, 1580.
was commended to the Father, and so by him motioned unto his Son. Which
motion from his Father, he did entertain with such respect and reverence, as
became an obedient Son, well knowing and acknowledging that he was unto him
in Gods stead, for directing and disposing of him in this business. And so not
long after, upon the mutual love, In a godly family.
and assent of the parties, and due and joint consent of the Parents, they were
matched and married together in the fear of God.

This was a godly entrance upon Gods Ordinance, the whole carriage of the
business being so warrantable on all sides, as that it was (through Gods
blessing) in the proceeding, as well as in the beginning, most comfortable to
all that had any part or portion in the same.

For here the Father does not marry his Son an infant, or under years,
before he have discretion to know what he does, and how to manage that estate.
Nor does the Son, being come to years, through the rage of lust, steal
himself from his Father, and by wanton attempts, and rash and foolish
contracts, prevent his Fathers choice, and bestow himself at his own
pleasure. Here the Father in a seasonable time, With a godly young gent.
without any long delays, provides his Son a wife out of a good family, a
godly young woman; for quality, and equality, birth and blood, years and
state, true religion, and good disposition, well consorting to himself and his
Son.

And here the Son, With mutual consent.
in all due subjection to his Fathers choice, does with his best affection
receive and take his wife from his Fathers hand. Here is the mutual consent of
the Parents liking and allowing of the match. And here is the ground of the
Childrens love and assent to their own marriage, even the mutual agreement and
consent of their Parents. Xenoph. 7. Cyropaed.
A matter themore remarkable in these days, and well worthy not only
observation, but imitation also of all parents and children in their
matrimonial contracts, especially of gentlemen, and such as are of the better
rank and condition amongst us in these parts. For here we have many both
Gentlemen and others so earthly minded, and covetously affected, that (so soon
as ever their children peep out of the shell) they begin to plot and provide
some one match or other for them, little regarding where they set or sow,
graffe and plant, modo ob rem: Yea the Thistle in Lebanon will not spare to
send to the Cedar in Libanon, 2 King 14.9.
saying, Give thy daughter unto my son to wife, Otherwise than many parents do
though a wild beast in Libanon do tread down the Thistle for his pride and
pains in so doing. Nay the Cedar will not be ashamed to give his sons and
daughters to match with the daughters and sons of the Thistle, 2 Chronicles. 25.18.
the greatest with the meanest, if the Thistle be clad with thistle down, if
land and living, wealth and riches, gold and silver may be had to satisfied
their lust after filthy lucre therewithal. I have seen a Gentleman, yea more
than one, or two either, very careful to have his horse of a generous race,
his hawke of the best aerie, his hound of the best brach, his spaniell of the
best litter, his cattle of the best breed, to serve his humor and his
pleasure, when yet he has had very little care or conscience, to place and
plant his children in such a religious stock and family, as might give him any
good hope of a godly issue, Where lust and lucre make the motion.
and offspring, for his better comfort and credit afterward. Lust, and lucre
made Shechem and his father Hamor, so eager, and earnest to marry with Dina
Jacobs daughter, The soul of my son, says Hamor, longs for your daughter:
And to draw on their people to join with them in giving their sons and
daughters to them also, they could both say, Shall not their cattle, and their
substance, and every beast of theirs be ours? It was not any love unto that
religion which they saw in Jacob and his children, but their inordinate desire
after their wealth and substance, which made them so earnestly to importune
Jacob, to match and marry with them.

And the fathers dropsy and the sons frenzy make up the match.
It is not much otherwise, I fear, with many of us, where the fathers dropsy
and the sons frenzy do either motion or make up many of our marriages.
Witness hereof, in parents such fishing for heirs, such catching up of Wards,
such pursuing of their profits, such hunting after carnal contentmets, such
aspiring of great hearts after great houses, such combining of cosens, in
cousening and cheating practices, to pleasure their friends by the spoil of
their neighbors, as either the Gentiles never heard, nor saw, either named, or
practiced; or if they did, they would have been very much ashamed, that such
things should have been committed without shame amongst them.

Witness also in children, their brutish and base lusts, who having made their
flesh proud by pampering, do now (to satisfy their sensual affections)
contemn and cast off all fear of God and man, Magistrate or Minister, Father
or Governor, and so stealing themselves from their own Parents, and robbing
other parents of their dear children, they do in the rage and heat of their
burning lust, either like fed horses neigh after their neighbors wives, Genesis
36.24.
or run and rush together like Anah his asses and mares, to beget and bring
forth mules, a bastard brood, or a froward and a wicked generation.

But it was far otherwise with this couple of whom we now speak, They live
together in peace and love.
who coming together in the fear of God according to Gods holy ordinance, did
also continue together, with such mutual comfort and contentment, that through
the blessing of God (he dwelling with her as a man of knowledge, and she with
him as a faithful helper) they possessed their vessels in holiness,
Papbnutius Epist. 31. Nicaen. Synod. Hist. Trip. l. 2. c. 14.
and in honor, preserved their chastity in the estate of matrimony, and saw
the fruit of their bodies, as branches of their vine, and their sons and
daughters as Olive plants round about their table, for the space of seventeene
years together.

CHAP. VIII.
His recreation of hunting.
IN the beginning of which time when he was first married, being then in the
prime of his strength, and flower of his age, about the age of one and twenty
years, he was much addicted to the customary and ordinary exercises and
recreations of hunting, and hawking, following the courses, and affecting the
company of such Gentlemen, as being of note and quality, took pleasure in such
things. Insomuch that joining with Ralph Done Esquire (grandfather to that
worthy Knight, Sir John Done, late high Sheriff of the County) for maintaining
their game, and satisfying their humor, and pleasure in these sports, they
kept betwixt them fourteen couple of great mouthed dogs, M. Done eight, and
himself six. I have not much to commend him for, in these matters, In some
abuses reproved.
but rather think him blameworthy for mispending so much precious time in
such carnal pleasures, and wasting his estate upon base and brutish creatures
to serve his lust, Pars^sacrilegii est, rem pauperum dare non paupenbus.
Hicron. ad Pa^mach.
which might have been much better bestowed on his own family, or on the poor
members of Christ to do them good. For if we must give an account at the day of
judgment (as the Judge himself has told us) of every idle word; how much more
accountable shall we be of every idle hour, and of every idle work? And if
when we have plenty of food, we are carefully to gather up the broken meat,
that nothing be lost; how much more careful ought we to be, that we be not
guilty of so wilful and wicked wast, as to give the childrens bread unto dogs,
and that by breaking whole loaves, and pouring out many bushels to maintain
our wide mouthed dogs, when the poor open their mouths wide for want, calling
and crying out for scraps and crummes, and cannot have relief, cannot be heard
crying, for the cry of dogs? A matter so much the more lamentable, because many
are less sensible of the grievousnesse of their sin in this kind. Some
inconveniences of hunting.
Dogs are devouring creatures (and so are Hawks too) 1. They swallow up a man's
best desires and delights. 2. They eat up the best of his days. 3. Devour the
most, of his substance. 4. Spoil a man of his fairest and fittest
opportunities either to be serviceable unto God, or profitable unto men. 5. Rob
wife and children of their means and maintenance, and oftentimes tire upon the
carcasses, and suck the blood of poor tenants, being charged upon them, to
ease their good masters of all charge in keeping of them.
That which Judas spoke falsely and profanely, we may here speak truly and
religiously, Ad quid perditio hac, What need all this waste? for albeit the
Ointment were costly which was powered out on Christ, yet was there no loss nor
waste in this cost, she did well that did it, and he was well worthy of it. But
for Gentlemen, who (having abundance) should honor the Lord with their
substance, and being rich in substance, and being rich in goods, should be rich
in good works, and ready to distribute, as the Apostles charge lies upon
them; for them I say, to be so mindlesse of their own duties, and other men's
necessities, and so sparing and close handed to bestow any thing on Christ, or
Christians, and yet so lavish and profit in spending upon their lusts, they
care not what they regard not how; this may cause us to ask them this
question, which they are as unable, a^ unwilling to answer, Ad quid perditio
haec? wh^ needs all this waste? and if they cannot answer us, their fellow
servants, how will they answer their Lord and Master, that has trusted them
with so many talents, when he shall call them to their reckoning, for the
mispending or misplacing of them?

CHAP. IX.
BUt what is your meaning (will some man say) in all this? Will you be so
strict, as to condemn all Hunting and Hawking as sinful and unlawful? Because
you ask me the question, I will tell you my opinion in few words. Amongst the
creatures of God, since the fall of man, The estate of the creatures since the
fall and before.
there are some noisome and hurtful, some profitable and helpful; and there
are now many of both sorts at enmity amongst themselves, none that are
servicable unto us, but they groan under the bondage and burden of it. But
from the beginning it was not so. The creatures were first all at peace amongst
themselves, all very good in themselves, and good for the use of man. And had
not man sinned, there should never have been any variance or strife amongst
the rest of the creatures, They would never have pursued one another for their
lives, nor have preyed one upon another for their food. The Wolf would have
dwelt with the Lamb, and the Leopard have lain down with the Kid, the Calfe
and the young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little child might have led
them; as the Prophet Isaiah, alluding to that estate, speaks. Whence we may
well conjecture, or conclude rather, that if now the Eagle fly after her prey,
Their enmity a fruit of our sin.
the Hound pursue the Hare, the Hawke ceise upon the Partridge, if now one
beast bite and devour another, if any of the fowls of the air do rend and
tear one another, all this is but the fruit of our sin, which can never be
rightly rejoiced in, so long as the root whence it sprang, is to be mourned
for.

Unlawful to take pleasure in it.
This then is my opinion (which yet I submit to the censure of sounder
judgment) I think it utterly unlawful for any man, to take pleasure in the
pain and torture of any creature, or delight himself in the tyranny, which
the creatures exercise one over another, or to make a recreation of their
brutish cruelty which they practice one upon another.

CHAP. X.
GOd of his goodness has given us liberty (I grant) to take the labor of
some, Genesis 9.2.3. Strab. Geo. l 5. p. 151.
and the lives of others, for our use. As we have the flesh of some to feed
us, the fleece to cloth us, the strength, and speed of some other, to case us,
and both in peace and in war to relieve us. And as he has appointed them to
serve us for our use and comfort, Polyd. de Inven. l. 3. c. 2. etc. 5.
Opusculum horrend. de Feris. Arg. 4.
so has he allowed us means and instruments, some natural, some artificial,
to bring them to our bent, and fetch them into our hands. Hence it is, that we
may warrantably use the natural faculties and qualities of some of the
creatures, which are more familiar unto us, for the overtaking and taking of
those (which being without our reach and compass) are either unwilling to come
near to do us good, or ready still to stand out to do us hurt. So may we use,
and that not only for our profit, Retia ad apros, ursos lupos capien. Authem.
l. 2. de Feudis Nemo.
but for our pleasure also (so it be in Christian discretion and moderation)
the speed and swiftness of the Greyhound to course the Hare, the sight and
flight of the Hawke to take the Partridge, the sent and sagacity of the Hound
to hunt the Dear, the nimblenesse and subtilty of the tumbler to snatch up and
cony-catch the Cony, Plutamb. de curiosit.
even when he seems but to dally and sport with her. And many other such
natural helps may we use for our sober refreshing and delight, as well as for
our profit and benefit; yet still with this caution and condition, Neither in
the enmity, or cruelty of, or toward the creatures.
that we take no pleasure nor delight, either in the enmity of the creatures
one against another, or in their cruelty when they tire upon, and tear one
another, much less that we please our selves in their pains, and not content
to take away their lives once only, unless we sport and delight our selves by
torturing and tormenting of them, to make them dye many deaths together in one
also. I saw once a Gentleman being about to feed his Hawke, pull a live Pidgeon
out of his Faulkners-bag, and taking her first by both wings, The example of
cruelty to the creature.
rent them with great violence from her body, and then taking hold of both
legs, plucked them asunder in like manner, the body of the poor creature
trembling in his hand, while his Hawke was tiring upon the other parts, to his
great contentment and delight upon his fist.

This Act was held by some that stood by, to be somewhat too cruel and
unmencifull, both because of the torturing pains he put the Pidgeon unto, and
for that he seems much to delight in the doing of it. It was lawful for him
(no doubt) to have taken the life of the Pidgeon, and to have given her warm
flesh to his Hawke for her supper, which he might have done by plucking off her
neck to procure a speedy, and prevent a lingering and tormenting death: whereof
the foresaid Gentleman being lovingly and respectfully admonished, he made
presently a resolute, or rather an obstinate answer, viz. That might
peradventure have given his Hawke some contentment, but this he did with
delight, for his love unto his Hawke, and for his own pleasure.

Stiffenesse in opinion without judgment, and fond affection without
moderation, breed no sound resolution, neither in, nor for the truth: but
rather obstinate and strong opposition against it. Even in taking away life,
where the act is lawful, there may be mercy shown, and so it may be done more
lawfully, because it is done mercifully: and in the same act there may be much
cruelty, and so the act for the man, and manner, is made unlawful because the
actor was unmercifull in the doing of it. Polyd. de Jnvent. Rerum. l. 2. c. 11.
and l. 3. c. 5. Authent. l. 2. de Feudis. Nemo retia sua, aut laq.
It is lawful to kill a Bird with a Bolt, to strike a Dear with a Bow, to
shoot at Foul with a Piece, to take Fish with Hooks and Nets, to set Toils
for Foxes, and lay grins and snares for wild and hurtful beasts; but to take
pleasure and delight (after we have their lives in our hands) to peek out
their eyes, to break their legs, to pierce their breasts with Bodkins, their
bodies with Pikes or Swords, and so to lend them a little use of their life,
only to linger and lengthen out the pains of their death: this is brutish
cruelty to a brute creature, and is no small argument of a bloody mind and a
bad disposition, if we will give any credit either to the light of nature
amongst the Heathen, Quintil. l. 5 c. 9. Erasm. ad Episcop. Basil. 15 22
or to the Word of God amongst Gods people. I have read in ancient Writers (and
so Eras^^^ does report that he had done) that the Magistrates amongst the
Grecians, observing a young boy to take great pleasure and delight, when he had
taken young birds, to prick, and peck out their eyes with Pins and Needles;
held him worthy to dye for his sporting cruelty: because they did conjecture,
that such a cruel disposition, and naughty humor in a child, might very
dangerously break out into some brutish and bloody practices, if ever he
should come unto his strength and riper age. And this seems to be the
meaning and intent of the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 22.6 Ex. 23.19. Deu. 14.^^.
when the people of God were forbidden if they found a Birds nest, to take the
damm with the young, and to see a Kid in his mothers milk, lest being accustom
to deal cruelly and unmercifully with birds and beasts, Gal. in E^. cap. 23.^^.
they might grow on to some savage inhumanity, and bloody cruelty, to wards men
also: and that because as a learned man says, Quia his initiis ad crudelitatem
in homines itur, ideo non incommode haec crudelitas in belluas, M. Cartvv. in
P^ov. 12.10.
inhumanitatis cujusdam peragitur. Because by these beginnings of brutish
cruelty toward beasts, men make way for farther proceeding in cruelty toward
men, therefore is this cruelty against beasts, charged for a kind of inhumanity
upon them that use it, much more if they take delight and pleasure in it.

CHAPTER XI.
A God man (says Solomon) is merciful or regardfull of the life of his beast,
but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Pro. 2.10
He according to the wisdom that God had given him, gives it as a note and
token of a godly and good man, to have a tenden care and due regard of his
beast, and that not only in preserving him in life to have his being, but in
keeping him in heart and good likeing, to have (in his kind) a welbeing also,
from his Masters merciful, and wise usage of him. As first to give him his due
allowance of pasture and fodder, Hey and Provender, and that in due season,
with other tending and dressing, according to his nature and condition in due
order, which is all the wages that the poor dumb creature does require of his
master, for his work and labor. Secondly, to moderate his hour and his toil,
his travel and his pains, propo^^ioning his burden to his strength, and his
labor to his power and ability to perform it; not to overcharge him for his
profit, nor overtoyle and tire him out for his pleasure, much less to spend
his spirits, and breath, and life and all, to serve his lust and vain humor.
Thirdly, not to be fierce and furious, cruel and violent, in immoderate
striking and beating, spurring and spurgalling, seutching and lashing, whipping
and scourging, as Balaam in his raging passion, did beat his Ass three times
because he crossed his desire and crushed his foot, and wished also that he had
a Sword in his hand, that he might have slain her therewithal. These things,
and this example I could wish, and do much desire, that diverse of our
Gentlemen, and others also, would well and wisely consider of, who in their
riding and running, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 5.
racing, and chasing for their recreation, as they term it, show as little
compassion to their Horse, as Balaam did to his Ass, and oftentimes either for
their vain pleasures and humor, or for winning their wager, and so for filthy
lucre, do most cruelly, as well as foolishly, spend the breath, and spill the
life of the beasts they ride on, 2 Pet. 2.16
and endanger their own limbs, and lives also therewithal. Certainly if the
dumb Ass speaking with man's voice reproved the foolishness of the Prophet,
for his cruel dealing with her in such rage and passion, and so sharp
correction, he having no good warrant for his way, nor good intention in the
end of it, Number. 22.23.30.
she having been serviceable unto him at other times, and now falling under
him only for fear of the Angel that stood in the way, with a drawn sword in
his hand, ready to kill him: Me thinks these Gentlemen's Horses being so
grossly abused should likewise rebuke the fiercnes and foolishnes of their
masters, if not by man's voice, yet by the voices of their grievous groans which
they may hear from them, when being over-rid, past their strength and breath,
their hearts are ready to break and to burst under them. If our enemies Ass
were lying under his burden, though we bear no good affection to the Master,
yet must we show some compassion to the creature, Exo. 23.5.
we must (as we are able) relieve him and help him up: and is it not then both
sinful, and shameful, to lay such burdens on our own beasts, or wilfully to
force them to such labor and pains, as the powers of nature, and strength of
their bodies cannot bear, nor answer, but by yielding up their lives, together
with their labors and sorrows into our merciless and cruel hands? O that we
could hearken to the voice of Christ, and learn of our Heavenly Father, Luc.
6.36. Psa. 36.6.
to be merciful as he is merciful, whose blested example might teach us to
be merciful both to man and beast, seeing in the sparing of Ninevie, his
compassions were extended not only to the many thousand children which were
amongst them, Drus. in Ion. c. 4.11.
but also to the beasts and multitude of cattle, which were there about them.
Should I not spare Ninevie that great city, Ion. 4.11.
wherein are more than six score thousand persons, that cannot discern betwixt
their right hand and their left, and also much cattle. Such mercy in some
measure did Jacob show (in his journey toward mount Seir) not only to his
children being young and tender, but to his flocks and herds also; that he
would not over-drive them one day, lest the flock should die; Genesis 33.13, 14.
I will lead on softly (says he) as the cattle that goes before me, and the
children shall be able to endure. A good rule for our horse-racers, rank
riders, and hot-spurre hunters (if they have grace to follow it) in all their
recreations and pursuit of their pleasures, to measure their actions, and
moderate their passions by; that as they may and ought to have a care, to
charge no burden upon their children, but such as they may well bear, so they
may not over-draw, nor over-drive their beasts for one day, nor put them to any
toil or travel, but that which they are well able to endure.

CHAP. XII.
THis is then the sum of all, touching hunting and hawking, how far they
are lawful or unlawful in my opinion.

First, it is lawful to hunt and to hawke for the taking of such creatures as
may be useful, or might be hurtful unto us.

Secondly, It is lawful to take pleasure in the natural properties and
qualities of such creatures as are used and exercised in hunting and hawking to
that end: As in the sent and sagacity of the Hound, the swiftness of the
Greyhound, the soaring of the Falcon, and flight of the Hawke, the jumping of
the Leopard, and speed and strength of the Horse.

Thirdly, It is lawful, in hunting and hawking to use both natural and
artificial instruments to take away the lives of some of the creatures, not
only for our profit, but even for our pleasure also.

Fourthly, It is lawful to hunt and hawke, using it as a recreation, not to be
a Hunter, or a Faulkener, as making it a daily occupation.

Fifthly, It is not lawful to take pleasure in the enmity of the creatures, nor
to make their vexation our recreation, putting them to unnecessary and
extraordinary pains in their life, and to like tortures in their death, for
our sport and pleasure only.

Sixthly, It is not lawful to spend more time, no^ so much by much, in these
recreations, as we must and ought to bestow in our honest and lawful callings
and vocations: As no man that means to preserve his health and strength, will
eat more of the sweet sauce, than of the wholesome meat which is provided for
him.

Seventhly, It is unlawful in and for our pleasure in these exercises (which
were intended especially for the refreshing of men's minds, and renewing of
their strength after honest studies and labors) to overtoyle, and tire out our
selves, as did Esau in his hunting, even until he was almost dead for hunger.
Inordinate affections to these games, and immoderate passions in the cross
occurrents of them, do not only mar all the sport, but deprive us of all
lawful use and fruit of them.

Eighthly, It is unlawful, by hunting or hawking, to overcharge our state, or
endammage our neighbors, by Horses and Hounds, costly at home, and cumbersome
abroad, so as we are made less able to do good to them that need, or to our
own families, and more offensive in doing hurt to them that might look for
better things from us.

Lastly, the exercise of hunting has been held in it self not only lawful,
but commendable amongst the ancient Romans, and by the judgment of the wisest
Statesmen, Athen. Dipno. lib. 1. cap. 20.
and Moralists of the world, both for increase of health and strength in the
time of peace; and for fitting and framing of the body to a nimble activity and
agility for sundry feats and exploits in the time of war.

Sertorius a Roman Captain and Commander, Plutarch. in Sertorio.
by his travel and pains which he took in hunting, had so accustomed himself
to hard adventures, and dangerous and difficult passages, that by the
nimblenesse and agility of his body, he was so able either to assail his
enemies, or to wind himself out of their hands also, with so great facility,
if he were in danger or distress, that he overcame them oftentimes (as
Plutarch reports of him) rather by light skirmishes, than by open encounter,
and public fight.

Xenophon, Plato, Aristotle, Plinius Secundus and others, Xeno. in lib. de
venat. Galen. lib. de sanitate tuend. and lib. de Indo parvae pile
have allowed and approved of hunting, both for the execise of the body unto
health and strength, and for inuring and training up of youth in the feats of
Arms, and exploits of war. Xenoph. in Cyropaedia, Plat. lib. 7. de Legib.
Aristot. lib. 1. Polit. Plin. Sec. Lib. 5. Epist. and in Panegyric. And Julius
Capitolinus, records that the Roman Legions were oftentimes exercised in
hunting, Jul. Capitol. in Maxim. p. 10 15.
under Maxinu^nus the Emperor, that so they might be better fitted for warlike
service and employment, Viget. dear milit. lib. 1. cap. 7.9.10.
as occasion should require. So likewise Vigetius reckons of those that have
been well exercised in hunting, running, leaping, swimming, to be fittest for
trained soldiers, and such as are to be chosen, before others, for warlike
affairs. And albeit many of our Gentlemen which are most addicted to this
exercise of hunting, do not always prove the best soldiers; neither have it
ever in their mind, so hotly to pursue their enemies, as they do their game,
or to make the dangers of war the end and aim of their sports in peace:
Galen. de lud. parvae pilae.
Yet seeing in the judgment of Galen, that renowned Philosopher and Physician,
hunting is one of those exercises, which is both healthful for the body, and
delightful for the mind also; we will so far rest in his judgment, and
allow them hunting for an honest recreation, if so be they will admit of Galens
counsel and limitation therewithal. Galen. ibid.
Nimium quod est reprehendo semper, etc. I always blame that which is too
much, and would have every art that we use, Lusus habet laudem si moderatus
erit. Promptuar. Damhouderii, pa. 229: Etlucta and cursu, saltu and certare
palaestra: Haec been convenient, sed moderata, viris. Promptu. Damhouderii, pa.
230. Est modus in rebus, etc. Hor.
used in moderation, Quae si modum excedat, jam bona esse desinit. Which so
soon as it begins to exceed measure, it presently cease to be good any more.
Ludendi est quidam modus, Cic.lib. I. Off.

Thus by occasion of this young Gentleman his hunting, keeping his Dogs and
following hi^ Hounds with so great care and cost, so eager desire and delight:
we have for a while held hunting it self in chase, and so followed the sent,
that we might find out the game, in the nature, end, and use of it, how it may
serve for profit, and how for pleasure, how we ought to follow it for the
manner and measure, that it may do us good; and not to exceed therein, lest it
do us hurt.

CHAP. XIII.
His more effectual conversion and the fruits of it, Cap. 14
HAving now spent some few years of his youth in the pursuit of these
vanities, lest he should trifle out his precious time in such carnal pleasures
any longer: The Lord began to awaken him to some better sight and sense of his
error and offense in this course, and to prepare him now as a vessel of
honor for better service and employment both in his own, and in his masters
house.

Upon his fathers death.
In the year 1587. It pleased tho Lord to call unto his mercy his worthy
Father, upon whose decease he being much perplexed both in mind and state,
some sorrows and fears, thoughts and cares began to stir and work within
him, and the Lord (who best knows the fittest times and seasons for his own
work) began to work also for his more effectual calling and reformation
therewithal. And this he did by the rebukes of his Word and checkes of his
Spirit, convincing his judgment, and changing his mind and heart, By Gods
good means.
from the love of baser, to a delight in better things: For now he began to
search his heart and try his ways, and to call himself to an account for his
former courses, and measuring all those things by the line of the Word, and in
the balance of the Sanctuary, which he had found or felt before in the
pleasures of this life, he saw there was nothing at all, in them all, but
vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit. Not very violent.
And albeit the pangs of his conversion, and pains of his new birth were not
so violent as others of Gods childrens have been; or as Paul's, Constantines,
and Luthers were, yet were his passions and affections, at this time, not much
unlike unto S. Austins, upon the point of his conversion, who being now weary
of the ways of vanity, and tired out with the weight of his own sin, in a
holy desire to cast off the burden that did press him down, and to shake off
the pleasing sins that did entangle him so fast, powered out his heart in
prayers and tears before the Lord, after this manner: Vsquequo Domine
irasceris? in finem? Ne memor fueris iniquitatum mearum antiquarum. How long
Lord will thou be angry? for ever? Like unto S. Austins.
Be not mindful of my old sins. Quamdiu? quamdius? cras, and cras? Quare non
hodie? quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae? How long? how long? To
morrow? and to morrow? Why not to day? why not this hour is there not an end
of my former filthiness? O happy Austin, and holy man of God, that was first
thus humbled, that he might be exalted! And yet more happy, that having the
Lord to seek him as a lost sheep, he finding himself to go astray, began
presently to seek the Shepherd, that sought him; and happy most of all in
this, that in so seeking the Lord, he did both find him and was found of him.
In many particulars
I will not compare this Gentleman for measure of grace, with S. Austin, but
for the nature, manner, means, and time, and truth of their conversion, he may
well go hand in hand with him. 1. Austin was about 32 years of age when he was
effectually called and converted, and so was he. 2. Austin had at that time
many combats betwixt Reason and Religion, the flesh and the spirit; and so had
he. 3. Austin had his heart full of prayers, and his eyes full of tears, when
he sought after God; and so had he. 4. Austin had and held sweet communion with
God by Colloquies, Soliloquies, holy and heavenly meditations; and so did he.
5. Austin having once tasted the sweetness of the Lord, thought nothing so
pleasant as to forgo the pleasures of his former vanities, Aug. Cons. lib. 9.
cap. 1.
Quam suave mihi subito factum est carere suavitatibus nugarum? And held it now
a joy to renounce those joys and toys, which before he was afraid to lose. Et
quas amittere metus fuerat, eas jam dimittere gaudium erat; And such for all
the world were this Gentleman's desires and delights, such his disposition and
affection, when once he had tasted how sweet the Lord was, and had drunk of the
pleasures of his house somewhat more freely and fully than formerly he had done:
Whereof Austin gives the reason for them both, Tu enim Domine, qui vera es, and
summa suavitas, ejiciebas eas a me, ejiciebas, and intrabas pro e^s, omni
voluptate dulcior, omni luce clarior, etc. For thou O Lord who art the true and
chief sweetness it self, did cast out of me those pleasures of vanities,
thou did cast them out, and did enter in thy self in stead of them; being
unto me more delicious than any delight, more clear than any light whatsoever.
6. Austins conversion was so blessed of God, that it was an occasion of the
conversion of others of his friends, as of Alipius, Nebridius, and Evodius,
near about the same time. And so was this Gentleman's conversion blessed of God
also, being attended and accompanied with the conversion of diverse of his
friends, brothers, and sisters, and neighbors, who being brought on by his
good means, and Gods blessing, unto a love and liking of the truth of the
Gospel, were also effectually called to the profession, and practice of the
same. 7. Austin being converted, did not only cease from the practice of his
former vanities, and old sins of his youth, but he renounced the heresy of
the Manichees, wherewith he was tainted, and did for go his Rhetoric Lecture
at Millan, fearing to do hurt unto his Scholars any longer, by poisoning
their minds with errors and lies, and corrupting their hearts with words of
vanity. And so did this Gentleman utterly renounce the pleasure, and practice
of his former vanities, and purge out of his heart the poison of Popish
errors, wherewith formerly he had been infected, and would never any more
either read, or hear such Lectures of vanity as formerly he was wont to do. 8.
Lastly, Austin upon his conversion began to seek and serve the Lord with great
power, and zeal, both in his person and calling, standing and striving for the
truth against a lie, yea every lie that durst confront it, or assail it. And
so did this Gentleman for his calling, and standing (according to the gifts and
graces which God had given him) though herein much inferior to Augustine, (I
confess) who is gone before him, yet superior by much to many, if not the
most of his rank, that either lived with him, or shall follow after him. The
truth of all which specialties, shall God willing be seen in diverse and sundry
particulars more plainly, in the course of his life, and sequel of this story.


CHAP. XIV.
SOme of the first, though not the fairest fruits of his change and conversion,
The fruits of his conversion. First as heir of the family in civil matters.
Secondly, cap. 18. His reformation.
began then to appear, when first of an heir he became an inheritor of his
Fathers state, and took possession of his house and lands. For being of
himself unfit (as many young heirs are) either to undertake such a charge or
manage such an estate, as by the fall of their parents is fallen unto them: he
notwithstanding (by the mercy and grace of God) at his first entrance, began to
cut off, and cast out all lets and impediments which might hinder him, and to
use and embrace all helps that might further him, in running the race which
the Lord had now set before him: for whereas there were two special matters of
importance that might now perplex him, first, how upon so small beginnings he
might sufficiently provide for his own family: Removing impediments.
and secondly, how (his father having charged him and the land, with the
portions of twelve children, sons and daughters, which he left behind him)
he might faithfully discharge that trust, which his father reposed in him: he
both wisely and conscionably first of all, laid away Hawks and Hounds, and
cast off for ever his wide mouthed Dogs, and utterly ceased any longer, to
follow them, or their followers. And which is yet more, Renouncing his
pleasures.
to cut off all occasions of wastefull and riotous expense both of time and
other things, having a goodly Park left him on the backeside of his house,
well stored and furnished with fallow Dear, he presently killed up the game,
and disparked the Park, and drawing himself to as narrow a compass as well
he could, lived so frugally and contentedly (and yet for his place very
competently and orderly) that he provided sufficiently for his own family, His
Frugality.
and faithfully discharged himself of his fathers charge, paying his brethren
and sisters all their portions, and placing them in marriage, and otherwise
very comfortably, as his own words will bear me testimony. This charge
through Gods assistance (says he) I well discharged. His fidelity.
And married well all my sisters, and preferred all my brothers, and none of
them offended. A rare example I confess, considering the young heirs, that
come to their lands in our time; for as commonly, they are sick of the father
(as Esau was, before his day, looking for his death) so when they come on a
sudden, to so great an estate, A rebuke to other men's prodigality, and
infidelity.
their wealth many times overgrowes their wit, and being now masters over their
own means, they are so far from quenching the heat of their former lusts,
that now they add fuel unto the fire, and cast oil into the flame, and
turning their liberty into licenciousnesse, and the grace of God into
wantonness, they become and grow like Infidels and Turks, neither providing
for their own families, nor regarding their brethren nor sisters, being yet
their own flesh and blood, and their own fathers issue and offspring as
themselves are. A fair check and rebuke also, may hence be taken for such and
so many of our Gentlemen of riper age, And a check to some others obstinacy in
their old sins.
as having been a long time ensnared in the lusts of youth, and fast bound
with the cords of their pleasing sins, have not yet (for all the means of
grace) after twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty years, obtained so much grace and
strength from the Lord, as this Gentleman, to break from the power, and cease
from the practice of their old sins, but are still a childish and vain in
their sports, and pursuit of their pleasures, as if all this while they had but
only sipped and tasted of Circes cup, but now are resolved to take yet a deep
and a full draught of it, even until they be dead drunk with their sensual
delights, and drop down in a moment into hell, from the hight of their jolly
vanities. O that the voice of Christ in his Word might rouse them and raise
them up out of this sensuality and security! Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Quia virtutibus
amaritudo permista est, vitia vero voluptate condita sunt: illa offensi, hac
deliniti feruntur in praeceps, ac honorum spem fulsi, mala pro bonis
amplectuntur. Lastant. Lib. 1. de falls. Rel. August. Confess. lib 8. cap. 5.
Insitam veritati austeritatem, natura hominum proclovis in vit^a pati non
potest. Lact. de Falsa Rel. Lib. 1.
They heat this voice and are many of them (I am persuaded) convinced by it,
but they return no answer, but as Augustine speaks, Verba tantum lenta, and
somnolenta: modo, ecce modo, sine paululum: A few silly and sleepy words, anon,
lo, anon; set me alone a little. But as it follows, Modo and modo, non
habent modum, and sine paululum, in longum ibit. Anon, and anon, will never
have done, and a little forbearance will grow to custom and continuance.

But seeing neither the precepts of the Word, nor the Pattern and example of
this worthy Gentleman living amongst them, nor the light which shines from
others round about them, is of any prevailing power for their conversion and
reformation: we will leave them as we find them, praying the Lord to amend
what is amiss, and to be merciful unto them, if he have any mercy in store
for them.

CHAP. XV.
Secondly, other fruits of his conversion in matters of religion, as Governor
of his family. In setting up religion in his family. 1 Chronicles 13.13, 14.
ANd so we proceed to some other fruits of this Gentleman's effectual calling,
that (so far as he has showed forth the virtues of him that called him out
of darkness into his mavelous light, he may yet be a lamp to give light
unto others, by the course and records of his life, even to such as desire to
be followers of such a leader, in the ways of grace and peace. After the Lord
was pleased thus to reveal himself in his Son Christ unto him, and to cause
the light of his countenance to shine into his heart, he could never have rest
in himself, until he had with Obed Edom, brought the Ark of God into his
house: and that he did with much joy and comfort, raising up an Altar for Gods
worship in his family, and so making it a little Bethel, a house of God, a
pledge of his presence, and place for his service. For thus began he to think
with Jacob, Ge. 30.30.
when shall I provide for mine own house also? Thus did he resolve with
Joshua, Josh. 24. Laid down first in the generals.
though not one of his neighbor Gentlemen would so resolve with him, Yet I and
my house will serve the Lord. Thus did he with Abraham, Command his children
and his household after him, that they might keep the way of the Lord, to do
justice and judgment. Thus did he govern his house with David, walking
wisely in the midst of it, setting his eyes or favor and respect upon the
godly, but not suffering a wicked person to abide in his sight. This was the
conquest of his faith whereby he did overcome the world. This was the work of
grace, being illightened himself to illighten others, converted himself to
convert others, being come unto Christ himself, to call on others to come unto
him, and abide with him. And for want of this victory of faith, and power of
grace, there is but few of our Gentlemen, that in these days have their houses
and families so well ordered and reformed, so well purged from old sins, and
seasoned so well with true religion, as this our Cornelius had, being himself
a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house.

CHAP. XVI.
ALL this that we have laid down in the generals may be seen more evidently
in the particulars, concerning the manner and order of the government of his
family, his holy exercises, and religious duties, And then in the specialties
and particulars. 1. In his family, and 2. In the assembly,

constantly and conscionably performed in the same. Wherein, his first, and
principal care was for his wife and children, that he might dwell with her as
a man of knowledge, and bring them up in the nurture and information of the
Lord; both which he through the good hand of God upon his holy labors, so
effectually brought to pass, that he had much comfort, though mingled with
some cross, in their well doing. In his family. 1. Dwelling with his wife as a
man of knowledge, in Peace and love as equal yoke fellows.
His wife, though well affected before, in matters of religion, and much
exercised in the duties and services of the same, yet now by her husbands
gracious and good example, in the practice and power of it, and his holy and
wholesome admonitions, instructions, exhortations, and wise and mild rebukes
also, as occasion required; she was brought on to a higher pitch, and degree
of knowledge and of grace, and became a faithful helper unto him, in the best
things, and a careful yoke fellow, to bear, and to draw in the yoke of Christ,
(both in doing and suffering the will of God together with him) as a true
Christian. A good example to husbands
A good example for such good men, as desire to be good husbands also, to
tender, and procure their wives comfort and welfare, as well in matters of
religion, tending to their salvation; as in the affairs of this life, to lead
and guide them aright, for their outward peace and contentment. And wives
As also for such good women that would be reckoned in the number of gracious
and good wives, that they be (in meekness and humility') so subject unto their
husbands, that they may be teachable to learn, and tractable to observe and
obey whatsoever, in and for the Lord, they shall require of them. This also
discovers the miserable condition of such families, A discovery of the misery
of unequal yokefellowes, Manifested in four instances.
where the governors are unequally yoked, being diverse both in opinion and
affection, touching matters of Religion; and so much distracted and disordered
in the performance of such religious duties: as the Lord in their families
requires at their hands, which I see not how it can possibly be otherwise,
when the husband draws one way, and the wife another. As first, when the
husband is an Atheist that calls not upon God, no prayer in his family, no
thanksgiving at his Table for his meat, no reading of holy Scripture: the wife
a Papist, contenting her self with her blind devotions, upon her beads and
books, in her private chamber and her closet, to feed and cherish her seduced
heart, and corrupted humor therewithal. Secondly, when the husband is a
profane Esau, minding only earthly things, and embracing, like Demas, this
present world, follows with great eagerness the profits and pleasures of
this life: the wife a godly matron like Sarah in her Tent, faithful and
painful, careful of her family and friends, with Mart ha, and conscionable
of that one thing which is needful, with Mary, having chosen the better part
which shall not be taken from her. Thirdly, when one thinks every little too
much, or enough at least, in Gods service, the other thinks again, all that
they can do too little, to testify their thankfulness and faithfulness to
God, in the religious duties of their families. Fourthly, when the one contents
himself with a form of godliness, putting a shag-hared servingman to read a
few cold prayers, and a simple and silly child to say grace, and so slubber
over their morning and evening service, being as well pleased as if they had
gotten Micha his Levite into their house, or one of Jeroboams priests to do
them service, in worshipping the Calf which is set up amongst them.

The other is much blamed for that, rejecting all pharisaicall formality in
religion, they desire such effectual and powerful means of grace, as may
enable them to show forth the power and fruit of godliness in a good
conversation. Alas! what distractions and contentions must here needs be? what
distemper and disorder both in the governors, and government of such a family
must needs arise? where husband and wife (who should being yoke-fellows, draw
equally in one yoke) are yet unequally yoked, ^oves qui jungit adaratru^, equos
ad currum pares eligit and ut aetas conveniat and forma, Amb. lib. 8 Epift. 86.
ad Paternum.
that when the one draws forwards, the other draws backwards, the one puts
his shoulder to the burden, the other withdrawes himself from it, or stands in
open opposition against the bearing of it. It was far otherwise with this
Gentleman and his faithful yoke fellow, who being both of one mind and one
heart, in the profession of the Gospel, and both well affected, and acquainted,
with the power and practice of religion, became as lamps and lights to the rest
of their family, by their holy example, and godly conversation amongst them.

CHAP. XVII.
2 In their godly education of their children.
THeir children they brought up in the knowledge and fear of God, laying the
foundation, by continual catechizing of them in the principles and grounds of
true Christian Religion, and building thereon farther, by such sentences and
portions of holy Scriptures, 1 By instruction.
as might best fit their tender years, and make the easiest impressions of
grace and truth in their hearts. And because he well knew that it was not
enough for him(...), i. to put good things upon their minds, but also(...), to
nurture them by correction, as occasion should require, 2 By correction.
and so both by the word and by the rod to bring them up in the information of
the Lord: He therefore did not spare to use the rod of correction as Gods
healing medicine to cure the corruptions of his children, and to heal their
souls of their sins by the same. Wherein if at any time his heart were so
overheated by his hatred of their sin, Wherein if his passions exceeded, He
was humbled.
and zeal for Gods glory, that he did either speak unadvisedly with his lips,
or deal too violently with his hands, He was afterward much troubled at it,
and much humbled for it; that going about to heal others, he had so rashly
procured a stroke and a wound unto himself, Healed.
for which now he found no better remedy than to have recourse unto his
heavenly Father by humble and hearty prayer, who heals all the infirmities
both of Parents and children, and forgiveth all their sins, And bettered in
4. particulars. Optabatur in eo, quod in aliis timebatur, ut irasceretur. Amb.
de obit. Theod.
when they seek unto him. The fruits of which his holy desires and endeavors
he found and reaped in due season. For first he became hereby more watchful
over his spirit and speech, in all such occasions, and provocations to passion
and distemper. Secondly, he grew more moderate in correction, keeping himself
within the bounds of it, discretion and compassion. Thirdly, when his passions
were most vehement against sin, he much assuaged the heat thereof, 3 In the
governing of his servants.
by his love and tender affections toward the sinner. Fourthly, He lived to
see those whom he most sharply corrected, effectually converted and reformed.

CHAP. XVIII.
I Come now after the branches of his vine to the plants of his vineyard,
namely his men, 1 In choosing.
and maidservants, amongst whom there was not one idle and unprofitable
person. Where, I hold him worthy great commendation, first for his godly care
in choosing: And secondly, for his good conscience in ordering and using of them
(as he did) so well, both in their persons and in their callings. As for their
choice, this was wont to be his course. As he heard of any that began to set
their faces toward Jerusalem, or to look toward heaven, as if they meant in
good earnest to travel that way: or of such as had traveled many Sabbath
days journey that way already: his heart was presently toward them, so that
by good and fair means he endeavored to draw such into his service, and if
he had place of employment for them, to plant them in his family, above any
other persons whatsoever. So that in a short time he was so well provided and
furnished with honest and faithful, godly and gracious servants, both men, and
women, that he had now, as Paul says, Philemon had once, a Church in his
house. And no marvel, seeing for continual supply there were many that were
religious, who would willingly offer themselves and make means to be admitted
into his house, and to do him service, until they were like David's host, a
great host, like the host of God, 1 Chronicles. 12.22. A full household, and gracious
family, where Husband and wife, parents and children, governors and servants
are all, either truly religious, or at least such, as do orderly and duly
submit themselves to all duties of religion in the family. Now for the ordering
and using of his servants, he did reckon of such as most faithful ever unto
him, as he found ever most faithful unto God, as did Constantius when he
purged his Court. And such he did much esteem, and entirely affect, as his
brethren and fellow servants in and under Christ Jesus. 2. For the using of his
servants.
Yea he made them sometimes as his companions in his familiar and kind usage of
them; sometimes, as his counselors, to advise, confer, consult, and resolve
with them, in matters of conscience, or of other importance sometimes as his
comforters in afflictions and tentations, that he might so receive some comfort
and refreshing from them.

Some of special note, as Old Robert.
Among the reft he had one of special note, an old disciple like Mnason, as a
father in his family to the rest of his servants, his name Robert Pasfield, but
better known by the name of old Robert, a man utterly unlearned, being unable
to read a sentence, or write a syllable: yet was he so well taught of God, that
by his own industry and Gods blessing upon his mind and memory, he grew in
grace as he did in years, and became ripe in understanding, and mighty in the
Scriptures. Yea he was so well acquainted with the history of the Bible, and
the sum and substance of every Book and Chapter, that hardly could any ask
him, where such a saying or sentence were, but he would with very little ado,
tell them in what Book and Chapter they might find it. Insomuch that he became
as a very profitable Index to the family, to call to mind what they had
learned, and to recover what they had lost by slip of memory: and not only so,
but a godly Instructor, and Teacher of young professors also, to acquaint them
with the Word, and to exercise their hearts unto godliness, by the precepts
and examples thereof, which he constantly did both at home and abroad, as he
had leisure and liberty so to do. Now if that which I have often heard be true,
that Bonus Textualis, is Bonus Theologus; A good Text-man is a good Divine;
then may Old Robert in our country proceedings, be allowed for a Divine, and a
Doctor also. He had many other good parts in him, a good gift in prayer, and
praise, very willing and well able to confer of good things, careful to
hear the Word read or preached, and to help his own, and his friends memories
by repetitions and some other means: as of a strange Girdle which, as I shall
show you, he had framed for himself to that purpose. The Girdle was of leather,
long and large: Old Robert his Girdle for help of his memory.
so that for compass it would go twice about him: This (for the help of his
memory) he divided into several portions and parts (as a Carpenter does his
Rule) and allotteth every Book of the Bible in their order, to some of those
divisions: As Genesis to the first, Exodus to the second, etc. Then for the
distinction of the Chapters of every Book, he annexed a long point, or thong
unto the several divisions, and made knots by fives or tens thereupon, to
distinguish the chapters of that book, he had also other, either points or
rushes to divide the chapters into their particular contents, or several
parts, or verses, as occasion did require.

This instrument of his own invention, he framed and used (as others do their
pen and writing) for the better help of his understanding, and relief of his
memory in his hearing of the Word preached; which he did with so good effect
and fruit, in observing all the points and Scriptures alleged in a Sermon,
and binding them upon the points, and partitions of his Girdle, as he heard
them, that in repeating of the Sermon afterward, he himself had great
benefit, and many other professors, much comfort and help, by his handling of
his girdle and fingering the points, and divisions of it.

A matter of such wonder unto all that ever saw it, and heard him repeat a
Sermon by it, that his worthy Master thought the girdle worthy to be kept and
reserved in his Study, as a monument of Gods mercy and old Roberts both piety
and industry, that he might be known to have been neither idle nor
unprofitable in partaking of the blessing of the ministry. A reb uke to
mindlesse and careless persons.
This man, and his girdle, shall rise up in judgment against many of greater
place than himself, who being both mindlesse in observing, and careless in
retaining what they hear, or have heard in the preaching of the Word, will
neither stir up the graces of God which are in them, nor exercise the
natural parts aright which God has given them, nor practice any artificial
helps of their own or other men's invention, for relief of their own
weakness both in mind and memory, and for supply of other men's wants,
according as their necessities may require. Hence also may we raise a just
rebuke of many of better parts, who having many helps both by arts and tongues,
Logic and learning, Art of memory, writing by characters, or otherwise; And to
such as use not their skill, and other faculties aright.
do not yet set themselves and their gifts a work in any good course, to make
the best benefit of that which they hear for themselves, that so they might be
more profitable unto others, according to the places and callings wherein the
Lord has set them.

CHAP. XIX.
His familiar conversing with old Robert.
THis old Robert though but a servant, yet being rich in grace, his Master did
so much esteem and affect, that he would as often as conveniently he could,
have him near unto him, he would often go to the Hop-yard, or threshingflore
(where commonly his business lay) to talk and confer with him, and sometime
for his own exercise to take some part and portion in the labor with him
also. This he did for their mutual comfort and contentment, in provoking one
another to holy duties, and communicating such things as they had read or
heard, for increase of godliness and goodness one in another.

Such is the nature and temper of humility and sincerity. The master never a
whit the more abased, because he did bow himself to the low condition, and
company of a servant; nor the servant ever a jot more proud or presuming,
because of this his Masters kind and Christian dealing with him. They were both
of them gainers, and no loosers, by such intercourse and exchange of Christian
offices. Both gainers by it.
Which I could wish, some of our Gentlemen and Gentlewomen did well weigh and
consider, who think they should lose, or let fall much of their greatness, if
they should use to speak kindly, or talk familiarly with their godly
servants, about their own occasions, or other good things, for by this stately
strangeness, they make themselves less able to do good unto others, and
deprive others of their liberty and opportunity to do that good, they desire
unto them again, and so both are losers and neither of them any gainer by this
stately stiffnesse.

Others dealing otherwise are losers by their statelines.
It was not thus betwixt Abraham and Eliezar, Moses and Joshua, Eli and Samuel,
Naaman and his servants, Job and his maidservant, David and his family, Christ
and his Apostles, Paul and his followers, all these serving one another in
love, and every member seeking to succor each other, the eye the hand, and the
hand the foot: the foot, and eye, and hand the whole body.

Thus they continued many years together master and servant, faithful in
their places, and fruitful in every good work, either doing good, or
receiving good for themselves and for others in the family: Mis kind usage of
him.
wherein yet this is farther very remarkable in this gracious Gentleman, that
when this his old servant became impotent through age, having spent about
thirty years in his service, and now growing toward fourscore, as unfit for
country labor, as old Barzilla was for court service; yet was he so far from
casting him off, or turning him away in his old age, that for many years
together he did nourish and feed him, with some of the best morsels from his
own table, In his old age.
by his own hand, permitting him to sit in the parlor or buttery not far
from him, that even at meal time he might as occasion served confer with
him. And thus he dealt with him in great mercy and compassion, as if he had
been his own brother, of the same loins and womb with him, even all the
days of his life until his dying day, and the very hour of his death.

Until the day and hour of his death.
A good example for rebuke of many merciless and profane Masters, who deal
no better oftentimes with their impotent and old servants, than they do with
their old Dogs; first grow weary of them, and then turn them off their hand
without any means or maintenance, To the reproof of merciless masters. 1 Samuel 30.13.
to live on a Commons or dye in a ditch: being herein more like unto that
cursed and cruel Amalakite (than unto this Gentleman, or any good Christian)
who forsook his servant, and left him in an open field behind him, in great
danger, and distress, because he fell sick upon his hand.

CHAP. XX.
BUt now to leave old Robert in rest and bliss with God, we are concerning his
Master farther to understand, that albeit he showed much respect and love unto
this ancient professor his faithful servant, yet did he wisely proportion his
regard and care of, and over the rest, in their places, to their good
contentment and his own comfort. Some he made choice of to be near about him
for attendance, Acts 10.7.
at home and abroad (and they such as did fear God) as did that good
Cornelius, who had ever devout men about him, His due regard to the rest of his
servants.
that waited on him continually. These were more happy than their other fellow
servants, because they were ever with him, to whom he was ever ready either to
impart and offer some wholesome words of admonition or instruction, or to
confer, reason, object, and answer in points of religion for increase of
knowledge, conscience and obedience, and that mutually and friendly, Some
attending upon him.
as they did serve him at his Table or did walk or ride abroad with him. He
never thought his Table better furnished, than when he had gracious and godly
persons to sit with him, or stand about him, nor his meat better seasoned,
than when it was poudered with such salt of wholesome words, and holy wisdom
as might minister grace unto the hearers that were present with him. Nullus
enim suavior animo cibus est, quam cognitio veritatis, Lact. lib. 1. de falsa
Reli. O how contrary unto this course, is their carriage, who like none so
well, as a knave to attend them, a flatterer to humor them, and a fool to
make them merry at their meat. It was the wisdom of Solomon to speak of
wisdom, both in natural and spiritual things, even at his Table; in so much
that the Queen of Sheba admired what she saw, 1 Kin. 10.8.
and heard; and reckoned his servants happy, that might then stand before him
and hear his wisdom. Shall I crave leave of our wise men of the world, to
tell them that in their courses they come so far short, not only of Solomon,
but even of this Gentleman, that they are not much better, than Salomons
fools, whose heads are so shallow, Prove. 1.12. and 9.6.
that they have no brains to speak of knowledge, nor of any divine things:
and their hearts so empty of grace and goodness, that they take no pleasure in
such company, nor in such talk, and conference at their tables, where they
imagine they cannot be merry if God stand by, nor be at any quiet in their
mind, if there be any good man there, that offers any occasion to speak of
holy and of heavenly things. Thus dealt he with the better sort of his servants
that were near about him, and attended on him. Some laboring for him.
And for the rest that were employed in his husbandry and business abroad, he
was not forgetful, but mindful of their good. He allotted them their places
according to their skill and knowledge, and proportioned their labor to their
strength, and their wages to their labor, ever allowing them liberty and
leisure, means and helps to accomplish the works which they took in hand;
and never suffering them to want any encouragement, which might make them
cheerful and faithful, in his, and Gods service. To which end he would often
(as other his greater occasions would permit) go abroad amongst them, His over
seeing of them, and wise dealing with them.
both to see the work, and to encourage the workmen. At which time, that both
he and they might go about earthly business with heavenly minds, he was wont
to raise matter of speech and conference, sometimes from their callings,
works, wages sometime from the good creatures of God, their nature, end, and
use: sometimes from the season of the year, the Spring, Seedings, Summer,
Harvest, Winter, fair or foul weather, and the like; and to apply these to
such places of the Scriptures as they had heard or read the same things in, for
their farther instruction and edification. Now for their work, what he saw was
well for manner and matter, he did likewise well approve and accept; and by a
due and kind commendation of their care and pains, he provoked them to
continue in well doing. What he saw was amiss, if it were of small moment, he
would wisely pass by it, if of greater weight, he would admonish them of, and
reprove them for it, yet not with any railing or reviling words (for ought that
ever I could hear) but in words of wisdom as became a holy man, and a good
Master: sometimes (it may be) more sharply, because the nature of the fault,
and disposition of the offender, might so require it, and sometimes more
mildly, as he found the party more sensible of his fault, and more tractable
for amendment. There was not the meanest amongst them, but he would labor to
cheer him, and encourage him in his service: and if he saw them any more
towardly, in duties of Religion, he would so much the more kindly speak unto
them, and more willingly confer with them. They did usually also exercise
themselves unto godliness, by mutual exhortations, and admonitions, drawing
on one another in every good way, and praying unto God in their courses
together, in the evening for a blessing upon their desires and labors, which
they ordinarily performed in the Kitchen, more privately, after prayer in the
Parlour with the whole family. So that by this means, the Master governing
religiously, His family a religious nursury.
and the servants obeying conscionably, his family became a common nursury for
the Churches of God, in the whole country. For, 1. Such of his servants as
were inclineable unto marriage, he provided well for them, and sent them out
being married in the fear of God, to raise and establish the worship of God in
their own houses. And such as were single persons, By disposing.
as he had any mind to spare them and to part with them, he either bestowed
them in other families, or suffered them to plant themselves in such houses,
where they might mutually both join, and joy together in Gods service, to the
spreading abroad of Religion, and farther enlarging of the kingdom of Christ
Jesus. Or dispersing his servants.
And then he made supply again, by taking out of the country such of their
sons and daughters, as were fittest for his planting or watering in that part
of the Lords Vineyard, or for sowing or setting in the Lords field.

CHAP. XXI.
THus far we have heard in what manner he governed, His course in Family
duties toward God.
and ordered his family in their several places, for the better discharge of
their duties amongst themselves: Now we are farther to observe his course and
carriage, in those exercises and religious duties, which he daily and duly
performed morning and evening with his family, in the worship of God, for their
mutual comfort, and for Gods praise and glory.

This Gentleman knew right well, that family exercises were the very goads and
spurs unto godliness, the life and sinnews of grace, and religion, The
necessity and excellency of family duties. Example in Abrah. Genesis 18.19. in
Cornelius Act. 10.2. in Lors and Eun. 2 Timothy 1.5.
the bonds and cords of love, drawing or leading to perfection. Like the coals
taken from the Altar, whereby both iniquity is purged, and men's hearts are
inflamed with holy and heavenly affections toward God, and good things. Like
the planting and watering of the Lords Vineyard, whereby every branch is made
more fruitful. Like the private training of Christian Soldiers, that they may
be fit, and more fit for public service. Like the nursing or nurturing of the
children, or heirs of great families, where some are fed with milk, and some
with stronger meat, all with wholesome food, until they be brought on to
their Fathers house, to be farther refreshed and feasted at his Table.

Of the soldiers Harness.
Lastly, he knew well that Family exercises in religious duties, were like the
putting on, and buckling unto us the whole armor of God, that so being
furnished with all offensive and defensive weapons, we may stand fast in the
evil day, and go through the duties of every day also, with more ease and
comfort.

His preparation in 4. things. 1 In his vigilance.
And upon these and such like serious considerations, he exercised himself and
his family unto godliness after this manner. First, for preparation, and
secondly, for execution. For preparation: It was his ordinary course to rise
very early in the morning, before the rest of his family, betwixt three and
four of the clock in Summer, and at, or before five in the Winter, so that by
this his vigilance and industry, he gained the liberty and opportunity most
commonly of an hour or two before he rung the bell, to awaken the rest of his
family: which time he bestowed most graciously, first in private prayer for
himself, 2 In his private prayer.
and for every soul in his family, making mention of some more particularly by
name, as their occasions or afflictions might move him thereunto: and giving
thanks to God therewithal, for such mercies and comforts, as both he and
they had received that night past, and formerly also from his hand. Secondly, 3
Meditation.
in meditation upon some part of Gods Word and works, wherewith he did season
his mind and refresh his heart, endeavoring so to set the Watch aright in the
morning, that the clock might go the better all the day after. 4 Industry in
writing
Thindly, he did as he had occasion usually write out fair, some part of
such Sermons, as he had by a running hand taken from the mouth of the
Preacher, for renewing and increasing of the benefit, and comfort which he had
reaped and received by the same. Thus did he watch over his family, when they
were at rest themselves, and commend them unto God by his prayers, before they
could open their lips, to speak unto him by their own words. Thus did he
awake with God in the morning, that he might the better awake unto
righteousness, and walk before God in holiness and uprightness all the day
after, even until the evening.

CHAP. XXII.
2. Hisexecution and performance of his family exercise.
THis he did by way of Preparation. Now for execution, in the performance of
his family exercises, he did discharge himself after this manner. After they
were come together upon the ringing of the bell, they did all very reverently
frame and compose themselves to stand in Gods presence, and then he himself
lifting up his heart with his hands unto God in the heavens, First a little
short prayer.
began his morning exercise after this manner, Blessed Lord God, and our most
merciful father in Christ Jesus, we thy poor children do humbly beseech thee
graciously to assist us by thy holy Spirit, in this our morning exercise, that
we may faithfully perform the same to thy praise and our comfort, and that for
Christ his sake our only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

This set form of his short prayer before his Morning and evening exercise, In
a set form.
I do the more willingly set down, that they may see how far they were
deceived, and what wrong they did him, who held him to be an utter adversary
to all set forms of prayer, who might also have received their answer and
been evidently refuted to their faces, if they had but observed his ordinary
practice, every Lords day in the public assembly, where he did reverently
accommodate himself to the public prayers of the Church, and religiously join
together with Minister and people, in the celebration of Gods service.
Certainly he was not ignorant, A set form of prayer justified.
that when our Savior Christ taught his Disciples to pray, he gave them
liberty to call upon the name of God their Father, even in that set form of
prayer which he prescribed, and in the same words: when you pray, say, Our
Father, etc. And yet for all that, he knew well enough that he gave the Spirit
of prayer also unto them, and unto all believers, children of the same Father,
that they might enlarge themselves according to those grounds, and frame all
their suits after that form, and therefore he gave this direction unto them,
After this manner pray ye, By our Saviors institution of the Lords prayer, and
By his own practice. Mat. 26.44.
Our Father, etc. yea Christ has left us his own blessed example for the
warrant of both, when in his Agonyhe prayed three times, using as the text
says, the same words: and when, after his farewell sermon to his Disciples,
he prayed for himself, his Disciples, and all true believers, unto the worlds
end, in great variety of words, and for many gifts and graces in particular,
which yet are not all mentioned, but are all for substance contained in that
pattern of true prayer.

None precisely bound to the letter of the Lords prayer, but to the matter, al.
Peter Martyr has made a collection of holy prayers out of David's Psalms, and
M. Perkins has gathered together S. Paubs prayers out of his Epistles, in both
which there is great variety both of matter and words, much exceeding the
letter of the Lords prayer: yet is there no Petition, or thanksgiving, in
either of them, which may not fitly be reduced to some parts and heads of the
Lords Prayer. For my part I shall never blame him that seeks to help his
understanding, memory, Set prayer a help.
and affection, by such means, if he bring new affections, to renewed
petitions, and set his heart a work to seek more seriously for the best
things, such as the godly labors of good men have in print set before him. But
if any man will rest in his book prayers, and never strive to speak unto God
out of his own heart, by his own Spirit, which teaches every true child of
God to cry Abba Father, Heart prayer best of all. Romans 8.
and helps our infirmities, that we may stand before him, as his children:
Such a man in my opinion, comes far short of the power and practice, comfort
and fruit, of true prayer, and is not much unlike to an impotent and weak man,
that being lame of his limbs, and having means of help and recovery tendered
unto him, had yet still rather use a pair of crutches borrowed of his
neighbor to go withal, as he can; than betake himself to his own legs
and feet, to walk in his way which the Lord has appointed for him, as he
might and ought to do.

CHAP. XXIII.
AFter this short prayer, because we are all commanded to sing Psalms unto
God, 2 His singing of Psalms.
to testify our rejoicing in him, to instruct our selves in his mercies, and
judgments, words, and works, and to make melody in our hearts before him, as
also to quicken our souls to praise and thanksgiving; he therefore did
usually call the whole family to sing some of the Psalms (such as he named
unto them) with grace in their hearts unto the Lord, which they ordinarily
performed with such melodious and sweet voices and affections, himself
beginning the tune, and the rest in a sweet accord, and harmony joining with
him, as if they had desired to sing David's Psalms, His delight in singing of
Psalms.
not only with David's Harp, but even with David's heart also. With this
exercise of singing of Psalms, he was much delighted, and oftentimes so
ravished in his spirit, with holy and heavenly joy in singing and sounding
forth Gods praises, that his heart would even spring and leap in his body, as
John Baptist did for the joy of Christ, in his mothers belly: Hieron in
Epitaphio Fabiolae.
yea he was so much affected with the praising of God in this kind, that he
took the word Halelu-jah (which is the title of nine Psalms, and the song of
the Quire of Angles) for his Poesy, and usually writ it in the first leaf of
all his books, with his own hand, to provoke and draw on others into the
fellowship of Gods praises with him, and to set it forth as an impresse or
character of his chief desire and delight, Amalaris de officio m^ss^c. 13.
to have the praises of the Lord in his heart, or in his mouth, in his care or
in his eye continually.

When the Psalm was ended, 3 His reading of the Scriptures.
he read a Chapter himself out of the Bible, keeping an orderly and constant
course in his reading, to make his family better acquainted with the order, and
matter of the Scriptures, and to season their hearts with some portion of Gods
Word in the morning, as a preservative against all unfavoury thoughts, noisome
lusts, rotten speeches, and ungodly works, all the day after. This he knew
was Gods holy Ordinance, from which neither Kings in peace, nor Commanders in
war, were exempted; wherewith all Governors of families are expressly
charged, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Ios. 1.7.8. Deuteronomy. ^1.18, 19, 20 2 Timothy 3.14, 15. Ioh. 5.39.
wherein both elder, and younger have been exercised, and whereunto all sorts
are by our blessed Savior exhorted. Search the Scriptures, etc. And this he
duly performed with such reverence and conscience, as might (to his power) best
become the solemnity of the action which they had in hand, and the majesty of
his presence, before whom they stood.

Now because he knew that all planting and watering was in vain, unless God
himself gave the blessing of increase: and that the Prayer of faith avails
much for that end, if it be fervent, he therefore with all his family, bowing
the knees of their hearts, as well as the knees of their bodies before the
throne of grace, did in the next place commend themselves unto God in humble
and hearty prayer, making their requests known unto God, 4. His humble and
holy prayer with thanksgiving.
in all manner of supplications with thanksgiving: which he usually performed
with that power and feeling, fervency and sincerity, faith, and humility (as
the spirit of grace gave him understanding, and utterance, and their several
occasions and other necessities did require) that he was oftentimes much
admired of them that heard him, and by his holy petitions and gracious
affections, did much refresh the hearts, and cheer the spirits, of many of his
neighbors and friends which joined with him. Genesis 32.26.27.28 Hos. 12.4.
He would so wrestle with God by prayers and tears, like Jacob, that he
would not let him go, until like an Israel, he had by praying and weeping
prevailed with him. The fruits of which his holy desires and endeavors were so
remarkable in that family, whether he prayed against sins or sorrows, or
sought unto God for grace and good things; that seldom did they meet again to
pray, but they had some new and fresh cause of praise and thanksgiving unto him
that had heard their prayers? Having always matter of praise, as well as cause
of prayer.
A godly and an holy course in prayer, which I wish, were as well performed, as
it is well worthy to be observed: Namely, Not only to consider wisely what we
ask in prayer, but to observe carefully how we speed after it: for in so
doing, as we should still be stirred up and provoked to new praises, so should
we be quickened and encouraged, to seek unto our God again, by continuing or
renewing the same, or the like prayers and requests unto him. This was the
practice of holy David, that man after Gods own heart, who having called upon
God, Psalm. 41.1.
did patiently wait upon him for hearing, and diligently observed what success
he had, and (as he found the fruit of his prayers) did thereupon come again
into Gods presence, with new and fresh praises, Psalm. 66.17.19.20.
I called unto the Lord (says he) with my mouth, and he was exalted with my
tongue: Verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my prayer.
Blessed be God which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.

CHAP. XXIV.
THus did he exercise himself and his family unto godliness every morning,
His evening exercise.
and after the duties of the day, and their natural refreshing and repast in
the end thereof, he called them again to the like service, and sacrifice in
the evening which he very religiously and constantly performed, much after the
same manner, saving tha^ then he took some more pains with them, having more
liberty, In opening and applying the word.
and better opportunity so to do for then he ordinarily instructed and taught
his family, out of that portion which he took in the Chapter, read at that
time unto them, propounding and applying some wholesome doctrine, profitable
for their godly edification, as the tenor of the Scripture best served, 2 Timothy
3.16.19.
whether to convince any error, or to confirm the truth, to rebuke any sin,
and to instruct in the way of righteousness, to comfort the heart (under hope)
in doing well, and settle the soul by faith and patience in suffering ill.
This was his holy defire and delight, to edify his family in faith and love,
For the use of his Family.
and to train them up in the true knowledge and fear of God, so acquainting
them with their duties toward God and man, Tit. 2.10, 11, 12.
that living soberly, righteously and godly in this world, they might beautify
their profession, and adorn the doctrine of God our Savior always, and in
all things. All which his godly pains and practices in the instructing of his
family out of the Word of God, as a pastor and teacher in his own house,
Crowned with a blessing from God
albeit they were through the blessing of God, crowned with good success at
home, yet were they much maligned, reproached, opposed, and questioned abroad,
and that not only by the vulgar fort, but even by some of our masters in
Israel, whose negligence was much rebuked by his diligence, their prophannesse
checked by his holy duties, their government in their families not only
obscured, but blemished, Opposed much by some men of the world.
but blemished, by the comely order and beauty of his government in his
family, which was so far advanced above some of theirs, as ever Bethell was
above Bethaven, Sion above Shilo, or the Temple of God, above the Temple of
Idols.

Which malignity of the world, His fortification against such assaults.
and enmity of godless persons against godly and good duties, when he well
observed and wisely considered of; he began to fortify his building, both for
his judgment and practice (as Nehemiah did the wales of Jerusalem against the
assaults of Gods enemies) which he did very faithfully and effectually, by his
painful collections, and observations which he made out of the Scriptures,
For justifying of his judgment and practice in thus teaching of his family.
and by the expositions, testimonies, and examples, of godly and good men,
records of antiquity, and evidences of worthy Writers, and witnesses to the
truth of God, all suitable to the doctrine of our Church, to justify his
course, and stop the mouths of all such as without any just cause did open
them so wide against it. I have seen and read what he has collected and set
down to this end and purpose, under his own hand, which I approve of, and
like so well, for his choice and pains, in binding up together so many sweet
and wholesome flowers of heavenly doctrine, By his collections and observations
out of godly and good authors.
for his own confirmation, and other men's satisfaction, that I could have been
well contented to have set down these his collections and observations at
large, concerning this point of the masters duty, in teaching and instructing
his family in the fear of God, and faith of Christ, and in opening and
applying some portion of the Scriptures to their minds and hearts, for that
end: but that I much feared, lest my labor and pains herein, at this time,
might be held not so needful, and less pertinent, seeing many godly men's
books are filled with the same, or the like instructions, since that time
(justifying the same point and practice) and that the bulk and body of this
little book, would swell too bigg, if I should bring in another Treatise, to
stuff up the bosom and breast of it.

CHAP. XXV.
And yet not usurping upon the Ministry. Nor by aprivate spirit. But by godly
and good means. Homines discunt prius quod doceant, and ab al^o accipiunt quod
aliis tradant. Amb. Coster us in eins Vita. Amb lib. 1. de Offic. c. 1
NOw because some may mistake both him and me, in this business, as imagining
that, by his private expounding of the Scriptures, he did usurp too much, and
trench too near, upon the office of the ministry, and were transported with
some private spirit of interpretation, above his pitch and place, and that all
this were now justified by that which has been said and done: Such must be
entreated to conceive better of our mind and meaning herein, and not to be too
rash in censuring, but to judge righteous judgment: For the pains which this
Gentleman took, in teaching and instructing of his family by the Scriptures,
were not raised, nor grounded upon his own private conceit or fancy, nor were
they fruits of any vain and unwarrantable presumption, as some might imagine:
but all that ever he brought unto them, he had either begged of God, or
borrowed of good men, or obtained by serious study and meditation, gotten by
reading of the Scriptures, and good Expositors, or by revewing his Notes also
of such Sermons, as he had heard upon such Scriptures and Texts as he had in
hand, using all good and holy means, to fit and furnish himself, with all
manner of spiritual provision for that service. The success whereof through
the good hand of God that was upon him was very answerable to his desires, and
endeavors for their good. For as Joseph by his diligence and pains, Providing
as Joseph.
in gathering and hoording up of corn, and by his wisdom in disposing, and
dispensing of it, did sufficiently provide sustenance for himself, and for his
fathers family: So did this worthy Gentleman, by all godly pains, and good
means, first furnish and store himself of all spiritual provision, For
himself and for his family.
to his own best use, and then bring forth some part and portion thereof,
whether as corn or wine, milk, or stronger meat to the relief and refreshing
of the souls of his family, as their occasions, or necessities might require
at his hands.

Now if in thus doing, any man or Minister shall envy him, and complame of
him, for preaching in his own house, Facti sunt onmes magistri, qui vix
poterant esse diseipuli. Amb. in Orat. ad pop. de Auxent. ^.
as sometimes Joshua did of Eldad and Medad for prophesying in the Lords host:
I would have every godly Minister to answer them, as Moses did him, Enviest
thou for my sake? I would to God that all Masters of families, were such
Ministers in their families, yea, and that all Ministers were such Masters, in
the religious government of their own house also.

CHAP. XXVI.
AFter the Lord had thus warmed the heartd this Gentleman, and his house also,
with the love of the truth, and made some gracious impressions of the beauty
and virtue of true godliness in the same, there arose out of this fire such a
flame of holy zeal, both against all lies and lying vanities, and for the true
worship and glory of God, Thus far of his religious government of his own
house in his private family. Now of his zeal to Gods house in the public
Assembly. 1. In abolishing means and instruments of false worship.
that beginning at his own house, as you have heard, he proceeded farther to
the house of God, according as it is written, The zeal of the house has eaten
me up. Much like herein unto good Josiah, who after he began to soeke after
the God of his Father David, in his own person and family, set himself a
work to look to the house of God also, and showed forth his godly zeal, both
in purging Judah, and Jerusalem from their graven and carved images, and in
advancing again the Word, and worship of God, according to his place and
power. For finding in the Church of Tarum, in his own Chapel, which of
ancient right did appertain unto him and his family, many superstitious
images, and idolatrous pictures in the painted windows, and they so thick,
and dark that there was, as he himself says, scarce the breadth of a groat
of white glass amongst them: he knowing by the truth of God, that though the
Papists will have Images to be lay men's books, yet they teach no other
lessons but of lies, nor any doctrine but of vanities to them that profess to
learn by them; Hab. 2. Papists will have images to be laymens books. Quod
legentibus Scriptura, hoc and idiotis praestat pictura cernentibus, quia in
ipsa ignorantes vident quidsequi debeant, in ipsalegunt qui literas neseiunt.
Gregor in Ep. 4. ad Servum. Massil. Episcod. De Consecrat. Did. 3. cap.
Perlatum adnos. Vide etiam Walsrid. Strabon. de Rebus Ecclesiast. cap. 8. de
vtilitate imaginum. Bulling. de Origin error. cap. 29. Vtilitas imaginumest,
quod instruunt simplices, admonent scientes, afficiunt amnes, Ecki. in Enchir.
Loc. 16. de imagine. and Urban. Rheg. loc. de Imag.
and considering that these dumb and dark images by their painted coats and
colors, did both darken the light of the Church, and obscure the brightness
of the Gospel. He presently took order, to pull downs all these painted
puppets, and popish idols, in a warrantable and peaceable manner, and of his
own cost and charge, repaired the breaches, and beautified the windows with
white and bright glass again.

Hereunto he was the rather induced, His inducements thereunto. Elizab.
Injunct. 23. Authority of the magistrate. And Example of good and great men.
Dent 12.3.
and encouraged, both by the liberty given, and granted by the Queens
Injunctions, utterly to extinguish and destroy all pictures, paintings, and all
other monuments of idolatry and superstition, so that there might remain no
memory of the samein walls, glass windows or elsewhere, within their
Churches, and houses: and also by the authority of a Commission sent down into
the country to the Earl of Darby, the Major of Chester, and others, to the
same purpose, at the same time. Neither was this all: for he had the Word of
God to warrant him, and the examples of godly and holy men to lead him, and
countenance him in this act, as of Ezekiah, in breaking to pieces the brazen
Serpent, 2 King. 18 4.2 Kin. 23.8. Bulling de Orig. error cap 29. Plat. de vit.
Pont. in Gregor. 3 Which made him proceed from the Chapel to the Church. This
act censured by papists. Sigon. de R. Italiae lib. 3. Platin. de vit. Pont. in
Grego. 3. Eckius in Enchirid. loc. 16. and Urban. Rheg. loc de Imag fol. 97. b.
of Epiphanius, in rending in Altars of Baalim; of Epiphanius, in rending in
pieces the superstitious veil, hanging before a Church at Anablatha,, wherein
was set forth the picture of Christ, or of some other Saint, and of Leo the
Emperor, who brake down all Images and Idols in Churches, as standing there
against the decrees of the first Council of Nice, and the Word of God. And so
upon these, and the like grounds, this Gentleman went forwards from his
Chapel to the rest of the Church, defacing a^ the popish and superstitious
Images, which he^ found dangerous, and offencive in any quarte or corner of it.
An attempt and act tha^ will be subject to the censure of the Patrons of
popery, and many other popish and profane persons, as a matter of gross
impiety and sacriledg^ to deal so rudely and contumeliously, with the images
of God, of Christ, and of his Saints. So did Pope Gregory the third
excommunieate the Emperor Leo, and stamped the name of Icon^clast (as a brand
of heresy) in his forehead, (...) breaking down of Images in the churches. So
did Bellarmine censure the Germane Protestants, as irreligious and profane,
because in their reformation, they spared not their Idols and their Images.
These men no doubt would have cast one stone of rebuke at Christ himself, if
they had seen him drive with whips, the buyers and sellers out of the Temple:
and thrown another at Paul, for speaking against the Images of Jupiter, and
silver Shrines of Diana at Ephesus, and for preaching against the Altar
dedicated to the unknown God, which he saw at Athens, had they been amongst
those persons, and in those places. Now, shall we entreat these hypocrites,
Justified by themselves, against themselves.
to turn their eyes into their own bosoms, and view the records of their
own stories, and then let them tell us, whether their beam be not much bigger
than our mote, in this kind of disgracing, or defacing images, and some other
things, which they account ornaments of their Churches. What if these
Catholics (as they desire and delight to be called) have cast with violence
the relics of their Saints, Nicu. Coni. lib. de Isaac and fill. Alexio.
into filthy and base places? what if they have thrown the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, with great indignation, sometimes unto the ground,
and sometimes into the fire? what if they have profaned their holy Vessels,
Altars, Temples? what if they have used their sacred images for seats, and
footstooles? Their own Writers will assure them, that in the taking of
Constantinople, Antonin. Histor. part. 3. tit. 19. cap. 2.9 3.
they were guitly of such and so great sacrilege, that they spared neither the
treasures of the Churches, nor the Silver Tables about their Altars, Sed
violatis sacrariis, cruces, iconas, and reliqua Ecclesiarum ornamenta
rapiebant, but profaning all the holy places, and holy things, they spoiled
their Crosses and Curcifixes, their Images, and other ornaments of their
Churches whatsoever. Let them read and consider, Ouuph in vit. Clem. 7.
Guiciard. Hist lib. 7.
what violence and indignity Cardinal Columna offered (in the taking of Rome,
under Clement the seventh) unto the Palace of the Vaticane, and Saint Peter's
Church, when he spoiled them of all their treasure and rich furniture, and all
the Ornaments of the Church besides. Now therefore, ye Hypocrites, either take
the beam out of your own eye, or cease to find fault with this mote in your
brothers eye any longer.

If ye be obstinate in this error of Image worship, and call upon our Church
windows, for your Church witnesses, Testes fenestrae. Rat. 10. Aug. de
Consensu evang. l. 1. cap. 10.
as your Father Jesuit Campion has done: we will then answer you with Austin,
Sic errare meruerunt, qui Christum and Apostolos ejus quaesiverunt, non in
sanctis codicibus, sedin pictis parietibus, They have well deserved so to err,
who have sought for Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy Book of God, but
in painted wales and windows, as you for your parts, Aug. ibid.
both do, and have done. Nec mirum si a pingentibus fingentes decepts sunt,
And no marvel, if such fainers and forgers as you are, be deceived with such
painters, and pictures as these be.

And as for this Gentleman of whom we speak, it shall be sufficient for him and
us, that in this his affection and action, he comes so near to that
commendation, which Ambrose gave unto Theodosius, Theodosius abscondit
simulacra Gentium, omnes enim cultus idolorum fides ejus abscondit, Ambrose
Orat in mort, Theo.
omnes eorum ceremonias obliteravit, Theodosius did obscure and disgrace all
the images of the Gentiles, for his faith did darken all the worship of Idols,
and obliterate all their ceremonies.

CHAP. XXVII.
2 In establishing Gods true Word and worship.
NOw as it was the just and due praise of these worthies of the Lord (according
to the nature of true zeal) not only to demolish and deface all instruments
or ornaments of idols, and false worship, but to build up, and beautify the
house of God, in procuring and providing all good means for his due and true
service: so may it be, and that justly an addition to this Gentleman's former
praise, that his heart was so enlarged toward God for his glory, and Gods
people for their good; that it was not only his care and conscience, to abolish
all occasions and provocations unto idolatry and false worship, but the very
joy of his soul, to bring in such godly and able Ministers amongst them (as he
could provide) almost every Lords day into the public Assembly. Such as did
feed the people (like faithful Pastors) with knowledge and understanding. Such
as did sow and plant (as Gods husbandmen) the seeds and roots of grace and
truth amongst them. Such as were Ambassadors of peace, both preaching unto them
the glad tidings of the Gospel, by the word of reconciliation; and beseeching
them also in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God: and Heralds at arms
also, By procuring godly Ministers to preach.
to lift up their voices as a trumpet, to tell the house of Israel their
transgression, and the house of Judah their finnes, and to denounce Gods
righteous judgments due unto the same. And all this he did of his own cost and
labor, and that with a cheerful and upright heart, honoring the Lord with
his substance, and giving means and maintenance to such as were the Lords
laborers in the Lords harvest. Of his own cost and charg.
All which his care, cost, and labor, although it was much slighted by many,
little regarded by the vulgar sort, much opposed by the popish and profane, and
too much undervalued by all: yet was he never daunted nor discouraged in his
course, nor weary of well doing, Little regarded.
neither Rheum the Chancellor, nor Shimshai the Scribe, by their letters; nor
Samballat and Tobiah by their mocks, threats, and slanders, Yet he not
discouraged, because the word of God prospered.
could ever divert him from his way, or cause the work of God to cease in his
hand. So the Word of God grew mightily and prevailed: and to use his own words,
so religion began to enter, mangre the devil, and his partakers, for I was
much opposed etc. In this passage I much desire to commend unto every
Christian, especially, to Gentlemen of good rank and place (to whom the Lord
has given a large portion in the blessings of this life) such fruits of faith
and love, and such virtues of Christ in this Gentleman, Many virtues of his to
be observed.
as are well worthy both the observation, and imitation of every true Christian.

1. His compassion on the multitude being as sheep without shepherd, when he
saw them erring from the ways of God, and like to perish for want of pasture,
expressing herein (in some measure) the holy affection of Christ Jesus.

And imitated.
2 Secondly, his free will offering unto the Lord of his own substance and
cost, to provide his people of spiritual food, and that with a cheerful and
free heart and hand, like unto David, who bought the threshing floor of
Areunah at a price, because he would not offer burnt offerings to the Lord, of
that which cost him nothing.

3. Thirdly, 1 Kin. 18.3.4. 2 Chr. 35.2,3 4
his entertaining and maintaining Gods Ministers, as Obadiah did the Lords
Prophets, besides his countenancing and encouraging of them as Josiah did the
Levites in the Lords service.

4 Fourthly, the exceeding joy and comfort that he took in setting forwards the
Lords work, for the foundation and building up the shouse of God, by his good
example, godly presence, and holy practice, in public places, and religious
duties, endeavoring to bring forth the head stone, Zach. 4.^7.
as Z^rubbabell did with shootings crying, Grace, grace unto it.

5 Fifthy, his courage and constant^y in maintaining all good exercises of
Religion against all oppositions of popish and profane persons, Nehem, 4
as did good Nehemiah, in going on with the in building of the was of
Jerusalem, notwithstanding all the attempts and assaults of secret treacholy,
(...) open hostility, made against him.

6 Sixthly, his uprightness and su^oirity, doing all that he did with an
honest and good heart, not to be seen of men but to approve himself unto God
in all things.

This worthy example thus decked and adorned with these jewels of grace, For
Gentlement to be rich in good works.
I desire also to commend unto the due and serious consideration of such
Gentlement and others, as being rich in this world, are yet poor, and very
poor in such good works, and had rather bestow an hundred pounds in building
and beautifying their own houses, than an hundred pence toward the laying of
the foundation, or building up the walls or windows of Gods house amongst
them.

For patrons not to spoil the Chur. being bound to provide for it.
And to such also as being entrusted with the lands and livings of the Church,
for the maintenance of the Ministry and spiritual provision of Gods people,
do notwithstanding turn their patronage into pillage, and their devotion into
sacrilege, cutting short the Minister of his means, and the people of their
provision, taking the wheat unto themselves, and leaving the straw and chafe
unto them for their portion only.

For prosane Gent. bestowing much upon their lusts, nothing upon Gods service.
Neither would I have them to pass without gentle admonition also, who had
much rather spend much of their estate, in maintaining idle and base persons to
serve their own lusts, and satisfies the humor of a rude and profane people,
as many do their Horf-riders, Faulkeners, Huntsmen, Lords of misrule, Pipers,
and Minstrels, rather to lead them, and their followers (both in their publik^
assemblies and private families) a dance about the Calfe, than such a dance as,
David danced before the Arc, with spiritual rejoicing in Gods mercies, and
enlarging of his own and the people hearts in Gods praises. Neither
maintaining any Leyite at home.
And being utterly destitute of all means of grace, both in assembly and
family and nothing sensible of the spiritual famine that has brought a
loathsome leanness into their souls, they neither make any conscience, nor
will beat any cost, Nor seeking after the word abroad.
to call on the Levites to bring in the Ark of God amongst them, nor will
seek themselves, nor suffer others (that much desire to enter into the
Kingdom of God) to frequent those places and exercises of religion, where the
heavenly Manna, the bread of life may be broken unto them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
ABout the year 1590. when he saw, Mr. I. D.
that having provided for the public congregation a worthy Preacher, whom they
seemed much to admire for his gifts, yet would not so much as thank him for
his pains, the Preacher grew somewhat unwilling to bestow his labor any longer
amongst them. He in Christian policy, Upon their neglect of the public
Ministry.
began to withdraw the Preacher of the Word from the assembly, to his own
family, to make them more sensible of the want of it, more careful to seek it
where they might find it, and more thankful to God and his servants, by whose
means they did enjoy it, and reap some fruit by it. To which end and purpose,
he built him a Pulpit in a Chapel in his own house, and for a season
maintained the Preacher there, so that (as he says himself) he had good
company every Sabbath day. He maintained the Preacher in his own family.
This company, as I doubt not but it was much to his comfort, so could it not
be, but much to his cost also, when, amongst a multitude, though some might
come to the Chapel with good minds, to feed their souls, yet others would
be as willing and ready to press into the Hall to fill their bellies. And yet
was he well contented to be at this charge also, for the increase of Religion
and further of the Gospel.

But he could not long make such an enclosure of the Word, nor so confine it to
his private family; for partly the public necessity, and partly the
importunity of some Christian friends, But after a while restored him to the
public assembly.
did work so effectually upon him, and prevail so far with him, that he
yielded up the Preacher to the public assembly again, and so continued to
maintain him, and other Preachers after him, until upon the death of the
Incumbent, God established a faithful Pastor amongst them. Let him if you
please, tell you thus much and the occasion thereof, in his own words.

The same Preacher being invited to a wedding at Peile, The cause and occasion
thereof.
preached there in the parlour, for which Sermon he was much admired. And then,
It was objected against me, that I had committed a great sin, to keep such a
worthy Preacher from the great congregation. But I said, none requested it, nor
gave him thanks when I brought him; And so continued to maintain the Minister.
And therefore he was unwilling to come amongst them. But I was glad then, to
bring the Word of God again unto them, and so have continued till now that God
has planted M. Clark amongst us.

And here I think it not amiss, seeing he thus touches upon M. Clark, in
this business of providing the Parish of a faithful and sufficient Ministry:
Both by his own and M. Clerks testimony.
to call in, and produce Master Clank's own words, for evident testimony to
his bounty and faithfulness in this particular.

He was the chief instrument, to plant, and establish the preaching of the
Gospel in this congregation. First, by providing diverse of Gods Ministers to
preach here oftentimes when the Incumbent was grown old, and decrepit:
afterward by maintaining a Preachet at his own proper cost and charges: And
lastly, by being a means to obtain the place for me in reversion, and allowing
me the greatest part of my maintenance. So that this Parish has cause for
ever, to acknowledge him a nursing father of Religion amongst them, and a
blessed Instrument to bring in the light of the Gospel unto them, when they
sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

CHAP. XXIX.
NOw because popery and profannes two sisters in evil, had consented, Popish
and profane Wakes a^ Tarum. Paul Jov. Hist. l. 24. Calv. de vera ecclesrefor.
Ratione. Bullsing de Origin. err.e. 33.34. His godly care and labor to
suppress them.
and conspired in this Parish, as in many other places together, to advance
their idols against the Ark of God, and to celebrate their solemn feasts of
their popish saints, as being the Dii Tuteleries, the special patrons and
protectors of their Church and Parish, by their Wakes and Vigils, kept in
commemoration and honor of them, in all riot and excess of eating and
drinking, dalliance, and dancing, sporting, and gaming, and other abominable
impieties and idolatries: this godly. Gentleman being stirred in his spirit, at
these their gross superstitions, and much grieved in heart at their grievous
misdemeanors and disorders, knowing well that the customs of the people were
rain, yea, and vile also, poisoning their minds with erriours, and corrupting
their hearts and lives with base lusts, and the bitter fruits thereof: And
fearing lest their carnal joys and delights in these fleshly and earthly
things, might make the Heavenly Manna to seem as light bread unto them, and
the wholesome food of life more unsavory and distasteful than otherwise it
would have been. By a more plentiful and powerful use of the Word preached.
This Gentleman, I say, to prevent these mischiefs, and procure the peoples
good, did usually at these times bring in, and set up the Ark of God in
greater pomp and power amongst them, to bring down and break in pieces their
Dagon, so much admired and adored by them. So he did, and prevailed in so
doing. Against S. Andrews day, which is the time of Tarum Wakes, and the week
following, I observed (says he) many years together, to invite two or three
of the best affected Preachers in the Diocese, that spent most part of three
days in preaching and praying in the Church, Whereby he prevailed and blessed
God.
so as the Pipers and Fiddlers, and Beare-wards, and Players, and Camesters, had
no time left them for their vanities, but went away with great fretting, and
yet multitudes of well affected people, filled the Town and the Church, and
that with much rejoicing, blessed be God. O what, and how great comfort and
contentment, did this godly man take in discountenancing and suppressing (so
far as he could) all popery and profannesse, With rejoicing.
together with all the instruments, abbetters and maintainers of the same! O
how great was his rejoicing, and solace, when by any care, cost, or labor, he
might refresh the bodies, and rejoice the souls of Gods people, either by
corporal or spiritual repast, And feasting.
provided and prepared for them! To which end, as it is well known, at one of
these times, besides all other provision, there was spent in his house a fat
Beife, and a half, within the space of three days, upon godly and well affected
people, and his Cook did then relate unto him. Of Gods people.
Such was his desire to do good, his delight in the Saints, his joy in the
house of God, and love to his service; that all other things, in comparison of
these, were but loss, and dross, and dung, unto him. O, Renouncing all
fellowship with sin and sinners.
how truly might he say with David, Away from me all ye workers of iniquity,
I will keep the commandments of my God: I hate all vain inventions, but thy
Law do I love: all my delight is in the Saints, and in such as excel in
virtue: I was glad when they said unto me, let us go up into the house of the
Lord, our feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem? How well did he herein
imitate the example of Christ, And herein following the example of Christ Jesus.
who at the feast of the dedication of the Temple (though it were no divine,
but a humane constitution) took occasion notwithstanding, upon the frequent
concourse of the people, to teach and preach the Gospel of the Kingdom unto
them, and whiles they sought after carnal things, to please their flesh, to
minister unto them spiritual, to profit and do good unto their souls?

Nether do I speak this to justify or approve these festival solemnities,
Bulling de Origin. (...). c. 35.114.
for the anniversary commemoration and celebration of Saints and Martyrs, and
dedication of Churches, which savor rank of the caske, and smell hugely of
the vessels of Judaisme, Paganism, and Papisme, Lib. Inter. cap. de
Ceremoniis. See Bullin. de orig. ^r. cap. 36. sol. 113.
whence they were first drawn (...) derived (for so I should condemn many
both Fathers and Councels, that have condemned and inhibited the like Wakes,
and solemn Assemblies at such times, and to such ends, which they called their
Vigilias and Encania, and that for the same errors, abuses enormities, and
villainies that we do now condemn them for) But I speak it to the just
commendation of this worthy Gentleman, D. Rain. de Idol. l 2. c. 3 13.
and for the fair provocation of other Gentlemen also, of like power and
place, by his example, is do what they can to suppress and abolish all such
Wakes and festivals: and if they cannot do that, yet to make the best of the
worst, by standing against them, striving both by courage and countenand, to
disgrace, and disappoint them, and to bring in better means of mercy and of
grace, either to water or to plant the Uineyard of the Lord which is before
them.

CHAP. XXX.
ANd this I doubt not, Nine reasons against popish and profane Wakes. Hieronin
Mat. 23.
but they would be more easily induced and persuaded to do, if they did
advisedly consider of these or the like reason, which might rectify their
judgments in these things.

1 That the celebration of such Wakes and festivals is utterly destitute of all
warrant of Gods Word, for who has requited these things at their hands? Isay
1. Romans 14. ult. Lih. Inter. cap. de Cer. Bulling. de Origin excap. 35. p. 111.
And whatsoever is done without warrant, (...) never be done with any comfort,
or good fruit, either in the a^^^ the issue of it.

2 That these are (...) base and bastard brood of the man of sin, begotten by
Satan, upon the body of that Whore of Rome, in the dark night of Popish and
Heathenish superstition; and therefore we are called to come out of Babell, so
many as are Gods people, and never to be partakers of her sins, lest we be
partakers of her plagues also. Aug. l. 22. De Civit. Dei. c. 10. Eusebius. eccl.
hist. l. 7. c. 14. Sigon. de Regno Ital. l. 3. An. 721.726.


3 That as one err our is a pregnant, and faithful mother of many more: so
this commemoration of Saints, and Martyrs, did breed and bring forth
reservation of their Relics, Adoration of their Images, Invocation of their
Names, and Peregrination to their Shrines, and that with great confidence in
them, and great expectation of bodily and ghostly help, and comfort from them.
Of all which errors and impieties, they must needs be guilty, and stand
convicted before God, who (whether they be of the tribe of Levi, as was Korah,
or of the Princes of the people, as were Dathan and Abiram) shall, or do rise
up in any tumultuous and rebellious manner against Moses or Aaron, Magistrate
and Minister, with their Censers in their hands, to offer incense unto such
Idols.

4 That such service unto Saints, is but witt-worship, Calv. de vera eccl.
reform. rati. Bulling. de Orig. error. c. 32. f. 104 Pars. in 3. Convers. Rain.
idol. l. 1.0.5.. 25 etc. Hospin. de Fest. in Cathar. Nov. 25 Anton. hist. part.
3 tit. 19 c. 1. 3 4.
will worship, and Idol-service, all which are both hateful unto God, and
hurtful unto their own souls, that either do them, or consent to the doing
of them.

5 That oftentimes by the Popish Calendar, such Saints are commended unto them
for commemoration of their persons, and celebration of their Feasts, as either
never were, as Saint Christopher, and Saint George, Saint Katharine, and the
like; or such as it had been good for them, that they had never been, as was
our Boniface the idol Saint of Banbury, Saint Dominic a grand agent for
Antichrist, and bloody persecutor of the true Church of Christ; or such as were
not much better than beasts for their conversation, as Medardus, Lubinus; or
such as having their souls frying in Hell, are yet adored as Saints, in their
Festivalls, and Wakes, here amongst us upon earth, and that after a more
solemn and devout manner, than either they themselves would, or could require,
if they were now in company, and held society with the Saints in heaven.

6 That to have fellowship with such as celebrate these Idoll-Feasts, is
reckoned by the Apostle for no less a sin, than to have fellowship with
Devils, nor is any thing that is offered to such Idols, accounted any better
service, than a sacrifice unto Devils. Now, God forbid, that they that profess
the fear of God, and bear the name of Christ, should ever so far forget
their communion with God, as to have any fellowship with Devils, or so forsake
the Lord the Fountain of living waters, and dig unto themselves broken
Cisternes that can hold no water.

7 That usually such assemblies upon such occasions, are for the most part, a
confluence of all vain and vile persons, a concurrence of all vices, a
combination of the Popish and profane, a very randavous of all rogues, and
vagabonds, and many times no better, than as the Prophet speaks, a very
assembly of rebels against the Lord. Now, we are charged to depart from the
tents of such wicked men, to separate our selves from sin and sinners, not so
much as to cate, or drink with such persons, to hate the garment spotted by
the flesh, and to touch no unclean thing, if ever we will have the Lord to
receive us, and to take us for his sons and daughters.

8 That the attendants and consequents, effects and fruits of such Wakes, and
Idol-Feasts, are commonly as base and bitter, as the sons of Beliall can
beget, or the vines of Sodom or Gomorrah can bring forth: such as are
swearing, and blaspheming; drunkenness, and surfeiting; brawling, and
quarrelling; wantonness, and uncleanness; riot, and excess in all manner of
wickedness, and ungodliness; seldom any such meetings, but they either are
sprinkled with blood, or spotted with some gross filthiness. Now, what honest
heart can abide in those places, or endure those persons, that will be sure to
vex his souls with their wicked conversation, and grieve his spirit, with that
which he shall daily and hourly hear and see amongst them. Woe is me (would
David say) that I am constrained to dwell in Meseck, and to have my habitation
in the Tents of Kedar. My soul is among Lions, I have dwelt too long amongst
them, that want grace, and hate peace.

9 And lastly, if they would set before their eyes, and consider the holy
examples of good and great men, who loving the truth, and hating a lie, could
never endure any fellowship with superstitious and idolatrous persons, nor
would ever yield themselves to join with them in the smallest things, having
any appearance of evil in them. Daniel would not be persuaded to defile
himself with any portion of the Kings meat, being once presented before an
Idol. David will neither touch, nor taste of the dainties, and delicates of
wicked and profane men. Polycarp would not so much as make a show of saluting
Caesar, as others did, nor of burning incense unto their Idols, though he might
have saved his life, and come to great honor also in so doing. S. John durst
not abide in the Bath, where the Herelike Cerinthus was, but presently got
himself away, lest the Bath for his sin should fall upon him, and upon all
that were with him for his take. Tripart. hist. l. 6. c. 35. Bullin. de Origin.
Er. c. 36. f. 115
Valentinian that valiant and noble man, being sprinkled (against his will)
with some of that heathenish holy water, which the Ministers of Fortunes Temple
cast upon him, as he went in and out before the Emperor Inlian, and finding a
drop thereof upon his cloak, with great indignation, gave the minister a box
on the care, in the Emperors presence, telling him, that he thought not
himself purged, but polluted by such sprinklings. All which being well and
duly pondered and considered, I conceive good hope, that men of any religious
affection, or ingenuous disposition, will not only refrain themselves from
such assemblies of vain men, but according to their place and power will be
ready to restrain, and suppress (as this worthy Gentlemen did) all such
popish and profane Wakes and Feasts that are amongst them or about them.

CHAP. XXXI.
Being still more religious.
AFter that he had thus planted and watered his own family, and for the better
increasing of the fruits of religion had well provide for the public assembly
also, he was much admired for his sincerity, as well as for his fervency in the
profession of the Gospel, and practice of true religion. He that had done so
worthily in Ephrata, became famous in Bethlehem; He grew more famous.
His name being perfumed with such, and so great variety of Gods graces, did
send forth a most fragrant and sweet smell, and savor, into all the families
of the country, round about him: insomuch, Many desite to sojournwith him.
that now diverse Gentlemen of the best rank, did much desire to sojourne under
his roof, and to table with him, for their better information in the way of
God, and more effectual reclaiming of themselves, and their families. That
honorable and worthy Knight, Sir Richard Grosvenor, Baronet, when he was young
and tender, was by his parents godly and gracious care, and desire of his
religious education, Sir R. G. in his tender years brought up in his house.
transplanted (as it were) into this family, where for the space of three
years, he was trained up and nurtured in the knowledge and fear of God, and
that with so good success and fruit of this Gentleman's labors, and
endeavors, (through the blessing of God upon him) that, both the University in
his youth, and the country in his reper age, may, and will seal him a worthy
testimony for a Gentleman of an amiable and sweet disposition, and of a
studious, and religious carriage, and conversation amongst them. The seed that
was then sown, and the plants that were then set in this soil, are yet still
increasing and bringing forth more fruit, both in his person, and calling,
whereof as we have seen a fair increase already, in some of his more eminent
employments, so do we yet look for a more plentiful harvest of his holy and
wholesome fruits, in their season, as he may have further calling thereunto.

Much about this time also, his brother in Law Master Hardware of the Peile, M.
Hard. and his family also tabled with him.
was very desirous to draw nearer unto him; and so with his good liking and
allowance, brought himself and his whole family, wife, children, and servants,
to be tabled with him. This Master Hardware at the first, seeing this Gentleman
in the government of his family, so full, and free, for wholesome admonitions,
and reproves, could no better abide a rebuke, than sore eyes can endure the
Sun. Which when Master Bruen had once and again observed, knowing that Patient
to be very sick, that is impatient of the means, and medicine, which might
cure him: He began to cast about how he might best deal with him, and most
effectually work upon him for his good.

What he did to this end, and with what effect and fruit, His wise and gracious
dealing with him and his.
he shall himself tell you, in his own words. I remember (says he) my
brother Hardware, when he was tabler with us, at first would not be reproved;
but after a while, having the 141. Psalm for our Evenings exercise, and then
diverse of my family did usually give Notes, being godly and well affected, all
concluded together, that all should speak of the fifth verse, Let the
righteous reprove me, etc. And my self gave the last note, after which time
he never resisted any more.

Yea more than all this, And the good effect and fruit there of.
he gives him yet a better testimony of his growth and proficiency in religion,
under his own hand in these words. It pleased God, says he, so to work upon
his, and their hearts, that they went home with new hearts converted unto God,
and professed religion in holy sincerity until their death. My brother
Hardware then at Peile, Both in his family and
set up religion in his family with great power and comfort; So that the very
first evening after their coming home, they began to sing Psalms, to read the
Scriptures, to Pray, and to Catechize; all which being ended, his wife ran unto
him; and kissed him, with great rejoicing, saying, O husband, I thank God, and
bless his name, that ever you came to Staplefoord. And so afterward being
Major of Chester, In the city
he that year showed his religion very graciously in his government, all praise
to God, etc.

These things he has thus set down (as he has done also many more) as
certain memorials of Gods mercies, Thus to season others.
in blessing his desires and endeavors, for the seasoning of others, both
persons and families, with the salt of true religion, by his hand, that so they
might be better able to offer themselves, and their services, as holy, living,
and spiritual sacrifices, acceptable unto God in Christ Jesus.

This was his labor of love, And to build up Gods house, in his own was his
labor of love. And joy of his heart.
to build up the house of God, even in his own house, and taking some out of
other families (as rough stones out of the Quarries) to hew, and square them
smooth, and polish them, to be as lively and precious stones, of, and for the
Lords Temple.

And this was the very joy of his heart, to see the word of the Lord prosper in
his hand, according to that saying of Saint John, I have no greater joy than to
hear that my children walk in the truth, I wish above all things, that thou
may prosper, and be in health, even as thy soul prospers.

CHAP. XXXII.
THis comfort and contentment which he took in laying the foundation, The
good success whereof.
and building up the walls of Gods house in this manner, did give him great
encouragement to furnish himself better, and to make his provision greater for
this work, both by his private studies, and also by his public travels and
endeavors; being herein not much unlike to holy David, who having it in the
purpose of his heart, 1 Chr. 29 1, 2.
to build Gods house, provided abundantly all manner of materials, wood and
stone, iron and brass, gold and silver, marble and precious stones, Made him
like David to make greater provision.
as he could procure them, far or near; besides all the treasure that he
offered of his own proper goods, even three thousand talents of the gold of
Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to the furthering and
finishing of the Lords house.

For whereas in those days, it seemed good unto the Lord, having compassion on
his people, to raise up, and establish, many holy exercises of religion, By
public exercises.
both in Cheshire, and in Lancashire; which were kept constantly every month,
and maintained worthily by the godly labors of the faithful Ministers and
Messengers of God in those parts, and that with great and comfortable success,
and fruit, for the edifying of the Churches of God in knowledge, faith and
obedience to the Gospel.

This worthy Gentleman, Which he frequented
taking hold of this fair opportunity, did frequent these assemblies, and
partake of the labors of the Lords Builders, with great diligence, care and
conscience, storing himself with their treasures, And became better furnished.
and lighting his Candle at their Torches, and so became both better furnished,
and more enabled, to set forwards the building of the Lords House, himself in
his own family, and other where is also, as he had calling thereunto.

In this his course which he took, In which his course, diverse things to be
commended.
for his own proficiency and growth, both in knowledge and in grace, I find
diverse things worthy, not only to be mentioned, but to be much commended, some,
and some to be admired also. As first his cheerfulness to go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and joy of heart to join with such holy assemblies, in
so holy duties, saying with David, 1 His cheerfulnes.
I was glad when they said unto me, let us go up into the house of the Lord.
Our feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem, Jerusalem is builded as a city
that is compact together, Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord,
unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

Secondly, his painfulnesse in taking many long and sore journies, 2 His
painfulnesse. 1 In seeking. 2 In gathering Manna and other provision.
with much toil and travel of his body, and no small cost and charge of his
purse, riding early and late, in heat and cold, short days, and foul ways,
sometimes ten, sometimes twenty, and sometimes thirty miles, as the distance of
the place, and season of the year required: and all this to this end, that he
might gather Manna, where he knew it would be rained down, and gleane after
the Reapers in the Lords Harvest, and buy Gold and white Raiment, Wine and Milk
without money, of the Lords Merchants, upon such of the Lords Mart, and Market
days.

Thirdly, his conscionable diligence in hearing and observing, 3 His diligence.
writing and recording, from the mouth of the Ministers, whatsoever they taught
and preached unto edification, and that with such eagerness of mind, and
readiness of hand and pen, that usually he took the whole substance and
matter of their Notes, Observations, and Sermons, in his book, 1 In hearing. 2
In writing. 3 In repeating.
home with him; which he would carefully repeat in his journey, to the
refreshing of the minds and hearts, of such good people as went along with him:
and when he came home, did write over again in a more legible hand, all that
he had gathered, and so made better use of it, for himself, and his family,
and set all as it were upon record, for the benefit of his friends, and his
own posterity. This his double diligence, he continued for the space of five
or six and thirty years together, 4 In recording the sum and substance of
all such exercises.
in writing, and writing over again, all such Exercises as h^ could come unto,
and all Lectures and Sermons in City or Country, and all public Fasts, and
thanksgivings, as he could hear of them. Insomuch that he has left unto the
heirs of his family, so many volumes of Manuscripts, under his own hand, set
up in a comely order in his own Study, as is scarce credible to report, being
yet there to be seen, as so many worthy monuments of his conscionable
diligence and faithfulness in the Lords service. In many manuse.
All which he has so earnestly, and carefully commended to the heirs of his
body, that he would have them upon his request, to read over, if it were but
once in all their life, the books that he has thus written, and committed to
their hands. Which his charge and request I wish they may ever be so mindful
of, that they may never fail nor faint, in the faithful discharge of it; that
so the blessing of the Recabites for obeying Ionadab their father, Commended to
the heirs of his family
in all that he commanded them, may come upon them also, This man shall not
want a man to stand before me for ever.

Fourthly, Ier. 35.1^, ^9.
his mavelous kind usage of the Ministers in all their meetings, commending
their pains, rejoicing in their labors, 4 His kind usage of Gods Ministers.
and many times defraying all their charges, always encouraging them in the
work of the Lord, with gracious and sweet words; sometimes of comfort,
sometimes of counsel, sometimes of admonition, Love unto their persons.
Reverence to their callings. Psalm. 110. His good affection to professors. Numb.
24 5, 6.
and mild reproof, sometimes of kind invitation to his house, and all this,
with such love unto their persons, and reverence to their callings, that
whatsoever he did, or said, he found good acceptance and allowance amongst them.

Lastly, his love and tender affection, to the best professors and proficients
in Religion; yea even to the weakest and poorest Christian; As he was to them
the crown of their assembly, and conductor of the Lords army, so were they to
him the crown of his joy, when he saw them a willing people, in the day of
Assembly, like an Army in holy beauty, O how goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and
thy Tabernacles O Israel. As the Valleys are they spread forth, as Gardens by
the rivers side, as the trees of Lignum-Aloes Which the Lord has planted, and
as Cedar Trees beside the waters.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THese were the virtues and holy duties wherein this gracious Gentleman by
frequenting these holy exercises did so worthily exercise himself unto
godliness, The exercises of Religion great helps unto godliness.
and whereby he did still grow in sound knowledge, righteousness and
holiness, to the praise of Gods glorious grace.

And these would I willingly commend in the example of this Gentleman (to be
duly considered, A motion for exchange with other exercises of profannesse.
and diligently followed) unto many of our Gentlemen, and to many of inferior
rank also, that they would make an exchange of their vain and profane
exercises of May-games, and Summer-greenes, of their Foot-racts, and
Horseraces, of their weekly and almost daily meetings, Asserant necesse est
singuli quique quod faciunt, nec voli^t victi facile succumbere, quamvic sciant
id quod faciunt non ^icere. Cypr. ad Magn. lib. 1. Ex. 6.
and matches on their Bowling Greenes, of their lavish betting of great wagers
in such sorry trifles, and of their stout and strong abetting of so silly
vanities, amongst hundreds, and sometimes thousands, of rude and vile persons,
to whom they should give better, and not so bad example and encouragement, as
to be idle in neglecting their callings; wastefull, in gameing and spending
their means; wicked, in cursing and swearing; and dangerously profane, in
their brawling and quarrelling.

O how great is the difference betwixt those holy exercises of Religion in Gods
house, and these profane exercises of corruption and lust, in the forest, or
in the field! Difference great.
How great is the opposition betwixt that assembly and this company?

How does the mighty God, Company contrary.
cause the light of his countenance to shine upon leaders, and followers
coming into his Sanctuary? Holy exercises acceptable to God.
And how (do you think) does he look upon them, that forsaking the
fountain of Living Waters, dig unto themselves such broken Ci^ernes, as
these are, which can hold no water? What is there in those exercises, but that
which is warrantable, commendable, profitable, and comfortable? And what in
these, that has any sent, or savor of such things? Profitable to men.
If these men were truly changed themselves, they would be easily induced to
make an exchange also of baser company, Yet will none make an exchange, but
such as are changed themselves.
for a better society; of fading and false joys, for durable and true
comforts; of worldly profits and filthy lucre, for spiritual gain, and the
true treasure; and of the vain applause, and praise of men, for the true
honor, and praise, which comes from God only.

CHAP. XXXIV.
IN the middst of these sweet comforts and refreshings, He was otherwise
exercised also ^y affliction.
which he thus received and enjoyed by these public exercises of Religion, It
pleased the Lord, otherwise also, to exercise his servant with a grievous
affliction, in the taking away with a stroke his dear wife, the desire of his
eyes and faithful Yoke Fellow; In the death of his wife.
who being well in the morning, began to be ill, and sick at Supper, and
departed this life the same evening.

Sudden death a fearful judgment to some.
Sudden death is held to be a fearful judgment, as though it were a
testimony of the wrath of God: And so indeed it has been, and may be to
some, who being wicked persons and continuing in their sins, without any
fear of God, any repent^nce or faith in Christ, are suddenly arrested by the
LOrds hand, and cut off by death in his sore displeasure. So it was to Err and
Onan the sons of Judah, to Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, Genesis 38 7 10.
to Corah a Levite, and Dathan and Abiram, Lev. 10.1, 2.
two of the Princes of the Assembly. And so it is likely it was also to Nabal
that churlish fool, Number. 16.1, 2, 30, 31 32.
of whom it is said, that after ten days the Lord smote him that he dyed. The
Scripture also seems to make it the ordinary portion and condition of the
wicked, that God will shoot at them with his arrow, Psalm. 64.7.
and suddenly shall they be wounded, that spending their days in wealth, Job
21.13
in a moment they go down into the grave, and that flourishing for a wile,
they fuddenly perish and come to a fearful end. Ps. 73.19. Sudden Death upon
a wicked lif, fearful.


True it is, that a sudden death attending upon, and following a wicked life,
is a fearful judgment, and a dreadful sign (so far as we can judge) of the
wrath of God: and yet we will not limit nor confine the Lords mercies; for
inter Pontem and Fontem, ferrum and jugulum Dei misericordia, Betwixt the
Bridge and the Brook, the Knife and the Throat, the mercy of God may appear.

But as all that live wickedly do not dye suddenly, Yet all that dye suddenly
do not dye fearfully.
so neither all that dye suddenly, are to be thought to dye fearfully, as
though they were deprived of Gods favor, and fallen under his heavy wrath, and
displeasure for ever more. No, we may not censure so severely, nor judge so
rashly, neither of our Brethren, nor of the ways and works of God. 1 Samuel 4.18.
Old Ely dyed suddenly when he fell backwards from his chair and brake his
neck; and yet I dare not say, but that as he lived, so he dyed the servant of
the Lord. Josiah was suddenly slain with an arrow, going against Pharaoh Necho
in the field; 2 Chro, 35 33.
and yet I dare not say, but that as he lived, so he dyed the servant of the
Lord. Genesis 35.19.
Jacob had his wife Rachel to dye suddenly in his journey on his hand; and so
dyed the wife of Phineas, 1 Samuel 4.19, 20.
when she heard that the Ark of God was taken; and yet we may not otherwise
conceive, but that as they lived, so they dyed the servants of the Lord.

And so we are to judge of this Gentleman's wife being a gracious and holy
woman; As this Gentlewoman very hope-fully.
that albeit the Messenger that was sent for her, seemed to be angry, and too
hasty to take away her life, yet he brought her no worse news than of a
joyful and a blessed death, which was indeed a passage to a better life.
Possid in invit. Aug.
It was the saying of S. Ambrose, upon his death bed, which might have been
hers also; I have not so lived that I am ashamed to live any longer, or afraid
to dye, if it had been sooner.

The life of the righteous finds never any worse end than the death of the
righteous: Number. 33.10. Rev. 14.13 2 Con 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 14.8.
and they that have the grace to live unto the Lord, shall never fail of this
mercy to dye in the Lord: and so they enjoy a double blessing, whether they
live or dye, they are the Lords.

Besides all this, No Death suddeine to a sound Christian Job 14.14
the reckoning and account of a true Professor and sound Christian is not to
seek, nor to make at the hour of their death. All the days of their
appointed time they wait, when their change shall come. Their wholle life a
Meditation of death, and a preparation for it. Every day they stand in
readiness, Ephesians. 6.14. Mat. 25.4, 10. Genesis 5.2 2. Mic 6.8. Psa. 4.8.
having oil in their lamps, and their lights burning, waiting for the
Bridgroome, and their Masters coming. In the morning they awake with God, all
the day long they walk with him, and before him, and in the evening and night
season they lie down in peace, Ma. 24.44 Heb. 13.5
and rest with him. So that what time or houresoever their Master shall come,
and call upon them, they shall not (through his mercy and grace, Mat. 7.4 44,
45, 45.
who will never take them at the worst) be unprovided, or unprepared for their
meeting of him.

And albeit this were a suddeine stroke unto her worthy husband, Ezekiel 24.16, 18.
as that was to Ezekiell, when his wife (the desire of his eyes) being well in
the morning, dyed in the evening; Thy Affliction sanctified.
yet did the Lord in mercy so sanctify this affliction unto his servant, that
by the power of grace and Christian wisdom he did moderate his affections and
subdue his passions, mourning for her death as sensible of his own loss, And
passions moderated. As Abrah. did for Sarah. Genesis 23.2 1 These. 4.13.
yet neither wayling nor weeping as a man without hope: For, Grandis in suos
pietas, impiet as in Deum est, Hieron. ad Pam. being well persuaded of her
gain, and that what he had lost, the Lord had found, as Hierome speaks, to
her everlasting comfort and the praise of his mercy and grace in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XXXV.
AFter these things, Standing in need of Marriage. He sought and found a
prudent wife. By good opportunity. Etiam caslae aaeimae in turpe labuntur
assensu, quaesi imputaret Altissinus, quis viveret castus? Aug. con. Julian.
lib. 4 cap. 2. And by good means.
finding himself to stand in need of marriage, and that (both for the comfort
of his life, and necessity of his Family) it was not good for him to be alone:
He sought the blessing of another helper, and a prudent wife, by prayer from
the Lord.

And as he sought, so he found, the Lord in his providence ordering and
disposing of the occasion, motion, match and marriage after this manner. As he
was in Mancester upon occasion of the holy exercise of Religion kept, and
continued in that place, he cast his eye upon a very amiable, and beautiful
young Gentlewoman, which diligently frequented that assembly; upon the sight of
whom, he confesses, that he had this thought arising in his heart, lo, this
is the woman, that the Lord has provided for my wife.

And so, that he might not only please his eye and follow his affection in his
choice, but might deal wisely and advisedly for his better satisfaction
touching her virtues, and graces (which he much desired were answerable to her
outward parts.) He acquainted one of his most trusty and religious servants (as
Abraham did Eliezer in a like business) with his thoughts and purpose, Genesis
24. Of his trusty servant.
and set him presently a work to inquire after her. Who being borne in that
Country and well acquainted in those parts, was well able to answer his
desires, and demands, concerning this matter. Declaring unto him, her Parents.
And so he told him thus much in effect, and after this manner. This young
Gentlewoman her name is Mistress Anne Fox, Sister to Master Fox of the Rhodes,
some 4 or 5 miles from Manchester, Her father
well descended both by father and mother. Her father a Gentleman of good
estimation, and account (whiles he lived) with that honorable Personage Henry
Earl of Darby, Stow. Chro. 1585. Ian. 20.
being Controller of his house, and one of his Counsel, and one of those
special Gentlemen that attended upon his honor when he was sent by Queen
Elizabeth Ambassador into France. Her mother yet living.
Her mother yet living, a very godly and gracious Matrone, descended of the
ancient and worshipful Families of the Addertons, and Lelands in Lancashire.
Her self a Virtuous, Prove. 31. Her parts worthy due commendatio^.
and Religious young woman, beautiful by Grace within, as well as by Nature
without; one that was well reported of in the Church of God, and well esteemed,
and accepted of the people of God; And such a one as in his opinion might be a
comfortable match and marriage for him. Upon this relation of his servant, and
good testimony, which he gave her, answering so well to his desires, he
neglected no time, but took his best opportunity to make a motion to her
mother, and her friends for a marriage, which being well accepted and
enterteined by them, he became a Suter unto her, So he made a motion for
marriage. Prevayled in it, and took her to wife.
and winning her affections, by his gracious speeches, and godly carriage, he
prevayled in his Suit, and so by mutual and cheerful consent of her friends,
he took her to wife, with much joy and comfort to both their hearts in their so
holy meeting and matching together in the fear of God.

The first year of their marriage, his Mother in law, gave them and theirs
their Table, during which time, he was as careful to do good unto that Family,
as if it had been his own house. And therefore he began to quicken himself,
He set up and renewed the exe^cises of Religion in that Family.
and to awaken them unto all religious duties of Prayer, and Praise, reading of
the Scriptures, singing of Psalms, godly Conference, Catechizing of the
ignorant, etc. Which albeit for the most part they were performed before in the
Family, yet he now being called and entreated by M. Fox, and his mother to
discharge these duties, did more powerfully stir up the gifts and graces of
God that were in him, and so set himself a work more effectually, to seek
their Conversion, and edification in the knowledge of God, and Faith in Christ
Jesus. All which his holy labors in private, being seconded and strengthened
by the public pains of their Pastor old M. Langley, that holy man of God,
and faithful servant of Christ in the House of God; were so effectually
blessed and prospered by the good hand of God upon him, that in the remembrance
of that year, and the sweet comforts and contentments, which he found therein.
The good success thereof.
He has been often both in his life and was also at his death, as it were
ravished with joy, and rejoicing in the Lord, enlarging his heart in
thanksgiving unto him, for his mercies to himself, By his own testimony.
and to others by his means. Hereof he has left an evident testimony under
his own hand, which I will not spare to record: let others read, consider, and
give righteous judgment.

My Mother in law, says he, then giving me Table for a year, there and then
we set up the Exercise of Religion morning and evening. In which time I trust
through Gods grace, my Mother in law there got true saving grace, and my sister
in law, now Mistress Hind, and another half sister of hers, and their brothers
Master William, and Master Thomas Fox, and a servant or two, and some
neighbors, which joined with us in the evening. Blessed be God that is pleased
by weak means, to express his great power, and mercy toward us.

CHAP. XXXVI.
THus were the mercies of God renewed upon his Servant, and his comforts
increased much in a strange Family, for the time that he did sojourn thus
amongst them. His return home to Stapleford.
Which when it was expired, in much contentment and peace, He began to look
homewards toward Cheshire, and to address himself for his journey to his own
house. And so, taking his beloved Wife along with him, Bringing his wife along
with him.
he brought her with much joy and comfort, home to Staplefoord, where they
mutually enjoyed one another in great peace, and love, for their own good, and
for the benefit of their whole Family.

And so it pleased God to repair, and make up the breach formerly made in his
house, by the death of his former wife, by bringing in another daughter of
Abraham, of gracious and good parts to take her place, and to supply what was
wanting in that behalf.

Now after a while, when the Lord had well settled and established him, and his,
for, and in the government of their Family again, according to their former
exercises of Religion and other civil, and domestical duties required in the
same: Diverse Gent. desire to sojourne with him.
There were many Gent. of the best rank in the Country, that desired and made
much, great fute, some for their children, and some for themselves, and some
for their friends, to so journe with him, as we have already heard some others
had in like manner done before them: And all to this end, that being partakers
of so good means of grace under his godly government, and gracious example of
a holy life, the ignorant might be instructed, the unruly reclaimed, the
superstitious reformed, the profane converted, or restrained; His family a
famous Nursery for Religion.
Babes in Christ might be nursed and grow up by the sincere milk of the Word,
and such as were of riper age, might be fed and strengthened with other
wholesome Doctrine, as with stronger meat. Thus his house, and Family, became
yet more famous, as a Seminary of true Religion; a Nursery for the plants of
grace, 2 Kin. 2.3, 5. 2 Samuel 17.18. 1 Samuel 25.
a field or Vineyard which the Lord had blessed, to bear trees of
righteousness, and fruits of holiness. Not much unlike to one of the Schools
of the Prophets by the river of Jorden or Jericho, or on the top of Mount
Carmel; or like to Samuels house at Ramah, whether many went to seek the Seer,
and to have counsel and comfort him. 1 Samuel 19.19. Iud. 21.2. 2 Kin. 22.14.
Act. 19.9, 10. 2 Kin. 2.7, 15, 18, 2 3. Genesis 28.17, 18, 19 M. Wilbraham places
his son in law and his daughter with him.
Like to the Hill of the Teacher, the College at Jerusalem, the School of
Tyrannus, yea a very Bethell, and a little Church of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. a true
house of God and the very gate of Heaven.

One of the first and best, and best worthy to be first of those Gentlemen
which dealt with him in this kind, and to this end, was that thrice worthy,
truly honored, and accomplished Gentleman Tho. Wilbraham of Woodhey Esquire,
the very beauty and glory of that house, and perelesse pillar of the Country:
who having married his eldest daughter, to a young Gentleman the heir of the
house of Vtkinton, of great place for his birth and blood, and of good parts
for his natural endowments and civil disposition (yet much addicted to the
pleasures of the World, and the lusts of youth) was very desirous to place them
both as so journers for a season in this Gentleman's house, and under his
Government for their good; that so they might be the better wained from such
occasions of evil, as happily else where they might meet withal, and better
acquainted with the means, and substance of true Religion, together with the
power and practice of it, which in all likely hood here they might find, and
attain unto in this Family.

CHAP. XXXVII.
His desire to give him contentment.
THis godly motion of Master Wilbrahams, for his son in Law, and his daughter
to so good an end, M. Bruen did very willingly entertain, and so received the
young couple into his family, together with such as they brought along with
them to attend upon them. His desire herein was, to give contentment to that
worthy Gentleman, whom he much esteemed, and entirely affected, for his parts
and place, And to do them good.
and to do what good he could to the young couple, being near a kin unto him,
and now commended to his trust. Which trust reposed in him, he did so
carefully and conscionably discharge, that, as he saw the hand of the Lord
leading him unto it, so found he the help of the same hand prospering his
endeavors for their good. The course which he held with them (as he did also
with others at their first coming) was to try their dispositions and
inclinations, affections and conditions, how teachable they were, and how
tractable they were like to be unto good duties, and good things. To try their
dispositions.
To which end he did very carefully look into their ways, see much, and say
little, bear, and forbear, He observed their words and works.
(as occasion did require) taking special notice of any good they did, or
said, and passing over many other lesser faults and slips, until he had some
fitter opportunity to admonish them. And this he has recorded himself to
their just praise and commendation, that being neither perverse in their own
ways, nor averse from good duties, they showed themselves very pliable unto
the orders, They were teachable and tractable.
and government of the family, in all their carriage and conversation amongst
them. One or two special testimonies hereof, I will not spare to relate,
seeing he has thought it meet to leave them upon record under his own hand.

Touching the Lords day.
This Master Done being young and youthly, yet very tractable, could not well
away with the strict observation of the Lords day, whereupon we did all
conspire to do him good, ten of my family speaking one after another, and my
self last, for the sanctifying of the Lords day. After which he did very
cheerfully yield himself, Blessed be God.

And concerning card-play.
Another instance he adds to the same purpose. I coming once into his
chamber, says he, and finding over the Mantletree a pair of new cards, no
body being there, I opened them, and took out the four knaves, and burnt
them, and so laid them together again, and so for want of such knaves, his
gaming was marred, and never did he play in my house, for ought that ever I
heard any more.

Here I cannot but commend both the Phisycian, and the Patient also: the
Physician that gave him a gentle purg so wisely, and the patient that took it
so well, that it wrought so kindly with him for his good.

A third testimony he gives them both, after this manner. His wife converted
Himself con^^^^ed
The said John Done being now Knight, was then young and youthly, yet very
tractable, his wife we feared inclining to popery, but I hope she got true
saving grace: and he being convinced in judgment, I expect the stamp of
grace in Gods good time.

This was no small joy unto him in his life, that he saw such holy fruit of his
godly labors, in these his near and dear Cosins, before his death; Their
children gracious and religious.
which was yet more increased and enlarged, by the blessing of God upon the
branches of their vines, their heir of good hope, their daughter in Law, and
four daughters all of them ripe in knowledge, and rich in grace, the humble,
and holy handmaides of the Lord Jesus. O, how greatly did he rejoice in their
comely order, their gracious conference, when he heard it, or heard of it,
their holy affections in religious duties, All witnesses of his faithfulness.
their godly carriage and conversation in all their ways? These can all
testify, if they will, (and they will all I know, as they can) his
faithfulness and cherefulnesse in this kind.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
His burning of Tables, Cards and Dice.
TOuching upon the former point of playing at Cards, and burning of the knaves,
he presently annexeth a note of remembrance, of another the like act of his,
almost twenty years before that time. In like manner (says he) almost twenty
years before, being in one of my Studies, and seeing a pair of Tables under
my feet, I took them with the thirty men, and the Dice, and all the Cards I
found, and put them into a burning Oven, which was then heating to bake Pies.
This I suppose he did, not to honor them as Martyrs, No^^s Martyes. But as
malefactors.
but to punish them all as malefactors, in their kind. For so I find by his
other collections which he has made, that he held Tables, Cards, and Dice, to
be all very gross offenders, and such as could not have their faults
(otherwise than by fire, or furnace) purged from them. And to speak herein as
the truth is; An attestation of the Fathers with him against them.
he has the attestation of many of the Lords Worthies, who neither held them
in better estimation for their judgment; nor did bear them any good
affection, for any pleasure or delight they could ever take in them.

Tenul. lib. de spectac. cap. 5, and 6 and 14 and 15, 16. and lib. de Pal. c.
5. Cyprian. l. de Alca. August. l. 1 Retract. ci 1 Aug. Epist. 54 ad Maced.
Aug. in Psalm. 31 Epist. 5 ad Dioscorum. Aug. li. 5 de Civit. cap. 1. Hieron in
Prove. 18.18. Idem in Zachar. cap. 8, chrysest Hom. 48. in Genesis Cap. 24. Hom. 6.
in Mat. and Hom. 38. Hom. 56. in Genesis Idem in Mat. cap. 14. Hom. 49. Vid 1 Cir.
4. Hom. 12. p. 414. Ambros^^ib. de Thobia. cap. 4 idem lib. 1. de Offic. cap.
23. Iaem in Psalm. 118. alias, 119.37. Idem in 1 Cor cap. 10.7. Hilar. in Psalm.
118. alias 119.37.
Many of the ancient Fathers are utterly against them, and not one of them all,
that I know, but he is well content to let Baal plead for himself, for they
have nothing to say in defense of them. Tertullian did smite them with a rod of
rebuke, in the general. Cyprian strikes them through, as with a Scorpion bow,
writing a whole book against them in particular. Austin and Hierome have not
spared them as they came in their way, and had occasion to speak unto them.
Chrysostom deals with these, as he does with other such heathenish games, he
cuts them, and hewes them in pieces, as Samuel did Agag, and grinds them to
powder, as Moses did the golden Calfe, in detestaton of them. Ambrose and
Hilary would have all Christians to turn away their eyes, both of body and
mind, Lactan. de vero cultul. 6. c. 20. p. 369. Idem Divin. Instit. Epit c. 4.
A^nob. adver. Gen^e^ lib. 7. p. 720.721. Greg. Nazian. Sermon. in Fest. Nativ.
Idem in fest. Pentwost
from all such worldly and ungodly vanities.

Lactantius and Arnobius are very vehement against all plays and games, as
having their original from the Feasts of the Heathen gods, Ludorum
celebrationes, Deorum festa sunt.

Gregory Nazian. sharply rebukes them that would seem to celebrate the Feast
of Christ's Nativity and the Feast of Pentecost, with such like heathenish
customs, sports and games. Gregor. in Moral. cap. 5.

Bernard writing to the Soldiers, of certain Christians which were at
Jerusalem, says thus of them, Aleas detestantur, mimos and magos, scurrilesque
cantilenas, tanquam vanitates, Danaeus do Lud. Alcoe page 54.55 Basil. horn. de
humili. Beda in 1. Tim. cap 5. page 281. Bed. in Act. cap 1. de Sortibus.
aut insanias respuunt and abominantur.

They detest all Dicing (or games of hazard) all Players, Sorcerers, all
scurrill songs, as vanities, or as frantic madness they renounce and abhor.

Basil, and Beda, Cassiodore and Isidore, Fulgentius, and Salvianus, are all of
the same mind, either wrapping them up in the general, together with all other
such worldly vanities, and carnal sports, heathenish games, and sensual
pleasures, (and so convincing them, Cassiod. in Psalm. 118. alias 119.37. Idem
in Psalm. 21. alias 22.18. Isidor. lib. 28. Etymol. cap. 16. Isidor. lib. 18.
Etymol. ca. 42, 44.51, 59.68.
as sinful upon the same grounds) or else dealing in particular more sharply
against them, as they had calling and occasion so to do.

And so does Oecumenius directly deal against Dicing, upon occasion of that
word which the Apostle uses against crafty and deceitful teaching, [(...)]
the word is taken says he [a talorum ludo, cujus proprium est hinc atque
illinc talos transfer dolosos] from the play at Dice, the property whereof
is, by casting and hurling here and there, to deceive by false dealing.

Lastly, Salvian. de Gubernatione Dei. l. 6. Occumen. in Ephesians. 4.14. Cyril. in
Evang. Jehan. lib. 8. cap. 5.
Cyril is very vehement against the corrupt manners of such Christians, as are
wont to celebrate their Festivals with such illiberall plays, and sports, and
vanities of this world; because hereby they grieve God most, when they ought to
please him best.

Unto this attestation of Antiquity, from the Fathers, Isidor. Etym. cap. 68
Council. Eliber. can. 79 Council. Apost. can. 41 42. Council. Constanti. Charanz
in 6. Conc. Gener, p. 199. Decret lib. 3. cap. Clerici. Gratian, Distinct. 35.
cap. Episcop. Antonin. 2. par. lit. 1. cap. 23. Justin. in ff. de Aleator.
Cicil Fraeter. Justin. in Authenticis Tit. do Sac. Episc. Alca Legibus vetita.
Horat. An. 22. Rich. 2. An. 21. Hen. 4. An. 17. Edvar. 4. An. 11. Hen. 7. An.
3. Hen. 8. and 33. An 14. Eliz.
here might well be added the testimony of authority from the Councils, Canons
Ecclesiastical, and Constitutions Civil, both Imperial, and Municipall.

Plato in Phae. Arist. Polit. lib. 7 cap. 17. and lib. 8 cap. 1 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. Plut. in Conv. lib. 1. cap. 4. Cic. Philip. Orat. 2. Ascon. Paedian. in
Cisero. Orat. Contra Anton. and Catil. p. 118. Senec. Apotheo. Claudii Imperat.
Julius Capitol. in Vero Imperat. page 852. Suelonius in Augusto. c. 71.83.
Senec. Consolat. ad Polybium c. 36. Turnch. Advers. l. 1 c. 6. Hadrian Iun Adag
62. Cent. 5. Plutarch. de(...). p. 281. Alex. ab Alexan. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c.
21.
And if need were, without any great ado, we can bring in witnesses enough,
more than will make a full Jury, to give evidence against these malefactors;
whereof some by the light of nature, and some by the light of grace, have said,
and set down enough to cast them, condemn them, and hang them up for ever. But
we will be contented for this time, only, digitum ad fontes intendere, to
point at the Authors in the Margent, whence, so many as have list and leisure,
may derive and draw water enough, either to quench their thirst, Polyd. Vir. de
Invent. lib. 2. cap. 13. Pet. Crin. de honest. Discip. lib. 24. cap. 14.
Ammian. Marcell. lib. 14. page 1420.1422. Idem lib. 28. page 1773. Calvin. Ep.
347. Bez. in Luc. 1.9. in Act. 1. in Ephesians. 4.14. Bulling. Dec. 3. Sermon. 1.
Danaeus de ludo Aleae. Hyperius de provid. Dei. p. Mar. Cap. 12. Class. 2. loc.
com.
after such pleasures of sin, or to drown, and overwhelme (as with a deluge)
all their carnal desires, and delights in such vanities.

And so I leave this point, His collections against cards and dice.
if I may first have leave to set down some few Observations which this
Gentleman himself has collected, to strengthen his judgment, and justify
his detestation of these games.

CHAP. XXXIX.
1 ALL games depending upon hazard or chance (as many call it) are to be
eschewed.

2 The Prince of Divils first invented the same, and the place was hell.

3 Such Gamsters were held and accounted for infamous persons, incapable of any
Office, and unworthy any benefit of Law.

4 Dicers, Har^ots, and Thieves, be of one Hall, and Corporation, and the more
cunning in this Art, the more wicked in their lives and manners.

5 All gain by gaming, is turpe lucrum, Prove. 16.33. and 18 18.
plain theevery, worse than usury.

6 All play at Dice is plain Lottery, Acts 1.26
which to useidely or trislingly, is a sin against the third, and ninth
Commandment. Ezekiel. 22.12.13. Act 16.16 Luke 6.31.


7 There is no recreation of body or mind in these games, unless it be in
desire and hope to gain, by another man's loss, which is unlawful.

8 Cards and Tables, seem less evil, but neither barrel better Herring,
there is such, and so much craft in pricking, and packing etc.

9 These are mixed games, consisting partly of Lottery, partly of wit, and
industry, and oftentimes maintained with tricks of cousenage and knavery.

10 The coat Cards were in times past the Images of their Idols. Phil. 4.8. 1
These. 5.22. Romans 13.3, 4, 5. Rich. 2. Hen. 4. Edw. 4. Hen. 7. Hen. 8. Eliz. 14.
1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Cor. 8.13. Mat. 7.12. Luc. 6.31 Dives eram dudum, me feertunt
tria nudum: Alea, Vina Venus, tribus this sum factus egenut.


11 We must abstain from such games, because, 1. They have never been, nor yet
are, of any good report in the Church. 2. There is great appearance of evil in
them. 3. The commandment of the Magistrate, forbidding them by the name of
unlawful games. 4. They tend not to Gods glory. 5. They are causes of much
hurt unto our neighbors, and occasions of many sins, and sorrows to the
gamesters themselves, and to their families: for thus many bring a Castle into
a cap-case, and a Lordship into a Cottage, and a Fee simple into a Fee single,
and an estate of abundance and superfluity, unto an estate of beggary and
misery.


And thus have you heard some reasons, of this godly Gentleman's both practice
and judgment, against Tables, Cards, and Dice, especially amongst Christians:
wherein I would entreat this favorable construction, at the hands of every
good Christian in his behalf, that they would not censure him as too singular,
or too precise in these things, seeing he has followed herein, the Doctrine of
such worthy Divines, and others, Pet. Mar. in Judge c. 14. Taffin of amendment
of Life.
in our reformed Churches, as have had their works approved, printed, and
published many years ago, even in our land, and in our own language, for our
instruction and reformation in these things. lib 2. c. 19. Perkins in his
golden chain on the third Commandment. Dudley Fenner in his Treatise of
Recreation. Northbrooke against Cards and Dice. Esty in his history of the
Gospel. Destruction of small Vices. Anatomy of Abuses, page 131. Dialogue
betwixt Paul and Demas. Sir Thomas Eliot in his Gover. book 1. chap. 26.
Ludovic Vivues in his Institution of a Christian woman. Chap. 3. M. Perkins in
his Cases of Conscience, Book 3. Chap 4. Bullinger Decad. 3. Sermon 1 in
pracept. 8. Bishop Babington in Com. 8.409. Bishop Hooper in Com. 8. page 75.
Canon. Ecoles. Anglucan. ann. 1571. page 7. and page 11.
See the Margent.

CHAP. XL.
NOW after a while having thus rid his hands, and fired out of his house these
so dangerous instruments of idleness, and profaneness, wastfulnesse and much
wickedness, as he saw every where Cards and Dice, Tables and Tablemen to be:
He began to think of a wiser, and better course, both to prevent these
mischiefs, In stead of Tables, Cards, and Dice, he set up two Bibles.
and to exercise the minds and hearts of his own family (and such as might by
occasion come to his house) unto godliness and good things. To which end he
brought in, and set up upon a deske, both in his Hall, and in his Parlour, two
goodly fair Bibles of the best Edition, and largest Volume (as then they were
Printed, some in a larger, and some in a larger and some in a lesser Fol.) and
these he placed to be continual residentiaries, the bigger in the Parlour,
Ohe in his Parlour. Another in his Hal.
and the lesser in the Hall (as the holy Tables of the Covenant of God, instead
of the profane Tables of the men of the world) wherein men of good minds might
exercise themselves in reading, and hearing the Word of God, for their farther
edification and comfort, as their list, and leisure would serve them thereunto.

A good purpose, I confess, and that of an honest and well affected heart,
both to cut off all occasions, and provocations to evil, and to open a way and
offer a passage by good means unto better things: And a course, no doubt, so
much the more commendable, Agreeable to Church Canons.
as it was more answerable to the Canons and Constitutions of our own Church of
England, by which there is a serious and heavy charge laid upon all
Archbishops, Can. Ecclesiae Anglicanae, anno 1571. Cap. de Episco.
Bishops, Deanes, Cathedral Churches, etc. that they provide themselves of
Bibles in the fairest and largest Volume, and of the Book of the Acts and
Monuments, and place them in their Hals, or dyning Chambers [Vs and ipsorum
famulis, and advenis usui esse possint] that they might be for the use of their
own servants, Bibles for Bishops Servants and for Strangers.
and for strangers also, which come in unto them. Which good order I would to
God it had been ever since as carefully and conscionably observed, as it was at
the first well and wisely ordained and enjoined by them. This neglected.


For then should we have had less cause to complain of the strange dealing of
some, who have been so busy about tything mint and cummin, that these and
other weightier things the Law are yet left undone.

A special remedy hereof might more easily be procured, A remedy for recovery.
if they whom it may most concern would be pleased to take into due
consideration, and so put in due execution, one or two other clauses of the
same Canons, touching the ordering, and governing of their own Families.

Episcopus etiam atque; eti^a considerabit, quod genus hominum admittat in
famulitium, etc. A Bish must very diligently consider and take heed what manner
of men he admits into his service, To take heed of evil, and provide good
servants.
for it sometimes so falls out, where this carefulnes and diligence is
wanting, Vt homines impios and verae Religionis inimicos and criminosos, and
tota vita impuros, and sceleratos admittamus? that we admit ungodly persons,
enemies of true Religion, criminous, unclean, and wicked men in their whole
carriage and conversation.

Great pity it were, that for want of this godly care in providing honest and
good servants, such Waspes, Telluris inutile p^odus; Nos unmeri sumus fruges
consumere nati. Epis. Wint. Scholares Col. Corp. Chapter Apesnominat. vit. Juel. p.
25. Our Can. against Cards and Dice and Al unlawful games.
and Hornets as these should ever be bred or brought up in a Bs. Hive, being
good fornothing but to eat up and devour all the Honey in it, and to vex and
sting the industrious, harmless and profitable Bees, which should live upon
it, and so labor thereby to bring more Honey to the Hive, and greater profit
and commodity to the whole Family.

Another clause of the same Canons is, that both they and their families, All
Deanes, Prebends, Canons, petty Canons, and Ministers of the Church, Parsons,
Vicars, Curats, etc. are absolutely inhibited to play at Cards, or dice, or
Tables, or any other unlawful games whatsoever. Dabunt operam ne ludant aleam,
neve Chartis, aut aliis improbatis lusibus se exerceant. Dabunt operam ne
ignavi and inutiles vitam ducdut in otio, and illititis lusibussh exerceant.

Which order how well it is, Some of our Divines in the Country make little
conscience of these Canons.
or has been kept and observed, they can best tell, and testify, that are
most conversant in those great Families.

Thus much we can say for diverse of our Divines, some Doctors, Parsons, and
Preachers in the Country: They are so ordinary Companions of Gamesters,
sorting and suteing with some of greater, and some of meaner place in Carding,
Dicing, and Tabling with them, that they seem to make no more conscience of
breaking these Canons, than children do of breaking sticks, or Boys are wont
to do of bursting through Cobweb-nets as they stand before them.

O that these men (otherwise learned and of good parts) would seriously
consider their own ways in their own hearts, and not disdain to walk
according to this Rule, nor to follow this good example of this worthy
Gentleman, of whom we write. So would they be more fearful, as he ever was,
to make sad the hearts of the righteous, whom the Lord has not made sad, and
more careful, not to strengthen the hands of the wicked that he cannot return
from his wickedness, Ezekiel. 13.22.
by their example, and practice of these things. Consider what is said, and the
Lord-give you understanding in all things.

CHAP. XII.
NOw to go forwards in this Gentleman's story, when he had thus wisely and
effectually reformed and ordered his whole Family, Some defect of the public
Ministry.
there began to appear some defects, and failings in the public Ministry
again; which he taking into due consideration, moved with compassion of the
peoples want, and very desirous to make some good supply, procured that
faithful Minister of Christ, M. Ar. St. to be Preacher at Tarum, whose
Ministry (being very profitable, He procured M.Ar. St. for supply.
and powerful) he so much delighted in, that as he did entertain him kindly,
so did he maintain him, and his Family very bountifully, for the comfort and
benefit which himself and many others did reap, and receive from him.

For better evidence hereof, as also for a farther addition to this Gentleman's
just commendation, and due praise; I will not spare to set down that worthy
testimony, which of late I received from him touching this matter and the whole
course of his profession and practice of Religion.

Good M. H. I received your letter, but I know not what to say of that worthy
Servant of God M. JOHN BRUEN, which you your self know not already. I think I
may well say of him, as it was said of Noah, that he was a just and perfect man
in histime, and walked with God. Whiles I was Preacher at Tarum, Whom he
maintained for the most part.
I had little maintenance, but what I had from him. And with much
cheerfulness did he minister both to me and mine that which was sufficient,
affirming oftentimes, that he had not the less for that which I and mine
received from him. For other matters, I know not what to say of him, His worthy
Testimony concerning M. Bruen.
that you your self know not as well or better than I. For he was ever one,
and the same, at home and abroad, very faithful unto God, and loving unto men,
walking in the uprightness of his heart in the midst of his house. I am glad
that God has put it into your heart to write something of his life and death,
that the memorial of his virtues, may be the better continued, and the Church
of God receive good thereby, etc.

This testimony is true, not only because it is given by his own Preacher, but
because it proceeds from a faithful, Being an eye and care witness.
both eye and eare-witnesse of the truth, who could not but speak the things
which he had heard and seen, and was no less willing than able to honor the
memory of this deceased Servant of God therewithal.

It was much about this time, that M. Perkins (that worthy man of God, famous
in our Church for his ways and Works) hearing much by sufficient Witnesses of
M. Bruen, M. Perkins hearing of him.
for his excellent parts, and pains in the profession, and holy exercises of
Religion in his own Family, and understanding also his godly manner, and comely
order in the government of his house, and the sufficiency and ripeness even of
his servants, for the knowledge and power of godliness; being ravished with a
kind of heavenly joy, Did much admire,
and stricken as it were with a holy admiration at the hearing of it, brake out
(as I have been credibly informed) into these speeches. Certainly this is no
other than the house of God, and for the practice and power of Religion, And
commend him
the very Topsiile of all England. This commendation I confess is very ample
and large, This commendatto the greater being fro a man so great himself.
yet so much the more to be esseemed, and accepted, because it proceeded from a
man of eminent parts and place himself, who knew right well, what was worthy
true praise, and what it was that did make a man's face to shine in the mids of
his own house and in the Congregation.

For, as Laudari ab illaudato viro vituperiumest, Vide Aul. Gell de Istaudate
li^. 2. cap. 6.
To be praised of a man utterly unworthy of any praise himself, is a
dispraise: So to be praised or a good man, a messenger of God, one of a
thousand, as he was, and that with such ardent affection, and heavenly
rejoicing. For the power of Religion and fruits of grace in that Family, must
needs advance the praise of this worthy Gentleman to a higher strain and pitch
of his due and true commendation.

Thus it pleased the Lord every day more and more to crown this Gentleman, and
his house, his desires, and endeavors, with honor and favor, beauty and glory.
Many Gentleme desire to so journe with him.
Insomuch that the eyes and hearts of many were toward him, and diverse of the
best rank in the Country, did much desire to have access and acceptance (as
some others had before) to so journ with him.

His house being herein (me thinks) not much unlike unto a goodly Tower upon a
hill, Aspicis us veniunt adcandida recta collibae Accipior nullas sordida
Turris (...).
fair built and richly beautified, which does easily invite and allure the
Doves of the valleys to fly and flock unto it, and for their better refreshing
and repose to build their nests in it.

And so upon the solicitation and importunity of his Cousins and Friends, he
entertained again diverse Families and personages of great place, to partake of
Gods means, and mercies with him in his Family. Who they were, what success
they had, what fruits they found, what comforts, and refreshings they reaped
and enjoyed in their cohabitation, and Communion one with another in holy
duties, he shall himself relate unto you in his own words, which he has left
upon record under his own hand, to this purpose.

Afterward (says he) many more desired to table with me: His own Relation.
The Lady Egerton widow, daughter in law to the Lord, Chauncelour, then being
with her company. And my consen Tho: Dutton of Dutton, with his wift, son and
daughter, that now is the Lord Gerrards Wife, being 10 of his Family, And 4
Gentlewomen of Hatton, being sisters, and one maid attending on them. Which
maid was froward at the first against Religion and religious duties. But God in
his mercy began first with her. For being in grievous affliction of conscience
she was humbled soundly, and had a most comfortable conversion, blessed be God.
Mary Sherington, I think was her name.

And they 2 of the sisters had a more easy conversion, but I believe, true
grace.

And the other 2 sisters convineed, and very honest modest maids.

And for my (cosen Dutton, his condition with me was to keep the Lords Sabbath
with my Family, as well afternoon is forenoone, which he and all his did, in
the public Congregation. All of us having then great help from a learned godly
Minister, M. Rob. Wats, a Reverend Worthy man of God, whom we called Old Eli,
for his gravity and faithfulness above many, and being continually with us in
my Family: Observing this order for our Family exercises, he and I to pray in
the family; he one morning, and evening, and I another, and both of us every
evening to give a note upon a chapter, and between nine and ten of the clock in
the forenoone, we agreed to have prayer again for the Tablers.

At the same time my cosen Dutton, being pressed and charged by some of great
place to maintain his Royalty of Minstrelsey for Piping and Daunsing on the
Sabbath day, my Minister, my self, and my family were earnest against it, and
prevailed so far with my cosen Dutton, that he promised that all Piping and
Dancing should cease on the Sabbath day, both forenoone and afternoon, and so
his Licenses were made, and do continue so until this day. And so we had
great peace and comfort together; blessed be God.

By all this we may easily see and perceive, how graciously the Lord dealt with
this Gentleman from time to time, not only to bless him, and his family every
day more and more, but to make him a blessing also to many others of his
kindred, and friends, which came but for a season to so journe with him.

CHAP. XLII.
NOW as sometimes it comes to pass that in the fairest calm, there may
arise a violent and suddene storm, to scatter, A sudden storm.
and disperse such vessels as have lain for a while at quiet rode in the
harbor: So did it fall out by the Lords disposing hand, in the mids of all
these their sweet comforts, to send amongst them a tempest of grief, Upon the
death of his dear wife.
and sorrow by the death of this Gent-gracious wife and yokefellow which
occasioned not long after a dissolving of his family, and a dispersing of the
whole Company.

The loss of this Gentlewoman was so much the more grievous, both to her
husband, and the whole family, because of the great help and comfort they had
all by her. She lived 10 years with this Gentleman her husband, a faithful
helper, and a fruitful Vine bearing unto him 9 Children sons and daughters,
and continuing with her husband in great peace and love, a prudent wife, and
wise fellow-governor within his house, much respected and beloved, A great
affliction to the whole family. Prove. 31.10, 11, 12 Pro. v 31.26.27, 28, 29.
Her virtues.
not only of her own, but of all these Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, which did
Table with them. Who can find a virtuous woman, for her price is far above
Rubyes? The heart of her husband does safely trust in her, so that he shall
have not need of poyle: She will do him good, and not evil all the days of
her life. She opens her mouth in wisdom, and the Law of grace is in her
lips. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread
of idleness. Her children arise up and call her blessed, her husband also, and
he praises her, many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all. A man may truly say without either fraud or flattery, that in some good
measure, Such a woman, such a wife, such a mother, such a governor, was this
Gentlewoman in her own house and family. Her due pr^ises. F^^ctum est
pr^cv^sissimum Margaritum. Virens smaragdi gemma contrita est, Hieron. ad Para.
deobitu Paulme uxoris.
She was also in her self, of a gracious and amiable disposition, having an
humble heart, and holy affections, beautified, and decked with that ornament of
the hid man of the heart, a meek, quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price. Yea she was one that was ripe in knowledge and rich in grace, full
of Faith and good Works: One that held communion with God and the godly in all
duties of Piety and Charity. And so continuing (as she did) faithful unto
death, she obtained what she desired, and expected, the crown of life.

What were the heavy consequents of this affliction in his Family, he has
himself set down, and that in so patheticall a manner, that I know some that
could yet never read the words, but their heart was full of sorrow, and their
eyes full of tears in the reading of them.

His own words be these. But when it pleased God to take away my wife from me,
then all mourned for her loss: As also in respect that all my tablers must now
part, being about the number of 21. my son John and his, being then with me.
But we did still so accord, and so loath we were to depart a sunder, The heavy
parting of his Tablers.
that I requested them to stay with me that quarter more, from January to
April, which was very thankfully accepted, which quarter we had much comfort
together, but mourning oftentimes to think of the quarters end. And the last
day sitting at dinner together, all so full of heavines, that in effect, there
was no meat eaten. So as I was forced to hide my self, All full of grief.
and could not take leave with them, all being so full of grief, etc.

When Jonathan and David, whose hearts were linked together in holy love, were
orced to part, and were now ready to take leave one with another: It is said in
the story, that they kissed one anther, 1 Samuel 20.41.
and wept one with another, until David exceeded. It was not much otherwise
with this Company that had lived under one roof in so great love and peace
together, when now they must part and take leave one of another, they kissed
one another, and wept one with another, until M. Bruen himself exceeded. M.
Bruen himself exceeded.
And so exceeded, that he was glad then to hide himself to conceal the
extremity of his grief, and since in recording of it, to draw a veil over it
with an etc. as the Painter did over Agamemnons face, when he knew that his
pensill could not express the heavy sorrows of a fathers heart, in the loss
of Iphigenia, so dear a daughter.

Pectoris vulaus tepore and ratione curatur, Hieron. ad Pammach. Time and
reason strengthened by grace, will moderate passions.
That which men say will avayle much with a natural man for allaying the
heat, and repressing the violence of grief, and sorrow, time and reason,
being now more strengthened by grace, and well qualified by Christian wisdom,
and moderation, brought this Gentleman to a good measure of patience, and
contentment in bearing, and breaking through this affliction, which he saw the
hand of the Lord had laid upon him.

For now he began to frame his affections for a single life, and to draw his
Family into a narrower compass, resolving to retire himself, and to live more
privately if it were but for a season, for the benefit of his children, which
the Lord had given him.

CHAP. XLIII.
WHat he did herein, upon what advise, to what end and with what success, to
others, and himself, both for soul and body, I think it not amiss, to tell
you at large in his own words. Then I continued (says he) a single life five
years and a half, or thereabouts. Two years in mine own house; In which
time, that man of God, good M.D. came unto me, who enquiring of my estate, I
told him I did owe about an hundred pounds, and had 4 daughters and diverse
sons. He therefore advised me to give over my house, and to go to Chester and
to live there a season, which I yielded unto, M. Bifeild then being there, a
godly Preacher, and very powerful in his Ministry. And there I lived 3
years, having the company of M. Bifeild and his wife, every Wedensday and
Friday to dinner, which were his Lecture days, with some other good company
besides. In which 3 years, it pleased God to stir up the hearts of many
neighbors to come every evening to prayer with us, and some every morning. My
sister Hardware, and her Family, she being a widow, came constantly, having a
convenient way through her garden, and often with her many friends and
neighbors. These our meetings were traduced by some, and excepted against by
others, and yet after a while being well known, what they were, no fault was
found. In this time, It pleased the Lord Almighthy to give a great blessing,
All praise unto his holy Name only, Many converted, and many confirmed, and
many convinced. And many could I name, but I spare. Let God alone be glorified
and magnified for ever, that by such weak instruments does manifest such great
power, grace and mercy. In these 3 years God gave me also a great earthly
blessing. 1 I paid all my debt. 2 I married my two daughters that were
marriageable, and paid their marriage portions. 3 I preferted a son or two. 4 I
maintained the poor in my own Parish in the Country, allowing all the
increase of my 2 mils in Stapl. for that end. 5 I maintained the poor in
Chest. both at my gates, and otherwise weekly as I was rated. All humble and
hearty praise and thanks be given to God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for
evermore, Amen. Then I returned home, and built my Study. And took to wise
Margaret, through Gods blessing, and by her one daughter dead, and one son
living. Al praise to God.


There are diverse things in this relation very remarkable, which may not well
be passed over in silence; tending so much both to his just commendation, and
to our information, and edification in the Faith and fear of God,

1 As first, that, Although the Lord was pleased sundry times to exchange his
comforts with crosses, yet was he never changed, nor moved from his
steadfastnesse.

2 Secondly, in all his afflictions he was willing to be humbled, but never
dejected nor discouraged, having learned in what estate so ever he was,
therewith to be content.

3 Thirdly, that where ever he was at home or abroad, in city or country, his
desires, and endeavors, were ever bent to do good, remembering the words of
our Lord Jesus, that it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive.

4 Fourthly, that where ever he went, whatsoever he did, the presence of the
Lord Jesus was with him, and his good hand upon him, to prosper him in all his
ways, and to strengthen his hand and heart in well doing.

5 Fifthly, that in every place he became a nursing father to the children of
God, Esaias 22.23.24.
whether they were babes, or such as were of riper age in Christ: yea he was as
a nail of the Sanctuary, fastened in a sure place, upon which men did hang all
vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels
of flaggons, as the Prophet speaks.

6 Sixthly, that notwithstanding all his great expenses, both in city and
country, in maintaining the poor, and entertaining of good people, yet his
estate was not impaired, but increased, the blessing of God enlarging his
substance and his store, according as it is written, Godliness is profitable
for all things, having the promise both of this life and of that which is to
come.

7 Seventhly, that in all blessings and comforts, whether corporal, or
spiritual, upon himself, or upon others by his means, his heart (tasting and
relishing the love of God in them) was marvelously enlarged in rendering and
returning all thanks and praise unto God alone, even for the least of them.

Thus far has this worthy Gentleman helped us to spin out the thread of his
own life, with his own fingers, and to make up (as it were) the web thereof
with his own hands. But as the cunning and curious workmanship of a cloth of
Arras, is but little seen and discerned, while it is in the Loomes, or when it
lies folded, and rolled up together; but when it is opened in a fair light,
displayed at large, and exposed to the view of the beholders, then the art and
skill of the work man does more evidently appear, in great beauty, and variety
of knots and flowers, Pomegranets and Lillies, pictures and pourtraitures of
princes and great personages, and the like. Even so the story of this
Gentleman's life, thus woven and wrapped up together, though it contain many
excellent things, of great value and worth in it, yet cannot the beauty and
glory of his particular gifts and graces, duties and services, be so well
discerned and observed, unless it be yet a little farther opened and unfolded,
and set forth to the view of such men, as desire and delight to look into such
things.

CHAP. LXIV.
IT will be therefore very requisite, and no less pertinent to the present
business we have in hand, to take a more strict view of some special parts
and passages of his life, wherein the gifts of Gods grace, the virtues of
Christ, and the fruits of the spirit, did more evidently and eminently appear,
to the farther beautifying and adorning of his person, and profession of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus.

Now to this end, for our better, and more orderly proceeding herein, All to
be said drawn to 3. heads
we will draw into a narrow compass, and reduce unto three general heads, all
such specialties, or particulars, as may be worthy our observation in the same.

1. As first, His Conversing with God. 1 His conversing with God
2. His Conversation in the World. 2 His conversation in the world.
3. His Deputure out of the World. 3 His departure out of the world. Exodus 31.1,
2.3, 4, 5.

When the Lord called Bezaliel by name, to work in the building of the
Tabernacle, it is recorded, that he filled him with the Spirit of God, in
wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
workmanship, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, in cutting and
setting of stones, and carving of timber, etc.

It was even so, or not much otherwise, with this worthy Gentleman, when the
Lord did (as it were) call him out by name, to work, for the building of a
spiritual tabernacle in himself, and in others: He filled him (in good
measure) with the Spirit of grace, in spiritual wisdom, holy understanding,
and heavenly knowledge, God gave him wisdom and Understanding. 1 Timothy 12 14 1
Cor. 15.10. Ier. 23.22.28. Also courage and strength. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13 14.
to work cunning and curious works by faith in love, whether it were in
Christians of better rank, as in gold and silver, or in such as were of
meaner place, as in brass and timber. So does the Lord ever furnish those whom
he will set a work and employ in his service, with all sufficient gifts and
graces, for the accomplishing of the work whereunto he sets, or sends them.

And as he gave him wisdom and knowledge, so did he also courage and strength
to manage a Christian life, and to fight valiantly the battles of the Lord,
against all the assaults of Satan, and of sinful men, of the flesh and of the
world, and to break through all difficulties and dangers that might stand or
rise up against him in his way.

The Lord dealing herein as mercifully with him as he did with Joshua, Josh.
1.5.6 9. As he did to Joshua.
when he sent him to fight against the Canaanites, and to put his people in
possession of the holy land (speaking unto him in these words of comfort and
encouragement) Have not I commanded thee? be strong and of a good courage, be
not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou go: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

And now having found this acceptance, To 5.1, 2.1 Pet. 2.3. 1 His conversing
with God Genesis 5.22. Number 12.8. 1 loh. 1.3.
and acquaintance with God, and tasted how sweet and gracious the Lord was in
all his mercies: It was the desire and delight of his soul to walk with God,
and to converse with him more frequently, and (as it were) more familiarly,
that so he might the better nourish and maintain that holy and heavenly
communion, whereunto he had called him in his son Christ Jesus.

And this he did most carefully and diligently endeavor, In 4 special duties
and labor to effect, by the conscionable performance of four spiritual and
special duties every day, and his more abundant offering of these, and other
his holy services, and sacrifices unto the Lord, upon the Lords day.

His daily duties were these, 1. Meditation.
First, Meditation, for increase of knowledge, and good affections toward God
and good things. 2. Observation.
Secondly, Observation of Gods ways and works, his mercies and judgments, to
gather and gain experience for himself and others, 3. Invocation.
of his merciful and rightetous dealing with us. The third, invocation of Gods
name, in prayer, and praise, for continuance and increase of mercy and grace,
and this for his constant perseverance in the profession of the Gospel in
uprightness and sincerity. The fourth, 4 Imitation.
imitation of his heavenly father, because we are commanded to be followers of
God as dear children, and this to renew his obedience, by his conformity to
Gods image, and to his Fathers will. Now for the first.

CHAP. LXV.
IT has ever been the practice of godly and good men, Gen 5.22 Genesis 6.9. Genesis
17.1. Genesis 24.63. His meditation
to exercise themselves unto godliness by holy and heavenly meditation. So did
Enoch and Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David and Hezekiah, Paul, and many
others, ever walk with God, keep their hearts in Gods presence, seek his
face and the light of his countenance, study his word, and consider his works.
And so did this Gentleman set his head and heart a work every day more or
less, by serious Meditation, to draw nearer unto God, so to grow in knowledge,
and in grace, and to increase in spiritual strength; the better to encounter
all sad, and sharp occurrents which either in doing, or in suffering the will
of God, he might meet withal.

This he knew, was the special means prescribed by God himself unto Joshua,
Josh. 1.78 The necessity and excellency of M^ditation.
that he might make his way prosperous, and have good success, namely to
meditate in the word of God day and night, and not to turn aside from it,
neither to the right hand nor to the left.

This he knew was the mark and character of a blessed man, Psalm. 1.2 Da mihi
magistrum. Genesis 24.63.
to delight in the law of the Lord, an in that law to meditate day and night.

And therefore for the better practice of this holy duty, he did usually carry
about him some part of the Bible, Means and helps which he used.
or his Sermon Note book, if he went abroad into the field to meditate, as
Isaac did in the evening, or were upon a journey, as the Eunuch was, when he
was reading and meditating in his chariot, on the prophecy of Isaiah,
concerning Christ Jesus. Acts 8.28.
Or if he were within doors, he gave himself much to the reading of the Word,
and to make collections of promises, Reading of the word.
precepts, comforts, prohibitions, mercies, judgments, marks of Gods children,
brands of wicked men, and many other good things, as he found them in the way.
And these he made the matter, or ground of his meditation, and the means to
enlarge himself in this exercise.

And of godly men's writings. His Cammon-place book.
To which end also he did very diligently read, and peruse the works of
diverse learned, and godly men, and drew unto certain heads and Common-places,
what he thought most worthy observation, and of best use in them. Amongst the
rest he was much delighted, and refreshed, with D. Hals Contemplations and
Meditations, M. Greenhams works, M. Rogers his Seven Treatises, which for his
better help and greater comfort, he had abridged, and drawn into an Epitome,
almost all, until he was informed that another godly man, a worthy Divine had
already done it to his hand. M. Baine. His following of the rules of direction.


Afterward, when M. Egertons practice of Christianity (containing the sum
and substance of that book) came forth, he addressed himself to make his best
use of that part of it, touching the art, and exercise of this divine
Meditation, wherein he profitted so well, that he was very able, according to
those places and rules of direction, to enlarge his meditations upon any
subject, that did usually fall within his reach and compass. So that now he
might say after a sort with holy David, Psalm. 119.97.54.
O how love I thy law, O Lord! It is my meditation all the day. I have made thy
statutes my song and my meditation, in the days of my pilgrimage. The gain of
godliness. 1 Timothy 6.6.
The gain which he got by this exercise of holy meditation was an increase of
godliness, and godliness, we know, is great gain, having all sufficiency in it
self for true comfort, and contentment. The fruits which he reaped of this his
planting, Many benefits and fruits of it.
and watering were very gracious and precious. As 1. the killing or quelling of
many noisome lusts, 1 Killing of lusts.
which like caterpillars, or cancker-worms are wont to breed in the best trees.
2. The dislodging and driving out many unsavory and worldly cares and thought,
2 Driving out evil thoughts.
which bring nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit with them. 3. This bred
in him a godly watchfulnes over his words, 3. Watchfulness.
and works, heart, and life. 4. It wrought in him a gracious aptness, 4.
Aptness to good duties.
and cheerfulness unto all good duties, wherein he might be either serviceable
unto God, or profitable unto men. 5. It ministered unto him counsel and
strength for the spiritual war, 5 Counsel and strength
that he might stand fast in the evil day, against all his, and Gods enemies.
6. It brought him to a heaven upon earth, 6 Conversation in heaven.
teaching him so to have his conversation in heaven, that he might go about
earthly affairs with a heavenly mind, as he saw he had calling thereunto. 7.
It kept his heart in possession of his integrity and sincerity, 7 Possesing of
his integrity.
ever calling upon him to keep faith and a good conscience always, and in all
things. 8. It wrought his soul to a gracious tenderness, lowlines, and meeknes,
8 Sensiblenesse of sins and sorrows.
to be very sensible of other men's sins, and sorrows, as well as of his own. 9.
It was unto him as a sweet perfume composed of many delicate and costly spices,
9 A perfume to all his actions.
which made all his thoughts, words, and works, more sweet and savoury, so that
where ever he came, he left no ill sent, but a sweet savor of his graces, and
virtues behind him. 10. And lastly, 10 A preservative against secret and open
sins.
this exercise of meditation, was unto him a sovereign preservative, not only
against secret and open, lesser and grosser sins, but against all the
inticements and allurements, of the pleasures and profits, honors, and favors
of this present evil world, so that he was neither entangled in them, nor
inveagled by them.


O how great is the difference betwixt this Gent, Great difference.
and many others of his rank, and of greater and meaner estate also I which
professing themselves to be Christians, Many enemies to it Psalm. 2.1.2. Psalm.
36.4. Zac 8.17. Ge. 27.41. 1 Samuel 18.1.23.25. 2 Samuel 17.23. 2 Samuel 16.3. Ps.
52.1, 2 Ioh. 13.2. Acts 5.1, 2, 3. Many of the better sort fail in it.
are yet either enemies, or strangers to this Christian duty required at their
hands.

Some there be so empty of grace and goodness, and so full of malice, lust,
pride, covetousnes, and voluptuousnes, that they cannot fix their minds nor
settle their hearts upon any good thing, to any good end: but if they meditate,
it is but upon vain or vile things, devising mischief upon their beds, and
imagiving evil in their hearts against their brethren. Such were Esau, Saul,
Achitophel, Ziba, Doeg, Indas Ananias and Saphira, all of which had their
musings, and meditations their several imaginations and consultations, but
never a good man, nor any good matter of meditation amongst them all.

Some other there are of better minds and hearts, who yet for want of good
acquaintance with this holy and heavenly exercise of meditation, for the nature
and manner, helps and means, end and use of it, have little experience of the
benefit which comes by it, and so deprive themselves of many sweet comforts, and
refreshings; which otherwise they migh enjoy by the practice of it.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things, Hos. 14 9.
prudent and he shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

Thus much of his first daily duty, namely his holy and religious Meditation.

CHAP. XLVI.
THe second follows which was his diligent, His observation of Gods works.
Psa. 64.7, 8, 9, 10. Psa. 66.3.5.
and careful observation of the ways and works, mercies and judgments of the
Lord.

It was the ancient profession, and practice of the people of God, to wait
upon the Lord and to observe his dealing with the just, and with the wicked in
the world. The way of the Just is uprightness, thou most upright do weigh
the path of the just. Is. 26.7, 8.
Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord have we waited for thee, the desire of
our soul is to thy Name, Ver. 9.
and to the remembrance of thee. With my soul have I desired thee in the
night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early, for when thy
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. Let favor be showed to the wicked, Ver. 10.
yet will he not learn righteousness in the land of uprightness will he deal
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. See the memorable
judgment of God against Vigetius Sa^^ni^us, Claud. Herminianus, observed by
Tertullians Scapul. A book of Rememb. lob 35.24, 25.
Much after this manner did this faithful Servant of Christ raise up his
thoughts and quicken his soul to a diligent and due observation of the ways
and works of God, both in his mercies toward the godly and in his judgments
against the wicked.

To which end and purpose he has observed, and recorded diverse and sundry of
the works of the Lord, which he calls a declaration of some of the works of
the Lord, to the praise of his glorious Name, power, and mercy: adding and
annexing that admonition and exhortation out of Job, Remember that thou
magnify his works, which men behold, Every man may see it, man may behold in a
far off.

To set down all such works of God, as he has observed, See some examp. of
Gods mercies to Christians observed by Tertull. ad Sca c. 4. Some mercies of
God observed.
I now cannot; to pass over all in silence, I may not, I mean not; And
therefore, to give a taste of some for the clearing of this point, and the
farther satisfaction of such as delight therein, I think it very meet and
convenient at this present.

To observe Gods mercies, faith he, with all humble praise and thanksgiving to
God only.

Some few years before my brother Hardware dyed, he had R.K. to his servant,
who is now an In-holder in Chester. The said R. was (as many thought)
bewitched, and waxed weaker and weaker. So as my Brother Hardware sent unto
me, and my family to spend a day with him, in prayer and fasting: At that time
I had good M. Wats the Preacher with me, To R. K. his sick neighbour^.
whom I brought with me, and others of my family to the Peele, and there we
found the said R.K. exceeding sick and weak, and like an Anatomy of death,
nothing to look to, but skin and bones, and not likely to live a day; all hope
of life being gone. He was brought, and laid in a bed in the chamber where we
prayed, And in the same evening he began to amend, and the next morning did
walk abroad, and the third day began to be so strong, that he fell to his work
and labor, with much rejoicing to the Family. All laud and praise to God
therefore. To his Setvant.


Anno Domini 1601, and in the Summer time, John Robinson my servant, going with
his teame, the cart laden, and he falling by some occasion, the wheel went
over his leg, being iron bound, yet hurt him not any thing at all. Laus Deo.

Anno Domini 1602 and in July, my son John, To his Son in danger.
being in Peaksmoore, took up a seith to see how he could mow, and the scith
entered in at his stocking upon the shin bone, and followed his leg, shaving
the hair, and came out at the backside of his leg, and touched no flesh nor
skin. Laus Deo.

The same Month and in the same Meadow, To a Labourer.
One casting a pikell up and down before him, and behind him; one being behind
him, the two greins of the pikell ran on both sides of his leg, and hurt him
not. Hallelujah.

Memorand. in Anno 1613, and in the Hey-Harvest, One Richard Rogers, Some
Judgments of Godremarkable.
that dwelt in my farm at Wimble Strafford, under Master Thomas Puleston my
tenant there; seeing two godly persons going in the way, said to one with him;
Now will I dance and swagger, and swear to anger and make mad yonder two
Puritans. No sint inulta esse diu Divinu^ Numen scelera, vid Herb. departioda
popelo a m^ribus devorato, Hist Pol. lib. 1 cap. 11. Vide simile de Hatto E.
Mog apud O. a, mag. lib. 17. c 21.
And did so, to the great grievance of those two godly persons. And presently
the revenging hand of God was upon him; so that this wicked fellow fell so
sick, that he was carried home in a Cart, and within three days died most
fearfully. All glory to God.

These are some of those Memorable mercies, and Judgments of the Lord, which he
has carefully observed, and recorded: I will let all the rest alone, saving
one, which being the most remarkable of all other; he has taken greatest
pains to observe, and set down in all the parts and passages of it.

The hand of God upon the Boy at Northwich.
This was concerning the boy of Northwich, his name Thomas Harrison, about 11,
or 12 years old, who was so strangely and wonderfully afflicted and tormented,
that many held him to be really possessed with a Devil. Others thought he was
bewitched: Some ascribed all to natural causes, few did endeavor to see and
acknowledge (as this Gentleman did) that though Satan might have a finger,
Satan's Malice, Gods Mercy.
yet the Lord had a chief hand in this Judgment, and that where Satan would
show himself cruel and malicious, to vex and destroy a poor child, there the
Lord was pleased to manifest, and declare himself to be merciful, and
gracious, in susteining and preserving of him.

CHAP. XLVII.
IT would be too tedious to set down, one quarter of that which he has written
of this child, partly from that which he himself saw, and partly from that
which he heard, and received under sufficient and faithful witnesses, having
spent above 14 leaves in 40, in recording of these things, All that he has
observed of him may be drawn to these 3 heads; 10 his violent and wonderful
fits, and passions; 20 his strange and horrible gestures and actions; 30 his
admirable and almost incredible sayings, and speeches, and all these without
any natural understanding, sense or feeling, for the most part in the
suffering, or in the doing of them.


His fits and passions.
His fits and passions were much after this manmer, Being brought so low, so
weak, and feeble for any natural strength that he was nothing (as we say) but
skin and bones; yet for the space of 24 hours every day (having one half
hour which they called: his awakening time, wherein they gave him a little
refreshing by some food to sustain him) he showed himself to be of that
extraordinary strength, that if he would fold his hands together, no man could
pull them asunder, if he did roll his head, or toss his whole body (as usually
he did) no man could stay, or restrain him; he would with mavelous
astonishment to the hearers, and beholders, sometimes howl like a Dog, mew like
a Cat, roar like a Bear, froth and some like a Boar. When any prayed with
him, his passions were the strongest, and his rage and violence the greatest,
ready to fly in their faces, and to drown their voices by his clamours,
yellings and outcries. If one came near him with a Bible though under his
cloak, and never so secret, yet would he run upon him, and ramp upon him, with
great violence, to have gotten it from him, and to rend it in pieces, as he did
diverse, when he could come unto them. Sometimes he would lie along, as if he
had been stark dead, his color gone, and mouth so wide open, that he would on
a suddeine thrust both his hands at once into it.

His gestures and actions.
And as for his gestures they were mavelous strange. In so great weakness
he would leap and skip up and down, from his bed unto the table, from the
table to the window, from the window to his bed again, and all with that
nimblenesse and quickness, as scarce any professed Tumbler could do the like.
And that which makes the matter yet more admirable, having all this while his
legs grown up close unto his buttocks, whereof he could now have no present use
for such feats of activity: Sometimes we saw his chin drawn up unto his nose,
so that his mouth could scarce be seen; Sometimes his chin and brows drawn
almost together, like a bended Bow. His countenance fearful, by yawning,
mowing, etc.

He was brought to the Bishop.
The poor Child being thus tormented, the Bishop for his better satisfaction,
hearing so much of his strange affliction, sent for him. His parents brought
him: And once the Bishop prayed with him, when the boy was so outrageous, that
he flew out of his bed, and all his men were afraid, and one of them fell into
a sownd, and then such a stir about him, that the Bish. was glad to lay hold on
the boy, ramping at the windows to have gotten out that way. But they could not
find him a counterfeat, as some imagined.

The Bishops License for a private fast for his release.
Afterward this Rev. Bish being moved with compassion toward the boy, did
grant a License himself, together with the High Commissioners, for a private
Fast in his fathers house, for his better help and release, according to Gods
good pleasure, and that in these words.

Having seen the bodily affliction of this child, and observed in sundry fits
very strange effects, and operations, either proceeding from some natural
unknown causes, or of some Diabolical practices: We think it convenient and
fit for the ease and deliverance of the said child, from his said grievous
affliction, that Prayer be made publicly for him, by the Minister of the
Parish, etc. And that certain Preachers, namely these following: M. Gerrard, M.
Harvy, M. Pierson, etc. these and none other to repair to the said chid by
turns, as their leisure will serve, and to use their discretion for private
Prayers and Fasting, for the ease and comfort of the afflicted, etc.

Ric. Cestren. David Yale. Griffith Vaughan. Hugh Burches.
According to the tenor of these directions, Master Bruen tells us, who did
join together in Prayer and Fasting to that end.

Master Harvy, and M. Pierson, says he, two godly Preachers, were with him,
prayed and fasted. My self also and some 20 or 30 more. But God gave not
deliverance at that time.

Now as for his Speeches strange in themselves, 3 His Speeches.
yet more strange in this, that he never uttered any of them, but when he was
in his fits, without any understanding or knowledge of what he did, or what he
said:

I will give you a taste of some few of them.

Jesus says (so he usually began his Speeches) The Devil when he comes, takes
away my hearing, seeing, understanding, hands, legs, that I should have no
senses, nor lims, to glorify God withal.

Jesus says, If they would have cast out the evil spirit, they should have
come better provided.

Jesus says, Some men did think that he that prayed had a better Faith than
the other, but he had not.

Jesus says, I have but three Devils, It is like one of the spirits will go
out of me, and go and take counsel of a great number of foul spirits, and come
again and trouble me worse.

Jesus says, Some folk will say that the Witch will not look one in the
face, but she will look here a way and there a way. And so he turned his hands
this way and that way.

Jesus says, The witch says she has done me no hurt that she knows of. A
witch may overlook a child, but she cannot make him in such a case as I am in.

The Devil is afraid when he hears any word that he must be cast out, then
he quakes.

Jesus says, Now the witch would feign undo that which she has done, but now
she cannot undo it.

Jesus says, Some say, if I were bewitched or possessed, I could neither move
my tongue, nor my lips: But the Devil can move both my tongue and my lips.

Satan I am bound to a hard prentice-ship, for thou will not give me leave
neither holy day, nor work-day to eat a morsel of bread.

The Papist that brought the stinking weed and laid it to my nose, if God had
not had a stroke in this, would have cast out the Devil. And a boy was
confederate with him. Now the Devil is possessed of their souls; And he must
continue a little while with me, but a great while with them.

God pulls the Devil back with a ring in his nose, yet the Devil shakes my
faith as if it would go out of me.

They may know there is some ill thing in me, for when I should say may
prayers, he would come up and stop me, and then I must stay a little, and then
again, and he would stay me.

Being in a sore fit and a great rage, biting his own hands, gnashing with his
teeth foming like a boar and casting blood and filth out of his mouth, he
uttered these words, Proud witch, witch proud, I will tell you who these
witches work: all upon life, all upon life, all upon life; but they cannot take
my life from me.

Well, these drunkards and whoremasters do not think upon their sins; well, how
then? There is no drunkard that does drink one spoonefulor drop of drink more
than does suffice nature, but the Devil does pen it down in his book: Well, it
is a great book, and he does keep it close until the day of Indgement.

And then he will lay it to their faces. At which time the hills will tremble
and quake, and the Devil will quake, yea he does quake for fear now.

Well, some would think it a great while to be bound with the Devil as I am, a
12 month or 2 years; but it is better to be so, than to wallow in
drunkenness, swearing, and whoring; for the Devil does work in their souls.

Well, some will say, how can the Devilly in so little a room? Well, the Devil
is as the wind, for when he did take a man away out of a chamber, be came in at
the little hole; but how did he take him away? even out at the top of the
chimney.

Well, there are some Papists, and some Atheists, and some of no Religion; woe
be to those that dye suddenly, for they have no time to repent, and especially
those that live in drunkenness, or whoring, or swearing.

Jesus says, they say he shall not out of me, but when God comes he will
strike home.

Many and many other more of his strange speeches I pass over, contenting my
self with these few, which were taken from his own mouth by the hand, and
under the testimony of faithful witnesses, some at one time and some at
another, as he himself did then deliver them, and as this worthy Gentleman has
in his diligent Observation of this, amongst other of Gods Judgments, made
mention of them and recorded them.

This therefore that has been spoken shall suffice, concerning the second
daily duty, which this Gent performed, namely, his careful observation of Gods
ways and works, mercies, and judgments amongst the sons of men.

CHAP. XLVIII.
His private invocation:
THe third follows, viz. His Religious invocation of the Name of God every
day. Now although it be true that he did very constantly perform this duty
every day, morning and evening with his Family (as formerly we have heard) yet
did he not hold that sufficient for himself, unless he did open his heart,
and pour out his soul in private before the Lord, making his requests known
unto him, Phil. 4.6.
in all manner of supplications, with Thanksgiving.

And this he desired and endeavored to perform, according to the Apostles
direction; 1 Timothy 2.8.
In every place lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting, that is, in
faith and love.

For he did not confine himself for his private Prayers unto any one place,
Not confined to one place.
neither within doors, nor without, but ever took his fittest opportunity, as
time and place might best move him, or lead him unto this Duty. Following
herein the holy example of Christ, and of other holy men, setting themselves a
part for this service, sometimes in and upon the higher rooms of the house
with Peter, sometimes in the field with Isaac, Acts 10.9. Genesis 24.63: Luc. 22:
39, 40. Ephesians. 3.13 14. Nehem. 2.4.
sometimes in the mount, and sometimes in the garden, with Christ Jesus;
sometimes in the Prison, with Paul; and sometimes in the Palace, with
Nehemiale; sometimes upon his journey with Jacob, and sometimes at the end of
it, Genesis 28.20. Genesis 24.12. Psalm. 6.6.9. Act. 10.30.
with Eliezer; sometimes on his bed, with David and sometimes in his closet, with
Cornelius.

If he were in his own house or about home, he had diverse places which he
interchangeably used for this purpose, because he would not be too much
observed to frequent one place, lest he should draw himself into some suspicion
of vanity or hypocrisy. He had variety of Closets, Studies, Chambers, and
other convenient rooms if he were within: and if he went abroad, he had his
Gardens, Orchards, Arbors, Groves, Woods and Fields, Walks and Shades, where
he did delight to speak and commune with his best friend, and to seek the face
and favor, help and succor of his heavenly Father, in and through the
mediation of his Son Christ Jesus.

And as he was choice of the place, so was he careful of the time which he
constantly set apart every day for his private prayer, His time for private
praver. Fsal 119.164. Seven times a day.
and praise: 7 times a day did he reverently and conscionably perform this
duty, causing his prayers to ascend as incense, and the lifting up of his hands
to be as an Evening Sacrifice.

The several seasons and times he took were these: The first in the morning,
before any of his family were stirring, being usually first up in the house,
Psa 55.27.7
and that both Summer and Winter. The second was before his breake-fast after
prayer in his family. The third was immediately before dinner. The fourth a
little while after dinner. The fist a little before supper. The sixth not long
after supper. And the seventh, a little before he took his Chamber to go to
his rest. Neither was he only so plentiful for the number of his spiritual
Devotions, as he was (by the grace of God) powerful in the manner, measure,
end, and issue of them. Powerful in prayer. Romans 8.26, 27.1 John 5.14. I am.
5.16, 2 Cor. 12.7.
For being full of Faith and of the holy Ghost, he could speak unto God by his
own spirit, in his own words, according to his own Will, and in the name of
his own Son: And so we know he could not but speak well, and speed well,
either finding that which he craved and sought for at Gods hands, or obtaining
more than all that he could desire or deserve: My grace is sufficient for thee.
And herein we are the rather induced thus to think, because usually, his
prayer was fortified by Faith, supported by Hope, inflamed with Zeal,
beautified with Humility, purified by Sincerity, and established by Constancy.
Now unto his Private Praying, he did usually upon some extraordinary occasion
(his own, or others) adjoyne private Fasting, His private Fasting.
which he was very frequent and fervent in, and that with so great austerity,
that he did much weaken his body, as well as afflict his soul thereby, as
sometimes Timothy did in the like case, 1 Timothy 5.23

Eusebius has reported and recorded it, Eusebius. etc: Hist. lib. 2. cap. 23.
of James the Just, that with often and continual bowing of his knees before
the Lord, for himself and the people, in earnest and fervent prayer for
remission of their sins, he has so lost the sense and feeling of his knees,
that they were as hard, and so as sensles, as the knees of a Camel. I will not
compare this John, with that James; neither for sanctity of heart, nor for
austerity of life. Tender? prayers and hard knees.
But for their Affections and Actions, Prayers and knees, tenderness of the
one, and hardness of the other. I think no man may justly put them far asunder,
if he ever knew how well they did herein agree together. Tuis oculis durities
de genibus camelorum in illo Sancto Asellae corpuseulo, prae orandi frequentia,
obcalluisse perspecta est. Hieron. ad Marcellum de laudibus Asellae.


The matter of his private prayers.
Now in these his private devotions, his desires and endeavors were
principally bent, to search his heart, and to examine his life, to confess and
bewail his special sins and infirmities, craving pardon for them, and power
against them.

And as he found any thing to be amiss in his Family by any transgression, or
affliction, he brought it in prayer before the Lord, to procure some help, and
healing of the same from his hand.

Here also did he mourn for the sins of Sion, Sins of Sion. Ezekiel. 9.4.
and take to heart the afflictions of Joseph, and desolations of Jerusalem.
Here did he bemone and bewail the common and gross sins of the Time, Sins of
the Time. Psa. 119.136.
and afflict his heart for the barrenness, or backsliding of many professors
of Religion, for their embracing of the world, and forsaking of their first
love. Praise and Thanksgiving.
Here did he also rejoice in the Lord, and praise his holy Name, for earthly
and heavenly blessings bestowed upon him, and sometimes for great deliverances
which he had wrought for him.

And thus did he converse with his God in this third Duty of Prayer and Praise,
in the Invocation of Gods Name every day.

CHAP. XLIX.
NOw follows the fourth, which was his holy Imitation of his heavenly Father
every day.

And this he endeavored, by conforming himself unto his Image, in expressing
the Properties, Virtues, Affections, and Actions of him that had begot him, and
called him to be conformable to the Image of his Son Christ Jesus.

To this end he daily labored to be more and more renewed in the spirit of
his mind, in knowledge, righteousness, Ephesians: 4.24. Col. 3.10.
and holiness of Truth according to the Image of him that created him.

And this he knew was the Duty of all Gods obedient Children, to be holy as
he is Holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Lev. 11. 44.
because it is written: Be ye Holy, for I am Holy.

This he knew also was charged upon us, Mat. 5.45, 46
by our Savior Christ Jesus, that in all our Affections and Actions, we should
behave our selves like the children of our Heavenly Father, and labor to
resemble him, in doing good unto all, hurt unto none, Amicos diligere omnium
est, inimicos autem solorum Christianorum: Tertull lib. ad Scapull Cap. 2.
yea in doing good unto the bad, as as well as to the good, and to our enemies
as well as to our friends, Mat. 5.48. Luke 6.36. Romans 2.4.
striving to be perfect as he is perfect; merciful as he is merciful,
righteous as he is righteous, wise as he is wise, patient as he is patient,
faithful as he is faithful, and endeavoring to hate iniquity, which he
hates, to love righteousness, which he loves, to delight in the Saints, in
whom he delights; and to hate the wicked, Psalm 5: 5: Heb. 1.9. 2 Cor. 3. last
whom his soul abhors.

After this manner did this gracious Gentle. set the Lord always before his
eyes, and following this blessed pattern and example of his Heavenly Father,
with all godly care and good Conscience; and so with open face, as in a Glass
the glory of the Lord, he was translated into his Image, from glory to glory;
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

And thus have we declared unto you the first of those three general heads,
proposed for the further opening and manifesting of the virtues of his life;
viz. his holy conversing with God, which consisted in his Meditation,
Observation of Gods Mercies and Judgments, Invocation of his Name in Prayer
and Praise, and Imitation of his blessed example in his Properties and
Affections, Words and Works.

CHAP. L.
NOw we come to the second, which is his conversation in the world. 2 His
conversation in the world. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 5. in fol. p. 166.


When Socrates was demanded, what countreyman he was, he answered, that he
was(...), a citizen of the world: and so he might well, knowing no other world,
but this present evil world. But this Gentleman, although (by his natural
birth and condition) of the same city and society with Socrates, yet (by his
new birth and regeneration) being called out of the world, Ioh. 15.19. 1 Ioh.
5.4.
and having by his faith overcome the world, though he were in the world, yet
was he not of the world; and though he were amongst the children of the world,
a froward and a crooked generation, Luke 16.8 Ephesians. 2.19
yet was he even then a citizen of the holy city, and of the household of God,
and a son of the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother of us all: And so
being(...), he had his(...), Ephesians. 2.19.
.i. his conversation in heaven, even while he was in earth, Phil. 3.20. So
that, of all that ever we knew in these parts, he might have taken up the words
of the Apostle with best warrant and most comfort, Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world: For such indeed was the course of his life, that he did desire nothing
more, than to walk worthy God, 1 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
endeavoring to express the very power of godliness, in the fruits of
righteousness, and holiness, to the praise of his glorious grace. Phil. 1.9,
10, 11. Phil. 2.15, 16.
And that he might so hold forth the word of life in his lamp and lantern,
that he might both shine as a light in himself, and be a light unto others
also in this present world.

Now for the better clearing and manifesting of this point, we will set down
certain rules of direction which he much desired to follow, partly as
preparatives for a godly conversation in the world, and partly as preservatives
against the contagion and corruptions of the same.

1 As first, Resolution against the world. God presence.
A holy resolution, so to use the world, as neither abusing it, nor being
abused by it, but to keep himself unspotted from it.

2 The second, A full purpose of heart, to keep his heart always in Gods
presence, knowing and believing that he hears all his words, and beholds
all his works.

3 The third, Striving against sin.
A constant and conscionable standing and striving against all manner of sin,
especially the sins of the time, and the common corruptions that are in the
world through lust.

4 The fourth, Desire to do good.
A godly desire in every company either to do good unto others, or to receive
good from others.

5 The fifth, Just dealing.
A good intention to deal justly, honestly and uprightly with all men, doing
no otherwise unto them, than we would have them to do unto us.

6 The sixth, Take all to the best.
An honest disposition to take doubtful things in the best sense, and best
part: so far as well we may, without wound of conscience in our selves, or
offense giving unto others.

7 The seventh, A careful watchfulness over our heart and tongue, spirit and
speech, that our words being powdered with salt, Watchfulness.
may minister grace, not grief, unto the hearers.

8 The eight, To be sparing in speech.
A great willingness to be slow to speak, and swift to hear, yea sometimes
to hear and see much, and to say little, unless we have a good calling
thereunto.

9 The ninth, Renouncing all worldly fashions and humors.
An utter renouncing of all the vain conformities of the world, neither
following the fashions, nor serving the humors of vain, or vile persons, nor
staying longer than needs we must amongst them, if by occasion we be in
company with them.

10 The tenth, Peaceable.
A good inclination to seek and follow peace with all men, so far as in us
lies, and so far as it may be had, and held with holiness, cutting off all
occasions, and provocations to strife and variance, with all speed that may be.

11 The eleventh, Contentedness in every estate.
A contented mind, and good courage in every estate and condition of life,
entertaining all crosses with patience, and turning them to their best use, and
embracing all comforts with thanksgiving, bearing and bringing forth the right
and proper fruit of them.

12 The twelfth and last, To keep our peace with God.
An unfeigned desire and endeavor to nourish our peace with God, walking as
Abraham did, humbly and uprightly before him, and referring all that ever we
think, speak or do, to the furtherance of our own reckoning, and to his farther
praise and glory.

According to these and other the like rules of righteousness and holiness,
he was taught of God to order his conversation aright in the fear of God. Iam.
3.13.
And thus he attained unto some measure and degree of that wisdom and grace
which S. James commends so well and worthily in a found Christian, Who is a
wise man and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show out of a good
conversation, his works, with meekness of wisdom: For so did this Gentleman
work and walk, even according to that wisdom which is from above; the
properties whereof are very precious: For, it is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.

CHAP. LI.
AND here I think it will be well worthy our labor and pains, if (for the
better confirmation hereof) we measure this Gentleman's life by this line of
heavenly wisdom, and take a special view of these jewels of grace, which
being attendants upon it, in his person, did much beautify and adorn that
which now we speak of, his holy and religious conversation.

He endeavored to be pure.
First therefore according to this wisdom which God had given him from above,
he endeavored to make his conversation pure and holy, answerable to that
religion which he did profess, which by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, is
pure and undefiled before God and the Father, and (as here it is said) it is
first pure. He was no doubt well atquainted with his natural corruptions,
Psalm. 51.5. Romans 7.20, 23, 24 Act. 1^.15.
passions, and pollutions of sin, both original and actual, inward and
outward, spiritual and corporal, and knew that though he should wash
himself with snow water, yet could he not say, My heart is clean, 2 Cor. 7. 1
Job 9.30.31. Zac. 13. 1. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Rev. 1.6. Rev. 7.14. 1. Cor. 6.11. 1
Pet. 1.15.
I am cleansed from all my filthiness, so long as he did bear about with him a
body of sin and of death. And yet he knew as well also, that the Lord having
opened the fountain of Grace unto him, and powered clean water upon him, and
washed him in the blood of Christ both for the remission of his sins, and for
purging away the pollution of them, He was no longer to be held polluted and
unclean, but holy and pure in his person through Christ, and so ought to
strive, to be more and more, in all manner of holy conversation.

And therefore hereunto, Act, 24.16
he did ever most carefully and conscionably endeavor himself, that being
espoused to one husband, 2 Cor. 11.12.
he might preserve and present himself as a chaste virgin unto Christ Jesus.

1 Pure in heart. Mat. 5.8. 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 4.28.
To which end he labored to be, first Pure in heart, knowing that Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. And this he did by faith and
repentance, and the help of Gods spirit every day, purging out old sins, and
renewing the beauty of former graces.

2 To be pure in hand, free from all iniquity and injury, and so washing his
hands in purity, 2 Pure in hand. 1 Timothy 2.8.
and innocence, he was ever ready, in every place, to lift up pure hands unto
God, and to compass his Altar.

3 Pure in tongue. Ephesians. 4.29. Esa. 19.18 Psalm. 37.30.
3 To be pure in lips and tongue, never suffering any rotten speech, or
unseemely word to fall from him; but having his language as pure as the
language of Canaan, his tongue did oftentimes speak of judgment, and his
speeches were sometimes as the very Oracles of God.

4 To be pure in his senses, 1 Pet. 4 11 Aug. Conf. lib. 10. Cap. 34. Job. 31.
1. Psalm. 119.37.
his eyes he made a covenant withal, to restrain them from wanton looks,
and to shut up those windows against all spectacles of vanity. And then only
or especially to open them, when they might serve as necessary lights unto the
body, or to behold the works of the Lord, that so he might be the better by
them. His cares were circumcised, Aug. Conf;. l. 10. c. 33. Rev. 2.7. Hos.
14.8. 1 These. 4.4
nailed to the posts of Gods house, bored by the spirit of grace, for audience
and obedience, to hear what the spirit speaks unto the Churches, What have I
to do any more with idols, I have heard him, I have observed him.

5 To be pure in his whole body, Jude v. 23. 2 Cor. 7.1 2 Timothy 2.21.
ever preserving, and possessing his vessel in holiness, and in honor, and
hating the very garment spotted by the flesh.

6 To be pure in the whole man, both soul and body, which he performed very
effectually, when clensing himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
Amaremte Juelle si no^ esses Zuinglianus: ^e eticus fide, vita certe videris
angelus: honcslus es at ^^heranus, Aumph^i^ vita ^u^llis Heb. 12.16. 1 Ioh.
3.12 Gal. 4.29. Isa. 36.4.7 2 Pet. 2.8. Isaiah. 5^.^5.
he became a vessel of honor, sanctified and meet for his masters use, and
prepared unto every good work.

And thus according to that wisdom which was given him from above, he became
first pure.

But here, some man will think, that, to be so pure in heart, and life, word
and deed, as you speak of him, to his great praise, will be returned back,
both upon him and you, to his just rebuke, and your farther blame.

For, are not we now fallen into those times, and are we not compassed about
with such profane Esaus, murdering Caines, scoffing Ismaels, railing
Rabsekahs, filthy and cursed Sodomites, that a man can hardly refaine from any
wickedness, but he makes himself a prey, as the Prophet speaks, nor seeks
after any goodness, but they will be ready to vex and persecute him, Psalm.
38.20.
and will needs be his adversaries, because he follows the thing that good
is? Doubtless, it may be said of us, Hermodorus E phe so pulsus quod f^ugi
esset, Cic. Tusc-Quaest. l. 5. Sic Aristides Ostracismo pulsus Athenis
Ostracism. Arist. Polit. lib. 3. c. 9. Tertul. in Apoluget. cap. 2. Ego Lucium
virum sapientem repent factum Christianum, defero. Tertul. ib. 1 Cor. 4.13.
Isa. 8.18. Luc. 2.34.
for many persons and places, as once it was of Rome, Omnia cum liceant, non
licet esse pium, All things are there lawful, only to be a godly and a good
man, is held amongst them to be unlawful.

So Tertullian has observed it, to be the streyne and manner of those times,
Cajus Sejus bonus vir, ideo tantum malus, quia Christianus, Cajus Sejus is a
good man, therefore evil only because he is a Christian.

And even so the case stands with us at this day, and that in our Israel, where
the children of God that desire to be (as their father is, and they are charged
to be) pure and holy, are no better esteemed, but (...) even as filth of the
world, and offscouring of all things, even until this day. Or at the best but
as signs and wonders in Israel, and marks to be shot at, as Christ himself
was (...), a Butt or mark to be shot at, by such as bend their tongues like
Bows, to shoot out their arrows, even base and bitter words against him. The
Disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord, if they have
called the master of the house Beelzebub, Mar. 10.24.25.
what better language can we expect from them, being his poor servants in the
same house?

But what good reason have these vain or vile persons, to open their foul
mouths so wide against purity in religion, and holiness of life, and
conversation? One of their best, is that which they have borrowed of their
father Caine, and which he was taught of his father the Devil, when he slew
his brother. And what was his reason, wherefore slew he him? Because his own
works were evil and his brothers good. 1 Ioh. 3.^2.
Is it then your antipathy against goodness, and your enmity against the godly
for their holiness, that provokes you to swell against them, and so much to
spleen and spite them, that you reproach and revile them, Act 7.54
and are ready to burst with anger, because you cannot wreake your malice upon
them? Isa. 57.3, 4. Genesis 3 15 ^ Kin. 21 10. 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 4.29.30.
If this be your reason, of this your cruel dealing; then judge you your own
selves of what breed you are. Are ye not rather of the seed of the serpent,
than of the seed of the woman? Are ye not rather sons of Belial, than the
children of God? And are ye not rather the children of the bond woman, with
scoffing Ismael, than children of the free woman, with holy Isaac.

CHAP. LI.
BUt why should it seem so strange a thing unto you, that every true Christian
should so carry himself (as this Gentleman did) that he may show himself pure
and holy in all manner of conversation?

Does not our heavenly father command it? 4 Pet. 1.16
Be ye holy, for I am holy. Does not the virtue of the death that henceforth
we dye unto sin, Romans 6.5, 6, 11, 13, ^8.
and live unto him, yielding our members to be servants to righteousness unto
holiness? Does not his blessed Spirit challenge it at our hands That we be
sanctified throughout, in soul, spirit, and body, 1 Co. 6.12 1 These. 5.23.
and preserved blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ? Does not
the Word of God tell us, that, This is the will of God, even our
sanctification, that every one learn to possess his vessel in holiness and
in honor? Heb. 11. and 12.1. and 13.7. Ephesians. 2.19.
Do not the examples of Ephesians. 5.3.1 Tim. 2.2.
such a conversation as becomes saints, in all godliness and honesty? Again
consider, What is the true religion? It is pure and undefiled before God. Iam.
1.27.
And who is a true professor of this Religion? He that is pure in heart, and
undefiled in his way. And what is the word, Mat. 5.8. Psalm. 119.1.
which is the rule of this Religion? The words of the Lord are pure words, as
silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times. Psa. 19.10 Pla. 12.6.
And what are the Sacraments annexed to this Word? They are sacred Signs, and
Seals, of holy mysteries in heavenly things. And 1 Cor. 11.24. Romans 4.11
Unto the pure all things are pure, they have a great liberty and large Tit.
1.15. 1 Cor. 3.22.23.
and in the use and comfort of them. Their holiness here is a pledge of their
happiness hereafter: Having their fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting
life. Heb 12.14. To. 6.22. Ioh. 17.24 1 Ioh 3.3 2 Timothy 2.21.
And what to be with Christ where he is, and as he is for ever? He must of
necessity purify himself even as he is pure, and so being a vessel of
honor sanctified, he shall be meet for his Masters use, and prepared unto
every good work.

Such are the persons, and such are the things which the Lord requires and
expects, in the profession and practice of every true Christian: Mal. 3.17.
And are not all these pure and precious in the eyes of Almighty God, and in
the sight of heavenly Angels, and holy men? Mat. 7.6
Has God given us these Pearls, and dare any so play the swine as to trample
them under feet and contemn them? Does the Lord reckon all holy persons, Psalm
13 5.4
pure and precise professors, as his chief treasure; the Church esteem them
as her holy children, Gal. 4.26.
and the true children of the Church, take them (as Christ himself does) for
holy brethren: Heb. 3.1. Heb. 2.11 12. Phil. 3.2. Gal. 5.15.
And dare any be so vile as to fly upon these like dogs, and that not only to
bark against them, but even to bite and to devour them?

Are not all such persons and things as we have named, perfumed with the sweet
odours of Christ's offerings, Rev. 8.3.4. 1 Ioh. 2.20.
and sufferings? Are they not all anointed with the holy oil of the Spirit,
as vessels and instruments of the Sanctuary, from their head, that holy one,
Christ Jesus? If so they be (as without all doubt they are) Then who is he that
bears the name of a Christian (as if he were a partaker of this anointing)
dare cast any foul aspersions, Act. 11.26.
as of Singularity, Schism, Puritanisme, Preciseness, Hypocrisy, and such
like, upon such persons, because they frame their lives to be pure and holy by
exercising themselves unto godliness in these things? Such may complain with
Tertullian, Pro tanta innocentia, pro tanta probitate, pro justitia, pro
pudicitia, pro fide, pro veritate, pro Deo vivo cremamur, Tertullian. lib. ad
Scap. Cap. 4.

Now because there be some, both in Court and Country, City and Sanctuary,
that pretend greater wisdom and moderation; they will not be so profane on
the left hand as Esau, neither will they be so preciseon the right hand with
Jacob, but either just of Gallio his humor, they care little for these things,
or of the Laodicean temper, Act. 18.14.17. Rev. 3.16.17.18. Romans 2.20 2 Timothy
3.5.
neither hot nor cold, yet think all is well, and nothing amiss among them.
And these pretend, that they have(...), a form of knowledge, and a form of
Godliness, but wanting the fruit of the one, and the power of the other, they
are no friends to sincerity and purity of religion in themselves, and show
themselves great adversaries to the holy profession and practice of it in
others, that desire to conform themselves to the tenor, and truth of it. Now
because I say there are some such, See the book of Common prayer.
I would willingly demand of these (so great opposites to a godly and holy
conversation) when they come before the Lord in the public assembly, and offer
up their solemn prayers unto God with Gods Minister (after confession of their
sins) that hereafter they may live a godly, righteous, and sober life, and
pray in another place, that the rest of their life may be pure and holy: I
would demand what their meaning is thus to pray unto the Lord? If they pray in
sincerity for a godly, righteous and sober life, why do they reprove that in
others, which they would beg of God for themselves? Why are they so great
adversaries, to the pure and holy profession of religion? When they pray
themselves that the rest of their own lives may be pure and holy?

Or if they pray otherwise in Hypocrisy, they do then but mock God, and
dissemble with him in their double hearts, and so deal wickedly and
deceitfully both with God and men.

O ye formal Hypocrites, pull out first the beam that is in your own eye,
Mat. 7.5. 2. Tim. 3.5.
and then look to the mote which is in your brothers eye. You catch after a
form and shadow of Religion, and content your selves with it: Be neither
envious, nor malicious against such of Gods children, as being your brethren by
Profession, have gotten hold, not of the shadow, but of the substance of it,
and in a holy conversation (otherwise than you do) show forth the power and
fruit of it.

He which is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy, Rev.
22.11.
let him be filthy still, And he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

CHAP. LII.
THus have we heard, that this Gentleman's conversation in the profession of
Religion, according to that wisdom which God had given him from above, I am.
3.17.
was first pure, and so stands accepted of God, and approved of all good men,
howsoever maligned and reproached by the wicked and profane, whose wisdom is
from below only.

First Pure, I am. 3.15.
and then Peaceable.

To be pure in heart and life breeds and brings forth true peace in both, Romans
5.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
for being so at peace with God, we have peace with our selves, and seek for
it with others, and one for another also. Heb. 12.14.


This was a second grace which did beautify this godly Gentleman's
conversation: Romans 12.18.
He was by grace of a very quiet and peaceable disposition, which he did very
graciously manifest in these particulars. 2 Peaceable.


1 He desired to keep peace with all men, Heb. 12.14.
and not to be at any difference or variance with any, if by any means he
could prevent it. Genesis 13.8 1 Cor. 13.5.
2 He would not be easily provoked by indignities nor injuries. 3 He had rather
forgive twenty wrongs than revenge one. Number. 12.3. Romans 12.19.
4 He would very willingly purchase and buy out his peace, sometimes with his
own loss, Mat. 5.39 Genesis 13.8, 9.
and by parting with his own right, if otherwise he could not well procure it.
5 He would shut his ears against tale-bearers (having been sometimes abused
by them) being the very seed-men of strife, Pro. 26.20, 21.
and firebrarnds of contention. 6 He would ordinarily recompense evil with
good, frowardness with kindness, Romans 12.21.
and fruits of passion and bitterness with fruits of moderation and good
affection.
To make all these, or the most of them more evident by one instance in his own
practice.

There was a Gentleman, one of his neighbors, A hard message.
who conceiving some great displeasure against him upon a very small occasion,
in his heat and ruff sent his man to this Gentleman, M. Bruen, with this
message, That his Master did inhibit and forbid him to come upon any foot of
his land, or any of his servants or family whosoever, upon their peril. To
whom he presently made this reply, Tell your master, A soft answer, and wise.
for answer to your message, only thus much: That if it please your Master to
come upon any part of my land, or any of his servants o^ family, to come into
my fields, at his, or their pleasure, they shall be all very kindly welcome:
And that if he himself will come unto my house, he shall be much more welcome
also. This answer savouring so well of grace and peace, and being so wifely
seasoned with discretion and good affection, did kill the heart of his
adversary with kindness, Pro. 15.1. Romans 12.20.
and as if coals of fire had been cast upon his head, did cause him to melt
into tears and tenderness, and so having such a return from so gracious a
Gentleman, of peace, for war; of love, for hatred; of mildness, for
fierceness; of discretion, for foolishness; of so great kindness, for so
great unkindnesse; he presently changed his mind, and being willingly
reconciled, became a faithful and true friend unto him for ever afterward.
Now as he was thus peaceable in procuring and preserving his own peace with
others, so was he no less careful of preventing or removing and occasions of
variance and strife amongst neighbors and friends, A peacemaker.
both near about him, and farther from him. If he saw natural brethren likely
to fall out (as even they are not always the best friends) he would lovingly
and wisely admonish them for peace, Genesis 45.24.
as Joseph did his brethren, You are brethren, fall not out by the way.

If he saw two Gentlemen's servants at strife and variance, fearing least such
sparks of contention begun by servants, might kindle a fire and flame (as many
times they do) betwixt the masters: He would begin to take up the matter with
the Masters, and then appease and pacify the servants, with meek and gentle
words of wisdom and peace, for their better instruction and reformation,
following herein the example of holy Abraham, who, upon a strife betwixt his
brother Lots heardsmen and his own, spoke thus wisely and peaceably unto him;
Let there be, I pray thee, no strife between me and thee, nor between my
heardsmen, Genesis 13.8.
and thy heardsmen, for we are brethren. And as he spoke peaceably unto him,
so did he deal (for peace sake) as peaceably with him, in giving him the
choice of the right hand, or of the left, in all the land before them, Genesis
13.9.
though he were superior both in place and grace unto him. And so would this
Gentleman make peace between Masters and servants. If he saw two Christians
strive together, as Moses did two Hebrews, he would take up him that did the
wrong, with the same, or the like words as Moses did, Wherefore smitest thou
thy fellow? And if sometimes he had no better recompense for his good mind and
meaning, than Moses had (as commonly the most wicked and injurious are most
rude and clamorous) he would be content to sit down with the worse, as Moses
did.

Thus have we seen, that walking according to that rule of heavenly wisdom,
which the Lord had given him, he was first pure in his conversation, and then
peaceable. And so the fruit of righteousness was sown in peace of him that
made peace.

CHAP. LIII.
HE was also according to the same rule, and quality of the same wisdom,
Gentle.
Gentle, that is, of a moderate, calm, and quiet temper, meek in spirit, and
mild in speech. This was a more special work of God in him, and a remarkable
fruit of this wisdom and grace which the Lord had given him from above. Not by
nature.
For by his natural constitution, and in his natural estate and condition, he
was of a passionate disposition, somewhat froward and fierce, angry and hasty:
but now having received not only pardon for sin, in the value of the death
of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.7 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 6.17, 18, 19 But by grace.
but power against sin, in the virtue of it, he found his nature healed, his
passions subdued, his frowardness changed into mildness, his fierceness into
meekness, and his roughness into gentleness. The power of grace had now
abated much of the violence of his passions, and the sweet influence of Gods
Spirit had taken away the bitterness and virulency of them; so that now they
were of a better temper, ordered by a better rule, and directed to a better
end; and were made as it were hewers of wood, and drawers of water, as Joshua
made the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.23.
for the use of the Tabernacle: That is, They became more serviceable unto God,
and more profitable unto men.

Paul when he was a Saul, was as cruel and fierce as a Lion, Aug. Conf. l. 8.
c. 4. Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 9.
but being a converted Paul, he became as mild and meek as a lamb.

So it is recorded of Patricius Austins father, as also Calvin, that holy man
of God, that he was in his natural disposition(...), hasty and angry,
^^afervidus. Beza in vit. Calv. p. 109.
which yet the Spirit of God taught him so to moderate, that there was never
any word heard from him, which might seem unbeseeming a good man. And yet of
this passion so subdued and seasoned, the Lord gave him (as he did also this
Gentleman) some good use, when he dealt in the cause of God, and of Religion,
and against refractory and obstinate offenders, turning his natural anger into
spiritual zeal against them.

Many of the ancient Fathers were of violent and fierce spirits, Many of the
Fathers very passionate Vid. August. Epist. 14, 15. and, Ep. 19.
savouring much of pride and passion, as they were men: but being called, and
converted, and become holy men of God, were great Instruments of Gods glory,
the Lord making use of their natural affections, for spiritual services, to
give them thereby, courage and boldness, constancy and confidence to stand out
against all such affronts and assaults of impieties and heresies, as in their
times did rise up and make head against them. He that shall read some of their
writings, as of Hierome against Ruffinus, Vigilantius, Jovinian, and against
Austin himself; of Austin also against the Pelagians and Donatists; of Hilary
against Auxentius and Constantius; Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 16. Sozom.
Eccles. hist. l. 7, c. 24. Yet well accepted of God and good men.
and of Chrysostomes sharp invectives against Endoxia the Empress; and of
Ambrose his severe dealing with Theodosius the Emperor, may easily see as much
as I say, That as they were men subject to like passions, as this Gentleman
was, and we are, (having some wild fire mixed with holy fire in some of their
best services) so were they accounted, and accepted, as holy men of God, both
for their persons and employments, notwithstanding all their frailties and
infirmities.

But to return to this grace of Gentleness in this Gentleman, Phil. 4.5.
It is that which the Apostle Paul calls(...), or(...), a moderate and meek
both bearing and forbearing, when indignities and injuries, either in word or
deed are offered unto us, or intended against us. His bearing and forbearing
Thus did he make his patient mind known unto all men, taking nothing (that
could possibly be well taken) in ill part, but interpreting all to the best,
would make the best of the worst, In meekness like Moses. Number. 12.1, 2, 3.
and so abate the edge of men's frowardness and fierceness, with words of
meekness and gentleness; imitating herein the meekness of Moses, against the
bitter and insolent speeches of Aaron and Miriam, when they rose up against
him: Iud. 8.1, 2.
And following the good example of Gideon, who, when the Ephraemites were very
angry with him, and did chide him most sharply, did answer them again with
meek and gentle words, most courteously and wisely; and so mitigated and
assuaged the rage of their passions presently. In mildness like his Master
Christ John 18.2^, 23.
But above all, remembering and expressing the mildness and meekness of his
Master Christ, who being checked, and smitten on the face by an officer of the
High Priest, as having answered him otherwise than was meet; never revenged the
wrong, but answered the party in great meekness of spirit, and mildness of
speech; If I have spoken evil, hear witness of the evil, but if well, why
smitest thou me?

Many of a cruel and bloody dispostion.
O how far short are all they of this his sweet behavior and gentle carriage
and conversation, which usually carry with them and about them war in their
hearts, strife in their tongues, swords in their lips, and blood in their
hands, 1 Ioh. 3.12. Genesis 4.23, 24. Gen 49.7. Pro. 15.1, 2
being as cruel as Cain, as proud and fierce as Lamech, as violent and raging
as Simeon and Levi, as churlish and foolish as Nabal, who was so wicked, that a
man could not speak unto him, 1 Samuel 25.17. A soft answer, says Solomon,
turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger. The tongue of the wise
etc. uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of fools powers out foolishness.

CHAP. LIVE.
HE was also (being taught and seasoned with the same wisdom which is from
above)(...), easy to be entreated, of an ingenuous facility, Iam. 3.1^ 4 Easy
to be entreated.
either to be persuaded to any thing that was good, or to be dissuaded from any
thing that was evil.

He needed not many reasons to press him to that which was reason, nor many
retractives to draw him back from that which he saw was otherwise.

An honorable Judge in open Court, Judge W. his testimony of M. Bruen.
when complaint was made of some wrong which he did to a neighbour-Gentleman,
by a watercourse about his Mills (out of that good opinion which he had and
held of him) gave him this worthy testimony: I cannot think but that you wrong
M. Bruen; I will undertake for him, make him but sensible of any error or
wrong which he has done you, and he shall both willingly of himself
acknowledge it, and make you double amends for it. Job 31.13, 14.
He durst not despise the judgment of his manservant, nor the cause of his
maidservant when they contended with him. For what then should he do when God
rises up, and when he visits, what shall he auswer him.?

Nay, that which is more, for such of his servants as were religious and wise,
he would give them good leave and liberty to advise with him, as Abraham dealt
with Eliezer, and Cornelius with his servants, to produce their reasons, to
persuade, or dissuade, as occasion did require, and. (if there were cause)
would he rather follow their opinion, than his own, and so suffer them easily
to prevail with him.

So did Naaman the Assyrian hearken willingly to the advice of his servants, 2
King 5.12.
persuading him with so reverent terms of honor and respect, and upon so good
reason, to go and wash himself seven times in Jordan, that he might be healed.

So did good David yield himself overcome by the seasonable and wholesome
counsel of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25 32, 33.
diffwading him by found reasons from shedding of blood so rashly, without any
great cause, in so great a rage and passion, against Naball, who by his
churlish answer and behavior, had provoked him to wrath against him. And thus
might this Gentleman's neighbors, tenants, friends, adversaries, find him
ensie to be entreated, (and so they did) ingiving, and forgiving, bearing and
forbearing, borrowing and lending, in doing any good, or restraining any evil,
as they had occasion to make trial of him. A good proof hereof may be had in
this one instance following.

There was a Portion of money, a matter of forty shillings given to the use of
the Parish, and so put into the hands of some honest men to that end; but
through some neglect, as the men failed, the money melted away by little and
little, and was at last quite wasted and gone. He easily entreated to his cost
For redress and repair hereof, M. Bruen was entreated to do something by
his own, or by some other means, even as he thought good. And here he showed
himself easy to be entreated, for he made answer presently, I mean not to
press upon any man's purse for this matter; and so took to his own purse, and
gave them forty shillings for supply of this want. But some so hard they will
give nothing
A matter (I confess) of no great moment, yet such, as if many of our
Gentlemen (of far greater means) were entreated unto, A man might sooher
wring forty pottles of water out of a flint, or marble stone, or draw forty
pints of wine out of a Church-wall, than get, I say, not forty shillings, but
forty pence, from any of their hands, for any Parish profit, or Church uses.
Yea they are so stiff and obstinate, No, nor pay their ov^ne (...) ti^^. 2.
that they will not be entreated to pay their own lays, and duties, whereof
they are convinced to their faces, that they wrong the parish in detaining of
them.

CHAP. LV.
BUt now to proceed to some other graces, and virtues of this worthy Gentleman,
which according to the properties of that wisdom from above, which the Lord
had given him, he expressed by his works, in a godly conversation: He was
(as we have heard already) first pure, then peacable, thirdly gentle, fourthly
easy to be entreated, and fifthly, as it now follows, full of mercy and of
good fruits.

Full of Mercy and of good Fruits. Iam. 3.17 Mat. 5.45. Luke 6.36.


He had learned this, of his Heavenly Father, to be merciful as he is
merciful, and that not only in Affectu, but in Effectu, not only in Affection,
but in Action also. A branch of the true vine. Ioh. 15.1, 2. Phil. 1.10.11.
Number. 13.23. A tree of right ousnesse. Esaias 61.3 Ier. 17.8. Psalm. 1 3. Ioh.
15.2.5.8. Psa. 92.13 14.


He was a Branch of that noble Uine Christ Jesus, from whom he drew such sap of
grace and virtue, by the power of faith, that he was filled with the fruits of
righteousness and holiness, to the praise and glory of God.

A Branch clogged with fruit, like that which was cut down at the Brook
Eshcol, which was so laden with one cluster of Grapes, that it was enough for
two men to bear it on a staff between them.

He was one of the Trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, whose
leaf was ever green, whose fruit did never fail, ever bearing his own
fruit, good fruit, much fruit, and even in his age more and more fruit, being
ever full and flourishing in the courts of our God. Full of good fruits toward
all.


He was full of Mercy and of good fruits, toward sinners, and toward saints,
toward neighbors, and toward strangers, toward friends, and toward foes,
toward the poor, and toward the rich, toward all sorts and conditions of
men, as he had opportunity and ability, so to declare himself unto them.

Now because the good Tree is known by his Fruit, and the true Uine by her
sweet Grapes: Mat. 12.33
we will take a view of some of his fruits of Mercy, and try what their taste
and relish is; that so finding them to be wholesome and savoury (as no doubt we
shall) we may judge aright of the tree that did bear them, and of the branch
that brought them to our hands.

Some of the fruits of Mercy which he showed forth in his holy conversation,
He did mourn for sinners
were directed unto such as were yet in their sins, blind, ignerant, popish, or
profane. Such as were without means of grace, being without God, and without
Christ, how would his bowels of compassion yern within him, Mat. 9.36. Exodus
32. Mar. 3.5. He did contemn contemners. 2 Timothy 3.3. Mat. 7.6.2 Tim. 3.5. 2.
Ioh. 10. Esaias 36.21.
and be moved for the misery that was upon them? How, often as he has by
occasion seen them in the midst of their Heathenish sports, and Idolatrous
feasts, either kissing the Calves, or dancing about them, has be looked
angerly upon them, and spoken roughly unto them, yet mourning for the hardness
of their hearts, which was upon them, and as it were bleeding inwardly, for the
wickedness committed by them?

If he by occasion did meet with such persons as were mockers, contemners of
God, and despisers of good things, he would not cast Pearls before Swine, nor
holy things before Dogs, but turn away his face from them, and not so much as
salute them, nor speak one word unto them.

But if he found any poor souls erring from the right way, yet desiring a
guide (as the Eunch did) to be directed unto it, Act. 8.31. Prove. 2.1, 2, 3,
4. Pro. 4.1, 2
and to walk in it: how careful would he be of their good? how joyful to
do them good? He would deal so choisely and tenderly, so mercifully and wifely
with them, by his wholesome instructions, loving admonitions, godly
exhortations, and good directions; that he did nourish and cherish them in
religion, as the tender Babes, 1 These. 2.^ 1. 1 These. 2.7.
Plants, and Lambs of Christ Jesus, and so brought them to a better liking of
the truth, and a greater love unto it, for their farther growth in knowledge
and in grace by it. Yea, such was his bounty and liberality to such persons, 1
Pet. 2.1. 2 Pet. 3.18
to encourage them and draw them on, in the true profession of religion, that
he would (if they were poor and needy) give to some money out of his purse, His
bounty to poor Christians
corn out of his Garner; to others, Bibles, Catechismes, and other good
books, which of his own cost he had provided to that end, and laid up in
store in his Study by him.

If he had seen a professor of religion in some decay and want for outward
things, he would endeavor to relieve him, by his own, and other good means,
For supply of their wants.
according to his present occasions, and necessities. I know those, that have
seen him take off a good suit of apparel from his own body, as it might be
this day, to bestow it the next, upon an honest godly man, that wanted seemly
raiment to fit him for some better service and employment.

And when he had thus done, to give him a good sum of money in his purse to
set him out in some good fashion, and to bear his charges, until he might
come to the place where he might better provide for himself. These are some
of the fruits of mercy, which this merciful Gentleman showed forth in his
godly conversation, both toward sinners and to wards saints, partly to their
souls, and partly to their bodies.

CHAP. LVI.
THese are some, but let us attend unto more. They that are rich in this world,
He was rich in good works. 1 Timothy 6, 18.
are charged to be rich in good works, to distribute unto the necessities of
the saints, to give themselves to hospitality, and not to forget to entertain
strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares.

This Gentleman was ever ready according to his portion, and proportion, to be
rich in good works, and full of good fruits, and so gave himself to great
hospitality, to entertain strangers, and to refresh the bowels of the saints.

His house was as the common Inn, His Hospitality.
or constant harbor of the Church, and of Gods children, and himself as
Gaius, a godly and good Host, to give them liberal, and cheer full
entertainment, as they came unto him. None so welcome to eat of his morsels,
or to drink of his cup, as such strangers, as were no strangers in Israel,
For Gods children.
nor strangers from the Covenant of promise, but fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, Such there were, Many passengers from
London to Ireland, and from Ireland into England, many travelers, horsemen and
others out of Lancashire, and the farthest parts of Cheshire, who would, (as
they had occasion to come to the Courts, or Faires of Chester) take up his
house for their lodging place, not so much I conceive for the ease, and
refreshing of their bodies, as for the comfort, and rejoicing of their hearts,
in seeing his face, in hearing his voice, in conferring and advising with him,
in having a portion in his prayers, and a part in his praises unto God with him.

His provision for his Table in plenty and variety.
Now for his ordinary Table which he kept for his hospitality, it was
bountiful, and plentiful, not unto excess and superfluity, but unto a very
competent sufficiency, and that with great, variety of Gods good creatures,
ever ready to his hand.

His flight of Pigeons the best in the Country, his Warrens of Conyes, not
inferior to many, his delicate Fish Ponds, surpassing all about him, (which
were the better for his own skill, care, and pains, which he took himself
with them) all these (being blessed of God unto him) might well furnish his
table, together with other ordinary provision, in and about his house, for the
comfort and contentment of any such strangers as would come unto him.

He could not endure any riot or excosse.
In all this great plenty and abundance, he would never suffer any wilful
waste, nor could he endure any wanton or wicked abuse of Gods good creatures;
his Buttery was open and free for any Gentleman, Servingman, Countreyman, so
far as they kept themselves within the lists, and limits of moderation, and
sobriety. But as for excessive drinking, quaffing, carrowsing, drinking and
pledging of healths, and the like shameful disorders, even unto beastly
drunkenness in great houses, the order and manner of his family was known so
well, No quaffing, no drunkenness, no healthing, in his house.
that of those which did come unto it, seldom or never was there any so
impudent, and shameless, as would give him, or his servants, any just occasion
of offense, or grievance, by such lewd behavior, and misdemeanour in such
things. Thus far of his hospitality toward strangers, one of his sweet fruits
of grace and mercy.

His charity to his poor neighbors. First for their bellies. His dole days
twice a week. In the time of dearth almost every day.
Now let us look yet for more fruit, in his charitable bounty toward his
poor neighbors.

The necessities of the poor in their hunger, and cold, for want of food and
raiment, did ever marvellously affect, and afflict his heart. And as he had a
merciful heart to pity them, so had he an open both heart and hand to
relieve them.

He did usually to his great expense and cost, fill the bellies of great
multitudes, which out of his own and other Parishes, did twice a week resort
unto his house for that end. And in the dear years he made provision for
them, almost every day in the week, and would many times see them served
himself, both to keep them in good order, and to make an equal distribution,
according to the difference of their necessities, amongst them. His bounty in
giving and lending.
He had his purse ever ready, as the poor man's box, or coffer, to give, and
sometimes to lend freely to those that would borrow, and pay again, his
admonition was, remember your promise, keep your day, and pay again, if you
will borrow again. And if he saw any willing, Money.
but not able to pay what they borrowed, he would rather forgive the debt, than
exact it. But if he found any to deal fraudulently and falsely with him, either
denying the debt, or pleading repayment, or pretending some kind of
satisfaction, as one dealt with Spiridion the Bishop of Cyprus, Sozom. hist.
Ecel. l. 1. c. 11.
to whom he had lent some measures of corn, he would then rebuke them
sharply and take heed of lending to such deceitful persons any more.

In the time of a great dearth, Or corn.
fearing that diverse of his poor neighbors were in great want, as having
neither money nor meat: He took an opportunity, when the most of his family
were gone abroad to a public exercise of religion, to call for the keys of
the Storehouse, where the corn lay, and presently he sent into the town to
such persons as were the greatest needers, willing them to bring their baggs
with them, which they did without delay, and so to supply their wants, he gave
them freely and with a cheerful heart, some fourteen measures of corn
amongst them at that time.

Now as he was careful to fill their bellies, 2 Merciful to the poor in
clothing their bodies also Job 31.19 20.
so was he mindful of clothing their backs and bodies also. He was loath to
see any (as Job speaks) perish for want of clothing, or any poor want
covering. Yea the loins of the poor did bless him, being warmed with the
fleece of his flock, or clothed by the cost of his purse.

It was his ordinary manner every year against Winter, 3. Provision. He
provides for them out of his own purse yearly.
to send some four or five pounds to Chester, to make provision for the
clothing of the poor, which seeing it could not reach unto all, he wisely
divided amongst several families, to such this year, as had none the last, and
to such the next year, as had none this. Now as these fruits of his mercy and
charity were manifest in the provision which he made for the poor, 4. Protect.
He protects and defends them.
so were there some others as conspicuous in the protection which he sought and
found for them. For he might truly say in some good measure, he had done as
Job did, and found the like blessing that he found. Job 29.12 13, 15.16, 17.
I delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the widows heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the blind, and feet
to the lame. I was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I
searched out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
his teeth.

Thus was he a protector of the poor, to deliver them out of the hands of
those that were too strong for them.

He was also as a counselor to defend their righteous and just cause, 5.
Advice. He counsels them, and as he is able does plead for them. Prove. 31.8, 5.
and to plead for them, and applying himself to that counsel which Bathsheba
gave to her son Lemuel, He opened his mouth for all that were in danger and
distress, as they came unto him, He opened his mouth for the dumb, to judge
righteously for them, and to plead the cause of the poor and needy, as they
had occasion to use him.

CHAP. LVII.
NOw as he was full of these fruits of charity and mercy toward rich or
poor; His fruits of faith and love to others also. In his harmony in judgment
with the best.
so was he plentiful also in good fruits of faith and love in his sympathy
with the godly, and in his antipathy against the profane of the world.

1 He held ever a gracious harmony in judgment and opinion with all such, both
Divines and Professors of Religion, as were most found and entire in the
knowledge and acknowledgement of the Truth. And this he did with great
confidence and resolution, 3 Ep. Ioh. 4.
and with much rejoicing in the Lord, as he saw the truth to prosper and
flourish in his days.

2 He had also a religious sympathy in affection with the Churches and children
of God in every estate and condition. In his sympathy with the godly in every
condition. Romans 12.15. Heb. 13.3 Psa 122.6 Psalm. 137.5, 6.2 Cor. 11.28, 29.
Heavy news of the Church did much offect him
He had learned of the blessed Apostle, that it was his duty to rejoice with
them that rejoice, and to mourn with them that mourn. He remembered the
afflictions of Joseph even in the midst of all his own comforts, and
contentments, and preferred the peace of Zion, and the prosperity of Jerusalem
before his chiefest joy. The care of all the Churches about him was daily and
continually upon him, so that he might say as Paul said, Who is weak, and Jam
not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? This fruit of his compassion and
tender affection to Gods children, did more especially appear, when he heard
of heavy news out of Bohemia, Hungary, Germany, the Palatinate, etc. He was
then so affected therewithal, as good Nehemiah was, when he heard by Hanani,
one of his brethren, that the remnant of the Jews were in great affliction,
that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, And afflict him also.
and the gates thereof were burnt with fire: For then he sat down, and wept,
and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven.

3 It did also no less evidently appear, His compassion in visiting the sick;
by his diligent and careful visiting of the sick, and such persons and
families as had some more heavy and extraordinary hand of God upon them. He
was held and reputed one of the best spiritual Physicians in all the country:
If any were troubled in conscience, afflicted in soul for sin, molested by
Satan, terrified by Gods judgments: Happy then was he that could get M. Bruen
to come unto him: his very presence was some ease and refreshing unto them; as
to that godly and worthy Preacher M. Dickons, on his deathbed. His godly
exhortations, wholesome admonitions, divine instructions, sweet words of
comfort; but especially his faithful and fervent prayers, were many times, as
so many gracious remedies against their grievous miseries and maladies. And to
speak as the truth is, as his gifts were rare, and pains great, in the
performance of these duties, so was the issue and success thereof (through the
blessing of God) many times answerable, and effectual, either for some full
release, or some relief in due season. Hereof he has witnesses enough, over all
the country, and many he has written down, of such and such mercies,
obtained of God by his good means, for such and such persons: the glory where
of he does ever in great humility ascribe unto the Lord, giving him all hearty
thanks, and praise, that would manifest his great mercy, grace, power, and
goodness, to so weak creatures, by so weak means.

His antipathy against profaneness.
Now as he held a holy Sympathy with the godly, so had he a great antipathy
against the profane, both persons and fashions, customs and courses of the
world. He knew well, that the fashion of this world passes away, and the lust
thereof, but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

He knew well also, that not only he himself, but all true Christians are
forbid by the holy Apostle, In garish fashions.
to fashion or conform themselves to this world, and enjoined to be
transformed in the spirit of their mind, that they may prove what is that
good, that acceptable and perfect will of God.

And therefore he could never be brought into any love, or liking of the
garish, foolish, vain and new-fangle fashions of the world in attire, or other
ridiculous gestures, and formal complements of the profane of this world, but
did in his heart abhor them, and in his life utterly shun and avoid them.

Being once at an high Sheriffs feast, where there were some Lords, Spiritual
and Temporal, as they are called, and many other Knights and gentlemen of
great place, there was an health begun by one of the Lords, In profane
customs, as in drinking of healths.
to the Prince, which after the manner, was entertained and maintained with a
great deal of ceremonial solemnity; As it went along, and drew near unto him
(many observing what he would say or do) he cast out in a moderate manner some
words of dislike to this effect: Here is a solemn service to the Prince, yet
did he never require it, nor will ever give you any thanks for it. And when
one pressed him to pledge and drink to the Princes health: he made this mild
and gentle answer only: You may drink to his health, and I will pray for his
health, and drink for mine own, Nos cramus pro salute imperatoris, etc
Tertull. ad Scapul.c. 2.
and so I wish you may do for yours. And so he put it off, and passed it over,
never sorting with them, nor yielding to any one of their solemn ceremonies in
that act. He did bear a more generous mind, than to be brought in subjection
unto every idle fancy and foolery, or to conform himself unto the humors and
customs of profane men.

The policy and power of Satan in healthing.
Certainly in this drinking of healths as now it is practiced at our gentlemen's
tables, there is the very power and policy of Satan set a work in them; as to
take up the time of their repast, with such vanities and provocations to sin,
and to draw them to delight themselves in such base works of the flesh, after
the humor and pleasure of carnal men, that all memory and mention of God or
goodness may be kept out, and that no speech of the word or works of God at
all may be had amongst them. M. Bolton his Directions to wilke with God. page
200, 201, 202, 203, etc.
Had I not been well prevented by the godly labors of a reverent and worthy
Divine, and my ancient and faithful friend, M. Bolton, who has spoken much
both out of the Fathers and other good Authors, against this drinking of
healths, and that to so very good effect and purpose; I had taken a little more
pains at this time, to provide some rods of rebuke for this sin, purposing to
whip it and scourge it round about the table, in the sight of our bowzing
gentleman, that take such and so much pleasure in it.

But now I forbear and refer them to his Book, praying them to read
advisedly what he has written learnedly of this matter.

CHAP. LVIII.
NOw to proceed, As this godly Gentleman had, and held an antipathy against all
vain and foolish fashions and humors of the profane men of the world; so did
he especially against the profane customs and corruptions usually maintained
in great houses, His antipathy against the profane customs and corruptions of
great houses. He offers a remedy.
so as he had an holy indignation against them, and would not spare (where he
had any hope to speed) to admonish his friends by word or writing, for the
reformation of the same. He knew it was written, Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. An evident proof of his carfulness and faithfulness
in this kind, he has left us under his own hand, in a portion and part of a
letter directed to a Gent. one of his near cosens: His words be these.

The comparison I used was with M. Wilbraham of Woodhey, to whom God gave
repentance two or three years before his death by the Ministry of my B. H.

His godly Letter for Christian admonition and reformation
I have often compared you, Cosen, to Thomas Wilbraham, whom the people of God
think to be in heaven. For in many things you were like him, but now you are
broken off, and in many things differ from him. 1 As first, he loved the
Assembly of Gods people, on the holy Sabbath, forenoone and afternoon, (But
you do not) though his body were as unwildy as yours is: 2 He loved often to
communicate, His good opinion and testimony of The. wilb. Esquire.
which you do not. 3 He loved and often desired the company of the godly into
his house, which you do not, but rather glory to have your house made a
through-fare of profane persons. 4 He would have his family publicly
catechized by a godly Minister, which you will not. 5 He had every day a
portion of holy Scripture read, and prayer morning and evening, and often
singing of Psalms, which you have not. 6 He abandoned and kept out of his
house, all roguish Players, which you do not. 7 He was usually at the public
exercises of religion at Torperly, and often at Northwich, which you are not. 8
He had a liberal disposition to releeve the godly in distress, which you have
not. 9 Although he had the world at will, as you have, yet he gloried not in
it, but honored God with his substance, which you do not. 10 He did grow in
knowledge and in holiness, with an hatred of sin, and love to Gods servants
and children, which you do not.
I fear, Cosen, you are in a Lethargy, or that the Alarm Bell of your
conscience is silenced. Take heed; It is a dangerous thing to grieve the Spirit
of God, by which you are sealed to the day of redemption. Try your self: for
if the Spirit be not quenched, it will check your conscience of all the
premises, and of many more secret sins, which do accompany such open and
gross faults and offenses. If the Spirit have any life in you, it will stir
up your heart often to pray, and that with tears, for the reformation of these
things. You were best to look well about you, that you may work outs your own
salvation with foare and trembling. Bro. 9.8.9.10.12.

His indignation against sin.
This Letter is a good evidence of his holy indignation against gross sins
in great houses, and of his good affection and godly care to draw his friends
out of the danger, and from the contagion of them.

His love and care to reclaim sinners. His joy in such as were converted.
It is also a worthy and honorable testimony of the gifts and graces, of the
effectual reformation and godly conversation of that worthily honored
Gentleman, Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey Esquire, whose name and memorial he
has thus sprinkled and perfumed with so due and true praises.

And here, O that the Lord would be pleased to grant me the prayer of my heart,
and the desire of my soul! That the heirs of this Gentleman's body would view
their faces in their fathers glass, and diligently see and consider how near
they come unto him in the power and practice of Religion: and that where they
shall find themfelves to come short of him, they would seriously address
themselves to express the virtues of him that is gone before them, Icr. 22.15.
16, 17.
and carefully endeavor to follow the gracious pattern and president which he
has left unto them.

CHAP. LIX.
ANother, one of the last, Fruits of mercy toward his Tenants.
upon the least of those good fruits, where with this goody Gentleman (of whom
we write) was filled, was his merciful dealing with his Tenants, toward whom
he did ever bear a very tender, and compassionate respect, and regard. He did
not grind the faces of the poor, by great fines, nor crush their bones by
heary rents and rackes, and sometimes three years rent together, at the
marriage of a daughter, Amos 4.1. Mich. 2.2. Mich. 3.2.
nor break their backs with bundens of oppression in all manner of cruel
services (as the manner of many was round about him, toyling the bodies and
tyring out the beasts of their poor Tenants) He did not use their labor
without hire, nor call for their work without wages, nor take the benefit of
their travel without any allowance of necessary sastenance (which is the sin
and shame of many Gentlemen amongst as) But in all things concorning their
profit, their ease, their peace, their Christian comfort, and contentment, he
ever carried himself as a merciful, He was a merciful Landlord.
and good Landlord toward them. Yea, it was the very joy of his heart to see
his Tenants prosper and thrive, in their estate under him, and to entertain
them lovingly and use them kindly as they came unto him. He was much of the
fame mind toward his Tenants, Sueton. in August.
as Augustus was toward his Subjects; He would not have any to come in fear
and trembling before him, as if they came to an Elephant, nor any to depart
with a heavy heart, of sad couritenance from him, as if they had been with a
Tyrant.

How contrary to these merciful courses, are the rigorous, and cruel dealings
of some Landlords, with their Tenants, who if they grow wealthly under them,
they are used and squrezed as spunges, as Vespasian did his Officers, Sueton on
Vesp.
to wrest and wring what they can from them. If their Leafes be expixed they
will hardly renew them, but upon such hard conditions, as they shall never be
able to live under them. Nay it may be they will grant no Lease at all, neither
for years, nor lives, but thrust out the ancient Tenant, and set his living
upon a rack (for the rack say they, is the casiest pace) and so pull down
other men's houses and families, to build their own nests on high; impoverish
others to enrich themselves; thrust others into corners, that they may enlarge
their own borders; Mic. 2.2.
and make other men their slaves and drudges, Isa. 5.
that they may domineere, and dwell alone as Lords of the land bound about them.

The woe that is denounced by the Prophet Isay, and by others also as well as
by him, against such sins, makes me to think, that such cruel Landlords,
will nor find in the end, the rack to be the easiest pace as they imagine,
nor the grinding of the poor to be their sweetest grist, as some conceive. No,
no, I rather fear that all the ease of such a rack will be no other, but to
amble with the world, to trot on with the wicked, to gallop to the devil, and
to take up their lodging in hell where they have a place prepared for them.

But we speak to them that have no ears to hear what the Spirit speaks
unto the Churches, but are rather like the deaf Adder, Cassied in Psalm. 57.
Lyva in Psalm. 57.
of which Cassiodore reports, that when she is likely to be charmed, she
makes her self deaf, by stopping one ear with the earth, and the other with
her tail, that she may not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely.

Thus have we made it manifest, that this gracious and Godly Gentleman, was in
his holy conversation, full, of mercy and full of good fruits.

All of which do taste and relish so much the better, because they were
seasoned with two other gracious qualities, of that wisdom which is from
above, namely, Equity, and Syncerity, for he was without partiality, and
without hypocrisy: According to that of the Prophet Micha, He has showed thee
O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly and uprightly with thy God?

And thus have we according to our purpose and promise, taken a more special
view of some parts and passages of this Gentleman's life, wherein the gifts of
Gods grace, the virtues of Christ, and the fruits of the Spirit, did more
eminently appear. As first, in his conversing with God; and secondly, in his
conversation in the world. And so we come from the course of his life in the
world, and draw toward the end of his life; namely, his departure out of the
world: which was the third and last of those 3. general heads, which were
proposed to be handled.

CHAP. LX.
COncerning his departure out of this world, 3. General Head. His departure out
of the world. 1. Prepar. 2. His Resol. 3 His confidence. 4. His constable. Psa.
90.12.
we propole diverse things to be considered and observed. First, his preparation
for it. Secondly, his patient resolution to Bear all the sharp occurrents of
it. Thirdly, his gracious confidence of a blessed and happy exchange after it.
Fourthly, his happy constancy in the faith of Christ unto the end, and in the
end, until he was put in possession of it, and so obtained the end of his
faith, the salvation of his lonle in Christ Jesus.

Now for the first, as his whole life was a meditation of death, so was it also
a continual preparation for it. For the Lord had taught him so to number his
days, that he did apply his heart unto wisdom. I say, both to be wise unto
salvation, and so wise also, as to consider, Wisdom. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Job. 14.14.
and often think too upon his latter end. So that, all the days of his
appointed time, he did wait, as Job did, till his change should come. Al his
studies and labors, all his holy duties and services, all his prayers and
tears, all his watchings and fastings, all his desires and endeavors, were
especially bent and directed unto this end (next unto Gods glory,) that he
might so run, that he might obtain, and so fight, His preparation for death.
that he might overcome, and in the end, be more than a conqueror in him that
loved him, that is in Christ Jesus.

It was therefore his care and confidence, ever so to live, that he might never
be afraid to dye; yea so to live, that he might desire to dye, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all, even where he is, and as he is for over. Phil
1.23 Paulm. in vita Amb. Possidon. in vita Aug.
As Paulinus has recorded of Ambrose, that being ready to dye, he uttered
these comfortable words, unto his friends about him. Non sic vivi, ut pude no
me inter vos vivere, nec mori timeo quiu bonum habemus Dominum, I have not so
lived that I am ashamed to live amongst you, neither am I afraid to dye,
because we have a good Lord.

His more especial preparation for his latter end, His more special
preparation in ten special duties.
consisted in these holy duties, and heavenly exercises. 1. To deny himself,
his wit, his will, his reason, and affection. 2. To renounee the world, and to
we are himself from the love of it, and from all the pleasures, profits,
honors, and favors of the fame. 3. To set and settle his affections on the
things which are above, placing his heart where his head Christ is. 4. To take
all his decays of nature, his bodily infirmities, want of vigor and strength,
abatement of natural heat and moisture, to be certain Impressions of his
mortality, and evident Summons to a dissolution. 5. To make all his spiritual
rejoycings and refreshings in the estate of grace, to be pledges, and earnests
(as it were) of heavenly and everlasting joy and happiness in the estate of
glory. 6. To consider, that unto the godly, death is but a passage unto life, a
dissolution of soul and body for a season, which afterward shall be restored
again in greater beauty and glory at the resurrection. 7. To observe, that
death puts an end to all sins and sorrows, to all temptations, and afflictions,
and brings us into the possession of an heavenly inheritance, where the true
treasure is in abundance, where also there are rivers of pleasures, and
fullness of joy for ever more. 8. To meditate, that here we are but strangers
and pilgrims, having here no continuing city, but seeking one to come, that
heaven is our home, and that whiles we are present in the body, we are absent
from the Lord, and that Jerusalem which is above, is the city of the Saints,
and mother of us all. 9. To confer and talk with his godly friends, of the
day of death, and time of his departure out of this world, even in the midst
of all other comforts: as Christ himself did with Moses and Elias in the holy
Mount, of his departure that is, of his death at Jerusalem; and as Austin had
much holy and heavenly communication with his mother Monica, Aug, Cons. l. 9.
t. 10.
and she with him, to the like purpose. 10. Lastly, to watch and pray with
oil in our Lamps, and our lights burning, taking every day for our last day,
Mat. 25.4. 2 Timothy 2.21. Mat. 25.23.
and so be ready and prepared for our Masters work, for our Masters coming,
and for our own reckoning.


Thus much of the means which he used, and duties which he performed, to
prepare himself for his departure out of this world.

Now for his patient resolution, to bear all the sharp occurrents of it.

As he had obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful in doing his will: So
had he also, to be patient and resolute, in suffering and abiding his good
pleasure, both in life and death. To which end the Lord had given him a great
measure of spiritual strength, Phil. 4.13 Ephesians. 6.13
that he was able to do (in a manner) all things in Christ which strengthened
him, and he had furnished him also with that(...), the whole armor of God,
whereby he might be able to stand fast in the evil day, whether of tentation,
or affliction, against all adverse power that might assail him: We read of
that faithful servant of Christ, Chrysostom, when he was grievously
persecuted by Eudoxia the Empress, that the Lord did give him such courage and
resolution, that he feared nothing, which she could do unto him, though she
did threaten never so much against him. Si vult, Regina me exulem agat in
exilium, Domini est terra and plenitudo ejust and si vult secare, secet; Chrysostom.
Ep. Cyriace. Epise. Tom. 5.
idem passus est Isairs: si vult in pelagus mittere; Ionoe recordabor, etc. If
the Queen will have me banished, let her banish me; the earth is the Lords and
the fullness thereof; If she will cut me in pieces, let her do so, The Prophet
Isaiah suffered the same death: If she will cast me into the sea, I will then
remember Jonah: if she will throw me into a burning furnace; the three children
suffered as much before me. Such like courage and resolution had this
Gentleman, against his natural afflictions, as Chrysostom had against violent
persecution. So that now he was able with valiant David, to go forth in the
name of the Lord, even against Goliath of the Philistims. And grew resolute with
Paul, not to reckon his life dear unto him (whatsoever afflictions might
befall him) so that he might fulfill his course with joy, Act. 20.24 To. 8.18.
Accounting all the afflictions of this world to be unworthy of the glory that
shall be revealed, and never fainting for any sorrow, because, although the
outward man did perish and decay, yet was his inward man renewed daily, 2 Cor.
4.16.17.
and all the afflictions of this life were but light and momentany to him, that
had an eye to the eternal weight of glory, laid up in heaven for him.

CHAP. LXI.
IT was observed by many of his friends, His graces much increased in his old
age.
both at home and abroad, that, in his declining days, when he faw he was
drawing on toward his journeyes end, his faith was exceedingly increased, his
hope and rejoicing in God much enlarged, his love, and zeal, wonderfully
inflamed; his affections toward God and the godly, Theodosius senior aetate,
sed validius fide. Amb. de Obit. Theod.
more holy and heavenly, and his motions toward heaven more quick and lively.
Much like the Elements, and other such natural bodies, which the nearer they
draw to their proper places, are ever more violent and speedy in their motions,
till they come unto them: So was it with this Gentleman for his spiritual
estate; the nearer he drew to wards his proper place (his mansion house, 2 Cor.
5. 1 Ioh 14. 2. Phil 3.13 Act. 20.24. Heb. 12.1
prepared for him in the heavens) the more eager his desires were, and his
motions more vehement to dispatch his journey, with all good speed, to finish
his course with joy, and to run out the race with patience, which was set
before him.

Those that he planted in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 92.14.15.
shall flourish in the courts of our God. They shall bring forth fruit in old
age, and they shall be fat, and flourishing. His laft days his best days.
Their last days shall be their best days, and their last works their best
works, and their fruit shall be more and better at the last, than at the
first. Isay 61.3.
Such a tree of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, was this godly
Gentleman, whose fruit did not fail, whose leaf did not fade, no not in the
winter of his age, Psalm. 1. Ier. 17.8. Psa. 92.13 14. Phil. 3.13
but did ever flourish in the courts of our God. He was of Saint Paul's
resolution; forgetting those things which were behind, and reaching forth unto
those things which are before, he pressed toward the mark, for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. His Resolution and courage against all
assaults.
And casting out as it were, his gantlet of defiance, against all the most
sharp and dangerous assaults that might encounter him, and be made against
him; he challenges them all, as Paul did: Who shall separate me from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation, on distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Shall sickness, or sorrows, fears or
terrors, pains or aches, fores or swellings, miseries of life, or pangs of
death so prevail against me? Nay, in all these things I shall be more than a
conqueror through him that loves me.

And so from Paul's resolution he grew unto Paul's persuasion, J am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come: Nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

His hope and expectation. Phil. 1.20 21.
And from this persuasion, to an earnest hope, and expectation, That in nothing
he should be ashamed, but, that with all boldness, as always, so now also,
Christ should be magnified in his body, whether it be by life, or by death:
For to him, to live was Christ, and to die was gain.

Being now thus settled and resolved, in patience and confidence to bear all
afflictions, and endure all grievances which might be either as forerunners,
or attendants on his departure and dissolution: It seemed good unto the Lord to
visit him with sickness, and that after this manner, as his faithful
yoke fellow has reported and fent me in writing from her own hand. Her words
be these.

CHAP. LXII.
His first sickness and visitation.
I Call to mind some words which he spoke unto me alone, at that time when it
pleased the Lord to visit him, which was upon the day after the Sabbath. That
morning he arose exceeding early, and having been in private prayer with God,
as his usual manner was, he performed afterward this duty in the whole
family. This being done, he went, as he was accustomed, into his Study until
dinner time. And having dined, he went into his Study again. And then it
pleased God, about an hour or two after, to visit him, as it were with an
Ague, after the manner of a shaking; and so withdrawing himself thence into
his little parlour, he laid him down upon his bed. Then said I unto him, Sir, I
fear your early rising has done you hurt. Then he replied, If you had seen,
wife, such glorious things as I saw this morning, being in private prayer with
God, ^ide Pos^d. de vita Aug. c. 27.
you would not have said so: For they were so wonderful and unspeakable, that
whether I was in the body, or out of the body, with Paul, I cannot tell. Thus
it has pleased the Lord, least I should be too much exalted by this glorious
sight, to give me (with Paul) a buffet in the flesh. All which things he spoke
with exceeding great joy unto me. Non probo quod ^esero: vix fas est credere
visis: Saepe Satan tali in lumine lucc nocet.


The like report of the like ravishing in spirit and such glorious sights
(which he saw not long before) he himself made unto some of his friends, after
he had been one day in private prayer with God in his grove. The particulars
he would not confess, but only told them in general, with great tenderness
of heart, 2 Cor. 11 14.
and many tears in his eyes, tears of joy, and tears of sorrow. Pati
timetis, exire non vultis, quid facium vobis? Possid. de vita Aug. c. 37.
For now he had a strong persuasion, that he should not live long, and that
within a while he should make a glorious change, of this life, with a better;
of earth for heaven, of this world for another, and of an estate of misery, for
an estate of glory.

And hereunto he did very carefully address himself, 3. Head. His confidence
of a happy exchange.
laboring for a gracious confidence of this blessed and happy exchange,
whenever he should come unto it. And this he did by clearing his evidence,
and confirming his assurance of it.

His evidence he cleared, by informing his judgment His evidence of it
His assurance he confirmed by such faithful records, covenants, grants,
gifts, His assurance for it.
fruits, and marks of his interest unto that estate, that neither sin nor
Satan, law nor conscience, death nor hell could infringe it, nor find any flaw
therein, to give either them any just occasion to except against it, or him any
cause once to doubt of it.

This his confidence was his comfort in all his sickness, His confidence cause
of his comfort.
which drew many comfortable and heavenly speeches from him. Such as these, and
the like.

O how great is thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of
men!

O how precious are thy thoughts unto me, Psalm. 31.19.
O God! O how great is the sum of them! Psalm. 139.17, 18.
If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake, I
am ever with thee.

I trusted in the Lord, Psalm. 31.
I said, thou art my god. My times are in thy hand. I am continually with thee,
thou have holden me by my right hand.

Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, Psalm. 31.23, 24, 25 26
and afterward receive me to glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails,
but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day. Psalm. 31.
O love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

As the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so pants my soul after thee O
God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living god. O when shall I come and
appear before God?

O let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.1, 2.
for thy love is better than wine. Because of the savor of thy good ointment:
Thy name is as an ointment powered forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.
Draw me, and I will run after thee.

God is not unrighteous, Heb. 6.10.
to forget our work and labor of love which we have showed unto his name.

Faithful is he that promises and calls us, 1 These. 5.24 Neh. 5.15. and 13.
v. 14.22.
who will also do it.

Remember me, O my God, for good, according to all that I have done for thy
people, and wipe not out my kindness that I have done for the house of my God,
and for the Offices thereof: Remember me, O my God, and spare me, according to
the greatness of thy mercy.

Some of these holy and heavenly Speeches, he uttered at his first awaking in
the morning, some in Prayer with his Family, some in his short Ejaculations,
some as the issue of his secret, and silent Meditations, some in conference and
speech with such of his Christian friends, as did come to visit him: and to
minister either other counsel or comfort unto him. Yea, and many hundred more
than these, which would be a matter of great difficulty, if not of
impossibility, to call to mind and to record them.

His heart was as a fountain full of the waters of life, John 4.141
full of the heavenly knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and now being as it
were broken open by affliction, the riverets of grace and truth did issue out
amayne.

He was full of matter, like Elihu, Job 32.^9.
and the Spirit within him did constrain him: Behold, his belly was as new
wine which has no vent; It is ready to burst like new bottles. Psa. 45.15.
His heart was ever inditing some good matter, and his tongue became the pen of
a ready writer.

CHAP. LXIII.
His diligence and conscience in frequenting Gods house.
NOw although his bodily infirmities did increase, and grow upon him, yet would
he not by any means be kept from the house of God, on the Lords day, so long
as either he could go or ride, which was some eight or nine weeks before his
death, and departure out of this world.

His house was distant about a mile from the Church, His cheerful going to
Church
the way fair and large, so that he usually went afoot, calling all his
family about him, leaving neither Cook nor Butler behind him, nor any of his
servants, but two or three to make the doors, and tend the house, until their
return. Psalm. 122. 1, 2.
And then taking his Tenants and neighbors, as they lay in the way, along with
him, he marched on with a joyful and cheerful heart, as a leaden of the
Lords host, toward the house of God, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
42.3.
I went with the multitude to the house of God, with the voice of joy and
praise, with a multitude that kept Holyday.

And so it was indeed his ordinary manner, to call his company near about him,
Singing of Psalms by the way.
and to join together with one heart and voice, to sing Psalms as they went
along, and that Psalm especially, How pleasant is thy dwelling place, Psalm. 84.
which they performed with such a melodious harmony, that the like may be said
of them, as was of the Jews; God made them to rejoice with great joy, the
wives also and the children rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard
even afar off. Neh. 12.43.
For although I cannot say as Augustine did, that by such sweet singing of
Psalms, diverse were converted to the faith of Christ, that were strangers to
it. Yet am I well assured by that which I have heard, that many that heard but
afar off, Some much delighted, and some much bettered by this melody.
the pleasant sound only of their delicate and sweet voices (according so well
together in Gods praises) were much refreshed, and delighted therewit hall, and
some as they drew nearer unto them, brought to a greater liking, and love of
the company and society of Gods children, and of these and such other duties
of Gods worship, His early coming to Church
as they did exercise themselves withal.

His coming to the Church with all his Family, attendants and followers, was
constantly before the beginning of prayers, or any part of divine Service, that
so he might more comfortably join with Gods Minister and people, in
confession of sins, in prayer, and praise, His reverent and holy carriage in it.
reading and hearing of the Word, singing of Psalms, and partaking of the
Sacraments: all which he did perform with such a reverent attention and
gracious affection, with so holy a carriage, and so good conscience, that, as
hereby he did much increase his own comfort, so was his godly example (no
doubt) a great encouragement to many others, yea, a very spur and goade unto
them, to be more religious and conscionable in Gods worship, and service.

After prayers and Sermon were ended, he seldom went to dinner, His dinner
time, he bestowed well in the Church.
but abode in the Church to bestow himself, and this interim in Gods Service,
with such good people as were willing to stay with him. And this he did by
repeating the Sermon, which he had taken very exactly (as usually he did)
with his own hand, and by singing of Psalms, and by wholly and wholesome
conference in, and about good things.

The Evenin Sacrifice he performed in like manner.
And so waiting for the Evening Sacrifice, after he had with like care and
conscience performed the public duties of the Sabbath in the same; he
returned homewards with his company, with much comfort and joy in their hearts,
endeavoring as they went along to increase their Knowledge, Faith, and
Obedience, by repeating, and conferring of the Evening Sermon, and to enlarge
their hearts in Gods praises, ^ Sam. 12.24.
by singing of Psalms a fresh, considering what great things he had done for
them.

Their return homewards and mutual care to do good.
And if any amongst them were afflicted, they would be ready to counsel him,
comfort him, and pray for him. And he himself especially, if he heard of any
such as were troubled in Conscience, upon the hearing of the Word, would be
ever mostready and willing, like the good Samaritane, Luc. 10.34 Gal. 6.1.
to power wine, and oil into that wounded spirit; wine that he might search
and scour it, and oil that he might supple, and heal it.

After this manner did he frequent the House of God, sanctify the Lords day,
rejoice in the Assembly of the Saints, and refresh his own Soul with Heavenly
Manna, and other spiritual repast, so long as he could either go, or ride
unto it.

CHAP. LXIIII.
His private Evening exercise full of life.
ANd then in his Evening Exercise, he was so full of life and zeal, that
besides his own family, many of his Tenants and Neighbors did much desire, and
delight to hear him, repeat the Sermons, press the special points, urge the
Conscience, and power cut his prayers unto God, with so tender and sweet
affections for them all, that the heat of his spirit did cause their hearts as
it were, to melt within them.

The great joy he had in the Sabbath and Fasts.
The joy and comfort which he found in these holy duties both in public, and
in private, on the Lords day, and in their Fasts, was so exceeding great, that
he would often, and earnestly wish; O that every day were either a Sabbathday,
or a Fast day, for then I should be well.

His thankfulness for one Sabbath more.
And when the Sabbath was past, it was his usual manner to bless God with a
thankful and cheerful heart, for that he had given him one Sabbath more
than he did look for amongst his people.

The week days were somewhat more tedious and grievous unto him, his bodily
infirmities much increasing, and his strength decaying; and yet would he never
be dejected, but endeavored to quicken his own soul, and raise up his heart by
Faith and Hope, speaking to his Family, and Friends about him, much after this
manner.

The time is not long, I must shortly lay down this my tabernacle, and then I
shall get the start of you all, 2 Pet. 1.14. Heb. 4.9, 11.
and shall celebrate an everlasting Sabbath before the Lord, with all his holy
Angels, and blessed Saints in the highest Heavens.

This he spoke rejoycingly, and yet with tears

Weary of the world.
He grew every day more and more weary of the world, and was then best
contented when he could dispatch worldly businesses with fewest words.

He makes his Will. Isay 38.1.
It was his provident and godly care to set his house in order, as good Ezekiah
did, to make his will, and to leave all things in good terms of peace, and
love: Which he did with good success accordingly.

And so by this means his mind and heart were disburdened, and cased of many
worldly thoughts and cares, So he was more free, and more fit for Heavenly
things. Gal. 6.10.
and he brought to a greater freedom, and liberty, both to think, and speak
of spiritual and of heavenly things. Which in no sort he did omit, but as he
could stir abroad in the House either to the Fall, Parlour or Kitchen, He would
drop some wholesome words of counsel or comfort, amongst such as he met
withal, and never cease speaking of holy, or of heavenly things amongst the
rest of his Family.

When many came to visit him, he would often say; Alas good Souls, what are
ye come to see? Job. 7.13, 19.
a poor wretch, a worm and no man, or a poor dying man. I may now say with
Job. If I wait, the grave is my house, I have made my bed in the darkness. I
have said to corruption; thou art my father, to the worm, thou art my mother
and my sister. Job 19.15, 16.
And yet I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth. And though after my skin, 2 Cor. 4.16.
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. Therefore we faint
not, but though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily.
And so our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, Phil. 3.20.21.
that it may be fashioned like his glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

Some that came unto him, would out of their common kindness, comfort him with
some hope of health and recovery: Si nunqua^ been; si aliquando, quare non
modo? Posidon. in vita Aug. Cap. 27.
to whom he would make this answer, My time is in the Lords hand, and it is
not likely it can be long, my days are past, my purposes are broken off, even
the thoughts of my heart, my task is ended, the Lord has no more work for me
to do, my warfare is accomplished, my race is run out, and finished; I now
only hope for, and wait for that crown of righteousness which Christ has
purchased for me, and God has promised unto me.

CHAP. LXV.
Milk for babes that came to visit him.
OF those which came to visit him, he observed that some were young
professors, and babes in Christ, others were of riper age, and better growth in
Christianity, and therefore he did apply himself unto them both. To the babes,
he would minister the sincere milk of the Word, in wholesome and easy
instructions, in mild and gentle exhortations, all sweetened with terms of
tenderness and love, To them that were of riper age in Christ, Stronger meat
for strong men H. b. 5. ult. His godly admonitions unto both.
he gave as occasion required, stronger meat, as to stronger men, even such
as by reason of use had their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.

Unto them both he gave these, and the like godly admonitions, To hold on, and
hold out, to be steadfast in their profession, and never to be weary of
weldoing, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
increase in faith, and abound in love, never to be discouraged by taunts and
mocks, railings and revilings, and other persecutions for the name of Christ,
but as they have given their names unto him, so to give their hearts also. And
then to be faithful unto the death, that they may receive the crown of life.

And that these, and other such like Instructions, and admonitions, might make
a deeper impression in their hearts, and be a stronger provocation to
Christian obedience in their lives: He did very gravely and wisely, He
commends unto them his own experience, and example.
as a Father, commend unto their due consideration, his own experience, and
example, from the time that he first began to embrace, and profess the Gospel.

His words were these, or much to this effect.

When first I began to profess Religion, there was almost none in the whole
Shire, that were acquainted with the power and practice of it.

I was, Psa. 102.6, 8.
as the Prophet speaks, like a Pelicane of the wilderness; I was like an
owl of the desert.

Mine enemies did reproach me all the day, and were mad against me. I was a
wonder of the world, yea a monster of men, Isai 8.
and many did bend their tongues like bows for lies; and shoot out their
arrows, even bitter words against me.

And yet for all this, that came upon me, I did not forget the Name of my God
neither did I deal falsely in his Covenant. Psa. 44.
My heart was not turned back, neither did my steps decline from his way. But
being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, I found his Grace was
sufficient for me, both to confirm me in the truth and to preserve me
blameless and harmless, without rebuke, in the mids of a crooked and
perverse generation. And so through the good hand of my God which was upon me;
I did overcome. For, the Work of God did prosper in my hand, and mine
Adversaries did not prevail against me.

But now, Isay 54.1.
that may be said to this Country, which the Prophet spoke unto the Gentiles:
Sing, O Barren, thou that did not bear, break forth into singing, and cry
alowd, thou that did not travail with child, for more are the children of the
desolate, than of the married Wife, says the Lord.

O how goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, Number. 24.5, 6.
and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! As the valleys are they spread forth, as
gardens by the river side, as the trees of Lign-Aloes, which the Lord has
planted, and as Cedar trees beside the waters.

Now the borders of the Church are much enlarged, the number of Belecvers
wonderfully increased, and blessed be God, every quarter, and corner of the
Country is now filled with the sweet savor of the Gospel.

O how it does refresh my spirit, Rev. 2.10. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Cor 15.58.
and rejoice my Soul, to see or to think upon their sweet faces standing
before the Lord in the day of Assembly, as an Army in holy beauty: Wherefore,
my beloved Brethren, so are none of those things which you shall suffer. Watch
ye, stand fast in the Faith, quite you like men, be strong, be ye steadfast
also, and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

With such gracious Speeches of Counsel and Comfort, of Admonition and
encouragement, did he stir up the godly minds of many Professors, younger or
elder, as they came to visit him.

CHAP. LXVI.
BY all this we may see, 4. Head. His constancy in Religion.
and observe an evident proof of his constancy in the profession, and practice
of true religion, being never weary of well doing, nor discouraged in
suffering any ill that did befall him. He was never unsettled in his course,
nor diverted from it, 1 King. 7.21.
no not by the strongest oppositions, and assaults that were made against it.

For this his constancy, he had obtained of the Lord two special pillars of
support, Boaz, i. In it is strength. Jachin, i. he shall establish. 2 Chronicles.
20, 20. Isa. 30.15 Heb. 10.35.36.
like those in the Temple Boaz and Iachin, namely confidence, and patience,
knowing right well that by believing in the Lord he should be established: and
that in quietness, and confidence should be his strength: and that he had
need of patience to keep possession of his soul, that having done and
suffered the will of God he might receive the promise, that is, the recompense
of reward, according to the riches of his mercy, and bounty in Christ Jesus.

And this may yet more evidently appear, Even unto the end.
by the last passages of his life, being now grown very feeble and weak, and
much like a dying Lamp, Great strength in great weakness.
the oil wasting, and the light decaying: For though his afflictions were
increased, yet were not his consolations diminished, though he were weak in
body, yet was he of perfect mind and memory; feeble in the flesh, but strong
in the Spirit: Yea, his spirit did continually breath out such savoury and
sweet words (as his speech would serve him) words of grace and peace, words of
joy and comfort, His comfortable and savory speeches.
like a sweet perfume, or some sweet odours, out of a precious box, newly
broken up, that all that stood by were much refreshed, and comforted
therewithal: and were well assured, that no pains of his body, nor pangs of
death drawing on, did half so much trouble him or annoy him, as his inward,
spiritual, holy, His consolations exceeded his afflictions.
and heavenly refreshings and rejoycings in his God, and from his Christ, and
by the Spirit, did make his consolations to abound, for increase of his joy and
peace in Christ Jesus.

About the fifteenth of January his strength was much abated, and his weakness
increated, by reason of a sore stopping in his breast and throat, which did so
trouble him, that he could take no food, nor refreshing, no not so much as a
Spoone-full of any Syrup, or broth or any other liquid thing: but he was ready
to faint and to be gone upon it.

It was much about this time, Sir H. B. came to visit him.
that a worthy Knight, his near and dear Cosen, came to see him, one whom he
loved most entirely, for his faithfulness in his place, zeal unto Gods house,
and love unto Gods people, Who when he saw him in so great weakness, could
not refrain from tears, but wept over him abundantly: which when he was
aware of, he began to speak comfortably unto him, saying; Good Sir, weep not
for me, for there is no cause of weeping, His gracious words and exhortations
unto him
but of much rejoicing in my behalf. Turn your tears into prayers, and let
me enjoy that fruit of your love. Let them weep that have no other hope but
in this life only, Let them weep that have no portion in the Lord, nor any part
in Christ Jesus: But as for you, and me, let us in every estate and condition,
while we live together, rejoice in the Lord together.

You are in your way, I am at my journeys end, walk on still, as you have well
both begune, Josh. 1.7, 8: Heb. 13.
and continued a long season. And the Lord will be with you, he will never
sail you nor forsake you.

And with many other words did he exhort him and others that were with him to
be Faithful in keeping Covenant with God, and to continue in the grace of God,
whereunto they were called in Christ Jesus. His son and heir came unto him.
Upon Monday being the 16 of Ian. his son and heir came unto him, whom he
rejoiced to see, unto whom he gave many wholesome instructions, and gracious
exhortations, praying for him, and blessing his children, encouraging him to be
constant in Religion, and commending unto him the excellency, His good counsel
unto him.
and reward of the same; Exhorting him also, to uphold the worship, and service
of God, both in the Assembly, and in his Family.

When Theoaosius that good Emperor was dead and gone, Amb^in Funere Theod:
Saint Ambrose at his Funeral went about to comfort himself, and the people,
that they had not wholly lost him, because he did yet live in his good and
godly sons, Arcadius and Honorius, whom as a part of himself he had left
behind him.

It was the godly desire (we may see) of this gracious Gentleman, His desire
to have his heirs to follow his steps.
that when he should be dead and gone, he might yet live in his children,
especially in the heirs of his body and Family, that they might be followers
of his Faith and Religion, both for the power and practice of it, as well as
Inheritors of his lands and possessions, for the fruits and profits of the same.

This was their Fathers charge, That being dead he might as it were live in
them again.
the discharge whereof would be their comfort and their crown; if the Lord
give them grace, thus to fulfill the desire of the dead, and the joy of the
living.

For so this gracious Gentleman should still live in his Posterity, and
Religion should neither dye nor decay in that Family, And that Religion might
never dye nor decay in that Family: Liquefacta; hac nive multum erit luti, Soc:
lib. 3. c. 19.
where it was maintained, not only in life, and strength, but in beauty and
glory; full of all good fruits (as we have heard already) and free from all
roots of bitterness, and from all sour grapes of gross Sins, springing and
arising from such roots.

CHAP. LXVII.
M.L. and my self came to visit him. Ian. 16.1625.
UPon the same day January 16. Master L. and my self came unto him. And here,
what shall I say? Recrudescit doloris vulnus, My sorrow bleeds afresh, I can
now rather weep, than write, mine eyes drop down tears, as my pen does
words; and my writing rejoices as it were to mingle it self with my weeping,
to blurre and blot my paper, that no more be said of these things, Curae
loquuntur leves, Senec.
ingentes stupent. But I will endeavor to refrain and contain my self,
Juvat tanli viriobitu^, and destendo scribere and scribendo deflere,
Linthprand. l. 1. cap. unto.
and tell you (as I can) some few things, of many, which I saw and heard from
him at that instant. Upon my coming unto him, so soon as he saw me, he
seemed to be much cheered, and comforted even in his very soul, and so spoke
(in such broken and short speeches as then he could) to this effect unto me. Oh
brother H. you are a welcome man unto me, I am here you see the Lords prisoner,
His patient waiting for release.
cast upon the bed of my sickness, and in great affliction; yet waiting upon the
mercies of my God, for a comfortable release in due season. And when he was
asked of the estate of his faith and hope in Christ, and whether his
consolations did not abound in the midst of all his afflictions: His con.
solations still abound.
Yes, I thank God, says he, they do, and far do exceed them. Yea, and that
which is more remarkable, the Lord of his mercy has given me so strong
evidence of his favor and love in Christ, Without all trouble of mind, or
conscience
that I am not troubled in mind nor conscience, with any doubts or fears, nor
a^ other Satanicall molestations or tentations, but rest and wait in patience
for the accomplishing of his mercies upon me, according to his good pleasure
toward me.

Hereupon, We rejoiced in his joy.
although we were sorrowful in his sorrow, yet were we joyful also in his
joy: and finding him so graciously settled and resolved concerning his peace and
reconciliation with God in Christ, and touching his assurance of his heavenly
inheritance, we resolved not to trouble him much with many words, in his great
weakness, but demanded of him, whether he would not have us to commend him
unto God in our prayers. At which motion he seemed to rejoice in his spirit,
and answered, yes, he would, and did much desire it. Prayed with him and for
him. Egredere anima, quid times? Egredere anima, quid dubitas? septuaginta
prope annis servisti Christo, and mortem times? In haec verba exhalavit
spiritum. Hieron. in vita Hila^ionis.
And so he raised up himself in his bed, and lifting up his heart with his
hands to God in the heavens, did as it were, reach after the petitions that
were put up to God for him, and joining in heart and spirit with him that
prayed, could not contain himself, but oftentimes with a cheerful consent,
said, Amen, Amen, unto the requests and supplications that were made, for his
good and comfort in Christ Jesus.

After this M. L. spoke a word unto him, to comfort him in the midst of all his
sorrows, that he knew that shortly he should be released and freed from all
sin and sorrow, from Satan and this present evil world: whereunto he answered
most cheerfully and graciously, "I know I shall, and be with " Christ which is
best of all. And now the messenger of death is upon me (which he spoke of the
hickock which had taken hold of him.) M. L. replied, I hope, Sir, that death is
no scare nor terror unto you. No indeed, it is not I thank God, says he, for
it is my way to life, and I am now called of God unto it.

And thus he continued in great pain of body, but yet in great peace of mind,
increasing still in consolations, and enduring all his sickness with admirable
patience, not showing any distemper, nor discontent, neither in word nor deed,
all the while, in the troubles and sorrow of the same.

His care for prayer in the Family.
After this, the same night he put it upon me to call his Family to Prayer, and
to perform the evening Sacrifice in the great parlour, commading them to set
open his little parlour door, adjoining to it, that he might hear us, and
join with us, and partake of such mercies and means, as the Lord should be
pleased either to offer unto us, or to accept at our hands.

The next morning, though he did wear a way very much, yet he called upon M.
L. to pray with him, Mindful of M. L.
being up very early, to go a long journey to preach his ordinary Tewsday
Lecture: Of whom he was so very careful, that he caused some provision to be
made for him, especially a Posset, that he himself at their parting might
drink with him.

The same day I staid with him until the afternoon, A heavy Parting.
ministering such help and comfort as I could unto him. And then mine own
occasions calling me home, my wife being his former wives own sister, and my
self, came to take leave with him, which when he heard and saw, his very
soul seemed to melt within him; for both his and our hearts were full of
grief, and our eyes full of tears, and so mingling our sorrows, our tears
and our prayers together; be commended us to the grace and blessing of God, as
we also did him. And then falling upon his face and kissing his cheek, we
took our long leave with him, leaving him yet in the hands of his heavenly
Father that would never leave him.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Some ever ready to pray with him.
THe same afternoon he called for M. Lan. and M. Clerk his own Pastor to pray
with him, and was never at quiet, unless he were either Meditating and
Praying himself, or had some godly man or good Minister to pray with him, and
for him.

Diverse desire a blessing from him.
Upon Wednesday morning, diverse of those that were with him, suspecting his
death and dissolution to be near, took leave with him, desiring at their
parting a blessing from him: Which he did willingly express; by lifting up his
hands and his heart unto Heaven for them; Uttering also some words which they
could not so well understand. In the afternoon he overheard some making motion
of blacks. I will have no blacks says he, I love not any proud or pompous
Funerals, neither is there any cause of mourning, but of rejoicing rather in my
particular. After this he entreated a good Christian to pray with him, which he
did very willingly, again and again, to his good contentment. And while they
were in prayer in the Family, they that were with him did imagine that he
prayed himself silently and secretly, He prays secretly himself.
by the pulling of his arms out of the bed, and lifting up his hands and his
eyes toward Heaven; whence only he did look for hearing and helping at Gods
hands.

And now growing so weak, that he was scarce able to speak a word, those
gracious people that were about him, prayed him to lift up his hand, if he
understood them, and would have them to pray for him, Other gracious people
pray with him.
which he did very willingly and readily, and so he joined with them, and was
heard to say Amen, to the prayers that they made for him.

Afterward they perceived that he prayed himself again, lifting up his hands,
and uttering these words, with many other to the like effect. The Lord is my
portion, His last Prayer.
my help and my trust, his blessed son Jesus is my Savior and Redeemer, Amen,
Even so says the Spirit unto my spirit: Therefore, come Lord Jesus, and kiss
me with the kisses of thy mouth, and embrace me with the arms of thy love:
Into thy hands do I commend my spirit; O come now, and take me to thine own
self; O come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, O come, O come, O come, And so his
spirit fainting, His last end
and his speech failing, he lay quiet and still, for a little season. And then
he meekly, and graciously yielded up his precious soul, into the hands of God
his Father that gave it, and into the arms of his Savior, that had bought it,
and redeemed it with his precious blood.

And thus having finished his course, and run out his race, the night of his
death shutting up the days of his life. Snaviter in Domino obdormivit, He
sweetly slept in the Lord.

All Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise, be unto our gracious God, in and through
his Son Christ lesus, for ever and ever, Amen.

Vae etiam laudabili vitae, si remota misericordia discutias eam, Aug. Conf.
lib. 9. c. 19.
Aug.
Quisguis tibi enumerat vera merita sua, Aug ibid. cap. 13.

Quid tibi enumerat nisi muneratua?
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

JOH. HANSLEY.
Jan. 16. 1640.

