An Historical NARRATIVE OF THE German Princess, CONTAINING All material
PASSAGES, from her first Arrival at Graves-end, the 30th of March last past,
until she was discharged from her Imprisonment, June the Sixth instant.

Wherein also is mentioned, Sundry private Matters, between Mr. John Carlton,
and others, and the said PRINCESS; Not yet Published.

Together with a brief and notable STORY, of Billing the Brick-Layer, one of
her pretended Husbands, coming to Newgate, and demanding of the Keeper her
Deliverance, on Monday the Eighth instant.

Written by her Self, for the Satisfaction of the World, at the Request of
diverse Persons of Honor.

London, Printed for Charles Moulton, 1663.

Most Noble, Generous, and Virtuous LADIES and GENTLEWOMEN,
I Am not ignorant what great advantage the frequent false Reports of my
Actions and Demeanours has given to the dishonor of our Sex: Let me tell you,
I had rather choose to be dissolved into Attoms, then justly to deserve to be
the occasion of any such thing. I therefore Adventured upon this Collection, to
evince to the World, the Falsehood and Insufficiency of the Designs against me.
There is no Person of Understanding, but may easily discern and conclude as
much as I desire for Vindication of my self from those Things my Enemies
aspersed me with, or that have lately been upon the Stage.

He who was first the Contriver and Promoter of the False Suggestions against
Me, coming to Visit me within one hour after the Just Sentence of NOT GUILTY, I
told him, If the Modesty of my Sex would permit me, I would Require the Comba^e
of him to appear in the Field. I looked upon him but as a base Detractor: I
required his Retiring from my Presence: He obeyed. His looks represented his
Guilt. I could mention him, but it is below me to take notice of him, further
then to know him for a Villain. But it being the Opinion of all Philosophers
and Divines, as well Ancient as Modern, That Detraction is the Chief Branch of
Envy, which is nourished by Lying, by which People of Honest Conversation are
grievously wounded. -- Diogenes the Cinick being asked, What Beast Bit most
Deadly? Answered, Amongst Furious and Wild Beasts, None like the Detractor. --
And amongst Tame and Gentle Beasts, None like the Soother and Flatterer. --
Themistocles the Thebane, upon the same occasion, said, There was no greater
Pain nor Misery in the World, then to behold the Honor or Credit of an Honest
or Good Man or Woman to be in the Mercy of a venomous Tongue, and to be
tortured by Detracting Speeches. A Spanish Author that I have seen, has this
saying, That all Nations do observe it as a Law, That a Dissolute Life in Men,
is not held to be such a Vice as in Women: That let a Report pass of a Woman,
True or False, Irreparably she lies under Infamy. Therefore I do imagine, that
our Ancestors were so prudent, that in the Instituting of several Orders of
Knights, they had still in Charge, That they should defend Innocent Ladies. And
I never read of any Knight that undertook a Distressed Ladies Quarrel, but he
Vanquished and Overcame. That Example of Valentinus Barnthius, a Native of
Toledo in Spain, in his History, wherein he mentions a Daughter of one of the
Kings of England, that was Married to the Duke of Saxony and Prince of
Piedmont, She not yielding to the Immodest Solicitation and Request of
Pancalier, whom the Duke her Husband had left as his Lieutenant in his Absence,
whilst he was busied in the Wars of France; The Count Imposed on her, the
Crime of Adultery: For Confirmation (wanting other proof) he Required the
Combat of any that should gainsay his Assertion. The which was Accepted by a
Knight of the Noble House of Mendoza; Who slew him, notwithstanding many
Disadvantages of a late Sickness, of his long Travel, and Disproportion of his
Strength and Stature, etc.

Francis the First of that Name, King of France, granted the Combat to
Castaigneray and the Lord Jarnac; Castaigneray having by words dishonored a
Lady, that was by Blood Allied to Jarnac: In the Opinion of all Persons,
Castaigneray by reason of his often Combats, Strength, Judgment in Arms, and
the use of Weapons, would be too hard for the Lord Jarnac; yet the Lord Jarnac
slew him: The which Convinced all the Spectators, That the Innocence of the
Lady Influenced the Sword of Jarnac. Many other Stories of like nature I could
Instance, but I shall conclude with this: Sure there is none will a Woman
deprave,
Unless he be a Coward or a Knave.


I do not mention these Stories, to reflect upon any of the English Gallants,
for not Taking part in my Cause, I at first apprehended I needed it not; and
now do much less need it: for that my Enemies by their Insufficient
Prosecution, made way for the World to conclude my Innocence. But I may in some
sort complain of my Husband, who wore a Sword by his side, and yet could suffer
me to be stripped of my necessary Raiment. But instead of that Civil Defense, the
least of Kindnesses he might have afforded me, that had enjoyed all Hymen's
Rites with me so lately before that Tragick-Part, he encountreth me with a
Volume of one Sheet in Quarto, wherein he has these Passages, That I by my
Parts deluded him. In answer to which, He deluded me by his Pretenses.

Reader, Thou shall receive them from his own Pen; In his Epistle to the said
Work, he has this Passage, I shall not give my self the Trouble, to recollect
and declare the several Motives and Inducements that deceitful but wise enough
Woman used to deceive me with, etc. In Page the 4 h he says, Her Wit did more
and m^re Engage me and charm me: Her Qualities deprived me of my own: Her
Courteous Behavior, her Majestic Humility to all Persons, her Emphaticall
Speeches, her Kind and Loving Expressions; and amongst other things her High
Detestation of all manner of Vice, as Lying, etc. Her great Pretense to Zeal in
her Religion; her Modest Confidence and Grace in all Companies, Fearing the
knowledge of none; her Demeanor was such, that she left no room for Suspicion,
not only in my Opinion, but also in others both Grave and Wise.

Some other things he Insists upon, as his undertaking to tell the Story of the
Management of the Business betwixt us; In which he is so far from doing Me
Justice therein, that he wrongeth Me and his own Soul by lying.

For Confutation of which, I refer the Reader to the ensuing Discourse; Only
there is one Passage that I am unwilling to let slip, that is in page the 6th,
he says, That my Father was in Town upon my Commitment, and did acknowledge me
to be his Daughter, and that I had played many such Tricks. It Is strange this
Father of mine could not be produced at the Trial, if that had been true; As
strange it was, That the Jury-Man himself (that was one of the Jury upon the
Trial of Mary Mauders) that they produced, who seemed to be a Man of Conscience
and Judgment, could not swear nor say, That I was the Mary Mauders alias
Stedman. But I wave all; and make it my Request to all Ladies and Gentlewomen,
seriously to consider the whole ensuing Discourse: The which if done, I may
rest Confident, that there is none but will set a Hand to the Erecting my
Reputation to a higher Pitch, then from whence my Detracting Enemies
endeavored to depress it.

From my Lodging, June 12, 1663. Ladies and Gentlewomen, Yours in all
Submissive Observance, Mary Carlton.

EPimenides the Philosopher being asked by the Rhodians, What that Virtue
called Truth was, answered, Truth is that thing, whereof (more then all others)
the Gods do make profession, and the Virtue that illuminateth the Heaven and
the Earth, maintains Justice, governs, preserves, and protecteth a State
or Kingdom, and cannot endure any wicked thing near it; also it makes all
doubtful and ambiguous matters clear and apparent.

The Corinthians also demanded of Chilo the Philosopher, what Truth was? said,
It was a sure Gage and Standard, to measure all things by it who neither
diminishes at one time, nor increases at another: its a Buckler, a Shield
that can never be pierced: its an Army never danted, a Flower that never
fails, a Haven that none shall perish in, or suffer peril.

The Lacedaemonians inquisitive after this rare Virtue, importuned Anaxachus to
delineate Truth to them; he drew its Portraicture in these fair, Lines, viz.
Truth is a perpetual Health and Welfare, a Life without ending, an Unguent that
heals all misfortunes, a Sun always shining, that never suffers by Eclipse,
a Gate never shut, a Journey in which none can wax weary: Its a Virtue, without
which all Strength is feebleness, and infirmness it self; Wisdom, Folly, and
Madness: Without it, Patience is but a Counterfeit, and Liberty but a Prison.

Augustus Caesar, in the Triumphs that he made for Mark Anthony, and Cleopatra,
brought with him to Rome a Priest of Egypt, aged 60 years, that was famous for
not telling a Lie in his whole Life; the Senate ordered his Statue to be
erected, and himself to be High Priest.

In the time of the Emperor Claudius, there dyed at Rome one Pamphilus, that
was upon good ground suspected never to have told Truth all the days of his
life; He, by the Emperor's Order, was denied Burial, his House to be razed,
his Goods confiscate, in detestation of so venomous a Beast, who was so
suspected, that when by accident he did speak Truth, the Hearers suspected
their own Knowledge.

I am not to insist upon this Theme; but Truth is an amiable and delightful
thing; it has been no less my Deliverer, then it was my Sanctuary; its
Precepts will I observe in this ensuing Discourse, that as to matter of Fact I
will have due regard, that Time nor Envy shall have no Advantage against me, to
detect me in any particular or material Circumstance: my Ambition never tempted
me to write a History of my Life, but my Necessity has constrained me to give
you a History of part of my Life; that is to say, from the first time of my
l^st coming into England; for that the World yet never had an exact Account of
what passed between Me, and Mr. John Carleton, now my Husband by the Law of
England, unto which we are both Subjects.

I having been at Colen, the place of my Nativity, from thence for dispatch of
some Affairs of mine, I went to Vtrick, from thence to the Brill, where I took
shipping in a small Vessel bound for England, and landed at Graves-end the 30th
of March last past, in the Evening, and came in the Tilt-Boat from thence to
London, betimes the next morning: In the Company that were Passengers, there
was one a Parson, for so his habit did be speak him, who offered me the
Civility of a Glass of Wine; but it being so early, we passed several Taverns,
and could not procure admittance, from Billings-gate, until we came to the
Exchange-Tavern against the Stocks, kept by one Mr. King; the Door being open,
and Mr. King in the Bar counting of Brass Farthings, the Parson asked him, if we
might have a pint of Wine; Mr. King replied, That we might: A pint of Rhenish
Wine, and a pint of Sack was c^lled for; and during the drinking of it, the
Parson offering to kiss me, I refused: Mr. King perceiving that I did not much
like the Parsons company, came in, and entertained me in Discourse; asked me, if
I was a Stranger; I told him, Yes, I came from Colen in Germany; and Mr. King
said, Since it was so early, that I could not go with convenience to seek a
Lodging, if I pleased to repose my self for a time, his house was free; that
although it was a public house, yet he had not overmuch to do in it, I might
be assured, it was a civil house, and that he had a kindness and a pity for
Strangers; and moreover added, to his courteous Discourse, his care of me,
saying, That if I had a Charge, I should have a care, for the Town was full of
wickedness, and that I might have some trick put upon me. I thankt him, and
told him, that I had a charge; that I was so much a Stranger, that I had no
where to go unto that I knew of at present; but where e're I went, I had
wherewith to defray my charges. Mr. King said, His house should be at my
service. I answered him, That I looked upon him as a civil person. I took my
leave of the Parson, and upon Mr. Kings Invitation, went to my Chamber, parcel
of his house that he had allotted me for my appartment: Returning Mr. King many
thanks for his civility, I took my leave of him also: He told me, that his Wife
should wait upon me when I rose.

Let the World judge, if it be probable that I could design any thing to
ensnare Mr. Carleton, when at my accidental coming into that house, nothing
could be more remote from my Thoughts or Apprehension, then he was; or then
that which happened afterward. By what I shall further say, I doubt not but to
undeceive the World, and demonstrate, that they designed against me: And
whether I have that Estate they dreamt of, it is not material; I am not much to
be blamed, if I have it, and conceal it, since they have pursued me in that
envious sort, of which the World is Witness.

Well, when I rose about 11 of the Clock, Mistress King, the Mistress of the
house, attended me; I was furnished with all respect with what I asked for, or
what was necessary: After which, I applied my self to writing of my Letters,
sent them away by the Post beyond the Seas, wherein I gave Instructions, for
the managing of those Affairs that concerned me.

Wednesday the first of April, Mrs. King made a great Feast, where were diverse
persons of quality, as she said, amongst the rest, her Brother Mr. John
Carleton. At this Entertainment, Mrs. King did advise me to call her Cozen, the
which I did. Thursday the 2d of April, Mr. John Carlton came in his Coach, with
two Footmen attending of him, calling him my Lord, and Mistress King did also
call him my Lord. With that I asked Mrs. King, if it was not the same person
that dined with us yesterday; she said, True, it was so, but he was in a
Disguize then, and withal, that in a humor he would often do so: But, says
she, I do assure you he is a Lord. Upon that I replied, Then his Father must be
an Earl, if living. She affirmed, that he was a person of great Honor. The
same time my Lord presented me with a rich Box of Sweetmeats: I could do no
less then thankfully accept thereof.

My Lord came every day afterward to Mr. Kings, and by his importunity would
carry me abroad in a Coach to Holyway and Islington. Mrs. King would often ask
me, what my Lord did say to me; I told her, Nothing that I observed, but his
Lordship abounded in civility-mixt with Complements. How, said she, Madam, He
loves you. Loves me, for what Mistress King, I replied. She said, For your
great Parts and Endowments. I asked her, How my Lord could tell that I had
either. She said, My Lord could see within me. I answered, That my Lord must
have very good eyes, if he could see within me, or else I must be very
transparant.

After which, I did order the matter so, that his Access to me was not so
easy: Mistress King importuneth me to admit my Lord to visit me; I told her
plainly, That I did not understand his Lordships meaning. He provided me a
great Banquet, at which his Lordships Mother was very fine dressed, who
questioned what I was. I told my Lord, That I had received Civilities from him,
and he had the like from me, and that I had no necessity to give any account to
any person what I was, for any thing that I intended; and that if any Design or
Affair of his required any such thing out of conveniencie or otherwise, he
might forbear it. His Lordship excused his Mothers Inquisitions, by saying, She
was his Mother, and that Parents did think themselves concerned, in looking
after the good of their Children. But (said he) Madam, Wave all this, however I
will marry you to morrow. What (said I) my Lord, without my consent: My Lord, I
desire your Lordship not to come near me any more, I will not lie under such
questioning and scrutinie: Your Lordship will be safe in following my advice,
in not coming at me at any more. Upon this his Lordship wept bitterly; I
withdrew my self from his presence: He writ a Letter of high Complements to me
(the which Letter perished in the storming and taking of my Outworks, by the
Forces of Mr. George Carleton, my Husbands Father:). at the same time I had a
Gown making upon my own account by Mistress Kings Tailor in the Strand, I took
a Coach and went thither; all this while the young Lord, not knowing where I
was, remained impatient until my return, where I found him standing at the Bar
(not the Bar his Lordship was afterward pleased to be one of the Instruments
to make me stand at) at the Exchange-Tavern, and suddenly claspt about my
middle, and violently carried me to my Chamber. I asked his meaning: He
answered, That I had forbid him my presence; that it had almost made him mad;
that he desired nothing more of me, then but to let him look upon me. Upon that
he did, with a very strange Jesture, fix his eyes upon me: In compassion to
him, I asked him what his Lordship meant, and intended; he replied in a kind of
discomposed manner, I would have you to be my Wife. I answered him, My Lord, I
rather think you have Courted me for a Mistress then for a Wife: I assure you,
that I will never be a Mistress to the greatest of Princes, I will rather choose
to be a Wife to the meanest of men.

Upon which, he uttered diverse asseverations in confirmation of the reality of
his intentions, and earnest desire of the Honor in making me his Wife, without
any respect to what I had.

The next day being Saturday Easter Eve, the Tailor brought me my Gown to my
Lodging, I being dressed and adorned with my Jewels, he again renewed his Suit to
me, with all importunity imaginable; and a little before that time, having
intercepted my Letters, and understanding how my Estate did lie, he and all his
friends renewed their Suit to me, to give my consent to marry the young Lord:
His courteous Mother is now most forward, pressing me to consent, by telling
me, that she should lose her Son, and he his wits, he being already impatient
with denyals and delays, adding withal, that he was a person hopeful, and
might deserve my condiscention: I withstood all their solicitation, although
they continued it until 12. of the Clock that night: The young Lord at his
taking his leave of me, told me he would attend me betimes the next morning,
and carry me to St. Paul's Church, to hear the Organs, saying, that there would
be very excellent Anthemes performed by rare voices, during which time, young
Captain Sakvell who they had made privy to their undertaking, out of some
discontent; threatened to discover the whole business, but he was promised 200l.
to be silent, and plied closely with Sack, that he was dead drunk that night:
the morrow being Saturday, the 19th of April last, in the morning betimes, the
young Lord comes to my Chamber Door, desiring admittance, which I refused, in
regard I was not ready: yet so soon as my head was dressed, I let him have
Access he hastened me, and told me his Coach was at the door, he carries me to
his Mothers in the Gray-fryers London, where I was assaulted by the young Lords
tears, and others, to give my consent to marry him, telling me that they had a
Parson and a License ready: So I being amazedly importuned thereunto, did then
and not before, give an amazed Consent: to the Church of Great St. Bartholomews
we are carried, married by one Mr. Smith, from thence we traveled to Barnet,
that it might not be known at Court, that he had married a foreign Princess:
He lies with me Sunday and Monday right, we return to St. Bartholomews again,
and were there married again the second time with a License, (they having
before falsely pretended a License) that there might be no defect or flaw in the
Marriage.

On Friday following, being the 24. of April, Lodgings are taken for my Lord
and my Self in Durham Yard, and much State and Grandeur is used for the Credit
of his Lordship. The next Friday following, being May Day, his Lordship with
great State carries Me into Hide-Park where I was accommodated by the
Courteous Respect of diverse Persons of Quality, with great Rarities.

My Husband by this time, publicly owned the Title of Lord, by the which Title
privately, he carried on his design upon me, he being one day in company with
some of his old Acquaintance, hearing him boast of the fortune he had matched,
they told him, that they might possibly commit an error, in calling him Mr.
Carlton, and that they should readily give him his due, by what Title soever
was proper to him, and that they knew not better how to be instructed then from
himself, who they thought would be least guilty of flattery in that case. Why
truly, said he, my Princess calls me Lord: upon that, he took upon him the
acceptance of the Title, publicly as well as privately.

The first time he came to me, he pretended to be a Lord, the which Title he
could not well-maintain, as the case stood, unless he made me a Princess: Now
let but the World judge how divilishly I had been cheated, if I had been a
Princess, I had no reason to undeceive them in their wilful mistakes, when I
saw by their practices, how much I was deceived, and disappointed; for now by
this time, M^s. King calls me Sister, and I come to understand that his
Lordship was a young Clark, his Father finding that his Lordships concealed
Honor had taken Air, addresseth himself to me, least I might take dislike
thereat, in finding my self so palpably deceived; and by all means I must make
over my Estate unto my Husband, saying unto me, Daughter, you will do well to
settle your Estate upon my Son, itwill satisfy the World, and redownd to your
Honor. I told him I saw my self deceived, and that although I could not keep
my affections from him, I would keep my Estate until that I did die: I cannot
but make a stop here, when I remember how violently they lately did prosecute
me, without all peradventure this saying of mine animated them to seek my life
so vigorously. This was the cause of my first breach with them, and the cause
of my troubles that did immediately ensue.

In one or two days, the Scene alters, and a Letter from Dover is contrived,
to be a discovery of me; For an accouut of which, I refer you to my Speech in
my Trial, for Vindication of my Self in that Particular.

My Husband's Father comes to my Lodging in Durham Yard, with Mris. Clark, and
my Husband and others, called me Cheat and Harlot, violently stripped me of all
my Apparel and Jewels, pulled off my Silk Stockings from my Legs, cut the
Lace of my Bodies, and scarce left me any thing to cover my Nakedness with;
hurried me before a Justice, where the Father and the Son are bound to
Prosecute me for having of two husbands; they prefs me to confess the Truth; I
did insist upon no other Justification then my Innocence: The which at last was
my Security and Refuge, against their Malicious and unnatural Dealing with me.
But I can do no less then say, That my Husband did nothing but with Reluctance,
and was pressed thereunto by his Friends.

Notwithstanding all which, I was committed Prisoner to the Gate House,
Westminster, without one penny of Money, or any manner of Relief; But my
Husband came thither to Visit me, and Charged the Keeper I should want nothing,
so far as 40 l. went, he would see paid; and afterward on the 11th of May, sent
me this Letter, the Copy of which I here insert Verbatim; the which I have now
by me, and shall keep it as a Relict.

My Dearest Heart,
ALthough the manner of your usage may very well call the sincerity of my
Affection and Expressions to you in Question; Yet when I consider, That you are
not ignorant of the Compulsion of my Father, and the Animosity of my whole
Relations both against You and my Self for your sake, I am very Confident your
Goodness will pardon and pass by those things which at present I am no way
able to help: And be you Confident, That notwithstanding my Friends aversion,
there shall be nothing within the Reach of my Power shall be wanting, that may
Conduce both to Your Liberty, Maintenance, and Vindication. I shall very
speedily be in a Condition to furnish You with Money, to supply You according
to your desire. I hope Mr. Bailey will be very Civil to you; and let him be
assured, he shall in a most exact measure be satisfied, and have a Requital for
his Obligation. My dearest, always praying for our happy meeting,

I rest, Your most affectionate Husband, John Carlton.
May the 11th. 1663.

At the same time, his Brother George came and Drank a health to my Confusion,
fell down dead Drunk, and afterward said, That ^ had poisoned him.

Other of my Husband's Friends came to Visit me in the Gate House, (of the many
hundreds of others, I shall say nothing) one of them said, Madam, I am one of
your Husbands Friends and Acquaintance, I had a desire to see you, because I
have heard of your breeding. Alas, said I, I have left that in the City amongst
my Kindred, because they w^nt it.

Another in his discourse delivered as an Aphorism, That Marriage and Hanging
went by Destiny. I told him, I had received from the Destinies Marriage; and he
in probability might Hanging. To wave many others of the like nature.

On the 3d of June, 1663. I am by Order brought to the Sessions in the Old
Bailey. The Court being sat, a Bill of Indictment was drawn up against Me by
the Name of Mary Moders, alias Stedman, for having two Husbands now alive, viz.
Thomas Stedman and John Carlton. The Grand Jury found the Bill, and was to the
effect following: viz.

That she the said Mary Moders late of London, Spinster, otherwise Mary
Stedman, the Wife of Tho. Stedman late of the City of Canterbury in the County
of Kent Shooemaker, 12 May, in the sixth Reign of his now Majesty, at the
Parish of St. Mildreds in the City of Canterbury, in the County aforesaid, did
take to Husband the aforesaid Thomas Stedman, and him the said Thomas Stedman
then and there had to husband. And that she the said Mary Moders, alias
Stedman, 21 April, in the 15th year of his said Majesty's Reign, at London, in
the Parish of Great St. Bartholomews, in the Ward of Farringdon without,
Feloniously did take to Husband one John Carlton, and to him was married, the
said Thomas Stedman her former Husband then being alive, and in full life:
against the form of the Stautute in that case provided, and against the Peace
of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

Afterward I was called to the Bar; and appearing, was commanded to hold up
my hand: Which accordingly I did; and my Indictment was read to me as follows:

Clerk of the Peace. Mary Moders, alias Stedman, Thou stand Indicted in
London by the Name of Mary Moders late of London Spinster, otherwise Mary
Stedman, the Wife of, etc. And here the Indictment was read as above: How say
thou, Art thou guilty of the Felony whereof thou stand Indicted, or Not
guilty?

Nor guilty, my Lord.

Clerk of the Peace. How will thou be tried?

I said, By God and the Country.

Clerk of the Peace. God send thee a good deliverance.

And afterward I being set to the Bar in order to my Trial, I prayed time
till the morrow for my Trial: Which was granted, and all persons concerned were
ordered to attend at Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon.

I was sent to Newgate, and in the Evening my Husband came to the Place I was
lodged at, and desired admittance. After I was acquainted with it, I desired he
should be admitted to my Presence. Upon his entering the Room he said, How do
you do, Madam? I thank you, my Lord, as well as ever I was in my life, never
better. I pity you, Madam. I scom your Pity, my Lord, I have too large a Soul.
But (said he) I come to take my leave of you for ever; You have not long to
stay here, I am sorry for you. Why, (said I) my Lord, have you numbered my
days? My propitious Stars a better sort of Influence then you imagine them to
have. Well (said he) I shall pray for you, Madam. I said, My Lord, why, are you
Righteous? The Prayers of the Wicked are not effectual. Upon that, he stepped
backward to be gone. I stepped forwards to him, and said,

Nay, (my Lord) it is not amiss,
Before we part, to take a kiss.
Why, said he, will you kiss me? I told him, Yes: and did so.

A Person of Honor desired him to stay and take a Glass of Sack; He said, No.
I Replied, I am sorry your Lordships Breeding is so poor, it will not give you
leave to be Civil.

On Thursday the 4th of June, at 9. of the Clock in the Morning, I was brought
by my Keeper to the Bar, and Silence being made, the Jury was Sworn, and the
Witnesses were called, viz. James Knott, Sarah Williams, Mr. George Carlton the
Elder. The Court with great Patience staid the p^osecution above an hour and a
half, in regard Mr. George Carlton alleged he was not ready with his
Witnesses. After which, the Court proceeded, and acquainted Mr. Carlton, That
they were not bound to stay so long as they had already; but he was bound to be
provided to prosecute.

The Indictment was Read, which was to this Effect; That I had at several times
married several persons that were now living; That I had married in St.
Meldreds Parish in Canterbury some years last past, one Thomas Stedman, a
Shoemaker now living; And that in April last past I had Feloniously married
one John Carlton, against the Statute in that Case made and provided.

James Knott was sworn, and said, That I was married in the place aforesaid,
unto one Thomas Stedman, who is now alive, and would have come up, if he had
had Money to have born his Charges; and that he gave Me in Marriage: That I was
born at Canterbury, and that my Father in Law his Name was Richard Foord.

He being asked, If he knew my own Father and Mother; He said, No. And further
said, That it was about a Week or a Fortnight before the Act for Marriages by
Justices of the Peace was put in Execution.

The Lord Chief Justice ask't Knott, What were the words used in the Marriage?
He answered, That he was so young, that he could not remember that.

William Clark Sworn, said, That there was an Indictment against Me at Dover,
for marrying of one Day, after Stedman, and that I was prosecuted by Stedman,
of which I was cleared.

Mr. George Carlton the Elder being sworn, gave in Evidence, That he saw my
Husband at Dover. Being asked, Whether he knew him to be her Husband? He
answered, That he could not swear it.

James Knott gave further Evidence, That I had two Children by Stedman.

Mr. George Carlton the Elder being asked, If he had any thing further to say,
acquainted the Court, That he had searched the Register-Book of the Parish
Church of St. Meldreds, Canterbury, but could not find any such Marriage
Registered. And further said, That the present Parson of the Parish did tell
him, That the Clerk of the said Place was often guilty of neglect in that kind.

Mr. George Carlton the younger being Sworn, said, That I was married unto his
Brother, John Carlton, in April last, in Great St. Bartholomews.

Mr. Smith, the Parson that married me there, gave in Evidence, That he married
Mr. John Carlton and my self, in April last, by the Book of Common Prayer, and
had a License produced to him for his Warrant; I craving leave to speak, said,
I acknowledged that I was married to Mr. Carlton, at the time, and in the
manner as is before expressed; therefore they might save themselves the Labor,
and the Honorable Bench the trouble of further Proof in that Case.

Mr. George Carlton the elder being asked, If he had any other Evidence to
offer, answered, That he had more Witnesses to prove my being married to other
persons. The Bench Replied, That there could be nothing given in Evidence that
was not contained in the Indictment. The Court asked Knot, Who were with him
besides at the Wedding he mentioned in his Evidence; he said, That there was
Mr. Man, the Parson that married Us, the Sexton, my Sister, and himself that
gave me.

Some of the Jury desired the Court to ask Knot, How old he was now: he
answered, That he was one or two and thirty years of Age. Mr. Carlton being
asked, If he had any more Witnesses, answered, No.

I standing all this while at the Bar, not once interrupting or disturbing the
Evidence of the other side, the Court calling upon me to make my defense, I
without any disturbed thought, or unquiet mind, did in a deliberate composed
manner, address my self to the Bench in this sort:

My Lord, In the first place, I do with all due respect and submission, humbly
beseech your Lordship, and this Honorable Bench, not to impute any thing that
I shall say to confidence, but rather to the necessity that lies upon me, to
make my Defense for my life. A thing that will sufficiently oblige any to make
the best Defense they can: but that does not weight so much with me, as that
which is every whit as dear to me as my life.

My Lord, It is my Reputation and my innocence, that incourageth me to speak
before your Lordship at this time, and it is that which produces confidence in
me, that as I am innocent of the thing urged upon me by them, the Justice and
Reason of you before whom I stand, by the which I hope to be acquitted and
rendered to the World what I am, not what my prosecutors would have the World to
believe me to be.

My Lord, I shall not trouble you with any thing impertinent, nor with any
things that related to these affairs more then needs I must: When his Son my
Husband, came and addressed himself to me, pretending himself a person of
Honor and upon first sight pressed me to Marriage: I told him, Sir, said I I
am a stranger, have no acquaintance here, and desire you to desist your Suit; I
could not speak my mind, but he (having borrowed some thredbare Complements)
replied, Madam, Your seeming virtues, your amiable person, and noble
department, renders you so excellent, That were I in the least interested in
you, I cannot doubt of happiness; and so with many words to the like purpose,
courted me. I told him, and indeed could not but much wonder, that at so small
a glance he could be so presumptuous with a Stranger, to hint this to me; but
all I could say, would not beat him off. Therefore my Lord. I do humbly
acquaint your Lordship that old Mr. Carlton did rather Design upon me, then I
upon him, to say nothing of what passed before I was married to his Son, of
which there was enough to demonstrate that evidently, so soon as I was married
to his Son, he desired me to make over my Estate to his Son, to satisfy the
World, that was somewhat amused, and in doubt of what is seems they had spread
abroad for their own Reputation: I answered him, Sir, I shall not dis-invest my
self of my Estate, until I did.

Mr. Carlton intercepted my Letters, by that understood how my Estate did lie,
that he had that expectation of what I had, is farther evident; for his Son
came to me, pretending to be a person of Honor and great quality, and the
better to accomodate himself in his application to me, he borrowed his Brother
Georges Cloak, it is the same he has on his back in Court before your
Lordship; and if any be deceived, I am.

My Lord, If that they could but have been insured that I had been the person
as to Estate, that they imagined me to be, your Lordship should not have been
troubled at this time, in these matters, if I understand them aright, they
would have been contented to have practiced concealment, in case I had had more
then one Husband. Instead of this defamation that I am loaded with, my Lord, my
crime is, that I have not an Estate, or at least such a one as they imagined it
to be; therefore my Lord, I say, I am brought at this time to this place; And
therefore, my Lord, were my Jewels seized to defray the Charge of their
expensive courting of me. To color what they have done, they fix the Offenses
of some Woman of Canterbury, a person that may be dead, or gone out of the Land
for ought I know, upon me: the place I know not, a place that I am a stranger
unto; if that had not bin so, they have had time enough since my first
Commitment to have produced more Evidence then any that has as yet been urged
before Your Lordship: My Lord, They brand me for marrying of a Shoo-make, and
another sad piece of Mortality, a Brick-layer. My Lord, My Soul abhors such
a thought, and never was accommodated with such Condiscention, to move in so
low an O^b. My Lord, by all that I can observe of the Persons that appear
against me, they may be divided into two sorts; the one of them come against me
for want of Wit, the other for want of Money.

That Money has been proffered to subborn some against me, I have Witness to
prove.

My Lord, These People have been up and down the Country, and finding none
there that could justify any thing of this matter, they get here an unknown
Fellow, unless in a Prison, and from thence borrowed, you cannot but all judge
to swear against me. My Lord, were there any such Marriage as this fellow
pretends, methinks there might be a Certificate from the Minister, or place:
Certainly if married, it must be registered; but there is no Registry of it, and
so can be no Certificate, no Minister nor Clerk to be found: And if I should
own a Marriage, then you see that great Witness cannot tell you, whether I was
lawfully married, or how? But it is enough for him (if such a paultry fellow
may be believed) to say, I was married. I was never yet married to any but John
Carlton, the late pretended Lord: But these persons have sought always to take
away my life, bringing persons to swear against me.

My Lord, When old Mr. Carlton saw that he could not obtain his End of me, he
threatened me with a Justice, and a Prison; and the Justice bound him over to
prosecute me; he must make the best of it, and therefore it is no wonder that
he repaireth to such Means and Instruments to effect my Ruin.

My Lord, I desire that my Witnesses may be called.

Elizabeth Collier said, That she coming to the Gate House to see her husband,
being a Prisoner there for Debt, one pretended that he came to see his Wife
there, named Mary Maullers. Upon that, she took upon her to personate the said
Person he asked for: He said, I, it is true, thou art that unhappy Woman that I
married. The which person she never saw before in her life.

Mr. Ed. Bailey, Deputy-Keeper of the Gate House, says, That he has heard 40
People, at the least, of Canterbury, ancient Livers and Inhabitants there, say,
That they never knew, nor did ever see me, before they came to see Me in the
Gate House, upon the Fame that was spread abroad of my being born at
Canterbury, and having acted such a part at Canterbury.

The Lord Chief Justice was pleased to ask Me, Where I was Born? I answered, In
Germany. He asked me, Where? I said, At Colen.

Mr. Clark was asked by the Court, Whether he could prove, or swear, That I was
the Mary Mauders that was Tried at Dover? He answered, That he could not,
neither prove it, nor swear it himself; for he was a stranger to the whole
Business.

I perceiving the slight Evidence, and that I needed not either to say more,
or offer more evidence in my behalf, submitted my Cause to the Bench and Jury.

Upon my being asked by the Bench, If I had more to say; I Replied, No.

The Court gave Instructions to the Jury as follows:

First, The Indictment was Briefly recited.

And as to the Evidence, the Court observed, That there was but one Witness to
prove the Indictment, and that he could not remember the manner of Marriage,
nor the words used there.

And if that I had been Married, and had two Children, and that the Jury should
believe that Single Evidence, and that he had sworn aright, I was to dye.

The Judge told the Jury, That they had heard of a Trial against me, for
having had Two Husbands before, one Stedman, and Day, at one time, and that
from a Jury-Man that was upon the Jury at the same Trial; yet he could not
swear, That I was the Woman.

The Jury went forth, and continued absent a quarter of an hour: Upon their
Return, and Silence being made, the Jury being called over, they were asked as
the Custom is, Who should say for them? They answered, The Foreman.

The Court asked, Whether they found the Prisoner Guilty, or not Guilty?

The Foreman answered, Not Guilty. Upon which, there was a Great Shout of the
People.

After Silence being made, I moved the Court, That they would Order the
Restoration of my Jewels. They answered, That I had Owned Mr. Carlton for her
Husband, he must sue for them, if Old Mr. Carlton shall deny the delivery of
them.

When the Jury was Returning with their Verdict, my Husband in the Garden, met
them; he asked one of them, If they had found me Guilty? He in answer to his
question, said, No, my Lord, We shall leave you to make much of your Princess.
He Replied, By God, I am undone, I will never own her.

Their Envy against me rested not here, they preferred several other Bills the
same Afternoon; and endeavored as much the next day: but the Grand Jury
perceiving it to be rather upon Malice, then upon any just ground that they had
so to do, flung them our.

During my stay at New Gate after the Trial a Kinsman of my Lords came to Visit
me, said, Madam, I think you are with Child. I answered him, That if I were, it
would be a young Clerk he would be born with a Pen and Ink in his hand and a
Bond about his Neck.

Saturday he 6th of June, I was discharged from my Restraint; since which, I
shall acquaint the World with what has happened to my Vindica^ion: It was one of
my pretended Husbands, by whom a Bill was prefer ed (but not found, as I said
before) by Billing the Brick-layer. Upon Whusun-Monday, the 8th of June
instant, the said Billing came to Newgate, demanded of the Keepers to deliver
his Wife to him: The Turn-Key, and other subordinate Officers of the Goal, told
him, They had none of his Wife; he insisted upon it, and with-stood all deni^l,
mentioned my name, and the particulars of my Trial: The Keepers remembering
there was a former mistake of the same person, given in Evidence on my behalf
at the Trial, called one Grizel Hudson a Convict, a pretty Woman, and in good
habit; the Turn-key a ked Billing, Whether this was his Wife? Billing replied,
Yes; and asked her, Why she did not come to him upon his first sending for her?
She told him, That the Keepers would not permit her to stir out of the Prison,
in regard her Fees were not paid. Billing said, He would pay the Fees; and
whispered her in the Ear, saying, That they had a mind to hang her (meaning the
Carltons) but he would not prosecute her: True it was, he had put in an
Indictment against her, but he could not help that. Well Moll, said he to her,
Have ye all your things? She said, Yes. But, said he, Moll, Why do you stay
here amongst such wicked Company, Rogues and Whores, I see their Irons about
their Legs. Why, said she, I have left some Li(...) engaged in the Cellar. To
the Cellar the Keeper carried them both; and there Billing left a Note under
his Hand, to pay five shillings to the Tapster: Which Note he has to produce,
to satisfy any that shall make further Enquiry in this particular.

He further said, That she had cheated him of forty pounds, and that he would
pawn the Lease of his House, rather then she should want Money, although she
was a wicked Rogue, if she would but live with him: She promised she would. He
told her he would give her a Sky-colour'd Silk Petticoat, and Wastcoat, and a
Podesway Gown, new Holland for Smocks, and all other things necessary. Billing
turning himself to the Company the^e present, said merrily, That she had cost
him much before when he married her, but he never lay with her, but he had kissed
her, and f^l^ her a hundred times. Billing asked her again, If she would leave
these wicked Rogues, and go long with him. She said, she had another Debt to
pay: He asked what it was; She said, Twenty pounds to such a one, a Stranger
then present, unto which person he gave a Note to pay 20l. in one month after
the Date thereof: (it is mo^e then probable he will be made so to do.)

He further said to her, That now it will trouble me to pay all this Money, and
then you to run away from me in a short time. Withal, said he, Moll, You need
not, for I have a better Estate them the young man that tried you for your
Life. So gave the particulars of his Estate, what in Money, Houses, Leases, and
Land. He added moreover, that he did love her out of measure, notwithstanding
she had done him other mischief, then what he had beforementioned. She ask
him, wh^t they were? He said, She had stolen from his Daughter a Knife and a
wrought Sheath, a Handkercher, and a Sealed Ring. With that, the Standers by
told him, that he was mistaken, that this Grizell Hudson was not the person: He
swote it was, and that he knew her well enough; that he saw her in the
Gate House, and that she knew what passed between us there: But, said he, Moll,
Thou art a cunning Rogue, I desire nothing of thee but to be honest, and live
with me; the which she promised, and he parted with great content thereupon.

Reader, Take the whole, and view it well; I leave it to thy Ingeruity, Whether
from the Trial it self, and other Circumst^nces, there be not enough to clear
one, in thy Judgment. I have omitted clothing of it in polite Language, in
regard I was confined to render it in those proper Terms and Words, that every
Accident carried along with it self, without adding or diminishing.

FINIS.
AN Encomiastick POEM UPON The German Princess.
FAmes Trump sounds forth the Amazons Renown,
Whose Worthy Feats have Kingdoms ovethrown;
The Triumphs of their Sex may win the Bays
From Masculine Fortunes more unworthy praise.
Some are for Valor, some for Learning praised,
Beauty and piercing Wit have others raised.
Man's highest Honors cannot pretend to claim
What is not justly due to Woman's Name.
And yet all Histories defective are,
And have not named a Female half so rare,
As this our PRINCESS; whose WIT so refined,
Made frustrate what her Enemies had designed;
Deceiving her deceivers, cast them all
Into the Pit they dug for her fall.
No more shall Cleopatra boast her. Parts,
Which won great Antony's and Caesar's hearts;
Though with one Passion she did both inflame,
In all Estates her Self being still the same.
To vainer purpose did Thalestris come
From distant Regions to procure a Son
Of Alexander: 'Twas not (I greatly fear)
Courage or Wit's Effect, but hot Desire.
This Foreign PRINCESS such perfections brought
Into our English World, as Lessons taught
Most proper; for our Age declining still
From bad to worse, goes on to what is most ill:
Our Ancestors renowned Virtues prized,
But we all real Honors have despised:
How well does she our dulled Souls revive,
And good Examples to the Great Ones give,
To Brave and Noble Virtues to aspire,
And make the under-duller World admire.
Thus, though disguised, her most Illustrious Worth
Through all Impediments of Hate brake forth,
Which her Detractors sought within a Prison
T'Eclipse, whereby her Fame's the higher risen.
As Jems in the dark do cast a brighter Ray,
Then when obstructed by the Rival-day;
So did the Luster of her Mind appear,
Through this obscure Condition, more clear.
And when they thought by bringing to the Bar
To gain her public Shame, they raised her far
More Noble Trophies, She being clearly Quit
Both by her INNOCENCE and Exc'lent WIT.
FINIS.

