THE APHORISMS OF HIPPOCRATES PRINCE OF PHYSICIANS.

WITH A short COMMENT on Them, taken out of those larger Notes Of GALEN.
HEURNIUS FUCHSIUS, etc.


With an exact Table showing the substance of every APHORISM.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Church
yard. 1655.

Hippocrates his life out of Soranus.
HIppocrates was born in an Island in the Aegean sea, called Cos or Ccos. and
was the son of Heraclides, and Praxithea the daughter of Phenaretes. He
reckoned his Pedigree from Hercules and Esculapius, and counted himself
nineteen generations or descents from the one, and twenty from the other. Of
his Genealogy Erat^sthenes makes mention. and Pherecides and Apollod^rus and
Arius Tarsensis. He was his Father Heraclides disciple, then to one Her^dicus,
and as some relate, he heard Leontinus the Rhetorician, and Democritus the
Philosopher of Abdera. He flourished in Pelops his time: and was born (as
Isthomachus relates in his first book of Hippocrates Sect.) in the first year
of the eightieth Olimpiad. But S^ranus a Coan, having searched the Library of
Cos, goes further* and says he was born during Abriada his Monarchy the seven
and twentieth day of the month Agrian, at which time the Coans do to this day
offer Sacrifices to Hippocrates. Another Author says he lived in the times of
Eliachim, Malachi, Pereno, and Socrates. He being exceeding skilful in Physic,
and the whole course of learning, after his parents died forsook his native
Country (as one Andreas falsely imputes to him in a book which he has written
of the Origin of Physic) for having fired the Cuidians Library. Others say he
left his Country through a desire he had to see the effects and success of
Physic in several effects, Climates, and places. But Soranus says the Lord
appeared to him in a dream, and wished him go to live in Thessalia Howsoever he
was famous all Greece over, and admired for his skill in Physic so far that he
was by Ambassadors sent for to Perdi^cas King of Macedonia when he was thought
to lie sick of a Consumption, and came to him, together with one Euryphon, who
was elder then he; and by some signs and tokens, found that the Kings disease
was a trouble of the mind, for after the death of his Father Alexander, he fell
in love with one of his Concubines called Phila: Which Hippocrates discovered
by his pulse, in which he felt an alteration at her coming into the room, and
acquainting Phila therewith, cured the King* He was also called to Abdera to
recover Democritus from his madness, and expel the Plague out of the whole
City. And the Plague being at a time gotten in amongst the Pahnonians and
Illyrians, they sent Ambassadors for him, who having enquired of them what
winds ordinarily blew there sent them away unsatisfied: and when by prudent
Arguments he foresaw the Plague would prevail upon the Atticans dominions, he
foretold it, and took great care both of those Cities and of his Disciples. And
he so truly loved Greece, that the renown of his learning spreading it self as
far as Persia, and Artaxerxes sending for him by means of Hystanides Governor
of Hellespont, upon proffer of exceeding great rewards, preferring honesty,
before lucre of money, he absolutely denied him; as by his letter written to him
it plainly appears. He freed his own Country, when the Athenians intended to
war against it, and had called the Thessalians to aid them, whereupon he had
great honors decreed him by the Coans. Yea and by the Thessalians, Argives, and
Athenians, who entered him into the Eleusinian Sacrifices or mysteries, next to
Hercules, and admitted him into their franchize, and allowed both him and all
his posterity maintenance of Corn out of their common Granaries. He taught all
as were studious of this Art, freely and without envy.

He died amongst the Larisseans about that time as Democritus also died, some
say at ninety, some at eighty five, some at one hundred and four, some at a
hundred and nine years of age. And was buried between Gyrtone and Larissa,
where his Monument is to this day to be seen, in which for a long time there
was a swarm of Bees, with whose honey the nurses coming to the Monument, would
anoint the Ulcers of infants mouths, and cure them. In many of his pictures and
Images he is painted with his head covered (some say) with a hat, it being a
sign of Nobility (for so was Ulysses painted) Some say his head was covered
with his Cloak, which some affirm was for comeliness because he was bald, and
some by reason of the weakness of his head. But some will have it done so by
him significatively to show that it i^ fitting to have the chief ^eat of the
soul well guarded and covered. Others say it is the dress of one who loves
travel: some again say it was to demonstrate the obscurity of his writings. And
finally some that it was to testify, that we ought in our health time beware
of such things as may be hurtful to us. Though some affirm it was because his
cloak should not hinder him, hanging about his hands when he was about to give
Physic, and that therefore he wrapped it up and cast it behind his head.

There is great controversy about his writings, so that the^e being several
opinions, it is not easy to assert any thing certainly concerning them, for
many causes which may obcure a man's judgment. As first his surname Secondly
because it is not possible to observe his phrase: Thirdly, because that
according to his age he alters it, besides many other reasons; I could (if I
pleased) allege. He always contemned money, was pious, and a lover of the
Greeks. Wonderful well-affected to his own Countrymen, so that he freed them
all from the Pestilence, as I said before, whereby he was much honored both by
them and the Argives and Athenians. He left two sons after his decease,
Thessalus and Draca, and a great number of Disciples; but his sons were the
most famous.

Hippocrates his Oath.
I Swear by Apollo the Physician, Aesculapius, Hygiea, Panacea, and call all
the Gods and Goddesses to witness, that I will observe and keep this
underwritten oath to the uttermost of my power and judgment. I will reverence
my Master who taught me this Art, equally with my Parents, will allow him
things necessary for his life, and will esteem his children as brothers, and
(do they desire it) will teach them this my Art without any salary or Covenant.
I will participate all my instructions, and Lectures and whatsoever I know
else, to all mine own and my Masters children, yea and to all my scholars, who
shall in writing be bound to me, and tied by a Physical oath, and to none else.

And as what concerns curing of the sick, I will to the uttermost of my power
and judgment prescribe them their diet, and will secure them from all
detriment and injury. I will not by any man's entreaties be moved to minister
poison to any man, nor give any advice to do it. Neither will I give a woman
any Physic to make her miscarry of her birth: but will use mine Art and lead
my life piously and chastely. I will cut none for the stone, but leave that to
skilful Chyrurgions. In what house soever I come, it shall be for the good of
the sick, and will abstain from offering any voluntary injury, especially in
any Veneral way to any such as I shall have to cure, men or women, bond or free

Whatsoever I shall see or hear during my cure, yea though I were not called to
give physic, but as it were being in a common conversation of life, if they be
not things fitting to be revealed, I will conceal and keep them secret to my
self. If I observe this oath faithfully, may I thrive and prosper in mine Art
and Living, and grow famous to posterity. Or may the contrary happen to me upon
breach of it.

An exact Table showing every Aphorism pertaining to every disease.
Note the first number stands for Aphorism, the second for Section.

Of sickness of the head. REad Aph. 71. Sect. 4. 64. 5. 67. 5. 40. 2. 5. ^. 7.
^ 10. 6. 22. 6. 51. 6. Lethargy, read ^0. 7. dead-sleep 1. 2. Overmuch waking
3. 2. Apoplexy 57. 6. 42. 2. 43. 2 Melancholy 24. 6. 56. 6. 11. 6. 9. 4.
Madness 22. 6. 5. 7. D^ating 53. 6. Sleep 2. 2. Falling Sickness 46 2. 8. 5. Of
the dispositions of the Sinews. Palsy 18. 5. Cramp 57. 4. 66. 4. 67. 4. 79. 4.
1. 5. 2. 5. 3: 5. 4. 5. 6. 5. 7. 5. 18. 5. 17. 5. 23. 5. 39. 6. 9. 7. 10. 7.
13. 7. 18. 7. 26. 7. Astonishment. 14. 7. Of the wry mouth, nose, or lips, 49.
4. Of the dispositions if the Eyes. 12. 3. 13. 3. 14: 3: 18. 3: 17. 3. 22. 3,
49. 4. 52. 4. 17. 6. 31. 6. 52. 6. 47. 7. Of the dispositions of the Ears. 49;
4. Of the dispositions of the Nose. 2. 6. 40. 2. 23. 3: 14. 3, 15. 3: 32, 3.
36. 7. 25. 5. Flux of blood at the Nose. 37. 3. 27. 4. 60: 4* 75. 4. 32. 5, 10.
6. 9. 7; Neesing 34. 5. 12. 6. 52. 7. Of the diverse dispositions of the Mouth
and Tongue. 25. 3. 32. 6. Dispositions of the Teeth. 26. 3. 53. 4. 26. 3. Of
the effects of the Throat, 23: 3. 34. 4. 37. 4. 11. 5. 37. 6. 60. 7. Affects of
the Breast and Lungs. 68. 4. Asthma 46. 6. the voice, 6. 5. 51. 5. 47. 7.
spitting of blood, 30. 3 67. 4. 47. 4. 14. 5. 10. 6: 15. 7. 37. 8. Plurisie 12.
1. 6. 3. 24. 3. 9. 5. 16. 5: 16. 6. 33. 6 Peripneumonia 34. 6. 12. 7. Enpiema
or spitting of matter 27. 6. Pthisick 11. 3. 14 3. 23. 3, 30. 3. 8. 4. 10. 5.
15, 5. 13. 5. 16. 5, 64. 5. 16. 7. Affects of the Heart. 66. 4. Affects of the
paps, 36. 5. 27. 5. 38. 5 39. 5 50. 5 52 5, 54 5 Affects of the Stomach. 15. 1.
18. 1. 33. 2. Difficulty of swallowing, 35. 4. Pain of the Stomach, 66. 4. 21.
2. Of thirst 27. 5 Vomiting, 2. 1. 7. 4. 22. 4. 10. 7. Of the Hicket 45. 13. 6.
15 6. 17. 7. Affects of the Liver. Pain of the Liver, 53 7. Aposthumes of the
Liver, 60, 5. 18. 6. 46. 7. Dropsy 23. 3. 86. 22. 6. 11 4. 35 6. 43 6. 5. 7*
48. 7. 46. 7. Of the hypocondres 64. 4. 74. 4. 64. 5. 40. 6. Affects of the
Gall and Spleen. Jaundies, 64. 4. 63. 4. 71. 5. 42 6. Of the Spleen 23. 3. 43.
6. 48. 6 Fluxes of all kinds. 14. 2. 21. 4: 22. 4: 23. 4. 24. 4. 26. 4. 28. 4
49. 5. 1. 6. 3. 6. 32. 6 43. 6. 48. 6. 5. 7: 24. 7. 30. 7. 31. 7 Pains of the
intestines, 11. 4. 49. 4 ^. 6. 7. 6. Iliac passion 44. 6. 10. 7 Affects of the
Fundament. 11: 6. 12. 6. Affects of the reins 6. 4. 80. 4. 7. 6 35. 7. 36. 7.
37. 7. 55. 7 Affects of the Bladder. 17. 3. 23. 3. 27. 3. 32. 3. 70. 4. 71. 4
73. 4. 72. 4. 74. 4. 75. 4 70 4. 76. 4. 77. 4. 75. 4: 80. 4. 82. 4. 83.2. 84.4
58.5 19.6. 44.4. 32. 7. 34.7. 35.7. 39.7. 40.7. 49*7. Affects of the members of
Generation in men. 63. 5. 19. 6. Of the affects of the members of Generation in
women. 13.3. 1.4. 28.5. 29 5. 5 30. 5.31. 5 32.5. 33.5. 34 5. 35.5. 36.5: 37 5.
38.5. ^9.6. 40.5. 41.5. 42.5. 43 5. 44.5. 45.5. 46.5. 47.5. 48.5 49.5. 50.5.
51.5 52.5. 53 5. 54.5. 55.5. 56.5. 57.5. 59.5. 60.5. 61.5. 62.5. 28.7. Of the
Affects that do appear in the Exteame parts. 46.2. 20.4. 31.4. 33.4. 44.4.
25.5. 21.6. 22.6, 28.6. 29.6. 30 6. 34.6. 49.7. 49.6. 55 6. 59 6. 60.5.
Aphorisms touching Fevers. 12.1. 14.1. 23.2. 25.2. 26.2: 28.2. 30.2. 34.2.
7.3. 8.3. 10.3. 12.3. 22.3. 29.4. 31.4. 44.4. 43. 4. 46.4. 48.4. 45.4. 49.4.
50.4. 51.4 52.4. 53.4. 55.4. 56.4. 67. 4. 50.4. 60.4. 62.4. 63.4. 94.4. 66.4.
67.4 68.4. 69.4. 26.6. 54 6. 71.4. Of Diet to be observed in Fevers. 4.1. 5.1.
6.1. 7.1. 8.1. 9.1. 10 1. 11.1. 13.1. 14.1. 15.1. 16.1. 17.1. 18.1. 19.1.
The Aphorisms of Hippocrates Prince of Physicians.
SECT. I.
The Argument.
This first Section does for the most part handle the Dietary part of Physicck,
prescribing not only the measure and observation in meats and drinks for sound
bodies, but also for those that are sick and diseased, with a moderation of
Labor and Exercise.

APHORISM. 1.
LIfe ^is short, the art is long, occasion sudden, experince dangerous,
judgment difficult. Neither is it suffent that the Physician do his office,
unless the Patient, and those which are attendants about him do their duty, and
that outward things be as well ordered, as those that are given inwardly.

This Aphorism is as it were an Introduction or Proeme to the whole Work.

APH. 2.
In distemperatures, loosnesses, Fluxes of the belly, and Vomitings which do
com of their own accord if such things be purged as ought to be purged, they
are easily endured, and are profitable, otherwise it falls out contrary. In
like sort if an emptying of vessels be done as it should be, it does good as is
easily suffered, otherwise it does work contrary effects. Wherefore
consideration is to be had both of the region and the time, and also of the age
and the quality of the disease for which such things ought to be evacuated, or
else not.

For the Physician ought in all things to imitate and assist Nature.

APH. 3.
The full habit and state of the bodies of wrestlers, if it comes to the
highest degree of fullness is dangerous; for it cannot continue and remain in
the same state, and when it cannot so remain nor grow into a better habit, it
remains, that it must needs decline into a worse. Wherefore that over full
plight of body must speedily be dissolved, to the end it may take a beginning
of new nourishment: Neither must we proceed so far that the vessels be quite
empty, and void (for that is dangerous) but we must proceed so far as Nature
will bear and tolerate. So extreme evacuations are perilous, and extreme
repletitions are likewise dangerous.

The former Aphorism was of the quality of humors to be evacuated now this and
those which follow, treat of the quantity.

APH. 4.
A small and slender diet in long and lingering diseases is always dangerous,
and in sharp diseases likewise, when it is not convenient, and again diet
reduced to extreme slenderness, is as full of peril, as extreme repletion, and
fullness in laborious and painful.

In this Aphorism Hippocrat^^ speaks, of the diet which fick men ought to use.

APH. 5.
The sick may offend in a slender diet, for thereby it happens that they grow
worse, for every error in this case is more dangerous, then in a somewhat fuller
diet. For the same cause, a very slender and too precise a diet, is somewhat
dangerous to sound and healthful bodies, because they endure the errors thereof
with more difficulty. Wherefore a thin and exact manner of diet, for the most
part is more dangerous, then that which is a little more full and plentiful
then should be.

He says for the most part; for Hippocrates meaning is not that a slender diet
is absolutely hurtful.

APH. 6.
To extreme diseases, extreme and exquisite remedies are best.

Extreme diseases are called those which are most sharp and acute.

APH. 7.
When therefore the disease is very sharp and has presently most extreme
passions and pains, we must use a most exceeding slender diet when it is so.
But when it is not so, we may use a fuller diet, and as the disease declineth,
we may by little increase the diet.

By passions and pains he means symptoms, which in these very sharp diseases
are seldom but ac^ompanied with hot Fevers.

APH. 8.
When the force of the disease is greatest, then a most sparing diet is to be
observed.

This Aphorism enjoins that in general which the former does give order to be
done in some particular diseases.

APH. 9.
But we must consider and conjecture by the sick man, whether he be able to
hold out, and persist with the prescribed diet, even to the state and uttermost
extremity of the disease, or may faint or fail and being too weak with such
diet, may yield the victory to the disease, before it retire, and be overcome.

For if the patient were able to endure without food, till the extre-(...) or
course: in the recourse of those fits, we must use abstinence.

This Aphorism speaks of intermitting diseases, which leave men for a season,
and then return again.

APH. 12.
The fits and kinds of the diseases, the seasons of the year, and the
observation of the alteration of the times of the fits return, if they come
again every other day, or after a longer interval of time, will show the sharp
invasions or extremities of the diseases* Likewise signs and tokens are taken
from those things which appear afterward, as for example in a Plurisie, if the
corrupt matter, avoided by spitting, appear presently in the beginning, it
declares the disease will be but short; but if it be longer before it do
appear, it declares a longer continuance of it. Moreover Urines, excrements of
the belly, and swets declare whither the diseases will prove easy, or
difficult, short or long.

For if diseases come in summer, they will for the most part proceed from
choler, and the fits come every third day, and last a short time, if in wiuter
they will proceed chiefly from Phlegm, the fits come every day and last longer.

APH. 13.
Old men easily endure fasting, those who are in their declining age not so
well, young men worse, and children worst of all, especially those who are of a
more lively spirit.

Old when they are above 50 until 70, for those who are decrepit ought to feed
often, but a little at a time.

APH. 14.
Those bodies that grow, have much natural heat, therefore they require great
store of food, or else the body consumes. But old men have little heat in
them, therefore they require but a little food: for much nourishment
extinguisheth that heat. And this is the reason that old men have not very
acute Fevers, because their bodies are not so hot.

This Aphorism shows the reasons of the precedent, namely why old men can
endure fasting better then young men and children.

APH, 15.
The venters by nature are most hot in winter, and in the Spring, and sleep
most long. Wherefore in those seasons more abundant food ought to be allowed,
because they have most natural heat; whereby it comes to pass, tha^ they need
more abundant food. Of which thing the differences of ages, and wrestlers
bodies, are sufficient proofs.

Venters are the stomach and belly. And sleep increases the natural heat.

APH. 16.
Moist diet is good for all that are troubled with Agues, especially for
children and others who are accustomed to such diet.

Because Agues are dry, and because custom is a kind of an acquired nature.

APH. 17.
We must also consider whom it may be convenient to feed once or twice a day,
more or less, and by little and little: we must attribute something also to
custom, age, season, and region.

Having before spoken of the quantity and quality of food which may be given,
he now speaks how it ought to be given, wherein he says custom, time, country,
and age ought to be considered.

APH. 18.
Sick folk do most hardly brook store of meat in Summer, in Winter most easily,
in the Spring time in a meaner manner.

Here he expounds more particularly what he spoke generally in the former
Aphorism, and says that in Summer they brook no store of food, the reason is
because then the native heat is weak and languisheth, and in Autumn the bodies
are obstructed, but in Winter, the Venters (namely the stomach and those parts)
are very hot, and their sleep is long, and in the Spring the natural heat
evaporates more then in Wiuter.

APH. 19.
Nothing must be given to them neither must they be constrained to take meat,
which have fits returning at certain determined courses: but we ought to
diminish food, before manifest tokens appear to judge of the disease.

To the end that Nature may not be called away from its concoction and
digestion.

APH. 20.
We ought not to move, alter, or change those things which are or justly have
been justly determined by Nature, either with medicines or other procurements,
but to let them alone.

Because Nature by her determiation having shown she is of herself strong
enough, needs no help of art.

APH. 21
Carry those things which are ^o be drawn out thither whether they shall seem
to incline and bend, by such ways and places as are fittest for conveyance and
expulsion.

If Nature be not able of her self (as in the former Aphorism) to expel the
cause of the disease, then let Art help, to do it that way as Nature enclines.

APH. 22.
We must move with Medicine those things which are concocted and digested, and
not those which are raw and undigested. Neither in the beginning of diseases,
unless they be provoked by their own force and violence, which very seldom
comes to pass.

Nature after concoction does segregate and expel humors; which if she be too
languid to do, then it is good to help it with medicines.

APH. 23.
Things evacuated and purged are not to be estimated by the^ multitude, but
advisedly to be considered if those things be avoided and sen^forth, which
should and (...) purged, which should be, it does good, and the sick may easily
suffer it, but if the contrary be evacuated, they do painfully endure it.

Having in this latter part of this Section spoken of purges given by
Physicians. He sets down this to put us again in mind of those purgations which
come voluntarily from Nature. Having said the same thing of them in the second
Aphorism.

SECT. II.
The Argument.
This second Section, of which the universal and plenary intention cannot well
be assigned and set down, has many things appertaining to the Doctrine of
Ages, Signs, Nature, and Purgation.

APH. 1.
IF sleep bring labor and pain in the disease, it is a mortal sign: but if it
bring ease and mitigation of pain, the sign is not deadly.

Sleep may hurt in two kinds: the one is common, when sick men sleep in the
beginning of their fits. The other is proper when they slelp at any other
times. Here we must conceive he speaks of the last.

APH. 2.
When a Delirium or raving is appeased by sleep, it is a good sign.

This is an example of the universal assertion in the preceding Aphorism, now
the reason of it is because nothing causes and nourishes raving more then
want of sleep; therefore if that cause it to cease, it is a sign death is
approaching.

APH. 3
Sleep and watching, if they be immoderate, and shall exceed a mean, are evil.

For all immoderate things are enemies and adverse to Nature, and too much
sleep is a sign that the brain is too cool and moist, and too little argues
that it is too dry.

APH. 4.
Neither satiety nor hunger, neither any other thing which shall exceed the
measure of Nature, can be good or healthful.

For health is defined to be a symmetry and just proportion, and besides too
much fasting fills the ventricle with evil humors.

APH. 5.
Weariness and dullness proceeding of their own accord, signify diseases to
come.

Namely such a weariness as comes, without any immoderate exercise of the body.

APH. 6.
They which suffer pain of any part of the body, and do not in a manner feel
it, have their understanding distempered and diseased.

That is to say, have any disease or sore which causes pain, and they feel it
not.

APH. 7.
Bodies extenuated and wasted with long sickness, are to be restored and
refreshed by little and little, but those which have been brought low quickly
and in short time, are sooner to be restored.

For in those who are wasted with long sickness, the flesh is wasted; in those
who are quickly brought low, the spirits only, which may sooner be restored
then the flesh.

APH. 8.
If any man eating meat after sickness, does not recover strength it argues his
body is burdened and oppressed with too much store of food. But if the same
happen to one feeding meanly, we must understand that he has need of
evacuation.

Because the body being oppressed with noxious humors, they hinder concoction,
wherefore the said humors must first be evacuated.

APH. 9.
How much the more thou shall nourish and cherish impure bodies, by so much the
more thou shall harm and hurt them.

This gives a reason of the former Aphorism. Namely, because the aliment which
you give to such bodies increases the quantity of vicious humors.

APH. 10.
He who will purge bodies, must first make them fluxible.

Which may be done two ways, either by opening the passages, or by cutting off
and extennating the thick humors.

APH. 11.
It is more easy to be restored with drink then with meat.

That is to say with a liquid aliment, for that is sooner altered and
distributed then a solid, and if yet greater speed be required, they may be
recreated with odours.

APH. 12.
Those things which are left behind after the Crysis, are wont to bring forth
relapses.

Left because the matter was not fit to be expeld, or Nature was so weakened by
sickness, that it was not able to expel all the noxious humors.

APH. 13.
The night which goes before the fit or invasion is tedious, but the night
following is commonly more easy.

We feel the pains of diseases more by night, then by day, because in the day
time, all the senses being awaked are employed about some other thing.

APH. 14.
The alteration of the excrements, not made to the worse part in fluxes of the
belly is good.

Because it is a sign that those noxious humors which by the excrements
appeared to be in the body, are voided and gone.

APH. 15.
When the upper parts of the throat or gullet are sore or a breaking out of
wheals does arise in the body, it behooves us to look upon the excrements, for
if they be choleric, the body is also sick, but if they be like the excrements
of sound persons, the body may be cherished without danger.

For if the excrements make no show of any further inward diseases those wheals
signify that Nature has been strong enough of her self to drive out the evil
humors into those external parts of the body.

APH. 16.
When hunger bears sway, we must rest from much stirring or labor.

For hunger and exercise together, would cast down strength, and dry up the
body too much.

APH. 17.
When over much meat is received against Nature, it causes sickness as the
manner of curing diseases proceeding from repletion does declare.

Because it oppresses Nature now those diseases are cured by evacuation, which
shows they were caused by repletion.

APH. 18.
Those thlngs which nourish speedily and plentifully, are quickly excreted and
voided.

For being speedily concocted and digested the excrements must also of
necessity have a speedy passage.

APH. 19.
Praedictions of death or health in sharp diseases are not altogether certain.

By reason of the sudden changes which happen in them, according to the Nature
of the humors; which cause those sharp diseases: and because the molestant
humor runs out of one part into another.

APH. 20.
They which in young age have a moist and loose belly, in old age have it dry.
But those who have it dry in their young age, have it moist when they are old.

This Aphorism is to be understood of those who continue in the same diet when
they are old, which they used in their younger years, otherwise it would not be
any way remarkable.

APH. 21.
Drinking of strong wine, puts away hunger.

By hunger here is meant a disease which is called Appetitus Caninus, or
Appetentia Canina, and those who are diseased therewith can never be satisfied,
though they eat never so much.

APH. 22.
Diseases which are bred of satiety and surfeting are cured by evacuation and
those which proceed from emptiness are cured by fullness, and so in the rest,
contraries are the remedies of contraries.

Neither must these contraries be used in an extreme degree, for neither too
much repletion nor too much evacuation can conveniently be endured.

APH. 23.
Acute and sharp diseases are judged within fourteen days.

Though some may be judged before, yet fourteen days is the uttermost day that
can be expected for the judgment or Crysis of such diseases.

APH. 24
The fourth day is the Index of the seventh, the eighth the beginning of the
week following. Also the eleventh day is to be considered, for that is the
fourth day of the second week And again the seventeenth day is to be
considered, being the fourth from the fourteenth, and the seventh from the
eleventh.

He has taught us that acute diseases run out to a Crysis within fourteen
days, which he here explains, and shows which are the Critical days for three
weeks together.

APH. 25.
Summer Quartan Fevers are for the most part short: but the Autumnal long,
especially those which remain till Winter.

Because in Summer the superfluous humors being driven into the outward parts
of the body, are quickly expelled through the pores, but they last longer in
Autumn, for they are some way peculiar to that season, because by the
forerunning Summer the faculties of the body are weakened, and in Winter by
reason that then the humors are thickened, and the pores shut up by the ambient
cold. And this is but for the most part, for sometimes it may prove otherways.

APH. 26.
It is better that a Fever should succeed a Convulsion, then Convulsion a
Fever.

For if a Convulsion precede a Fever, it proceeds from fullness, which is
easily cured by evacuation, but if it succeeds it proceeds from emptiness, and
is very dangerous for the Patient.

APH. 27.
We ought not to be too confident if a sharp disease slacken without any
reason. Neither much fear those diseases which happen without any reason. For
most of them are uncertain, and do not usually last long.

For if it slacken without reason, it threatens a relapse, and if it come
without reason, it is not much to be feared, for it will fall having no good
foundation.

APH. 28.
If the body of those which have a sharp Fever abide all at one stay, and is
nothing abated, or else is melted and wasted away beyond reason, it is a very
evil sign, for the first does signify a continuance of the disease, and the
latter a great imbecility of Nature.

For the first is caused by a density or thickness of the skin, and thickness
and gluttinousness of humors, and the latter by a thinness or tenuity of the
skin, and extenuation of humors which commonly is followed by imbecility of
Nature.

APH. 29.
In the beginning of diseases if there appears cause for moving of any thing;
move it. But when they are in their state it is far better to let it alone.

The reason of this Aphorism is laid down in the next.

APH. 30.
Abo^^ the beginnings and ends of dis^^se^ all things (...) calm and remis^* in
(...)d state more vehement.

This Aphorism is but the reason of the precedent, and explains the formers and
its own meaning.

APH. 31.
If the body thrive not with him who after a disease feeds well it is an evil
sign.

For it signifies one of these two things, namely that he takes more food, then
Nature (yet weakened by sickness) can digest. Or that there is yet such
abundance of evil humors left in the ventricle and other parts of the body,
that whatsoever is put into it presently corrupts with them.

APH. 32.
Those which in the beginning of sickness feed much, and do not thrive
therewith, for the most part do at last fall into a loathing of meat. On the
contrary, those who in the beginning do vehemently abhor food, and afterward
desire much meat, are more easily freed from their sickness.

Because feeding hard whilst there be yet relics of evil humors remaining in
the body, increases the quantity of those evil humors, and so hinders their
convalescencie. Whereas those who feed sparingly in the beginning oppress not
the powers of Nature, which increasing do at last expel those remainders of
evil humors.

APH. 33.
In any disease, if reason be not weakened nor hurt, but that it is willing to
embrace such meats as are proffered it, it is good, but if it be otherwise it
is evil.

Because to have ones good understanding sound, signifies that the brain and
all the nervous parts, with the Liver, Heart, and Ventricles are also well
affected, whereas if the Reason be hurt, it signifies that both the Brain and
Ventricle are out of frame.

APH. 34.
They are not so dangerously sick, to whose nature, age, habit, or season, the
disease is familiar and agreeable; as they to whom the disease is not agreeable
to any of those things.

By Nature here is meant the temperament of the body, by habit: whether a body
be composed of a soft and tender flesh, or of a thick and solid. Age, and
season are easy to be known what they mean, howsoever for examples sake, acute
Fevers are not common to old age, the body being then cold, and likely are
deadly in old men. And what diseases have most affinity with each season of the
year, is shown in the third Section, the Aphorisms 20, 21, 22, 23.

APH. 35.
It is better in any disease that the parts adjoining to the Navel and
nethermost belly be somewhat thick and gross: for the extenuation and
consumption of them is evil, and then it is not safe to minister purgations
working downward.

Because the thickness and grosseness of those parts signify that the native
heat is more valid, and the concoction better.

APH. 36.
Those which are endued with health of body, do quickly faint drinking a
purging potion: and so do those which use bad and corrupt nourishment.

For in healthful men, the purging potion finding no vicious nor redundant
humor to draw out and evacuate, does first dissipate the spirits, then
dissolves those parts which are humid and moist, and finally corrupts those
which are solid. And those which use bad food have sharp and biting humors,
which being by the medicament driven through the sensible parts of the body do
cause fainting:

APH. 37.
Those which are of sound and perfect health of body, do painfully and
grievously endure purging medicines.

This Aphorism is more general then the former, which expressed but one
symptom which befalls sound men when they are purged. But this includes all the
rest.

APH. 38.
Those meats and drinks which are worse, yet pleasant, are to be preferred
before those which are better, but yet unpleasant and distasting.

Because they please the Patient best, and because the Ventricle does more
greedily embrace, and speedilier concoct those meats and drinks which are
pleasant.

APH. 39.
For the most part old men are not so often sick as young are: But being once
taken with long diseases they commonly dye.

Old men are presumed to be more discreet and temperate in their feeding which
is the cause of this assertion for those which are not so, are more subject to
sickness then young men, being weaker then they.

APH. 40.
Rheums descending down to the mouth, and falling down to the throat do not
come to concoction in those which are very old.

This is as it were an example of the latter assertion of the precedent
Aphorism, namely that old men once taken with long disease commonly dye.

APH. 41.
They dye suddenly which do often, and vehemently swoun and faint without any
manifest cause.

Because it argues an imbecility of the vital faculty.

APH. 42.
It is impossible to cure a vehement Apoplexy and very hard to cure a weak one.

For all Apoplexies are caused by a stopping of the animal Faculties from
descending any lower into the body then the head.

APH. 43.
Strangled and suffocated folk, being not as yet dead, do not return to
themselves, if there appear any foam about their mouth.

Because it is a sign that the Lights are violently wronged.

APH. 44.
Those which are very gross by Nature, do enjoy shorter life then those which
are lean.

Because fat men's native heat is weaker then lean men's.

APH. 45.
Change and alteration of place, and diet, and especially of age, free children
from the falling evil.

For when they come to their youthful age they are cured by their hot and dry
temperament.

APH. 46.
Of two pains at one time, not possessing the self-same place, that which is
the most vehement, does dull the pain of the other.

It does neither cure nor expel the other, but only dull and obscure it.

APH. 47.
Whiles filthy and corrupt matter is digesting, pains and Agues do rather
happen, then when it is come to maturation

For when it is maturated the inflammation and burning cease.

APH. 48.
In every exercise of the body, when it begins to be wearied, rest does
presently mitigate the weariness.

For as he said in the two and twentieth Aphorism of this Section, one contrary
is the cure of the other.

APH. 49
Thoke who are accustomed to daily labors, although they be weak or old men,
do more easily endure accustomed exercises, then those who are not accustomed
to them, although they be strong and young

Because custom is a second nature

APH. 50.
Things accustomed a long time, although they be worse are wont to be less
grievous, then those which are unaccustomed, wherefore also a change is not to
be made to unaccustomed things.

Because the bodies are subject to changes, therefore upon such changes we must
also fall upon some unaccustomed diet.

APH. 51.
It is danderous at one time, much and suddenly, either to empty, fill, heat
or cool, or by any other means to move or stir the body. For any thing passing
the bonnds of mediocrity is an enemy to Nature, and that is safe which is done
by little and little, and especially when an alteration and change is to be
made from one thing to another.

Namely from accustomed to unaccustomed.

APH. 52.
He must not pass forthwith from one medicine to another, when all things fall
not out so well as they should, to him; who does proceed by good reason; so
that remain still and continue which seemed to him to be so from the Beginning.

For it is no point of wisdom lightly to recede from that which once you have
approved of, though it does not presentely work as you would have it.

APH. 53.
Those which have a moist belly, pass their youthful age more easily then those
which have the same dry: but they pass their old age more hardly and with more
difficulty, for when they wax old, for the most part it is dried.

This Aphorism is of it self plain enough, and compared with the 20 Aphorism of
this Section, they expound one another.

APH. 54.
Greatness and tallness of body is comely to the state of young age: but to old
age it is improfitable, and worse then a short stature.

For it burdeneth old men, and makes them go stooping and crookbacked.

SECT: III.
The Argument.
This third book is almost reduced to the discourse of ages or times,
expressing unto us two common places, that is to say the strength and force of
ages, and the diversity of diseases throughout those ages, and times.

APHORISM. 1.
ALteration and variableness of the seasons, do most especially bring forth
diseases, and likewise great alterations of cold and heat in those seasons, and
of other things answering to them in proportion.

Because they alter the air which we draw in continually with our breaths.

APH. 2.
Some natures are well or ill affected in Summer, and some in Winter.

By natures he means the temperatures: and of them the cold and moist
temperatures fare best in Summer, and the hot and dry worst.

APH. 3.
Some diseases are well or ill affected, some more to one time, and some to
another, and some ages more to some one time, place and kind of diet then they
are to another.

He now affirms that to be true in diseases and ages, which he had in the
precedent Aphorism asserted in temperatures of the body.

APH. 4.
Autumnal diseases are to be expected in those seasons, when on the self-same
day it is sometimes hot, and sometimes cold.

For not the names but the temperatures of the seasons, are the causes of
diseases.

APH. 5.
The South wind dulleth the hearing, obscureth and darkneth the sight,
offends the head with aches and rheumes, procures and causes heaviness and
faintness in the members. When therefore it is frequent and blows often, such
things are incident to the weak and sickly. Contrariwise the North wind causes
coughs, exasperateth and excoriateth the jaws, hardens the belly, suppresseth
Urine, stirs up cold shiverings and shakings, ingendereth the pains of the
sides and breast. Therefore when this wind bears sway those that are weak and
feeble must, look for such accidents.

The South wind by reason of its hot and moist Nature, and the north wind
because of its cold and dryness do work these effects in weak bodies.

APH. 6.
When the Summer is like the Spring time, we must expect much sweating in Agues.

Because by its temperate and moderate heat, it draws the humidities of the
body to the skin, but cannot dissolve them into vapors.

APH. 7.
Sharp Agues are engendered by great drought and dryness, and if the year prove
to be for the most part such; as the state of the season is, such kinds of
diseases for the most part must be so expected.

Sharp Agues are those which quickly end, but have heavy and troublesome
symptoms.

APH. 8.
In certain and moderate times, observing their seasonablenes, certain and
seasonable diseases having a happy determination are engendered. But in
uncertain and immoderate times, uncertain diseases are engendered; and evil to
be judged.

For diseases follow the nature of the efficient causes, and the efficient
causes are likely such as the temperature of the year is.

APH. 9.
In Autumn universally there are most sharp and deadly diseases: but the spring
time is most wholesome, and free from deadly diseases.

The reasons whereof are, first by reason of its ineqnality, the mornings and
evenings being cold and the midday hot. Secondly, because the preceding Summer
has made the humors adust. Thirdly; because the said Summer has weakened the
forces. Fourthly, because the morning* and evenings ambient coldness drives the
vicious humors into the body. And fifthly, because there is abundance of fruits
eaten in that season, the eating of which breeds store of evil humors.

APH. 10.
Autumn is hurtful to such as are in a consumption.

By reason of its dryness, coldness, and inequality.

APH. 11.
Amongst the parts of the year if the Winter be extraordinary dry, and the
Spring very rainy, and subject to southerly winds. It must of necessity fall
out that in Summer, sharp Agues, Rheums in the Eyes and Bloody-fluxes do happen,
especially to women and men who are of a moist nature.

By reason of the abundance of humors which are subject to putrefaction.

APH. 12.
Contrarily if Winter be Southernly, full of rain and warm, and the Spring dry
and northernly, women whose childbirth and deliverance happens near the
Spring, do upon the least occasion suffer abortment and untimely birth: or if
they be delivered at their due time, they bring forth such weak and diseased
children, that either they die quickly, or live but weakly and sickly. To
others there happen bloody-fluxes and hot inflammations of the eyes, and to old
men rheums which shortly kill them.

This Aphorisms meaning is plain enough now, the particular causes why these
several diseases happen are set down at large in Galens Comments to which we
refer the Reader.

APH. 13.
Summer being dry and the wind northernly, Autumn full of rain and the wind
southernly, vehement pains of the head are to be expected in the Winter
following. Also coughs, hoarsnesses, and rheums, distillings at the nostrils,
and to some pining Consumptions.

Having in the preceding Aphorisms spoken of the Winter and Spring, he now
speaks of the other two seasons, namely Summer and Autumn.

APH. 14.
A northernly and dry Autumn is profitable and good to men which are of a moist
temperature, and also to women, to others it causes hot inflammations in the
eyes, and Fevers partly sharp, and partly long, and some also are troubled with
Melancholy.

This Aphorism ought to be annexed to the former as part of it.

APH. 15.
Of all the seasons throughout the whole year, dryness and droughts are more
wholesome and less dangerous to man's life, then daily showers of rain and moisture

This Aphorism by right should have been placed after the 17th of this Section,
and the 17 after the 5, as Galen shows in his Comment upon this present
Aphorism.

APH. 16.
When there is much rain these diseases for the most part are engendered, namely
long contlnuing Agues, Fluxes of the belly, corruption of humors,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexies, Squinancies But when there is much drought there
happen Consumptions, Rheumes in the eyes, pains of the joints, difficulty in
making Urine, and passions of the intestines or inward parts.

This Aphorism is as it were an explication of the former, by which some
ignorant men might infer that in a dry year, there would be no diseases at all
engendered.

APH. 17.
Daily seasons of weather being northernly do close and strengthen the body and
make it nimble, well colored and quick of hearing. They dry and harden the
belly, but bite and offend the eyes, and if any pain have possessed the breast,
they make it more grievous* Contrariwise southernly seasons loose and moisten
the body, and weakens it, dull the hearing, cause heaviness, and giddiness of
the head, mistiness and dimness of the eyes, dullness and laziness of the body,
and make the belly loose and laxative.

For the northern wind is cold and dry: and the southern hot and moist.

APH. 18.
As touching seasons of the year in the Spring and beginning of Summer,
children and those which are nearest to them in age, live in very good health;
in Summer and some part of Autumn old men live best, but in the rest of Autumn
and Winter they of a middle age.

Summer is good for old men by reason of the frigidity of their nature, Winter
for men in the strength of their age, because it abates and is contrary to
their bilious temper.

APH. 19.
Any diseases, are engendered in any times of the year, yet many are rather
caused, and stirred, in some one more then in another.

Intending in the following Aphorisms to set down what diseases are peculiar to
several times of the year he promises this as a general one.

APH. 20.
In the Spring there happens madness, melancholy, falling-evil, fluxes of
blood, the squinancy, rheumes, distillations of humors, coughs, leprosies, dry
scabs, morphues, and many ulcerous wheals, pushes, and pains of the joints.

Which diseases for the most part being not dangerous, but rather conducing to
health by driving out noxious humors out of the inward to the outward parts of
the body; this Aphorism rather confirms then opposes the latter part of the
ninth Aphorism.

APH. 21
In Summer there are some of those diseases before spoken of; in the Spring
also continual Fevers and burning Agues, and many Tertians, and Quartans,
Vomitings, Fluxes of the belly, inflammations of the eyes, pains of the ears,
ulcerations of the mouth, putrefactions of the genitals, and sweatings,

Namely in the beginning of Summer are incident some of those diseases which
were also toward the latter end of the Spring, for it being of the same
temperature they must engender the same diseases.

APH. 22.
Also many Summer diseases are in Autumn, both Quartans and uncertain wandering
Agues, swellings of the Spleen, Hydropsie, Consumptions, Strangury Looseness
and excoriations of the bowels, aches of hucle-bone, Squinancies, shortnesses
of breath, straight pressings or drawing together of the bowels in some part of
them; the Falling Sickness, madness, and melancholy.

The beginning of Autumn, and end of Summer have the same affinity as the
beginning of Summer and end of the Spring.

APH. 23.
In Winter are engendered Plurisies, inflammations of Lungs Lethargy, Rheums in
the nostrils, hoarsness, coughs, pains of the breasts, sides, and loins,
headaches, swimmings and giddinesses of the head (causing dimness to the eyes)
and Apoplexies.

This and the precedent Aphorisms concerning seasons, are to be understood when
seasons do hold their own order and temperature.

APH. 24
But as concerning ages, these diseases do happen to little children and lately
born; Ulcers in the mouth, Vomiting, Coughs, want of sleep, great fears,
inflammations of the Navil, moist runings at the ears.

Having spoken of the seasons of diseases he now sets down in what ages such
and such diseases use to happen, beginning with infants newly born.

APH. 25.
The time of Teeth-breeding coming, there happen itching of the gums, Fevers,
Convulsions, Fluxes of the belly, especially when they bring forth their
dogteeth, and especially those children chiefly that are most fat, and have
their belly bound.

Which time of teeth breeding begins commonly at seven months of age, and
sometimes at four: the dogteeth at a year or ten months.

APH* 26.
When children begin to be a little elder, they are subject to the
inflammations of the Almonds of the mouth, dislocation of the turning joints in
the nape of the neck inwardly, shortness of wind, breeding of the Stone,
round-worms, gut-worms, long hanging warts, Satyrasms, Stranguries Scrophules
in the neck and other risings, especially those before declared

Now he sets down those diseases which children are subject to after they are
past teeth-breeding, to twelve or fourteen years of age.

APH. 27.
Moreover to those which are greater and coming to ripe age, there happen many
of those former diseases, but more long continuing Agues, and fluxes of blood
at the nostrils.

This Aphorism concerns children about twelve, thirteen, or fourteen years of
age, and ripeness of age comes sooner or later according to the beat or
coldness of constitutions.

APH. 28.
The diseases of children for the most part, some of them attain to the Crysis
or alteration within 40 days, some within seven months, some within seven
years, others when they come to ripe age. But those which shall continue
longer, and shall neither be dissolved, in men children when they come to be
about fourteen years or fifteen or maiden children when their monthly terms do
break forth, do use to last a long time.

Or as Heurnius says in his Comments, do last as long as they live.

APH. 29.
To young men there does happen spitting of blood, Consumptions, sharp Fevers,
falling-sicknesses and other diseases, but especially* these we have now
rehearsed.

This age according to Heurnius is when their voice breaks and they begin to
speak big. (...) nostrils, dimness of sight, Glaucoma, and dullness of hearing.

Here by old men he means those who have attained to their last age.

SECT. IV.
The Argument.
This fourth Section is variable, but for the most part is reduced to
evacuation and prognostic signs of future events.

APHORISM. 1.
THou shall purge childbearing women if it be needful, at the fourth month
after conception, and so unto the seventh, but those more sparingly: but the
conception being younger, or elder, thou shall abstain.

Because in those months the ligaments wherewith the conception is fastened to
the womb, are strongest and thickest, and not cas^e to be broken by the
commotions of purging medicines.

APH. 2.
Such things are to be drawn out of the body by the use of purging medicines,
as they are, which issuing out of their own accord would do good to it. But
those which issue out in a contrary manner are to be stopped.

For it is good in artificial purges to imitate Nature.

APH. 3
If such things be purged as should be it is good, and the Patient does easily
endure it. But if you do otherwise, the patient does endure it painfully.

This Aphorism being the same with the 2 and 25 of the first Section, it needs
no further explication, and some have in this place left it quite out.

APH. 4.
In Summer it is more convenient to purge the upper Venters, in Winter the
inferior by stool.

For in Summer choler is the predominant humor, and naturally by reason of the
ambient heat all things are carried upwards, so it is best to purge by Vomit.

APH. 5.
Under the Canicular or Dogstar, and before it, purgations are painful and
difficult.

Because the ambient heat seeks to draw the humors outward by sweat while the
purgation forces them out by stool.

APH. 6.
Lean and slender men are easily provoked to Vomit, and therefore must be
purged by vomit, unless it be in Winter.

For slender men are for the most part chollerick, which choler if they have a
facility in vomiting should be purged upward, unless it be in Winter, for then
the inferior venters must be purged by stool.

APH. 7.
Purge those which do not vomit easily, and are in good plight, downwards by
stool, so it be not Summer.

For at any other time of the year you may securely do it.

APH. 8.
Do not purge them upwar^s which are subject to a Consumption or Phtysick.

For fear of hurting the instrumental parts of respiration which are weak.

APH. 9.
Thou shall purge melancholy folk strongly by stool, in like manner beginning
the contrary way of purging.

For light matter bending upward, must be drawn out by the upper parts, but the
heavier and grosser matter by the lower parts.

APH. 10.
We must purge in very sharp sicknesses, if the matter do move to the purging
of it; and that the very same day wherein the sickness does begin; for delay in
such diseases is very hurtful and dangerous.

Before the strength of body fail, or diminish, or the aguish heat increase, or
the humors which wander up and down the body settle about some principal part.

APH. 11.
Those which have gripings and wringings in the belly, and horrible pain about
the navel and the loins, and cannot be eased and dissolved by medicine or
otherwise, they will fall into a dry Dropsy.

Which is called a Timpany.

APH. 12.
Those are not to be purged in Winter by vomit, whose stomach and belly cannot
retain meat until it be digested

He means such purges as are general and purge the whole body; for in
particular purges you may do otherwise. As if we would only ease the ventricle
of phlegm, we may do it by vomit in Winter. And by the same reason, if yellow
choler be in the intestines only, we may in Summer purge it out by stool.

APH. 13.
Their bodies are to be made moist before hand with plenty of food, and with
ease and rest; who taking a potion of Hellebor do hardly and painfully vomit.

Because if the nerves and other dry parts of the body be not moistened the
Hellebor which is hot and dry in the third degree, and is very drawing, may
cause deadly Convulsions

APH. 14.
Hellebor being drunk, the body ought rather to be moved, then yielded to sleep
or rest: For the sailing in a ship does manifest, that our bodies are provoked
and st^irred by motion.

And seeing that motion of it self provokes the body to vomit, much more will
it do it, with the help of a medicine. And rest keeps the body in the same
state, motion changes and alters it.

APH. 15.
If you will have Hellebore to work more forcibly move and stir the body, but
when you will stay it, procure sleep and do not move.

For since motion sets it more violently a working, rest must needs cause it to
stay, seeing contrary operations work contrary effects.

APH. 16.
Hellebor is very dangerous to them which have a healthful body, for it
ingendreth Convulsions.

For it is one of its chief qualities to cause distentions, so finding no
excrements in the body it falls upon the solid parts, and especially the
nerves.

APH. 17.
If he which has not an Ague does loath his meat, has a gnawing of the mouth
or the stomach, a darksom giddiness of the brain, and bitterness of the mouth,
it signifies that he had need to be purged upwards.

For these are three symptoms by which the Physician may know the Patient has
need of being purged upward.

APH. 18.
Whosoever having need of has pains above the Middriff, it is a sign he must
be purged upwards, but the pains which are under the same, show a purging
downwards to be needful.

For which way the humor naturally desires to go, that way you must by the help
of medicines send it.

APH. 19.
Those which do not thirst while they are purged by a medicinal potion, shall
not leave purging while they do thirst.

Because the excrements being evacuated, the mouth of the ventricle is dried up
which causes thirst.

APH. 20.
If there be gripings about the Navel without a Fever, and heaviness of the
knees, and pain of the loins, they signify that there is need of purging
downward.

Because that all these symptoms show that the noxious humors motion and
violence is downward.

APH. 21.
Black excrements of the belly like unto black blood, coming forth of their own
accord, both with a Fever, or without, are most evil, and by how much the more
the evil colors are, so much the worse, the excrements are. But such things to
be expelled out by a medicine is far better, and that by how much the more
colors there shall be.

For if they come out of their own accord it shows there are many ill affected
humors in the body, which driven out by Physic the body remains sound.

APH. 22.
In the beginning of any disease if black choler come forth either above or
beneath it is deadly.

For it signifies that nature is ill affected, which never evacuates
superfluous things till they be concocted, wherefore if black choler come
forth in the beginning of a disease, it is evacuated by its proper malice and
not by the law of Nature.

APH. 23.
Those which are pined or brought low by sharp or long diseases, or by wounds,
or any other means, and do void black choler or as it were black blood, do dye
the next day following.

Namely through the imbecility of faculty, and greatness of the disease.

APH. 24.
A Bloody flux if it proceed from black choler is mortal.

Because it ulcerates the entrails with an ulcered cancer, which can hardly be
cured in the outward parts, to which medi caments may be applied; therefore much
less there where no such medicaments can be applied.

APH. 25.
For blood to be carried upward of what kind soever it be, is an evil sign, but
if black blood be avoided downwards it is good.

For if it be carried upwards, it shows there is some vessel opened, extended,
or broken in the upper parts. And in this place by carrying upward is meant
through the mouth, not through the nostrils, which for the most part is good.

APH. 26.
If any man being afflicted with a bloody flux, void as it were little pieces
of flesh, it is a mortal sign.

For then the exulceration is so great that it can no way be healed.

APH. 27.
To those which have store of blood flowing from what part soever, in Fevers,
their bodies become come moist after they have been refreshed.

Because the natural heat is weakened by store of blood flowing, and though
here mention be made only of Fevers, yet it holds in other diseases likewise.

APH. 28.
Those which avoid chollerick excrements downward, if deafness come thereupon,
they cease from avoiding them. And those which are affected with deafness are
cured of it by avoiding of chollerick excrements.

He means not a permanent deafness, for that is not so cured, but of a
transitory or supervening deafness caused by choleric humors molesting the
brain, which must needs cease when they come down.

APH. 29.
If cold shakings happen, to them that are sick of an Ague, the sixth day they
have a difficult Crysis, and we cannot well judge of the disease*

Because for the most part they presage either death or return of the disease.

APH. 30.
In them which are afflicted with fits of Agues, whenever the Ague shall
leave them, if it return the same hour the next day it is wont to have a
difficult Crysis, and determination.

That is to say it will not easily be dissolved.

APH. 31.
Imposthumes are caused near the joints, and especially near the jaw-bones, or
mandibles to them which feel weariness or lassitude in Fevers.

Because the heat of the Fever having drawn the humors up into the head, when
they fall down again the jaw-bones being very weak cannot expel them to other
parts of the body, but there they must rest. And the joints heated by motion
attract the humors of the body.

APH. 32.
Those which recovering from a disease have a pain in some place shall have
Imposthumes or botches in that place.

He speaks of such as recover and yet have some relics of feverish matter
remaining in their bodies.

APH. 33.
If any part be pained before the disease, there is the seat of the disease.

Therefore if it be a principal part, we must endeavor to divert the humors
from thence.

APH. 34.
If a suffocation of the breath do happen upon a sudden to one afflicted with
a Fever, no swelling appearing in the jaws or gullet, it is deadly.

For it is a sign that Phlegm stops his breath and respiration, without
which he cannot live.

APH. 35.
If to one afflicted with a Fever the neck be suddenly turned awry, and he
can scarce swallow, and no swelling appear it is deadly

For it shows there is an inflammation in the muscles lying before the throat,
or in the throat it self.

APH 36.
Sweats are good to those who are sick of an Ague, if they issue forth the
third, fifth, seventh, ninth eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, one and
twentieth, thirty, and four and thirtieth days, for those sweats work the
dissolution of the disease: those which happen otherwise signify pain and
length of the disease, or a return of the same.

For these are the only days of Critical sweats, in which we may be judge of
the d^ssolution of the disease.

APH. 37.
Cold sweats with a sharp Fever betoken death, but with a mild and gentle
Ague, length of the disease.

Because it shows that the Patients body does so much abound in cold humors,
that neither the natural, nor the sharp Fevers heat is able to heat them.

APH. 38*
In what part of the body the the sweat is, there is the disease.

Because in that part, stick the redundant and noxious humors.

APH. 39.
And in what part of the body there is heat or cold, there the the disease is
settled.

Namely in an excessive manner, and not proceeding from any external cause, for
it shows a distemperature contrary to health.

APH. 40.
And when alterations do happen in the whole body, and it is sometimes cool,
and sometimes hot, or one color arises after another, it signifies continuance
of the disease.

Because Nature cannot in a short time concoct and subdue several defects or
diseases.

APH. 41.
Much sweating caused through sleep without any manifest outward cause,
signifies that the body is fed with store of food. But if this happen to one
that feeds sparingly, it shows that the body wants evacuation.

By reason of the evil humors and excrements which are the causes of that
sweating.

APH. 42.
When there is much sweat cold or hot always issuing forth, the cold signifies
a longer, the hot a shorter disease.

Because it shows the matter to be thin, which nature can easily concoct and
shake off.

APH. 43.
Continual Fevers which afflict every third day more vehemently, and do not
cease are the more dangerous, but if they cease and pause in any manner, they
signify that there is no present danger.

For it shows the Phlegm does not trouble any noble part, and that no
venomous force has laid siege to any principal part. And natural strength does
recollect it self during the intermission of the Fever.

APH. 44.
Swellings and pains about the joints are caused to them who are afflicted with
long Agues.

By the humors set^^ng in those places, unless they be carried away by a thick
white urine making.

APH. 45.
Those which have swellings and pains of the joints after long Ague, feed over
liberally.

For the disease being gone, no other reason can be given for this redundancy
of humors.

APH. 46.
If a cold shivering fit, the Fever being without intermission, do assail the
sick man being already weak, it is a deadly sign.

For it shows nature to be so far spent, that it is able only to stir, but not
to thrust out the excrement; or if it does, the sick man faints therewith.

APH. 47.
Excrements avoided in Fevers not intermittent, by vomit, or spitting, if they
be of a leaden color, bloody, stinking, or choleric, they are all evil: but
if they come forth conveniently they are good

Leaden color because they signify a mortification of those parts from whence
they come; bloody because they signify an opening of some vessels. Stinking
because they signify putrefaction. Ch^lerick because they testify abundance
of choler.

APH. 48.
In continual Fevers, if the exterior parts be cold, and the inward burn, and
the Patient be thirsty, it is a deadly sign.

Because the ^eat of that inward part draws all the blood to it, whereby the
heart is oppressed.

APH. 49
In continual Fevers, if the lip, eye, brows, or nose be turned aawry, if the
sick man do not see nor hear, which soever of these shall happen, the body
being weak, death is near at hand.

For all these are signs that the moving animal faculty suffers.

APH. 50.
If there happens in a continual Fever defficulty and hardniss of breathing,
with delirium and doting, these signs are deadly.

Because it signifies that both the brain, and the instruments of breathing do
suffer.

APH. 51.
Aposthumes in Fevers which are not dissolved in the first Crysis or judgment
signify length of the disease.

Because they show that there is a multitude of noxious humors, which nature
could not expel at one Crysis.

APH. 52.
It is not absurd to weep and shed tears in Fevers and other diseases
voluntarily, but to weep against the will is very absurd and inconvenient.

Because that weeping against the will shows a weakness and imbecility in the
retentive faculty.

APH. 53.
They have fierce and vehement Fevers, who have a tough, and clammy moisture
about their teeth in those Fevers.

For those clammy moistures cannot grow there so abundantly without excessive
heat which dries up the pituitous humor.

APH. 54.
Those who have long lasting dry coughs, in burning Fevers, which do not
provoke much, are not wont to be very thirsty.

For by that motion which is made in coughing, there is some humidity drawn
from those places which are adjoining to the rough artery.

APH. 55.
All Fevers proceeding from tumors in the groyn, and other adenous parts are
evil, except diary Fevers which last but one day.

For those Fevers come when those tumors are caused by some outward thing, as
some blow or the like, and not by any inward inflammation.

APH. 56.
Sweat coming often upon one sick of an Ague not ceasing, is evil, for the
disease is prolonged, and it signifies that there is much moisture.

Which abundance of moisture asks nature much time to concoct and disperse.

APH* 57.
If o^e have Convulsions, or Cramps, a Fever coming dissolveth them:

Because the Fever does heat, extenuate, and shake off those cold humors which
filled up the nervous parts.

APH* 58.
If a cold shaking fit does come upon him which has a burning Fever, it
dissolveth it.

For a burning Fever being caused by choler putrefying in the veins, and a
cold shaking, by the cholers being swiftly carried about the sensible parts of
the body, it shows that the choler is come out of the veins, to the skin.

APH. 59.
An exquisite and perfect Tertian Fever comes to his Crysis or state, in
seven circuits or fits, at the utmost.

An exquisite Tertian is that which is caused by yellow choler carried up and
down the sensible parts of the body, keeping its nature pure and sincere.

APH. 60.
Those that wax deaf and thick of hearing through Fevers, are delivered from
it, by flux of blood at the nose, or by the belly.

It is no marvel if diseases cease, when the noxious humors are translated or
carried away.

APH. 61.
Unless the Fever leave the patient in the odd days, it is accustomed to
return again.

If this Aphorism should speak of all Fevers it were false: if of acute and
continual Fevers it is true.

APH. 62.
Those which have the yellow Jaundise upon Agues before the seventh day have an
evil sign.

Because the yellow Jaundies proceeds from the inflammation of the Liver.

APH. 63.
Those Fevers which have their shaking fits every day are every day dissolved.

Yet there remains some fire whereby the paroxism is renewed.

APH. 64.
It is a good thing for them which have the yellow-Jaundies coming on them in
Fevers on the 7 day, ninth, eleventh, or fourteenth, unless the right
Hypocondrium be hard, for then it is evil.

For the Hypocondrium being hard signifies there is an inflammation of the
Liver.

APH. 65.
In Fevers a vehement heat about the Stomach, and a gnawing about the heart is
bad.

Because it signifies an ebullition of choler in the tunicles of the ventricle
or stomach.

APH. 66*
Convulsions and vehement pains about the bowels in sharp Fevers are evil.

For vehement Fevers dry and stretch the nerves like fire, and by the same
vehemence of heat and drought, the bowels are pained.

APH* 67.
In fevers great fears or Convulsions after sleep do prognosticate evil.

For fears signify the repletion of the head with melancholy humors and
Convulsions, abundance of phlegmatic humors.

APH. 68.
The breath not keeping its due course, is evil: for it does signify
convulsion.

Caused by the over-drying of the muscles and nerves which move the stomach

APH. 69.
Urines in a Fever being thick, clotted, and little in quantity, do profit
them that make them, if afterward, thin urine, and much in quantity be avoided
by them. But those urines most commonly become such, in which the hypostasis or
sediment shall appear presently after they are made, or not long after.

Because the gross humors causing the Fever are expelled in the humor, which
makes the urine which comes afterward to be thin in respect of that.

APH 70.
Those who have their water troubled or unclean in Agues, such as are the
waters of Cattle, have or shall have headaches.

Because the windy or flatuous spirit is easily drawn up into the head together
with heat.

APH. 71.
Those which shall have their Crysis or alteration of the disease the seventh
day, have a little red cloud in the urine the fourth day, and other things
thereunto belonging accordingly.

These red clouds are seldom seen, though the white be frequent, and are both
of them signs of concoction.

APH. 72.
Urines very clear and white are bad, especially in those who are afflicted
with phrensies.

Because such urines are signs of an extreme crudity. And Galen says he never
knew any one who was afflicted with a frenzy, and made such water, saved.

APH. 73.
Those which have an inflation of the Hypoco^dria, and a rumbling pain of the
loins succeeding, have their bellies moistened and loosened except the wind
break forth downwards, or store of urine do issue forth. And these things
happen in Fevers.

Namely in essential, not symptomatical Fevers, and such as are diseases of
themselves.

APH. 74.
Those that have hope of Aposthumations to come about the joints, much urine
thick and white does deliver from the Aposthume, such as is wont to be avoided
in painful Fevers the fourth day: when also blood shall be voided out of the
nostrils, there shall be a dissolution and deliverance speedily.

For those urines purge out the humors which would cause the aposthumations,
and especially if there be a bleeding at the nostrils joined, for then the
causes issue out two ways.

APH. 75.
If any piss blood or filthy matter, it signifies an exulceration of the
Kidneys or bladder.

That is, if he do it for a continuance, for otherwise it may proceed from some
other cause

APH. 76.
Those which have small pieces of flesh, or as it were hairs issuing forth
together with thick urine, do avoid those excrements from the Kidneys.

Those small pieces of flesh are part of the reins or kidneys, and are a
manifest sign of their being ulcerated, but the hairs are only bred there, but
are no part of them.

APH. 77.
Those which avoid thick urine with certain things like bran, have their
bladder infected with scabbedness.

If the defect be not in the veins for such stuff comes sometime from them.

APH. 78.
If any piss blood on a sudden, it is a sign there is some vein of the Kidneys
broken.

Namely mere and pure blood, and without any external cause.

APH. 79.
They in whose urine appears an hypostasis or sediment full of sand, have
their bladder troubled with the stone.

This Aphorism is mutilated and defective, for the sand may come as well from
the kidneys as from the bladder.

APH. 80.
If any one piss blood or clots of blood, and make his water by drops having
pain in that part of the belly (which is between the Navel and the secret
parts) named hypogastrion: or at the seame line of the skin of the Cods, called
perinaeum, and at the place called pecten (where the hair about the privy
members grows) then the places about the bladder are diseased.

Namely all the parts belonging to the bladder, and not the bladder only.

APH. 81.
If any one piss blood or filthy matter, or little scales, and there be also a
stinking or strong smell, it betokens an exulceration of the bladder.

The two first accidents may happen upon the exulceration of any of the
instruments serving to make water, but the scales and stink are proper signs of
the bladder being ill-affected.

APH. 82.
Those which have an Aposthume bred in the urinary passage, are delivered from
it, the same being brought to suppuration and broken.

Which suppuration and breaking, gives the urine free passage.

APH. 83.
Voiding of much urine in the night does signify small evacuation of
excrements by the Fundament.

He makes particular mention of the night, because at that time by reason of
the sleep Nature is most busy about her concoction and distribution.

SECT: V.
The Argument.
This fifth Book or Section is variable, yet it does almost wholly entreat of
the diseases of women, and of the good and bad dispositions of the womb.

APHORISM. 1.
A Convulsion after taking Hellebore is deadly.

Namely after white Hellebore, and that for five causes. First by reason of the
agreement which is ^etween the nerves and the mouth of the Stomach. Secondly by
reason of the biting humors which it draws to the mouth of the stomach. Thirdly
by reason of the abundant evacuation the Hellebore causes. Fourthly, by reason
of the attractive faculty by which it draws the moistness from the nerves. And
fifthly because it vehemently dryes up the substance of the nerves.

APH. 2.
A Convulsion caused by a wound is deadly.

Not always but for the most part.

APH. 3.
The Hicket, or a Convulsion after a copious flux of blood is evil.

Because of the great emptiness caused by the copious flux of blood, and
because the Hicket is caused by a depraved motion of the ventricle.

APH. 4.
After an immoderate purgation, a Convulsion or Hicket is evil.

For the same reason that they are evil after taking of Hellebore. Aph. 1.

APH. 5.
If one that is drunk suddenly fall dumb, he shall die with a Convulsion
unless he be taken with a Fever, or presently recover his speech as soon as
his surfeit is dissolved

Obj. How can wine being hot cause a Convulsion which is a cold disease?

A. Wine is hot moderately taken, over abundantly cold as a little oil powered
upon a fire will increase it, but an over abonnding quantity thrown upon a
little will put it out.

APH. 6.
Those who are taken with a Cramp or distention called Tetanus, die within four
days, or if they overpass them they recover.

Because it is a sign that nature has overcome the disease.

APH. 7.
The falling sickness, which is before ripeness of years may be cured: but that
which comes after five and twenty years of age for the most part accompanies us
to death.

By ripeness of years he means 25 years of age, yet they are not all curable
before that age, unless they take a care in dieting themselves.

APH. 8.
Those which have a plurisie, unless they be purged upwards within fourteen
days, shall have their disease turned into an imposthume

Namely spitting and purging such matter upward.

APH. 9.
A Consumption likely happens in that age which is from the 18 to the 35.

Namely that Consumption which comes by an exulceration of the Lungs.

APH. 10.
Those who have the evil cause of the Squinancy and escape it, that evil
passes to the Lungs, and they dye within seven days, but if they escape, the
humor imposthumates.

And if that imposthumated humor be not purged out it breeds a Consumption.

APH. 11.
If the spittle which they void by coughing that are affected with a
Consumption, do stink vehemently being cast upon the coals, and the hairs of
the head do fall off, it is a deadly sign.

For the more faculties are weakened in so much the worser case the Patient is.

APH. 12.
If a flux of the belly happen to them, which have their hair falling away by a
Consumption; death is near at hand.

Because it proceeding from weakness also, it shows a further weakening of the
natural faculties.

APH. 13.
Those which cough forth frothy blood, do retch and draw the same out of the
Lungs.

And it is part of the very substance and flesh of the Lungs.

APH. 14.
If a flux of the belly happen to him which is in a Consumption it is deadly.

This affirms what was said before Aph. 12 and moreover that a flux of the
belly added to a Consumption, is alone sufficient to kill without falling away
of the hair.

APH. 15.
Those which are infected with an imposthume by a Plurisie, if they be purged
from the corrupt matter within forty days after the breaking of the imposthume
are cured, or otherwise they pass into a Consumption.

For the matter will otherwise be so putrified that it will perish the lungs

APH. 16.
Hot water too often used, brings these discommodities: tenderness of the
flesh, distemperature of the sinews, heaviness, and stupefaction of the mind,
fluxes of blood, faintings and swounings; and to these things succeeds death

Hippocrates here wishes us to shun; the excessive use of any thing, though
never so temperate.

APH. 17.
The use of cold water, brings Convulsions, distentions or Cramps, blackness,
and cold Aguish shakings.

This is also not of the use simply but of the immoderate use of cold water.

APH. 18.
Cold water is hurtful to the bones, teeth, sinews, brain, and marrow of the
back. But that which is hot is good and profitable.

All the parts here rehearsed are by nature the coldest.

APH. 19.
We must heat those things which are over cold, except those which pour forth
or are inclined to pour forth blood abundantly.

For when there are more diseases then one coupled together, we must make have
to cure that first which is most urgent.

APH. 20.
Cold water biteth and nippeth Ulcers, hardens the skin, hinders a soreness
from maturation of the corrupt matter, causes blackness, brings forth cold
shivering fits of Agues, Convulsions, and distentions of the sinews.

This Aphorism relates some other hurts which cold water does.

APH. 21.
Notwithstanding there is some time when in the Cramp without an ulcer in a well
flesht young man in the midst of Summer, plentiful pouring out of cold water,
does call back the heat, and so the heat dissolves the Cramp.

This is not done by any virtue of its, but accidentally by drawing the natural
heat outward in such well flesht young men.

APH. 22.
Hot water yields unto us a great token of security and safety, when it
causes suppuration, yet not in all Ulcers. It softneth and mollifieth the
skin, and makes it thin, it does appease pain, it mitigateth and assawageth
cold shakeings, Convulsions and distentions: It dissolveth the heaviness of the
head: It profits broken bones very much; especially if they be bare without
flesh, and principally in the head, if they be ulcerated: it profits those
things which are mortified, and ulcerated through cold, eating Ulcers in the
Fundament, privy members, womb, and bladder. To all those hot water is a
friend, and of good judgment; but cold water is an enemy and destroyer.

Not in all ulcers, because some will not be brought to supuration by heat

APH. 23.
We must use cold water to those sores from whence blood does issue, or is
about to issue, yet not to the same place, but near to it. And if any
inflammation or burning of the parts, do incline to a red and bloody color,
with fresh clear blood, apply cold water to them, but if the inflammations be
inveterate and old it makes them black. It helps the inflammation called
Erysipelas, if it be not ulcerated, for if it be it hurts it.

Now he relates what things cold water is good for.

APH. 24.
Cold things, as Snow and Ice are hurtful to the breast, they procure coughs,
they cause ruptures of the veyns, and produce Rheumes.

He has spoken of the effects of cold water, now he speaks of the hurt which
other cold things do.

APH. 25.
Cold water poured out abundantly, does ease and diminish the tumors and pains
of the joints, which are without ulceration. And also gouty swellings and
pains, and Convulsions for the most part, and dissolveth the dolor, and
diminishes it. for a small benumming has the force of dissolving and putting
away of pan.

The end of this, phorism is a reason of the whole Aphorisms assertion. As if
he should say a little benumming puts away pain; cold water benumeth,
therefore, etc*

APH. 26.
Water that is quickly made hot, and quickly cools, is most light.

He means not by weight, but he speaks of that water which does not long
burden the belly, and quickly passes through.

APH. 27
It is good for them who desire to drink in the night, to fall asleep when they
are very thirsty.

Because sleep concocts the food, which being concocted ingenders blood, which
nourishes and moistens the parts of the body.

APH. 28.
A Fumigation of odoriferous spices brings forth women's terms: and would be
also profitable for many other things, if it did not breed heaviness of the
head.

For it does excite the expulsive faculty of the womb, and open the
obstructions of the veins which touch the womb.

APH. 29.
Thou shall pruge a woman with child if necessity require, the 4th. month after
conception, until the 7th month, though those that come near the 7th, not so
much: but the conception being younger or elder thou shall abstain.

This Aphorism is the same with the first of the fourth Section.

APH. 30.
A woman with child, a vein being opened aborteth, and so much the rather if
the conception be of any bigness.

Because it takes away part of its food, namely the conceptions.

APH. 31.
It is pernicious and deadly if a woman great with child be taken with any
sharp disease.

For large feeding will kill the mother by increasing the disease, and little
store of food will starve the conception.

APH. 32.
A woman is cured from vomiting blood, by her monthly terms issuing forth.

By the Physicians drawing down the blood to the lower parts.

APH. 33.
A flux of blood at the nose is good for a woman whose monthly terms do fail
contrary to the course of nature.

For if this happen not contrary to the course of nature, such a failing is
nothing.

APH. 34.
If the belly be very laxative and loose to a woman with child, there is danger
fo abortment.

Because the food is not distributed to the liver and other parts of the body,
so that the food is taken away from the conception as when she is let blood.

APH. 35.
Sneesing happening to a woman grieved with suffocations of the womb, or that
has a difficult deliverance, is good.

For by a vehement shaking of nature, it excites it, redintegrates the natural
heat which was almost extinguished, and shakes off such noxious humors as
hanged upon some part of the body.

APH. 36.
The monthly courses being discolored, and not coming forth always in the
same manner and time, declare a purgation to be necessary for the woman.

To purge those humors which cause the discoloration, and the alteration of
time.

APH* 37.
If the paps be suddenly extenuated and become lank, to a woman with child
abortment does follow

This also happens, for want of food for the conceived child.

APH. 38.
If one of the dugs be extenuated and become lank to a woman conceived with
child with twins, she brings forth one of them before the due time; and if
the right dug become slender, she brings forth the male, if the left, the
female.

For likewise the male conceptions lie on the right side, the female on the
left: as is set down Aph. 48.

APH* 39.
If any woman, neither with child nor having been delivered of child have milk
in her breasts, her monthly courses have failed her.

The blood which should have turned to monthly terms, turning to milk in the
breasts.

APH. 40.
Women in whose dugs there is blood heaped together, will be mad

For that blood is very bilious, which striking up into the head, causes
madness.

APH. 41.
If you will know whether a woman have conceived or no, give her a potion of
honey and water mixed together going to sleep, and if she feel gripings and
wringings of the belly, she has conceived, if she do not, she has not
conceived

For such a potion is very windy, and the woman having conceived her womb does
press down, and keep together the intrails.

APH. 42
If a woman conceived with child, bear a male she is fresh and well-colored,
if she bare a female she is ill-colored.

This Aphorism is one of those which for the most part are true, though not
always.

APH. 43.
If the inflammation called Erysipelas be bred in the womb, if the woman be
with child, it proves deadly.

One reason is because the chief cure for an Erysipelas is letting of blood and
that must not be done to a woman with child for fear of an abortment, Aph. 30.

APH. 44.
Those women which are very lean contrary to nature, and do bear children, do
suffer untimely deliverance until they grow fatter

Because that food which should be for the child in the womb, goes to the
nourishing of the mother.

APH. 45.
Those women which being reasonable fat, and make abortion the second or third
month without any manifest cause, have the ends of those vessels which come to
the womb called acetabula or Cotylidons full of a pituitous or phlegmy humor,
neither can they contain the conception coming to any weight, but they being
broken it falls down.

Whereby she must of necessity abort

APH. 46.
Those which are fatter then nature requires and cannot conceive have the
orifice of the womb compressed and closed together by the fat Call of the guts,
and cannot until they grow leaner.

He means the inward orifice of the womb for it has two.

APH. 47.
If the womb shall Aposthumate in that part where it lies near the hip or
huckle-bone, it must be cured with tents dipped in a liquid medicine called in
Greek Emmoton.

It must be thus cured the sore being first broken either by art or nature.

APH. 48.
Men children for the most part lie on the right side of the womb and females
on the left side.

This is because the womb is warmer on the right side, by reason of its
vicinity to the Liver.

APH. 49.
A medicine procuring sneezing put into the nostrils does drive and force out
the Secundine, so that you stop the nostrils and mouth, close with the hand.

Which if it remained would putrify there, and with the stench offend the
head.

APH. 50.
If a woman will stay her courses apply a very great cupping-glass under her
breasts.

For there be veins which come up thither from the inferior parts.

APH. 51.
Those women which are conceived with child, have the orifice of the womb shut
and closed up.

That the air may not get in and corrupt the seed, and that the heat of the
womb may not get out.

APH. 52.
If milk flow plentifully out of the dugs of a woman bearing a child in her
womb it signifies that the child is weak: but if the paps be hard and stiff,
they declare a stronger conception.

Because it shows in the former part that the child is not able to draw it for
his own nutriment. But when they are solid it shows it has nutriment enough,
and that which superabounds goes to the breasts, and is there turned into milk.

APH 53.
The dugs and paps become slender and lank to those women which shall abort:
but contrarily if they become hard, pain shall molest the paps, hips, eyes, or
knees, but they shall not suffer abortment.

Because of the superfluous matter which is brought thither from the womb.

APH. 54.
Those women which have the mouth of the womb hard, must of necessity have it
shut up.

This Aphorism had been better placed immmediately after the Aphorism 51.

APH. 55.
Childbearing women which are taken with Fevers, or are brought to a low
state without any manifest cause, do bring forth their birth painfully, and
with danger: or are in danger of life by an untimely deliverance.

Because it shows a great weakness or imbecility in them.

APH 56.
If a Convulsion, or swouning happen to a woman, in her flux of monthly terms,
it is an evil thing

If they be vehement or last long, it may be deadly because the womb is
exhausted and draws all the noble parts into a simpathy with it.

APH. 57.
Women's terms flowing immoderately, diseases are engendered; and being suppressed
or stopped, diseases happen from the womb.

By their immoderate evacuation, the whole body is cooled, and its forces
weakened, if they be stopped, in progress of time, excremental humors gather
together in the womb.

APH. 58.
The strangurie or dropping out of the urine does happen by the inflammation of
the straight gut, and likewise of the womb, or if the reins be ulcerated. But
if the liver be inflamed, the Hicket succeeds.

By reason of the vicinity of the bladder to the straigbt gut and the womb, and
because of the purulent matter of the reins passing through the bladder: and
the hicket is caused by a high inflammation of the liver because it swells the
liver, and oppresses the ventricle, and the bilious humor falling from the
liver comes into the ventricle.

APH. 59.
If a woman do not conceive, and thou would know if she shall conceive at
all, let her be wrapped round about with clothes, and make a fume under the
lower parts, and if the scent be perceived to pass through her body to her
nostrils, and her mouth, know that she is not barren by any default in her self.

Because then the body is clear of all vicious humors, and the womb it self is
in a good temper.

APH. 60.
If the monthly purgations keep their course in a woman that is with child, it
is impossible that the conception should be well.

Because it wants its aliment and food, being fed by that menstruous blood all the while it is in the womb.

APH. 61.
If a woman's monthly courses stop, and she have neither shivering cold nor Ague
coming upon her, and she loath her meat, make account that she is conceived.

For at the first conceiving of a woman, the child cannot make use of those
courses for its food.

APH. 62.
Those women which have their womb cold and dry do not conceive, nor those
which have it over moist, for the seed is extinguished and perished in them. Also
those women cannot conceive which have those places over dry and hot, for the
seed corrupts for want of nourishment. But those women which have obtained a
moderate temperature of the places in respect of both the oppositions and
contrarieties they are fruitful.

This Aphorism by right should be placed next to the 59 Aph.

APH. 63.
The same consideration and reason is likewise to be respected in men men, for
either through the spongy substance of the body, the spirits are dissipated and
scattered abroad so that the seed cannot be cast forth; or else the humor does
not issue forth because of its grosness or thickness; or else because of
coldness it does not grow hot, to be collected in its proper place* or by the
means of heat, the very self same thing may happen.

This Aphorism is held to be spurious, and none of Hippocrates, both by Galen
and others.

APH. 64.
It is not good to give milk to those who are troubled with the headache, or
with Agues, nor to those who are troubled with flatus Hypocondriacus, nor to
those who are troubled with thirst. It is also naught for them which avoid
choleric excrements downwards, or to those which have sharp Fevers, or have
had some copious evacuation of blood. But it is good for those which are in a
Consumption, so they be not troubled with any vehement Fever. It is also good
for long lingering and mild Agues, so there be none of the sore spoken of
signs. And those who are brought low without any apperant reason or occasion,

The particular reasons for these particular assertions may be seen at large in
Galen, Fuchsius, and Heurnius Comments, which would be too long to rehearse here.

APH. 65
They are seldom troubled with Convulsions or madness, which have apparent
tumors with their ulcers. But Convulsions and distentions happen to them to
whom the tumors shall suddenly vanish away, if they happen on the hinder part
of the body. But if they happen on the fore part, there happens madness,
vehement pain of the side* suppuration or spitting of matter, and the
bloody flux.

Because the humors reside there. And if they go away by degrees also there is
no danger for it shows, that the noxious humors are shaken off and dissolved.

APH. 66.
If no tumor nor swelling appear in great and bad wounds, it is a great evil

Because it signifies a passing of the noxious humors to the principal parts.

APH. 67.
Soft tumors are good, raw and indigested ones evil.

Because the first signify there is a concoction, and in the second there is
none.

APH. 68.
To one who has a pain in the hinder part of his head, the vena recta in the
forehead being opened does good.

The vena recta is that which is over against that which is opposite to that
vein which nourishes the part which is evil affected, so the opening of it
does both evacuate and divert the noxious humors.

APH. 69.
Cold shakings and shiverings for the most part do begin to women from the
loins, and through the back come to the head. But to men they do rather begin
in the back part then in the forepart, as from the hinder part of the thighs
and from the elbows; the rarity and thinness of the skin is a token thereof,
which thing, the hair there growing, does declare and manifest.

For the thicker the skin is, the l^ss will hair grow upon it.

APH. 70.
Those which are taken with a Quartan Ague are not at all taken with
Convulsions: but if before they have been taken, upon the coming of the
quartan, they are delivered.

He means here such Convulsions as come by repletion of the nervous parts, with
thin and pituitous humors, which by a quartan are both expelled and concocted

APH. 71.
Those who have their skin acide, and dry, die without sweating, but those who
have a loose and open skin, end their life with sweat.

He speaks here of those who have a Fever.

APH. 72.
Those that are diseased with the Jaundies are not much molested, with
windiness.

By reason of the heat and strength of the parts belonging to the stomach,
which causes them to concoct the food fully and perfectly.

SECT. VI.
The Argument.
This Section does almost altogether concern that part of the Art which
foretells good and evil things to happen in diseases.

APHORISM. 1.
IN a long lubricity and slipperiness of the guts, if a sowerish belching do
happen, which was not before, it is a good sign.

For it signifies, that now the food remains a while in the stomach, till such
time at least as it begins to concoct.

APH. 2.
Those which have there nostrils more moist then others by nature, and their
seed also do enjoy their health but badly; but those which have the contrary
properties, are more healthful.

By the nostrils he means the brains which purge that way, and by the humidity
of the Seed, the humidity of the whole body, the seed coming from the blood.

APH. 3.
In long fluxes of the bowels, loathing of meat is evil, and with a Fever it
is worser.

Because it signifies a mortification of the nourishing faculty.

APH. 4.
Ulcers which are every way smooth and bald.

Because of an evil humor lying in the bottom, which eats up the roots of the
hair, as salt earth does the herbs roots which grow on it.

APH. 5.
In the pains of the sides, breast, and other parts, we must consider whether
they increase or differ much, or keep at a stay.

Whither they differ namely in their kind, or in their vehemence, whether they
be pricking* stretching, or provoking.

APH. 6.
The diseases and infirmities of the Kidneys and Bladder are of hard and
difficult curation in old men.

which old age begins at fifty years which Hippocrates confirms in his sixth
Book Epidemion where he says he never saw or knew an ulcer of the reins or
bladder cured after fifty years of age.

APH. 7.
Dolours and pains of the besly being aloft and in the upper part are more
light and easy, those which are not aloft are more vehement.

We must understand this word aloft not according to the length and height of
the body, but according to its depth and thickness, so be those which are not
aloft, he means those which are next to the back.

APH. 8.
Ulcers or sores in the body of those which are diseased with the dropsy, are
not easily cured.

For an ulcer cannot be cured until it be exactly dried, which cannot easily be
done in those who have the dropsy, by reason of their superabundant humidity.

APH. 9.
Broad wheals are not very full of itching.

For they are not bred by such hot humors as those which are narrow and high.

APH. 10.
Corrupt matter, water or blood issuing out, by the nostrils, mouth or ears,
dissolveth and cures a vehement and grievous headache.

If that the pain proceed from inflammation, or abundance of crude humors
gathered in the head, for if it proceed from other causes, there must be other
cures.

APH. 11*
The Haemorroides happening to those, which are troubled with melancholy and
pain of the Kidneys are good.

Both by reason of the evacuation, and because they evacuate such humors as
ought to be evacuated.

APH. 12.
Unless in the cures of Haemorroides which have long continued there be one
vein kept open, it is to be feared that a Dropsy or Convulsion will shortly*
follow.

That nature may by that means purge out those evil humors which remain.

APH. 13.
The Hick^^ troubling us is put away by sneezing.

If the said Hicket was caused by fullness For by sneezing not only the brain:
but the stomach also, by reason of the nerves derived unto it, is vehemently
shaken, whereby the humors exciting the Hicket are evacuated.

APH* 14.
If in him who has a Dropsy if the water flow from the veins into the belly,
the disease is dissolved.

If Nature or Physic make evacuation of it from thence.

APH. 15.
Vomiting coming by the mere benefit of nature dissolveth and riddeth away a
long flux or looseness of the belly.

By reason of the retraction and drawing back of the humors which (...)
downward.

APH. 16.
A looseness of the belly, to one afflicted with a Plurisie or inflammation of
the Lungs is an evil thing.

Because it signifies the liver to be so affected, by the consent of those
parts which serve for respiration, that through weakness it is not able to draw
the aliment to it self, and convert it into blood.

APH. 17.
It is good for him who has a waterish dropping and running of the eyes, if he
be taken with a flux and looseness of the belly.

Whereby Hippocrates shows us a convenient way how to cure such eyes, namely by
drawing the humors which cause the disease downwards

APH. 18.
It is a deadly thing when the bladder is wounded, or the brain, or the heart,
the midriff, any small gut, the Stomach or Liver.

The Greek word for wounded is here (...) which signifies deep wounded; for
otherwise some of those parts have been wounded and cured as Galen says.

APH. 19.
A bone perished or cut off, a cartilage, gristle, or sinew, or any little
parcel of the eyelid, or of the foreskin, being diminished, do not grow or
join together.

Yet they may be knit together by some other kind of substance as we see in
bones.

APH. 20.
If blood flow contrary to nature into any concavity it corrupts and is
putrified of necessity.

That is, into any other concavity besides the veins and arteries.

APH. 21.
If the swellings of veins in the legs, called varices; or the Haemorroides,
shall happen to them which are mad, their madness is dissolved.

Because nature drives those humors which cause madness into the more ignoble
parts.

APH. 22.
Breaches or fluxes of humors, which descend from the back to the elbow, are
dissolved by opening of a vein.

By reason that those humors are thereby evacuated.

APH. 23.
If fear and sadness continue long, it is a sign of melancholy.

Namely without any outward cause, for those who are sad or fearful for any
outward cause, their sadness and fear do not commonly last long; but if they
do, they will turn to melancholy, if not to madness.

APH. 24*
If any small or slender gut be pierced, it does not grow together again.

This was spoken Aphorism 18. wherefore Galen and Heurnius would have it
expunged.

APH. 25.
If the choleric tumor Erysipulas being outward be returned inwards, it is
evil; but if being inwards, it is turned outward, it is a good thing.

By this example Hippocrates shows that it is good to have all sores and
diseases of tbe body to come from the noble and inward parts to the ignoble and
outward ones.

APH. 26.
Those burning fevers are dissolved with dotage or raving, in which are
trembling shakings.

They are indeed dissolved, but that dissolution at last brings a general
dissolution of the body by death

APH. 27
If the corruption, matter, or water do flow out altogether at once from them
which are burnt or cauterized, or cut by the Surgeon for the cure of the
inward aposthumation between* the lungs and the breast, or of the Dropsy, then
the diseased shall questionless die*

By these examples Hippocrates shows that all total evacuations made at once,
are noxious and deadly.

APH. 28.
Eunuchs or gelded men, are neither troubled with the Gout, nor with baldness.

Because in Hippocrates time they used a very good diet, and lived very
temperately they were not troubled with the gout, though now adays they be, and
their not being bald comes from their native moisture, which makes them have a
very thick skin.

APH. 29.
A woman is not troubled with the Gout unless her monthly terms fail her.

The same reasons may be alleged for women as were set down in the former,
for Eunuchs. But if her terms fail her, then the superfluous humors being
driven to the outward parts may cause it.

APH. 30.
A boy is not troubled with the Gout till he has used Venery.

Unless it come through their seed, or if the parents have had the French pox.

APH. 31.
Drinking of strong wine, a ba^^, a fomentation, phlebotomy, or a purgation
does cure the pain of the eyes.

According as the cause of the disease is, so must the manner of the taking of
it away be various.

APH. 32.
Those which stammer are for the most part taken with a long flux of the belly.

Because stammering shows an extraordinary humidity of the tongue, whereof the
ventricle of necessity participates.

APH. 33.
Those which have sour belchings are not much subject to a Plurisie.

Because sour belching is a sign of much phlegm, and the Plurisie for the most
part invades those who are troubled with much choler.

APH. 34.
Great swelling veins in the legs called varices, are not incident to them who
lose their hair, and if they happen to have varices whose hair do fall, their
hair will grow again.

Because those vicious humors which before corrupted the hair, are now gone down
into the legs.

APH. 35.
If a cough come upon those which are troubled with a Dropsy it is an evil
thing.

For it signifies the watery humor to be so increased, that it has seized upon
the rough artery, and so causes danger of suffocation.

APH. 36.
Phlebotomy cures the difficulty of making urine, but we must open the inward
veins.

Namely that difficulty which proceeds from inflammation or fullness

APH. 37.
If a tumor appear in the neck to him that is troubled with a Squinancy or
Quinzy, it is good.

Because the humors are come from the inward parts to the outward.

APH. 38.
Those who have hidden or deep Cancers are not to be cured of them; for they
which are healed die soon, and those which are not healed, live longer.

For fear of provoking or irritating them.

APH* 39.
A Convulsion is caused by repletion or evacuation. So is also the Hicket.

Namely when the nerves are filled with some thick or clammy humor, or over
dried. And the Hicket is said by Galen to be as it were a Convulsion of the
stomach.

APH. 40.
They who have pain about the the hypocondrium without an inflammation are
cured by a Fever happening to them.

Because the humors which caused it are dissolved by the heat of the Fever.

APH. 41.
If a suppuration or corrupt matter, hidden in the body does not show it self,
it is by reason either of its own thickness, or of that part of the bodies
thickness where it lies hidden.

Yet we may find that there is such corrupt matter hidden by two signs namely
by the pain, and by a Fever which it causes.

APH. 42.
If the Liver wax hard to them which are affected with the yellow-Jaundies, it
is an evil sign.

For it signifies there is either a hard tumor or an inflammation in the Liver

APH. 43.
The splenetick which are taken with a bloody flux in the bowel, do dye of the
Dropsy, or a slipperiness of the bowels, following a long flux.

By splenetick he means those who have a tumor in the spleen, bred there, by a
melancholy humor.

APH. 44.
They dye within seven days, to whom the disease called Ileos or pain in the
small guts shall happen after a Strangurie: unless a Fever supervening, store
of urine issue forth.

For the Fe^^^er with its heat concocts and ex^^^^ates the thick humors, so
that they may go out through the passage of the urine.

APH. 45.
If ulcers continue a year or longer, the bone of necessity must grow foul, and
the Cicatrices be hollow.

Because the bone being perished under, the flesh cannot grow up again as was
said Aph. 19. of this Section.

APH. 46.
Those which become Crookbackt by shortness of wind, or a cough before they
attain to ripeness of years, do die quickly.

Because their breast or bulk does not increase as their lungs and heart does,
they must in a short time to suffocated.

APH. 47.
Those are to be let blood or purged in the Spring time, to whom opening of a
vein or purging may do good.

For the Spring time being temperate is most fit for purging or leting blood.

APH. 48.
The difficulty of the intestines and guts, coming upon them which are diseased
with the spleen is good.

Because the thick and melancholy humors are thereby eva^uated as Aph. 4^

APH. 49.
Goutie diseases, the inflammation being assuaged, within forty days decease.

For the inflammation will be cured within forty days, if the Physician
prescribe right, and the patient be truly obedient.

APH. 50.
It must needs be, that a Fever, and Vomiting of choler must come upon them,
which have their brain wounded.

A Fever, because any principal members inflammation causes a Fever, and
the vomiting of Choler because of the consent and agreement which is between
the brain and the stomach, to which some of the great nerves descend from the
brain.

APH. 51.
Those which are in health being suddenly taken with the headache, and
presently become dumb and snort, die within seven days, unless a Fever come
upon them in the mean while.

Because the Fever heats, attenuates and resolves the windy spirit and the
pituitous humors which cause these symptoms.

APH. 52.
We must consider in their sleeps if any part of the eyes appear; for if any of
the white of them appears, the eye lidds not being fast closed, if it do not
happen by a Flux of the belly, or by the taking of some medicinal potion, it
is an evil and very deadly sign.

If it happen not through some external cause, for it signifies an
imbecillitie of the faculty which moves the eye lids.

APH. 53.
That doting which is done with aughter is not so dangerous, as that which is
done with earnest sadness.

For it does not proceed from so adust a Choler, as that which is done with
earnest sadness.

APH. 54.
Painful breathings in sharp diseases with a Fever, as it were of such as
sigh, and mourn, are evil.

For it signifies either a hardness of the nerves or muscles, or a weakeness of
natural strength, or some affect that causes pain, or is convulsory.

APH. 55.
Pain of the Gout do most commonly afflict, and are provoked in the Spring
and Autumn.

In Spring because the humors gathered together in the winter are expelled from
the stronger parts to the weaker; and in Autumn by reason of its inequality,
and because the evil humors gathered together by eating of fruits in Summer*
settle in those we akest parts.

APH. 56.
The falling down of humors are very dangerous in melancholy diseases at
those seasons. And declare an Appoplexie, or a convulsion, or maddness or
blindness.

If they fall down to the ventricles of the brain, they cause an Apoplexy if
to the nerves a convulsion, if to the substance of the brain madness, if to
the eyes blindness.

APH 57,
Apoplexies are caused most especially from the fortieth to the sixtieth year.

He means those Apoplexies which proceed from melancholy, which in those times
abound in our bodies.

APH. 58*
If the Call hang forth of the body, it must of necessity putrefie.

SECT: VII.
The Argument.
This seventh Section is altogether prognosticall and foretelling things to
come, and herein he entreats of presages of health and death.

APHORISM. 1.
COldness of the extreme parts in sharp diseases is evil.

Because is shows there is a mighty ^nflamation in some of the inward parts,
which like a cupping glass draws all the blood to it, and so leaves the
extreme parts cold.

APH. 2.
Flesh black and blew because of a foul diseased bone, is an evil thing,

For it shows there is a great putrefaction of the bone, and extinction of the
natural heat.

APH, 3.
The hicket and redness of the eyes after vomiting are evil

For these two together show there is a great inflammation, either in the
ventricle or the brain.

APH. 4*
After sweat, cold shiverings and shakings are not good.

For it is a sign that nature is weak, and that the sweat has not had power
to drive out all the noxious humors.

APH. 5.
After madness, a bloody Flux, the dropsy, or an extansie or trane is good.

For it signifies that the noxious humors are gone from the head to the lower
parts

APH. 6.
Abhorring of meat in a long disease, and the excrements avoided down without
mixture of humors, are evil.

Because, it shows the inbecilitie of the concocting faculty, and that all
natural humidity is dried up by the seaverish heat.

APH. 7.
Cold shakings, and fond dotings, after much drinking of wine are evil*

The first by reason, it is a sign that the native heat is extinguished by the
much drinking of wine. And the doting proceeds from the heads being full of
fervent blood and vapor.

APH. 8.
After the breaking of an imposthume inwardly faintness; vomiting and swouning.

He speaks here of the breaking of imposthumes which break in the stomach, for
the symptom of vomiting follows none else.

APH. 9
After a Flux of blood, a Delirium or raveing, or a convulsion are evil.

For it shows a great drought of the body, and weakness of the brains forces.

APH. 10*
After the Iliack passion, or colic the hicket, raveing, or convulsion are
evil.

Which are caused by the foulness of the stomach and consent which is between
the brain and the stomach.

APH. 11.
After a pleurisy, an Inflammation of the lungs is evil.

Because it signifies that part of the noxious humors is gone from the Iess
noble part of the ribbs, to the more noble viz. the lungs.

APH. 12.
A frenzy after an inflammation of the lungs is evil.

The inflammation of the lungs, sending up vapors into the head, and they
possessing the brain cause a Frenzy.

APH. 13.
A Convulsion, or the Cramp, after hot burnings, are evil,

Because it signifies a great dryness of the nerves or sinews.

APH. 14.
Astonishment and raving through some blow of the head is an evil sign.

Because it signifies that the wound has penetrated to the ^raine*

APH. 15.
The spitting out of corrupt matter, after the spitting of blood is evil.

Because it signifies that the lungs are exulcerated.

APH. 16.
A consumption* and a Flux of the hair or of the belly, coming after the
spitting of corrupt matter are evilsignes, for when the spitting is stopped,
the diseased do die.

The first part of this Aphorism is averred, Aphorism. 11. and 12. of the 5
Section, to which we referr you. The reason of the second part is because if
the spitting be stopped, the lungs are so oppressed with the abundance of
phlegm lying on them, that the patient is suffocated and strangled, for want of
breath.

APH. 17.
The hicket coming through an inflammation of the liver is evil.

For it shows the greatness of the inflammation, of which the stomach also
participates, and being bitten by store of choler swiming in it, it causes the
hicket,

APH. 18.
A convulsion or raving caused through watching is an evil thing*

For watching does extremely evacuate and exiccate the body; which causes both
the raving and convulsion.

APH. 19.
After the laying bare of a bone, the inflammation and hot tumor Erisipelas is
evil.

For it shows a confluction thither of hot blood and choler, which corrode,
and consume the adjacent flesh.

APH. 20.
Putrefaction or impostumation after, from the inflammation Erisipelas is evil,

For it shows the malignitie of the said Erisipelas, which does not only
exulcerate the upper parts of the body, but feeds deeper in, and creeps on to
the sound parts

APH. 21.
A Flux of blood, after a strong pulse in ulcers is evil.

First because it shows an extreme inflammation to be joined to the ulcer;
secondly because this eruption or Flux cannot be, unless the month of the
artery be opened: which is very difficult to be stopped.

APH. 22.
After a long pain of the parts belonging to the belly, an imposthumation is
evil.

Which it must needs come to at last* unless death of the patient prevent it

APH. 23.
After avoiding of unmixed excrements downwards, a bloody Flux is evil

For such humors will erode and perish some parts of the intestines.

APH. 24.
Raving or Delirium ensues after the wound of a bone, if it penetrate into the
hollow or void space.

He speaks here of the bones of the head only, as appears by the 14. Aph.

APH. 25.
A convulsion after the taking of a purging potion brings death.

Because is signifies an incurable drought.

APH. 26.
A great cold of the uttermost parts, through vehement pain of the parts
belonging to the belly is evil.

The reason whereof is set down in the comment of the 1. Aphorism of this
Sect.

APH. 27.
If the disease called Tenesmus shall happen to a woman with child, it is the
cause of abortment.

This Tenesmus is a great provocation or desire to go to stool, and when they
come thither can do nothing.

APH. 28.
If either a bone, cartilage or sinew, shall be cut in the body, it does
neither increase nor grow together again.

This was spoken before in the 19. Aphorism Sect 6.

APH. 29.
If a strong Flux of the belly shall come upon him that is diseased, with a
dropsy called Leacophlegmatia, it dissolveth and cures the disease.

Because it evacuates the efficient cause of the disease, which is abundance of
white phlegm, from whence also comes the diseases name.

APH. 30.
They have a falling down of phlegmatic humors from the head, which do a vid
froathie excrements out of the belly.

For phlegmatic humors being windy, it is no marvel if they be froathie.

APH. 31.
Sediments in urines, made in the time of agues like unto course wheat-meal do
signify that the sickness shall continue long.

For it shows a kind of gross thick humor, which cannot be disolved or voided
in a short space.

APH. 32.
Choleric sediments in urins, which at the first were thinn, do signify a
sharp disease.

For choler always causes sharp diseases. And urines are always faithful
messengers of the affections of the veins.

APH. 33.
Those which makes diverse urines, have a vehement disturbance in their body.

For when the urines are so, it shows a manifoldness of humors to be viciously
diseased

APH. 34.
The urins in which bubbles do swim a loft, signify a disease of the reins,
and that the disease will endure long.

For those bubbles proceeding from humiditie which is extended about by a
flatuous spirit, do cause a cold disease which cold diseases are long.

APH. 35.
Those to whom a fattness swims upon their urine together and on a sudden, it
is a sign the disease is in the reins, and asharp one too.

For if the disease were in the whole body, it would come forth by little and
little, and it is a sharp one, for the head of it melts the fat of the reins.

APH. 36.
If also pains be caused to those which are diseased with the grief of the
kidneys about the muscles of the back bone, and have the signs abovesaid, if
they be felt toward the outward parts, look and expect that the imposthume
shall be also outwardly. But if the pains bend and decline rather to the inward
parts, we must then expect the imposthume will be inwards

Namely if the pain has been long and great.

APH. 37.
Vomiting of blood is wholesome to them which do it without a Fever: but if it
be with a Fever it is an evil thing, and the cure and remedy of the same, is
to be performed with things that have a cooling and binding ^ualitie.

All vomits of blood are bad, Sect. 4. Aphorism. 25, therefore this must be
here understood comparatively, namely that it is more tolerable without, then
with a Fever.

APH. 38.
Distillations upon the upper belly come to suppuration and ripeness within
twenty days.

By the upper belly, he means the stomach, whose heat causes the suppuration
to be made so soon.

APH 39
If any one piss blood, or clots of blood, and be diseased with the Strangury,
the pain falling into the Perinaeum, Hypogastrium, and Pectinem, the places and
part about the bladder are diseased.

Perinaeum is the part between the privy Members and the Fundament.
Hypogastrium the bottom of the belly: And Pecten that part under the belly
where the hair grows.

APH. 40
If a man's tongue suddenly become feeble, or any part of the body benumbed
without feeling, it is a sign of melancholy.

For they proceeded from a thick juice which is partly melancholy partly
phlegmatic.

APH. 41.
If the hicket happen to old men, purged above measure it is not good.

Because such a hicket is bad in all, especially in old men, because in them
all diseases are greater, and more to he doubted by reason of the imbecilitie
of that age.

APH. 42.
If the fever be not caused by choler, much warm water poured upon the head
does disolve it.

Under the name of choler ^e does here comprehend all other humors, as Phlegm,
blood and black choler.

APH. 43.
A woman has not the use of both hands alike,

By reason of the imbecilitie of woman's nature.

APH. 44.
If a clear and white matter do issue out from them which are affected with
corrupt matter, when they suffer cauterizing or incision, they do escape: but
if bloody, stinking, and filthy matter do issue forth, they die.

By being affected with corrupt matter he means all which have any corrupt
tumor, but especially such as have it gathered between the lungs and the breast,

APH. 45.
If clear and white matter do issue from them whose liver is corrupted, and is
burnt, they recover health: for the corrupt matter is contained in the coat,
but if that which comes forth be like the lees of oil they die.

The reason of the Aphorism is set down in it, when he says, the matter is
contained in the coat, for if it penetrate into the flesh or substance of the
liver they dye.

APH. 46.
Cure and heal pains of the eyes, which proceed from drinking of strong wine*
and bathing in hot water, by opening of a vein.

This Aphorism is by Gallen and Heurnius held to be spurious and not worthy of
Hypocrates; alludes to the 31. Aphorism of the 6 Section, yet it much differs
from it.

APH. 47.
If a cough come upon one diseased with the dropsy, he is irrecoverable

This and the 35 Aphorism of the 6 Section are all one.

APH. 48
Drinking of neat strong wine, and the opening of a vein dissolves the
Strangurie and Dysurie, but the inward veins must be opened.

He speaks not of all Stranguries and Dysuries, but only of that Strangurie or
dropping of urine, which is caused by coldness, and of that Dysurie, or the
urines painful coming out, which proceeds from a viscous and flatuous humor.

APH. 49.
A swelling and redness arising on the breast of him who have a Squiancie is
good, for the disease inclines outward.

This differs nothing from the 37 of the sixth Section, but only in the place of
the rednesses arising, so that in both, Hippocrates scope is to show that in
this disease it is good to have the humors tend outward.

APH. 50.
They die within three days, whose brain begins to corrupt, but if they
overpasse them, they shall recover their health.

Because the brain is a principal and most noble part: But if they escape three
days it may be hoped, the disease may remitt and that the natural forces will
overcome it.

APH. 51.
Sneezing is provoked out of the head, the brain being much heated, or the void
space of the head being much moistened: For the air enclosed within, does
break forth; and it makes a noise because it passes through a narrow place.

He speaks in this Aphorism only of that sneezing which is caused by the
motion if nature desires to drive out flatuous spirit out of the head.

APH. 52.
Those who are grieved with vehement pain of the Liver, are delivered from it,
if an Ague come upon them.

Which vehement pain comes by windiness which the fever disperses

APH. 53.
Those which have occasion to have blood taken from them, must be let blood in
the Spring.

This is part of the Aph. 47. Sect. 6 look upon that is Comment.

APH. 54.
Those which have phlegm enclosed between the ventricle and the middriff, which
is painful to them, having no passage into either of the bellies, are delivered
from the disease, the phlegm being turned through the veins into the body.

Matter may come out of the veins into any place of the body, and being
extenuated return into them again.

APH. 55.
Those have their belly filled with water and die, whose Liver replenisht with
water, makes an eruption of it in the upper part of the belly where the Caul is.

This Aphorism speaks what is for the most part, for by the help of nature and
medicaments such may be cured.

APH. 56.
Wine being drunk with an equal proportion of water, puts away sorrow, yawning,
and cold shaking

For wine by its moderate heat expels most of those matters which cause these
symptoms and tempereth the rest.

APH. 57.
Those which have a little swelling in the urinary passage, they are delivered
from it, the same being brought to suppuration and broken.

This Aphorism is the same as the 82 of the fourth Secton where it was
explained.

APH. 58.
They must of necessity become dumb presently, which have their brain
vehemently shaken and troubled by some outward occasion.

In the word dumbness he here comprehends all other voluntary motions.

APH. 59.
Hunger and fasting is to be endured by bodies consisting of moist flesh. For
fasting dries the body.

He means so much fasting as will serve to correct the humidity of the flesh.

APH. 60.
Where there is alteration in the whole body, and it becomes cold and hot
again, or changes from one color to another, it signisies length of the
disease.

This Aphorism is repeated from that which is Sect. 4. Aph. 40.

APH. 61.
Much sweat hot and dry frequently issuing forth, declares abundance of
moistness, which in a strong body is to be vacuated upwards, in a weak one
downwards.

This Aphorism is thought by Galen to be spurious, and also the three
following, yet Heurnius says no such thing. But says this Aphorism means that
sweat which proceeds from superabundance of moisture, and not from plenty of
food.

APH. 62.
If Agues become more fierce and vehement every third day without intermission
they are dangerous. But in what manner soever they shall cease it signifies
they are void of danger.

APH. 63.
Those which are afflicted with long Fevers have little swellings or aches in
the joints.

APH. 64.
Those which have long swellings or pains in the joints after a Fever, do use
too plentiful a diet.

These three last Aphorisms are the same with the 43, 44, and 45 of the fourth
Section, where they have been already explained.

APH. 65.
If any give the meat to one sick of a Fever, which he gives to a healthful
person, he shall strengthen the healthful person, and increase the malady of
the sick.

This Aphorism also is falsely imputed to Hippocrates.

APH. 66.
We must look upon those things which pass through the bladder, whether they be
such as issue forth in prosperous health. For those which are unlike them, are
unhealthful signs, but those which are like them, are healthful signs.

This Aphorism speaks that which Hippocrates in a manner speaks elsewhere: yet
because it has neither the form nor phrase of Hippocrates, Galen rejects it.

APH. 67.
Also when the sediments, if thou shall suffer them to rest, and shall not move
them, do sink down into the bottom like shavings of guts or such like matter,
if they be few, they signify the disease is but little; but if they be many,
that it is great Then it is necessary to evacuate the belly downwards;
otherwise if thou shall give broth and nourishments, without purging the belly,
the more thou give, the more thou shall offend.

This Aphorism Galen holds to be foisted in by some sophister and lover of
obscurity and to be none of Hippocrates.

APH. 68.
Crude, raw and undigested excrements voided downwards, do proceed from black
choler. If they be many, they proceed from a more copious quantity, if they be
few, from a lesser.

This Aphorism participates of the formers obscurity, and by some is joined to
it and made the latter part of the other.

APH. 69.
Spittings, in Fevers not intermitting, ash-colored bloodyish, choleric,
stinking, are all evil. But if they come forth conveniently and easily they are
good, whether they issue out by the belly or bladder. And if any thing stays
unpurged which should have come forth, it is evil.

This Aphorism is in a manner the same with the 47 of the fourth Section

APH. 70.
When any one goes about to purge unclean bodies, he must make them soluble
and fluxible.

This Aphorism has also been explained in the tenth Aph. of the second
Section.

APH. 71.
Sleep and watchfulness, if they exceed a measure, are a disease.

This is also the same Aphorism in substance with the third of the second
Section,

APH. 72.
In Fevers not intermitting, if the exterior parts be cold, and the inward
burning and the patient have a Fever.

This Aphorism was better set down Sect. 4. Aph. 48. for why should he add at
the end of this, if the patient have a Fever when he had already said in the
beginning, In Fevers not intermitting.

APH. 73.
In a Fever not intermitting, if a lip, nose, eye, or eye-brow be perverted
and turned awry, if the sick man do not see nor hear, whatsoever of these
things shall happen to a weak sick man, death is near at hand.

This Aphorism is the same with the 49 of Sect. 4.

APH. 74.
After white phlegm comes a Dropsy.

Namely when the body and its vessels, are abundantly filled with it

APH. 75.
From a looseness of the belly, proceeds a bloody flux.

Not from all loosnesses, but only such as are long lasting, and bilious as
Aph 23.

APH. 76.
After a bloody flux comes a Lienteria.

Which is a flux of undigested meat. See Sect. 6. Aph. 43.

APH. 77.
After the corruption of the bone comes the impost humation of it called in
Greek Sphacelismos.

It may be also taken for a Gangrening of the flesh about it.

APH* 78.
After vomiting of blood, a Consumption, and an evacuation of filthy purulent
matter does ensue.

This Aphorism is set down several ways, but I have followed Galens exposition.

APH. 79.
We ought to behold what things they be which pass out by urines or by the
belly, and what things issue out through the flesh. And we must also consider
and behold whether the body do decline in any other thing from nature. For if
little be a voided the disease is little, if much, the disease is great, and if
very much it is deadly.

To the end that the Physician may know the disease, he must take special
notice of the excrements, and examine them in substance, quantity, quality, and
the time and manner of getting them out. For the excrements represent the Idea
of those parts from whence they proceed.

FINIS.

