THE MANNER HOW STATVTES Are enacted in PARLIAMENT BY Passing of Bills.

Collected many years past out of the Iournalls of the house of Commons.

By W. Hakewil of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.

Together with a Catalogue of the Speakers Names.

London, printed by T. H. for John Benson, at St. Dunstans Church yard. 1641.
Cum Privilegio.

THE PREFACE.
HAving about thirty years past, the free use and perusal of all the
Iournalls of the Commons house of Parliament, from the first year of K. Edward
the sixth, being the most ancient that they have) until that time. And being
unwilling to lose the advantage of that opportunity, I read them all through,
and whatsoever I conceived to tend to the rule of the house, (wherein I was the
better enabled to udge, in respect I had served in diverse Parliaments, or
Sessions of Parliament before that time) I reduced under apt Parliamentary
Titles: Amongst the rest in this Chapter of passing of Bills, I was the more
sedulous, because it is indeed the daily and most proper work of that house,
wherein I have been careful, not to propose any thing for a rule, for which I
have not vouched the authority of the Iournall. Those my collections, I
imparted many years since to some of my friends (which being by the length of
time multiplied into very many copies) one of them (and I think the falsest
written of all the rest) was without my knowledge lately printed, and by the
negligence of the Printer, the errors of the copy were much increased,
insomuch that it pleased the honorable house of Commons, (because it concerned
their orders) to take notice thereof, and take some order therein; by which I
was induced to make this publication, being otherwise very unwilling to have
appeared in print, and to have subjected my self to public censure.

It were (in my poor opinion) to be wished, that the same course were taken by
the house of Commons, as was by the Lords in 18. Iacobi Regis, who appointed a
Committee for the collecting of the rules and orders of that house; which being
collected, they caused to be fairly engrossed in a roll of parchment, which by
order is always read in the beginning of every Parliament, and rests in the
custody of the Clarke of that house, to be presently resorted unto upon all
occasions, where by much of their precious time is saved, which other wise
perhaps would have been spent in the debating of the Rules and Orders of their
house.

Another excellent Order was made by their Lordships, that once every week, a
Committee appointed for that purpose, that should peruse and perfect the
Clerks notes, and that at the end of every Session, all the orders of that
Session should be engrossed in vellam, and fairly bound up, which course
first began in the time, when my worthy friend Master Henry Elsynge that most
industrious and able Gentleman, was Clarke of that house, and has continued
ever since; whereas before that time all their Iournalls (of which the most
ancient are from the beginning of King Henry the eight) are in paper, as are
those of the Commons house, but more fairly written.

If to this care of perfecting of the Iournalls of the house of Commons, there
were some provision made by that house, for the safe preserving of them,
answerable to that which the Lords have, whose Clarke has a house belonging to
him, and his successors, where all their Records are kept to posterity, the
Iournalls and Records of the Commons house, would not (as now they may) come to
the hands of Executors or Administrators, and be removed to and fro in hazard
of being lost, or corrupted and defaced, as is well known that some of them
have been, and that in passages of the greatest moment, whereby the Common
wealth may receive great prejudice if it be not prevented, which my humble
propositions, I do (together with this Treatise) in all humility submit to the
great wisdom of that honorable Assembly, by whose favor this is published:

WILL. HAKEWIL.

The Contents
BY whom Bills are drawn and presented to the Parliament, Fol. 1 Orders to be
observed in preferring of Bills to be read, 6 Touching the first reading of
Bills, 10 Touching the second reading and committing of Bills, 19 Touching the
third reading of Bills, 33 Touching Provisoes, Schedules, Amendments, and
Amendments of Amendments, 45 Touching the sending of Bills from one house to
the other, 68 Touching the Royal Assent, 74 Eliz concerning the adding of a
proviso by the Commons, unto a Bill sent to the Lords, engrossed and signed by
the Queen, and passed by the Lords for the restitution in blood of a certain
Lord, and sent down by the Lords to the house of Commons.
A Catalogue of the Names of the Speakers of the Commons House of Parliament.
Page 105
PEtrus de Mountford. Page 106 Scroope. 107 Sir Peter de la Mare. 107 Sir
Thomas Hungerford. 108 Sir Pierce de la Mare Ibid. Sir James Pickering. Ibid.
Sir John Goldesborough. Ibid. Sir Richard Walgrave. 109 Sir James Pickering.
Ibid. Sir John Bushey. Ibid. Sir John Bushey. 110 Sir John Cheney. 111 John
Dorewood. 112 Sir Arnold Savage. Ibid. Sir Henry de Redeford. 113 Sir Arnold
Savage. Ibid. Sir William Sturney. 114 Sir John Cheyney. Ibid. Sir John
Tibtoft. Ibid. Thomas Chanser. 116 William Stonrton. Ibid. John Doreward. 118
Thomas Chanser. Ibid. Walter Huugerford. Ibid. Richard Redman. Ibid. Sir Walter
Beauchamp. Ibid. Roger Flower. 119 Richard Bayuard. Ibid. John Russell. 120 Sir
Thomasa Wuton. Ibid. Richard Vernon. Ibid. John Tirell. Ibid. Mr. William
Allington. Ibid. John Tirell. 121 John Russell. Ibid. Roger Hurst. Ibid. John
Bows. Ibid. Sir John Tirell. Ibid. Sir John Tirell. 122 William Boerly. Ibid.
William Tressam. 123 William Burley. Ibid. William Tressam. Ibid. John Day.
Ibid. Sir John Popham. Ibid. William Tresham. 124 Sir William Oldham. Ibid.
Thomas Thorpe. 125 Sir Thomas Charlton. 126 Sir John Wenlock. Ibid. Thomas
Tresham. Ibid. John Green. Ibid. Sir James Strangwayes. 127 John Say. Ibid.
William Allington. Ibid. John Wood. Ibid. William Catesbey. Ibid. Thomas
Lovell. 129 John Mordant. 130 Sir Thomas Fitzwilliams. Ibid. Richard Empson.
Ibid. Sir Reginald Bray. 131 Robert Drury. Ibid. Thomas Inglefield. Ibid.
Edmond Dudley. Ibid. Sir Thomas Inglefield. 132 Sir Robert Sheffeild. Ibid. Sir
Thomas Nevill. Ibid. Sir Thomas More. 133 Thomas Audeley. 134 Richard Rich. 135
Sir Nich. Hare. Ibid. Thomas Moyle. 136 Sir John Baker. 137 Sir James Dyer.
Ibid. John Pollard. 138 Clement Higham. Ibid. John Pollard. 139 William
Cordall. Ibid. Sir Thomas Gargrave. 140 Thomas Williams. Ibid. Richard Ousloe.
141 Christopher Wray. Ibid. Robert Bell. 142 John Popham. Ibid. Mr. Sergeant
Puckering. 143 Mr. Sergeant Snagg. Ibid. Edward Cook. 144 Mr. Sergeant
Yelverton. Ibid. Mr. Sergeant Crook. 145 Mr. Sergeant Phelips. Ibid. Sir
Randall Crew. Ibid. Sir Thomas Richardson. 146 Sir Thomas Crew. Ibid. Sir
Thomas Crew. 147 Sir Heneage Finch. Ibid. Sir John Finch. Ibid. John Glanvile.
148 William Lenthall. Ibid.

FINIS.
THE PASSING OF BILLS.
CHAP. I.
Sect. I.
By whom Bills are drawn, and presented to the Parliament.
Public Bills are usually drawn by such of the House (with the advice of
Lawyers) as of themselves are earnestly inclined to the effecting of some
public good, which requires the assistance of some new Law, which being
fair written in paper, with wide lines, they are either by some member of the
house publicly presented to the Speaker in the house, with some short speech
setting forth the needfulnesse of a Law in that behalf, or are delivered in
private to the Speaker or the Clarke of the Parliament, to be presented to the
house at some time convenient. And it is in the choice of the party to prefer
his Bill. First, into the Lords house, or the house of Commons which he list,
and as he shall think it may most advantage his cause.

Many times upon the motion of some one of the house (wishing a Law were made
for provision to be had in such a case,) a Committee is purposely appointed by
the house to draw a Bill to that effect; which being done, one of them
presents it to the Speaker.

This is usual in cases of great moment and difficulty.

The Bill for Subsidies is usually drawn by some of the Kings Council, after
the substance thereof, for the number of Subsidies and fifteenes to be granted,
and the times of payment, is first agreed in the house. The preamble thereof
contains the causes of the grant, which is usually drawn by some principal
member of the house, being a selected committees for that purpose.

Bills for the Revivall, Repeal or continuance of Statutes, are usually drawn
by Lawyers being members of the house, appointed thereunto by the house upon
some motion to that purpose made, which is usual at the beginning of every
Parliament.

Private Bills are usually drawn by Counselors at Law not being of the house,
and sometimes by those of the house (and that for their fees) which howsoever
it has been held by some to be lawful, yet it cannot be but very
inconvenient, seeing they are afterward to be Judges in the same cause.

A Bill has been sent to the Speaker signed by the hand of Queen Elizabeth
with special commandment to be expedited, but that is a rare case and very
extraordinary, yet such was her Majesty's favor to Sir Thomas Perrot in a Bill
for his restitution in blood as it appears by the Clerks Iournall 35.
Elizabeth 26. Martii.

Such Bills as being first passed in one house are sent unto the other, are
always sent in parchment fairly engrossed.

Thus much touching the first drawing and presenting of Bills to the Parliament.

Sect. 2.
Orders to be observed in preferring of Bills to be read.
Public Bills are in due course to be preferred in reading and passing before
private: and of public, such as concern the service of God and good of the
Church. Secondly, such as concern the Commonwealth, in which are included
such as touch the person, revenue, or household of the King, Queen or Prince,
and they ought specially to be preferred in passing. Lastly, private Bills
should be offered to be read and passed in such order as they were preferred.

There have been oftentimes orders in the house, that after nine of the
clock, when usually the house grows to be full, they should not be
troubled with the reading of any private Bill: And toward the end of the
Parliament, when there remains many Bills in the house undispatched, there
has been a special Committee appointed to take a survey of them, and to
Marshall them by their titles in such order as they should think fit; they
should be preferred to their passage, having respect to the importance of the
matter which they concern.

It has at sometimes been ordered, that every one that prefers a private
Bill should pay five pound to the poor, which was done 43. Eliz. toward the
end of the Parliament when they were troubled with much business, but it
holds not in other Parliaments.

In the Treatise de modo tenend. Parliamet. which I have seen exemplified
under the great Seal of Ireland in the sixth of Henry the fourth, testifying the
same to have been sent into Ireland by Henry the second, for a form of
holding Parliaments in that Kingdom, of which I have a copy there is (touching
the order of preferring of Bills) this clause found.

Petitiones suntaffilate sicut deliberantur, and sic per or dinem leguntur and
respondiantur, sed prime determinentur quae ad guerram perti nent, postea de
persona Regis and Regine and puris suis, ac gubernationem little and postea de
communibus negotiis terrae; sicut est de legibus faciend. and emendend. ( viz.)
originalibus judicialibus and executoriis post judicium reddit, and post
singulares petitiones secundum quod sunt super filariis.

But the Speaker is not precisely bound to any of these rules for the prefering
of Bills to be read or passed, but is left to his own good discretion (except
he shall be especially directed by the house to the contrary) and howsoever
he be earnestly pressed by the house for the reading of some one Bill; yet if
he have not had convenient time to read the same over, and to make a breviat
thereof for his memory; the Speaker does claim a privilege to defer the
reading thereof to some other time.

And thus much touching the order of preferring of Bills, to be read or passed.
Now follows touching the reading or passing of them.

Sect. 3.
Touching the first reading of Bills.
THE Clarke being usually directed by the Speaker (but sometimes by the house)
what Bill to read, with aloud and distinct voice, first res^eth the title of
the Bill, and then (after a little pause) the Bill it self; which done
(kissing his hand) he delivers the same to the Speaker, who stands up
uncovered (whereas otherwise he sits with his hat on) and (holding the Bill
in his hand) says, this Bill is thus intitn'ed; and then reads the title;
which done, he opens to the house the substance of the Bill, which he does
either, trusting to his memory, or using the help or altogether the reading of
his Breviat, which is filed to the Bill, sometimes reading the Bill it self,
especially upon the passage of a Bill, when it has been much altered by the
Committees, so that thereby it differs very much from the Breviat.

Tertia Sessione 1. Parliament. Iac Reg. It was ordered that the committees
which amended the Bill, should likewise amend the Breviat in the principal
matters for the case and direction of the Speaker.

When he has thus opened the effect of the Bill he declares to the house
that it is the first reading of the Bill, and delivers the same again to the
Clarke.

The Bill containing the Kings general pardon has but one reading in the
Lords house, and one below: The reason is, because the subject must take it as
the King will give it, without any alteration: and yet many times exceptions
are taken at the reading thereof, for that it is not so favorable as in former
times.

The like of the Bill of Subsidies granted by the Clergy.

That day that the Speaker being approved by the King, comes down into the
Commons house to take his place, the custom is to read for that time only one
Bills, left unpast the last sessions, and no more, to give him seisin as it
were of his place, 39. Eliz. 27. Octo.

The usual course is to spend the morning before the house grow full in the
first readings, and to defer the second or third reading till the house grow
full.

At the first reading of the Bill it is not the course for any man to speak to
it, but rather to consider of it, and to take time til the second reading; yet
it is not altogether without president that a Bill has been spoken for, and
against upon the first reading, which is very seldom, and only in cases where
the matter of the Bill is apparently inconvenient and hurtful to the
Commonweal, and so not fitting to trouble the house any longer; but at the
first reading no man in ordinary course should speak to any one part of the
Bill, or for any addition, for thereby it is implied that the body of the Bill
is good, which till the second reading does not regularly come to the trial.

If any Bill originally begun in the Commons house upon the first reading
happen to be debated to and fro, and that upon the debate the house do call
for the question, it ought to be not whether the Bill shall be secondly read,
for so it ought to be of ordinary course, but whether it shall be rejected in
this sort As many as are of opinion that this Bill shall be rejected (say yea)
As many as are of the contrary mind (say no) and the greatest number of voices
shall carry it, 43 Eliz. 17. November. The Bill against unlawful hunting. 5.
Sess. Iac. Reg. 25. October.

If a Bill coming from the Lords be spoken against, and pressed to be put to
the question upon the first reading, the Speaker in favor and respect thereto,
should not make the question for the rejection, as in Bills originally begun
in the Commons house upon the first reading, but should first make the question
for the second reading: And if that be denied, then for rejection. This course
was usually held by Sergeant Phillips when he was Speaker. But usually when any
such debate is upon the first reading of a Bill, the Speaker does forbear to
make any question at all thereupon, except he be much pressed thereto, for that
it were fit better to consider of it before it be put to such a hazard.

If the question for the rejection be made, and the greater voice be to have
it rejected, the Clarke ought to note it rejected in his journall, and so to
indorse it upon the back of the Bill, and it shall be no more read; if the
voice be to have the Bill retained it shall have his second reading in course.

It is against the ordinary course that the same Bill should be read more then
once in one day, yet for special reasons it has been suffered, that private
Bill have been in one day read twice; As in the aforesaid case of Sir Thomas
Perrot though it were a private Bill; so was it likewise done in the Bill for
the assurance of lands given by Master Sutton for charitable uses, because he
was taken then extreme sick, and that it was doubtful whether he might live
while the Bill might have his passage in ordinary course.

And it is likewise done sometimes when the house lacks other businesses
wherein to employ themselves, especially if the Bill be of no great importance,
howsoever it is never but upon motion and special order.

When special Committees appointed for the drawing of some one special Bill,
present the same ready drawn unto the house: it has been often seen that the
same Bill has been not only twice read, but ordered also to be engrossed
the same day as it was in the Bill against counterfeit seals, 23. Eliz. 16.
Feb. And in the Bill against disobedience to the Queen 4. Martii of the same
Parliament.

Neither is it without president that a Bill has been thrice read and passed
in the same day; as was the Bill of recognition of his Majesty's title which
came from the Lords, 1. Iac. Reg. Sess. 1. but this is a president that
stands alone, and in that case it was resolved that the Bill might not be
returned to the Lords without a copy, first taken thereof by the Clarke to be
reserved in the Commons house.

Sect. 4.
Touching the second reading and committing of Bills.
A Bill may be preferred to be secondly read the next day after the first
reading, but the usual course is to forbear for two or 3. days, that men
might have more time to consider upon it, except the nature of the business be
such that it requires haste.

After the Bill is secondly read, the Clarke as before in humble manner
delivers the same to the Speaker, who again reads the Title and his
Breviat as he did upon the first reading, which done, he declares that it
was now the second reading of the Bill, and then he ought to pause a while,
expecting whether any of the house will speak to it, for before the Speaker
has so declared the state of the Bill, no man should offer to speak to it;
and then and not before is the time when to speak.

If after a pretty distance of time no man speak against the Bill for matrer
or form, he may make the question for the engrosing thereof, if it be a Bill
originally exhibited into the Commons house.

So likewise if diverse speak for the Bill without taking exception to the form
thereof, he may make the same question for the ingrosing. The like question
for the ingrosing ought to be made, if the greater voice be that the Bill
shall not be committed, for it were to no end further to delay the proceeding
of the Bill if there be no exception taken to the matter or form thereof, but
upon the second reading, and after the Speaker has dilivered the state
thereof, the house does usually call for the comitting of the Bill, and then if
any man will speak against it either for matter or form, he ought to be heard.

After the first man has spoken, the Speaker ought to rest a while expecting
whether any other man will speak thereto, so ought he likewise to do after
every speech ended, when he perceives that the debate is at an end, he ought
then to make the question for the committing thereof in this sort.

As many as are of opinion that this Bill shall be committed say ( yea.)

And after the affirmative voice given, as many as are of the contrary opinion
say (no.)

And he ought by his ear to judge which of the voices is greatest, if that be
doubtful, the house ought to be divided touching the manner, whereof there
shall be more said in another place.

If upon division of the house it appears that the numbers are equal, the
Speaker has the casting voice upon all questions.

If it appear that the affirmative voice be the greater, then ought he to
put the house in mind touching the naming of Committees, which is done in this
sort.

Every one of the house that list may call upon the name of any one of the
house to be a Committee, and the Clarke ought in his journall to write under
the title of the Bill the name of every one so called upon, at leastwise of
such whose names (in that confusion) he can distinctly hear, and this he
ought to do without partiality either to those that name, or to the party
named. But touching the naming of Committees, and their duties, more shall be
said in another Chapter.

But he that speaks directly against the body of the Bill, may not be named
a Committee, for he that would totally destroy will not amend.

When a convenient number of Committees are named, then ought the Speaker to
put the house in mind to name time and place, when and where the Committees
may meet, which the Clarke ought likewise to enter into his journall book,
and when the house is in silence, he ought with a loud voice to read (out of
his book) the Committees names, and the time and place of the commitment, that
the Committees may take notice thereof.

After a Bill which is sent from the Lords has been twice read, the question
ought to be for the Commitment, if it be denied to be committed, it ought then
to be read the third time, and then the next question ought to be for the
passage and not for the ingrosing, as it is where the Bill originally begins
in the lower house, for Bills which come from the Lords come always engrossed.

This question for the passage should in ordinary course be then made when the
Bill is denied to be committed, but not till the Bill have been read the third
time.

If that question for passage be deferred till another day, it has been much
doubted whether it may then be then offered to the passage; but upon debate of
this point after many arguments to and fro, Anno 27. Eliz. 18. February by the
opinion of Sir Francie Walsingham, then one of the house, and by order of the
whole house it was agreed it might be done.

The Bill then in question was the Bill against fraudulent conveiances. Fol.
85. and 86. in the Clerks book for that year, so it was done 1. Sess. 1.
Parliament. Iac. Regis for the Bill of hunting. But this president is not so
safe, for the house considering that oftentimes the Bill is denied to be
committed upon utter dislike thereof, after it has been long debated; and yet
if that rule should hold, there may be a time picked out of great disadvantage
to the house to put it to question for the passage.

In the debating of Bills in the house no man may speak twice in one day,
except the Bill be oftener read then once, and then a man may speak as often
as the Bill is read, otherwise it is at Committees, or when in the house the
debate arises upon some motion concerning the order of the house; but touching
the manner of speaking, and what orders shall be observed therein, more shall
be said elsewhere.

When the Committes have fully resolved touching the Bill, and the amendments
thereof; one of them by the consent of all the rest ought to make report thereof
to the house, opening the substance of the things amended, and the reasons
thereof; which done, he ought to bring the Bill so amended to the Clarke, and
to stand by the Clarke all the while that the Clarke is reading of
theamendments, and ought to help the Clarke in reading of the same in case it
be difficult to be read, which falls out very often by reason of
interlineing or ill writing.

The Clarke ought to read every amendment and interlineing twice, that so it
may have as many readings as the rest of the Bill has had, and very many times
it will fall out that the inlineing and amendments so read by the Clarke, will
of it self (without reading of the clause going before or following) be no
sense, yet notwithstanding the Clark ought only to read the new amendments
without meddling with any of the rest of the Bill, for it is intended that the
reporter has declared to the house the reason of the amendment, and the
connection thereof to the rest of the Bill to make it sense.

And it has sometimes been permitted (when the amendments have been many,
and ill written) that the whole Bill has been first read, and then the
alterations by themselves.

The Bill of hostile Laws. 3. Sess. 5. Parliamen. Iac. Reg. 4. Iunii 1607.

After the amendments thus read, the Clarke ought to deliver the Bill unto the
Speaker, who ( holding the same in his hand) ought again to read the Title
thereof, and to put the question whether or no it be the pleasure of the house
that the Bill thus amended shall be put to the question for engrossing, and
then ought to pause a while, expecting whether any man will speak to it or no;
for it is as free for any man to speak against the Bill at this time, though
it has passed the approbation of the Committees, as it was at the second
reading before the same was committed.

And after the debate is ended, the Speaker ought to put the question for
engrossing.

If the greater number of voices be that the Bill ought not to be engrossed,
the Clarke ought to make an entry in his journall, that the same was dashed,
and so ought he likewise to note upon the back of the Bill, and the day when.
If the voice be to have it ingrosed, it is the office of the Clarke to do it.

It is always to be observed that when the Bill is ingrosed, the Clarke ought
to indorse the title thereof upon the back of the Bill and not within the Bill
in any case.

So ought likewise such Bills as come from the Lords to have Titles engrossed
upon the back of the Bill, and not within: In defect whereof, diverse Bills
coming from them, have been returned to be amended, As may appear by the
journalls 27. Eliz. 19. December. 13. E. 27. May, 39. E. 24. October. 4. Sess. 1.
Parliament. lac. Reg. 5. Maii.

The Bill as it is Amended by the Committees ought to remain with the Clarke
for his warrant, and it is not an ordinary course to cause the Bill so amended
to be fairly written for the better ingrosing thereof; yet has it been seen
that a Bill ill written in the amendments has been returned to the Committees
to be fairly written, and by them presented to the house; and upon the
reading thereof ingrosed, 27. Eliz. fo. 91. in the journall. At sometimes it
has been ordered that a Bill so written should be proceeded in as a new
Bill, 23. Eliz 28. Feb. 27. Eliz. fo. 91. in the clerks book or journal.

After a Bill has been committed and is reported, it ought not in an ordinary
course to be committed, but either to be dashed or ingrosed; and yet When the
matter is of importance, it is sometimes for special reasons suffered: But
then usually the recommitment is to the same Committees. The Bill against the
Marshall sea, 3. Sess. 1. Parliament. Iac. Reg. 30. April 1607. was committed
and reported and council heard at the bar. Whereupon it was recommitted and
other Committees added who altered the former proceedings, and it was agreed
that the former proceedings were waved, and the latter good.

Sect. 5.
Touching the third reading of Bills.
SOme two or three days after the Bill is thus ordered to be thus ingrosed,
and is accordingly ingrosed; it is offered by the Speaker to be read the third
time for the passage thereof.

For the most part, the Speaker puts not any one Bill to the passage by it
self alone, but staieth till there be diverse Bills ready ingrosed for the
third reading; and when he has a convenient number (which may be five or six,
rather less then more) then he gives notice to the house that he purposes
the next day to offer some Bills to the passage, and desires the house to give
special attendance for that purpose, and then the day following he does
accordingly put them to the third reading. First, private Bills until the
house be grown to some fullness, and then offers to be read the public
Bill which are ingrosed.

It has at sometimes been ordered for the preventing of carrying of Bills,
with few voices, that no Bills shall be put to the passage until nine of the
clock, at which time the house is commonly full, or shortly after.

When the Bill is read the third time, the Clarke delivers it to the Speaker,
who reads the Title thereof, and opens the effect of the Bill, and tells
them that the Bill has now been thrice read, and that (with their favors)
he will put it to the question for the passing, but pauseth a while, that men
have liberty to speak thereto, for upon the third reading the matter is
debated afresh, and for the most part it is more spoken unto this time then
upon any of the former readings.

When the argument is ended the Speaker ( still holding the Bill in his hand)
makes a question for the passage in this sort; As many as are of opinion that
this Bill should pass say yea etc.

If the voice be for the passage of the Bills, the Clarke ought to make a
remembrance thereof in his Journall. If otherwise, then his remembrance must be
made accordingly. Upon the Bill thus passed (if it be the Bill originally
exhibited in the house of Commons) the Clarke ought to write within the Bill on
the top toward the right hand these words Soit baille aux Selgneurs.

If the Bill passed be a Bill originally begun in the Lords house, then ought
the Clarke to write underneath the subscription of the Lords, which always is
at the foot of the Bill, these words, A cest Bille les comuns sont assentus.

There are diverse other forms of signing of Bills, sometimes when new
Additions are made, sometimes when Provisoes are added, of which more ample
mention shall be made in the chapter which treats of the duty of the Clarke.

If the house see cause to amend any thing in a Bill originally begun in the
Commons house upon the third reading thereof, and that the amendment thereof
will not much deface the Bill, nor spend much time, the use is to cause the
Sergeant to call in the Clarke that did ingrose it (being usually a servant to
the Clarke of the house and to cause him standing at the Table, by his master,
in the presence of the whole house, to amend the same according to their
direction. Sometimes if the amendments be but of a few words, it is done by
the Clarke himself, writing of a fair hand.

It has sometimes been seen (which is rarely yeeleded unto, and only in
cases where the Bill to be passed is of good importance) that if a question
grow for the amendment of some clause, or for the making of some addition
thereunto, that it has been recommitted for the amendment thereof: but then
usually the Committees are appointed forthwith to withdraw themselves into the
Commitee Chamber, and presently to dispatch the same.

The Bill concerning Rites and Ceremonies, at the third reading was referred to
be farther conside. red of, 14. Elizab. 20 Maii, and in 43. Elizab. 2.
Decembr. The Bill to avoid double payment of dibts, 13. Sess.1. Parliament.
Iac. Reg. Master Bathwests Bill being ready for the question to pass, was
deferred for eight days, that the other part might have notice, and then
passed without further opening. Quod nota.

No Bill upon the third reading for the matter or body thereof, may be
recommitted, as has been said, but for some particular clause or proviso it
has bin some times suffered; and that difference was taken for a rule in the
Bill for Seasands, 4. Sess. 4. Maii 1610. In the third Sessions of the first
Parliament of King James, 12. die Maii, the Bill of clothing being engrossed,
and read the third time, exception was taken to the last proviso thereof,
whereupon after much debate it was recommitted; which is to be observed as a
thing unusual after the third reading.

The next day if was returned again by the Committees, with their opinions
that they held it fit that a proviso therein should be struck out; whereupon
the question grew whether the proviso being put to the question alone, and
rejected, the whole Bill should not be dashed, thereby at last resolved no;
whereupon the proviso being put to the question and rejected, it was ordered it
should be razed out of the Bill, which was presently done at the board, by the
Clarke, and the Bill was put to the question, and so passed. The like in the
Bill concerning Wherrymen the same Session, 18. Maii 1607.

It has been much doubted, whether when a Bill is in debate for the passage,
it ought not to receive the resolution of the house the same day wherein it is
first offered to the passage, but there have of late been some presidents,
where the case being of some importance, and the debate growing long, the
argument has been put over till the day following, in which case he that
has already spoken to the Bill the fist day, may not again speak the second,
no more then he may speak twice in one day where the argument is not deferred
to another day.

If a Bill be rejected, the same Bill may not be offered to the house again
the same Session; but if it be altered in any point material both in the body
and in the title, it may be received the second time.

In the time of the reading of a Bill, the house should not be interrupted
with any other business, and yet in 1. Eliz. 24. Maii, the house adjourned it
self till the next day, after the Bill for sealing clothes was half read,
only to be present at the conference about Religion in Westminster Abbey.

Sometimes the house conceiving much offense against some Bills, does not only
order it to be rejected, but to be torn in the house; as it was done in the
Bill to avoid Aliens not being here for Religion; 1. Eliz. 23. Iannar.

It has been seen that two Bills being apt to be joined together, have by
order of the house, after they have been twice read, ordered to be engrossed
as one Bill, and so passed, which is somewhat strange, for that both being made
into one Bill, it is thereby become a new Bill; nevertheless it was so done in
two Bills concerning Treason, 13. Eliz. 26. Apr.

When a Bill is thrice read and passed in the house, there ought to be no
further alteration thereof in any point. Nevertheless if it do appear that
there be some apparent mistakings therein, either by false writing, or
otherwise, the house upon notice thereof has caused the same to be amended the
day following, and reading the amendments three times, have again passed the
Bill upon the question, which is a rare president; yet was it so done 23. Eliz.
20. Ianuarii, Popham being Speaker, which is a memorable case.

Anno 23. Eliz. 14. Martii, the Lords sentdown a Bill touching the maintenance
of the borders of Scotland, the house proceeds with another Bill to the same
effect, the Lords complains that it is against order so to doc, without praying
a conference with them which was spoken by the Lords at a conference and
answered by the Committees of the Commons house, they might lawfully so do.

Sect. 6.
Touching Provisoes, Schedules, Amendements, and amendments of Amendements.
TOuching the offering and passing of Provisoes, the course is thus; If any man
will offer a Provisoe to a Bill originally begun in the Commons house, it ought
to be offered in paper as long as the Bill it self is not ingrosed; but when
the Bill is once ingrosed it ought to be offered in parchment, and not in paper.

If a Provisoe or Schedule of addition, be offered to any Bill coming from
the Lords at first or second reading, it must be offered in paper and not in
parchment, though the Bill be a Bill ingrosed, for that it may receive much
amendment at the Committee, and when it is together with the Bill returned to
the Committees, there ought to be a special question made by the Speaker
whether the Provisoe shall be ingrosed, if it be denied, he may put the Bill to
the passage at the third reading without the Provisoe, if otherwise, then he
ought to deliver the Provisoe to be ingrosed, and some other day when the
Provisoe is ingrosed must put the question upon the passage.

If it be offered at the first reading to a Bill begun in the Commons house,
which is seldom, it ought to be but once read at that time, and so filed to
the Bill; If at the second reading it ought to be read twice as the Bill it
self has been, and ought to be committed together with the Bill; if it be
offered at the third reading, the Bill being ingrosed, it ought to be read
three times before the question be put for the passage of the Bill; but after
every several reading thereof, the Clarke ought to pause a while to give men
time to speak thereto: many times upon the second reading it is spoken unto,
and sometimes committed or amended at the Board, sometimes rejected without
more reading: upon the third reading thereof the question ought to be made
whether or no the house does think fit to annex that Proviso to the Bill read,
which question ought to be made singly upon the Proviso, and afterward the
question ought to be made for passage of the Bill, together with the Proviso
annexed. If the Bill with the Proviso annexed do pass upon the third reading,
the Clark ought to sign the same in this sort upon the Bill toward the right
hand. Soit baille Anx Seigneurs ave^.
que un provission annex.
And ought to sign the Proviso it self. Soit baille anx Seigneurs.

The like rules here given for Provisors are to be observed, when any Addition
(which always contains in it another clause) or branch of the Bill, is
desired to be enacted, and offered by any of the house, with this difference,
that whereas the Clark in case of a Proviso makes mention of the Proviso
annexed, he ought in this case to write avec^ un Schedule annex, for that which
contains an Addition, is called a Schedule. After a question propounded in
the affirmative, upon the passage of a Bil, and before the question for the
negative part, a Proviso was offered, and judged to be received, 1. Iacobi 13.
Iun. 1604. Such Bills as come from the Lords, have their passage in the Commons
house by three readings, as well as those that originally begun, there when
they are committed, and the Committee see cause to make some amendment in them,
they ought not to interline, or raze, or make any other alteration in the Bill
it self, as they do in their own Bills, but in a paper thereto annexed they
ought to express in what line, and between what words they desire the
amendments to be made, which they ought to return up to the house. If upon
the report thereof, the house shall approve the doings of the Committees, then
ought the Bill with the Paper affixed, to be sent to the Lords house, to be
accordingly amended by the Lords, if they shall so think good. So likewise
ought the Lords to do where they desire alterations in any Bill passed from
the Commons house unto them. And in this case after the amendments read three
times, the question ought first to be put whether the amendments shall
accordingly be assented unto. Secondly, for the passage of the Bill, which the
amendments (if it pass) the Clark ought to sign it in these words underneath,
the signing of the Lords at the foot of the Bill. Acest bille avecque les
amendments les comuns one assentus.

When the Lords send down amendments they ought to be read two times, and
then if excepted unto, put to the question for the committing. If they be
approved by the Committees, and so reported then ought the question to be put
for the amendment of the Bill accordingly.

Anno 29. Eliz. 25. December. the Bill touching laborers, passing first from the
commons house, was sent from the Lords with amendments in parchments, and the
parchments formally indorsed, Solt baille aux comuns; to which, exception being
taken, there was much contention about it between the houses, and Presidents
sought up, and at last resolved it ought to be in paper without any indorsement
at all; otherwise it is where there is a Schedule of additions, or a Proviso
annexed, for they ought always to be sent in parchment; the journall book in
this place handles this point at large.

If there be cause to make alteration in some Proviso or Schedule sent from
the Lords, the amendment ought to be tendered in paper, and so passed to the
Lords, 3. Sess. Iac. Reg. 30. Iunii.

If besides the amendments a Proviso be added thereunto or a Schedule of
additions, there ought to be mention thereof made by the Clarke in the signing
of the Bill.

If the Commons house pass a Bill sent from the Lords with some additions by
way of Schedule (which ever contains some new clause or entire branch added
to the Bill) or with some Proviso to be added thereto, the same ought to be
signed as a new Bill. Soit baille aux Segneurs.

For the omission of which the Lords conceiving that they have not had warrant
to proceed, thereupon, have returned the same to the Commons house to be
amended, and the same has been reformed accordingly, in the Bill against
scandalous rumors, 23. Eliz. 8. Maii.

If the Lords do absolutely disallow of any thing required by the Commons
house to be put out, or of any addition or alteration to be made by way of
amendment, the Bill can then have no further proceeding; for if the Commons say
put out, and the Lords say let it stand as it was, the same being before
determined by question in the Commons house, cannot be brought to the question
again, 23. Eliz 9. Mar. The Bill of scandalous Rumors etc. But if the Lords
for explanation of such a sentence as is in question, do add words to the
additions of the Commons, without putting out of any part of that which is
required to be added or altered by the Commons, the same being set down in
writing by the Lords, and sent to the Commons, together with the Bill, if the
Commons do allow thereof, they are to add the words required by the Lords
paper, and to insert the same into their own paper, and so return the same to
the Lords; who thereupon ought to enter it into their Bill ingrosed, and so the
Bill has his passage. The like in all points mutatis mutandis, in Bills
originally, begun in the Commons house, and sent to the Lords; but if to the
Bill coming from the Lords, any Proviso or entire new matter be added by the
Commons (because it is adjudged as a new Bill) and has not been at the
question in both houses, the Lords may by their paper require to have part
thereof put out, or may offer additions thereunto, which being returned to the
Commons, and they giving allowance thereof, they are accordingly to amend the
same in their own house, without sending it back to be amended by the Lords;
for amendments ought always to be in that house from whence the thing to be
amended originally proceeds; though the directions for the amendments came
from the other house; and so mutatis mutandis, in Provisoes or other entire
additions required by the Lords to be added to any Bill proceeding from the
Commons: And it is held for a general rule, that neither house may of
themselves put out any thing which they have before passed, otherwise then
requested by the house which has not passed the same: In the Parliament 31.
Eliz. when Mr. Snagge was Speaker, It was usual when either house desired the
clear passage of any Bill sent unto them from the other house, in which they
though fit to make alterations to acquaint the house from whom it came, with
the alterations which they intended to make, and to desire to know their
willingness thereto, thereby to prevent the hazard of the Bill; If perhaps
they should make alterations not approved of. In like sort they sometimes used
conferences only, to prevent the casting away of Bills for some small
difference about the amendments. See for this the Clerks book of the
Parliament 21. Martii, and 27 Elizab. 10. Martii; the Bill against Jesuits: The
like 23. Eliz. 17. Martii, the Bill against seditious rumors. Anno 23. Eliz.
24. Martii, In the Bill for the better government of Westminster, the Commons
at the request of the Lords do alter their own amendments. The like was done
by the Lords at the request of the Commons upon a conference for that purpose.
In the Bill of Hostile Laws, 3. Sess. 1. Parliament. Iac. Reg. 29. Iunii 27.
Eliz 22. Feb. The Lords by a message without any paper sent unto them, have
been prayed by the Commons house to amend the sense of some of their
amendments, that so the house might further proceed there with all, which has
accordingly been performed, and then their amendments have been considered,
allowed and returned, 23. Eliz. 17. Martii, In the Bill touching Scottish
orders.

In the Bill against vagabonds 13. Eliz. It was resolved that certain words
required by the Lords to be put out, should not be put out of the Bill, but
stayed still in the same, qualified with other words, with condition that if
the Lords should not agree to the said qualification, the house would not be
bound by the said resolution, which was done of purpose to avoid the hazard of
the Bill, in case the Lords should not agree thereto.

When amendments of any Bill coming from the Lords are returned by the
Committees or otherwise added by the house, they ought presently to be read
three times before they be put to the passage with the Bill. In the Parliament
13. Eliz. at the third reading of a Bill which came from the Lords, an addition
in paper was by question affiled to it, the addition having been but once
read, the Bill was put to the question, and the house divided upon the passage,
the error being espied, after long argument thereupon, the additions were
ordered to be read twice more, and the Bill was again put to the question and
passed: this was the Bill against taking up of previsions within 5. miles of
Oxford, which passed 25. May, in the Parliament Anno 2. and tertio P. and M.
the Bill for exactions at musters, had a Proviso annexed by the Commons house,
and the Lords returned the Bill, desiring the Proviso annexed might be taken
off, and a new devised by themselves put in place thereof.

Anno 27. Eliz. 5. Feb. The Lords having made additions to a Bill passed from
the Commons house, the Commons pray conference with them, and desire that they
themselves may have leave to make a further addition to their own Bill, or
that the Lords would be pleased to supply the same with an addition of theirs,
which the Lords refused to do, because they found no such president, Anno 27.
Eliz. Fol. 81. In the Iournall, The Bill against fraudulent conveiances passed
from the Lords, was upon the second reading refused by the house to be
committed; whereupon the Lords craved a conference, and showed it was a Bill
which her Majesty called her Bill, drawn by the Council, with the advice of
her Judges, and therefore wondered at the proceedings of the house, and
concluded that they expected and desired that the house would take it into
their further consideration; afterward the house by a special Committee
praying their Lordshippes to join in petition to the Queen about matters of
Religion, causing the messengers to stay in the painted Chamber, after a while
sent out unto them the chief Justice and others to tell them, that when they
received an answer from the house touching the Bill of fraudulent conveiances,
the house should have an answer touching the petition.

An. 27. Eliz. 10. Mar. Fo. 130. in the Iournall to the Bill against Jesuits,
which passed from the the Commons house, there were some amendments desired to
be made by the Lords, the Commons by message desire the Lords to reform their
desired amendments in some points, which the Committees for the Lords thought
could not be done by order; but the Commons house resolved it might be well
helped by a Proviso in the Commons house, and chose rather to take the course,
then further to urge their Lordships therein.

Anno 27. Eliz. 13. Mar. The Bill touching the sabbath, which upon diverse
conferences of the houses, received diverse additions, alterations and
amendments of amendements, and by that means was much defaced, was sent down
by the Lords and prayed by them that it might be new written, which was done,
and so it passed again in both the houses.

Anno 25. Eliz. 31. Mar. The Bill against popish recusants, first passing from
the Lords, was returned with amendments, which the Lords aseented to, and sent
down the same again amended by them accordingly; And also a Proviso annexed
thereto to be passed, if the house should think good, which was yielded to;
and the Proviso being thrice read, was with the Bill passed accordingly, 6. Apr.

This is a very remarkable president, that a Proviso should be added by them
who first passed the Bill, and not to have any reference to any alteration or
amendment inserted by direction from the other house.

When amendments are desired by the Lords to a Bill past from the lower house,
and thrice read, the question ought to be whether the house will be pleased to
admit of those amendments, and that being yielded unto, the Bill it self ought
not again to be put to the question.

If it be resolved to allow the amendments, the alterations are usually made by
the Clerks servants sitting without the Parliament door, according to the
direction in paper annexed to the Bill, and the Clarke is trusted with the
examination thereof.

In the fourth session of the first parliament of king James, it was conceived
by some of the commens house, that by reason that Bills which are passed in
both houses and oftentimes razed in either house, and no mention made any where
of such razures lawfully made, that it might give occasions to persons ill
disposed, to make razures in Bills past, much to the prejudice of the Common
wealth; it was therefore moved that the L. Chancellor for the upper house, who
supplies the place of Speaker there, and the Speaker in the house of Commons
should subscribe their hands to every Bill so razed; and that mention should
be made upon the Bill of all the razures therein, but this motion was not
further prosecuted.

Sect. 7.
Touching the sending of Bills from one house to the other.
WHEN the Speaker has in his hands a convenient number of Bills ready passed,
as five or six or thereabouts, he then puts the house in mind of sending
them up to the Lords, and desires the house to appoint messengers, who
accordingly do appoint some one principal member of the house for that
purpose, to whom the Bills are delivered in such order as he ought to present
them to the Lords, which is done by direction of the Speaker, except the house
be pleased to give special direction therein.

The order which has usually been observed in ranking of them, is first to
place them that came originally from the Lords.

Secondly, those that being sent up unto the Lords from the Commons house, were
sent back to be amended.

Thirdly, public Bills originally coming from the Commons house, and they to
be marshalled according to their degrees in consequence.

Lastly, are to be placed private Bills in such order as the Speaker pleases.

Many times the house (with a purpose specially to grace some one Bill) sends
it alone sometimes with a special recommendation thereof. The messenger for
this purpose is usually attended by thirty or forty of the house, as they
please and are affected to the business.

In the Parliament Anno 31. Eliz. Mar. A private Bill for the relief of one
Thomas Haselridge, being passed, the Commons house was sent up only with four
or 5. messengers, to which the Lords taking exceptions, returned the Bill,
saying, they had cause to doubt that it passed not with a general consent of
the house; because it passed not graced with a greater number, and left it to
the consideration of the house, to send it back in such sort as was fit. The
principal messenger which delivers the Bills to the Lords coming in the
first rank of his company to the Bar of the Lords house, with three congees
tells the Lords, that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons
house, have sent unto their Lordships certain Bills, and then reading the title
of every Bill as it heth in order, so delivers the same in an humble manner
unto the Lord Chancellor, who of purpose comes to the Bat to receive them.

Bills sent from the Lords to the Commons house, if they be ordinary Bills, are
sent down by Sergents at Law, or by two Doctors of the civil Law, being
Masters of the Chancery, and being attendants in the upper house, accompanied
sometimes with the Clarke of the Crown an attendant there.

Bills of greater moment are usually sent down by some of the Judges
assistants, there accompanied with some of the Masters of the Chancery, who
being admitted entrance, do come up close to the table where the Clarke
sits, making three congies, and there acquainting the Speaker that the Lords
have sent unto the house certain Bills, does read the Titles and delivers
the Bills to the Speaker, and so again departs with three congies; when they
are out of the house, the Speaker holds the Bills in his hands and
acquainteth the house that the Lords by their Messengers have sent to the house
certain Bills, and then reading the Title of every Bill, delivers them to
the Clarke to be safely kept, and to be read when they shall be called for.

Bills originally preferred to the Lords house, have such proceeding in that
house in all points, as Bills preferred to the Commons house have there, only
when any question is made in the Lords house, the trial thereof is by saying
content or not content, and if that be doubtful, then by telling the Poles,
without dividing the house.

Sect. 8.
Touching the Royal Assent.
WHEN Bills are thus passed by both the houses upon three several readings in
either house, they ought (for their last approbation that so like to silver
they may be seven times purified) to have the Royal Assent, which is usually
deferred till the last day of the Session; But it may be given at any time
during the Parliament; touching which it has been much doubted, and oftentimes
debated, whether the Royal Assent given to any one Bill, does not ipso facto
conclude that present Session, which question is of great consequence; for if
thereby the Session be at an end, then ought every other Bill not having the
Royal Assent (though it has passed both the houses) to be again read three
times in either house, and to have the same proceedings as at first, as if
nothing had been formerly done therein; so must it be of all other Acts of
the house. But in the last Session of the first Parliament of King James, the
house being then desirous to have a Bill to be forthwith passed, declared,
that the Royal Assent to one Bill or more, did not dissolve the Session
without some special declaration of his Majesty's pleasure to that purpose, 8.
April 1604. in the Journall.

So likewise it appears by the Iournall 1. and 2. Phil. and M. 21. November,
that the King and Queen came of purpose into the Parliament house to give
their Assent to Cardinal Pooles Bill. And upon question made, it was then
resolved by the whole house that the Session was not thereby concluded, but
that they might proceed in their business, notwithstanding the Royal Assent
given, but for more security it is usual to insert a Proviso to that purpose.

At the giving the Royal assent it is not requisite that the King be present
in person for by express words of the Stat. of 33 of Hen.8. Ca.21. The Kings
Royal assent by his letters pattents under the great Scale signed by his hand,
and declared and notified in his absence to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and to the Commons assembled in the higher house, is and ever was of as good
strength and force, as though the person of the King had been there personally
present, and had assented openly and publicly to the same; According to which
Statute the Royal Assent was given by commission, Anno 38. Hen. 8. unto the
Bill for the Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk, and very oftentimes since.

The Royal Assent is given in this sort: After some solemnities ended, of
which mention shall be made in the Chapter which treats of the conclusion of
the Parliament, the Clarke of the Crown reads the Title of the Bills in such
order as they are in consequence, after the Title of every Bill is read, The
Clarke of the Parliament pronounces the Royal Assent, according to certain
instructions given him from his Majesty in that behalf.

If it be a public Bill to which the King assenteth, the answer is Le Roy
leveult.

If a private Bill allowed by the King, the answer is, Soit fait come il est
desire

If a public Bill (which the King forbeareth to allow) Le Roy se avisera.

To the Subsidy Bill, Le Roy remercy ses Loaulx Subjectes accept lout
benevolence, et auxy le veult.

To the general pardon, Les Prelates, Seigneurs et Commons en cest Parliament
assembles au nom de touts vous auters subjecte temoreient treshumblement vostre
Majesty, et prient dieu vous doner en sante, bone vie, et long.

And thus much concerning passing of Bills according to the modern practice:
In ancient times the practice was much differing as elsewhere shall be
declared; but that ancient order as it was nothing so curious as this, so was
it not so safe for the Subject, as by comparing both together will easily
appear.

A report of diverse memorable passages between has Houses in the Parliament
18. Eliz. concerning the adding of a proviso by the Commons, unto a Bill sent
to the Lords, ingrosed and signed by the Queen, and passed by the Lords for the
restitution in blood of a certain Lord, and sent down by Lords to the house of
Commons.
A Noble Lord, whose Father was attainted of murder, (and thereby his blood
corrupted) made suite to the Queen to be restored in blood by Parliament,
which she inclined unto, and in declaration of her good liking thereof, signed
his Bill ingrosed, which passed the Lords house, and was sent down to the
Commons.

The Bill upon the second reading by some was impugned, through mistake of the
person, and by some others, for that there wanted a Proviso for purchasors from
his Father and other Ancestors.

To the first, it was answered, that seeing her Majesty had signed the Bill, no
doubt she was satisfied touching the person, and he being a young Noble man
there was great hope of him.

To the second, that if the saving (which was already in the Bill) were not
sufficient, there might be other provision.

The Bill was committed, and the Committees thought to add a Proviso to bar
the Lord, that he should not take advantage of any errors in any fine or other
conveiance by his Father or Ancestors, but should be in that case as though
his blood were not restored, in which state he can bring no writ of error: The
occasion of which Proviso grew chiefly, for that the Lords had within few
days before in this Session dashed a Bill that passed in the Commons house for
the helping of such errors; whereupon they thought it dangerous to give that
scope to any man that should be restored in blood; and therefore they added
such a Proviso both in this Bill and other Bills of the like kind.

The said Lord endeavored by his council to satisfy the Committee, that the
saving in the Bill was sufficient without a new Proviso; but they being not
satisfied therewith, he procured a message from the Lords to the Commons, that
the Bill might pass in such sort as was signed by the Queen without any
addition, which they thought could not be made without the consent of her
Majesty, which message was sent after the Committees had agreed upon the
Proviso, and reported the same to the house. The Commons took this manner of
dealing to be very strange, not having heretofore received any such message
from the Lords tending to prescribe them what they should do in the actions of
that Council, and notwithstanding that message intended to proceed as they had
begun.

The next day the Lord procured another message from the Lords, desiring a
meeting and conference with the Commons about it, which message the Commons
conceiving it to be strange to be in this manner pressed, they gave the Bill a
third reading, and the new Proviso as the course is, and so sent up the Bill to
the Lords with the Proviso annexed, with one other Bill.

Herewith the Lords were greatly moved, and the same afternoon sent a message
to the Commons house by Mr. Justice Munson, and Sergeant Barham, that some of
them should come to speak with certain of the Lords in such matters as they
had to say to them, and to the Commons house; according to which message
certain of the Commons house were appointed, and did give attendance on the
morrow morning between 8. and nine of the clock in the painted chamber,
sending in word by the Usher of their being there.

The Lords, after a great pause, at last came fotrh into the painted chamber;
the number of them were many, and the persons of the principal Noblemen of
that house, after they had taken their places at a long table, and used some
conference amongst themselves, they called for those of the Commons house, to
whom the Lord Treasurer in the name of all the rest present and absent, said in
effect;

That the Lords of the upper house could not but greatly mislike the dealing of
the Commons house in their passage of that Bill, especially for that they had
passed the Bill with a Proviso annexed, notwithstanding their sundry messages
sent to them in his favor; and lastly, one message to have conference with
them for resolution of such doubts as were moved; wherein they took themselves
greatly touched in honor, and thought that the Commons house did not use that
reverence toward them as they ought to do: The cause besides, (he said) was
such as they saw no reason why the Commons house should proceed in that order,
for the Bill being signed by her Majesty (he said) none might presume to alter
or add any thing to it without the assent of her Majesty, which they for their
parts durst not to do; for proof whereof he showed the Committees sundry
provisoes in King H. 8 time annexed to the like Bill signed by the King,
inferring thereby that none might pass otherwise; moreover he said that by the
opinion of the Judges which were in the upper house; the saving which was in
the Bill was so sufficient as there needed no addition of such Proviso as the
Commons house have annexed; and therefore required them to know what reasons
did lead them to proceed in this order.

This and some other large speeches being uttered to this end the Committees
answered, that their commission was only to hear whit their Lordshippes would
say, they would return and make report to the House, and so attend upon them
again with answer.

When this was reported to the Commons house, it moved them all greatly, and
gave occasion of many arguments and speeches, all' generally misliking that
kind of dealing with them, and thinking their liberty much trenched on in three
points: One that they might not alter or add to any Bill signed by the Queen;
Another that any conference should be looked for, the Bill remaining with them,
except themselves saw cause to desire it: And the third, to yield a reason why
they paffed the Bill in that sort.

After all these things were sufficiently debated, an answer was agreed upon to
be returned to the Lords by the same Committees, and they gave their
attendance upon the same Lords in the same place, to whom was said in effect,
by one of the Committees, and by the consent of the rest,

That they had delivered to the Commons house the sense of that which their
Lordships had said unto them, which as they had conceived did stand upon two
parts; One on the manner of their proceeding in this case; And the other on the
matter wherein they had proceeded.

To both which they had commission from the house to make unto their Lordships
this answer:

First, That they were very sorry, that their Lordships had conceived such an
opinion of the house as though they had forgotten their duty to them, praying
their Lordships to think that the Commons house did not want consideration of
the Superiority of their honorable estate, in respect of their honorable
calling, which they did acknowledge with all humbleness, protesting that they
would yield unto their Lordships all dutiful respects, so far as the same was
not prejudicial to the liberties of their house, which it behooveth them to
leave to their posterities in the same freedom they have received them.

And touching the particular case, the manner of their proceedings (as they
think) has not bin any waits undutifull or unseemly.

For the Bill being sent from their Lordships to the Commons house received
there (within little space) two readings, and because upon the second reading,
some objections were made to let the course of the Bill, the house thought fit
to commit it, which does show that they had no disposition to overthrow the
Bill, but to further it, both in respect of her Majesty's signature and that it
came passed from their Lordships; and whether the Lord whom it concerned had
cause or not to think himself favorably used in being heard by the
Comittees, with his learned council they referred to their Lordships
judgments. That after the Committees report of their doings the house gave the
Bill a third reading, and so passed the same in such sort as now their
Lordships hear it notwithstanding their sundry messages to the contrary. And
lastly, notwithstanding their message of conference, They said they could not
otherwise have done without breach of their liberties, for they took the order
of Parliament to be that when a Bill is passed in either house, that house
wherein the Bill remains may desire conference with the house that passed the
Bill, if they think good, but not otherwis;e; and this Bill passing from the
Lords to the Commons house, they might desire conference, but not their
Lordships, the Bill passing from themselves.

And thus much for the manner of their proceedings touching the matter wherein
they have proceeded, in that they annexed a proviso to this Bill, the same
being signed with her Majesty's hand, they thought they might lawfully do it
without offense to her Majesty, taking her signature to be only a
recommendation of the cause to both the houses, without which they could not
treat of any Bill of that nature, the house not being thereby concluded, but
that they might alter or add any thing that should be thought meet either for
her Majesty or the subject: which proviso they have delivered upon good
consideration, not hastily and inconsiderately, but upon great and sufficient
reasons moving them, praying their Lordship so to conceive it: Nevertheless to
declare the reasons in particular to their Lordships as they were required on
that part, the house desired their Lordships to bear with them, for that were
to yield an account of their doings of things passed in their house, which they
could not in any wise agree unto, being so prejudicial to their liberties.

This speech finished, the committees were willed by the Lords to return unto
the nether end of the Chamber, and after some pause and consultation amongst
the Lords, they called again the Committees, and to them was said by the Lord
Treasurer, that the Lords had considered the answer that the Committees had
brought to them from the Commons house, and touching the first part thereof, he
said that although through such information as was given them, they might have
cause to conceive amiss of the house in the manner of their proceedings, yet
because themselves were the truest reporters of their own actions, and the best
interpreters of their own meanings, the Lords did therefore accept thereof and
rested satisfied with the same.

But touching the other part, he once again pressed the Committees to show
cause why the house added that Proviso which the Lords took to be suspicious;
the Bill (as he said) containing in it a saving that was sufficient for all
causes that might happen.

To that was said by one of the Committees, that they, humbly thanked their
Lordships that it pleased them to accept of their answers to the first part;
but for the second which concerned the matter it self, and the reasons that
moved the house, he said the Committees had no further authority to deal in,
having only commission to deliver to their Lordships the answers which they
received from their house.

Whereupon the Assembly brake up, the Lords returning to the higher house, and
the Committees to their house, where at their coming, one of them reported
their whole proceedings with the Lords, where with the house was much
satisfied, seeing that so great a storm was so well calmed, and the liberties
of the house preserved; which otherwise in time to come might have been
prejudiced in those three points before remembered which are indeed if they be
well considered of great weight and importance.

The Bill (as it appeared after) passed no further; the Lords notliking the
Proviso, nor the Commons house yielding to the withdrawing of it, for the
causes before declared.

Concerning amendments of Bills in the Iournall of 31. Hen. 8.
Die veneris 23. die Maii existen. 15. Parliamenti.
A Bill passed both houses in one day.
HOdie per dominum vicegerent. quedam introducta est Billa concedens Reg.
Majestati authoritatem constituendi Episcopos in diversis locis hujus Regni
sui, quae quidem Billa prima secunda and tertia vice lecta traditur Regis
Attornato in domum communem deferend and immediate per ipsos de domo commun^
relata and expedita.

Die Martis 24. die Junii 20. die Parliamenti post proroga. etc.
A Bill by assent amended after it had passed both houses.
MEmorandum quod hodierno die, concordatum est inter Proceros and Co^munes,
quod cum in Billa concernente stabiliamentum opinionum inactitatum sit ut
hujusmodi sacerdotes qui ante hac uxores duxerint easdem ante festum Sancti
Iohannis Baptiste, (qui hodierno die est) repudiarent, ut nunc alter dies illis
ad easdem repudiend. limitaretur, qui eft duodecimus dies instantis mensis
Junii, and ut eadem billa indicta sententia raderetur and emendaretur. Quod
nota.

Die Sabbati 28. die Junii 24. die Parliamen. post prorog. etc.
Concerning the adding of a Proviso by the Commons to a Bill by them sent up.
MEmorandum quod immediate post decessum prefati Willielmi Kingston and
aliorum, Richardus Rich Miles (ancellarius augmentationis reventionum coronae
domini Regia, and alii de domo inferiori proceribus declaraverunt eos Regiam
Majestatem convenisseillique supplicasse quatenus eis liceret annectere billae
concernenti punitionem eorundem qui accipitres, damas, aut cuniculos ue
Majestati pertinentes furaciter capient, provisione quandam limitantem tempus
accusationis per transgressoribus ejusdem Billae Regiamque Majestare eis
petitionem suam hac in part concessisse verum priusquam in domum Communem
reversi sint dictam Billam per Willielm. Kingstone, militem and alios ad
Proceres fuisse allata^. Itaque prefatus Richardus Proceres (nomine
Communitatis) rogavit, ut vel predictam Billam illis remitterent ut illi
hujusmodi provisionem eidem annecterent, aut ut illis placeret talem
provisionem componere, and eam dictae Billae annex. in dom. Communi mittere,
cui per dominum Canc. ex assensu Procerum responsum est, quod si prefatus
Richardus hujusmodi provision. componeret eandemque Proceribus afferret, illi
circa eandem procederent, prout inde causam cernerent.

A Catalogue of the Names of the Speakers of the Commons house of PARLIAMENT.
IN the reign of William Rufus, there was a great Council or Parliament held
at Rockingham, as may be collected out of the History of Eadmerus, for he
terms the same, Totius Regni Adunatio, and says, that a certain Knight
came forth and stood before the people, and spoke in the name and behalf of
them all, whereby the mind and consent of the people was understood, who (as
is conceived) was the Speaker of the Commons; but the author names him not;
this is mentioned only because of the antiquity thereof.

Petrus de Mountford. 44 H.3.
That he was Speaker of the house of Commons may be collected out of the
Register of Saint Albane Fol. 207. where it is said, that he Vice totius
communitatis consented to the banishment of Adomar de Valence Bishop of
Winchester, by which also it may be conceived that the Lords and the Commons in
that time sat in several houses, or at leastwise gave their assents severally.

Scroope. 6. Ed.3. Monsi. William Trussell. 13. Ed. 3.
The Commons answer by his mouth, and therefore it is conceived he was their
Speaker, though not so named in the record.

Sir Peter de la Mare. 49. Ed 3. Sir Thomas Hungerford. 51.Ed.3.
This is the first named Speaker upon Record 51. Ed. 3. n. 89.

Sir Pierce de la Mare. 1. Rich.2. Sir James Pickering. 2. Rich.2. Sir John
Goldesborough 3. R.2. Sir John Goldesborough 4. R.2. Sir Richard Walgrave.
5.Rich.2.
He was the first that made excuse, desiring to be discharged (for ought
appearing in Record) but the King commanded him upon his allegiance to except
the place, seeing he was chosen by the Commons.

Sir James Pickering. 6. Rich.2.
No Speaker recorded from 6. R. 2. to 17.

Sir John Bushye 17. Rich.2.
He was presented to the King in full Parliament by the Commons, the first I
find so presented, he was a special Minion to the King.

Sir John Bushey. 20. Rich.2.
There are many P^^^ Roll. of R. 2. which men^o^ no Speaker as 11, 13, 14, 15,
16, 18.

Sir John Bushey. 21. Rich.2.
This Parliament was held in the Palace yard of Westminster, in a long house,
built with timber of purpose, left open at both ends, both the houses fate
together therein, an especial place made for the Speaker: the cause of this
extraordinary meeting was the impeachment of the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl
of Arundell and Warwick.

Sir John Cheyney. 1. H.4.
He is styled in the Roll not only Parlour, but Procurator de les Commons; the
next day after he was presented he grew sick, and the Commons made choice of
Mr. John Darwood in his place, and yet he came up with the Commons to the
Lords house, and prayed to be discharged by reason of this infirmity,
declaring whom the Commons had made choice of, and prayed he might be
accepted, which was granted, and he made the like protestation as Sir John
Cheyney had done, which was that he might have liberty to amend any mistaking
in that which he should deliver from the Commons, and made none of the other
requests now usual.

lohn Dorwood Esquire. 1. H.4.
He made no excuse, for ought appears.

Sir Arnold Savage. 2. H.4.
The first time appearing upon any Record that the Commons were required by the
King to choose a Speaker, but afterward it is still continued, only omitted
16. of Henry the fourth.

Sir Henry de Redeford. 4. H.4. Sir Arnold Savage. 5. H.4.
After he had made the ordinary protestation concerning his owns mistakings, he
further desired the King in the names of the Commons that they might freely
make complaint of any thing amiss in the government, and that the King by the
sinister information of any person would not take offensively that which they
should complain of in that behalf: which petition was yielded unto by the
King, 5. H. 5.11.8.

Sir William Sturmy. 6. H.4. Sir John Cheyney. 6. H.4.
Parliamentum indoctorum, so called because in the writ of summons there was a
clause no Lawyer should be chosen.

Sir John Tibtoft 7. H.4.
He desired to be discharged, because of his youth, but he was nevertheless
allowed of, but having forgotten to make the usual protestations upon the day
of his allowance; he came up the next day and made it, and added further
(which never any Speaker did before or since) that if any writing were
delivered by the Commons, this Parliament and they should desire to have it
again to amend any thing therein, it might be restored to them, which was
granted, R. Pav. 7. H. 4 n. 6. he was the son of John Lord Tiptoft, and in
the tenth year of Henry the fourth was made Lord Treasuret of England, and
created Earl of Worcester by H. 6. while he was Speaker he signed and sealed
the Deed of the intailing of Crown. 7. H. 4. with these words, Nomine totius
Commutatis.

Thomas Chauser Esquire. 9. H.4. Thomas Chauser Esquire. 10. H.4. Thomas Chauser Esquire.
13. H.4. William Stourton Esquire. 1. H.5.
This Speaker Without the assent of his companions, did agree before the King
to deliver in Parliament certain Articles, but about three days following,
the Commons finding themselves agreeved therewith, sent unto the Lords (the
King being then present) Mr. John Dorewood and diverse of the Commons with him,
and declared to the King that their Speaker had no authority from them to yield
thereunto, and therefore they desired to be excused therein, which the King was
pleased to accept, about two months after, the Commons coming before the King
did present for their Speaker the same Mr. John Dorwood, because their old
Speaker being sick in his bed was not able to execute the place, whom the King
allowed of.

John Doreward Esquire. 1. H.5. Thomas Chaucer Esquire. 3. H.5. Walter Hungerford Esquire.
2. H.5. Richard Redman Esquire. 3. H.5. Sir Walter Beauchamp 3. H.5. Roger Flower
Esquire. 4. H.5. Roger Flower Esquire. 5. H.5. Roger Flower Esquire. 7. H.5. Richard
Baynard 9. H.5. Roger Flower Esquire.1. H.6. John Russell Esquire. 2. H.6. Sir Thomas
VVauton. 3. H.6. Richard Vernon Esquire. 4. H.6. John Tirell Esquire. 6. H.6. William
Allington Esquire. 8. H.6. John Tirell Esquire. 9. H.6. John Russell Esquire. 10. H.6.
Roger Hurst Esquire. 11. H.6. John Bows Esquire. 14. H.6. Sir John Tirrell 15. H.6.
Sir John Tirrell 17. H.6.
The King taking notice of the sickness of the Speaker, and that by reason
there of he could not intend the affairs of the Parliament, commanded the
Commons to make choice of a new Speaker, who accordingly did make choice of one
Mr. William Boerly, and did by one John Hody (Knight of a Sheere) inform the
King thereof, who there upon was allowed of by the King without any more
ceremony.

William Boerly Esquire. 17. H. 6. Willam Tressam Esquire. 18. H.6. William Burley
Esquire. 23. H.6. William Tressam Esquire. 25. H.6. John Day Esquire. 27. H.6. Sir John
Popham 28. H.6.
This excuse by reason of his age and impotency by his service in the war,
was allowed of by the King, and the same day the Commons presented M. William
Tresham for their Speaker, and he was allowed.

William Tresham Esquire. 28. H.6.
He made no excuse at all, for ought appearing on the Record.

Sir William Oldham 29. H.6.
He made no excuse.

Thomas Thorpe Esquire. 21. H.6. Thomas Thorpe Esquire. 31. H.6.
He was arested in execution at the suite of the Duke of York between two
Sessions of Parliament, wherein the opinions of the Judges being demanded by
the Lords, the Judges answered, it belonged not unto them to judge of the
liberties of Parliament, whereupon (without them) it was adjudged that he was
not to have privilege, which was signified to the Commons by some of the
Lords, and the Kings pleasure for present choosing of a new Speaker was
declared unto them, whereupon they forth with chose Sir Shomas Charlton.

Sir Thomas Charlton 31. H.6. Sir John VVenlock 33. H.6. Thomas Tresham Esquire.
38. H.6. John Green Esquire. 39. H.6. Sir James Ttrangwaies 1. Ed.4. John Say Esquire.
7. Ed.4. William Allington Esquire. 12. Ed.4. William Allington Esquire. 17. Ed.4.
John VVood Esquire. 22. Ed.4. William Catesbey Esquire. 1. R.3.
In these times the Lord Chancellor, Speaker of the Lords house (being for the
most part a Bishop) took a text out of Scripture, or some other Theme, and
grounded his Oration thereupon, therein declaring the cause of the Summons of
the Parliament, and in conclusion thereof, as the use now is, declared to the
house of Commons the Kings pleasure, that they should repair to their house
and make choice of a Speaker, not naming any day when they should present him
(as is now used) and when the Commons had chosen their Speaker, they sent up
some of their house to the Lords to desire them to intimate to the King that
they had made choice of a Speaker, not naming whom, and to move the King to
appoint a time when they should present him, and (commonly the King having
been formerly spoken unto) the day agreed upon by the King, was declared unto
them; at the day appointed, the Commons presented their Speaker, who prayed
that he might be excused; but his excuse not being admitted, he makes the
common protestation touching his own mistakings, without any petitions in the
behalf of the Commons, as is now usual.

Thomas Lovell. Esquire. 1. H.7.
After Knighted and made of the privy Council to King Henry the 7. and H. 8.

John Mordant 3. H.7. Sir Thomas Fitz williams 4. H.7. Richard Empson Esquire. 7.
H.7.
Learned in the Laws, Recorder of Coventry, afterward of the privy Council
to H. 7.

Sir Reginald Bray 11. H 7.
He made the usual protestation for himself, but there is no mention at all
upon the Record concerning any petition the liberty of the Commons.

Robert Drury Esquire. 11. H.7. Thomas Inglefield Esquire. 12. H.7. Edmond Dudley Esquire.
19. H.7.
Learned in the Laws, he was afterward of the privy Council to H. 7.

Sir Thomas Ing'efeild 1. H.8. Sir Robert Sheffeild 3. H.8.
Recorder of London.

Sir Thomas Nevill 6. H.8.
The Speakers presentment, excuse and protestation, are only entered on Record
before this time, but no Oration of theirs till this time.

Sir Thomas More 14.and15. H.8.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, after Lord Chancellor of England, he
was Speaker of the house of Commons in this Parliament, and Speaker of the
Lords house the next; he made the usual protestation for himself, and prayed
if any of the Commons should in debate of matters speak more largely then they
ought, that it might be pardoned by the King, which the King granted.

Thomas Audeley 21. H.8.
Sergeant at Law, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal, in 24. H. 8. made Lord Chancellor of England, and lastly created a
Baron: He made the usual protestation for himself, but there is no mention
upon the Record of any petition by him made in the behalf of the Commons.

I have not found any Speaker named in the Record or Chronicles in these years
of H. 8. viz.

22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. Richard Rich 28. H.8.
Afterward made L.Chancellor, and created a Baron; the first that is recorded
to have made request for access to the King: from him are descended the Earls
of Warwick and Holland, now living.

Sir Nich. Hare 31. H.8.
Afterward Master of the Rolls, and after that Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England, after which he lived but 14. days.

Thomas Moyle Esquire. 34. H.8.
The first that is recorded to have made petition for freedom of speech, the
petition for privilege from arrest is of latter days, but it appears in the
first of H. 4. that Sir John Cheney then Speaker, made a general request that
the Commons might enjoy their ancient privileges and liberties, not naming any
liberty in particular, and he is noted to be the first that is recorded to
have made that request, but they all make the usual request or protestation
touching themselves.

In the latter end of the reign of K. H. 8. there is no mention made in the
Parliament Roll of the presenting of any Speaker, nor in the time of Ed. 6. or
Queen Mary, nor during the Reign of Queen El. when Sir John Puckering was
Speaker, but the memories of the Speakers names of those latter times is only
presented in the Journalls of both Houses.

Sir John Baker 1. Ed. 6. to 5.
Four Sessions. Chancellor of the Augmentations.

Sir James Dyer K t. 7. Ed.6.
Sergeant at Law, afterward Kings Sergeant and Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas.

John Pollard Esquire. 1. Mary
Learned in the Laws, he continued Speaker during two Sessions.

Clement Higham Esquire. 1. and 2. P.M
Learned in the Laws and one of the privy Council, afterward Knighted and
made L. Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

John Pollard Esquire. 2. and 3. P. M.
Learned in the Laws, afterward made Sergeant.

William Cordall Esquire. 1. and 2. P. M.
Master of the Rols and one of the privy Council, he was Knighted the day he
made his oration, and was Master of the Rolls when he was chosen Speaker, as
may appear by comparing the date of his letters pattents, with the time of his
being chosen Speaker.

Sir Thomas Gargrave 1. Eliz.
Learned in the Laws, and one of the Queens Council in the North, he made
the four Requests, ever since and now usually made by most Speakers, as
appears by his Oration.

First, for free access to the Queen.

Secondly, liberty of speech.

Thirdly, for privilege from Arrests.

Fourthly, that his mistaking might not prejudice the house.

Thomas Williams Esquire. 5. Eliz.
Learned in the Laws.

Richard Ousloe Esquire. 8. Eliz.
The Queens Solicitor, he was first chosen member of the Commons house, and
then being made Queens Solicitor had a writ to attend in the upper house, and
upon the death of Mr. Williams, at the request of the Commons, was sent unto
them, and they chose him their Speaker, but so, as the house was divided upon
the question.

Christopher Wray Esquire. 13. Eliz.
Learned in the Laws, afterward Lord chief Justice of the Kings bench.

Robert Bell Esquire. 14. Eliz.
Learned in the Laws, after made Sergeant and Lord chief Baron.

John Popham Esquire. 23. Eliz.
Solicitor to the Queen chosen in place of Sir Robert Bell who was made Lord
chief Baron, and died also before this Session. Mr. Popham was afterward made
the Queens Attorney, and after chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and one of
the privy Council; when he was chosen Speaker he was an assistant in the
upper house, and sent for as Mr. Ousloe was.

Mr. Sergeant Puckering 27. Eliz.
Till twenty eight during two Sessions: afterward made the Queens Sergeant,
and Lord Keeper of the great Seal.

Mr. Sergeant Snag 31. Eliz.
Afterward made Queens Sergeant.

Edward Cook Esquire 35. Eliz.
Solicitor general, afterward made Queens Attorney, and Knighted, Lord chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, a privy Councellor, and lastly made Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Bench.

Mr. Sergeant Yelverton 39. Eliz.
Afterward made Queens Sergeant, and after that one of the Judges of the Kings
Bench, and Knighted.

Mr. Sergeant Crook 43. Eliz.
Recorder of London, afterward made Sergeant to Ring James, and one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, and Knighted.

Mr. Sergeant Phelips 1. Iacobi
He was during the time he was Speaker made Master of the Rolls, and yet sat
as Speaker.

Sir Ranulph Crew 12. Iac.
Sergeant at Law, afterward made Kings Sergeant and chief Justice of the
Kings Bench.

Sir Thomas Richardson 18. Iac.
Sergeant at Law, afterward made Kings Sergeant and chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and after chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

Sir Thomas Crew 21. Iac.
Sergeants at Law, afterward made King Sergeant.

Sir Thomas Crew 1. Caroli R. Sir Heneage Finch 1. Car.Reg.
Recorder of London Sergeant at Law.

Sir John Finch 3.and4. Car.
Queens Atturny, afterward made one of the Kings Council at Law, then chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and lately Lord Keeper of the great Seal.

John Glanvile Esquire. 16. Car.
Sergeant at Law, at the Parliament begun the 13. of April 1640. and was
dissolved 5. May following, and so continued but 22. days; afterward he was
made the King Sergeant.

William Lenthall Esquire. 16. Car.
Learned in the Laws, one of the Benchers and Readers of Lincolns Inn at the
Parliament which began the 3. of November, 1640.

FINIS.

