The best and worst of PAUL, and his character in both conditions.
2 Cor. 12. 1. to ver. 11. It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory, I
will come to visions and revelations of the Lord, etc.
Preface.
IT is worthy of consideration for your encouragement, to be frequent in your
addresses unto God, that when a man comes from heaven, having had immediate
converse with Jesus Christ, as great things are ordinarily communicated to him
there: so great things may be exspected from him. As John being upon the Lords
day in the spirit, Rev. 1. 10. (which was a degree of heaven) that is, being
possessed of the spirit, and acted by it, you could see little from him, but
what favored of the spirit. Then had he those clear Visions in the Revelation
concerning the state of the Christian Church, and the ruin of her numerous and
potent adversaries, which is most heavenly Aqu^ vitae to cheer her drooping
spirits in her wildernesse-condition.

And in Acts 4. 13. when the Jewish high Commission, who had convented the
Apostles Peter and John, saw their boldness, and perceived that they were
unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them,
that they had bin with Jesus. It was visible that Jesus had left something upon
them extraordinary. No man ever came near to him, but he went away better from
him. He delights to dart down Divine irradiations into there minds, and to leave
some heavenly tincture upon the spirits of his Saints.

Note.
Hence it is, that they who spend much time in secret communion with God, know
most of his mind, and are best able to open the cabinet-counsels of Heaven, and
to reveal the deep mysteries of the Gospel to others in public.

This was likewise Paul's advantage, whom you find in this Chapter in variety
of postures, one while you hear of his being caught up into heaven; soon after
you find him at the next door to hell, being under such a black temptation of
the devil, and his messenger. Here you have the best and the worst of him.

1. Paul in an high pitch of communion with God, which he discovers most
modestly, by way of self-vindication from the false cavils of others, ver. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2. Paul under the tyranny of the messenger of satan, ver. 7. 3.
His ardent importunate address unto God by prayer. ver. 8. 4. Gods gracious
return by way of answer, ver. 9. 5. Result thereof, Paul's humble posture, and
most self-denying resolution, ver. 10.
Verse. 1.
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory, I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord.

You have here a singular copy, (and I doubt, we find it unimitable, in
regard of our weakness) which the blessed Apostle Paul sets us, when God
himself came in competition he passes by, and over-looks himself, and desires
rather to advance God and to magnify Christ; It is not expedient for me
doubtless to glory; he had to do with false Apostles, and they sought to
disparage him, to cloud him, and eclipse his glory, yet he would not endeavor
so much to withdraw the curtain, and to remove that cloud from himself, as he
will employ his all, that the Sun of righteousness may appear in his most
glorious luster. 2 Saluberrimum animo (...), Grot.
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory, I Will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord:

Doct.
A man who is acquainted with the teachings of the great Doctor of the chair
that sits in heaven, has learned to prefer God before himself; to advance Gods
glory rather then his own.

Species objectae vigilanti aut somnianti. Geot.
Most men would serve themselves before they serve God; Paul says here, stand
thou by thy self. It is not expedient for me to glory, but I have had indeed
visions and revelations of the Lord, of them I will glory: here you have
visions (...) quae citra extasin siunt. Piscat. (...), quae siunt per extasin.
Piscat. Afflatus, lux (...) perfunditur. Grot.
(...) such discoveries as are presented to the eye of men either waking or
sleeping, (as it were) bodily representations, and revelations, which some make
to be more sublime and Seraphicall discoveries, I Will come to visions (says he)
such things as are obvious to senses; yea, I Will come to revelations of the most
heavenly secrets, such as I could never had known, unless I had been wrapped
up to heaven: and the reason why a man thus taught of God, will prefer his
glory before his own, is

Reas.
Because this is indeed the essential and grand work of conversion, and the
infallible sign of grace in the heart, to depose self, and to set up God upon
his throne: therefore as by Adams fall, we threw off the image of God, and set
up carnal self-love, Romans 1. 12.
when the second Adam comes to rule in the heart, then we do displace carnal
self-love, and again restore God unto his crown and dignity; this is the
character of a Saint, of a Disciple, says Christ in Luke 14. 26. If any man
hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and his own life for
my sake, he cannot be my Disciple. He must love Jesus Christ better then the
world, yea better then himself, and accordingly he has an instinct within him,
that will incline him to prefer Christ above himself.

A short hint only by way of Use.

Use.
Consult with your own tempers, feel the pulse of your own spirits; so much
grace you have, or so much progress in grace you have made, and not one
degree, not one grain more, as you have learned to advance God, to lift up
Jesus Christ above your selves, and all your own interests and ends, when once
they enter a contest with their Sovereign Lord the King of heaven.

Verse. 2.
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago.

A man in Christ, doubtless one being in Christ having union and communion
with him, and so referres to the subject being in Christ, rather then to the
object. I knew a man in Christ, having such and such revelations; I knew a man
in Christ above fourteen years ago. All Expositours agree not whether these
fourteen years ago have reference to Paul's conversion, or to the time of this
revelation that Paul had; probably, both may be reconciled in one; above
fourteen years ago, so long it was at least since Paul was converted, soon
after he was converted, he might be wrapped up, and have this revelation; and
so it may have reference unto both.

I knew a man, why does not Paul say, I Paul, seeing he was the person
certainly; yet he speaks of himself. Hence observe

Doct.
They who know most of God, are most modest when they come to speak of
themselves.

What said Job? in the 42. Job 5, 6. I heard of God, great things have been
spoken of him now, in the later Chapters, immediately before of wonderful
discoveries made, but now my eye sees thee, therefore I abhor my self in
dust and ashes; here is the temper of a Saint, and why will he be thus modest?
good Reason.

Reas. 1.
He well knows that Pride is a cursed weed, most opposite to God; and his glory;
for we do by pride most immediately contest with God; God will have the crown
upon his head; Pride says, the crown must be upon mine: God says, I will have
my will; Pride says, I will have mine: Now a Saint that is acquainted with the
rules and laws of self-humiliation, learns to abhor this pride, for it is so
opposite to God, it is said therefore, God is most opposite to pride, in the 1.
Peter 5. 5. (...).
The 'Lord resists the proud, he does lead forth an army (as it were) march
forth in the head of an Army against proud persons; they are so directly
opposing him. But then secondly,

Reas. 2.
Pride is most opposite to the life of Faith which is the Gospel of life; Faith
is the Gospel Grace; you shall see this in the 2. Hab. 3, 4. a most excellent
place, that will show you what an opposition there is betwixt Pride, and
betwixt Faith: The Vision is yet for an appointed time, but in the end, it
shall speak and not ly, though it tarry wait for it, because it will surely
come it will not tarry. Now Pride says. 2. King. 6. 33.
I will not stay Gods leisure, I have staid a great while and I will wait no
longer: what is this? Behold (in the 4. verse) his soul which is lifted up, is
not upright in him, but the just shall live by his faith. A proud soul that is
not upright, but the just, (there is the opposition) he shall live by his
faith, that will be con^ent humbly to wait upon God, and say, Lord, thy time is
best, I will stay thy leisure, I have no will of my own, no end of my own, I
will be at thy disposing come when thou please, I know thy word will be made
good: Now an humble Saint knowing this, that Pride is so opposite, he will
speak modestly: and there are two Cases, wherein he learns to be very modest so
far as he acts his Saintship.

1 Case.
When he comes to speak of himself, there he watches over himself, for Pride and
Vainglory would step in, and a man would speak of himself; it may be tell
stories of Gods providenco, but the close shall be wound up with something of
self; God has shown those and those great mercies to me, and it is not so much
to set up God, as to set up my self; this is the temper of a carnal heart.

2. Case.
When he comes to reprove others he is very modest who knows much of God, he
will not do it out of passion, but with compassion, showing all meekness to
men. Tit. 3. 2.

O therefore, let us every day at the throne of grace put in 1. Use.
Caveats against pride, and let us preserve a godly vigilance over our selves,
against Pride which is the most natural weed to our corrupt spirits, and
springs up most plentifully in the soil of our carnal hearts, let us watch
against it; Gods dear servants have been overtaken with it: Jonah though a holy
man of God for the main, yet sometimes he discovers himself to be both a proud
and pettish Prophet; the Lord will send him of a message, and to preach this
Doctrine, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. Jon. 3. 4.
He thought that God would not be so gracious to them, therefore he runs away,
and when he saw that the Lord was gracious, (not knowing what an intention God
had, the holy reservation he had, not being expressed,) yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown, unless they do repent: for God is not bound,
neither does he alvvayes reveal every part of his will; what he says is
true, yet he does not alvvayes speak out; When Jonah savv that the people of
Nineveh did convert to God, at least externally humble themselves in sackeloth
and ashes, and were like to obtain mercy, at least a reprievement, as to the
execution of the judgment, verse. 7, 8.
Jonah preferred his credit, before the word of God, that he was rather angry
that his own word was not made good; then God should show mercy to a whole
city; what a pettish disposition here was; you and I are of the same
constitution, the Lord make us more circumspect in maintaining a guard about
our hearts. Prove. 4. 23.


There is good reason therefore, why Paul should advise (pray take notice of
it) in the 1. Tim. 3. that a Bishop he would have, he must be blameless, in
the 2d. verse, etc. but in the 6. verse, not a Novice: (...).
not one that is newly sprung up, a young plant, newly converted to the Faith
newly planted (as it were) in Christ; why? left being lifted up with Pride;
lifted up with Pride; why so? Of all generations of people in the world, there
is none more apt to be proud then young Converts: O they will presently despise
others, if they be not as high as themselves, and come on as far as they are,
and up to their principles; and if you add this further, A young Convert, and
a young Minister, especially if he be well gifted, is more apt to be proud: I
speak it not so much to disparage those, as to engage them to Vigilance over
their own hearts: not a Novice, lest he should be proud, in that he is a
Minister; O he has gifts, though a young man, yet able to teach a whole
Congregation, to come off it may be with applause, here he sw^lls, here he
admires himself, and falls into the condemnation of the Devil; it seems that
was Pride, and that judgment that he fell into was for Pride, that was the
Devils sin, The Devil would equalize himself with God, is Peter Lombards
expression: Diabolus voluit separisicasse Deo. Lombard.
and they who understand the Original, will find that there is something
different from what is (I humbly conceive) ordinarily comprehended in the 6.
verse of the Epistle of Jude, And the Angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation; But left their own habitation; here is the sin
still of the Angels, what was this? they would not be contented to stay in that
place where God set them, nor to keep their station: kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation: both the expressions make fully up the
sin of the Angels and not the judgment; (as some expositours do conceive) they
would be gadding abroad, and were more curious and inquisitive, then God would
allow them to be, and so you have in the 2. Peter 2. 4. For if God spared not
the Angels that sinned, but cursed them down to hell, but reserved them in
chains: Sinned, there was there fault, as is expressed here, kept not
theirfirst estate, he has reserved them in chains, there is their judgment.

Verse 3.
I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the body, I cannot
tell, or whether out of the body I cannot tell, God knows, such a one caught
up to the third heaven, such a one caught up, he was snatched up. (...).


Doct.
Sometimes God does surprise his servants, with most glorious and gracious
discoveries, Verse 4.
he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable things, if you please to
compare the 4. verse. Heaven the place where Christ and the blessed Angels,
with the souls of Saints departed are, that his people may know his good
intention toward them, they shall see and taste Heaven before they come to
enjoy it. What is the reason, why God does thus surprise them?

That he may show all is of free grace, they shall have such mercies as they
never asked for; Reason. Isa. 65. 1.
for as God sometimes is found of us, when we do seek him that he may encourage
us to pray, so, sometimes he is found of us, before we seek him, that we may
see free grace may prevent our prayers; Note.
and he bestows not mercies only with reference to our prayers, lest we should
come to think our prayers meritorious.

A Use.
s we should bless God for the glory of his free grace, that he will surprise
us, so walk in such an humble posture, that therein thou may find God
delight to come in upon thee; for freegrace never works so naturally, as upon
its own proper object; which is, when we have the greatest sense of our own
unworthiness, even full of self-annihilating thoughts. We never see so much of
God, as when we see least in our selves; we are never able to discover so much
of the stars in the day time, (as the Philosophers intimate to you) as when
you are lowest, when you are in the bottom of a dark pit: The choycest wines
are the best preserved in the lowest cellars: The most glorious discoveries are
communicated, and continued to those that lie lowest in their own
apprehensions. Next observation hence, is this,

Doct.
That when God is pleased most fully to discover himself unto his Saints, they
are not able for the present to reach every thing in those discoveries:

Paul knew he was wrapped up, but bywhom, the manner, whether in the body, or
out of the body I cannot tell, says he, God knows; he must appeal to God; why
does the Lord keep them in the dark thus?

Because he would keep them humble; and therefore you shall find often this
expression in Ezekiel, and I desire you will take notice of it, I observe not
in any of the Prophets so often (if at all this expression) Son of man, Son
of man, (says he to Ezekiel) come and see, or to that purpose he calls him up
to make great discoveries to him why Son of man to Ezekiel? none of the
Prophets had more glorius Visions then Ezekiel had, that he migkt keep him
humble, when he had the greatest discoveries, yet he shall not understand all
things in those discoveries; I do not believe Ezekiel did, nor Daniel, nor
others, (and it is the judgment of too times more learned men) but that God
reveals his prophesies by degrees: Prophesies are fulfilled gradually D. Jakson.
It was enough for the Lords purposes for the present, that Ezekiel and Daniel
should have such things revealed to them, as they were to communicate to the
Churches, it may be Paul also should understand more afterward, then Ezekiel
and Paul were able to apprehend for the present; they are gradually apprehended.

Use.
If we are not able to reach every thing in Gods revelations, such discoveries
as he makes, therefore let us not rashly, and proudly, and insolently censure
others that are not able to understand every thing in Scripture, that are not
able to untie all knots, to resolve all difficulties. There are some things
(...), 2. Pet. 2. 16. Peter says, there were such in Paul's Epistles: and it is
a saying of that reverend and learned Mr. Robert Bolton, now in heaven, that
lived in Northamptonshire, says he, Verse 29.
There are some places of Scripture, that we must be content to be ignorant of,
till we come to the University of heaven, and he reckons that in the 1. Cor.
15. being baptized for the dead: and that women should have a care how they
carry themselves, because of the Angels in the 1. Cor. 11: and some other
places he summed up: Verse 10.
Do not disparage, do not reject men's Ministry, or despise their poor
endeavors, because they are not able to discover every thing; Bless God for
what he makes known by them, so far as he reveals his Son in them, and to you
by them; and remember the very Apostles themselves did not know every
Circumstance in those Revelations they had.

Here Paul says, I knevv Such a one caught up to the third heaven; what third
heaven is that? you shall see more to clear it in the 4. verse: And I knew such
a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows; how
he was caught up into (...). Zenoph. vivarium (...). S. Scr. hortus deliciarum;
transfertur verbum ab horto Edenis loco amoenissimo, ad seeds and mansiones
coelestes significandos; Joel 2. 3. (...). Hebraicae literae (q^uod raro fit e
Graecis) hanc Graecam vocem nobilitarnut, a Graca Haebraicam hanc constando;
(...) Cant. 4. 13. Eccl. 2. 5.
Paradise, Paradise, what is this Paradise? the Rabbis have a conceit that
there is a Paradise, a kind of a third place, where the souls lie asleep, and
do not come to heaven, therefore they make not only a Hell, but such a
Paradise, and then heaven; when the body and soul comes to be after the
resurrection. But there is a three fold Heaven; 1. That heaven which is called
the air, -- the expansum here below where the Fowls are, the Fowls are said to
be in heaven. 2. There is the Coelum stellatum -- where the stars are; and
then 3. There is the coelum gloriosum, the seeds sanctorum ^^^^^rum, where the
throne of God is, and doubtless this paradise here is the third heaven; for so
he said, such a one caught up into the third heaven, in the second verse;
therefore this paradise must be that heaven. It is a vain conceit (at least
from this place for ought I could yet ever learn from any other) to conceive a
third place where they say Lazarus his soul when he was dead and was raised
again, was in this paradise; but we need not to be inquisitive after that;
Where the Scripture has no tongue, why should we have an ear? Here is a place
that is this paradise, it is called the third heaven, and as Christ said to the
Thief, when he had desired he might be in the kingdom, Luke 23. 43.
This day shall thou be with me in paradise. The kingdom of Jesus Christ is
paradise; paradise the kingdom of Christ; why, here paradise is the third
heaven, and therefore they are the same: now he was caught up into paradise,
and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for men to utter.


It is not lawful, under favor of the learned Translatours, (...).
may we not here rather render it thus, no power to utter, whence comes the
word (...), Authority; which he had no commission to utter: some render it not
possible, so in the Margin, some not lawful; but I am sure very learned men
thus render it, which there is no commission for a man to utter; but admit it
is not possible to utter, they were such great things, a man cannot, nay, a man
also always must not utter; has no commission to utter every thing that is
made known unto him. But to pass on,

Of such a one will I glory, yet of my self will I not glory, but in mine
infirmities; Paul take him as in himself, he will not glory, he is far from
glorying; in a third person it may be he will glory of the same things, and in
the same things, that he will not glory in himself; but rather act the part of
an noble man indeed, and really act it, ( not hypocritically, sustinendo
personam,) but he will debase himself to the lowest; that is an humble posture,
the frame of an humble soul, and desire to advance Christ to the highest,
disparage himself, conceal himself, so God may appear in his glory,

For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; he had matter to
glory if he would have produced it, for I will say the truth, he might have
spoken a great deal of truth, when he gloried in himself, but he will not do
it: but now I forbear, least any man should think of me above that which he
sees me to be, or hears of me; here is an admirable fruit of humility; I desire
it may be observed, an admirable fruit of humility; and the Observation is this,

Doct.
That he who has a deep die of humiliation, is sometimes very careful to
conceal himself, and his own glory. Why so? least any man should think of me
above that which he sees me to be, or bears of me; Why is he thus careful to
coneeal himself? upon this very ground, even as Jesus Ghrist, Michael the
Archangell, (for he was that Michael that did contest with the Devil about
Moses his body where he should be buried,) Satan would fain have known the
place, Jesus Christ would have it concealed; Note.
why? lest that he being so great an instrument of the glory of God, people
should adore him, and sacrifice to him; he knevv how superstitiously, how
idolatrously those people were inclined, notvvithstanding all the discoveries
of God they had had, all the glorious ordinances, and all the providentiall
administrations, it should be concealed: so does an humble Saint well know
that he has great reason to conceal himself; why? lest others should advance
him too high. It may be there is such a man that is an humble Minister, if they
should know that he converted such a soul, or that he made such a book,
(therefore my name shall not be written to it) they would adore him too much;
it may be a charitable person, if they should know he gave so much money to
such an use, they would idolize him.

Therefore I Will conveigh it secretly, not pompously displaying his own good
works, and I hope many Parliament Men, and men in great place, they can be
content to serve God, and serve the Public, though their name be not printed
and ranked in such and such catalogues; here is the frame of an humble spirit:
and therefore by way of Use,

Use.
If you be so desirous, very desirous to discover all of your self, set always
the best side forwards, to guild over all your actions, with the most specious
commendations, and cannot be content to do any thing in secret, but that it
must be published; O suspect there is a great deal of unmortified pride in thy
heart; thou had need pray to the Lord to humble thee; and pull down those
proud plumes of thine, for if there were a deep die of humiliation, thou
would be content to conceal thy self, especially when the glory of God and
thine come in competition; and be glad so Gods cause were carried on though by
another. Thus Luther did encourage Melancthon: God is able to raise his own
sinking cause, and though we are unworthy, it may be done by others. Potens esi
Deus suam labentem causam origere, si nos digni non erimus, fiat per alios.
For though I should desire to glory, I shall not be a fool, for I will say the
truth, but now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he
sees me to be, or that he hears of me; and lest I should be exalted above
measure, through the abundance of revelations: abundance of revelations.

Doct.
Sometimes you see the Lord gives to some of his servants abundance of
revelations; not this and that revelation, but abundance of revelations: shall
know many things, why so? what account can we give of the wisdom of God in
this?

Reas.
Because he does intend (here is the reason) to gain himself abundance of glory,
by such and such persons, he will not make them the conduit-pipes of
conveighing such and such discoveries of himself unto others; the Lord has
fitted for, and given parts. and the Spirit, and gifts, and graces, suitable to
be a glorious instrument, and therefore he shall have abundance of revelations:
and therefore by way of Use,

Use.
Let it be our care to bless God, heartily bless God, and this were a sign
indeed of love to Jesus Christ, and a freedom from envy, if thou be kept in
the dark thy self, yet thou can bless God that some others have an abundance
of revelations; but here is the wretched muttering of pride in our carnal
hearts, we cannot endure that any body should know more then our selves; O this
has broken many good Lectures, this has bred a great deal of heart-burning
amongst Ministers, this makes (it may be) great Counselors and Statesmen many
times endeavor to pull down one another; why? because they grow as trees
before their windows, and a little hinder their prospect, because it may be
they have greater parts, and greater abilities then themselves, and are able to
say more, and gain more reputation, and do more then they: O this is not a
thankful frame, this is not an humble posture.

Qu.
I but says many a soul that would be in the highest form; It may be, I have
as many revelations as others, and as great discoveries are made to me: for
answer to this Question.

An.
I beseech you let us a little consider, for there is much talk of Revelations,
and I hope there are many, and a great deal of discourse of new light, and I
hope there is much, many more clear discoveries, and will be, (for the Pope
must come down by new light, how ever some men scoff at it) I do not mean by an
addition of new fundamentalls, and by new light substantial truths, but indeed
Revelation is this properly, the spirit of Revelation enabling us more fully to
see what is already revealed as the rule to discover those objects which are
propounded in the word of God, Note. What Revelations now to be expected.
and therefore for your satisfaction to these that say we have such and such
revelations, etc. First,

1
Know that there are some extraordinary Revelations, which are made to
Churches, and those by public persons authorized by God himself, and they are
always infallible; Upon this very ground, does our Savior say, in the closure
of those seven Epistles in the second and third Revelations: He that has an
ear let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: when the Spirit speaks
when he has a tongue to speak, we must hear; but then

2
2. There are other Revelations that are not made thus to public persons, and
wherein there is not always that infallibility, throughout, in the whole,
though so far as the Spirit reveals himself to any, he is infallible; but it is
not so to them, because they are not public persons, and that act by a public
Commission; Prove. 14. 10. Revel. 2. 17.
there are Revelations to particular persons; now what is the difference
betwixt those two? why, they are for themselves, others for the public
therefore they are infallibly and extraordinarily acted, and they know it so to
be; as Paul said, you shall find in the 16. of the Acts, there when he was
called to Macedonia, (it is a very good place for this purpose, and I desire it
may be considered,) when he had that Revelation there, that he must go into
Macedonia; it is said, Paul, come into Macedonia and help us, you shall find he
says, he went; why? he went immediately because he was assured, that he must
go; in the 10. verse; After that he had seen the Vision immediately endeavored
to go into Macedonia assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us to preach
the Gospel to them; If you will ask any man; How will you know you have a
Revelation? Note.
I hope Sir, I have it from God; If he say so, he hopes he has it from God,
I Will conclude, it is no such extraordinary Revelation, for if he had had an
extraordinary Revelation from God, wherein he was infallible, then he had that
(...) which here Paul found (at least in a good measure) and it would so far
have discovered it self to him, that he should have had a strong assurance that
God called him, and he must go; but I remember a story, A man had knocked down
Images out of a window, and then comes, and consults with a Divine, Sir, think
you not I had an extraordinary call to knock down these Images? Do you think
it? yes Sir, then I know you had not; for if you had had an extraordinary call,
then you would have had an assurance too from God that he had called you; So
that if there be an infallible Revelation, there is a certain evidence goes
along with it: Note.
hence I conclude, Many people that talk so much of Revelations, have not these
extraordinary Revelations, because they have not these Certainties; But then
there is also a Spirit of wisdom and Revelation that Paul prays for, for
all his Ephesians: in the 1. Ephesians 17. 18. that their eyes might be opened,
by the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ, that they
may know the hope of their calling; but what? these are for our selves, and
whereas the other Revelations to public persons, are extraordinary ones, and
that others may have discoveries, and others are to be obliged to observe them;
As suppose I or you, or any particular Saint in this congregation, we should
go to prayer, and read a Chapter, and it may be have a hint, a beam of light,
that we understand this in reading of a Chapter, that we never savv before,
though we read it an hundred times; I Will bless God, this is a new light, God
comes in to me, and gives me, a degree of the Spirit of wisdom and
Revelation: but what is the difference now? here is the grand mistake amongst
many men, and I desire it may be rightly apprehended, Much difference betwixt
Revelations to private Christians, and to public persons, such as the Apostles.
this Revelation I bless God for, may be of good use to me, but this is no
obligeing rule and light for others, as the Apostles was when their Revelations
were extraordinary. If you will say, I have this light, and you must follovv
my light, here you are mistaken, unless you are a public person, for what is
thy revelation here, that light that God is pleased to give thee, is for the
satisfaction of thy soul, or it may be for thy own guidance, but not oblige
and impose upon others, and this is a grand deceit now a days, when many an
honest-hearted Christian, (for so I believe many of them are) very
honest-hearted, and have much communion with God, and receive many good hints
from him in prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, and attend upon ordinances,
if they will make use of this to themselves, well and good, (if the Lord
prosper them in it,) but if they will come and say, I have had this Revelation
and you must believe as I believe, and do as I do, because God has shown me
such things, there (brother) you are mistaken; for God gives thee a Revelation
not to propose a new rule, that thou should impose upon others, as he did to
the Apostles that were persons extraordinarily acted, assisted, and directed,
and had a Commission for that purpose; but he gives thee this private discovery
for thy own private satisfaction, and advantage, and if thou use it to that
purpose, thou have much cause to rejoice in it, and bless God for it.

Object.
But it may be you will object and say, But I must make use of such Revelations,
(I must name the word, I would to God there were no occasion for it,) as the
Antiscripturists speak, men that dispute against the Scriptures, and will not
allow the Scriptures to be the word of God, and disparage them in comparison of
their Revelations; A strange thing, if they consider that place in Peter, they
had a Revelation indeed, they had seen and heard a voice in the Mount, in the
2. Peter 1. 19. We (says he) have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you
do well, to take heed; A more sure word of Prophecy: when he compares a voice
in the mount from heaven, yet he calls it a more sure word of prophecy; The
Apostle commends them for taking heed to the Scriptures.
whereunto you do well that ye take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark
place till the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, not as they
will expound it, not that you must take heed to the sure word of prophecy,
till Jesus Christ come into your hearts, and then throw away the Scriptures. O
most rotten and unsavory, and (I dare say) an ungodly exposition; but you do
well to take heed to those discoveries that are made, in the prophetical
Scriptures, in the old Testament, there speaking comparatively, until Jesus
Christ dawn in your hearts, give light, rise, and there gloriously appear,
Until, often in Scripture signifies a continuation of time, and not only a
period. as Mat. 1. 25. vid. Gerard. ^omment. on the place.
till there be a more full Gospel Light, for that he speaks of, as you shall
see Gerard and some others upon the place; but I must proceed; Quest.
let me add this further, you that will say, Revelations must be our Rule,
because the Scriptures are so dark and you do not understand the translations,
you do not know them, and there are such variety of translations in several
places you cannot tell what to think, to this let me answer; in the first
place, and

Answ.
It is a very good hint that Austin has, if so be there are two diverse places
of Scripture, and wherein there are diverse readings; whether the old Copy, or
this Copy, or that Copy, be true, we cannot tell: (says he) but the more the
better; this is Austins answer, the more the better; the greater variety of
readings, and a greater commendation it is to Scripture, because, though there
be some vaiety of readings, in regard of particular words, yet you shall find
all those readings agree in the substantialls; it is a great commendation now;
and (my brethren) Scripture is not so much the words as the sense, and if the
sense be the same, as to the fundament all points in all places, the multitude
of various readings is no disparagement; for it is rather indeed a wonder that
it is so well, and a mavelous work of providence, that a Bible running
through so many hands, writing first, and then printing, and now so many
hundreds above thousands of years together, diverse thousands (as you know a
great part of the old Testament was) that there should be no more mistakes, an
admirable work of providence.

But then I will ad'e this further, Many of those mistakes that are, it is an
easy matter to reconcile them. I confess, it is not very obvious to all but
learned men that are Antiquaries, and Critics, and are able to consult with
books, and have seen ancient Copies, etc. they are prepared to reconcile; As
there is a difference now in Mark and John concerning the times there about
Christ's suffering, one says the third hour, and another says the sixth, how
shall we reconcile them? Mark 15. 25. Third hour. John 19. 14. sixth hour.
learned men have seen ancient Copies, where they are both the same, an ancient
Copy of the 19. of John naming the third hour.

We have a place in the 27 of Matthew 5. where it is said there, as I take it,
the Prophet Jeremy, if you please to turn to the 27. Chapter, or look it at
your leisure; See Dousius and Junius his Parallels.
at the 9. verse then was that fullfilled, that that was spoken by Jeremias the
Prophet: some tell us Jeremiah, and Zachary written contractively in the
Hebrew, are the same, and some say among the Hebrews, and others say Zachary
was Jeremiahs scholar, and therefore called by that name; but here is a short
answer salves all; I can tell a man Learned Archbishop Usher.
that has seen a Copy, six hundred years old, where there was neither Jeremy
nor Zachary in, but the Prophet: there is a short and full answer.

There is another place in the 1. Corinthians: (it is very considerable) and
the 15. there says Paul, I protest by your rejoicing that we die daily; some
read it, I protest by our rejoicing; in the 31. verse; (...) or (...), it is
not I, on all the learned men, (I dare say) in this assembly, or in any other,
can possibly determine, whether is were to be read ours or yours: whether our
rejoicing, or your rejoicing; because they are both a truth; yet I could tell
you what is answered; learned Critics give this answer, that the ancient
Greeks did pronounce the Eta, and the Upsilon much alike, and then when a copy
came to be transcribed, he that did write did not look upon the copy, but
heard one dictate and read to him, now they did pronounce Eta like Upsilon, and
so the mistake might be easy; he that writ, could not well tell whether he
said (...) or (...), they being alike in the pronunciation; and upon this very
ground, might be the mistake, now many such places I might name; Do not thou
decline the word of God, and fly to Revelations; know thou there is, and do
thou carefully maintain, that sweet harmony that is between the word of God,
and the Spirit of Revelation; Do not separate word and spirit which God has
joined.
and if the sauie Spirit that did endite the word, do speak in thy mind, and
work in thy heart, then indeed thou have a great deal of cause to rejoice, and
then thou may safely go on; but cursed will they be in their practices, that
do divide those things, separate them that God has conjoined together, word
and spirit, do not thou advance Spirit, to the dsparagement of the word: make
use of the word in a concurrence with the light of the Spirit, and improve the
Spirit for a more full discovery of the word: I much hasten; Lest I should be
exalted, through an abundance of Revelations, there was given to me a thorn in
the flesh; least I should be exalted:

Doct.
The Lord is most careful to suppress, to hinder the thriving of his people
in any sinful course; therefore says he, lest I should be exalted through the
abundance of revelations, he gives him a thorn, lest I should be exalted above
measure, why so? willthe Lord hinder it thus?

Resp.
He knows that we are naturally prone to corrupt even the best things; and this
the nature of Pride; whereas all other evils rise out of evil, Pride springs
out of the ashes of good: and whereas we should glorify God with our good
things, we do engrosse those good things to our own glory, and so most
sacrilegiously rob God; The Lord knows this, and therefore in such cases, will
be most careful to hinder us from undoing our selves: he loves us so dearly;
even as a father loves a child, if he sees the knife, (though it be a very good
thing, and very useful) will cut the child's fingers, he will take away the
knife from the child, though the child cries after it: if the Wife come to love
the servant once, better then her Husband, though he is a most useful servant,
an excellent steward, an admirable secretary, a very good, and dexterous, and
faithful Bayliffe, yet because he gets into the husbands place, and has that
room in his wives affections, that is peculiar to him, and she begins to be
disloyal toward him, he will turn his servant out of doors, why? because he
will not have his Wife to be undone, nor suffer his own glory to be eclipsed.

Use.
Therefore let us humbly kiss Gods rod, and listen what language it speaks, and
he who has appointed it, Mic. 6. 9
even when he smites; know this to your comfort he can smile upon us; and when
other men think the sentence of death is passed upon us, (it may be) he is then
enlightening of us; when others think he is marring and undoing of us, he is
making and doing us most good, when others think by humbling providence, he is
blasting us, then he is raising us, and preparing us for great mercies: O how
good a God have we! Take us in the very worst, in the lowest condition of our
Christianity, in the blackest, and bitterest part of it, when we suffer, even
then God is dealing like a wise Physician, even giving us recovering, or
preventing Physic; Medicina (...)
and hence it is that the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 4. 10.
the God of all grace who has called you to eternal glory, make you perfect,
after you have suffered a while, make you perfect,, strengthen, stablish,
settle you: there is no less then four words; as if he should have said, Never
expect, though you be called to oternall glory, never expect that he that is a
God of grace should make you perfect, till you have suffered a while; never
think thou art undone, though the world say thou art undone, though God himself
afflict thee, never so severelie, and whip thee with a smarting rod, as here
Paul had a thorn in the flesh; because thou have to deal with that God that
loves thee, more wisely, better then thou can love thy self; that knows what
is proper and good for thee, more then thou know what is good for thy self;
he pitties thee, he loves thee, even as a father pitties his children; Psalm.
103. 13.
Nothing more unhappie, then the happiness of those that go on in a sinful
course; and the greatest temptation of all, sometimes is, to have no
temptation; Nihil infelicius felicitate peccantium. Maxima tentatio nulla^
habere tentati^nem.
when God shall rather lay the reyns upon our necks, and leave us to our
selves, it is a sign he is angry with us; and when he would undo a man indeed
eternally, then gives him up to himself, and leaves him to himself; in the 81.
Psalm. 11. 12. you would have none of me, you would not hear my voice, I will
give you up to your own hearts lusts and walk after your own counsels; Self
shall take you and lead you, you would not be guided by me; but when God loves
a man, then he will nip him, and chide him for his sinful courses.

There was given me a (...). Proprte stimulus aut spina in carne, ut stimulus
lateri, Hos. 2. 6. (...). Obsepiam viam tuam spinis. Sir. has it, Shephaia
stimulus. Arabs (...) elegantissime, percussus in spina five stimulo in
corpore: ut quis invitus confoditur stimulo, sic Paulus; five (...) ut Chys.
five, dolor auriculae, ut Tertul. five carnis and corporis multo gravioribus
tormentis, ut Cypr. five alio quocunque. Vide corp. sermon.
thorn in the flesh, (...), Immissus mihi a Satan. Nam (...) vox tribuitur
rebus inanimatis, inquit Grot. vel potius malus aliquis spiritus a Satana
emissus. Sic Christus nominat Angelos Diaboli. Mat. 25. ^1. Piscat.
the messenger of (...) In genere Adversarius, dictum de Angelo bono and malo,
Mar. 22. 22. Perduellis, ut Rezin. Solom. non tam proprie Diabolus. Sic
Christus nuncupabat Petrum Satan in lingua Syro-Hebraea Christo vernacula,
Adversarium non autem Diabolum, Mat 16. 23.
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

Doct.
Sometimes it costs Saints very dear to have sins prevented: why?

Reas.
Because they are so desperately inclined unto those sins, and those sins so
highly provoking unto God, so contrary to the method of his proceedings, to his
glory, to his Son, and his kingdom, to his Spirits, if they being rooted so in
these things, it must cost them a whipping; as it is with a scholar he may be
ingenuous and a good scholar, but if he be habitually radicated in some wicked
course, if the master loves him he will whip him, and whip him again and again,
till he do reduce him and reclaim him.

What whip was this here that drew blood from him? a thorn in the flesh: of
this, Expositours have several interpretations; some will have it to be the
lust of uncleanness, that is not probable; some will have it to be his
original corruption set on by the devil; that seems more probable: but there
is a thorn given in the flesh, therefore it must be something that God gives;
given in the flesh; the messenger of Satan to buffet me: very learned men
resolve upon this, that Paul was reproached much by the false Apostles, he was
disparaged, a man of mean presence, (as they conceived) and it may be he had
some imperfection in his speech, something or other they did cast upon him to
cloud him; and as if he did live upon the people, and rob them of their
estates, etc. Now when the devil shall be let loose upon him with a new
commission, O here was a thorn indeed! a thorn in his sides indeed; the word is
very emphaticall, I cannot stay long upon it, now here was that that the false
Apostles came and buffeted him; you Paul have undone the people, and misled
them, etc. they came as messengers of Satan, and God might give them a
commission as he does to the devil and wicked men, by way of holy and wise
permission: and this is a thorn in the flesh, why? in regard of the
painfulnesse and reproachfulnesse of it.

Use.
As you desire to prevent great and sharp afflictions, watch against great sins;
and when God does great things for you, take heed you be not guilty of great
wantonness, and so provoke him to turn your light in to darkness, your health
into sickness, your plenty into poverty, your peace into terror; and instead
of a spirit of revelation and consolation, and those sweet discoveries, and
abundance of revelations you had, take heed you provoke not the Lord to send a
messenger of Satan to buffet you, and to delude your comfort from you, and
have a kind of hell in your consciences. 2 These. 2.


Verse. 8.
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, it might depart from me.

Doct.
It is the spirit of a Saint when he is under affliction, then to seek the
Lord, and to seek him with importunity: why? the reason is this,

Reas.
There is a divine instinct, it is not only a prudentiall instinct that carries
him toward God; he knows all his riches lies there, and all his strength is
treasured up in Jesus Christ, he is able to do nothing without Christ, John 15.
5.
and therefore he will run to the throne of grace, and there appeal to God in
Christ, pour out his soul, represent his desires, act that excellent place,
Phil. 4. 6. In nothing be careful, but in all things make known your requests
with thanksgiving. (...).
A Saint that is indeed taught of God, does as naturally move toward heaven in
his streights, as a piece of iron that is touched with a lodestone, toward
the North, you cannot dissever them, sometimes he may be forced to neglect
prayer in a morning, or this time or that time, but it may be it brings him
down on his knees, and drives forth tears afterward, and he is never quiet
till he is got to him center again, to his right point, till he is come to his
wonted communion with God.

Use.
O acquaint your selves more and more with the life of faith, and act that life
of faith in prayer; for what is prayer but the breathing of faith, when the
poor soul comes and lies at the feet of God, and there pants and breaths out
earnest desires before him; and know this for your comfort, the Lord not only
delights to bestow blessings upon his servants, but he delights to have
fellowship with his servants in prayer. O that we could echo back again, and
go to the Lord, not only to obtain such mercies from God by praying, but to
enjoy him in prayer; this would be heaven indeed.

Besought him thrice, here was his importunity,

Doct.
A praying Saint that is acquainted with God, will not be satisfied till he
hears from God; he knows there is an holy violence in unportunate Prayers which
is well pleasing: It is good to besiege heaven with such an importunity, as
rises up to an holy impudence, it is most acceptable to him; who desires to see
the face and hear the voice of his beloved. Luke 11. 8. Cant. 2. 14.


Use.
Let us be much in prayer; O pray importunately, not sluggishly, not lazily, not
formally; (the Lord humble us for such defects, such omission, such commission,
such defilements of our holy duties;) remember that woman of Canaan, how she
prayed in the 15. of Matthew: Son of David, have mercy upon me, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil, and when they would have sent her away, O still
she prayed; when Christ gave her a discouraging answer, she will not take it,
she had learned to distinguish between delays and denials; and at last, when
that Jesus Christ (you shall find in the place) says this to her, the Son of
man was not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel; we must not give childrens
bread to dogs: Lord, if I may not have a child's portion, yet let me have a dogs
portion, let me have some crumbs of mercy, let me pick up some thing from under
thy table, something thatfals from thee; O woman great is thy faith, be it unto
thee even as thou will. Here is a great deal of faith appears in importunity;
and you shall find, as I remember, in the 5. of Luke; (I am sure it is in Luke)
there they were so importunate; when such an one was sick, and troubled, they
would untile the house, and let down his body; that Jesus Christ might cure
him, and heal him; here was importunity.

Luke 18. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, etc.
Mat. 15. 28. A praying Saint may have what he will. Joh. 15. 7. Luke 5. 18. 19.
It is said of King Edward the sixth, that good Josiah; when he that taught
him, Sir Jno. Cheek, a man of great account in his time, a very learned man was
sick, he went to visit him, and told him, says he, Come, be not discouraged, I
have been begging you of God, and he has assured me you shall not die of this
sickness, and it proved so; here was an admirable copy of a young King.

There was another before him, Elfredus, King of England too, much (it seems)
in prayer: v. Fascicul. Temporum. Elphredus R. Angl. vir totus virtuosus, octo
horas in orando, legendo, and scribendo expendit, octo in negotiis regni, octo
in cura corporis.
He divided the 24. hours into three parts; one eight hours he allowed for his
ordinary repast, refreshing, and sleeping; another eight hours for public
negotiations, and affairs of the Kingdom; and a third, for reading and
praying; this was admirable in those dark times.

I have read almost the same of M. Estie a learned and godly Minister, sometimes
Fellow of Caius College.

And so I might have told you of King Edward the sixth, that when he was
crowned, they put then one sword into one hand, and another into another, one
for England, and another for Ireland; says he, there must be a third sword, or
else all will not do, and that must be the word of God, the sword of the
Spirit, that must teach me what to do; O what copies were here from a Kings;

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.

I wish the example of so great a person may have a great influence upon you.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me; and
he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee.

Doct.
God has many ways of answering our prayers: First, His Attributes, his
Providence, his Promise, his Son interceeding in heaven, are all engaged to
make good what his Spirit breaks forth in us, so that importunate prayer shall
not miscarry;

Reas,
Why? God will never be behind hand, but rather before hand with his servants;
when they are a praying people, he will be a God hearing prayers; and therefore
upon that ground encouraged them, to come and pray, O thou that art a God
hearing prayers; it is his continual work; so the word in the Original will
bear; to thee shall all flesh come: Psalm. 65. 2.
An admirable place. Psalm 90. 14, 15, 16.

Quest.
Does God always answer his peoples prayers?

Answ.
Yes, some way or other.

1 Sometimes in the very particular mercy; as to Hannah in 1 Samuel 1. 20. 27.
Samuel.,

2 Sometimes by the commutation of a greater good; God has many ways of
answering his childrens prayers.
As a child would fain have such a knife, no, you shall not have it, but you
shall have a better thing, and it may be the Mother will give it a piece of
gold, that is better. Thus he does answer prayers by way Eminency; a high
degree. Per commutationem majoris boni. Zanch.


3 Though he does not give the thing we desire, yet he gives us hearts to be
content without it; it may be God denies you children you beg for children, God
will not give you children, but he gives you hearts to be calm and patient
without such a blessing: there is an admirable mercy, and possibly (as to thee)
as the thing desired as great a mercy; according to that hint in Phil. 4. v. 5.
In nothing be careful: let your requests be made known to God with
thanksgiving, what follows? the peace of God, which passes understanding,
shall guard your hearts. (...).
God (it may be) will not give you the thing, but you shall have a sweet
serenitie, and calmnesse of spirit, which is as sweet; and so it is with many
thousands of souls, it may be you have experience of it, when you come from
Prayer, you shall not always have the thing you desired, but God has given
thee a sweet persuasion of soul to rest fiducially, to commit thy self to him.

It may be, as Paul's case here, God will answer your prayers, by giving you the
ground of your prayers. Moses would have seen the land of Canaan, by going into
it; he shall not go thither, but God will before he dies, carry him up to Mount
Nebo, and thence he shall see it, before he dies; there is the ground of his
prayer granted. So you desire health, that you may honor God thereby: It may
be God will give not thee health, but he will enable thee to glorify him by
faith and patience under sickness: here are thy prayers answered, because thou
have the ground and end of thy prayers: Paul says here, Lord let this thorn be
taken from me; says God, my grace is sufficient for thee; it shall not be
taken away but in effect, virtually interpretative, as to him, it shall
equivalentlie; my grace is sufficient for thee; though I take not away thy
enemy, yet I will give thee a buckler, and then all will be well; O what says
Paul? would you and I were able to end this discourse, with Paul's words and
Paul's Spirit.

Verse 9.
Most gladly therefore (says he) will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me.

Doct.
The spirit of a Saint inclines him to glory in that which glorifies Christ,
though he himself be debased.

Verse 10. Habitare hoc (...) ^^stendere, sicut homines saepius domi sunt quam
extra domum. Grot.
Hence Paul here glories in his infirmities, and takes pleasure in them, that
Christ's strength may approve in his weakness, and that the power of Christ
(...), may dwell upon him, and compose him about as a Tent does, and therefore
will be visible to the honor of Christ.

1, Quest.
What is it properly to Glory?

Answ.
It imports three things. 1. To rejoice in a thing, 2: To express that joy out
wardly. 3. And that with a degree of exaltation and boasting: As Jer. 9. 23,
24, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the rich man in his riches,
etc.

2. Quest.
Why so much desired by Paul that the power of Christ may dwell upon him; though
with his own abasement?

Answ.
The glorious discovery of his power, of his powerful grace is very desirable:
hence he prays, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19.
that the spirit of Revelation would open their eyes to see the exceeding
greatness of his power in believers, and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. he prays that God
would fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power; Christ is much magnified when his power is much displayed.

Use.
Is it thus? what is it the Lords pleasure I should undergo this thorn, and is
the Lord withal so gracious to say, My grace is sufficient for thee, and thou
shall have that to support thee? Let us wisely apply this Scripture when we are
thus abased; there was the greatest person in England in her time, (I speak it
not with any reflection) that said thus to one of her Favorites, when he was
desiring such and such a thing: My grace is sufficient for thee; what ground
there was for any mortal creature, though the greatest of Kings, or Queens to
apply, or make good these words, I know not unto man, but I am sure God can,
and does, and will do it unto his children; therefore let us rest upon him; and
whatever we undergo, say, Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me; here is a spirit of a
Paul indeed, a most saintlike spirit, the very spirit of a man that had been in
heaven; that had the highest pitch of Communion with God, and influence from
God, and impression of Gods Spirit upon his heart: most gladly therefore will I
glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me; sometimes
he says, in the 6. Galathians 14, God forbid, I should glory in anything but
in Christ, and him crucified; but this is very consistent, he therefore glories
in his infirmities, in reference to Christ, that the power of Christ may rest
upon him, he can be content to be any thing, or worse then nothing; and
notglory in those multitudes of Revelations and discoveries that are made to
him, but he will be content to glory in his reproaches, necessities, that the
power of Christ may dwell there; Let my weakness appear, so Christ's strength
may appear, for he says afterward; Quo magis adversis premor, co majora Deus
per me operatur. Grot.
when I am weak I am strong, when I am most weak in my self, then Jesus Christ
is most strong, when I am most debased in my self, Jesus Christ is then most
exalted in my soul; and thus Paul when he was in a strait, which would be no
strait to you or me, or most in the world, whether he should live or die, I am
in a great strait says Paul, I had rather for my self, be dissolved, and be
with Christ, Phil. 1. 21.
that I may enjoy him, but for you* I had rather be debarred of those joys for
a while; O here is a man that is kindly humbled; and most ingeniouslie-affected
toward Christ (the Lord if it be his will, out of the rich treasure of his
grace, vouchsafe the same mercy to you and me) that at least we may look, and
reach, and labor to climb, and creep by degrees, after this, that we may so
far love Jesus Christ better then our selves, that we would not only glory
in the Revelations we have, and the mercies we have, and the parts we have, and
the success, and acceptance; (these are plaufible and comfortable things) but
if we should be kept low, if God should visit us with humbling provividences,
if God should eclipse our Credit, or suffer us to be disparaged, that we might
say, heartily, O Lord, I therefore will glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me; The Lord raise us to such an Heroical frame
of spirit. I end all as Cyrill concludes his preface, Meum est docere, Vestrum
est auscultare, Dei est perficere.

FINIS.

