ITER LVSIT ANICVM; OR, The Portugal Voyage.

With what memorable Passages intervened at the Shipping, and in the
Transportation of her most Sacred Majesty KATHERINE, Queen of Great Britain,
from LISBON, to ENGLAND.

Exactly observed

By him that was Eyewitness of the same,
Who though he publish this, conceals his name.
Plus valet unus oculatus testis
Quam mill auriti. Aug.
Carmina secessum; scribentis and otia quaerunt;
me mare, me venti, me fera jactat hyems.
Verses ask time, and leisure, but I Am tossed
With winds, and waves, and with cold winters blast.
By S. H. a Cosmopolite. LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, for Robert Paulett at
the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane, near the Inner Temple Gate, 1662.

TO THE KING, His Most Sacred, and most Excellent MAJESTY.
PArdon, Great Sir, this forwardness of mine,
Pardon each rude, and indigested line.
I am no Poet, Sir, nor Poets Son,
It Is seldom, I ere look toward Helicon.
The Eminencies that in them are known,
Except their Poverty I must disown;
And't was my Loyalty, and not my Wit,
As Poet, that has still occasioned it.
Here; as it was incumbent every day,
I could not, Flamen like, but Sing and Pray.
Iliads, and Odyss', trouble, and Triumph too,
Of your Great Queen, Great Sir, I offer you.
I thought it my allegiance for to tell
What accidents within our Voyage fell.
To me 'twas Antidote against the harms
We feared, or felt, among the dreadful Storms.
It Is now an offering; your Majestic Frown
May mak't a burnt one, then I Am quite undone.
That would astonish and appale me more,
Then all the Horrors of the Sea before.
But it is your gracious Candor I do sue,
Which is both Patronage, and pardon too.
Grant it, Great Sir, to him, who nere knew how
To merit the least wrinkle, from your brow.
Send from the Chancery of your Royal Breast,
Your Royal pardon, my Quietus est.
Your Majesty's most humble Servant, Subject, and Suppliant, S. H.

A La Serenissima y muy Poderosa Reyna la Reyna de la Gran Britainia, Francia,
y IRLANDA, etc.
Serenissima Reyna,
YA que honrado he sido, con aver estado enserviendo a V. M.tad, en el Carlos
Royal; he dado a saber al' mundo, las amargas yervas con que Comio V. M.tad las
pascuas sobre el atlantico. en que recuento, estan acompan^ados, otros
memorables sucesos, que Comprehenden, las sumptuosas solenidades (en Lisboa),
de la partida de V. Mtad; y por amor de Orden y metodo, los he fundado en la
lustresa de los Gloriosos, y hechos muy famoses de los antepasados, de V. Mtad;
que primeramente scalaron El monte de Avila, y en progresso, con sus armas
valerosas se dieron ser, absolutos duenos del India Oriental y del poniente,
sobre ciudades infinitas, fortalezas y rios, Algunos de ellos saliendo del
Paraiso.

La vendicion de la Reyna del Zur, sea la de V. Mtad! en el gozamiento, asi de
la saviduria, como la persona del nuestro Solomon bendito: sea V. Mtad Como la
vin^a frutifera, naciendo por los paredes de su Casa! Sea su Casa un Castillo
impregnable! sempre bien Compuesta sin algun emfado estranxero! Sea su
primogenito de V. Mtad, el mas alto de los reyes de la tierra, que asi en
continuo reza.

Seranissima Reyna El muy humilde y muy fiel Criado y rezante de V. Mtad. S. H.

TO THE Most Serene and powerful Queen, the Queen of Great Britain, France,
and IRELAND, etc.
HAving had the honor to attend your Majesty in the Royal- Charles, I have
here let the world know with what bitter herbs your Majesty did eat your
Passover through the Atlantic Sea; which relation is accompanied with other
memorable passages that take in the pompous solemnities of your departure from
Lisbon: and being a friend to Method, and Order, have laid the Foundation
thereof in the splendour of your glorious and renowned Ancestors; who first
climbed up Mount Avila, and in process of time with their victorious armies
made themselves absolute Lords over the Oriental and Occidentall Indies, over
many Cities, Fortifications, and famous Rivers, some of which take their rise
from Paradise.

The blessing of the Queen of the South be ever on you, in the enjoyment both
of the wisdom and person of our gracious Solomon. May you be like a fruitful
Vine by the sides of his house; and may his house be an unvanquishable Fort
against all Assaylants; Let it never be disordered by any Foreign Invesion, or
Domestic Treason. May your Firstborn be higher then the Kings of the Earth.
This is the constant prayer of

Most Serene Queen Your most humble, and most faithful Subject, and Servant S.
H.

THE APOLOGY, TO THE READER.
EIght hundred leagues, short of Parnassus Mount,
My slumbring Muse, awakt, which made account
T'indulge her self in silence; since she h'as flowne
Over th'yawning Waves, and Seas, to Helicon,
And dipped her fluttering wings; returns again,
Meets me oth' Coasts of Portugal and Spain.
Thence she retires to England, where she Roves:
Amongst the Laurel, Thickets, and the Groves
Declaring in the following numbers, when
And where, and how King John got's Crown again,
Relating no Romance, but what was seen,
In the transporting of Great Britains Queen.
Presuming neither more then to begin,
And jangle, to get better Ringers in.
Resolving after this never to be seen
Or show her self, on the Pierian Green.
Censure not too severely these of mine;
Or write thy self, that I may censure thine.
S. H. THE ALARM, TO The SPANIARD.
IT is decreed! nor can thy tottering Fate,
O Spain, resist the Lusitanian State;
Though Ensigns, Ensigns, Armies, Armies meet,
And in dire Thunder Cannons Cannons Greet;
They Will reach the topmost Jewel in thy Crown,
And Place a Bend in thy Escutchion.
Sixty two years, in Triumph, thou have swayed
Their Scepter, to a Rod of Iron made.
Thy Yoke was heavy and their Bondage more.
Then the Sicilian Tyrants used before. (...)ve(...)i (...)ent(...).

Near nine times seven years Vassallage they knew
Bidding all Rights, and Liberties adieu.
But the Grand-climacterick-year being come,
It put a period to their Martyrdom,
And Tropic to thy Tyranny and rage,
Confining thee unto some other stage;
To Act thy bloody Scenes, as to their woe
The have done 'ith Indies, and at Mexico.
Maugre all Rancor, now it is decreed
To take thy turn, either to bend or bleed.
The Battle.
BUt what was gained by Philip the Second, then
By John the Fourth was reassumed again;
Their Laws, their Freedom, Privilege, and Crown,
By his successful sword were made their own.
That John, whose Ancestors in open field
Conquered five Kings, and made their Armies yield;
Lest Spain should plead Prescription, thought it best
To Send the Usurper his Quietu^ est.
What more did the Old Patriarch before Ab(...)

In Conquering of Chedor-Laomer,
And's Murnivall of Kings, on Sodoms Plain?
Then he, to get, and keep, his Crown again.
Nay! Rather less, he vanquished four, in all,
King John Triumphs over six, in Portugal.
Thus Old * Vlissision they did regain, Lisb(...) (...)ly e(...) (...)sion,
(...) (...)lisses (...) it w(...) (...) his t(...) Trav(...)

First, from five Kings of Moors; and now from Spain.
Both in December, both the very day
Of the same Month, they bore the Palm away.
The Conquest.
THE News, Torpedo-like, Con(...) riz (...) new (...) King (...) La(...) Alas
(...) i. e. (...) for I(...)
benumbed the Sense
Of Spain, with its Narcotick influence
Quite Changed the hue of Olivarez Face
For all his Counterseit Albricias:
Amazed the Inhabitants from whom 'twas gone,
Like lightning, beyond the Banks of Rubicon:
Two Kingdoms in one Morning to fall off,
May make the King to sigh, though the Count Olivarez scoff.
Such feathers from the Austrian Eagles wing,
With such dependencies, both Kingdoms bring,
'Ith East, and Western Indies; in the Isles,
Tercera, and Medera; in Brasile, (...) to (...)rbe

In Congo, Angola, Manac, Azarim,
Mombaza, Mozambick, and Agazim. (...)m to. (...)gitur (...)ndo.

Whole Cities, Countries, Nations did fall,
Throughout the World, to the Lot of Portugal,
And can Spain less then tremble, sigh, and groan,
To see such Prodrom's of Confusion,
Ruin approaching, and the People hurled
Into distraction, through the spacious world?
But as the victories at Marathon
did prove a Sabbath to the Athenian.
So what was lost by Spain, did prove to be
TO Algarues, (...)ra (...)be(...) (...)cu(...) in (...) (...)in (...)l(...)
the (...)he
and Portugal, a Jubilee.
The Triumph.
THy Ne plus ultra now is streach't as fair
As Ana, from the Streights of Gibraltar.
The Thebans, (...)er Cu(...) (...)tn(...)
Pillars that of old did stand,
As Bondaryes, on this, and the Africa Land,
Are now transplanted to the Indies, where
They 'have found a station in each Hemisphere.
From east to west, from Goa to Brasile,
The Spanyard fled before the Spanish steel.
Before that Sword, which only brandisht stood
Not bathed, nor drenched, like his, in the adverse blood!
Rather than kill, King John says, let't suffice,
To drive away these birds from the sacrifice.
Though they have mischief upon mischief pil'd,
We Will strike the Serpent, but we will spare the Child.
Remove the Spanyard, and restore the Crown,
To whom it is due by right succession.
Thus Ashur-like, the conquering Prince thought good,
Rather to swin in Oil, than wade in Blood:
One only Sacrifice, or two at most,
Appeased the King, and satisfied his host;
It Was not his glory, for to gulge, but taste
The Spanish blood, for all their Furies past.
One of that Nation, Vasconzello's Fall,
Spains Secretary, served to atone them all.
The Proposal of Marriage.
FIve Lustres are well nigh accomplished, A ^st(...) years
since
Lisbon has triumphed in her Native Prince.
For sixteen years King John the Scepter swayd,
Now in the Sepulcher of 's Fathers laid:
The Crown upon Alphonso th'sixth is come,
And with it all his vast Dominion.
Now it is the care, and interest of all,
But o'th Queen-Regent most of Portugal,
To match the only Daughter of the King,
From whom some Royal Cyons soon may spring.
That Queen, whose memory should be enrol'd
Amongst greatest Princes, and in lines of Gold,
Dispatches her Ambassador away
To Englands King, and then keeps Holy Day.
The publication of the Banes.
THe Banes between two Kingdoms, published, run;
B^rn by the wings of Fame through Christendom.
Twixt Englands Monarch, and the Infanta, there,
The sole Intelligence that moves that Sphere.
Englands First borne; King Charles, the Exiled Son
By Miracle restored to his Fathers Throne.
And Donna Katherina, who may boast
A change as wonderful upon that coast.
Great Charles, to whom all Christendom gives place,
And Royal Katherine, of Braganza's race,
Consult their Auguries, (...)spo(...)door (...)e.
and you will sinde both gain
Their Crowns, like spoils of Salmacis, again.
One to Insulting Regicides gives Laws,
The other from Spanish yoke the neck with-draws.
The Match completed.
SEe! See! the Illustrious pair of Princes greet!
Who in affection and in Fortune meet;
Heavens Arbiter, in Hymeneal-bands,
H'as joynd these Princes hearts before their hands. Quo(...) junx(...)
j^nx(...)

No Sea must sunder those whom Love conjoynes;
No time must ravel what great Hymen twines.
Tagus over flows her Banks; the Curled Maine
Sends out great tides to attend our Sovereign.
Neptune resignes his Trident, Venus swayes
No more; its Englands Empress rules the Seas.
The Royal Charles, proud of her Princely Bride,
With several gallant Squadrons, by her side,
Attends the motion, as her Convoy home,
Where three Crowns more are added to her own.
The Voice of Joy, and Gladness, now are seen
To fill the Palaces of King and Queen.
Nor was it the hand of Mortal man (alas)
But Gods right Arm, that brought it all to pass.
To His Excellency, the Earl of Sandwich.
HEaven's was the work, yet in these Royal Scenes
The Supreme Agent's pleased to work by means.
Angels have joined their hearts, and now their hands
By men must be conjoynd in Wedlock bands.
The management of which affair was due
To none alive (Lord Mountagn) but you:
You that by the Sea in th Royal Charles did bring
The Royal Charles, Great Britains welcome King,
From Heaven by Sea and Land are still employed
To Bring unto King Charles, King Charles his Bride.
Your Grandeur, as Ambassador, is seen,
In your attendance on great Britains Queen.
At every Audience, the Grandees stand,
In you to admire the Glory of our Land;
Your person splendent. and your numerous Train,
Dazzling all eyes, of Portugal, and Spain;
First, on the spacious River which of old
In Chronicle was famed for Sands of Gold:
Next on the thronged Shore, (...)ena
where millions stood
TO attend your Landing, from the Rapid flood.
Then, then the ancient Prophecies were Crowned
And store of Gold on Tagus Banks was found,
It was last Summer, Sir, when you began
To Catechize the bold Mohammedan,
And now your active Soul's ready, we see,
In England to Create a Jubilee.
Euope, and Afric too, do sound your fame,
To Europs glory, and to Africks shame.
Posterity, in Volumes shall declare
What your atcheivements were, what your Trophies are
What Is done within the Streights, what more,
Was spoke in thunder from the Tangier shore.
What memorable services were done
By your great prudence to our Nation.
The Spaniards said, when that great work was done,
you would laid a padlock on all Christendom.
Others were heard (of Eminence and note,)
To say, you would now the Spaniard by the throat,
The Hogen Mogens hearts did fry and burn,
To be so nigh, and miss so good a turn.
Thus through the Temple of Virtue you have past
To the Temple of Honor and Renown at last.
All your appearances at Court, Aboard,
In the greatest splendour Sea, or Land afford:
Two Nations, being at Contest, each who shall
Load, with most dignities, our General.
Such Honors has your Excellence, who brings
The best of Consorts to the best of Kings.
Thus to be Famed, and known, by one, and all.
Englands Ambassador and Admiral.
The Valediction between the Queen of England and the Queen of Portugal.
THe affairs of State, and ceremony, past,
The parting, and the farewell, comes at last.
The King, both Queens, with all their Glorious train.
Do Solemnly appear in Court again.
Here they receive his Excellence; and he
From them receives her Sacred Majesty:
So rich, so splendid, that you might have told
Whole rocks of Diamond, in Mines of Gold.
Here the two Queens took leave, but in such sort
As with amazement filled the thronged Court.
Their carriage more then masculine. No tear
From either of their Majesty's appear.
Art conquered Nature; State, and Reason stood
Like two great Consuls, to restrain the Flood
Of passion and affection; which, nere the less,
Appeared in sad, but prudent comeliness.
Majesty acted, as Dictator here:
And as Lord Paramount in's proper sphere.
Bearing the sway, and sole dominion
Of Art, Love, Reason, Nature, Passion.
Light sorrows find a vent, from Great ones rise
A damp that stops the sluices of the Eyes.
A Scene so solemn, that the standers by,
Both Lords and Ladies, did that want supply.
In this great concourse, every one appears,
Paying a tribute to them, but in tears.
Thus were they dry, like Gideons fleece; when round
About the spacious Court was watery ground.
And they that conquer Kings, and kingdoms too,
Show how themselves, themselves can conquer now.
It is not Caesar, or Miltiades
Can boast of Trophies, adequate to these.
Since they, that govern Passion, triumph more
Then they that conquer Kingdoms over and over.
Her Majesty Shipped on St. George his day.
SAint George was this day mounted in such state,
He feared no Dragon; and could find no mate.
This day surmounted other Feasts as far
As any Festival in the Calendar
Does other days; The Portugeses vaunt,
St. George their Guardian, and tutelar Saint.
St. George for England too, the English cry! Apr Stilo

Though perhaps neither knows the reason why.
This was the allotted, and the appointed day
The Queen first took possession of the Sea.
England and Portugal were then made one,
After a stately, grave Procession.
The Churches visited, the Offerings laid
On the Altars, and all due Devotion paid.
The People thronged in multitudes, to see
Their King, and our great Queen in Majesty.
Houses were out o'th windows hurled, the array
That in Imbroyderies, and Velvets lay,
And coffined up for many years before,
By all consents were turned out of door.
Thousands of houses, and vast pillars told,
Array d with Damasks, Silks, and cloths of Gold.
All Streets adorned, triumphant Arches framed;
In all rich Furniture as can be named.
Thus passed the King with all his Royal train,
Conducting the INFANTA to the Main.
Thus Englands Representative, (...)arl of (...)ch (...)el(...)
we see
Attend, receive, conduct her Majesty:
And as great Trajan triumphed once in Rome,
In Effigy: (...) oculi (...)de(...)
So they, that hither come
Our Great King Charles in Lisbon streets might see
Triumphant with his Queen in Majesty.
The Robes, and Royal Ensigns he put on
In The solemn day of's Coronation.
He in his Princely Portraiture, and she
Both in her Person, and her Effigy.
From the Procession to the Royal Gallery.
DOwn from the City, to the Sea they come
Into the Kings Gallery, a glorious Room:
And such, as they of Lisbon have not known
To speak the splendor of that Nation.
So Xerxes fettered up the Hellespont
With His bridge of boats; He, and his Army on it.
As the Grear King Alfonso, here, we see,
Over Tagus rears a stately Gallery;
(Barges and boats were numberless) which stood
To bridle up the raging of the Flood:
And make a Royal passage for the King,
For Englands Queen, and for what Nobles, bring
Their Majesty's aboard the Royal- Charles:
Dons, Condies, Marquesses, with Dukes and Earls.
Ladies and Lords san's number, with a train
Would blear the eyes, or break the heart of Spain.
Thus linked, and chained together now we stand,
As if the Sea were married to the Land.
And thus of two, both Nations were made one
In this arrival, and conjunction.
The Queen comes aboard.
ANd thus in Princely Equipage she comes
Into her gloriously Embellished Rooms,
Where Persia, India, Italy have sent
As tribute, both for use and ORnament,
Such Riches, and such Furnitur as flow
OR from Bezaleel's loom, or mines below;
Made by the curious Artists, to set forth
Their matchless skill, and the Queens matchless worth:
Her royal Cabin, and her State-room too
Adorned with Gold, and lined with Velvet through.
The cushions, stools and chairs, and clothes of State
All of the same materials, and rate.
The bed made for her Majestics repose,
White as the Lily, red as Sharons Rose,
For color, cost, and candor may compare
With what in History we find most rare.
Egypt, nor Isles of Chittim have not seen,
Such rich imbroderies, or such a Queen.
Windows with Taffataes, and Damask hung;
While Costly Carpets on the Floors are flung.
Regions of Perfumes, Clouds of incense hurled,
In every room of this our little World.
Here she begins her Progress; comes a board;
Turns Voyager to greet her Greatest Lord,
The Royal Charles by Sea and Land she will take,
Both for her Zenith, and her Zodiake.
Her Majesty's welcome Aboard.
Welcomed she was in thunder, while the shore
By King Alfonso's Order strives to out-roare
Our Cannon, and our Culverin, which fly,
And Fill the Land, the Waters, and the Sky.
Give fire the Captains cry, and Quick it is gone
Beyond the Axis of the Horizon.
Lightning and Thunder from each Oaken side
Proclaims the welcome of our Royal Bride.
Such Thunder bolts, and such Grenades fly
From Stem to Stern, from waters to the Sky
Between his Castles, and our floating Isles.
The amz'd In habitants for many miles,
Surpriz d with wonder, (...)arting
Gazed, and thought it strange
Earths Center reeld no^, at the Inter-change.
St. Georges Night.
THus has the day been solemnized by all;
But it is the night must Crown the Festival.
Then, then, Dame Nature had Convulsion fits,
And to keep up the Revels, lost her wits.
The Sea was all on fire, and people came,
In shoales like Fishes, to behold the flame.
The Great Pavilion of Condensed Clouds
Had now no other light but from the shrouds.
The Stars like images of Jupiter fell down,
And Fixed a while in the watery Region:
As if the Virgins, or Ariadnes Crown,
To Court the Queen had here descended down,
All lesser lights, as Homagers were sent,
To pay this duty in their Element.
The luster of the night darkened the day,
Dampt the bright girdle of Andromeda.
Nor could the famed Cassiope presume
Among these dazeling Tapers, to a Room.
Thus Israell-like we gly'd into the Sea,
Pillar'd with Fire by night, and Clouds by day.
The ancient Story of old Argos eyes,
In Cannons mouths you might Mythologize.
From Earth, and Waters, Light, and Fire, were sent
In Blazing Comets to the Firmament.
Balls of consuming Wildfire here were hurled,
Like to quick Fire drakes through the liquid world.
The lights of heaven were darkn'd, the pale Moon
Pulled in her horns, to see her self outdone.
Each Ship a globe of glory did appear;
Each light a fixed Star in's Hemisphere.
That that had least had most; (...)?
for there the Queen,
Queen-Regent of th'new Firmament was seen.
Charles Wain was here predominant, and these
Great lights below, dared the Antipodes.
City, and Sea were gilded with the shine
That overspread them both in this design.
Those Engines blazed with flames, which just before
Roared out in Thunder to the astonished shore.
The Hulls, the Masts, the Cordage, and the Tire
Of those Boanergeses seemed all on fire
And yet no noise nor harm; what did appear
Was fitted to the Eye, and not Ear.
To please the Queen. the Elements conspire,
That of the Earth, the Waters, and the Fire.
Oh for an Aye ry Wagoner, whose prayer
Elias-like, (...)s (...)i, (...).
may now command the Air.
The KINGS last Farewell.
THe wind was wholly contrary that day,
All which in visiting was passed away.
But then, when Morpheus had closed up most eyes,
And nights black Curtains were drawn over the Skies;
Down comes the King in's Royal Barge, amain
Incognito! with his harmonious train:
To sing his Sisters Farewell, which was done,
To Ecstasy, and Admiration.
Under our gilded Galleries he floats,
And there they advance their most melodious throats
In several Sonnets, which the Artist calls
Epithalamions, Carols, Madrigals.
Thalia to the Queen did here impart
What skill in Music lay, and what in Art.
What comes from Instruments, what from the throats,
Well warbl'd out in sweet-dividing Notes.
The vocal Music that we heard this Night,
Had in it the Quintescence of all delight.
Here was the true Arion, who they say,
Made Dolphins dance, and caper in the Sea
Here was the Orpheus, and Amphion too,
That with their Music did such wonders do.
Laid Charms on man and beast, made stones to rise
From th'sullen Earth, and re-salute the Skies.
It were a task for Lanier, Cook, or Lawse,
To give the merit of it just applause.
I want both Skill and Language to express
The order, melody, and comeliness
Of this nights action: But the approaching day
Silenced the Music, sent the King away.
That morning we put to Sea.
HElen, (...)na, (...). all
and Troy never parted; where the Queen
Was present, there the Court was also seen:
It Is now a floating in this Royal Arc,
At which the Stars may gaze, and Dogs may bark.
Down to the womb of moisture now we fall,
Leaving the Native soil of Portugal.
Where formerly on shore we did descry
Whole Constellations of Nobility
Clouded with sadness, Ladies all in Vails,
E're we weighed Anchor, or could hoise our Sails.
Each man's an Agamemnon, as they say,
Mourning to part with Iphigenia.
The Ladies farewell to her seemed to be
Sadder then th'parting of Andromache.
Oh! for a Zeuxis, or Aglaophon,
To paint their looks at Lisbon, now she is gone.
Deluged in seas of sorrow; hear their cries!
Colchos it self never sent forth such a Prize!
Great Englands Argonaut, that Princes bears,
That widows all our joys, drowns all our tears.
The Royal Charles, in her, has shipped in more
Than all the Lisbon Caracks did before.
Both Indies in a trice, where ere she comes,
She out-ballances all Wealth, Persumes, and Gummes.
Tagus does flow to Thames, and now White Hall
H'as found Capacity for Portugal.
London has swallowed Lisbon, Englands Coast
Has gained more from us, then our Conquests boast.
A virtuous Virgin, on whose cheeks do lie
Concentred Beauty, Grace, and Modesty.
A Gracious Bride, whose mere Intrinsic worth
Runs parallel with what the world brings forth;
A Glorious Queen, arrayed in Majesty,
Mirror of Virtue, Prudence, Piety.
A Virgin; Bride, and Queen, young, fair and good,
Leander-like attempts the curled Flood,
To court Great Britains King, o'th British shore,
Waving both Tagus and Pactolus over;
Leaving all hopeless e're her like to see,
Except it come, Great Charles, from Her, and Thee!
Good Wind and Weather.
ALL Oracles invok't, we launch again,
By Heavens safe Conduct, to the Briny-main;
Our Canvas swelling with such gentle gales,
As strain no Top-masts, and yet fill her Sails.
Our hollow Keels the Ocean do divide,
With all advantages of Wind and Tide;
Mercies do seem to multiply; We find
Fair weather added to the fairest wind
A cross and contrary Wind.
THe morn was glorious, but our hopes (Alas!)
Blasted, and withered, e're the day did pass:
The wind did alter, and the weather rage,
Both with the angry Element engage.
The Waves did rise, the Clouds let fall their Rain;
Ships took in Seas, Men pumpt them out again,
Nor were we far into the Ocean gone,
But we were crossed with an Euroclydon;
North-east, and turbulent just such a one,
As crossed that Vessel of Election.
He from Lasea, we from Lisbon came;
Ours had a storms, but his a tempests name.
The ambitious Waves in curled Billows fly
Rolling themselves in Mountains to the Sky; then (...)n (...)ains (...)lled
(...)ae; (...)a, (...)ng (...)an(...)

So vast, so very high, they seemed to some
To be the very Mountains of the Moon.
The hollow winds with whistling from the Clouds
Strain both the Topmast, Mainmast, Yards, and Shrouds.
The very day was darkness, and the night
Presented naught but horror to the sight.
The sounds of Port and Starbor'd heard before,
Were dwindl'd to Non-near, and ware-no-more.
The Face of Heaven was dreadful; and the noise
Of wind, and water drowned the Saylors cries.
'Larums of vengeance sounding in our ears,
So lately filled with Music of the Spheres.
In this Great bustle 'twixt the Sea, and Storm,
Some had their Main-sails, some their Topsails torn.
The Passengers in this Storm.
THe Jaw-fall'n Passongers could as soon ear
Morsels o'th Mainmast, as a mess of meat.
Cordials of Amber, and dissolved Pearl
Would now be Nauseous to Man and Girl;
Doctors and Pothecaries were useless now,
The Sea was Physic and Physician too.
Some in the Star Chamber, some in Cabins lie,
Neither had more to do, but winck and die.
Ai-ke! cries one, Jesus! another says,
Here Is one a cursing, there is another prays,
Here laughs a Saylor, while another cried,
He Would change this great Fish-market for Cheapside.
The Deck with sick men covered; so that
It looked like the valley of Jehosaphat.
Alive, or dead they knew not, like Men shot
With dreadful Thunder live, but know it not.
They who the Storm in darker Cabin's spent,
Took each his Coffin; and his Monument;
Resolving there to lie, and lie alone,
'Till the Trump should sound a't Resurrection.
A Whale near the Ship.
In The midst of these encumbrances, we spied
A Tortuous Leviathan by the Ships side,
Who on the Rouling waves did sport and play,
Taking his Pastime in the troubled Sea.
Great store of Porposes do here advance
Above the Surges: And the Dolphins dance,
As if those wonders which in the deep do lie,
Had all been shuffl'd into Mutiny.
With cross and adverse winds for thirteen days
We roll and tumble on the fearful Seas;
And pass our time with very small delight
Amongst Sons of Neprune, and of Amphitrite.
Each Man turns Votary, his Temple dressed
With Royal wreaths, like great Apollo's Priest,
Praying the Heaven of Heavens propitious be,
In the safe Conduct of her Majesty.
The Mariners Prayer.
ILLustrious Princess, may nor Wind nor Tide,
Crowd to disturb King Charles His Royal Bride.
Gentle as breath of Eunuchs be the Gales
That fill and swell your large distended Sails:
Now let all storms be crampt; The surly wind
That stirs Hesperian billows be confined:
May never Aeolus with boisterous blasts
Invade your Canvas Cordage, or your Masts;
Nor Thracian Boreas, whom Poets said,
Too loudly courted the Erythrean Maid,
Too saucily attempt to see you; But sail on
Free from them all, free from Euroclydon.
From all stones Billow-gnawn, and waves that roar
Like those upon Puzzola, or Baiae shore;
May never Remora, nor Proserpine,
Nor Aeacus, nor Alceus, who design
And prophecy hard Sea-adventures, Be
Occasioned to foretell your Naufragie;
Lest while such Destiny they should make known,
They blast our Kingdoms Glory, and their own.
Blessed by a higher Auspice, still go view
Your vast Dominion, while we jointly sue
Your safer Convoy through the watery main,
As the return of Englands Prayers again,
That He who gave's a King, and him his due,
Would give him all things else, in giving You.
Castor and Pollux too, who use to save
The weather-beaten-vessels from the wave,
With bright Orions help, May all cornbine
In Pitch-dark Firmaments most bright to shine.
That no cross Constellation them undo,
Who bear both Caesar's Name, and Fortune too.
But that from South to North we come again
With CHARLES his Bride enthroned in Charles his wain.
The Queens Courage.
A Little Remora the Ship, they say,
Of Caius the Emperor did stop the way;
But nothing can Retardate Englands Bride,
Hinder, or keep her from King Charles his side.
'Twas not a Cyclops that could block the way,
Or keep Ulysses from his Ithaca;
The sight of which he did prefer by odds
Before the Immortality o'th gods.
It was not Helespont, though it divide
The shores, from Sestos to Abydos side,
Could part that Amorous Pair, The Ambiguous flows
Conspired to bring them to their sweet repose. Le-

So here, while we our constant Course do ply,
Mounting on Surges sometimes to the Sky,
As if we would climb the Clouds: Then sinking fall,
With hollow Waves, as low as lowest of All.
Seas, like Ceraunian Mountains, that do swell
As high as Heaven, and fall as low as Hell;
Yet not the Envellop't Clouds, nor blustering Wind,
Nor raging Billows, though they roar by kind,
Such Resolution does her Breast afford
Can Fright the Infanta from her Royal Lord.
All danger she disdains, o're-looks all harms,
Till she be lodged within her Sovereigns Arms.
Cast up the various hazzards, and you will say,
They Are more then Hercules ran for's Omphale.
And yet none more vivaclous then She,
The Pride and Glory of the Company.
The reward of Patience.
THe turbulent Atlantic that did roar,
Bellow and bluster, but the day before,
Appears so gently mild, so calm to day,
You might well call it the Pacifick-Sea.
The raging Wind was breathless; Now no noise,
Or from the Surges here, or from the Skies.
E're long, twelve Leagues a Watch, the Yeomen cry,
A better Wind never blew out of the Sky;
A smoother Sea, no man alive can boast,
Or fairer Weather on the Biscay Coast.
The Sea-sick Passengers that loathed their meat,
Are readier now for to devour, then eat.
And that Ship-Royal, which in the darkest night,
To The rest o'th Fleet still bore the Royal Light, cum Pupp(...) tuler(...)

In these brave Gales has easily found the way
To be their Leader through the Atlantick-Sea.
And thus with winged-speed, She plows the Seas
(Like Atalanta, and Hippomanes;)
All Armed with Zeal: No Golden Apple here
To stop the Passage of her swift Carreire.
To the Queen.
A Main! For England, now the Say lors cry,
The Royal Standart fluttering in the Sky,
Old Palinurus to his Compass flies,
Having no Object now, (...)s^ (...)r.
but Seas and Skies.
Lifting his watchful Eyes, his heart, his hands,
The Helmesmen waiting still his quick commands.
The Weather beaten Pilots, who do know;
What Oracles, and Tripod's used to show,
Bestir themselves, improve their utmost skill
To do their duty, and observe his will.
That son of Neptune, the Lieutenant stands
Daring all Weathers, wary in's commands.
Master and Mates, the Boatswain, and his crew
From stem to stern, bid ease and sleep adieu;
From the Gunner, and his Gang, before and af't,
The rest o'th Navy are their duty taught.
Silence or Thunder from their Admiral
Creates Example here to One and All.
Each Mariner to his sheats, and Halyards stands,
Ductile and Pliant to supreme commands,
Restless and laboring, till their Anchor's laid
In Thames, Great Queen, which were in Tagus weighed.
To the World.
THe Royal Navy now being put to Sea,
Their Loyalty and Duty for to pay,
Let no bold interruption that can
Bid others stand, upon the Ocean,
'Twixt us and the Horizon, presume to appear,
On peril of being sent to their own sphere.
Lower your Topsails Dutchmen: strike amain;
Down with your Flags, proud Hollander and Spain.
Let no bold Frenchman dare to come too nigh,
That English Flags or Ensigns can descry:
Let all your several squadrons Homage pay
To the great Lord and Lady of the Sea.
To Englands Monarch still; now to his Queen;
Let not the thoughts of Ruben Intervene.
England! thy floating Isles, thy wooden Walls
Damps the discourse of ten Escurials:
A Navy so puissant never was known
To cross the Seas, since Seas knew Oleron.
On the Royal Charles.
SHips are Hermophrodites; we call them Men,
Charles, James and Henry; At next breath again,
She Is a brave Man of War, here is one for all,
P^h the Worlds wonder, and her Admiral.
The Royal Charles; The name o'th Faiths Defender,
Admits Expressions in a double Gender.
No Phlegmatic Commander can gainsay
This truth, but in discourse will pa'st away.
Bate me this Sea-absurdity, and then,
He fall to write o'th Royal Charles ag'en.
The Worlds seven wonders, Time had swallowed down,
Seem to be now disgorg'd in this alone.
A Ship so Large, so Gilt, so Gun'd, so Manned,
So Armed, so Fortified, as may withstand
All Opposition that may seem to come
From any Port or Part of Christendom.
Her Ensigns, Pendants, Streamers and Array,
Richer then the King of Tyrus put to Sea.
Her Trumpets Silver, and her Wastcloth's round,
Formed of the deep'st-dy'd-Scarlet could be found.
Her high-exalted-Masts like Towers would shake
The lofty Coloss over the Rhodian Lake.
Her Cannons, and her Culverine out-roare,
Ferar as Cacodemon on the shore,
And's Terrae-motus too; make Sea-Nymphs wonder
To hear them drown with their noise noise of Thunder;
Which Ecchoing from that stupendous Pile,
Would Deave the Deaving Cataracts of Nile.
Her loud-mouth'd-Cannons at each Volley make
The amazed Skies to rend, the Earth to quake;
He that were stung with a Tarantula
No Doctor needs, but hear them sing and play,
That makes him danoe, and dancing does most sure
Discharge the Poison, and complete the Cure.
Were such the Antagonists as made account
To lift up Pelion upon Ossas Mount;
Say they were strong as Tytheus, or stout
As proud Porphyrion, or Rhetus rout:
She like a Lioness to fury bent,
Peace-meal the trembling Saracen shall rend:
And they shall soon'st who most in blood delight
Lay weapons down, admire, but never fight:
When they her Great Artillery espy
And English Lions in her Fanes discry,
In homage to her Sovereignty shall yield,
Forgetful of their Projects, sword, or shield:
And all their numerous Fleets at her command
Their inauspicious squadrons shall disband.
Pass through her Sancta Barbara, and there
Such horrid, deadly Engines do appear
In such variety, as do declare
What Wit, Invention, and what mischief are:
Eighty-six Piece of Ordnance you may see
In The number of her great Artillery:
And each if levelled as they do not miss,
Worse then the Brazen-Bull of Phalaris;
For other Warlike Instruments we score
Of several sorts, about a thousand more.
Gorgon, the Ship of Perseus, ner' struck
Such terror to the Assyrians; Never took
Such vengeance on 'em, as she shall
Under the Conduct of our Admiral,
On all Opposers power from Thames, Ha(...), (...)me
her Throne,
To the Borders of Seafaring Zebulon.
Nor is her state impaired by this her strength,
But still keeps Company in breadth and length.
An Elegant contexture here you find
Of what may please the eye, or pose the mind.
Here Is strength and stateliness together meet,
Fullness, and Fineness do each other Greet:
Here Is all materials convenient,
That either serve for use, or Ornament;
That fit the Court, or Camp, in Peace, or War,
Some fetched from bordering Territories; some from far.
Inside and outside too you may behold
Ore-laid, or richly trimmed, with burnisht gold.
Her brazen Entralls through the Decks appear,
While Silken Flags are hovering in the Air,
Her rough and Oaken sides are lined within
With Velvet smoother then the Ermins skin.
Profit and pleasure meet; for with delight
Things necessary do present to sight.
In The Front a well manned Castle takes your sense
In The Rear a Court full of Magnificence;
Here sits in Majesty Great Britains Queen;
And Sons of Mars and Thunder there are seen.
The Glittering Ladies in her presence stand;
Without appears a rough and Armed Band;
Those do the Needle handle, these the Spear,
They have their Muffs, these do their Gantlets wear;
Those have their Beads and Bracelets, Pins and Laces,
These deal with Halyards, Cables, Sheats and Braces.
Now when a Glorious Journal shall be made
Of all the Voyages, Thou Charles! have had
On the dull waves below; Be it not denied
By all Consents, but thou be stellify'd,
And placed in the Spheers above, while we
Admire all wonders, in admiring Thee.
The Royal Charles in her present Capacity.
MEan time 't must be confessed by one and all,
The Court of England, and of Portugal:
The Floating Agora; The moving Camp,
That of all Regal Powers does bear the stamp;
The Church Epitomized; The State Calcined,
The Kingdoms garbl'd, and their Court refined;
The Sea-mans Aereopage and Arsenal,
The peoples Pantheon, and their Capitol.
The Army Modeled, and the Council all,
Or most Abstracted in our Admiral.
What Languages are wanting here? Amongst us
Are some of Athens, some of Ephesus.
Here are trades Manual, and to tell true,
Of several Regions, and Religions too.
Here Is a Reward for good, if good they do,
For bad here is places of Correction too.
In her we climb the Billows, work and pray
Tritons auspicious Conduct through the Sea:
Imploring the saf'st Passage e're was seen,
To land our Cargazoon, Great Britains Queen;
At whose Arrival Myriads ready stand
With Groves of Bays and Laurel in their hand,
To attend the Royal Nuptials, and as meet,
To lay them down at her Majestic Feet.
To the Nation in General.
THus England multiplies her Joys at last
Without Legitimating By-blowes Past.
The Rapes and the Adulteries o'th last Age,
Being quite proscribed the Verge o'th British Stage.
The Ravishers of Scepter, Throne, and Crown,
To the Gulf of shame and vengeance tumbled down:
From Royal and Illustrious Branches She
Delivers over to Posterity
Hopes of the greatest Glory, (...)en(...)
ere were hurled
By Fate or Fortune through the extensive World:
Thus Jubilees and Triumphs She puts on,
For the days and years of her Affliction.
Rebellion in's own Fatal chain lies bound,
And horrid Treason's Grovelling on the ground;
Both which with their Infection did fly,
Like to Acesta's Arrows, through the Sky,
And caught fire flying too, as soon as gone
In The upper, middle, and lowest Region.
But now the Be of Ashur, and the Fly
Of Egypt, both are banished Britany,
The heads of both those Hydra's are lopt off,
While Peace and Plenty at them both do laugh.
The Glorious Mothers of such Sons we see
As bless them both for blessing Majesty;
And of such Glorious Daughters as arise,
And in their Morn and Evening-Sacrifice
Do teach the astonished World on bended knees
To beg from Heaven Regala's like to these.
To the King and Queen.
OH! May Your Royal Sons as Cedars stand
To Govern Yours and many a foreign Land;
May the Remainder of Your Progeny
Like Pollisht Corners of the Temple be:
That Kings, and Queens, Crowns, Scepters, Diadems,
May Flow and Flourish from Your Regal Stems,
To Rule both East and West; (...)ule
May Thules bounds
Be but one Tropic to Your Royal Crowns.
Thence may Your Awful Scepters stretch as Far
As is the Artick from the Antartick Star,
And Crown succeeding Ages with the Joys
That to their Children from Your Loins arise.
FINIS.

