THE SPRING OF Strengthening Grace In the ROCK of AGES, CHRIST JESUS.
DEMONSTRATED In a plain and short SERMON Preached at Twickenham in Middlesex,
near Hampton Court, April 16. 1648. By Thomas Hill D.D. Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge.

PHIL. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: for God
works in you, both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure. De ipsis
hominum voluntatibus facit, quod vult, and quando vult, habens humanorum
cordium, quo voluerit, inclinandorum omnipotentissimam potestatem. Aug. de
corrept. and Great. cap. 14. Christus meus and omnia.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, 1648.

TRVTH and LOVE Happily Married in the SAINTS, And in the Churches of Christ.
Ephesians 4.15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ.
Paul's chains and tears have had a prevailing rethorique; he has wept as well
as swet over his hearers with good success: Acts 24, 25*
when he was to preach to Felix, though a Prisoner, though with a Chain, he
made him tremble; and here in the first Verse, he comes as a Prisoner for their
sakes to beseech them; and a further and special Emphasis, The Apostle uses
four Arguments to Unity. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the spirit in the
bond of (...)*
he comes to persuade them to that which is most pleasing, namely, To Unity; to
which purpose he uses four several Arguments;

First, There is a common engagement of all Saints to Unity: I beseech you walk
worthy of your Vocation, whereunto you are called, with all lowliness and
meekness, forbearing one another in love; there is one body, one spirit, even
as you are all called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all; here is a whole bundle of Arguments, in this first consider your
Vocation, those Privileges to which you are advanced thereby; and they leave a
very great obligation upon you, as Saints to study Unity.

Equity of the thing, Verse 7.
in the 7. Verse. Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure
of the gift of Christ: unto every one of us; every one has some gift, as it
pleases Jesus Christ to proportion out such a measure to this Saint, and such a
measure to that Saint; the little finger in the mystical body, so much as is
fit for him, in the hand, so much as is fit for him, and this with a common
respect, that there might be a mutual use of all those, with subserviency to
the whole; in reference to the mystical body of Christ, there is an equity in
it.

great congruity; and that argument you shall find in the 8, 9, and 11,
Verses: Verse. 11, 12.
Jesus Christ when he did ascend, he gave gifts to men; all the gifts that are
in the Churches, and graces, they are derived from the same efficient cause,
and therefore it is most incongruous, that they should be distracted and
divided, so as to reflect dishonorably upon him that is the sole efficient
cause of them, and that with common intents and purposes, for good of the
mystical body.

necessity of it, Verse. 13, 14.
till we all come to the Unity of Faith, and that we be no more tossed to and
fro as children, and carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine; but that
we speak the truth in love, and so grow up into Jesus Christ in all things, who
is the head; here is the necessity of it, you will never grow up to intimate
communion and fellowship with Jesus Christ, you will never make a wise improvement
of him, as members of the mystical body, unless you learn this heavenly skill,
namely, How to advance Unity; and so I come to show you what propositions this
last Argument, drawn from the necessity of the thing, Verse 15.
will afford us; in the 15. Verse, which by Gods assistance, according as the
weak measure of strength I have will bear, I shall insist upon at this time,
But speaking or following the Truth in Love, grow up into Christ in all things,
which is the head: where first, its clear,

Doctr. 1.
Jesus Christ is the head of Saints, the head of the Church.

Doctr. 2.
2. The Lord Jesus Christ when he ascended and gave gifts to men, did intend,
did expect, that there should be such an entertainment of the gospel, that we
should grow up into Christ in all things, who is the head.

Doctr. 3.
3. Thinking, speaking, following the truth in love, is the Gospel method to our
Spiritual welfare; I Will begin with the first,

Christ is the head of particular Saints, and the head of the Church: Doctr. 1.
In the state of innocence, Adam was the head of the great family of the world,
when he forfeited his headship, and all that he did enjoy, by eating the
forbidden fruit, that family was dissolved, he was turned out of Paradise, all
was scattered abroad, and we with him, were then cast into a desperate
condition, unless God would be pleased to find out a second Head; and to that
purpose, out of the riches of his Grace, and the infiniteness of his Wisdom,
that which Angels could not reach, which men had not so much as any thoughts
of, or desires after, God pitched upon, namely, Christ, and designed him the
Head of the Corporation of his Church, of a certain number given unto him in
his eternal Counsel, for whom he should undertake; and this learned Expositors
conceive to be the meaning of that place, where he speaks of (...) there in
Ephesians 1.10. That he might gather together all things, (...).
that all things might be headed under one; headed under Jesus Christ: Now
before the fall, all were headed under the old Adam; now when they were in a
shattered condition, they should be reconciled and collected, headed under
Jesus Christ; for the better opening of this, you may be pleased to take notice
of three particulars:

Headship it self.

Appropriation of this Headship, to whom he is a Head.

Headship.

The Headship it self o^ Christ.
First, For the Headship it self; he is a Head,

1. Respectu Dignitatis.
1. In regard of his pre-eminence; it is an expression in 1 Col. 17.18. In all
things having the pre-eminence, he is the Head; every member in the mystical
body has a Dignity, and is advanced to an excellency, to some degree of it,
but he that is (...) that has the preheminency, he is the Head, that is
Christ; but this is not all, if you look upon a Picture, there the head of a
man has a pre-eminence, therefore we must have more then this: He is head,

2. Respectu Regiminis.
2. In regard of Direction, and in regard of Power, being a wise head, able to
advice, and guide, and govern the body; as the Apostle Peter speaks of him in 1
Pet, 3.22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels,
Authorities and Powers being made subject to him; he has a universal, and
absolute regiment over all things in heaven and earth, over men and Devils: but
then

3. Respectu Influxui.
3. In regard of that Influence that he does convey to the bodies: Sense and
Motion is derived from Christ as the spring; it is true, that in the natural
body, there the heart is primum vivens, but in the mystical body, the head is
primum vivens, and he gives life to us, and we derive our life from Jesus
Christ, the head; he has life, and he has it abundantly in himself, and he
lives, that we may live; as I remember there is such an expression in John
10.10.

4. Respectu Vnionis.
4. In regard of Union, he does tie altogether; the nerves and sinews would not
unite the members of the mystical body, unless Jesus Christ were the Head; As
he is the Foundation stone, and so supports the building, so he is the Corner
stone, both the beauty, and strength, and union of the building, Fundatio
fundatissima, as Junius renders it, in Isa 28.16. a most sure foundation, and
the Corner stone, as Peter has it, in 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. with reference to that
place; and so in these four particulars Jesus Christ has a Headship: The
appropriation of Christ's Headship.
the next thing is now, The appropriation of this Headship, to whom is he a
head? He is an external Head to all the members of the visible Church, to all
professors as he is a vine, and does communicate some sap to those that are in
him, no way but by an external profession, as you have it intimated in John
15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, shall be cut down and cast into
the fire; and therefore there are some branches in him externally, as he is an
external Head to the Church, as he is a vine; but indeed, he is properly the
Head of his body, the Savior of his body; he is a Head to those, to whom he is
a Savior, in Ephesians 5.23. As the King has a common relation to all his
Subjects, but a more pecular relation to the Queen, who is a Subject and a
Spouse, Note.
and so has Jesus Christ to his Church; and the reason is this, because there
is a full commensuration betwixt all the three glorious persons in the
Trinity; they are grossly mistaken that will make Jesus Christ to dye for all,
and yet will not in their sense, so as to make them Salvabiles if they will,
and yet cannot say, That either God has given Christ to all, or given all to
Christ, or that the Spirit of God will apply that Redemption to all, for there
is a commensuration, there is an adaequation, betwixt the three glorious
Persons in the Trinity, and their workings for the Salvation of the Saints:
Jesus Christ dies for those whom God has given to him, with purposes of
Salvation; I do not deny, but all the wicked in the world, may have some
benefit by the death of Christ, as all have some common pledges of the bounty
of God, and all may have some common operations of the Spirit of God; but if
you will speak of any thing as to Salvation, there is a commensuration betwixt the
three persons in the Trinity, and their workings; Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, Sanctification of the Spirit, and the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, in 1 Pet. 1.2. indeed in 1 John 2.2. He is a
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world: Note.
to whom did John write that Ep^stle? to the Jews; and therefore to show that
they had not all Religion now engrossed amongst them, and that the Election of
God did not still run amongst them, only he speaks in that dialect, he did not
intend every particular man in the world, for then he must intend men that sin
against the Holy Ghost, which is impossible that they should be saved: No man
will say that understands any thing, even in Catechistical Divinity, that Jesus
Christ dyed to save them, which he must do, if he dyed for every man in the
world, with such purposes to save them; and so in 1 Timothy 1.4, 5, 6. He is given
a ransom for all; why all? There is one God, and one Mediator, now Jews and
Gentiles; as Jesus Christ did take our nature upon him, both Jews and Gentiles,
all estates shall have the common privilege, and benefit, and advantage of
being in a capacity to receive blessings from him, spiritual saving blessings,
that is, all conditions, whether Kings, and all in Authority, or Servants, or
others, not every particular person, but as in one place Jews or Gentiles, so
in another place, not this or that condition, but all estates, and all
relations, and all conditions; but still the Appropriation is to the Church, as
here he says, from whom the whole body is joined together in the 16. Verse.
from whom, from Christ the whole body is joined together, so it is the body
that has this influence from him; Christ's Title to this Headship of his Church.
but then

3. What is his Title to his Headship? it is threefold;

The designation of God and the Father: God the Father has sealed him, he gave
him to be a Head to the Church over all things, in Ephe. 1.22, 23. and then

His personal fitness: Of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, In him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom; and then

His own propitious readiness: We were not in any degree so willing to be
saved, as he is to save us; He came down to seek and to save that which is
lost; Luke 19.10
the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and anointed him to preach the Gospel, it
was his business; and as he had a Commission from his Father, and came under
the Broad-Seal of Heaven, so he had a strong inclination ^^^m his own bowels,
to engage him to it; there is his Title: the use of this,

Use. 1. Pope no vicarious Head of the Church. v. Polau Sputag. p. 3351.
1. To try the title of the Popes Headship to the Church; how comes he by it?
for a Church to have two Heads, one body to have two heads, it is a Monster,
you will make it Monstrous; we do allow in a good sense, That the Supreme
Magistrate is, Caput politicum in the Church, to command good things according
to the Word of God, and to restrain evil according to that Word; we hold forth
confidently, that Jesus Christ, he is the only proper Head of the Church, that
does convey all saving spiritual blessings; life, nourishment, direction, and
all those admirable advantages to the body; v. B^d^l.
we cannot allow a Caput Vicarium, a Ministerial Head, there is no need of
that; Jesus Christ is the (...) the Head; here is an Article that gives an
Emphasis, what needs it any other? Jesus Christ is present always in his
Church; when he withdrew his Corporal presence, he would then requite his
Church with his Spiritual presence; and that presence of his Spirit, it should
accompany them to the end of the World: But the Pope as great as he is, cannot
be present in every place; we need not spend any more time in crying down that
that is so prodigious: so many several Saints, and so many several Churches, in
several parts of the world, how is it possible that a Pope can be Head of them
all? but then

2. Beware of being injurious to the least member of Jesus Christ: If Christ be
the Head of the body, Use 2. Caution. Its dangerous to be injurious to any of
Christ's members.
surely his body is dear to him; never think to ruin the body, or to drown the
body, as long as the Head is able to keep it self above wat^^; never think to
hurt the body, as long as the head is able to secure it, and protect it, and
defend it; there are very notable expressions in several of the Prophets, as in
Daniel, There are four great Monarchies, Dan. 2.45.
then came a little stone hewn out of the mountain, and breaks them all, one
after another; All opposite powers to the Kingdom, and Headship of Jesus
Christ, shall be confounded, in despite of the Pope, and Turks, and Devil and
all: All the Kingdoms of the earth shall at last become the Lords, and his
Christ's, and then in the 12. of Zachary, you shall find there in the 5. Verse,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls numerously, for I, says
the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in
the midst of her; a wall of fire to burn up the Enemy, and I will be the
glory in the amidst of her, for the comfort of his people, the presence of God
is the glory of any place, and therefore he says, He will create a defense
upon the glory; an admirable place in the 4. of Isaiah, Verse 4, 5.
Pour upon them a Spirit of burning and judgment, to direct them, and consume
the Enemies, and he will create a defense upon all the glory, upon his Saints
which are the glory, so he is pleased to count them, though there be no
preparations in them to raise a defense, he will create it; yea in Zach. 12.2.
Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all people round about: And
in that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all that
burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the
earth shall be gathered together against it; Strong encouragement for all
Christ's members.
O what encouragement is here for the poor Saints, the Citizens of Jerusalem!
let all the desperate Atheists, and profane opposites, combine against the
people of God and plot, although they may have it may be some particular
advantages, as it is said of the Romans, they were Pralio victi, but not Bello,
it may be now and then they may get an advantage in this combat against the
Church, but yet they shall never totally and finally overcome them, though they
be all gathered together; God will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone to all
that burden themselves with it: There will a time come, when the Lord will
grind to pieces, all those that have any Antipathy against Jerusalem, when God
will trample Satan and all other Enemies under the feet of his Jerusalem, Romans
16.28.
when God will call for all them forth, that would not have him to rule over
them, Bring forth mine Enemies that would not I should reign over them, and
slay them before me, in Luke 19.27. there is the second Use.

Use 3.
3. If Jesus Christ be the Head of the Church, then surely he must have a body;
an head without a body were prodigious, and therefore that Doctrine of the
Arminians must needs prove false, That would have Jesus Christ come into the
world upon these terms, and to dye upon such considerations, that all things
should be left so far to man's Free Will, that it was in their power, unless
they would be so good natured as to believe, when Jesus Christ called upon
them, that he should not have one Member, Contrary to Pau^s Doctrine. Phil.
2.13.
no body at all: This is the erroneous Doctrine of Arminius and his Followers,
that go upon his principles; is it impossible that Jesus Christ should not have
one Member, for he gives only posse, he gives not velle, if you will not
believe, and improve your Free Will, you may choose whether ever you will
believe or no; they will not allow, that Jesus Christ by an invinciable, by an
almighty power, shall carry men, and overcome men so far, as to make them of
unwilling, to be willing to believe; yea, where Arminius has four decrees
concerning the Salvation of men, you may be within the compass of all those
four decrees, Note.
and yet not be saved, a miserable condition; he tells you, God has decreed to
give Christ, and means, and that all who believe shall be preserved and saved,
but he tells you not that he has decreed to give faith and repentance to any
one man, to enable him to believe, To believe is man's act but faith is Gods
gift.
and therefore it is a most dishonorable Doctrine to the Headship of Christ;
blessed be God that it so much discovered, and we are so far delivered from it,
though it is most unhappily of late in some parts of it, got into too many
Popular hands. But then

4. Take heed (I beseech you) of any obstructions that might hinder a sweet
communion betwixt the Head and the Members, Use 4. Caution.
that might hinder an intercourse betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls; let this
rather be your care, to gain that heavenly skill, how you may make use of Jesus
Christ as the Head.

Sovereignty, let him be all in all; the Sovereignty of his Grace, and the
Sovereignty of his Independency, to save whom he pleases, and to do what he
pleases with men, Romans 9.15.
to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and because he will have mercy.

Wisdom as a Prophet, seek wisdom from God, and it shall be given you, in James
1.5. as you should give him the honor of his Sovereignty, allowing him this,
that as the Potter, he may make some vessels to honor, 2. Tim. 2.20*
and some to dishonor, as he pleases.

of his Riches and Fullness, seek supplies from him, do not live upon your
selves, nor upon your duties, nor upon ordinances only, but live upon Jesus
Christ in all, so give Christ the honor of being the spring of your Supplies;
in him are fresh springs.

best friend in the world, and labor for such an intimacy with him, that he and
you may be acquainted, for he says, If ye love him, and keep his commandments,
he and his Father will come and take up his abode with you, and he will
manifest himself to you, in John 14.23. O how much of heaven will that soul
have upon earth, that he should have Jesus Christ come and dwell with him! and
when he goes to Prayer, manifest himself, when he goes to read the Scriptures,
paraphrase upon the Bible, and suggest sweet hints to him; when he is in any
straights, overpower him with a Divine instinct, though he has not an express
revealed will to walk with, as we have not in every particular circumstance of
an action; O that then Jesus Christ should particularize some general Scripture
to you, or bring something to your mind that you have heard in a Sermon, it
may be a dozen years ago; give him the glory of this, and improve him to this
blessed purpose.

2. Doctr.
The Lord Jesus Christ did intend, and does expect, that upon his ascension and
giving gifts* there should be such an entertainment of the Gospel, that we
might grow up into him in all things, who is the Head: It is the perfection of
a Christian, to improve all the three Persons in the Trinity; when you look
upon God and his attributes, to find proportionable impressions upon your
souls, by his greatness, to learn to fear him, by his godness to love him; when
you look upon the Spirit of God, and his working, then likewise to feel some
stamps answerable thereunto, that you may have an inclination to comply with
him in all things; so likewise when ye behold Jesus Christ in the passages of
his redemption, to make use of all, that there may be some proportionable
correspondency betwixt his dispensations toward you, and your improvement of
them. And here I shall briefly desire you to consider under this point, these
three particulars:

intention it self, and the expectation of Jesus Christ.

grounds of it: and

ends of it.

Christ's intention and expectation in giving gifts.
1. For the intention and expectation of Jesus Christ himself, when he did
ascend and gave gifts, it is this, in three particulars:

growth.

growing up into Christ.

in all things: I beseech you mark these three particulars.

First, That there should be a growth; how a growth? so as to complete the
number of all the Saints, 1. That there should be a growth.
that not one of them be lost: Jesus Christ has undertaken, that he will not
lose one that God the Father has given him, and therefore all those must be
called in; and it is conceived by learned Expositors, that that is the meaning
of this place, Christ has given gifts, for the perfecting of the Saints; that
is, for the completing the number;

To fill up the number of persons, that so many as were elected from eternity,
so many might be called in: and then

For the completing of the graces of those Saints, both in the degrees, and in
the activity of them, for Jesus Christ (it is Ephesians, Which is his body, the
fullness of him that fills all in all: Ephesians. 1. last.
Jesus Christ fills all in all, and yet (he says) his body is the fullness of
him; he is pleased not to account himself complete as head of the Church, till
his members be completed, as to the number of them, and till their graces
likewise be complete to such a degree as he intended: but then

Secondly, There must be a growing up, there must be the manner, grow up into
Christ; 2. A growing up. (...).
not only a concorporating with Jews, as the Gentile Churches did, in the 3.
of the Ephesians, not only an incorporating into Jesus Christ, though that is
very much, into the body of Christ, but a transforming into Christ, that you
may be molded in Christ; I would not be too bold with those expressions of
Nazianzen, because I see they are abused, (...) It is an admirable one that
Athanasius has, That Jesus Christ took the nature of man upon him, that so we
might have the nature of God conveyed to us, the divine nature; there is a
ground for that expression, in 2 Pet. 1.4. and a delivering up into Christ,
into his word, in Romans 6.17. the form of doctrine into which you were
delivered; here is an admirable improvement of Christ, when a Sermon is
delivered to you, the mind of Jesus Christ discovered, for you to be delivered
up to it, that you may go out of the assembly under the power of that truth,
and molded in it; and then withal, that Christ might be in you, and you might
be in Christ, that there might be a mutual in-dwelling, as in that place in
John, yea, that we may come to live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, in
Gal. 5.25. yea, and that the very life of Faith, the life that we live, may be
by faith in the Son of God, in Gal. 2.20. not only now and then to pray in
faith, but to live by faith, to act all in faith; here is a growing up into
Christ, not only a growing to some knowledge of Christ, or to some profession
of Christ, or to make toward Christ, but to be molded, to be transformed into
Christ; here is the entertainment and improvement of the Gospel that Christ
expects: but then

3 Growing up to Christ in all things.
Thirdly, Growing up in all things unto Christ; There is the proportion, or the
dimension, as a Head, Our growth must be as large as his Headship; now as he is
a Prophet, so we must grow up into him, that we may have wisdom, and all those
supplies from him; as he is a Priest grow up in him, that we may have
Righteousness from him, for the covering of all our sins; as he is a King grow
up in him, that we may have a Redemption from all our snares, bondages and
enthralments; for our being and well being, having our subsistence in him, in
God the Father, and in Christ Jesus, as in 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. when we are converted,
we come to have a new subsistence in Christ: for Truth, and for Degrees of
Grace grow up into him, for habits and acts, for the velle, as well as for the
posse, for converting and renewing grace, for it is he that works in you the
will and the deed, of his own good pleasure, as in Phil. 2.13. for comforts,
and for hopes, in 1 Pet. 1.8. That you may have joy through believing, and the
God of peace fill you with hope, in Romans 15.13. all our strength and comfort
lies in union with Christ, and influence from him: Note.
It is an easy matter to sprout in hypocrisy, and in self-love, and in
earthliness, and so in a formal external profession, and to have a bulk of
outward performances; but its an hard matter to grow into an inward communion
and intimacy with Jesus Christ, to be transformed into him. So I have done now
with the first thing, the sum of the expectation; the next is,

The grounds
The ground, why Jesus Christ expects this; for very good reasons,

Reason 1.
1. This is the grand purpose and effect of Christ's ascension; he did ascend to
give gifts, he did ascend to give his Spirit, and that is the great promise of
the New Testament; he promised to give his Spirit, and shall he give his Spirit
which he purchased at so dear a rate, and shall the Spirit give gifts to men,
and those gifts be actuated, and exercised, and prepared for you, and shall not
we improve them? O what an ill requital is here!

Reason 2.
2. He has a vehement desire of union and communion with all those that God the
Father has given to him, Behold I stand and knock at the door, if any will
hear my voice, then I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me;
that is a melting place, a winning place, in Rev. 3.20. Jesus Christ is
impatient (as it were, I may speak it with reverence) to want communion with
them who are his in Gods eternal counsels. But then thirdly, Christ may well
expect this,

Because attaining the intended stature and measure of the fullness of Christ,
Reason 3.
we are fit for heaven, as in Ephe. 4.13. Till we all come to the unity of
faith, and to the perfect stature of the fullness of the age in Christ,
therefore there is such a pitch, and Jesus Christ expects it; you will never be
fit for him, till you come to your pitch: there is a minimum quod sic, as
Philosophers speak about natural bodies, so about every member of the mystical
body, you must come to such a degree of grace before you are fit for heaven;
now God has designed you that, that you may be meet to be partakers of the
inheritance with the Saints in light: it is not slipping out of a drunkards
habit, Note.
and to desire to be dissolved, or to receive the communion, or to give such
and such legacies, or to send for a Minister, and say, Lord have mercy on me:
No; thou have been a drunkard and an Atheist all thy days, thou art not meet to
go to heaven; Paul blesses God that has made him meet: Heaven is a holy
place, and God is a holy God, and thou have a very cursed sinful nature, very
unfit for heaven, till thou be pollished, fashioned and framed; now Jesus
Christ expects this: The third particular follows; I shall not dispatch all,
you will give me leave to consult for my own health. As you have had the
expectation it self, and the grounds of it, so you shall have

The end: Now the ends of it are two, The end.
why Christ intended this, and expects this:

stability in Christ: and

improvement of Christ.



Stability in judgment; O that is an admirable thing: The stability in Christ.
Stability in judgment.
Health of body is a great matter, but truly soundness of faith, especially in
these unstable times, is much greater: It is a good thing to have the heart
established with grace; that is, with the doctrine of grace, and not with
meats, not to be carried up and down with this wanton opinion, and that wanton
opinion, in Heb. 13.9. A good thing to have the heart established in grace.

Stability of affection.
To have a stability in affection; that thy affections may center upon Christ,
as thy love, and thy desire, and thy hope, and thy joy; thou may desire
other things, yet thou may be able to say, Psalm. 73.25.
I have none in heaven but thee, and none in earth that I desire in comparison
of thee; you may love other things, but you may be able to say, I love Jesus
Christ for himself, and love my self and all other things in reference to him;
I value power, and estate, learning, and all outward thing, nothing, but with
reference and subservience to Jesus Christ: O here is a sweet stability of
affection! and that Jesus Christ may not only be thy joy, but the exceeding
gladness of thy joy, Psalm. 11.
a triumph of joy, to joy more in knowledge of Christ, and communion with
Christ, then you do in all outward comforts and advantages whatsoever: here is
a sweet stability of affection; these people will not be carried up and down so
much with either crosses or comforts, as very many are. But then

Stability of conversation.
There is a stability of conversation, that is, a blessed stability, in James
1.8. A double minded man is unconstant in all his ways; as long as you have an
end and an end, a heart and a heart, a mind and a mind, you will never be
constant; you know not where to find any men in the world, but godly men,
because they have fixed principles, Note.
they make conscience; but come to a covetous man, when you speak of his
covetousness, there you have him, when you speak against his earthliness, there
you lose him; he has a double mind, something for God, and something for the
world, has no more Religion then suits with his worldly designs; he will hear
a Sermon because it is cheap, yet he will (it may be) deceive you in his shop,
because there is his interest; and he will (it may be) be jolly and frollick,
and scoff over a cup of sack at the people of God soon after Sermon, though he
has expressed (it may be) a great deal of zeal to the Minister; why, there
lies his interest, he is a jolly man, a professor at large, and he must be
bold: O here is no stability. It is a blessed thing, and a sweet advantage* and
Jesus Christ intends this, that you should be grounded in Christ, being rooted,
and grounded, and stablished in the faith, in Colosians 2.7. Now the next end
is this,

Your improvement of Christ: An improvement of him, Improvement of Christ.
for what purpose?

Why, for all necessary gifts; as a Magistrate, as a Minister in any place of
trust, he has variety of gifts, in 1 Cor. 12.

For all graces; he has variety of graces, he has abundance of Spirit, that
you may be filled with all the fullness of God, as I remember in Ephesians. 3.19.

In all conditions and relations; In all conditions and relations.
that you may know how to be sick, and how to be poor; how to be Magistrates,
how to be Ministers; I have learned to want and abound, I can do all things
through Christ enabling me (says Paul) in Philippians 4.13. And then,

In all duties; you can do nothing without Christ, In all duties.
but as he gives in, as he communicates himself, and vouchsafes to assist you;
when he withdraws, you flag, you wither.

I Will be bold to say a word to my Brethren of the Ministry: Use. 1.
O that Ministers would chiefly study and mind this work, this is proper
Pulpit-work, to put people upon such an entertainment of the Gospel, that they
might improve Jesus Christ, and grow up to a stability in him; Paul was sent,
had a Commission, according to the faith of Gods elect, That is, to preach the
Gospel for the working faith in Gods elect.
in Tit. 1.1. and Gal. 4.19. I travel in birth with you (says Paul) till
Christ be formed in you: O what pain it cost him every Sermon. It was a great
speech, yet I have heard it as a certain truth concerning Reverend Mr. Bains,
That every Sermon cost him as much in his sense (as he thought) as it did
ordinarily cost a woman to bring a child into the world; I travel in birth,
till I see Jesus Christ formed in you; Pulpits are not for News only, Note.
and to lead people this way, and that way, upon politic designs, and
sometimes upon our own carnal interest; Pulpits were never intended for
passionate invectives, to cry up this party, or cry down that party, in a
vehement passionate manor; let us rather use hard reasons, and soft words: If
we conceive they be in an Error, undermine their Error, and avoid any
exasperating provoking names, which rather alienates them, and hardens them,
then recovers them: This is not the method to preach men unto Christ, but
rather to preach away the most and best of our hearers.

Use 2. For Citizens chiefly, who enjoy such rich Gospel-advantage.
Is it thus, that Jesus Christ intends this entertainment of-the Ministry,
that we may grow up into him in all things; then I beseech you give me leave to
call upon you, and I do not know where I could speak more fitly in any place of
the world, then in this famous City, and never more seasonably, then when the
Representative of the City is met, namely, that you would consider, What means
you enjoy, what Gospel Light the Lord has entrusted you with, Mat. 11.22.
and what he expects from you; will it not be much easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah, then for London another day? you that have been lifted up with
Capernaum to heaven, if you improve not the means, make account, if one place
in hell be hotter then another, to be thrown down into it: And all I have to
say, is this, Let it be your care so to improve the Gospel, that you may derive
more from Christ, and live more in Christ, and express more of Christ* that you
may be inclined and enabled to do more for Christ: Here accept these two short
hints;

Growth must be proportionable to the means you enjoy.
1. Growth must be proportionable to the means you do enjoy: Brethren, let me
confidently say it, That measure of growth that might please God in some parts
of England, will not satisfy God from you that live in London; why? because as
you have higher food, and more spiritual and more glorious Gospel-discoveries,
the Lord expects proportionable improvements: And let me say this,

Growth must be of all parts.
2. There must be a growth of all the members of the body; that is a rule
Philosophers give, Augmentation is of all the parts, and therefore to grow
upwards and downwards; to grow more humble, more in faith, more in love to the
Saints, more in activity for God; this it is the Lord expects, 2 Pet. 3.18.

Use 3.
This may rectify our judgments concerning the Ministry of the Gospel, and
that in two great points:

For information concerning the Ministry. Consider the Original of the
Ministry.
First, Behold it in its Original, it is the Ordinance of Christ, and it is the
fruit of the ascension of Jesus Christ; they are to be instructed and pitied (I
believe many of them may go according to their present apprehensions, and
therefore it were happy if they might be with a spirit of meakness reduced)
that will cry down all our Ministry as Antichristian; why? because there were
or are some defects in Ordination by Bishops, or whoever; admit that to be
true, but I beseech you, what is the Original? from Christ; and if any man will
ask an able godly Minister in England, where had you your Ministry? you will say
from the Prelates, he will say from Jesus Christ, though it is true, the manner
of conveying the power of exercising the Ministry be by men, for Paul says,
Gal. 1.1.
He was an Apostle neither of men, nor by men; not of men, so he differed from
false Apostles, not by men, so he differed from ordinary Ministers: Now suppose
I, or any other Minister of the Gospel, Note.
have had our Ministry conveyed to us from Christ by men, and there has been
some defects in the manner, will you say, that that defect in the manner,
destroys the thing? Doubtless it is a great and provoking evil, to cry down the
whole Ministry, because some seek themselves, or others of the Ministers affect
too much power, hereby the devil carries on his design
I think not any body would say, the Marriage was null, because they were not
so rightly married in every particular, as to the manner, or to say, that a
Magistrate is no Magistrate, because in every particular, it may be he received
not his Magistracy, in the due form according to the Statutes, etc. there is a
great deal of difference (my brethren) betwixt the grounds of nullifying, and
reforming a thing; we are all sensible of it, and desire God to pardon what
has been amiss, and to heal what is still out of frame; there has been
defects in the manner of conveying our Ministry, or else why do we desire to
reform it, but we confidently affirm our Ministry is from Jesus Christ; Christ
gave gifts, with the office and Authority, but what? not only Prophets and
Apostles, but Pastors and Teachers: then

2. Behold the Ministry, in Christ's intention in giving it: Behold the
Ministry, in Christ's intention in the giving of it.
Why did he give it? it were a sweet thing to consider, and I am persuaded it
were a good method to cure some of London distempers; no marvel, if you that
have such admirable gifts, be still so lean and crazy in spirit: what will cure
that distemper? look at the Ministry of the Gospel, as the Ordinance of Christ,
and the fruit of the ascension of Christ; therefore when you go to a Sermon,
say not, I Will not hear this man or that man, because he is a fierce
Independent, I Will not hear that man, because he is a rigid Presbyterian, nor
such a man, because he is a vehement Independent, away with all such
unseasonable words; but say this, I Will go and attend upon the Ordinance of of
Christ, and I Will go and attend upon that which is a fruit of the ascension of
Christ; and withal let me add this, and I desire it may be remembered, That
Ordinances and Ministry now cease, and we are under another new
Administration. A most dangerous and most unsound opinion.
I wish I had more strength to insist upon it, because it is a most dangerous
opinion, and does undermine the very foundation of the Gospel, namely, to hold
as some do, and vent it with much boldness, That the Ordinances and the
Ministry cease, and because that Popery did once overspread the world; now we
have no Ordinances, and now we have no Ministry: and what place do they bring,
it is a most strange confidence, and it is in Print, and many of you know the
Book, it is cried up sufficiently: One interprets this place of Scripture (I
beseech you let us consider it in the fear of God, and with the spirit of
meekness) Christ promises he will be with them, he gives his Apostles
commission to go abroad, and says, He will be with them to the end of the
world, Mat. 28.20. (the Lord pardon and heal all wresting of Scripture, See Mr.
Saltmarsh his Book called, Beams of the bright morning Star. p. 134 etc.
if it be his will, and prevent it for time to come) To the end of the world,
says he in print, that is, to the end of this age of Ministration, they are
his own words, to the end of this dispensation: Now he makes account that this
Gospel Dispensation is ended, and now we are come under a third Dispensation or
Administration; we were all under low Administrations, the Gospel is in a manner
at an end, What another Administration then that of the Father through the Son
by the Spirit.
and God is all in all immediately in his Saints. O that Scripture should be
made to serve our purposes! weigh the place meekly, I desire not to meddle with
men's persons, but I must be faithful to Jesus Christ, and the souls of his
people; and according to the light he has given me, I shall endeavor to make
it appear, that Interpretation is not consistent with the Text:

Reasons against this Interpretation of Mat. 28 20 for his third
Administration. (...).
Jesus Christ in the 18. Verse of the 28. of Matthew says, All power is given
to me in heaven and earth, go therefore and teach all nations.

Teach all nations; surely if this Dispensation be now ended, if the Ministry
be at an end, all nations cannot be taught, and so Jesus Christ will lose some
of his elect, for they cannot be called in, for there must be no Teaching (it
seems) no Ministry.

2. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I commanded you: All
nations will never be taught all things, whatsoever Jesus Christ commands them,
and the Apostles and Ministers cannot fulfill their commission if the Ministry
be ceased, (...).
and we must have no Ministry, and no Ordinances to instruct them in all these
things.

And lo (lo, Christ would have you take notice of it) I am with you, not only
I will be with you, but am with you, and that every day, he is with you always,
always even to the end of the world.

4. The end of the world: What, to the end of this Dispensation, and for the
age of this Ministration only? brethren, I could fetch it out of the very
Original it self; whereas he says, (...).
(...) Signifies an Age, I grant it does, but it signifies Eternity many times
in Scripture, For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory, for ever and ever, I
am sure of it, there it is not a Dispensation only. And then for the end,

I could fetch it not only out of Plato, (...).
but also out of the Septuagint, and out of other places, where that Greek word
signifies Consummation, therefore there must be an end; but let us go on
further.

I Will ask any man that will say these words, that I am with you to the end of
the World, That is, to the end of this Dispensation; When did this Dispensation
begin? in what year did it begin? Let any man tell me that Jesus Christ will be
with his Disciples or Ministers, to this hundred year, or to this age, and then
he forbears: Is it to all persons, or to these persons only? then who are
they? I would very fain have these plain Questions resolved: O you will say, it is
till the Spirit comes; the Spirit comes! Why, the Spirit was coming ever since
Jesus Christ ascended, and does come with new lights daily, and the Spirit will
be coming, till Jesus Christ come again the second time.

6. And I would ask further, I beseech you, unless there be a Ministry, how
shall we have Popery confuted? You say, because Popery has defiled the
Ministry, there is no Ministry; I say, Popery must be confuted by the
Ministry: you may burn an Arrian on the head, but Arrianism must be confounded
by the Ministry; you may hang a Papist, but we know that you can never confute
Popery, but by the light of the Ministry; and Paul has said this, The Pope
shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming, 2 Thessalonians. 8.9.
viz. in the ministry of the Gospel.

7. I would know this also, If the faith were once delivered to the Saints,
that is, Once for all, as Interpreters have expounded it; Jude ver. 3.
What, shall we have a new Edition, or a new Gospel? had we not an everlasting
Gospel before? Nay further, Jesus Christ will give up all things to the Father,
When? when he has conquered all his Enemies, 1 Cor. 15.9, 24, 28.
and after the Resurrection, and then God will be all in all: Well, they say,
they are Goded and Christed, and God is immediately in them, and they are under
the third Dispensation, and we are still under these low Administrations, then
they must make us believe, the Resurrection is past; for God shall never come
to be all in all, and Jesus Christ never give up his Kingdom, till the
Resurrection be past; and then further, go now to the neighbor words of my
Text, He gave gifts to men, that all might come to the Unity of the faith, Ephesians.
4.11.
and to a perfect stature. All come, and therefore be confident, I dare venture
my soul upon it (which is a great word) that Jesus Christ will have a Ministry
more or less, till he have brought in all the Elect, and I have this ground for
it out of the word, He gave gifts, Pastors and Teachers, till all come to the
Unity of the faith, and to the acknowledgement of the Son of God, and to a
perfect stature: Now if they say there is no Ministry, then they must make us
believe, that all the Saints are come in, and that there is a perfect number,
etc. and their graces completed; but I must spare my self, the time is past, I
have had late and sad experience, what it is to spend too much upon weak
Spirits, not recovered; though I confess I intended most upon the third point,
Following the truth in love.

1. What is Truth?
What is this Truth? Why, as Gods glory is the Constellation of his Attributes,
as Gods happiness is the absoluteness of his self-sufficency, as Gods holiness
is the impression of his image, as comfort from God is the glimpse of his
loving countenance, as the learning we receive, is a beam of his wisdom falling
upon us, so indeed Truth is the issue, the representation, and the discovery of
his revealed will, and of his mind to us concerning Doctrine and Worship, What
we should know, and what we should practice.

What is Love? not only a Love to the Truth, that is good, 2. What is this
love?
not only a love to Christ the head, that is as good, and the proper genius of
Saints, carries them to both these, (...).
but indeed a love to the Saints, to the Members, love the brethren, love the
corporation of Saints, in 1 Pet. 2. v. 7.

What is it to follow or speak the Truth here? 3. What is it to speak or follow
the Truth in the Text.


For Explication, where three things considerable; The Greek word here
signifies, sometimes,

To speak the Truth, in Gal. 4.16. (...).


To do the Truth, in John 3.21. and in Ephesians. 4.24.

To follow the Truth with a sincere constancy; (...).
so learned men interpret it, (...) does answer to an Hebrew word, (...) in
Niphal, that signifies to be firm, and to be constant; and so doubtless it is a
great part of the meaning here, by the opposition, That you may be no more as
children tossed to and fro, Verse. 14.
but following the Truth in Love, that is, following it with constancy, and
firmness, and cleaving to it.

I humbly conceive, To speak the Truth here, is too straight, as will appear,
if you please to compare the Context. Scripturae plenitudinem adoro.
I choose rather to take the largest sense (adoring the deep and mysterious
fullness of holy Scripture) so to seek, follow and embrace the Truth with that
firm constancy, that we should be ready to speak and do the Truth upon all
occasions. Indeed, Truthing it in love, Truthing it in Love, a good motto for
Saints. Doctr. 3.
which were an admirable Motto for Saints, and most seasonable in these unsound
and censorious times, Truthing it in love.

Truthing it in love, seeking and following the Truth with constancy, is the
Gospel method of our spiritual welfare; This was John's counsel to the Elect, 2
Ioh. 2.4, 5.
and his comfort concerning the Lady (a practice worthy it seems of great
persons:) This was John's joy concerning her and her children, and concerning
his Gaius too, in the beginning of his third Epistle, That they walked in the
Truth, and the Truth dwelt in them, Verse 2, 3.
and they in Truth, loving one another; Here is Truthing it in Love: now in
short, Reasons, why Truthing it in love so useful.
what reasons why this is the Gospel method to our welfare; first, considered,

Singly, Truth and Love, as they are in themselves, contribute much.

What Truth and Love do to prevent evils, singly considered.
Secondly, Jointly, consider the happy marriage of Truth and Love, they operate
much to advance this Gospel-design.

First, For Truth, It has a sovereign virtue to prevent and to cure those
spiritual maladies, which are most obstructive to the good of Persons and
Churches: Truth keeps from Ignorance, from Superstition, from Errors, from
Heresies, yea from profaneness.

Love keeps from Strife, from Schism (although there be some differences
amongst Saints, all men see not by the same Light) if there be Love, it will
keep them from making a difference in affection; ^ Tim. 4.3, 4 1 Cor. 10.28,
29, 30.
or keep them from all unwarrantableness, disclayming communion with their
Brethren; It is want of Love that does that.

Secondly, Truth, if there be differences in judgment (as there may be) yet it
has this power, that it will teach men to hold their Christian liberty, by
satisfying their conscieriees in the lawful use of it.

Love will teach them not to use their Liberty unseasonably to the offense of
their Brethren; the Truth makes you free, if you know the Truth, in John 8.32.
Truth will give us a Freedom, that we shall not suffer our selves to be under
unnecessary and unwarrantable humane impositions, but shall see our Freedom; 1
Cor. 8.13.
and in the use of indifferent things, Love will make me so tender, and so
Indulgent to the Conscience of my Brother, that I Will rather deny my self, then
offend him; here is Love and Truth singly, as to the preventing of evil. And
then

What Truth and Love do to promote the best good of Saints, being jointly
considered.
Secondly, Here is Truth and Love, that have a direct Subservience to promote
the best good of Saints in their Communion with Christ; now Truth enlightens
the mind concerning the whole Council of God, concerning agenda, and credenda;
teaching us, that like as Usurpers, not as Libertines, we encroach upon the
Headship of Christ; and Love enflames us, and enclines to embrace Truth, and
reject Falsehood, and what ever is profane, Psalm. 119.127, 128. I hate every
false way, I love thy statutes, etc. Truth will not only inform us, but engage
us to inform others, to teach and instruct them, that they should know what
they should do, and Love will teach us to do it with Meekness; 2 Timothy 2.25.
Exhort them that are contrary minded with meekness; oftentimes we preach smart
Sermons, give hot reproofs, like as when Physicians give Potions scalding hot,
they will spit them out again, and cannot endure them, and they go away
prejudiced; I cannot endure to hear such a man, he is so hot and furious, and
vents his own spirit: O it is Love and meekness causes us to deal tenderly, and
softly, meekly with our Brother, and this is indeed the Spirit of the Gospel;
There is no more diabolical Spirit, then a furious Spirit, and no more Gospel
Spirit, then a meek and calm Spirit: But I must contract. The next thing is,

Love and Truth jointly, What Truth and Love being jointly considered. 1 Cor.
8.1.
when they are married jointly together, and go hand in hand, and Saints by
them joyn-heads and hearts, O then, and then only they operate fruitfully:
Truth without Love, breeds only empty dry Speculations, which puff up; Love
without Truth, is a blind, if not a Popish, yet an unwarrantable devotion
amongst formal Protestants; Note.
What is the reason? you shall see now amongst many of your dull and cold
Protestants, more zeal about Christmas day, then the Lords day, about hearing a
Passion Sermon upon that they call Good Friday, then upon any other day: Here
is Love without Truth, now Truth and Love joined together, would keep the
people from being too fond about these unwarrantable practices; But will some
say, what, do ye blame us about Easter, and a Communion at Easter? etc. Have we
it not in Scripture? See what Scripture they have for it, I would this secret
were declared to all the world, it would break many snares with which diverse
are entangled:

In the Acts, there is the word Easter indeed, (...) after the Passover, not
after Easter, if truly translated, Acts 12.4. vid. Minshul^s Dict.
in the twelfth Chapter, When he had apprehended him, he put him in Prison, and
delivered him to four quaternions of Soldiers to keep him, intending after
Easter to bring him forth to the people: There is Easter, but will you hear
now, how it came in first? You Will easily believe that it must be jumbled in one
way or other, if you understand the Original; There was the word Passover, but
no Easter, the word Easter was not found out in many hundred years after this
was spoken of Peter: But here was a secret.

It was a glorious work of King James, he set diverse Oxford men, and Cambridge
men, and City Ministers, with others to Translate the Bible, a glorious work,
how ever Translations may be slighted amongst us, yet Bugenhagius and other
Divines, when they had the Bible Translated into the Dutch language, Note.
they kept that day of the year a Feast of Thanksgiving for the Translation of
the Bible, they were so affected with the mercy, but it is a great unhappiness,
when the Translation of the Bible shall be brought to serve our purposes.

I have it from certain hands, such as lived in those times, that when the
Bible had been Translated by the Translators appointed, the New Testament was
looked over by some of the great Prelates, (men I could name some of their
persons) to bring it to speak Prelatical Language, and they did alter (as I am
informed by the means of one that was a great observer in those times, and
lived then) Fourteen places in the New Testament, to make them speak the
Language of the Church of England, that was so cried up: and I Will tell you some
of them.

(...), Acts 1.20.
First, In the first of the Acts, speaking of Judas, Let another man take his
Bishopric; it is forced, it signifies Charge or Inspection: but that you may
believe that the Bishops are the Apostles Successors, let another man take his
Bishopric.

Again, In the second of the Acts, it is Not suffer my Soul to lie in Hell;
this is clear, Former Translations have it, not suffer my Soul to lie in the
Grave; But it was learned Bilsons Opinion, and thrust into the Thirty nine
Articles, that Christ did Locally descend into hell; and to make that
Translation agree with the Articles, they must change Grave into Hell.

Acts 2.27. (...).
Also the Fourteenth of the Acts, They ordained them Elders, they loved to cry
up Consecration of Churches, and Dedication, and such kind of things, and
Episcopal Ordination too (for these all advanced the power of the Priests and
the Bishops, which brought in Transubstantiation amongst Papists) and therefore
in the Geneva Translation, There was both (...) and (...), yet sometime the
former included in the latter.
that was rendered, chosen by suffrages, by lifting up of hands, the word
Primarily imports that, it may be in some of the Fathers it includes both, they
will tell you, because afterward having chosen Elders by Suffrages or Voices,
they did Ordain them.

Next, I come to the first of the Corinthians, 12.28. An abominable violence
offered to the Original, God has set in the Church, Apostles, Teachers, Helps,
Governments, and you shall find here a great imposture, it may be now altered,
appearing so gross, but I have seen it, and read it in some Translations, Helps
in Government; (...), Helps, Deacons, Governments, Elders.
which is a most horrible prodigious violence to the Greek words, for they are
both the Accusative case, Helps; there are Elders, Government, there are
Deacons; now to obscure these, you must put it, helps in Government.

I had it related since the delivery of this plain Sermon, by one who most
confidently affirmed it, No^e this grand Imposture.
That the learned man to whom it belonged to Translate the first Book of
Samuel, having rendered that which Samuel from God spoke concerning Saul, 1 Samuel
8.11. This shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, He will
take your sons, etc. He was sent for to Lambeth, and there persuaded to make
the words Will take your sons, etc. Shall take; which he conscienciously
refused, well knowing it was not spoken by Samuel to Saul, by way of direction
for duty what he should do, but Prophetically and Eventually what he would do.

And then lastly, for Easter; this was another place that was altered (as you
have heard) to keep up that holy time of Easter, as they would think it, for
herein was the innocence (though unhappiness unto us) of the Primitive
Worthies, and other Christians; these had fair intentions in bringing in many
things, they thought to win upon the Heathen, and therefore would not wholly
anull, but change things, change some of their great Feasts into
Christmas-time, change now (it may be) Pentecost into Whitsontide, and the
Passover into Easter; it had a good intent: but minding their own intentions,
more then Gods Word, their Rule, you see how these constitutions of men are
degenerated. Now I beseech you, let us not suffer our selves to be abused, when
a word Easter shall be thrust in (for it was diverse hundred years after Peter,
that the word Easter came in) shall we therefore go and keep up an Easter
Communion above all times else, for such pretenses as these are? Brethren, the
more you join Truth and Love together, the more you will be free from these fond
kind of Devotions: And let me say this, It is Blind Devotion indeed; and many
men that are so zealous for these, and women too, they think to get protection
for other courses.

It may be many a Lady that paints and spots, and trifles away precious time,
if she be but zealous at an Easter Communion, she thinks to get a protection
for all vanities else: A Citizen, if he be a Patron to such a Minister,
frequent Lectures, then he may be frollick, and vain, and loose, etc. Here is
Love without Truth.

Let me add this, Truth without Love makes many swell, and contemn others; and
Love without Truth edifies to Superstition and to Idolatry sometimes; What
brought in Praying to Saints, but Love without Truth? But you will allow me to be
so indulgent to my self, as that if either the ordinary place, or the ordinary
time be not observed, to pity a man that has seven months labored under a
quartane Ague, and had a fit late last night. I might make three Uses: and the
first should have been this,

1. Use of Instruction.
To show you, why many Professors are so barren, and many Christians so dry, and
unstable amongst you, because they have not minded this conjunction of Truth
and Love; which is the Gospel method to grow up into Christ, and so to our
Spiritual thriving: For upon him all our fruit is found, Hos. 14.8.

2. Use of Caution.
Take this as a Use of Caution, I beseech you, would to God I knew what language
to speak to win upon you: I would beseech you, this Honorable Representative
City, who have so great an influence, have been so much concerned, and are
still so much interested, to beware that you suffer not your selves, by any
policies of men, or cunning undermining whatsoever, to be cheated of your Truth
and Love, lest you lose your selves, and Religion, and City, and Estates, and
indeed the Kingdom. Brethren, there are desperate Designs on foot; and as so
much good has been brought to this Kingdom heretofore by the City, and their
Zeal, and their Purses, and their Courage, and their Fidelity; so now there
has been of late great tryings of conclusions, how to work upon the City so
far, to make them instrumental for the destruction of all, and the Devil has
many active Soldiers abroad.

Two dangerous Regiments.
There is indeed one unhappy Regiment of those that are Erroneous though diverse
of them very honest-hearted, and of those that are not such friends to love as
they should be; and certainly, much has been our misery, by reason of
uncharitable mistakes, of Errors in matter of Faith, and Schisms in point of
Love.

Jesuitical, Atheistical, Profane Party, that take advantage of these Errors,
and these Divisions, as he says, They do fish in troubled waters, Captare
impacata and inquieta tempora.
that know how to improve all these Errors and Divisions, to drive on their own
Design; and nothing more ordinary then for some Malignants (though I love not
names) or disaffected persons, call them what you will, those that are no
friends to Truth and Love, nor Parliament, nor Army, nor any
Scripture-Reformation, they will come in one company, and aggravate the
Miscarriages of the Parliament and Army, Now what is their plot? to keep open
the Breach, that so at last Episcopacy and the old Common-Service-Book may come
in again: Who sees not this? And I confidently say, and pray God it may be
considered in time, that you, out of any Discontent, or out of any passionate
Animosities (I hope the Lord will keep so wise a City from it) suffer not your
selves to be ridden by them: Do you not remember first they would have divided
Army and Parliament? there was a time God prevented that: Do you not remember
there was a time they would have divided City and Army? the Lord keep you from
that evil: And now their last conclusion is, to divide those that are Friends,
and engaged in one Covenant, to try if they can set England and Scotland at
variance, and engage them in Blood again: And this is their Plot, and how shall
they bring this about? O, by that malignant Jesuit Contzens Rules (there is a
little Book called Look about you, Translated out of his Works) and he gives
you Eight Rules to cheat people of their Religion, and to serve in Popery by
Art: I would you could all get that little Book, A little book in quarto,
called Look about you.
and you should see that very Contzens Spirit is amongst Malignants, and they
walk by the same Rule, Come by Degrees, and come by Compulsions, and such
politic strains he has there: Take notice of your ways; and (my Brethren)
it is most clear, your Friends grieve for it, your Enemies begin to triumph in
it, that they can have such a Power in the City, and with several well-affected
people in the Land, who are friends to Truth, to Peace, and to the Government
of Christ: They will come and tell you, What, no Government; Can ye believe
they are friends to Government? What, Note.
Drunkards, and Atheists, and Profane wretches friends to Government? They
that cannot endure a personal Reformation, would they have an Ecclesiastical
Reformation? Will you trust them with a Government? and a Government of their
own settling? what Government think you we should have? Now so many of the
well-affected both of Ministers, and Gentlemen, and Noblemen in Scotland are
against an Engagement in War, and so are they in England, who are they that are
forward to engage? I Will put no Character upon them, you know who in England
are, and you have heard who in Scotland, and what Government think you they
would settle? God keep us from a Government of such men's settling; for we
should have Profaneness, and looseness, they would make such a latitude in
Government, that all should return to the old track again; We must have as
grossly mixed Communions as ever, and their old Ceremonies, their zeal for
Christmas Day, and their Good Friday (more zeal this year then last, for these
things, and more last then before) And what do these men aim at, I beseech you?
The Lord God of Heaven inform us aright, if I be mistaken, I wish I might see
my Error; If any of you may through discontent, be transported, the Lord
discover it to you; And let us take heed of this, that while we are jarring one
with another, we do not betray our selves and all to a third Party, to a Common
Party, that would destroy both: It may be here may be the advantage, which is
but a poor one, first destroy Independents, and then destroy Presbyterians, and
set up Profaneness and Looseness as much as ever. Now the Lord cause you to
join Faith, and Love, and Truth so together, that you may not be cheated by
such men. The third Use: And truly, I have one word more to say, and if I
thought I should dye the next Fit, I should desire to speak to this City, and
that is this:

I come hither this day, 3 Use of Exhortation.
(and though I do it cheerfully to observe your pleasures, yet not without some
hazard to my health) that I may say a few things to you, and the Lord help me,
that I may deliver what I did intend, and that you may entertain it with the
same affection I tender it to you: My business should be, if I had power this
day, as a poor unworthy friend to the Bridegroom, to draw a Contract between
Truth and Love, in all you Citizens of London, that all you, though you may
have some different Opinions, yet I would have Truth and Love matched and
married happily together in you. Brethren, I confess that there are many
Errors, but take heed you be not more offended then needs, Note.
or at least thereby perverted by the politic Designs of those that serve
themselves in these Divisions, and upon you.

First, I do not think all Opinions are Errors, Some Errors are 1. Contrafidem.
2. Infide. 3. Praeterfidem.



that some men call Errors.

Secondly, All Errors are not alike, not equally opposite to the Faith.

Thirdly, Clubbing, and Imprisoning, and Compelling, is not the proper way to
cure Errors, though there may be some course taken to restrain erroneous
persons, when they are opposite to the peace and welfare of the State, etc. But
that I would say, is this, That Errors, they must be reduced and confuted by
Truth; and then withal, it is most certain, That Errors abound not by reason of
a Reformation (and therefore to charge it upon a Reformation, is very gross)
but there is a defect in our Reformation which gives occasion to them.

And as for Love, they cry for Love, for Love, and it is a wonder, men that are
against the very Substantials of the Gospel, yet they will cry out against any
little Heterodox Opinion, and for Love: How can they ever expect that godly and
wicked men should join together in Love? What Churches then should we have?
indeed we will love the most carnal men in the world with a love of pity, but
not with a love of complacency and delight: And Jesus Christ expects it not,
but that we should love as he loves. But then further, what love should we
have? such a love as indeed does tend to Edification, and does tend to
Reformation, and such a love as is Soul-love, and such a love as is a love to
the Head, as well as to the Members; such love as is not complemental, and
frothy, and flattering. O therefore let it be your care still, not to suffer
your selves to be any ways misled, because there are some defects, and want of
Truth and Love, it has always been so: In Origens time and Chrysostoms, they
came to them, complaining, that there are Divisions amongst Saints; they
answered, And Divisions will be: Are all Philosophers of a mind? Are all
Physicians of a mind? and if all Saints be not of a mind, it is no marvel;
only let them have a care to preserve Affection, though they differ in
Opinion. But to close up all.

That great Oracle of the Law, learned Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes, gives
five properties of a Parliament Man, and I think they will as well agree to an
Alderman, to a Common-Councel-man: I desire they may be considered;

First, says he, He must be wise, and constant, so able to discern and know
things aright, persons, circumstances, that he be inflexible.

Secondly, He should have a good Memory, so to remember past evils, that he
labor to prevent future dangers. The other three he takes from the Elephant:
First, says he,

In Elephante melancholia transit in nutrimentum corporis.
Thirdly, An Elephant is without gall, that gall that he has does transire in
nutrimentum corporis; if he have heat he will use it, not out of a selfish
passionate respect, but rather guide and direct it to a zeal for the good of
the whole Body the Commonwealth. And then secondly, for that too he draws from
the Elephants;

Though the Elephants be maximae virtutis and maximi intellectus, yet gregatim
semper in cedunt, and so not uociva as solivaga are. Homini erranti viam
ostendit.
Fourthly, The Elephants they never go alone, but they go gregatim; and those
creatures that go alone, Bears and Foxes, they are hurtful; those creatures
that are most innocent, they go together: If you will show you are most useful,
and innocent creatures, like sheep, O keep together. And then the third is,

Fifthly, The Elephant is (...), he says, that the Elephant loves men: I would
have all these properties meet in every one of these Worthy Citizens, that are
any way betrusted with the Government of the City: The God of Heaven give you
wisdom, and give you to remember all Providential Dispensations that are past,
and deliver you from passion, and gall, and make you flock together, and head
together, and teach you to love men; All this would still engage you against a
common Enemy: Love men as men, love the bodies of men; and you have given a
most glorious account of that this year, to your praise I must report it, here
is this year, etc. why, here is a glorious proof of your love to men; Love
their bodies, love their souls, love them as Christians, especially love them
as Saints, have a care to breed them up in Callings, train them up in some
degree of learning; this is most honorable, and, I hope, being done with an
honest heart, it will further your account at the great Day.

I yet dare take the boldness to add the Rules, Rules concerning Truth, and
the pursuance of it. 1. Rule about Truth. Ezekiel. 13.2.
which I chiefly intended: Some Rules now for your pursuance of Truth, and some
for the pursuance of Love, that they may be happily married this day.

For Truth, let the Word of God be Rule and Judge; when you enquire after
Truth, study the revealed will of God, and make use of revelations in
concurrence with the Word of God; but do not set up revelations against the
Word of God. It was a desperate expression from Valde, in a Book of his in
great request now adays; it is true, he had many things good in him,
considering the darkness of the times wherein he lived, a Spaniard; says he,
We must use the Scriptures, as we use Pictures (he was a Papist) use Pictures
for a while, till we get apprehension of the thing or person realized to us,
then throw them away, because now we can pray without Pictures: So, use the
Scriptures till we have got our minds raised and elevated, and then we need no
Scriptures. The Lord deliver us from this Opinion, which tends to undermine the
very Word of Christ.

Far be it from me to say any thing against New-Light, properly so called,
though there is some so called, which is, I doubt, Darkness; nor against all
Revelations, for there is a Spirit of Revelation: but I desire it may be wisely
considered, how the Spirit of Revelation discovers it self; Thus chiefly, not
in bringing in a New Gospel, and such New Dispensations to us, as many talk of;
but in Discovering that Word which he has revealed, and we have by us, in
raising our minds to understand that word more fully, and those works of God
that are in it more clearly: I would heartily bless God for it in my self, or
in others, if it were such a Spirit of Revelation, as should help me to see any
Word of God, or any Work of God in me more clearly: Ephesians 4.17.
This is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation the Apostle to the Ephesians
speaks of; but if you will talk of Revelations, that you have Revelations beyond
the Word, and it may be sometimes in a manner contrary to the Word; Cassianus
his Collat. 2. de discretione, cap 5.
surely this is not the way of truth. There is a poor old man Hero in
Cassianus, that thought he had a Revelation, that when he was in the bottom of
a pit, he should get out; but for all his Revelation, he was deceived. I desire
such things may be considered. The next thing is this,

2. Rule about Truth.
Mind Truth wisely: I would say under this head,

1. Be sure it be Truth that you contend for; not for unwarranted Ceremonies,
not for trifles, for those things that deserve not the name of Divine Truth:
And then

2. Proportion your zeal to the nature of Truth: There are some Truths de fide,
circa fidem, and in some sense praeter fidem; I must not allow the like zeal
for all; I will have the Substantial part of my zeal for Substantial Truths,
and for other Truths, so much zeal as the nature of them calls for: This is to
mind Truth wisely, this is that that becomes you. And then withal,

3. Rule about Truth. (...).
Mind Truths according to the directions of Truth:

1. Meddle not with things too high, be sober; A Spirit of Sobriety in Divine
things, and Modesty in Secret things, is most suitable to a Saint, Romans 12.3.

2. Mind not Curiosities, with neglect of those things that are necessary:
Affirm constantly (says Paul to Titus) that those that are believers maintain
good*works, but as for fables, let them go, Tit. 3.8.

3. If you will do what becomes you concerning Truth, Do not clap a Jus Divinum
rashly upon every one of your Opinions: O that brings us into a great deal of
bondage; diverse things may be very good, and yet better, and more safely
settled as Prudentials, as Humane Constitutions, then as Divine Constitutions,
unless we be sure we are upon Scripture-grounds, then I say nothing against it.
What is the reason now that the Pope cannot alter? Jus Divinum nititur verbo
Divino. Ames.
I have heard it from some that have spoke with learned sober Papists, asking
them, What think you of Transubstantiation, or the like Opinions? they profess,
Though we would, yet we cannot alter them, the Pope having asserted them, who
is infallible; so that if we change one Point of our Religion, we spoil all.
Truly, if we clap a Jus Divinum, Note.
we cannot alter it, for we are engaged to hold it, though we were mistaken: I
had rather settle too little, then too much, then we leave room for New
Discoveries; We may better add then diminish: I cannot take away a Jus
`Divinum, without a great deal of disparagement.

Do not presently obtrude with confidence your own conceits upon others, 4.
Rule about Truth.
but rather mistrust them: Learned men have had their Errors, the wisest men
have been deceived; and do not rashly run from one Extremity to another.
Chrysostom he would, and others they would run from the Manichees so far, that
they went too far toward Pelagius: Many of us run so far from Popery and
Prelacy, Note.
that we run into other Extremities, very dangerous and unhappy. O take heed,
let me add this further, as you would be friends to truth,

Know that you have to deal with those men, 5. Rule about Truth.
that will bring in Errors, sensim sine sensu; as the Devil dealt with Adam and
Eve at first, how did he beguile them? he corrupted their minds by degrees
(take heed of his methods) from the simplicity that is in Christ: 2 Cor. 11.3.
You shall first have a little step, and something like a Truth, and that may
be disputed at first, then comes another, and then comes another, and so at
last you are involved in inextricable Errors. But the sixth and last thing I
shall say under this head;

Take heed of being too far engaged in a party; 6. Rule about Truth.
it is the way to sell a man's judgment: for if I be one of a party, I must
strain hard to say as they say, and subscribe as they subscribe, else I shall
be an Apostate; this is dangerous, then all must be proclaimed Heretical that
differ. Many a man has broke his Conscience, violated his peace, by this
Engagement, Note.
because he must not break with his Party.

It is a notable rule Politicians have, Inclinus ad neutram partem sit Dominis
^^rius^.
He that inclines to neither Party, is master of both: And I profess, I know
not any generation in England that sleep so quietly, as those that are
unengaged to this or that Party: What there is good in Episcopacy, they will
not decline it, because the Bishops had it; What there is good amongst the
Independents, they will close with it; What there is good in Presbytery, they
will entertain that: And these are the men that Preach with Freedom, that
converse with Freedom. I do desire and hope there may be a good Moderate
Presbytery settled amongst us; yet I Will profess to the world, I Will not be so
engaged to own every thing in it, that I will not embrace any thing that is
good in another way: The Lord keep us from being engaged to such Parties, that
will make as slaves in our Consciences to them.

1. Rule about Love. 1 Cor. 16.14. Ephesians 5.2. Col. 3.12, 13.
In your contending for Truth, let there not be an abatement of Love: Think it
not enough to be an Orthodox, unless you be a loving christian too, that all
things may be done in love, that there you may walk in love, and be clothed
with love; three places are to that purpose. Let me add this then further,
that you may advance this happy Union and Marriage betwixt Truth and Love,

2. Rule about Love.
Love men more for the work of God you see in them, then you slight them for any
such defects or mistakes, as are consistent with godliness and with Saintship,
Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. Rule about Love.
Do not think ever to recover men with passionate invectives; Do not think to
confute their Opinions with vehement reproachful speeches: It is Love that
melts, that wins upon them: And I desire that you, and I, and all Ministers
might practice this, That when we deliver the most sharp reproofs, it might be
Scripture Language, and with a Scripture-Spirit, that may be the way to recover
them, whereas the other hardens them it may be they will never hear you more,
and then what have you got by it? you may preach against them absent, and that
prejudices them still, till at last it may be you have preached away almost all
your hearers. Further, that you may advance this happy Union of Truth and Love,

4. Rule about Love.
Study to please, every one your godly Neighbor, for his good to edification;
and such as are strong, must bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves, says Paul. Romans 5.1, 2.
It argues a great deal of proud fondness of thy own conceit, (...). Basil. Ephesians
5 2*
and want of love to thy Brother, when thou will contemn every one who attains
not thy measure. There must be a Christian personal Toleration, forbearing one
another in love; though there may not be a State- Toleration of all Religions.

Do not delight in affixing reproachful Names; 5. Rule about Love.
to cry down people under this or that Name, never any good comes by it: for
there is this inconvenience, You wrap in all, that it may be do not deserve it,
not going so far as others: As to cry down all men under the name of
Anabaptists, though it may be some of them do only scruple about the Baptizing
of Infants, and are far from the opinions of the German Anabaptists, who deny
Magistracy, etc. and so, many such like instances I might give. Let me add
this: If you would indeed get a Spirit of love, and advance it, let this be
your care,

That in the midst of all differences of Judgment, 6. Rule about Love.
you maintain a sweet harmony of affection, and labor to study a sweet
compliance: What if thy Brother be not come up to thy Light, will thou
therefore renounce him, and reject him? It may be God intends not to all men
the same proportion: Shall I contemn my Brother, because I have more grace?
Phil. 1.27. and 3.15, 16.
If another man should renounce me, that has more grace then I, what would
become of me: These and many such Rules I might give. I have but this one word,
and that is as a means by way of direction, how to marry these, Truth and Love
together: O that the Lord would help us to enter into Covenant to complete the
Marriage, seriously to resolve now, That for time to come we labor more to
Truth it in love, and more to love with Truth; labor lovingly to embrace the
Truth, and sincerely to pursue Love: Concordi^ communa periculum ^oll^t^r.
The very Heathen could say this, and it is a good Rule, I wish we Christians
might learn it too. If you would be too hard for the common Enemy, and not
suffer him to gain advantage against you, agree, otherwise he will prevail over
both Parties of honest-hearted Christians (for so I am confident there are
amongst those that differ in Church Matters) God forbid either of them should
be destroyed: I say, if you would keep a third Party from destroying both, let
there be Concord; your union will be strength* it will engage the presence of
God; whereas your Divisions alienate and estrange God from you. Livy, l. 28.
And here let me tell you a Story out of Livy, There was one Packuvius, that if
he had not been so vicious, had been happy, and more worthy of our imitation,
but his practice herein is commodious for you, There being a great difference
betwixt the Commons and the Senators, and nothing would satisfy the Commons,
but the Senators death; he gets all the Senators once by a stratagem into the
Senate House, and locks them in, and comes to the Commons, Well, I have now got
them at your mercy; and then they were frollick, and would be revenged; he
resolves to give them out one by one, and they had the first out: But I pray
you Gentlemen, said he, let us consider, if we destroy all the Senators, who
shall we have in the place of them to govern the City? Who shall come in the
stead of them to rule? Why, one man would have this Governor, another man would
have that; so at last they fell all to pieces, and they were glad to let the
Senators alone: then he quieted the Commoners, and fetched off the Senators,
because they could not agree upon a Successo; you have discontents in the City
and Country too too many, and if it be the Lords blessed will, I would they
might be healed: and some would have the Army destroyed, and a great many care
not what becomes of the Parliament, and I fear, many care not what becomes of
the City; but suppose this, That either Parliament or Army should for present
be destroyed (I speak to wise Citizens) before you would have either of them
destroyed, Note.
consider who should come in their places: If Malignants should come into their
Power, and destroy you and the Kingdom too, better the Commons had spared the
lives of the Senators. Remember this Story, and make this use of it. I have
said enough to wise men, and I Will end all with that Prayer of John in his
second Epistle to the elect Lady, and her Children, Grace be with with you,
mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
the Father, in truth and Love: And hope you will all say Amen to it.

FINIS.
To his very worthy Friend, JOHN BROWN Esquire One of His Majesty's Justices of
Peace for Middlesex, and Clerk to the Right Honorable the House of Peers, More
intimacy with Jesus Christ.
Most worthy Gaius,
AS there are some Capital Sins for which we must abase our selves all our
days; such as have broken our Consciences* should often break our hearts: As
there are some Cardinal Virtues (to speak in the Moralists language) which must
be our every-days work, as being the Essentials of Christianity; so are there
some Providential Dispensations in the course of our lives, which must be
acknowledged even to Eternity; amongst which we may well reckon loving and
faithful friends, constant men's affections being of themselves mere
weather-cocks, very mutable, which are Gods Vials by which he pours his favors
upon us. And here, Sir, I must rank you with those, for whose acquaintance I
have much cause to bless God, having received in few years more real love from
you, then diverse do from some of their friends in many years: Your hearty
kindeness has made so deep an impression upon me, that I cannot satisfy my
self without some public Acknowledgement of that whereof so many have been
witnesses.

I can confidently (and indeed have very much reason) speak to you in the
language of John,

The Elder unto the welbeloved Gaius, 3 Epist. ver. 1.
whom I love in the Truth: far be it from be in a glorying way only to
complement with him who has expressed so much affectionate reality unto me.

And without flattery I do pray, Verse 2.
That you may prosper and be in health, even as your soul prospers, through the
rich mercy of God in Christ to you.

Verse 3. Non vis errare? ego sum via; non vis falli? ego sum veritas; non vis
mori? ego sum vita; non habes qua^ eas nisi per Christum; non habes quo eas
nisi ad Christum.
Pray let me add this by way of thankfulness to God (it being a return of weak
Prayers) I rejoice greatly to hear so many of the deserving Brethren testify
of the truth that is in you; and that not only in your tongue or outside
profession only, but that you walk in the truth, making the truth your path,
which leads to Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6.

And I trust (through the goodness of your God) I may have occasion in his time
(which is always the best) to rejoice, as John also did, that yours walk in the
truth.

But your love to me, together with your dear and gracious Consorts, puts so
much the stronger obligation upon me, it being not only personal, both in my
former health and time of present sickness, but indeed to my dear Mother, the
University of Cambridge; which I must ever love and honor, whose welfare you
have (in your Sphaere) most happily promoted, and that with such laborious and
bountiful respect, as stands upon Record with thankful Acknowledgement amongst
us.

Go on, beloved Sir, to love Jesus Christ, in and for himself; love him in his
Ordinances, and in his Saints; value all the outward comforts with reference to
him and his glory: Ride on prosperously in your Zeal for Truth, and in the
exercise of meekness and moderation of Spirit, which is a Scripture expression
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and for want of which, many (great pretenders to
Reformation) look too too much like as if they were acted by a Diabolical
Spirit therein: The Lord multiply his Graces in you and yours, and his
Blessings upon you all.

Accept this from him,

Who desires as a faithful friend to serve you in love, Thomas Hill.
From your own house in Westminster, Apr. 28, 1648.
The SPRING of Strengthening Grace IN THE ROCK of AGES, Christ Jesus.
2 TIMOTHY 2.1. Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus.
WEll might Solomon, among other of his Divine Oracles, publish this in the 30.
verse of the 11. of the Proverbs, The righteous is as a tree of life, and he
that wins souls is wise; and Daniel, who in Ezekiel was ranked amongst the
chiefest of wise men, Ezekiel. 28.3.
They that be wise, and they that turn many to God, Sermo Dei est sicut hamus
non capit nisi capiatur. Aug. 1 Cor. 9.19, to 22. four times together.
(in Dan. 12.3.) they shall shine like stars: Paul likewise is a most glorious
instance of this, who took a great deal of pains (though he met with many
crosses) in fishing for souls, he became all to all; (that is, in the use of
indifferent things, not to venture upon any thing which is unlawful, as many
wrest the place, to gratify their own lusts) that he might save some; Paul
himself it seems did not expect to gain all he preached unto: doubtless this is
a very high point of wisdom; for hereby they trade most for Gods glory, and
best for their own Eternal good, being glorified with him and by him: And I do
not believe there is any that was a mere man, to say no more, that will bring
more Troops, more Regiments of Children, such as have been victorious Soldiers
over the Devil and his Agents, at the day of Judgment, then Paul will; he will
have a large flock, as Behold, Isa. 8.18. Division. 1. part.
here am I, and the children thou have given me; and none of the meanest of
these will be his Son Timothy, which leads me to the first part of the words,
1. persons Exhorting Exhorted.

The persons Exhorting and Exhorted; Paul the Father, and Timothy the Son: it
may be a Son, not so much because he beg at him to the Faith; it is probable he
found him a Disciple, for ought appears, in Acts 16.1. there the first time
that I can remember that Paul met with Timothy, and there he calls him a
Disciple; and you find in 2 Timothy 1.5. how Paul blesses God for the Faith that
is in Timothy, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy mother
Eunice; therefore he may be his Son rather in regard of his Spiritual
Education, then by being begotten: As a Master or a Tutor is a Father, though
he did not beget his Children, 2. part. substance of Exhortation Be strong. 3.
part. The rock of thy strength, 3. The grace that is in Christ Jesus
his Pupils, or his Scholars, but only train them up.

2. Here is the Exhortation: The substance of it, Be strong, as becomes a
Soldier of Jesus Christ.

3. Here is the Rock of this strength, Be strong in the grace that is in Christ
Jesus: It is not by any intrinsecal strength, but in the grace that is in thy
Head Christ Jesus.

4. Here is the Engaging illation; the particle, that comprizeth an Argument,
that engages him to it: Thou therefore, my son; Therefore, Why? because thou
have so great a trust committed to thee, Hold fast the form of sound words,
which thou have heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus: and
That good thing which was committed to thee (ver. 14) keep, by the holy Ghost
that dwells in us: Still he leads him to seek strength from above, Keep, by
the holy Ghost.

Explic.
Be strong] (...), get something within, that may strengthen and enable thee to
do thy work: (...), be strong, be strengthened, passively, expect it from
another; Strength is that which men glory in, and therefore very desirable.

But what strength?

In the grace] He does not only say, Be thou strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, as Ephesians. 6.10. But in grace: indeed he ultimately intends
a participation of strength, but withal intimates the original of that strength
to be Grace; as if he should say, Thou stand in need of strengthening virtue
in thee; all that strength must be derived from Grace, expect it from no
external motive, without God himself (we have no arguments to move him to
bestow strength upon us) it is his Prerogative Royal, peculiar to himself, to
act independently, Note.
to have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and Because he will have mercy, Romans
9.15. Ephesians. 1.4, 6, 9. All derived from grace, and resolved into grace.

And where lies this strengthening grace?

In the grace that is in Christ Jesus: very significantly, in the Original by
the Article, indigitating Christ to be the Spring of thy strengthening grace.]
God will not trust thee with grace in thy own keeping, lest thou prove a
Bankrupt, Note.
as Adam did; and thou would soon grow intolerable proud, if thou wast able
to act by thy own strength independently upon God ( very hard to keep down that
weed even now in thy most depending condition) therefore thy strength shall lie
in Christ's hands, and thou be at his disposal for the communication of it; so
that thou shall always have occasion to say, Lord, I cannot mortify pride by
the strength of my own humility, that often fails me: Lord, I cannot confute my
unbelief by the strongest arguments my Faith can produce; I shall never be able
to trample upon Satan, or keep up under his Temptations from sinking, without
the strength and sufficiency of that grace which is in my Head Christ Jesus:
Lord, make me strong by that Almighty grace which is in him.

That there is such a Spring of quickening grace in our Rock Christ Jesus, is
evident; (...) Non satis babuit humeroru^ was said of one who wanted strength
proportionable to his work.
Isa. 9.6. The Government is upon his shoulders, for the perfection of his
Church, and many other good purposes, which require strength, which is hinted
in the expression, On his shoulders.

Paul had a Commission to Preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8.
to display his grace, which is like a Sea, you can find no bounds, like a
Spring, you cannot reach the bottom: The Sea of Christ's grace (as in nature)
flows from the Spring, and the Spring from the Sea; so there is no reason of
grace, but grace it self.

This is to be acknowledged by all to be the deep mystery of God, and of the
Father, and of the Son, in whom are hid all the tresures of wisdom and
knowledge: The same blessed Apostle, Col. 2.2, 3. treasures therefore 1.
Abundance, 2. of things of price, of wisdom and knowledge, which being
directive as well as operative, impart strength: Hid, sometimes we hide things
for secrecy, and so the life of a Saint may be hid from carnal, from godly
spectators, yea from himself, and they droop under doubts: So other things we
hide for safety, so chiefly (though secrecy not excluded) Col. 3.2, 3. the life
is hid with Christ in God, and here is security of the Saints, when Christ who
is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory; Shall,
let Beelzebub and all his Angels do their worst, appear with him in glory.

Upon the same account does this man of God, so intimately acquainted with
Christ Jesus, in his Epistle to Philemon, ver. 6. pray for him, Some copies
read (...), others (...), both will come to one purpose, though the last more
full and indeed more probable.
That the communication of his Faith might become effectual; there is his
Faith, with the strength, and the efficacy of it, by the acknowledgement of
every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus: there is grace in Christ, and
therefore derivatively in you, because originally in him.

I might hence gather several Observations; the first whereof might be this:

1. Doct. The Spring of a Christians strength is in the Rock Jesus Christ.

Exp^ic. Here you have three particulars, conducing to Explication of this
Gospel Truth.

1. The nature and proportion of this strengthening grace in Christ Jesus.

2. His title to it, and possession of it.

3. The sweet variety, and various sweetness of this strengthening grace in
Christ.

First, for the nature and proportion of it, two things will clear it.

1. There is in Jesus Christ the fullness of grace.

2. The redundancy of this fullness of grace. In Christ Fullness Redundancy of
grace.


He is a full fountain, and likewise an overflowing fountain: The more you
contemplate Christ in the glorious glass of the Gospel, the sooner you will
discover in him a Prophetical fullness of strengthening grace; 1. A Prophetical
fulness of grace in Christ.
and that both in regard of the strength of his Word, and in regard of the
power of his Spirit; both which are of great strength.

If you cast your eye upon the second Epistle of Paul to Timothy, 1. Strength
in his word
Chap. 3. ver. 15, 17. you shall find that the holy Scripture is able to make
a man wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus (there must
be still an improvement of that strengthening grace which is in him) and
likewise it is profitable, that the man of God may be perfect, 1 Ioh. 2.14.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. There is that in the word of Jesus
Christ, which is able to complete men as Saints, and as Ministers, and
therefore doubtless full of glorious strength.

And so likewise in regard of the Spirit, 2. Strength of his Spirit.
hear what the Prophet Micah says, Chap. 3. ver. 8. But truly I am full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare
unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. And when Jesus Christ did
appear to Paul, Acts 26.13. to make him a Minister and a Witness, both of these
things which he had seen, and in those things in the which he would appear to
him, ver. 16. doubtless there was a powerful presence of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ, abundance of strengthening grace to be conveyed by him, otherwise how
could he possibly open their eyes to whom he was sent, ver. 18. to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified
by faith that is in me (still they are led to the Spring of grace in Christ)
now all these speak no less then an Almighty power.

You may perceive a fullness of strengthening grace in Christ, 2. A priestly
fullness of grace in Christ.
as he is the Churches Priest; otherwise he could never make full satisfaction
to his Fathers Justice: He could never so prevailingly intercede for the Saints
in Heaven, 1. Christ's gracious satisfaction
which are the two Branches of his Priestly Office, when all the sins of his
people met upon him (so it is in the Original) Isa. ^3.6. they would have sunk
him, had he not had more then the strength of a man: Therefore that he might be
a perfect Mediator between God and man, he was God-Man, taking Humane nature
into the fellowship of the Deity, and communicating Divine nature unto those
which he did intend to save: Hence Paul says, Romans 3.24, 25. We are justified
freely by Gods grace, through the Redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

Hence he further says, Acts 20.28. that God did purchase the Church with his
own blood: So that in this part of the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ there
was the power of God himself put forth.

2. Christ's gracious intercession.
Neither is there less strengthening grace manifested, when he comes to appear
for his people in heaven, in the presence of God, as Heb. 7.24. This man,
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, which passes not
from one to another; (certainly here was wonderful strength) that Christ being
once offered, should bear the sins of many, and unto them that looked for him,
he should appear the second time without sin unto salvation, as in Heb. 9.28.
That his having done away all their sins, should advance them to Salvation,
which still shows the strength of his grace. Therefore well might Paul annex
that, Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come
unto him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: This is the
ground of Paul's triumph, not only for himself, but in the name of all the
Saints, in that admirable place, Romans 8. from the 34, to the 39. ver. Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter) Nay, in all these things we are more then conquerors through him
that loved us: For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Here is strengthening grace of Almighty and everlasting efficacy.

As Jesus Christ is the Churches King, 3. Christ's Kingly fullness of grace.
he has a proportionable inexhaust stock of strengthening grace, without such a
power he could never suppress the numerous and potent adversaries of the
Church, which was the the solemn agreement betwixt him and his Father: Psalm.
110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, 1. Christ's powerful suppressing his enemies
(God the Father said unto God the Son, David's Lord) sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footstool; He will bring them to the lowest and
most abject condition, though for the present they look never so high and big
upon the poor members of Christ.

And accordingly he is still acting in heaven, whereas he does appear for his
people; so doubtless against his enemies, as is most clear in Heb. 10.12, 13.
But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever (so much
strength of grace, in that it need be but one) sat down on the right hand of
God, from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.

We may with much encouragement wrestle with God, and wait upon him, both for
the discovering and confounding of the great Impostors, Mahomet and the Pope,
and the removing all the Crutches of Babylon in any of the Kings Dominions, or
elsewhere: for this work is carried on with so much power, that in Gods time all
the Kingdoms of the earth will become the Lords, and his Christ's. To the same
purpose you shall find an Angel come down from heaven, having great power, and
the earth was lightened with his glory, and he cried mightily with a strong
voice, Babylon is fallen (all suitable to the powerful design of Christ) Rev.
18.2. And she shall be utterly burned with fire, in whom was found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, Chap 18. last verse.
of all that were slain upon the earth (some way reducible to her, or her
adherents) for strong is the Lord God who judges her, ver. 8.

Neither could Jesus Christ be a Resurrection to any sinners, 2. Christ's
powerful advancing his people.
nor quicken with Spiritual life whom he would, as Ioh. 5.20. unless that were
true ver. 26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given the Son to
have life in himself; and that to be able to raise his own unto eternal life,
ver. 29. All which argues abundance of strengthening grace in him: This was the
foundation of Paul's Prayer for his Ephesians, chap. 1. ver. 18. That the eyes
of their understanding being enlightened (here is powerful grace still) they
might know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power.

Here is a great heap of Emphatical expressions, to show the accumulative power
of the grace that is in Jesus Christ: Were he not so strong, that he were able
to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think, according to the
power that works in us, Ephesians. 3.20. Paul would never have used such an
expression, That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; there must (it seems) be a power in
us to enable us to fathom and comprehend the vast dimensions of that
strengthening grace that is in our Head) here is the breadth of this grace, Col.
2.13. Psalm 103.
covering all the sins of every one of his ele^t, Mat 16 18.
even from Adam to the end of the world: Here is the length of this grace, it
extends from everlasting to everlasting: Here is the depth of it, it lifts up
poor creatures from the very pit of hell: Rev. 3.21.
And the height of it, it advances them to sit by him in his own throne in
Heaven.

2. The redundancy of grace that is in Christ Jesus.
After the intrinsecal fullness of the grace of Christ, follows the Redundancy
thereof: for there is in him not only plenitudo vasis, but also plenitudo
fontis; there is the original fullness of a living fountain in him, which he
delights to communicate for the supplies of his people. This discovers it self
in four particulars:

1 Redundancy of his grace into all their faculties.
There is a Redundancy into all the faculties of our souls, he fills the Mind
with gracious principles, the Conscience with a holy tenderness, the Will with
flexibleness and compliance with his Will, and sways the Affections to act
regularly upon their objects. Doubtless Christ Jesus the second Adam will do as
much for all those that have Union with him, Romans 5.12, 15.
as the first Adam did against those that were in him: And therefore whereas by
his fall there was not only a total deprivation of original righteousness, but
a universal depravation of all the faculties (a general disharmony being
wrought in them) accordingly Jesus Christ, by the infusion of gracious habits,
will reduce them to an holy complexion and constitution; as 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. The
very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole Spirit, soul
and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: You
see he takes care for the restitution of the whole man. Let the Arminians as
falsely as confidently suggest, that for our Conversion there needs only a
wakening of the Understanding, and a rectifying of the Affections, the Will
(according to them) being left as Illibato virgo, for freedom to good being
never ravished by Adams fall: Jesus Christ teaches other Doctrine, who knowing
the corruption of the Will, tells you what the tenor of The Covenant of Grace
is, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. The Lord says, He will take away the stony heart of
Flesh, and put a new Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in his
statutes: There is the redundancy of Christ's fullness for the supplying of the
Will, as well as other faculties with holy dispositions.

Christ's fullness is redundant into all the graces of the Saints, 2. Redundancy
of the grace in Christ into all the graces of the Saints.
increasing them where they are little, strengthening them where they are feeble
and languishing, acting and animating them where they are dull and dead. Hence
it is that some of the Servants of Christ, who though they have but a little
stock of grace, yet keeping in with him, and holding communion with him, do
thrive much more in the Spiritual trading, both for the magnifying of Christ,
and for the good of their own souls, then diverse others who make a greater
show, and it may be have a larger portion of habitual grace. Hence it is that
Paul has recourse to this fountain by prayer, Phil. 1.9. And this I pray, that
your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all sense; that you
may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without
offense till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Unto this purpose
the Spouse invites her beloved to send forth his influence, Cant. 4.16. Awake,
O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof
may flow out: It is the presence of Jesus Christ who makes the spices; that is,
the graces of his Spirit which grow in the Garden of his Church, to cast a
sweet perfume: whereas he being absent, the Saints will seem to wither, at
least comparatively, even as the Trees, they will have an Autumn, yea a Winter,
not only send forth no pleesant fruit, but even the leaves fall off, and the
sap retire into the root; there will be a winter of their graces, till the Sun
of Righteousness return with healing and quickening in his wings; that is, by
the gracious beams of his Word and Spirit: Then and never till then, shall they
go forth and grow up as Calves of the stall, Mal. 4.2. be fat and flourishing.

3. Redundancy of the grace that is in Christ Jesus into all their duties
Christ's fullness is redundant into all their Duties, wherein they exercise those
several Graces* that they may with Spiritual vigor, and powerful activity,
perform those services to which the Lord calls them, as Paul says, With my
mind I my self serve the Law of God, Romans 7. ult. and Romans 8.26. Likewise the
Spirit helps our infirmities; for we know not how to pray as we ought.

O what heartless and sapless Performances do we multiply when Jesus Christ
withdraws; then, and then only we pray with life, when the Spirit of Jesus
Christ does help our infirmities: A word in the Original is very Emphatical,
when the Spirit takes us into his arms, and carries us on powerfully against
those infirmities that would clog, and cloud, and depress our Spirits in duty:
then they do duties not only materially good, but formally well in a Spiritual
manner, from Evangelical principles, upon Evangelical motives, and for
Evangelical ends, when there is a redundancy of the grace of Christ into them,
upon whom all our fruit is found, Hos. 14.8.

4. Redundancy of the grace in Christ Jesus into the various estates of his
Saints.
There is a redundancy of the fullness of Christ into all their various estates;
As when they are called to suffer, that they may do it with cheerfulness, not
sinking under carnal discouragements, but rather chide their souls out of it;
as the Psalmist on the 42. Psalm. ver. ult. Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise
him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God: When they are advanced to
a prosperous condition, that they may have a victorious Faith, triumphing over,
not only the frowns, but the favors of the world, 1 John 5.4. For want of
this, Solomon and Hezekiah did so miserably lose themselves in a Springtide of
prosperity: It was Paul's great advantage, that he had learned how to walk
unchangeably with God in great changes, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. Not that I speak in
respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. I know both how to be abased, and how to abound: Every where and in
all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound,
and suffer need. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil.
4.13. the same Original word with that in the Text.

We are apt to overgrieve or undergrieve at crosses; therefore Solomon gives
that wise counsel, Prove. 3.11. My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord,
it should not be slighted, neither be weary of his correction; we should not
faint under it: And his father David before him spoke as seasonably, If riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them: Psa. 62.10.
There is a danger as our Estates are greatned, so our Affections should swell
to an inordinate cleaving to them. None of these evils can be prevented, but by
the strengthening grace of Jesus Christ.

In the next place I shall endeavor to discover, 1. part. Christ's title unto,
and possession of this strengthening grace, which is threefold* 1. By the grace
of Union.
as God inables, Christ's Title to, and possession of this strengthening grace,
which he has by a threefold Claim:

He has a grace of Union, so learned Divines call it, by virtue of the
Hypostatical Union, our nature being so highly advanced into such a near
fellowship with the Divine Nature; all his Saints (though never so unworthy)
are brought into a capacity of receiving strengthening grace from him, as Joh.
1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth:
where you see clearly, when the Word was made flesh, there follows in him a
fullness of grace and truth. And as express to this purpose is that of Paul.
Col. 2.9, 10. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

First, There is fullness in him, that he might be able to empty and communicate
himself, according to the various necessities of his Saints.

Secondly, There is fullness of the Godhead in him, not only of some God-like
dispositions, and of the Image of God, which may be in Saints.

Thirdly, All the fullness of the Godhead, the whole Divine Nature.

Fourthly, All this fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ, he is there not as
a Guest, not as a Friend, but as an Inhabitant, to fix his constant abode there.

Fifthly, And all this bodily, personally, (most mysteriously) and not
transciently, vertually, and by participation only, as in a good degree it may
be in the Saints. And for this happy purpose has Jesus Christ such a Spring of
good in himself, who is the Head of all Principalities and Powers in that ninth
verse, which is added because they should see they need not go to the Angels as
their head, verse 18.

2. By the grace of Unction.
He has this fountain of strengthening Grace in himself, by the Grace of
Unction, the unction of the holy Spirit, which God gives to him, not by
measure, Joh. 3.34. not by drops, and measure of the gift of Christ, as to us,
Ephesians. 4.7. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand,
ver. 35. of Joh. 3. And amongst other good things, the Holy Spirit, Note.
the great New Testament Promise was the Promise of the Spirit, as the Messiah
was the grand Promise in the Old Testament: And this he pours, not drops out,
and that much more generally then before; as Acts 2.17. And it shall come to
pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: And
by virtue of this Unction of the Spirit, you may see what glorious things Jesus
Christ communicated unto poor sinners, if you please to compare Isa. 61.1. with
Luke 4.18.

3. By the grace of Office.
He has it in him by the Grace of Office, you will allow the expression, being
designed by the Father as a public person, for the advantage of all those
whose Names are written in the Book of life, and for those whom the Father had
given to the Son.

He was appointed by Commission under the Broad Seal of Heaven, to be The grand
Lord Treasurer for his Church, the common Storehouse of their strengthening
provision.

This he does signanter declare, and that most fully, Joh. 6.27. when he bids
them, Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life.

Here is the ground which the Son of man shall give unto you, never doubt it,
for him has God the Father sealed.

This is the Doctrine that John the Baptist published concerning Christ, Joh.
1.16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. It seems
there is an overflowing fountain of grace in him, which was fully opened when
he came into the world, Joh. 7.38, 39. else how could all Believers, with John,
receive of his fullness, had there not been a full fountain, it would not have
been drawn dry, though communicated to so many, and grace for grace:

1. Whether it be by way of accumulation (as some interpret it: (...). Camer.
or

2. Whether by way of additional supplement, we receiving the grace of the New
Testament, instead of the grace of the Old Testament: or

3. Whether by way of correspondency, there being such proportionable
impressions of that grace that is in Christ, so far as we are capable (for
there was that in Christ as Mediator, wherein we cannot resemble him) made upon
us, that as the print upon the wax answers to the Seal, as the characters upon
the Son answer to the Father; so there are such visible stamps of the grace of
Christ upon the Saints, that in the language of Peter they are expressly said to
be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
having such Divine dispositions so incorporated, so naturalized into them,
that what good they do, springs not from external motives only, as in
Hypocrites, Note.
but from an inward principle of new Nature: And therefore acting from this new
Divine Nature, they do good with more constancy and delight then others: And
upon the same account does John tell you, 1 John 17. v. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: In Moses Law there were
shadowing Types, in the Gospel of Christ there is the substantial Truth of
them; there were Predictions and Prophesies, here fulfilling grace.

Hence Christ says in the 10. Chapter of the Evangelist John, ver. 10. I am
come, that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly,
that he might be a perfect Savior, to answer the greatest exigencies of all his
poor sheep, maintaining their lives in despite of all their Wolvish enemies.

3 part. The various sweetness and sweet variety of the strengthening grace in
Christ Jesus.
The third particular follows; to wit, The various sweetness, and sweet variety
of that strengthening grace that is in Christ: This may be made appear, to the
great comfort, and strong encouragement of the Saints; and that in a fivefold
Stream, flowing from this living Spring of grace in Christ.

First, Here is strength from the electing grace of God in Christ, where there
is a great deal of strength, and indeed the fundamental Stone, which is the
strength and support of the house: The foundation of all the Spiritual and
Eternal building lies there, Ephesians. 1.45. He has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him
in love, having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: Grace and his good
pleasure is the Spring of all.

Secondly, Here is strength from the transacting grace of Christ; when there
was an agreement betwixt God the Father and God the Son, God had given so many
to him, he would undertake for those many, God did accept his undertaking, then
Christ went on, there was a great deal of strength in this transaction; as 2 Timothy 1.9. According to his purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began: how possibly given us before the world began? why? it
was given us in Christ Jesus in his negotiating with God for us.

Thirdly, Here is a great deal of strength also in the converting grace of
Christ; He has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, What purpose and grace?
That which was in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.9. He did graciously purpose it,
therefore it should be infallibly effected. Note.
A place that in the Synod of Palestina 1200 years ago, and above, the learned
Divines made excellent use of, to cut asunder the sinews of Pelagianism, as
indeed it does, and so still of Arminianism, which is but that weed revived, as
learned Dr. Featly makes it most clearly appear in his Pelagius Redivivus.

Fourthly, There is a great deal of strength likewise in the assisting grace of
Christ, when there shall be new supplies communicated from his Spirit, to
enable us to perform every duty, and to order our sharpest sufferings to the
best good of our souls; as Paul assures himself, Phil. 1.19. For I know that
this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayer, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly and lastly, There is a rich proportion of strength in Christ, for our
crowning and persevering in him; even so much that the very 'Devil himself
shall not be able to rend us off, we standing by a Covenant of Grace, being
kept by the power of God (not only through our Faith) to salvation: The father
will hold the child, though the poor child through weakness let go his hold.

Now follows the Spiritual improvement of all this in a seasonable and short
Application. Applic.


A serious and seasonable invitation, A serious invitation for all strangers to
seek acquaintance with, and interest in Jesus Christ. Ioh. 3.19.
to all such who are yet strangers unto Jesus Christ, that they would seek
acquaintance with him, and interest in him.

It is most wholesome counsel, Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be
at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee. This will be the worlds
condemnation with a witness, yea with a vengeance, That light came into the
world, and men loved darkness better then light, because their deeds were evil.

O most unhappy mistake, when Sin the worst of evils hinders them from Jesus
Christ the best of good: This, this if there were no more, will fully justify
him in their eternal condemnation, being that he so seriously sought unto them,
to wit, in the way of his outward Ministry, Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! by those Prophets
which thou did kill.

Themistocles (as Story reports) in his lower condition, Vid L. Verulans
Apothegmes, 26.
was much in love with a young Gentleman, which scorned him; when he grew to his
greatness, which was soon after, he sought to him, but Themistocles said, We
are both both grown wise, but too late. If when Jesus Christ in the course of
his Ministry, in an humble manner stands and knocks at the door of thy heart,
speaking this melting language unto thee, as he did to those great sinners the
Laodiceans, Rev. 3.20. If any will hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come into him, and will sup with him, and he with me: If you shall then deny
him entertainment when he thus condescends to seek to you, that you might seek
to him, for your own Spiritual and eternal welfare; wonder not, if afterward
you see you are wise too late, when the Master of the house shall have shut the
door, and ye begin to stand without knocking, and crying, Lord, Lord, open to
us, and he shall repulse you with this doleful answer, I know you not whence
you are; it may be ye will complement with him, beginning to say, We have eaten
and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: but he will
resolutely persist to proceed against them, who have so wilfully rejected him,
and say, to their eternal confusion, I tell you, I know not whence ye are,
depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. O all ye who have tasted the
sweetness of this grace which flows from the Rock Christ Jesus, do what you can
to rescue poor deluded, seduced souls from under their prejudices, and any
other temptations, which alienate them from him who is their only happiness. O
that you would tread in their steps, Joh. 1 40, 41. when Andrew had found
Christ, presently he finds his brother Simon, and says unto him, We have
found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ; and he brought him
to Jesus: at least endeavor to bring them to Jesus in Gospel means; and v. 44,
45. Philip having found Christ, finds Nathanael, and says unto him, We have
found him of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth. Note.
Observe, they speak great and good things of Christ, that they may persuade
them to seek him; a good copy for you, how to deal with your carnal friends:
Thus the Samaritan woman, Joh. 4. though in her parley with Christ she had been
very carnal, ver. 9, 11. yet being convinced, and perceiving that he was a
Prophet, ver. 19. upon this she bears her water-pot, and goes into the City to
the men, ver. 28. saying, Come and see a man which has told me all things that
ever I did: Is not this the Christ? ver. 29. Her invitation was so effectual,
that the men went out of the City, and came to see him v. 30. many of the City
believed on him for the saying of the woman, she won them to a credulity; so
may you, if you endeavor to gain a good opinion of him in their minds: But
many more believed because of his own word, ver. 41. How would this woman
rejoice in their acceptance of her invitation? How will they eternally bless
God for it? Why will not you endeavor, that you and your carnal friends should
have the same occasion of everlasting triumphing mutually in one another in
heaven?

FINIS.
BEhold, 1 Use.
what convincing reason all you Saints*here have to put an high value upon
Jesus Christ: He is called by the Prophet, The Rock of Ages, Isa. 26.3. And
therefore upon the strongest grounds called by the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.26. The
Rock of his Heart, and his Portion for ever; and that after he had been in the
Sanctuary of God beholding his glory, ver. 17. coming from the North (so
Chaldea lay in regard of Judea) Hereupon to the same purpose, when Habakuk saw
a bitter and hasty Nation, as he calls the Chaldeans, Hab. 1.6. threatening, and
indeed beginning to ruin Judah (its probable the Captivity was then begun)
appeals to God, in this language, ver. 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O
Lord my God, O Rock God. This is the Prophet Micahs Dialect (its sweet to
observe the harmonious breathings of the Spirit in several Prophets) chap. 5.2.
who speaking of Christ as the Ruler in Israel (there is his strength) adds,
Whose goings forth have been from of old, from the days of Eternity.

Where is your Faith in this Eternal Rock, that should be emboldened to
frequent actings upon for all new supplies; as in Romans 1.17. Paul tells us,
The righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; that is,
righteousness enough for one act of faith after another: So in Christ, grace
upon grace' though the actings of faith be never so often repeated, which
indeed is very pleasing to him. O remember, I beseech you, where your strength
lies; and know, that unless you do learn this Art of Memory, it may cost you
very dear, many a smarting whipping: The want of this provokes God to be
sometimes severe with his beloved children.

Here is a double method of his proceedings:

1. He whips them unto Christ, and to the dependence upon his grace, by
Spiritual desertions: A most sharp remedy, the sting of other afflictions. His
gracious presence does sweeten every thing, his absence will embitter any
thing. David found this by woeful experience, which made him groan so sadly,
Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice: When he had broke his conscience by sinning, Note.
God would break his bones for sin; And again ver. 12. Restore to me the joy of
thy salvation; and ver. 10. Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right
Spirit within me. Its true, the Lord had so far deserted him, in regard of
sensible comforts, that he may desire their restoring; and, which may be
observed by the way, let the proud Arminian say what he can, David was not
become silius irae, but only silius sub ira, still a beloved son, he begs
indeed the cleansing of his heart, but only the renewing of a right spirit
within him.

See in Arminius his Works, a notable Discourse about Gods Providence in men's
sins. Deus non permittit peccatum tanquam otiosus spectator, sed eff^^aci
quadam permissione, quamvis nullo modo sit Author peccati.
2. The Lord whips his children to an improvement of the grace of Christ, by
suffering them in his holy and wise providence, to fall into some great, and it
may be some scandalous sin, which shall draw on a sharp affliction. This is to
a Saint a most sharp cure; yet God makes it often effectual to that happy end:
for, though we be the only proper authors of sin, yet Gods permission is not
otiosa, but eff^cax permissio; He knows how to govern its subserviency to the
Covenant of Grace, and to bring good out of evil, otherwise he would neither
suffer evil of sin or punishment to be; David too clear an instance of this
Rule: Hereby the Lord whipped him out of himself, to seek mercy from his
Savior, Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving
kindeness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions.

FINIS.

