UNDER GOD Humbly Desiring his Blessing to this Famous and Wonderful Never
Failing CORDIAL DRINK OF THE WORLD. The Great PRESERVER of Mankind.
A SECRET Far beyond any thing YET KNOWN TO THE WORLD. Never Published by any
but by me Thomas Hind G. in London, Most Approved and Admirable for its
EXCELLENT VIRTUES AND USES.
This is to give notice to all Person, That my Cordial is sold at no place in
London, or in England, but within Aldersgate in St. Martins, next door to the
Fountain Tavern, at the Picture Drawers House, and also in York City in
Owsegate, at the Hand and Pen, at Mr. John Haindes house, as at the end of my
Bills will fully direct you, and the Price of each Bottle; and that you may
know (that I Thomas Hind am the True Author) I have for prevention of all
Pretenders and Counterfits, set my Seal on my Bottles, being the Wounded Hind
with T. H. encompassed in a Laurel, that none may be Deceived by any, being
informed that the Counterfiting of it, has been often Attempted to the
Displeasure of many, etc.

And though my Bills and Directions, and the Seal on my Bottles may be
Counterfited, yet if they have it at the two aforesaid Houses, they cannot be
deceived, but shall have it as Pure and Good, as if they had it out of my own
hands; neither are my Bills given commonly about, but only with my Cordial at
those two houses, etc.

And of late one boldly takes upon him to make use of my cures in the words of
my Bills and Directions, and sets them forth in his own Name, and wilely under
the Notion of the People, and injurious abuse of my Name, to disgorge
inveterately his designed malice, spite and envy, with close and great deceit
against my succesful proceedings and great Cures attested by the People, and
not only so, but wilfully inventeth what he will, and uses endeavors to defame
me too, and this to draw his purpose about, to bring a reputation on his
Liquor, by maligning of my Never Failing Cordial.

As for his near driven shift, with a hardy brazen Brow, to say that he taught
me, and that he never revealed the Receipt to any in the World. It is notorious
false, both Oracle and Vassal, has failed in their Dictates, and deceived one
another, for he could never reveal that [which himself never knew] nor any in
the Nation. Neither am I so prodigal of my Writing, or did ever use such
practices to set my hand to Justify false transactions, and stolen words out
of my very own Bills of my Cures of the Stone and experiences on the People.

My laborious Travels in diverse foreign Counteries, and great pains above
Twenty years, is truly well known; and how curious inquisitive I was in the
great concernment of health, as now effectually appears.

And am now informed of many pretenders that would shamefully Counterfit it, to
deceive the People, and lay claim to the Practice of my Never Failing Cordial,
they hearing of its great Cures, have changed their white Liquor to another
Culler, [to revive its dying Nature,] but it is all in vain to change Cullers,
for the thing like the thing, is not the thing it self, to work, the effect
intended; for there is several ingredients in mine that none in England does
know off, which through the blessing of God, does powerfully prevail to effect
the Cures my Bills mentions, at does daily appear by the 'Peoples experience.

THis Cordial is so Agreeable to Nature, that it performs all its Operation as
Nature would have it; as if She had fitted to her Self, or found out Mediums to
reduce all her Extremes to an equal Temper; It being fitted to all Humors,
Ages, Complexions, Sexes, and Constitutions: For if any Noxious Humor offend
the Noble Parts, This Great Preserver will so Highly Fortify Nature, that it
will not admit any Enemy to enter: And He or She that keeps this Inestimable
Jewel by them, May bid Farewell to former ways they used, and will save them
that Great Expense of Charge.

For by good Experience of my own sad Condition, and Others, for the space of
Five Years, I was driven from one Doctor to another, but all that they could do
was not able to help me; and was at the Wells. They said, If that did not Cure
me, no Physic would; but I found no help there, so that they had given me
over: For had I continued longer, in all human sense I should have been in my
Grave long ere now.

But I fell to the use of This My Never Failing Cordial, which in a very short
time set me at Liberty, and am now in perfect Health: All Glory be to God for
it.

THis Great Preserver, or Never Failing Cordial will not fail to Cure the GOUT;
for it Stifles it in its Birth, or Kills it in its Strength, as true Experience
has found: Extracting out of all parts of the Body, those Crude and Viscous
Humors, which are the Spawn and nourisher of it: and does free the Joints of
all other Diseases to Admiration.

Dissolving the Stone and Gravel; a better Remedy CANNOT BE: For when it is
Congeated, it brings away, (the Sand and Gravel soft) as Butter or Fine Flower
under your Finger; and not only so, but does destroy the Original Cause: It
Never fails to Cure the Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys Ulcerated, that
sends forth water like blood, and wonderfully Cleanses the Reins of all
Foulness and Imperfections, and forces Urine.

It restores all languishing Natures, and Melancholy drooping Spirits: It will
not fail but Perfectly Cure the Hypochondriack Melancholy; and does most
Powerfully oppose all Black, and mixed Humors, as the Grand Enemy to Nature:
for it is continually drawing them out of the Veins and Arteries into the
Stomach, and from thence sends them away,( after that) Nature Rejoices.

It pursues the Surfeits from place to place; and though the body be swelled
up, in two days time it will raise them out of their Beds, and set them on
their Feet again: It takes away the Scurvy out of the Body Root and Branch;
and the Dropsy to Admiration, and all other Distempers that join with it.

It takes away the Headache, dissiness, and Swimming in the Head, or Megrim;
Convulsion-Fits in the Head, and Swooning away in their Night Sleep, Though
Afflicted for many years.

It helps bad Digestion, Pain or any stoppage of the Stomach, and shortness of
Breath: It Causes a good Appetite, and Defends the Head From all Vapors
which ascend from the Mother and Spleen; and is a most certain Remedy against
the Cholick, or any griping of the Guts, and stays Vomiting.

It takes away all Pains from the Heart, and Perfectly Cures those that are
stopped with Phlegm, as Choked, and stifled in their Sleep for want of Breath.

It gives Ease to Ancient People of the Tissick, but Cures those that are not
too far gone.

THis Harmless and Pleasant Cordial is so great a Friend to all Womenkind, that
they cannot have a Richer Jewel bestowed upon them as relating to their Health
than this; That will not fail to Clear them from Obstructions, fitting and
inabling them for Conception, and also after Delivery or Miscarriage, though in
danger of death, it is an effectually remedy.

It does Cure the Green Sickness of all sorts in two days: This is that which
will not Fail but bring them to a Virgin-blush, Upholding Nature in the
Strength and Vigor, Making the Visage well Colored, the Breath Sweet, the
Body Lusty.

It helps fore and Rheumy Eyes; it stays all Rheums that fall from the Head
upon the Lungs: It perfectly eases all Coughs, Colds, and wheesings; and Cures
Consumptions if not far gone.

It does free the Liver and Spleen of all Obstructions, and so by that means
helps the Fits of the Mother and Spleen: It is good for Nurses which give
Suck, for it will cleanse their Blood, and Cause good and Wholesome Milk; It
Cures the Rickets in Children, by opening the Obstruction, and many other
scurvy Diseases.

It bursteth and perfectly destroys Worms of those that are in Years, and
almost over gone with them, bringing away the skins of half a yard, and near a
yard long; As has been Proved.

It keeps a clear Passage between the Head and Heart, and will not Admit of
any Noxious Humors to annoy the Noble Parts: It will keep off those Frightful
Fears, and Griefs, from their violent feizing on the Heart, enabling a Weak
Person to make wonderful resistance, by taking away the sharp Humors; which
they may see come away: A happy Riddance.

It takes away the Extreme Burnings in the bottoms of the Feet, and Palms of
the Hands, which so fore afflict the Heart: Those that are too hot, it cools;
and in them that are too cold, it increases heat and strength, by taking away
the Cause, as the Directions at large do show.

To Conclude, it highly exalts the Generative Virtue, restores Radical
Moisture; Cleanses and Strengthens the Vessels, in both Sexes.

I need not Name Particulars.
FOr, in a word, its that which Stifles most Diseases in their Birth, or Kills
them in their Strength, keeping all Sexes in their Pristine Health; who will
Admire the Effects, and consess it to be a Rich Treasure in time of Need, which
will not fail them (under God;) For it does most wonderfully Purify the whole
Body of Man, so that few Diseases (God's appointed time being not come) is able
to withstand it: For most Distempers are subject to its Innocent and wonderful
Operation. Did the World but know it, they would highly Esteem it a speedy
Friend to Health, truly deserving the due praise of all Men.

And (through the goodness of God) by long Traveling, I Purchased with a great
Sum this Pearl, and Inestimable Jewel, (as I did many) but this is the best
that ever I heard of amongst them all, for it has perfectly Cured me, ( That
was Afflicted with most of the aforesaid Distempers.) I might have bought
Diamonds at a far Cheaper Rate than the Gravel-Stones cost, that came from me
in Unspeakable extremity.

And through the Earnest Desire of Many that knew and heard of my long
Languishing Condition, and now Cured by this Rich Cordial, have Importuned with
me so far, for to Publish it, (though I need it not for gain:) For I have a
Competent Estate otherways to live on without the Practice of this.

But out of an Hearty Design of Promoting the Health and Common Good of All,
Who may and would be helped, I have set forth this, to inform the wonderful
Effects that have been wrought by this Cordial Spirit, and abundantly Testified
at large by many, which this Bill cannot contain, to give all sorts of Persons
full satisfaction of its Innocent and wonderful Operation in the whole Body of
Man; but for brevity sake I have here omitted.

I do faithfully promise all Persons, That this Cordial Drink is so safe, and
so truly prepared, and does taste so pleasant, That the least Child may take
it, Sick or Well, Winter or Summer.

I have inserted nothing but what my Cordial will not fail to Cure, AS
EXPERIENCE HAS FOUND upon Men, Women, and Children, and does find true to the
End.

This approved and Never-Failing Cordial, is Sold in no place in England but in
London, within Aldersgate in St. Martins, next Door to the Fountain-Tavern at
the Picture-Drawers House, at 6 s. the Pint Bottle, and 3 s. the half Pint
Bottle; And also at Mr. John Haindes House dwelling in York City in Owsegate at
the Hand and Pen, with Directions at large in Print for the Use of it, at 7 s.
the Pint Bottle, and 3 s. 6 d. the half Pint Bottle, for Convenience of all to
save Charges, and bid Farewell to their former ways for ever. A Happy Riddance,
and a Blessed Remedy. Soli Deo Gloria.

With Allowance.


