THE SEASON FOR Englands Selfe-Reflection, AND Advancing Temple-work:
DISCOVERED IN A SERMON PREACHED To the two Houses of Parliament; At Margarets
Westminster, Aug. 13. 1644. being an extraordinary day of Humiliation.

By THOMAS HILL B. D. Pastor at Tychmersh in Northamptonshire, A Member of the
Assembly of Divines.

The Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved. Jer. 8. 20.
Now set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God, arise therefore
and build ye the Sanctuary of the Lord God, etc. 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. LONDON,
Printed by Richard Cotes for John Bellamy, and Philemon Stephens. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE House of LORDS, and THE Honorable House of
COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER.
THE Lord Jesus Christ, whose name is wonderful, has reserved for this last
age of the World, wherein he intends to do great things for his Church and
against his enemies, the accomplishment of many precious promises, and the
discovery of most glorious providence. Amongst all other your State
observations, I hope you treasure up the experiences of his wonder-working hand
for you since this happy Parliament began, that so you may grow eminent as well
in Christian, as in state-wisdom. Never had any Assembly of Counselors in
England, greater reason then you, to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 17. How
precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God: how great is the sum of them! It
were well worthy your wise care, to take some course, what ever it cost, by a
discreet and faithful pen, to preserve the story of Gods providence about you
since these troubles began, that so his honor might live therein, when you are
dead.

Its true indeed, the Lords dispensations have been very various toward you,
and the method of his counsels, past finding out; As the Israelites in the
wilderness, were sometimes not far from Canaan, and then cast back for a long
time; so you sometimes begin to think your selves got near the shore, and to
discover the Land, some hopes of a gracious issue, then a new storm arises and
drives you into the main Sea again: witness your present straites, your renewed
perplexities. Amongst other reasons hereof, this may be one; It may be God
will not finish your state-affaires, till you are more vigorous in his
Temple-work. Who knows how soon poor England, yea and all the three Kingdoms,
might become gloriously happy, could you remove such obstructions, as interrupt
the building of Gods house? Your selves are not a little concerned in the
expediting this great business of settling the Church; opinions of most
dangerous consequence begin now to spring up amongst us. The controversy is
not now only betwixt congregationall and classical Divines, (who are called
Independents, and Presbyterians) in point of Church government; (There seems
to be some good hopes of a fair accommodation betwixt them) But with such
others also who vehemently cry down not only the power of Ecclesiastical
Synods, but likewise the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, in matters of
Religion, See Bloody Tenent.
thereby at once opening a door to all licentiousnes in opinion and practice,
even for Jews, Turks, and any whomsoever. The Good Lord stir up your hearts
who have so great a share in the managing, and in the success of the great
work in hand, to do what becomes you in such times as these are; When so many
of your own Rank (the Lord humble them for their unfaithfulness) have
deserted their Trust, You have obtained this great mercy, this high Honor, to
be employed in Temple-service. I hope you often consider, who has made you to
differ, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
and what he at this time expects from you.

You will please to allow me the boldness to put you in mind of David's
carriage, who, when the three mighty men brake through the Host of the
Philistims, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23. 16. He
would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord: and he said, Be it
far from me O Lord, that I shall do this? Is not this the blood of men that
went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it, ver. 17.
The tranquillity and many sweet refreshings, the liberty and opportunity of
doing Service to Church and State in the Parliament which you enjoy; Is it not
the blood of very many men? How often have your Noble and courageous General
with other Worthies of the first Magnitude, jeoparded their lives in the High
places of the field to secure you in your Houses, in your employments? How much
trouble and hazard have our dear Brethren of Scotland undergone to themselves
and Kingdom, to keep You from the danger of popery and slavery? yea how many
thousands, some of all ranks, (it may make us bleed with sorrow to number
them) have already shed their dearest blood, that you may possess your lives
and estates? God forbid, be it far from any of you, that what is purchased
at so dear a rate, should be prostituted to your own selvishnesse, or any
ignoble service. Let all you have, rather be powered out to the Lord, and
consecrated to his service in building him an House, Isa. 43. 4.
who has loved you so much and given so many men for your lives.

It was an high strain of courageous Rhetorique, in one of the City Soldiers
at Newbury sight, (as it is related from good hands) who, when he lay bleeding
under mort all wounds, breathed out this admirable expression: O that I had
another life to loose for Jesus Christ! O that I had another life to loose for
Jesus Christ! Let this speech live in you after his death. Be willing at least
to sacrifice the improvement of your Lives, which cost the precious blood of
Christ, and many of his dear members, in lifting up his Name, and advancing
his Temple.

Nehemiah, when he would encourage them in building the wall of Jerusalem,
notwithstanding all the scoffs of the adversaries, after he had armed the
Laborers, Nehem. 4. 13. 14. He said unto the Nobles, and to the Rulers, and
to the rest of the people, Be not afraid of them, remember the Lord which is
great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your
daughters, your wives and your houses. The Lord in mercy turn your fighting
into building, and rebuke your enemies, that you may have more liberty to build
his House.

Herein I can rise higher then Nehemiah; you build not only for your Sons
and Daughters, but for the Lord, who is the Husband of his Church, the Prince
of Peace, the King of Glory, that has prepared an house eternal in the
heavens, for all that sincerely build his house here on Earth. 1 Chr. 22. 16.
Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with you. Which is the hearty
prayer of him, who,

Though most unworthy, desires to serve you faithfully in the advancing
Temple-work. THOMAS HILL.

ENGLANDS SEASON FOR Selfe-Reflection, AND Advancing Temple-worke.
HAGGAI 1. 7, 8. 7 Thus says the Lord of Hoasts, Consider your ways. 8 Go up
to the Mountain, and bring wood and build the House, and I will take pleasure
in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord.
IN reading the Holy Scripture, Preface*
that you may gain a more comprehensive knowledge thereof, you shall do
wisely, as to observe the original Language, in which the Holy men of God
spoke, and to borrow what light you can from the neighboring words, in the
context; so withal very seriously to inquire into the Method of the several
books among themselves; Hereby might you often find the understanding of one
book to be as a key to unlocke another, to which it has a peculiar
reference. In the general were you well acquainted with the five Books of
Moses, Search the method of the books of Scripture amongst themselves.
(they being the Basiso^ll the I^st) It were a good preparation for your more
intimate knowledge of the whole frame of Scripture. Then for the particulars,
if you would clearly understand the Psalms, read the Books of Samuel much,
especially the Second; many of the Psalms being penned occasionally, upon some
passage of Story there mentioned, they will thence receive much light, And if
you desire to be well versed in the Proph^^e, read over and over the two
Books of the King^, and the Second Book of Chronicles, where you have the
History of the Kings of Israel and Judab, in whose days the several Prophets
did prophecy; as doubtless in the New Testament, See Ludo^. Capel. Hister.
Apostol.
d^stinct knowledge of the Story of the Acts of the Apostles, would make many
of their Epistles much more familiar to you.

You must not conceive (as too many do) that the Res gestae, the things
contained in the Scripture, were acted in the same order, wherein the Books
are ordinarily ranked up in your Bibles. Let none think that Isaiah was the
first of the Prophets in order, of prophesying, See Danaeus his Presace to
Comment. on the small Prophets.
because he is now placed first; (Learned men conclude out of 2 Kings 13. 25.
that Jon^h prophesied first of all the sixteen Prophets) Nor that Paul's
Epistles to the Romans, and to the Corinthians, were the first he wrote,
because now so placed amongst the Books of the New Testament. See Paraeus in
his Prol^gom. on the Epist. to the Romans.
They who mind the story of the Acts of the Apostles, affirm the Epistles to
the Thessalonians, to have the precedence. Who ever ranked the Books of the
Prophets, and the Epistles of the Apostle Paul, did rather consider the
quantity of the volume then the order of the Contents in them.

It Is true, whereas the Prophets are ordinari^y cast into three ranks, some
who prophesied before the captivity of Babylon, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
others, giving the people warning of it, some who were appointed to bring them
cordials, in the captivity, as Ezekiel, and Daniel; some to quicken and direct
them, after their return from the captivity, as Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi;
These three you shall find in their proper place, which is to be last in
order. In reading them it is good to join the History with the Prophecy, one
will Illustrate the other.

There are little Historical Books which have some contemporaneity with these,
(...) Nehemia^.
as containing the story of Gods providence about his people, and their
carriage toward him after their return from the captivity. If you please to
cast your eye upon Ezra 5. ver. 1. In reading Scripture compate Historical and
Prophetical books. Verse 1.
there you shall find, upon the cessation of the building of the Temple,
mentioned, Ezra 4. 23, 24. God stirred up Haggai, and Zechariah, to prophecy to
the ^ews, as here, Hag. 1. 1. The word of the Lord came by Haggai the Prophet
unto Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel Governor of Judah, and to Joshuah the
son of Josedech the High Priest, whom he finds readily willing to be
engaged in Gods work; This you may observe in all stories.

When the Lord has any glorious design to carry on, Note.
he prepares some active Instruments to concur with him therein.

Here Hagg ai was raised by God to stir up Zerubbabel, Joshuah, and the
people, they were fitted to entertain the Prophets counsel, and to concur
with God in his great work, as appears most clearly, Ezra 5. 2. and Hag. 1.
14. where you have a most proper Echo to Haggai his Sermon, a joint
contribution of their indevours, The Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel,
the spirit of Joshuah, and the spirit of all the remn^nt of the people, and
they came and did work in the House of the Lord of Hoasts their God. And when
the Lord intended to employ Luther for the discovering and confounding the
Abominations and usurpations of the Pope, what a Train was there laid for that
work, in the unexpected concurrence of others with him at that very time? Then
were there some great persons stirred up by God, to appear for him and protect
him from the fury of his Adversaries, as the Duke of Saxony, etc. About that
time there were some Learned men, See Sleiden Comments.
furnished with ability and courage to second him; as Zivinglius, etc. yea, and
then some Cities prepared to receive his Doctrine, which so many others
persecuted. As it was in Judah, in H^zekiahs days, The hand of God was upon
them to give them one he^, 2 Chronicles. 30. 12. So in Germany in Luthers time.

The same happy experience have we found amongst our selves: Psalm. 102. 13, 14.
when the Lord was pleased to arise to have mercy upon his Sion, first in
Scotland, Mark the constellation of divine Providence in Scotlands and
Englands Reformation.
and now in England; what a constellation of providence has appeared, in
awakening the spirits of so many, to be vigorously active for the blessed
work of Reformation? According to that in Psalm. 110. 3. The people are willing
in the day of his power. Some of our Zerubbabels, of our Joshuahs, and of the
remnant of our people, have been more willing then formerly to be engaged in
Temple-worke. God will either find or make Instruments to serve his purpose in
advancing his own great design.

But be the work never so good, there will be some obstructions, and though
some Instruments be prepared for action, yet there are too many ready to
retard the best and most plausible things. Hereupon this man of God, the
Prophet Haggai, being sent with a Message to quicken the building of the
Temple; First, begins with complaints to their negligent intermission, in the
Lords Work, discovering the carnal principle, Verse 2.
which did mis-lead them, ver. 2. This people say, the time is not come, the
time that the Lords house should be built. The Babylonish furnace had not
burnt up all their dross, they had been seventy years at the School of
affliction, and yet many of them very poor proficients. They made good
Solomon's Proverb, chap. 27. 22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar
among wheat with a pestell, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

Indeed they do not here bluntly, and peremptorily refuse to join in building
the Temple, but endeavor cunuingly to put it off.

Sloathfull spirits will study pretenses and excuses to palliate their
negligence in the Lords work. Note.


And where ever it light they care not, so they may but shelter and justify
themselves in their own omissions.

They will be so presumptuous as to devolve their negligence in re-edifying
the Temple upon Gods providence, as if by those lets which had been an
hinderance unto them, God had shown, that he would have the work deferred
till some other time, and rather then they will be put out of their pace, they
will likewise cast reproach upon the zeal and forwardness of those who began
to lay the foundation of the Temple, so soon after they returned from the
Captivity. Their sloth and subtilty prompts them to cry out in this
disparaging and discouraging language: The time is not yet come, the time is
not yet come.

This is the very same spirit, A strong antipathy against rebuilding the Temple
in all ages.
which now adays breathes in our Anti-Reformers, (all carnal men, as carnal
in all ages, are acted by the same principles) they cry impetuously, What need
we be so forward in Reformation? cannot we stay and do things by degrees? Oh
how long do you think should Haggai, Zerubbabel, and Joshuah, have stayed for
the building of the Temple, if they had waited till Rehum the Chancellor,
Shimshai the Scribe, the Samaritan, and the slothful party had been willing,
heartily to join with them? even as long as our Brethren of Scotland, and Gods
servants in England should have expected, before the Popish and Prelaticall
party will concur with them to advance a Scripture Reformation. They all will
still be pretending something for their delays.

But the Prophet well knew that the true reason of their intermittings was the
contempt of Gods service, Verse 3, 4, 5, 6.
and their carnal affection to their own ease and pomp. This he further
reproves and confute^, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. by two arguments.

First, one drawn from the shameful preferring themselves before God. ver. 4.
Is it a time for you, O ye, to dwell in your seiled houses, and this house lie
waste? most unlike to David, 2 Samuel 7. 2.
who swear unto the Lord, Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my
house, until I find out a place for the Lord; an ^abitation for the mighty
God of Jacob. Psalm. 132. 2, 3. 5. And as unanswerable was this carriage of
theirs to all that distinguishing respect and indulgence which God had
vouchsafed them, in preserving and bringing them out of the Babylonish prison.

Secondly, another drawn from those smarting evidences of Gods displeasure,
against their negligence, ver. 6, 7. Now therefore, thus says the Lord of
Hoasts, Consider your ways, ye have sown much, and bring in little, etc. And
then like a good Physician, after the discovery of a dangerous disease, he
applies a suitable Remedy, he proceeds to exhortation, ver. 7. 8. where you
have:

First, Division of the Text.
The Person speaking, the great God, Thus says the Lord of Hoasts.

Secondly, The Counsel he gives, consisting of two branches:

The first looking hackward, ver. 7. Consider your ways: they must be finding
out what has been amiss heretofore. Read over former neglects and successes.

The second looks forward, what they were now to be doing, ver. 8. Goup to the
Mountain, and bring wo^d, and build the house: which he backs with undeniable
reasons, and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the
Lord.

I will begin with the Person speaking: It is not only Thus says the Lord,
which had been enough to have put them upon the most serious consideration of
their ways, but diverse times in this Chapter, and in such other places of
Scripture, where the people of God met with Armies of adversaries to hinder
them from building the Temple; he speaks to them as the Lord of Hoasts.
Whence you may observe:

When the People of God conflict with much opposition in doing his great work,
1. Observat.
then especially is he pleased to make known himself, as the Lord of Hoasts.

At the first there was but an Host, Tsebaam, in the singular number, V. Bish.
Lake Sermon. 8. on lsa. 9. 7.
but one Army, Genesis 2. 1. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all
the Host of the Creatures; Indeed when Adam had fallen, then it is (...)
Tsebaoth, ever since God said, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity betwixt the
Serpent and the woman; and between their seed: there have been two Armies on
foot in the field, the Dragon and his Angels, contending against Michael and
his Angels, yet the General is still but one, who is Lord of Hoasts.

Quest. Why is God so often called the Lord of Hoasts?

Answ. There are diverse good reasons why his creatures may be called his Host,
as Exodus 12. 41. Psalm. 148. 2.

First, Exerci^^, 1 A^^pia. 2. Propter ordinem
for their multitude, they are very numerous.

Secondly, for their Order, they are most wisely ranked in reserence to the
service of their Commander.

Thirdly, 3 Propter obedientian.
in regard of their ready obedience to their great General. All creatures
stand ready in battle array, pressed to do the will of God, V. Paraeum in
Genes. c. 2. v. 1.
as an Army set in Martial Order.

Fourthly, some add a fourth, God has a special providence in governing the
affaries of war. He brings the Sword, Levit. 26. 25. And he makes Pea^e,
Psalm. 46. 9. and therefore may well be called the Lord of Hoasts.

Quest. Why does the Lord then especially delight to make known himself as the
Lord of Hoasts, when his people meet with opposition in doing his great work?

Answ. It is the great wisdom and goodness of God, to represent himself by
such Names, Titles, Relations, and Resemblances, as may most sutably discover
his own Glorious excellencies, and best draw forth the exercise of his
childrens graces toward him. In the New Testament, according to the riches,
sweetness, and clearness of the new administration of the Covenant, God is
known to his People, as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3. as
the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10, as the God of Peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. but
seldom as the Lord of Hoas^^ I can remember it but twice there, in Romans 9. 29.
and in Jam. 5. 4. though in some copies, in Jam^^ it is mis-printed, the Lord
of Sabbath, in stead of Lord of (...).

In the Old Testament (as some reckon) you shall find the Lord of Hoasts, at
least two hundred times, and most frequently in Haggai, and Zachary, when the
people of God were employed about Temple-worke, and contested with many
adversaries therein. In the second chapter of Haggai, you have it five times in
four verses, as in the 6, 7, 8, 9. verses, and in the eighth Chapter of
Zachary, which consists but of three and twenty verses, you have no less than
eighteen times, The Lord of Hoasts.

God who is All-sufficient, accounts this his glory, to make known himself
answerably to all the exigents of his Churches. When the Devil musters up
forces against them, he will approve himself the God of Hoasts, such a God
who is able to do more for them, than the Dragon and all his Angels can do
against them.

Then let us this day lie before God, Use 1. Instruction.
with an humble satisfaction of spirit, in the midst of all these commotions
and confusions that are now in England, or any of the three Kingdoms. Our God
being the Lord of Hoasts, could have prevented them, and can allay them,
stilling the proudest waves as he pleases. He knows how to preserve his
Friends, and to reserve his Adversaries, 2 Pet. 2. 9. He who can command light
to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor, 4. 6. can as easily bring order out of
confusion; and unless he could bring good out of evil, he who is the
Supreme Governor of the whole world, would never suffer any evil to befall
his People. It does not argue any defect either in his power or love, that his
people in England have so long smarted, Ephesians. 3. 10.
and still go under such heavy pressures, but it is the manifold various
wisdom of the great Lord General, so to marshall all his Hoasts, as they may
do execution according to the Counsel of his will, and all in reference to
his grand design, The advancing his own great Name in the salvation of his
People. you have no reason to mutter, because sometimes it is male cum bonis,
and been cum malis, because sometimes the godly suffer, and the wicked prosper,
(mis-interpreting such providence, humors and feeds Atheism) why should not
you allow God the honor of his Sovereignty? He is the Lord of Hoasts, and as
he makes use of his prerogative in saving the souls, and in using the parts
and abilities of men, so likewise in the sparing and afflicting of them. The
same God who Isa 4. 56. has said, He will create upon every dwelling place of
Mount Zion, and upon all the Assemblies, a cloud and a sm^sk by day, and the
shining of a flaming fire by night, etc. by way of protection; has likewise
said for affliction, Isa. 45. 7. I form the light and create darkness, I make
peace, and create evil, I the Lord do (...) these things.

It is good therefore, when God is come out of the habitation of his holiness,
for all flesh to be silent before him, Zach. 2. 13. and in stormy times to
sail by the Psalmists Compass, Psalm. 37. 7. be^ silent to the Lord, and wait
patiently for him. If God bring thy estate low, get thy spirit as low. 1 Pet.
56.
If God break and shatter the kingdom, get thy heart broken and humbled under
his mighty hand. Let thy soul lie level with Gods providence. Remember the
God of Hoasts is his name, Amos 4. 15.

If God delight in conficting times to represent himself to his Church as the
Lord of Hoasts: Use 2.


Then beware of cowardly fear, Caution against carnal fear in conflicting
times.
suffer not your selves to be discouraged by the most potent adversaries, when
you are engaged in his work who is the God of Hoasts. Solomon tells us, Prove.
29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare; but who so puts his trust in the
Lord shall be safe. Carnal fear betrays reason, as well as faith, when it
is predominant: Thousands in England have found this true by woeful experience,
who out of distrustful fears, choosing rather to sin than to suffer, have
miserably ensnared themselves, whereas if by faith they had taken Sanctuary in
him who is the Lord of Hoasts, he would have been their safety, their high
place.

What though puissant Armies should combine, and raise great mountains of
opposition in the way, yet the great Lord General who commands heaven and
earth, will carry on his own work. Hence he gives a challenge to those
mountainous Adversaries who did hinder Zerubbabel in Temple-work: Zach. 4. 7.
Who art the^^, O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain,
and be shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shoutings. But how should
this be carried on? not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts. What though enemies do most proudly insult? then remember what
the Lord says, Zeph. 2. 8, 9, 10. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the
revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and
magnifyed themselves against their borders. Therefore, as I live, says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the
children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of netles and saltpits, and a
perpetual desolation: This they shall have for their pride, because they have
magnifyed themselves against the people of the Lord of Hosts. In defiance to
the pride of railing Rabshakehs, the Lord of Hosts will still appear like
himself, in the behalf of his own people; even when their power is gone; The
Lord shall judge his people, their enemies shall slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32.
35, 36. not always in our time, but in due time. Often his childrens
extremity, proves his opportunity to help, as 2 King. 14. 25, 26.

Suppose your Army should be in straits, the cause is still the same, and your
God is still Lord of Hosts, possibly this may be his Method, to our
Redemption, first, to humble us, before he will exalt us. I hope you keep a
fresh remembrance of the late glorious success in the Northern parts, On
Marsionmoore, July 2. 1644.
so far beyond your thoughts and hopes: Underprop your spirits when they
begin to sink, with a branch of that Psalm which Luther delighted so much
to sing, when the Church was in troubles, Psalm. 46. 7. The Lord of Hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge.

If second causes should fail, the first cause the Lord of Hosts, can supply
or govern their deficiency to his peoples advantage. He is great in counsel,
and mighty in work, a God that will do wonders rather than suffer his own
cause or people to miscarry; no reason therefore in the worst times to be
discouraged.

Hence learn this Lesson, very seasonable for these Military times.

Be improving daily this Style, Use 3. Direction.
whereby God makes known himself to his People, as the Lord of Hosts.

As you endeavor to fortify your selves, Engage the Lord of Hosts by Prayer.
and the Kingdom against numerous adversaries, so with all be sure to cry
mightily by Prayer to him who is the God of Hosts. It is a peace of singular
Christian skill, when you address your selves to seek God, then by an eye and
hand of Faith to single out those divine perfections in him, which are most
suitable to your exigents. In these times of sad and bloody distractions in all
the three Kingdoms, when so many are up in Arms, concurring with the Irish
Rebels, who would plunder us of our Religion and lives, as well as of our
Liberties and estates; it is a most proper season for us all, Oration lenit.
^^chryma cogit.
to muster up our tears and sighs, to besiege Heaven with our importunities,
that we may engage the Lord of Hosts to appear on our side; let us say, as in
Psalm. 74. 22, 23. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause; remember how the forlish
man reproacheth thee daily, forget not the voice of thine enemies, the tumult
of those that rise up against thee increases continually.

I might produce a cloud of witnesses to encourage your Prayers. You may read
Exodus 17. 11. When Moses held up his hand Israel prevailed, and when he let
down his hand Amalek prevailed. This listing up of his hands was partly to hold
forth the Red, as an Ensign to strengthen the Faith of the Soldiers, and also
to express the lifting up of his hands together with his heart in Prayer. Here
you may see a different success of the Israelites, accompanying the different
gesture of Moses body, by the wise providence of God, appointed to be a real
expression, both how forcible Moses prayers were, and also how weak the
Israelites were in themselves, if God (of whose assistance the Rod was a sign)
should not stand on their sides. Who would not then, night and day lift up
their hearts and hands, making use of their interest in the Lord of Hosts, in
the behalf of his conflicting people?

How did Jacob overcome enraged Esau, but by overcomming with his Prayers, the
Great God of heaven, who has a Throne in all men's spirits? God was pleased, as
appears in Genesis 32. 24. to con^iescend to wrestle with Jacob, both for his
instruction, and his consolation, Vide Paraeum in Genesis 32.
he would teach him hereby that he must be content to be a wrastler, and
that therein he should be victorious. Jacob had power with him and prevailed,
when he wept and made supplications into him, Hos. 12. 4. who in ver. 7. is
the Lord of Hosts. He wrastled with him by his importunity in prayer, Genesis 32.
26. I will not let thee go except thou bless me. Let us now when we are
humbling our selves before the Lord of Hosts, Praying Christians shall be
wrastlets.
deal like wrastlers. They will first spy out their advan tage, and there lay
fast hold: Secondly, they pursue it with diligence. Set faith on work, to spy
out Gods Attributes, his Promises, or anything in him, whereon you may lay
hold, and resolve to take no denial, say every one, I will not let the Lord of
H^sts go till he bless us with hopes of a gracious deliverance from our
desolating troubles.

Admit your Army be in great straits, so was Asa and his Army, 2 Chronicles. 14.
you may read ver. 9. A mighty Host of a thousand thousand, Junius renders it,
Decres (...) millum. And the Geneva, ten hundred thousand.
came out against him. He made first his approaches to the great God by
fervent prayer, ver. 11. And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord,
it is nothing with thee to help whether with many or with them that have no
power. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest in thee, and in thy name we go
against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God, let not Man prevail against
thee. He does not say, against us, but against Thee; He did wisely interest
God in his Cause, and thereby was triumphantly victorious, ver. 12, 13, 14, 15.
So the Lord smote the Aethiopi^ns before Asa, etc. The Parliament has Asaes
advantage, they appear in the Cause of God, they may with the more boldness
press the Lord of Hosts to engage himself for them; and though you cannot
find a particular promise of good success expressly made unto you herein, yet
the Lord of Hosts has a particular over-spreading providence, on which you may
depend in all your undertakings.

The same successful Method did Jehosaphat use when he was in fear of
numerous and potent adversaries, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. He (...), and set himself to
seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast. Some men would only have complained in
discontent against their enemies, others in policy would only make warlike
preparations, but good Jehosaphat would in the first place try what he could
do with God by Fasting and Prayer, (that is a good fear which drives us to
God, and begets Prayers unto him.) In his prayer (as prudent men use to do in
their Petitions to Princes) he gathers together many strong Arguments. He.
well knew that much of the strength of our Prayers lies in the strength of the
Arguments we therein use; When you play, single out the most prevailing
Arguments.
first, he draws an Argument from God himself, and his Covenant, whereby they
had interest in him; ver. 6. from his powerful providence, and from their
former experience, from Gods promise, from the Enemies, and their cruel
opposition, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And lastly, he appeals to God himself
with much Rhetoric, ver. 12. O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have
no night against this great company, that comes against us, Appeal to the
Lord of Hosts.
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Why should not we
take this course? We have been for many months, and for some years engaged
in a bloody war, we have in several Battles appealed to the sword for
justice upon the Sons of violence, (the Camp is the supreme Judicatory) let
us now go one step higher; As John Husse, when be was condemned by his Popish
Judges, appealed to Jesus Christ, the most high Judge; So let us appeal from
enemies, yea and look above Instruments, let us put our cause and all our
affairs of greatest concernment, into the hands of the Lord of Hosts, desiring
him to judge betwixt us and our adversaries. Hang confidently upon that branch
of his own word, Jer. 50. 33, 34. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the children of
Israel and the children of Judah, were oppressed together, and all that took
them captives held them fast, they refused to let them go; Their Redeemer is
strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause,
that he may give rest to the Land.

But with all when you have prayed, Remember that you act your Prayers. Act as
well as pray in times of trouble.
All your work is not done when Prayer is ended. As you wait e^pecting that
the Lord should make good your Petitions, so you should work and do good
according unto them, (by your prayers you engage your selves as well as God.)
This were an excellent temper of Spirit in these conflicting times. To pray
with so much fervency, as if you were to carry on things only by the power of
your Prayers; and yet also to act with so much diligence, as if you were to
work out Englands welfare by the strength of your own endeavors. You have
good Jehosaphat in the same place, 2 Chronicles. 20. for your happy pattern herein,
ver. 20. etc. he did very industriously act, consult, as well as pray. He
first prayed that he might bless his actions, then he acted that he might
back his prayers; by both he became very victorious over his enemies. The Lord
of Hosts so wonderfully appeared for him against his adversaries, that rather
then they should prevail, they should help to conquer and destroy one another,
ver. 23.

Come we now to the second observation; In that the Prophet presses upon them
with ingeminations, in the name of the Lord of Hosts, verse 5, and 7. Now
therefore, to consider their ways, being their endeavors did not prosper,
verse 6. Ye have sown^ much and bring in little, ye eat and have not enough,
ye drink etc. in diverse kinds Gods disfavour was manifested, whereupon he
calls on them, ver. 7. to consider their ways. Hence learn;

When the hand of God is stretched out against a people, it is then a proper
season for them to set their hearts upon their ways, 2. Observe.
and seriously to consider them.

Consider your ways. It is in the Hebrew, set your hearts upon your ways,
Ponite cor vestrum super vias vestras, i, expendite quaeso negotiorum vestrorum
eventus atque successus. Inspicite penitius ut res vestiae sele habeant, and
mox aperta videbi it is Dei vobis irati argumen ta. Gualt. in Hagg.
do not only by direct acts in a brutish manner, follow on what is before
you, and without your selves, but retire in words; seriously six your hearts
upon your own ways, that you may know and consider them. Considering imports
a bending of the mind to think upon and observe any thing. The hearts
reflecting upon its own courses, by comparing them with the rule of Gods word,
and withal here undoubtedly it implies a weighing the events and successes of
their affairs, how God blesses and prospers them.

The holy Ghost commends unto us the considering of our ways, as a singular
means to steer our courses aright: It may possibly prevent the commission of
sin, Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in owe and sin not, commune with your own hearts.
Prove. 4. 26, 27. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established: turn not to the right hand nor to the left; remove thy foot from
evil. It may reduce the straying soul when it has sinned, Excellency of
self-considering.
Lament. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the
Lord. The Devil well knows the spiritual advantage that may be gained by this
practice, and therefore does still with all his might upon every occasion
oppose it.

You shall ordinarily find, that people are more easily drawn to read then to
pray, and will sooner be persuaded to move in a track of customary praying,
then seriously to consider themselves: The more necessary any duty is, the more
opposite Satan and our wretched hearts are there unto. Amongst all others,
whether Merchants, Travelers, etc. Consideration has great influence; and
without exception is as useful in Christianity: And especially is most
seasonable for Christians in evil times. This is one of Wise Solomon's Oracles,
E^cles. 7. 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of
adversity consider. Every one can in the day of adversity complain of their
wants and troubles, can quarrel with the faults and impotency of Instruments;
yea, and will very frequently repine at the dispensations of Gods providence;
whereas the proper work were to apply themselves to a serious consideration of
their own ways. When you feel the smart of an evil of punishment, then you
should be searching for the evil of sin; consider then both the inflicting
and the procuring cause, who it is that smiles, and why he smites.

Why is the consideration of our ways so seasonable when Gods hand is
stretched out against us? Quest.


Because such inside work, as it is a good fruit of Heavenly wisdom, Answ.
1. Reasons why conside^ation of our ways is so seasonable in times of trouble.
so it may be an evidence of our sincerity, which will prove an excellent
cordial to cheer us in evil days.

Hypocrisy may teach us to multiply outside performances, sincerity draws the
heart inwards to selfe-reflection, and to employ it self upon its own ways,
by self-considering and self-judging. The bodily eye sees other things, but not
it self, so the eye of the carnal mind: hence the Lord complains of their
wickedness appearing herein, No man says What have I done, Jer, 8. 6. But the
more seriously any lay out their thoughts how to discover the evil of their
own ways, the greater matter of rejoicing they have at home, what ever evils
they meet withal abroad. The testimony of such a conscience in the worst
times, would be a continual feast, when to him that wants it, All the days
of the afflicted are evil, Prove. 15. 15.

Secondly, considering of our ways is the most proper echo of Gods correcting
hand, and that spiritual emprovement he expects we should make of his
chastising us, Mic. 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of
wisdom shall see thy Name, Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. God
speaks not only by his Word, but also by his works, and that with a louder
voice, he calls by his word, but he cries by his Rods; even to this very end,
that we may consider what he says by it. Our present Rod which has whipped
so many thousands to death, since this unnatural War began, preaches this
doctrine of self-consideration unto ENGLAND.

In 1 King. 8. Solomon makes diverse Prayers at the dedication of the Temple,
answerable to the several exigents of Gods people, one is that God would hear
their prayers, and maintain their cause when they go out to battle against
their enemies, verse. 44, 45. And suppose they then sin against God and
provoke him to deliver them into the hand of the enemy: yet their case is not
desperate, verse 47. If they shall bethink themselves, 1 Kings 8. 47.
and repent, then hear (...) prayer, and maintain their cause, ver. 49.

Where you see that retiring into their own hearts, and bringing their hearts
upon their ways, is that which the Lord looks for in the evil day, before
they shall find deliverance. When this is wanting he complains by his
Prophets, as of Israel in Amos 4. yet have ye not returned unto me, this
expression is found four several times in the same Chapter, ver. 6, 8, 10,
11. They did not return unto the Lord, because by his judgments they did not
first learn to return into themselves.

Thirdly, because consideration of our ways is the most compendious method to
our self-humbling, and self-reforming, and the Scripture way to obtain
reconci^^ation with God. David first considered his ways, before he turned
his feet unto Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119. 59. The Prodigal Son came first
home to himself, Luke 15. 17. by the consideration of his former evil ways,
before he came home to his Fathers house to find gracious entertainment there.
And then when once a sinner by his self-reflection has learned to renounce his
evils, the Lord is most ready to embrace him as a reconciled Father, with the
sweetest evidences, of his love and favor, Esa. 1. 16, 17, 18. When you have
learned by considering your ways, to put away the evil of your doings from
before Gods eyes: come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord. 2. Cor.
6. 17, 18
The holy God would not entertain such a familiarity with them before they
were cleansed.

By all which it clearly appears, that as we desire a comfortable argument of
our own sincerity, to make a wise emprovement of the correcting hand of our
God, to be loosened more from sin, and to enjoy more sweet evidences of the
favor of our God, in evil times especially, when his hand is stretched out,
we should set our hearts upon our ways, and seriously consider them.

Here then two sorts of people their Errors in the gl^sse of this Truth. Use
1. Instruction.


First, Error. 1.
of such as set their hearts upon their worldly comforts, upon their carnal
ends and interests in evil times, when Gods hand is stretched out against
England, but not upon their ways to consider and reform them. This was
Baruchs distemper, Jer. 45. 5. for which the Prophet reproves him roundly.
What? when God is breaking down what he has built, when God is plucking up
what he has planted; what now art thou a seeking great things for thy self?
Seek them not. It is most unworthy of a Baruch, or any of Gods Servants, to be
minding themselves only, and their own secular advantages in troublesome
times, when they should be concurring with their God in his dispensations. The
Lord expects that his Judgments should drive you off from Creature comforts,
into your selves, and to think upon your own ways, that so thereby you might
be drawn to nearer communion with himself. This were proper language for
these black and bloody times; to be able to overlooke your selfe-respects and
advantages, and in good earnest to breath out those holy expressions, Esa. 26.
8. In the way of thy judgments O Lord have we waited, for thee, the desire of
our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Secondly, another Error is of such who set their hearts and thoughts much to
consider when (...) ways, Error. 2.
that they overlooke and neglect their own. Too too many there are, who can
write characters upon diverse others, yet are great strangers to themselves.
They are indeed (...), busybodies in other men's matters, Bishops in other
men's Diocesses: 1. Pet. 4. 15. Aliono^umm. spectores, (...). Alieni
specul^tores, Cypt.
but in the mean time their own gardens overgrowne with noisome weeds, and
this not considered.

Alassel it is very easy to spy out the haltings of others, to complain of
the stumblings of some in the way, or of their swerving from the ways of God;
and to arraigne many as Ineendiaries and Malignants; (and yet never consider
how many sticks we our selves have gathered to inflame this desolating War.
This error is so much the more dangerous, because it is so common, and withal
so unbeseeming the children of God, who ought presently to reflect by
self-consideration, when they see their Fathers displeasure once begin to
appear: would these two sorts look upon themselves in this glass, they might
go away blushing with shame for such unseasonable errors.

If when the hand of God is stretched out against us, it be a proper season to
consider our ways then, Behold here Caveat against carnal security,
especially, in evil days, as most unsuitable for such a time when Gods
awakening judgments are abroad. It argues a most wretched frame of spirit to
fall on sleep even under the Rod, for any to grow secure in some, Use 2.
Caution. Against carnal security under Gods hand.
when God is whipping for sin, is a sign of desperate wickedness.

Solomon gives us a double character, Prove. 22. 3. Prudens ^ spicit inspicit
prospicit
A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself. He discovers a
judgment in the causes, presages symptoms as well as in the beginnings of it,
and accordingly hides himself in his God; But the simple pass on and are
punished, go plodding on in a sinful course, by an heedlesse secure
non-consideration of their ways, and so at the last are broken all to pieces.

God expects and takes it for granted that, as in Esa. 26. 9. when his
judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness: And is highly provoked by the contrary carriage, which you
shall have expressed, ver. 11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not
see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea the
fire of thine enemies shall devour them. They who will not see the judgments
of God to their humiliation, shall feel them to their confusion. This does no
question multiply our Rods, and draw our the War from Summer to Winter, from
Winter to Summer; (and who knows how long it shall continue, if we still
continue secure?) in that we have not learned by so many real Sermons from
Heaven, to set our hearts upon our ways. You may observe a terrifying hint in
Ezekiel. 9. 8, 9. when God was slaying them, as now he is in England, they were
very secure in sinful wyes, verse. 9. the Land was full of blood, and the City
full of wresting of judgment: (Is not this our unhappy case?) the root of these
cursed weeds was their Atheism, they say, The Lord has forsaken the earth,
and he sees not. God would not bear this security in sin; and therefore
thunders in verse. 10. Mine eye shall not spart, neither will I have pity, but I
will recompense their way upon their hea^^.

Our wisest men have been much puzzled, and brought to a loss again and again
since these troubles began. Both sides at first were ready to think that one
battle would decide this great controversy. But alas, standers by may see
the hand of God contriving the protraction of these Wars, even when we have
begun to please our selves with some hopes of Peace. 1. Sometimes there have
been overtures of a pacification, but then not a concurrent willingness on
both sides at that time. 2. Sometimes when the Parliament Forces have had good
successes, they have not been so happy in managing and pursuing, as in
obtaining their victories. 3. Again, too often, in the very ^ick of time for
great action, there have been some passionate selvish clashings among
counselors, amongst Commanders, or both. But what lies at the bottom of all
this? Is there not a Jonah asleep in the Ship, which occasions the storm? Are
not we still secure in our wonted sins? Doubtless, Security in sins lengthens
Englands calamities
Gods wise hind so orders the great affairs of England, that we may feed
longer upon the bitter fruits of our own wicked ways, which we have not yet
seriously considered: we tread in Ephrains sinful steps, and therefore no
wonder, if we taste of Ephraims judgments, Hosea 7. 1, 2. When I would have
hesled Israel, then the iniqutiy of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness
of Sanaria, for they commit salshood, the these comes in, and the troop of
Robbers spoileth without. (This is too true of England) And they consider not
in their hearts that I remembers all their wickedness, now their own doings
have beset then about, they are before may face. It was Ephraims fault, they
did not set their hearts upon their ways; they did not say to their hearts,
God remembers all our wickedness, hereby they plunged themselves into heavy
evils. It concerns us all to watch and pray, that such security betray not
England into more devouring calamities.

Be persuaded, I beseech you, as you desire to approve your selves good
Christians, Use 3. Exhortation Let Gods hand lead you into your selves, to
consider your own wayesa.
good Patriots, improve the hand of God that now lies upon England, to a more
full consideration of your own ways. It is good logic, and as seasonable
divinity, which the Prophet uses in ver. 5. Now therefore consider your ways,
because God is angry with you, therefore set your hearts upon your ways.

Religion should teach Christians not only to meet God in the way of his
ordinances, but also in the paths of his providence. It was their sin, Jer.
8. 6. when God observed their carriage and language in evil days, They spoke
not aright, they made perverse interpretations of Gods Judgments, no man
repented of his wicked^esse, saying, What have I done? The Lord expected that
when he spoke to them by his judgments, they should speak to them selves of
their sins, saying, What have I done? what have J done?

And if you will be awakened to consider your ways by any judgments, then me
thinks by the Sword, and most of all by such a devouring Sword as is now
drawn in England, it being so great sign of Gods high displeasure against us.
Scarce ever any war managed with a greater Antipathy. As in the natural body,
Physicians account those Diseases most dangerous, which are morbi complbi^^^^,
where there is a concurrence of diverse diseases; The Sword a grievous evil.
so in the body politic, we may call War, plag. compli^catissima; War for
the most part, Levit. 26. 25 Jer. 9. 16.
especially if it continue long, brings with it cruelty and oppression, breeds,
profaneness and Atheism; Germany has had fad experience hereof, God grant
England may not find and seele the same! Therefore some Expositors observe upon
those word, Lev. 26. 6. Neither shall the Sword go through your Land: there is
not only a promise that they shall live in peace, and not be destroyed by the
sword of their enemies, but that he will keep the Sword from so much as going
through the Land, because Armies of soldiers do too often destroy Countries,
not only by fighting against them, but even by going through them.

It were a seasonable study for us all, and an excellent point of wisdom for
the greatest Counselors, It were excellent wisdom to know the cause and
remedy of Englands ^vill^.
to find out the proper cause and remedy of these great evils which lie upon
ENGLAND: we may well say with the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 9. 12. Who is the wise
man that may understand this, and who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord has
spoken, that he may decalare it for what the Land perishes, and is burnt up
like a wilderness, that none passes through? England has a great stock of
prayers going in Scotland, in Germany, amongst the Protestants in France, and
that gasping remnant in Ireland. We have had many solemn praying days at
home, that this bloody Sword might be sheathed, we have often spoke that
language; Jer. 47. 6. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou
be quiet? Put up thy self into the Scabberd, rest and be still. The Sword
has hither to answered us negatively, as in verse. 7. How can it be quiet
seeing the Lord has given it acharge against Askelon? If God will charge the
Sword in England to ride circuit from North to West, and so all over the Land,
who can discharge it? In the end of verse. 7. there has he appointed it. It
moves by commission from God, and does execution where, and as long as he
pleases. Doubtless we may conclude, being the Wars are still protracted,
there is something yet undone by us, which God expects from us. It was one of
Solomon's prayers to God, 1 Kings 8. 37, 38. If there were a pestilence, if
there were a Caterpillar, or if their enemies besiege them in the Land, what
prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people
Israel, which shall know every man (...) plague of his own heart, Plaga anini
j^ 1. Now tank^n patint^^ mala quae cernun^^^, (...) and al scond^^a quae
lantum ille nov^^ qui ea pati^^, and conscientiae, reclamatronem (...) peccata,
Pet. Mart. in locum
then ^eare thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive. You have had many
Parliament Fasts, but all this while it may be you have not seriously
considered your own evil ways; you have not yet known every man the plague
of his one heart, and therefore God has not yet answered your former prayers.

You are again met upon a Solemn day, to humble your selves in your present
straits, and to seek Gods Face. As you desire the Lord should be found of
you, labor first to search and find out your own bosom Achan. We feel by
lamentable experience, the Lord still maintains a controversy with the Land;
Mo^h and Ammon, Papists and Atheists, or any adversarics, though never so much
enraged, could not fight against us, unless our sins put Swords into their
hands. This is the work of the time, when Gods hand is stretched out against
us, this is the duty of the day when we profess selfe-humbling, then to be
very inquisitive into our selves, that we may ^ix our hearts upon our own
ways.

Many of you are Great Senators, who may look upon your selves in a double
capacity, as private and public Men, and so have just occasion to consider
both your personal and public ways. When you begin to fasten your thoughts
upon your own personal ways, that you may truly understand your selves, and
have a right apprehension of your own ways; be pleased to take these hints.

First, do not only compare your selves with your selves, and your present
ways only with your own former ways. Directions in considering your
personal ways.
That rule is too short. A hard-hearted Pharaoh, a wicked Herod may have some
fits of goodness, some fleshly purposes and promises for God, and yet still
the bent of the heart be engaged in evil ways.

Secondly, do not compare your own ways with other men's ways. That rule
will prove crooked. You may be much better then some others, and not good in
Gods account, not sound at the heart witness the Scribes and Pharisees.

Thirdly, wisely compare your own ways with the unpartiall Rule of Gods Word,
inqui^ing whether your ways be Gods ways. You have sent abroad an excellent
Ordinance for a strict observing the Lords Day, reflect and inquire how you
keep it your selves: And whilst you consult about Church and State Reformation,
Luke 1. 75.
are you selfe-Reformers? Do you endeavor to walk in ways of holiness and
righteousness before God all your days, as good first and second-Table men,
giving both God and Man their due?

Again, if you look upon your selves in your public capacities, there will
be a great deal of work for consideration of your ways, how you walk
therein. You are advanced to this Honor, either by birth or by choice, to be
the great Counselors of the Kingdom. Hypocrisy in hearers, and flattery in
Ministers are odious at any time, but most abominable upon a day of
Humiliation. I cannot approve my self to God and my own conscience, unless I
should knock at your doors who sit at the stern, Some quaeres in the
considering of our public ways.
and beseech you who are such public Persons in the two Houses of Parliament,
to consider your own public ways. To this purpose I will be bold to propose
these following Quaeres.

Do not some of you walk in ways of Opposition to a through Scripture
Reformation of the Church; and are too ready when the government of Christ is
propounded, 1 Quaere.
to speak their language, Luke 19 14. We will not have this man to reign over
us? After you have had such elbow-roome for your lusts, are you not unwilling
to take the yoke of Christ upon you, fearing the strictness of it? Insomuch
that you cannot heartily say the three first Petitions of the Lords Prayer.
Hallowed be they Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is
in Heaven. What says Conscience to this Quaere?

Are there not some amongst you who walk in such ways of dull indifferency, 2
Quaere.
and lukewarm neutra^ity, that though you do not oppose, yet you little care
what becomes of Religion and Reformation, so you may be quiet? Provided you
may have hopes to enjoy your selves in your Palaces and your Parks, with your
Hawks and Hounds, and to swim in wonted Country contentments, without that
slavery which is contrary to our English Spirits: as for Religion, whether any
thing or nothing, how little do some of you care?

What answer will your Consciences give to this Quaere?

Are there none who pretending to Reformation, 3 Quaere.
yet walk in such ways of politic Selfe-seekings, and Selfe-servings, that
they value their own ends, intersts, advantages, and private opinions, much
more then the welfare of the Kingdoms, and the public promoting the Cause of
God? must not all comply with their designs, stoop to their engagements,
concur with their Opinions, otherwise they care not to hazard the welfare of
the whole?

O that all your consciences could give a satisfying answer to this Quaere!

Are there not such to be found amongst you, 4 Quoere.
who being got into warm and fat places, walk in ways of covetousness and
oppression therein? as they in Micah 2. 1, 2. Having porver in their band, they
covet fields and take them by violence, and houses and take them away; oppress
a man and his house, even a man and his heritage: yea, out of a greedy desire
of gain, do not some falsify the public Trust, that they may feather their
own nests, and make provision for themselves?

Are all your Consciences clear in answering this Quaere?

Are there none amongst you who in your private Committees, 5 Quaere.
and in the administering of public Justice walk in ways of une^^nnesse and
partiality? Sometimes revenging themselves on such as have displeased them,
other times conniving at great sins, and high offenses in such as relate unto
them; and too often out of mere favor, mis-imploy their power to make such of
their friends Sequestrators, or other Officers, who both oppress the Subjects
and deceive the State. Under such (who ever put them into their places) many
parts of poor England sadly groans. Can you all with conscience of your own
Innocence confidently answer this Quaere?

Lastly, suppose you could all wash your hearts and hands, 6 Quaere.
and leave not so much as suspicion of any of the forementioned evils; yet are
there not many amongst you who have been very remiss and sloathfull in
Advancing Temple-work? Have you been valiant for the Truth? Jer. 93. Romans 12.
11. Luk 10 27.
Have you been fervent in spirit serving the Lord? Have you loved your God, who
has so gloriously preserved you in the midst of so many flames, with all your
strength, improving all your Parliament power for him? O have not very many of
you minded much more the building of your own House, then the rebuilding of
Gods Temple?

What says Conscience to this Quaere? guilty or not guilty?

What if the All-seeing God should this day come down amongst you, and search
our Parliament, as once Jerusalem, with candles, Zep^. 1. 12. And if, as you
have already Voted many of your Members out of the Houses, for their
Delinquency, so the Lord should dismiss all others, as unworthy of such an
Honorable Trust, who are still found within any of these ^ixe Ranks; I
appeal to your selves, would not this much lessen your number?

Other be entreated, when the hand of God upon England calls for it; you who
are the Representative Kingdom, stir up your selves and one another to
consider all your ways, Think, speak, and act, as in Lamentat. 3. 39, 40.
Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
Let us search and try our ways and turn again unto the Lord. This were very
seasonable fruit for such a time as we live in.

Come we now to the second Branch of that Co^nse^l which the Lord of Hosts,
here gives them. Having called them to lock backward by selfe-reflection, ver.
17. Here he quickens them to look forward, putting them upon Action.

Go up to the Mountain, and bring Wood, and build the House, and I will take
pleasure in it, and I will be glorisyed, says the Lord.

The Temple was long in hand before it could be finished (some say See (...)
his Chron.
above an hundred years, till the time of Darius Nothus, See Lausbergn^.
others who cast it upon Darius Hystaspis, reckon it about eighteen years,)
there was Prophet upon Prophet, and Counsel after Counsel, yet all little
enough to persuade them to Go up to the Mountain, and build the House.

Whence Observe,

Temple-work is not easily, not suddenly accomplished. 3. Observe.


If you please to read seriously the Story of Ezra, there you may perceive the
many obstructions the Jews met with in rebuilding the material Temple, and
then to compare what Luke says in the Acts of the Apostles, there you shall
see as great impediments to retard the Apostles, in building the Spiritual
Temple, the Church of Christ. Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe,
Compare Ezra and the Acts of the Apostles.
were not more desperately set against Zerubbabel and his Associates, Ezra 4.
7, 8. then the Rulers and Elders, and Scribes, Annas the High Priest, and
Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander and as many as were of the kindred of the
High Priest (the whole fraternity of the Jewish High Commission combined
together) did endeavor to hinder Peter and John in laying the foundation of the
Spiritual Temple. Reasons why Temple-work is not easily, not suddenly
accomplished.
See Act. 4, 5, 6, 15, 16, 17, 18. how they convented, threatened, and would
have silenced them, Commanding them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name
of Jesus. Reas. 1. An Anripathy in the most against it.


Temple-work is of that holy nature, that it finds a great Antipathy in most
peoples spirits. The building of Gods house, wherein he requires to be
worshipped and served according to his own will, does so much cross the wills
and lusts of carnal men, that they cannot be brought to comply with it. They
are not willing to be personally reformed, and therefore employ their power
and policy, their strength and wit, to oppose public Reformation; They who
desire not themselves to be built up a spiritual bonse, and to be an holy
Priesthood, to offer sacrifices unto God, will not heartily promote Temple
Work. 1 Pet. 2. 5.


Temple work meets with implacable opposition from the Devil, Reas. 2. The
Devil implacably opposite to it.
which much hinders the accomplishment of it, as in Rev. 12. 2. when the Church
was traveling with Christ mystical, and pained to be delivered, under pangs
of persecution, to bring forth a glorious birth, there was a great red Dragon,
having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads, ver. 3.
Which stood before the Woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour
her child as soon as it was born, ver. 4. Here you have Satan and his Viceroy
the Roman Emperors, red with fury and the blood of Saints, having seven
crowned heads, that is, seven kinds of Governments successively (as Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemvirs, Dictators, Emperors, and Popes) having ten
horns, that is, Rev. 17. 12.
ten Kingdoms, into which the Empire in the time of the last head is rent;
This Dragon continually watched how to crush the Church of Christ, like Pharaoh
and Herod, in the birth and infancy of it. Exodus 1. Matthew. 2.
He well knows that the advancing of Christ's Kingdom, in the building of the
Temple, is the ruining of his usurped Dominion, which exasperates him so much
that he will muster up all his Forces to hinder the progress of it.

The Adversaries of Temple-work are very subtle and industrious to raise such
prejudices against it, Reas. 3. Adversaries subtle and industrious.
as may cloud the glory of Reformation.

This is often whispered, though most unjustly, as if the Reformers would make,
not a Renovation, but an Innovation, and as if they would erect a frame of
Church Government, opposite to Civil Authority. What the Devil, what the
Jesuits, with all the seed of the Serpent can devise, shall be thrown in as
blocks in the builders way; they will still do their utmost to cast mountains
of difficulty; to keep off Zerubbabel from adding the top stone. ^ach. 4. 7.


The cordial Instruments to carry on Temple-worke are but ^ew in comparison of
adversaries, 4. Reas. Instruments (...) and (...).
and some of them too often either grow weary and sloathfull, if not
treacherous, or being swayed by earnall policy, degenerate into selfe-seekings,
and selfe-servings, and others, from whom much is expected, so miserably
divided amongst themselves, that in stead of combining against the common
Enemy, to advance the building of Gods House, they fall into sharp
contestations one with another, whereby Temple-work is most unhappily
obstructed, England is like to find the sad experience of this as well as
Germany.

Power and Authority, which have the great influence, Reason 5. Power and
authority seldom forward to encourage it.
are seldom so happy as to be employed and improved readily for God, which
occasions many delays in Temple-work. 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many mighty men, not
many noble are called, either to enjoy Salvation in Heaven, or to do great
Services on Earth. Cunning adversaries know how to flatter Princes, to abuse
their Greatness, to hinder Goodness. Diverse of the Persian Governors acted
successively in an opposing or hindering the re-building the Temple, before a
Darius could be found who would resolutely promote the finishing of it. There
were many Generations of bloody persecuting Nerves amongst the Roman Emperors,
before one Constantine who would employ his power to advance the building of
the Christian Church.

God will be All in all, and especially acknowledged in Temple-worke, Reas. 6.
God will be acknowledged All in all therein.
and therefore suffer it to be carried on through such delays and
difficulties, that we shall have evident reason to cry Grace, Grace, to the
Lord of Hosts, as in Zach. 4. 7. In the beginning of this Parliament, the
Counsels of Reformation did move very vigorously, as if the work would have
been suddenly done, People began to eye the Creature too much, and to set up
some second causes too high, advancing them even into Gods Throne. The Lord
has since taken from us by death, diverse zealous and worthy Instruments, and
suffered so many intervening rubs to hinder our dispatch of Temple-work, that
we are taught to eye God more, and now to speak this Language, Use. No reason
to be so much offended with out delays and difficulties in Reformation
The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this, Isai. 9. 7.

If Temple-worke be not easily, not suddenly accomplished, Then why should any
be offended with delays and difficulties in the present work of Reformation?
Gods glorious works have ordinarily small beginnings, are carried on without
external pomp, and for the most part make very slow progress: this possibly
may offend carnal spectators; but our Savior pronounces all them Blessed, who
shall not be offended in him, Matthew. 11. 6. How mean so ever he appear in
his word, or in his works. God has laid the Foundation of a glorious Temple
for himself in England, The work indeed hangs long in our Zerubbabels and
Joshuahs hands, many are herewith much offended and discouraged; Be pleased to
read over the Story of Gods Providence about the building and reforming of his
Church from time to time, you shall then find the motion in Temple-work is
seldom quick. Great works as well as great bodies move but slowly.

By the good hand of our God upon us, there is a beautiful Fabric of his
House, (as near as we can according to the Apostolical pattern) preparing
amongst us, and some such things are already done toward it, as will be of
singular concernment both in reference to the Honor of the Lord himself, and
also to the comfort of the Inhabitants. Great things done in England toward
Church Reformation.
In stead of the High Commission, which was a sore scourge to many godly and
faithful Ministers, we have an Honorable Committee, that turns the wheel
upon such as are scandalous and unworthy. In the room of Jeroboams Priests,
burning and shining Lights are multiplied, in some dark places of the Land,
which were full of the habitations of cruelty. In the place of a long Liturgy,
we are in hope of a pithy Directory. In stead of Prelaticall Railes about the
Table, we have the Scripture Railes of Church Discipline in good forwardness.
Where Popish Altars and Crucifixes did abound, we begin to see more of Christ
crucified in the simplicity and purity of his Ordinances. In stead of the
Prelates Oath, to establish their own exorbitant power, with the
appurtenances, we have a Solemn Covenant with God, engaging us to endeavor
Reformation, according to his Word, yea, and the extirpation of Popery, and
Prelacy it self. Who could expect that such great matters should be easily
and suddenly effected?

Yet still you must make account the Devil will besti^re himself to ralise all
the Forces he can, from Hell, or on the Earth, to hinder the progress in this
Blessed work, and admit your hopes should yet he deferred, however suffer not
your Spirits to sink with discouragement. In these delays the Adversaries may
have one design, hoping hereby to undermine the building, before it be
finished; but the wise God has another design herein, he knows how to take
the wise in their own craftiness, 1 Cor. 3. 19.
and through their retardings to carry on Temple-work with great advantage; All
our delays and difficulties may prove the Lords method to fetch off peoples
Spirits, to close more fully with his own work. The business of
Church-Reformation, stuck here most of all, even in the reluctance of the
peoples minds against it, and their indisposednesse to comply with it, as in
good Jehosophats days, The high places were not taken away, for as yet the
people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles.
20. 33. Our Temple-work was no more forward, because the hearts of the most of
England have been so backward to it. Behold here the admirable providence of
God, how he has improved the lengthening of our Troubles; Hereby he has by
little and little molded peoples spirits to a more pliable disposition,
Temple-work goes on in the midst of all our troubles with advantage.
and made many much more ready to concur in the building of the Temple, in
the Advancing of Reformation.

When the wars began, thousands in England who in a humor would have taken
up Arms to fight for the Prelacy and the Service Book, have been so hammered
and hewed by the continuance of Gods Judgments upon us, that now they are come
to this; Let the Parliament and Assembly do what they will with Prelacy and
Liturgy, so the sword may be sheathed, now Truth shall be welcome, so they
may have Peace.

O then, why should not you hold up your courage and confidence in the midst of
all obstructions and difficulties? God walks toward you in his ordinary pace.
You have already reaped such good fruits as will help to bear the charges of
our long delays. The Lord has hereby facilitated the rebuilding of his own
house. There are wise men who think our Reformation would have been very low,
had not God raised the spirits of our Reformers by the length of these
multiplied Troubles.

It has been more then once observed by such as look on, that when our
Parliament Spirits have begun to fail and sink, then some Plot or other of
the undermining adversaries has been discovered, whereby they have been
quickened to the Lords work, and when they have begun to clash and divide
amongst themselves, then has appeared some common danger, wherein they were
all involved, and so have been happily reunited for the public welfare of
Church and State. God knows how to make all events subservient to his own
purposes. You read in Isa. 1. 25. 27. Before Zion shall be redeemed with
Judgment, he will purely purge away her dross, and take away all her Tin.
Here was much dross in England, both of persons and things. Wonder not if they
be not suddenly or easily removed. Many drossie persons and things have been
taken away by the length of these troubles, which otherwise in all probability
would still have clogged us. As in matters of State, the civil Sword being so
indulgent, would not take off Delinquents, therefore the Lord still renues the
Commission of the Military Sword, to do Justice till his Counsel be
fulfilled. So in the Affairs of the Church, many poor deluded people in
England were fond of their needless Ceremonies, and ready to dote on some
Babylonish trinkets, who probably would not have been weaned from them, had not
God whipped them off by the continuance of these troubles. You have the greater
reason to be satisfied under his hand; who hereby makes us more willing
heartily to return from Babylon to Jerusalem, that we may go up to the
Mountain, and build the Lords House: And so I hasten to the last observation
out of the eighth verse. Go up to the Mountain and bring wood and build the
house;

It is doubtful to some Expositors what Mountain is here meant, whether mount
Moriah, where the former Temple was built, Montanus.
that it might there be raised again: Hierome.
Or whether it be Lib^nus, and that they should go up thither to cut trees,
and so carry them to Jerusalem, to build the Temple. In reference to the main
purpose, Qui inf^a teiram habitant non possunt aedificare Templum Dei.
both will come to the same, the Lord calls upon them with expedition to build
his House.

Go up to the Mountain. You must (says Hierom) Ascend from the Valleys to the
Hill, call off your mind from earthly things, if you would build the Temple of
God. Ambrose glosses upon it. Ascendite in montem Scripturarum caelestium, etc.
Go into the Mountain of the Heavenly Scriptures, Ambros p. 12.
cut there the Tree of wisdom and life, etc. Let us leave these Allegories,
and with Junius embrace that which the whole series of the words most clearly
holds forth. The Lord here puts them upon a course how to recover themselves
from under those evils which lie upon them, he bids them shake off their
sluggishnesse, break through opposition, go up to Sion, and build the Temple.
Hence observe;

To set seriously and readily about building the Temple is a most compendious
way to obtain favor from the Lord of Hosts when his hand is lifted up against
a people. 4 Observat.


The Lords great design here on earth, is to prepare a Temple to raise a
glorious Throme for his Son in his Church: This is the tenor of his
promises, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many Generations,
Isa. 60. 15. His providentiall dispensations run this way, Isa. 62. 6, 7. I
have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their
peace, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. In the material and
spiritual Temple this was his great work, what was typified in the one, shall
be gloriously accomplished in the other, Hag. 2. 7. 9. there he does engage
his favorable presence. In this place will I give peace, says the Lord of
Hosts.

Hence by his Prophets the Lord did so much incite the Jews to expedite this
work. Hereby he trained them up to the expectation of Christ, and to faith and
hope in him who was represented by this Temple; hereby they might be led
Heavenward in the exercise of the duties of piety whilst they are employed in
Temple work; Quomodo quaerenda fuit ejus gratia nisi ut in Sanctuarium
venirent, ac inde rursum conscenderent animis et fide in (...), Calv.
yea indeed the neglect of the building of this House would argue much
profaneness of spirit, it being the place which God himself appointed for
his solemn public worship.

But I need not look further then the Text it self, which has native strength
in it to confirm the observation. Behold here a double Reason to quicken you
all, as you desire favor and rest in these troublous times to be diligent in
building Gods House.

The first reason speaks to their self-love. Reas. 1. Their advantage.
And I will take pleasure in it, Ero propitius in ea, as Calvin reads it, with
others. There you shall meet my blessing, there you shall have the privilege
to seek me, and the happiness to find me. There the Lord had by his promise
engaged his own gracious presence with his people, Visible speculu^ praesentia
meae enter v^s Calv.
and his acceptance of their prayers and services. Compare 1 Kings 8. 29. with
Deuteronomy. 12. 11. My name shall be there; and there should be his eye, his ear,
and his hand, according to their exigents.

The second reason suits as much with his own glory, Reas. 2. His own glory.
And I will be glorified, says the Lord. Gods people have three glorious and
gracious aspects of their heavenly Father; in Christ, in the Church, and in
Heaven: He first looked upon them in Christ from eternity, and they may behold
him in Christ; then they meet him in his Church, in his house here upon earth;
and afterward shall come to enjoy him everlastingly in He^ven. And indeed for
the present, we never see so much of Gods glorious goodness in Christ, we
never see so much of the glorious hopes of Heaven, as when we converse with
God in his own house. There he does show to his people most of his glory,
manifestative, he is glorified, and then also his people do active and
objective, glorify him, both in the building of his house, and worshipping him
therein according to his will, Psalm. 102. 16. When the Lord shall build up
Sion, he shall appear in his glory.

Is building Gods house the ready way to obtain Gods blessings? Then, Use 1.
Caution.
as you desire to approve your selves friends to Englands tranquillity, take
heed you be not found, either Retarders, or Underminers of the building, in
these times of Reformation.

The first Item shall be against Retarders of Temple-work, Two sor^s of
Retarders of Temple-work
who are of two sorts.

First, profane Atheists, who cannot endure to think of any such Reformation
as will confine and straiten them in making provision for their lusts. 1.
Profane Atheists.
There are too many of all ranks who combine in this confederacy. They are not
only poor Peasants, the prafanum vulgus, who quarrel against the strictness
of Reformation; I wish none of our great ones were to be found in this
Catalogue. I fear many of our Ministers will help to fill it up. When Christ
was to come into his Temple, there needed a John Baptist to prepare the way, to
make the mountains l^w, and the rough places plain, Isa 40. 3.
and all little enough, Mal. 3. 2. But who may abide the day of his ^omming?
and who shall stand when be appears? For he is like a Refiners fire, and
the Fullers soap. In such a posture Christ appears in England, in these
Reforming times, which makes profane ones who are not willing to be refined,
retard what they can.

Secondly, Carnal Selfe-Seekers are deeply guilty of retarding Temple-worke; 2
Carnal selfe-seekers.
, you shall find in 2 Timothy 3. 2. 4. there is a wicked Regiment, a wretched
conspiracy of such men as make the last times perilous. In the very front comes
self-love, ver. 2. Men shall be lovers of their own selves, and withal, ver.
4. Such as are lovers of pleasures more then of God. They who value their
carnall-selfe at so high a rate, that they will prefer their own ends, their
ease, their pleasures, any thing of themselves before God and his Honor, will
be ready upon every occasion, to hinder Reformation, and will rather employ
their wit and influence, to keep down Gods House, then that the building of
Gods House should occasion the pulling down of their beloved carnall-self.

The second Item is for underminers of Templework, of whom there are likewise
two sorts, Two sorts of underminers of Temple-work.
swayed by two different undermining principles:

First, 1 Some would allow nothing by divine right in the Church.
Such who would have nothing jure divino, nothing stand by divine right in
Church affairs, but resolve all wholly into State power, and civil policy.
Gods House will never be built but by the Line of his own word. Moses had the
pattern of the Tabernacle, Solomon of the Temple, and the Apostles of the
Christian Church as the Lord directed. Doubtless there may be an extreme on
both hands, some would wind up jure divino too high, and seek an express
institution for those things which are dictated by the very light of reason,
common to all, or wrapped up in the general Rules of Scripture. Others are so
much afraid of jure divino, that they would turn it out of the Church, and
bring all to jure humano; and so far subordinate the Church to the State,
that Jesus Christ the Lord of the house, shall not be allowed either to build
or rule his own house according to his (...).

I confess it is good to be wise herein, I ^ame wisely to disting^^^h betwixt
Christ's Institutions, and man's prudennails.
not to put the stamp of Jus divinum upon any thing, without clear warrant
from the word of God. And withal, as you are to be careful that you do not
(...) prudentials into the Throne of Divine institution; so you should beware,
that you seek not to bring down divine Institutions into mere State
prudentials, lest you be found underminers of the Lords Temple. Be not shie
of Jus divinum, where you have verbum divinum for it. The Kingdom of Christ is
not inconsistent with any Civil policy, which tends to the public good; it
never hurts any States but such as do oppose it, them indeed it will break all
to pieces, witness the four Monarchies one after another.

Secondly, Such who would have a toleration of all ways of Religion in this
Church; 2. others would allow a Tol^ration of all Religions in the Church.
Remember the Covenant.
These would lamentably undermine the building of Gods house amongst us, as
being so contrary to the indevouring of a Scripure reformation unto which we
have so solemnly engaged our selves. Doubtless the word of God holds forth one
true way of Religion in the Christian Church. Let there be a most exact
inquiry what Latitude the Scripture does allow for different opinions and
practices in that one true way.

But to set the door so wide open as to tolerate all Religions, to make London
an Amsterdam, (which yet some contend for, and would now be content to
tolerate Popery it self, so they might enjoy their own way, though not many
years since their spirits would have risen at the mention of such a thing in
England) is such an undermining of the Temple, that this would soon pull down
Gods house here, but never build it up. God forbid that any of you should be
sound either retarders or underminers of such a work.

If the advancing of Temple-work be the most compendious way to obtain the
blessing of the Lord of Hosts: Use 2. Exh^^tation


Then (Right Honorable and Worthy Senators) as you desire to contribute
toward England welware, quicken your selves and one another to diligence in
building the Lords Temple. The more you desire to see your own decayed houses,
and estates repaired and settled, be the more zealous and faithful in
re-building Gods house. It may be the wise God will not suffer you to enjoy
your Palaces, till you have finished the work of Reformation, that he may
enjoy his Temple.

I desire you may remember all Gods diverting providence, Remember Gods
diverting providence for our good.
working for your good, that your active prudence may be engaged for his
service. Had not the Lord of Hosts diverted the Kings Army from coming up
toward London, when they had gotten Bristoll, and the Earl of New-Castles
Forces from coming up to the then Associating Counties, when he set down
before Hull; yea, had not the Lords mighty hand kept Prince Ruperts formidable
Army from coming Southward, when he had got so great an advantage by raising
the Siege at York; how much more sad might Englands condition have been before
this time? And I hope you will upon this day of humiliation so wisely observe
his humbling providence in our present straites and troubles, Improve humbling
providence.
that you may be awakened to a more serious consideration of your own ways,
and in an holy revenge of your former negligence, set your selves upon the
building of the Lord Christ's house.

O that there were amongst our Nobles and Gentry, many more of David's spirit,
who made great preparations for the building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. Yea
in his trouble he prepared for the house of the Lord, ver. 14. They have had a
large share in these devouring troubles. Much of the blood of our Nobles and
Gentry has been spilt and many of their houses and estates ruined in this
unnatural War, as if the Lord had a special quarrel against them,
intending to stain the pride of their glory. The Lord make them wise who
remain to study Gods meaning herein. Certainly this were a good improvement of
it, for you who have been preserved to consecrate your lives, your Honor, to
the honor of your good God, in the building of his House.

Quest. What preparations should we make for the building of Gods House? what
may we do toward it?

Answ. Be pleased to accept of these few plain directions, Directions how to
help^ forward the building of Gods House. 1 Down with the old building.
improve your interest and influence for the acting of them.

First, Down with the old building of Popery and Prelacy. The Pope has been
raising himself a pompous palace, for many years together, upon Christ's
ground, a great incroachment upon our dear Savior, who is King of his Church,
which must come down, it is designed to ruin, Rev. 14. 8. Prelacy was the
Scaffold whereby this building of Popery was raised to so great an height, and
now many would retain it as a crutch, to support tottering Babylon; Make good
your Solemn Covenant; If you are not in a capacity for the overthrowing of it
by the exercise of the Legisative power in a Bill; it is worthy your wise
consideration whether it were not fit to do what you can by passing an
Ordinance of Parliament against it.

Secondly, 2. Away with all the rubbish
, when you have pulled down the old building, leave no rubbish upon the place.
It was an unhappy defect in former Reformations, though some of the grand Idols
were removed, yet still there was so much Babylonish sfuffe left behind, which
now has occasioned great trouble. Away with Ceremonies, Altars, and
Crucifixes, away with the Popes Canon Law, or whatsoever may give any occasion
to Samarit an builders, to make such a mixture in the Church, as is contrary to
the simplicity in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. which should be the rule of the
Churches Conformity.

Thirdly, Lay a good foundation, 3 Lay a good foundation. Fundatto fundaussima.
sun.
in the building of Gods house, Christ in his Gospel a sure foundation, Isa.
28. 16. The foundation is both the strength and the rule of the building, to
which it should be commensurate: There is a foundation personal, Christ
himself, 1. Cor. 3. 11. and doctrinall, as he is held forth in the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. The more you mind these in the
work of Reformation, the more glorious house you will raise for God to dwell
in.

Fourthly, Look to the superstructions, 4 Look to the superst^^ctions
when you have laid a good foundation. Do not multiply humane inventions, in
stead of divine Ordinances. Consider what Offices, what Administrations the
Lord of the house has prescribed in his Word. He has given Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. He has set in the Church, Helps, Governments, 1 Cor.
12. 28. not helps in government, (as it is in some Copies mis-printed) but
Helps, Governments, which most learned Expositors make to be Deacons, and
Ruling Elders, to assist the Pastors and Teachers; Let us not be afraid of
admitting such as God himself has prescribed; there is no better way of
building Gods House, then out of his own Materials.

Fifthly, Labor to approve your selves lively stones, spiritual Temples to
Jesus Christ, 5 Approve your selves lively stones.
then indeed you will add very much to the building of Gods house: 1 Pet. 2.
4, 5. The Apostle represents Christ as the Living Stone, and if you come to him
as lively st^nes, ye are built up a spiritual house; Temple-worke will not
be advanced by dead stones.

Sixthly, Improve your Parliament power, to multiply builders in the Church. 6
Multiply Builders.
Poor England complains under three great defects:

First, Schools and Universities are much decayed, where builders might be
prepared.

Secondly, Ordination is wanting, whereby they might be solemnly set apart for
so great a service.

Thirdly, Maintenance to encourage them in their work, is miserably, and
scandalously poor in many places.

Reckon it your Honor to cherish the Seminaries of Religion, and Learning,
that many Candidates for the Ministry may be trained up there. Be pleased to
quicken your Counsels in ripening the Ordinance for Ordination, according to
the advice of the Assembly, The ordinance for Ordination is since ^ully passed.
presented to the Honorable Houses, that such as are able and willing to help
to build the Lords House, may be admitted to the work; And let your wisdom
contrive how the Lords builders may have a sufficient, Salarium ministri sit, 1
Sufficiens. 2. Honorificum. 3. Fixum.
an honorable, and a certain maintenance. How much might an Ordinance for the
reviving of the Ecoffees to recover Impropriations conduce to this happy
purpose? Hereby shall you be renowned amongst those who have done much to
help to build the old waste places, and to raise up the foundation of many
Generations, and you shall be called the Repairers of the breach, the
restorers of paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. which is a promise made to such a
Fast, as God has chosen. As I began, so I will end with the counsel of the
Lord of Hosts, which he backs with much sweet encouragement to such as are
ready to build his house, Zach. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Let your hands
be strong, fear not, let your hands be strong.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1^. l. 25 for retite in words, ^. inwards, p, 17. l. 9. ^. so, p, 21. l.
33. ^. flashy.


