THE EIGHT SECTIONS OF HIPPOCRATES APHORISMS Reviewed and Rendered into
English: According to the Translation of Anutius Foesius. Digested into an
exact and methodical form. AND Divided into several convenient Distinctions,
and every Distinction into several Chapters, wherein every Aphorism is Reduced
to its proper Subject. Whereby the Reader may easily find out any desired
Aphorism without the tedious Revolution of the whole Work. Wherein also many
Aphorisms are significantly interpreted which were neglected in the former
Translation.

The next Page will show the contents of every Distinction.

-- Facies non omnibus una
Nec diversa tamen.
Ovid. Metam. Licensed July 14. 1664.

Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed by W. G. for Rob. Crofts, at the Crown in Chancery Lane. 1665.



DISTINCTION I. THE first Distinction contains all such Aphorisms which are
either Diagnostick or Prognostic, whereby the Practitioner may find out the
Disease and judge thereof. DID. II. The second Distinction contains those
Aphorisms which treat of the Regiment of Diet convenient either for healthful
or sick persons. DID. III. In this Distinction are handled such Aphorisms
which set down the general way of Curing Diseases. DID. IV. In this
Distinction are set down such Aphorisms which concern the praeternatural
Affects distributed to Man's body in every Age, by the Winds and Seasons of the
year. DID. V. This Distinction contains such Aphorisms which concern Fevers
and their Accidents. DID. VI. This Distinction contains such Aphorisms which
make mention of all the particular and Internal Diseases of the body from the
Head to the Foot. DID. VII. In this Distinction are contained such Aphorisms
which mention all the External Diseases of Man's Body.
The Eight several Sections of Hippocrates Aphorisms.
Distinction the first, containing all the Aphorisms Diagnostick and
Prognostic.
THis small Book of Aphorisms of Hippocrates, does fundamentally instruct
those who shall thoroughly learn and observe them, with all the grounds
belonging unto Physic; and whereas the Invention and scope of a Physician may
be redived (which otherwise would be infinite) unto two heads, that is,
Preservative and Curative; to preserve the body of man in its integrity of
healths: and secondly, being swerved from that to remove all cause; which shall
or may cause any preternatural affects or distemper. Therefore for the more
ease and and perspecuity to the Reader, the Aphorisms which respect both those
intentions are distinctly and severally proposed under their proper heads; and
being it is necessary that the Physician should rightly understand and judge by
the particular Signs before he undertake or administer any Physic for the
Cure, whether the affects do refuse or perform their natural Actions, therefore
in the first place such informing Aphorisms are set down, and they are these
which follow.

CHAP. I.
The Proem.
LIfe is short, Art long, Occasion sudden and dangerous, Experience deceitful,
and Judgment difficult. Neither is it sufficient that the Physician be ready to
act what is necessary to be done by him, but the Sick, and the Attendants and
all outward necessaries must be lightly prepared and sitted for the business.

Sect. 2. Aph. 4.
Neither fullness nor emptiness, nor any other thing, if it exceed a mean in
nature, is good.

Sect. 2. Aph. 5.
Wearyishness, or a lazy indisposition arising of its own accord, is the
forerunner of a Disease.

Sect. 2. Aph. 6.
They who are grieved in any part of their body, and are scarce sensible of
their grief, have their animal faculty distempered.

Sect. 2. Aph. 26.
It is better that a Fever succeed a Convulsion, than a Convulsion a Fever.

Sect. 2. Aph. 27.
Sudden intermissions or alleviations in Diseases are not much to be trusted
unto, which happen without some reasons, neither ought we much to fear such
evils which happen without a sensible cause. For many of those things are
uncertain, neither are they wont to continue long.

Sect. 2. Aph. 28.
It is an ill Sign when Feaver-sick persons either retain their fullness of
body, or else are overmuch wasted, and emaciated by the Disease. For the one
signifies a prolixity of the Disease; the other, weakness of the Patient.

Sect. 2. Aph. 30.
The Symptoms of every Disease are most easy and light about the beginning
and ending thereof, but in the state and vigor, most vehement.

Sect. 2. Aph. 31.
If any man being recovered of a Disease is not profited by his meat taken
orderly, it is an ill Sign.

Sect. 2. Aph. 33.
It is a hopeful sign when the Sick continues undisturbed in mind and body
after such things as have been administered unto him. But the contrary if
contrary things happen.

Sect. 2. Aph 39.
Old men usually are less sick then young men, but such daily Diseases as do
happen unto them, do commonly accompany them to their death.

Sect. 2. Aph. 40.
Hoarsenesse and Rhumes in very old men will not be concocted.

Sect. 2. Aph. 42.
A strong Apoplexy is incurable, but a slight one is not easily cured.

Sect. 2. Aph. 44.
Very gross and Corpulent bodies by nature dye sooner then such which are spare
and lean.

Sect. 3. Aph. 45.
Young men are chiefly freed from the Falling Sickness by change of Age, Air,
and Diet.

Sect. 3. Aph. 50.
Such things unto which we are accustomed unto by long intervalls of time,
although worse, are less irksom: and troublesome unto us, then such which are
not familiar unto us; wherefore we ought to make a change to those things which
are not usual unto us.

Sect. 2. Aph. 53.
They who have their bodies soluble are in a better condition of health,
especially while they are young than those whose bodies are hard and costive,
but in their old age they live worse, because then their excrements are usually
dried.

Sect. 2. Aph. 54.
A tall Stature of body in Youth is comely and not unseemly, but in Old men it
is unserviceable, and worse then a short Stature.

Sect. 2. Aph. 30.
Such intermittent Fevers are hardly to be judged, which return again at the
same hour the next day, wherein the intermission was the day before, be it at
what hour soever.

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
If any part of the body were afflicted or troubled before the Disease, the
Disease does confirm and determine it self in that part.

Sect. 4. Aph. 36.
Such Sweats which express themselves in Fevers, the third, fifth, seventh,
ninth, eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, one and twentieth, seven and
twentieth, thirtieth, or the four and thirtieth day, are beneficial, because
they are Critical; But such as do not begin upon some of those days signify
danger, prolixity of the Disease, and its reversion.

Sect. 4. Aph. 38.
Sweats do declare a Disease in the body.

Sect. 4. Aph. 41.
Much sweat in the time of sleep without some manifest cause arising, does
argue that such bodies do use a more liberal diet; but if they happen to him
which eats but sparingly, they tell that there is a necessity of Evacuation.

Sect. 4. Aph. 42.
If plenty of Sweat, whether hot or cold always flow, the cold does signify a
bigger, the hot a less Disease.

Sect. 4. Aph. 45.
They who have swellings, or pains about the Junctures after long Fevers, do
feed plentifully.

Sect. 4. Aph. 51.
If intermittent Fevers are not dissolved by their first brises at the
beginning, they then usually continue long.

Sect. 4. Aph. 52.
Voluntary tears flowing in Fevers or other Diseases produce no inconvenience,
but involuntary are more inconvenient.

Sect. 4. Aph. 53.
Those Fevers are most vehement wherein an Edaminis humor caused by the
Fevers, grows to the Teeth.

Sect. 4. Aph. 54.
He that has a dry cough lightly moving and persevering in a burning Fever,
is not much troubled with thirst.

Sect. 4. Aph. 56.
If Sweat happen to one Sick of a Fever, and the Fever cease not, it is ill:
For the Fever is prolonged, and much moisture is thereby signified.

Sect. 4. Aph. 57.
A Fever succeeding, frees from a Convulsion, or the distension of the Nerves.

Sect. 4. Aph. 58.
A vehement cold or shaking, frees him who is Sick of a burning Fever.

Sect. 4. Aph. 59.
An exquisite Tertian is judged in seven circuits at the utmost.

Sect. 4. Aph. 60.
Deafness occasioned by a Fever, is taken away by an issue of Blood out of
the Nostrills, or a Flux of the Belly.

Sect. 4. Aph. 62.
The Yellow Jaundies coming upon a Fever, if it appear before the seventh day,
is bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 63.
Such Fevers as have rigors every day, are daily dissolved.

Sect. 4. Aph. 64.
If the Yellow Jaundies come upon a Fever, the seventh, ninth, eleventh, or
fourteenth day, it portends good, unless the right Hypochondrium be hard, then
it is not good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 68.
Interception of Spirits in a Fever is bad, for a Convulsion is thereby
declared.

Sect. 4. Aph. 80.
If Blood and clots be voided with the Urine, if the party have a Strangury,
and the pain fall down into the lower part of the belly and the Perinaeum the
parts which appertain to the Bladder are disaffected.

Sect. 4. Aph. 81.
They which void Blood, suppurated matter, and small crusts or skales with
their Urine, and if an ill smell of the Urine be concomitant, it signifies
exulceration of the bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 82.
If a tumor rising upon the Yard turn to suppuration, and break, a dissolution
succeeds.

Sect. 4. Aph. 83.
Much Urine voided in the night season signifies but little dejection by Stool.

Sect. 7. Aph. 30.
Ejections and excrements which are frothy voided by Stool descend from the
brain.

Sect. 7. Aph. 32.
Urines then at the top with bilious Sediments, signify an accute Disease.

Sect. 7. Aph. 33.
Variety of Colors in the Urine signify a vehement perturbation in the whole
body.

Sect. 7. Aph 36.
When the aforenamed Signs do happen to those whose Reins are disaffected, and
if grief or pain be about the Muscles of the back bone, because the pains are
carried to the external parts, expect the abscess or imposthumation to be
outward. But if the pains tend rather to the inward parts, we must expect the
imposthumation to be more inward.

Sect. 7. Aph. 37.
Vomiting of Blood without a Fever is healthful, but with a Fever it is
evil, and then it is to be cured with such Medicines as have a cooling and a
restringent quality.

Sect. 7. Aph. 38.
Distillations falling upon the upper belly within twenty days, turn to
suppuration.

Sect. 7. Aph. 40.
If the tongue on a sudden be incontinent, or any part of the Body struck, it
signifies Melancholy.

Sect. 7. Aph. 41.
If the Hicket happen to elderly men by immoderate purging, it is no good Sign.

Sect. 7. Aph. 49.
If a tumor or redness do happen in the breast of him that is Sick of a
Squinancy it is a good Sign, for then the Morbifick matter is sent to the
external parts.

Sect. 7. Aph. 52.
A Fever succeeding does take away a vehement pain of the Liver.

Sect. 7. Aph. 54.
When Phlegm is imparted between the Midriffe, and the Stomach, causing pain,
and has no passage either upward or downward, if that petuitous humor be
carried by the veins to the Bladder, the grief thereby is taken away.

Sect. 7. Aph. 56.
Wine allayed with an equal proportion of water does take away sorrow, yawning,
or extreme quaking.

Sect. 7. Aph. 57.
[You have this Aphorism before in the fourth Section, Aphorism 82.]

Sect. 7. Aph. 61.
Much Sweat either hot or cold always flowing, signifies plenty of humors in
the body, which in a strong body must be drawn away upward, but in a weak one,
downward.

Sect. 7. Aph. 63.
Small tumors turning to suppuration or pains in the joints, do arise in such
bodies who have had long Fevers.

Sect. 7. Aph. 64.
They who are troubled with the aforenamed imposthumations or pains of the
joints by Fevers, do use more then ordinary Diet.

Sect 7. Aph. 65.
Meat exhibited to one sick of a Fever does nourish the Disease, but to a
healthful body it gives strength.

Sect. 7. Aph. 66.
Respect must be had to those things which are voided by Urine, whether the
Sediments resemble those of Sound bodies or not; for by how much the more they
draw from them, by so much the more they are more significative of Diseases;
but the nearer they appear like the Urines of sound bodies, the less Diseased
they argue the party by whom they are made.

Sect. 7. Aph. 71.
Either sleep or watching exceeding a mean, is a Disease.

CHAP. II. Of Prognostics. Prognostics.
THe Diseases, seasons of the year, and the vicissitudes of the circuits being
compared together among themselves, whether they are made every other day or by
great intervals of time, do show the accessions and qualities of Diseases.
Moreover, the Symptoms also which presently appear show the same things, of
which condition is spittle in Pluretick bodies; if it appear in the beginning
of the Disease, it signifies its brevity; but if it appear later, it argues
that the Disease will be long. The Urines also, the Excrements and Sweats, when
they appear do give notice whether the Disease will have a hard or easy Crisis,
and whether it will be short or long.

Sect. 2. Aph. 5.
[See this Aphorism in the second Aphorism in the Diagnosticks.]

Sect 2. Aph. 13.
When a Crisis is intended by nature, the night before the access is tedious
and vehement, but the following night usually is more tolerable.

Sect. 2. Aph. 23.
Acute Diseases are terminated by a Crisis within fourteen days.

Sect. 2. Aph. 24.
The fourth day is the Index of the seventh, the eighth of another seventh. The
eleventh also must be had in consideration, because it is the fourth of another
seventh. Again, the Seventeenth must be looked upon, because it is the fourth
from the fourteenth, and the seventh from the eleventh.

Sect. 2. Aph. 27.
[You have have this Aphorism verbatim in the fifth Aphorism of the
Diagnosticks, to which I refer you.]

Sect. 2. Aph. 28.
[See this in the Diagnosticks, Aphorism the sixth.]

Sect. 2. Aph. 33.
[This Aphorism is the same with the ninth Aphorism of the Diagnosticks.]

Sect. 2. Aph. 44.
[This also you have word for word in the tenth Aphorism of the Diagnosticks,
unto which place I refer the Reader.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 11.
When the bowels are wrung, great torments about the Navil, and a Concomitant
pain of the Loins is present, if the morbifick matter be neither taken away by
a purging Medicine, nor any other means, it is confirmed into a dry Dropsy or
Timpany.

Sect. 4. Aph. 21.
Black dejections like Melancholy blood, coming of their own accord, whether
proceeding with a Fever or without a Fever, are the worst of all, and so much
the worse by how much their colors are many and bad; but if they are caused by
a Medicine, it is better; and the more commendable, if their colors are many
and not bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 22.
If black blood issue forth either upward or downward at the beginning of any
Disease whatsoever, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 23.
If they who have been emaciated by accute or continual Diseases, by wounds or
any other means whatsoever, do void black choler, or something like black
blood, they dye the next day following.

Sect. 4. Aph. 24.
If an Excoriation of the bowels or a Dysentery take its original or cause from
black Choler, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 25.
It is not good to void any blood upward of what kind soever it be, but if
black blood be sent forth downwards, it is good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 26.
If small pieces of flesh be ejected with the excrements by him that has a
Dysentry or Bloody Flux, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 27.
They from whom by reason of a Fever much blood does flow, be the Flux from
what part soever, when they are refreshed have moist bellies.

Sect. 4. Aph. 28.
Succeeding Deafness stays and takes away bilious dejections, and Deafness
if bilious dejections arise is finished.

Sect. 4. Aph. 29.
Those Fevers have a very difficult Crisis wherein Rigors or extreme cold fits
appear the sixth day.

Sect. 4. Aph. 30.
[See this Aphorism in the same Section and Aphorism in the Diagnosticks.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 35.
It is a mortal Sign when in a Fever the Neck is so wrested on a sudden no
tumor preexistent that the Sick can hardly swallow.

Sect. 4. Aph. 37.
Cold sweats arising in an accute Disease signify death, but in a more mild
and benign Disease the prolixity thereof.

Sect. 4. Aph. 4.
When mutations chance in the whole body, as if the body be now cold, and then
hot again, or if one heat arise from another, the continuance of the Disease is
hereby signified.

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
Those Fevers which afflict most vehemently every third day, and have no
intermission, are more dangerous, but if any intermission be, be it after what
manner soever, it signifies the Patient to be out of danger.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
They who are Sick of long Fevers, have either tumors or pains about the
junctures succeeding.

Sect. 4. Aph. 46.
It is a mortal Sign if frequent rigors come upon a Feverish person he being
weak, and the Fever not intermitting.

Sect. 4. Aph. 47.
All excreations by spitting, whether they be of a wan color, bloody, ill
savoured, and bilious, are bad in Fevers not intermittent; but it is a good
Sign if good excrements are sent forth either by Stool or Urine. But if any
matter be sent forth by those places and profit not, it is a bad Sign.

Sect. 4. Aph. 48.
If in a continual Fever the extreme parts are cold, and the inward burn, and
the Sick be very thirsty, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 49.
In a not intermittent Fever, if either the Lip, the Eye-brow, Eye or Nose be
turned away; if the Sick see not, or hear not, if any of these Symptoms
appear, death is at hand.

Sect. 4. Aph. 50.
Difficulty of breathing, and dotings in continual Fevers are mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 55.
All Fevers caused by an inflammation of the Kernels, are bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 61.
All intermittent Fevers usually return if they do not intermit upon unequal
days.

Sect. 4. Aph. 65.
A vehement heat in Fevers about the Stomach, and a gnawing of the Mouth of
the Stomach, is naught.

Sect. 4. Aph. 66.
Convulsions, and vehement pains about the Bowels in acute Fevers, is naught.

Sect. 4. Aph. 67.
Tremblings, or Convulsions coming by Sleep in Fevers are bad.

Sect. 5. Aph. 1.
A Convulsion caused by taking of Hellebore, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 2.
A Convulsion happening upon a wound is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 3.
A Convulsion or Hicket succeeding a great fllux of Blood presageth ill.

Sect. 5. Aph. 5.
If loss of Speech happen suddenly to a Drunken man, he dies Convulsive,
unless a Fever seize him, or his speech return to him at the same hour
wherein nature does usually digest the Distemper.

Sect. 5. Aph. 6.
They who are taken with a Convulsion, dye within four days; but if they
escape that time, they grow well again.

Sect. 5. Aph. 7.
They who are troubled with the Falling Sickness before they attain the age of
Fourteen, may be freed from it; but they who are taken with it at the Age of
five and twenty, are usually accompanied therewith to their death.

Sect. 5. Aph. 8.
Unless they who are Sick of a Plurisie be cleansed in fourteen days, the
matter is altered into Suppuration.

Sect. 5. Aph. 9.
A Consumption most commonly begins when we are of the age of Eighteen, to
Thirty five years.

Sect. 5. Aph. 10.
If matter falling to the Throat, and turn out to a Squinacye, it settles upon
the Lungs, and the Sick dye within seven days; the which if they escape, the
matter turns to Imposthumation.

Sect. 5. Aph. 11.
If the spittle of Consumptive persons (being cast into the Fire) send forth an
ill savor, and their hairs fall off, it argues death.

Sect. 5. Aph. 12.
The falling of the hair, and an extreme looseness succeeding in a
Consumption, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 13.
Frothy Blood cast forth by spittle comes from the Lungs.

Sect. 5. Aph. 14.
A Diarrhaea or Extreme Looseness in Consumptive persons is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 15.
Pluretick persons suppurated, if they are cleansed within forty days after the
Rupture is made, are freed, otherwise they grow into a Consumption.

Sect. 5. Aph. 71.
They which have their Skin stretched forth, dry and hard, dye without
sweating; but they which have a loose and thin Skin, end their life with
sweating.

Sect. 7. Aph. 1.
Coldness of the extreme parts in acute Diseases is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 2.
Wan and ill colored flesh occasioned by the Distemper of a bone foretells ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 3.
The Hicket and Redness of the eyes caused by Vomit, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 4.
Shivering after sweating is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph 5.
A Dysentery, a Dropsy or a vehement disturbance of the mind, (called
Exstasis) succeeding raging or madness, is good.

Sect. 7. Aph. 6.
Abhorring of meat and sincere dejections by Stool with continual Disease
portends ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 7.
Extreme chillness, and raging by much drink is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 8.
Faintness, Vomiting, or Swounding are occasioned by an Imposthume broken
inwardly.

Sect. 7. Aph. 9.
Madness or a Convulsion caused by too much Flux of blood, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 10.
Either Vomiting, the Hicket, Convulsion, or raving caused by a Disease of the
thin gut (called Ileum) is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 11.
If an inflammation of the Lungs is caused by a Plurisie, it is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 12.
A Phrensy coming by an inflammation of the Lungs is a bad messenger.

Sect. 7. Aph. 13.
A Convulsion or the Cramp, taking their original from extreme burnings, is
naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 14.
Stupidity or dotings, occasioned by a blow upon the head, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 15.
If imposthumated matter be voided by spitting, after spitting of blood, is
naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 16.
A Consumption and flux succeed spitting of imposthumated matter, but when the
spitting stops, the Sick dies.

Sect. 7. Aph. 17.
The Hicket coming by the inflammation of the Liver, is evil.

Sect. 7. Aph. 18.
A Convulsion or raving occasioned by too much watching, is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 19.
An Erysipclas is caused by the laying open of a bone.

Sect. 7. Aph. 20.
Putrefaction or Imposthumation caused by the tumor called Erysipclas, is
naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 21.
A Flux of Blood proceeding by a vehement and conspicuous wound in the Ulcers
of the Arteries, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 22.
A continual pain in the parts which belong to the belly causes suppuration.

Sect. 7. Aph. 23.
An Excoriation of the Bowels is caused by sincere ejections.

Sect. 7. Aph. 24.
If a bone be peirced or cut to the cavity thereof, it causes a Delirium.

Sect. 7. Aph. 25.
A Convulsion caused by a purging potion, is mortal.

Sect. 7. Aph. 26.
An extreme coldness or chillness of the outward parts, occasioned by a
vehement pain of those parts which belong to the belly, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph 27.
An often and vain desire of going to stool, without any performance happening
to women with Child, does cause abortion or miscarriage.

Sect. 7. Aph. 28.
If any bone whatsoever, a Grissel or a Nerve be cut in sunder in the body, it
will neither be nourished, nor grow together again.

Sect. 7. Aph. 29.
A violent flux of the belly happening to him that is troubled with the
Dropsy, called Lencophlegmatia, does take away the Disease.

Sect. 7. Aph. 41.
It is a bad Sign when the Hicket happens to elderly men by overmuch purging.

Sect. 7. Aph. 42.
Plenty of warm Water cast upon the head, removes a Fever, if it did not
proceed of Choler.

Sect. 7. Aph. 44.
Suppurated persons being burnt or cut, if pure or white matter issue forth,
they escape, but if the matter be something bloody, filthy, and ill savoured,
they perish.

Sect. 7. Aph. 45.
They who are cauterized for an impost humamation of the Liver, if pure matter
and white issue forth they survive, because the suppurated matter is included
in the coats or tumiles. But if the matter flowing forth resemble the Lees of
Oil, they perish.

Sect. 7. Aph. 50.
They whose brain is suddenly taken or benumbed, dye within three days, the
which if they escape they recover.

Sect. 7. Aph. 55.
If the Liver being full of water empty it self into the omentum or kell, then
the belly is filled with water, and the party dies.

Sect. 7. Aph. 60.
When there are mutations in the whole body, and the body be universally cold,
and again hot, and does not alter that heat, the prolixity or continuance of
the Disease is hereby signified.

Sect. 7. Aph. 74.
A water between the skin succeeds the Dropsy, called Lencophlegmacye.

Sect. 7. Aph. 75.
A Dysentery or bloody flux succeeds a Diarrhaea, or flux of the belly.

CHAP. III. Of Signs by the Spittle.
Sect. 1. Aph. 12.
THe Diseases, seasons of the year, and the change of the circuits, being
compared together, whether they are every day, or every other day; or by
greater intervals of time, will declare the Accessions and Qualities of
Diseases: Moreover, the same things are judged by such Symptoms as presently
appear, of which nature is the spittle in pluretick persons; if it appear
presently and at the beginning of the Disease, it foretells its brevity, but if
later, the prolixity thereof. The Urine also, excrements of the belly, and
sweats when they appear, do give us notice how to judge whether the Diseases
will be easy or hard, short or long.

Sect. 5. Aph. 11.
If the spittle which is cast forth by coughing in Consumptive persons (being
cast upon the Coals) send forth an ill savor, and a falling off of the Hairs
be concomitant, these are deadly Signs.

CHAP. IV. Of Sweats.
Sect. 4. Aph. 36.
THose Sweats in Fevers are good which be in the third, fifth, seventh, ninth,
or eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, one and twentieth, the seven and
twentieth, thirtieth, or four and thirtieth day, for such Sweats are Critical
and Judicatory; but those Sweats which do not so express themselves, signify
labor, continuance of the Disease, and its return.

Sect. 4. Aph. 37.
Cold Sweats appearing in a very acute Disease, signify death; but in a more
mild and gentle Disease, the continuance thereof.

Sect. 4. Aph. 41.
Much Sweating in sleep without a manifest cause, shows that the body does use
a more than ordinary diet. But if they happen to one that does not eat, they
give notice that the body has need of evacuation.

Sect. 4. Aph. 42.
If much Sweat flow continually, whether hot or cold, the cold signifies a
greater, the hot a less Disease.

Sect. 4. Aph. 56.
If Sweat happen in a Fever without intermission of the Fever, the Fever is
prolonged, and it is an argument of much moisture in the body.

Sect. 5. Aph. 71.
When the skin is stretched forth, is dry and hard, they dye without Sweating;
but when it is loose and rare, they end their lives with Sweating.

Sect. 8. Aph. 4.
Vehement and swift Sweats. which arise upon the Critical days, and dangerous;
and such also which are expelled upon the forehead standing like drops of
water or flowing, those also which are very cold and much, for of necessity
such Sweats must issue forth with violence, excess of trouble, and continual
expression.

CHAP. V. Of Urines.
Sect. 4. Aph. 69.
URines made in a Fever, which are thick, curdled, and few, if they alter to
many and thin, are beneficial, especially if they are such wherein either at
the beginning or not, much after a Sediment appears.

Sect. 4. Aph. 70.
Urines in Fevers which are troubled like those of kine, signify a pain of
the head either present or to come.

Sect. 4. Aph. 71.
If a Crisis happen upon the seventh day, the the Urine has a small red cloud
in it upon the fourth day, and other things responsible.

Sect. 4. Aph. 72.
All Urines which are very clear and white, are bad, but such appear chiefly in
phrenetick persons.

Sect. 4. Aph. 73.
They whose Diaphragma being lifted up, makes a murmuring pain of the Loins
succeeding, have moist and soluble bellies, unless much wind break backward,
or plenty of Urine be voided; These Symptoms are contingent in Fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 74.
When there is a probability of an Imposthumation about the joints, plenty of
Urine, thick and white being made, freeth from the abscess: such kinds of
abscesses do begin to be carried every fourth day in Fevers accompanied with a
weariness, or lazy indisposition. And if an Haemorrhagile, or bleeding at the
Nose happen at the same time, the Disease will very shortly be dissolved.

Sect. 4. Aph. 75.
Blood or suppurated matter, being made with the Urin, signifies either
Ulceration of the Reins or Bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 76.
Small pieces of flesh, or something like hairs voided forth with the Urine,
are sent from the Reins.

Sect. 4. Aph. 77.
When something like bran is sent forth with a thick Urine, the Bladder is
troubled with a Scab.

Sect. 4. Aph. 78.
They which Piss Blood freely mixed with their Urine, have a Vein broke in
their Reins.

Sect 4. Aph. 79.
A sandy sediment appearing in the Urine signifies the Stone in the Bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 80.
He that pisseth blood, and curdled matter with his Urine, if he have the
Strangury, and the pain fall down into the lower belly and the Perinaeum, is
diseased in those parts which belong to the Bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 81.
Blood, suppurated matter, and small scales voided with the Urine, if an ill
sent accompany, signify an exulceration of the Bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 83.
Plenty of Urine made in the night, signifies but small ejections by stool.

Sect. 7. Aph. 31.
When the Hypostasis or Sediment of the Urine of men sick of a Fever, happens
to appear like gross pieces or gobbets of parched barley not exactly ground, it
signifies that the Disease will be long.

Sect. 7. Aph. 32.
Bilious Sediments, but thin above, signify an acute Disease.

Sect. 7. Aph. 33.
When the Urines are sundry and divided, there is a vehement perturbation in
the whole body.

Sect. 7. Aph. 34.
Bubbles standing upon the upper part of the Urine, signify a Disease of the
Reins, and that it will be long.

Sect 7. Aph. 35.
Fat upon the top of the Urine heaped together, signifies a Disease of the
Reins, and that it is acute also.

CHAP. VI. Of Signs by the Flux of the Belly.
Sect. 2. Aph. 14.
IN Fluxes of the Belly, alteration of the excrements, unless they are changed
to bad, are beneficial.

Sect. 2. Aph. 15.
When the jaws are afflicted, or if tumors appear in the body, the excretions
or excrements are to be taken into consideration; For if they are bilious, the
body also is sick, but if they are like those voided by sound bodies, you may
securely nourish the body.

Sect. 2. Aph. 20.
They whose bellies are moist while they are young, when they grow old are
costive; but such as are costive in their youth, have soluble bodies when they
grow old.

Sect. 4. Aph. 21.
Black excrements like black blood proceeding of their own accord, either with
a Fever, or without a Fever, are worst of all, and so much the worse by how
much their colors are more and worse. But they are better if they are caused
by a Purging Medicine, and so much the better, if their colors are many and
not bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 23.
If they who have been emaciated by acute or long Diseases, by wounds, or any
other means, do void melancholy or black blood downwards, they dye the next
day after.

Sect. 4. Aph. 24.
If a dysentery took its original from black choler, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 25.
It is not good to void any blood whatsoever upward, but if black blood be
voided downward, it is good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 26.
If little pieces of flesh be voided by him that has an excoriation of the
bowels, it is mortal.

CHAP. VII. Of the time of the Crisis appearing.
Sect. 1. Aph. 12.
TO avoid a tedious and needless repetition of the same Aphorisms, I must
refer the Reader for his satisfaction of this Aphorism, unto the former
Chapter of the Signs by the spittle, where he may satisfy himself.

Distinction the second, containing the Aphorisms treating of Diet.
THe former rehearsed Aphorisms have discovered the essence and quality of the
Disease, the which being known, the next intention of the Physician respects
the cure of Diseases, and the preservation of that which remains in the sick
person, according to nature. The latter whereof is performed by a convenient
course and rule of diet, which our Author has delivered unto us in the
following Aphorisms.

CHAP. I. Of a convenient diet in Diseases.
Sect. 1. Aph. 4.
ASlender and exact course of diet, always either in long Diseases, or in
acute, where it is not admitted, is little safe. And again, a diet which comes
to an extreme slenderness is grievous; so also is fulness, if admitted to
extremity.

Sect. 1. Aph. 5.
Diseased persons offend in a spare and thin course of diet, by which they are
more hurt. For every error uses to be more grievous in a thin, than in a more
full course of diet; and therefore also a thin and slender diet by a certain
prescription is less safe to healthful bodies, because they bear those errors
more grievously: For the same reason therefore a thin and accurate diet is for
the most part more dangerous, than something a more plentiful and liberal.

Sect. 1. Aph. 7.
When the Disease is very acute, it forthwith comes to its state and danger,
and then it is necessary to use a most thin and slender course of diet; But
when the Disease is not very sharp and quick, but there is liberty given to
exhibit something a fuller diet, we may afford so much the more plentiful diet,
by how much the Disease is abated of its extremity.

Sect. 1. Aph. 8.
When the Disease is in its state and greatest vehemence, then it is necessary
to use a most sparing diet.

Sect. 1. Aph. 9.
But a conjecture is to be had from the sick, whether such a quantity of diet
be sufficient for him to subsist to the vigor of the Disease, or whether he
will fail and not be able to endure the assault, or whether the Disease do
first remit, or be lessened.

Sect. 1. Aph. 10.
Therefore when the vigor of the Disease is sudden, forthwith we must use a
slender diet; but if the Disease arrive to its vigor and state later, than at
the time of the vigor and a little before, we ought to take away all meat; but
before the fit we may allow the Sick such a diet which may enable him to endure
the assault.

Sect. 1. Aph. 11.
In the Fit of an Ague the Patient must shun and avoid eating; For it is
hurtful to give meat to the Sick then; and we ought to suspect and fear those
things in the Fits, which grow worse and worse by the circuits.

Sect. 1. Aph. 16.
Moist food is convenient for all Feverish persons, also for Children
especially, and others who have been accustomed to a diet of the same nature.

Sect. 1. Aph. 17.
We must observe to whom we may allow food to once or twice, to whom much or
little, or to whom meat is to be allowed by parts; yet we may indulge something
to the time, the Region, the age and custom of the patient.

Sect. 1. Aph. 18.
We are more averse to meat in the Summer time, and in the Autumn, but in the
Winter we can endure them best of all; the Spring is the best season next the
Winter.

Sect. 1. Aph. 19.
To such whose Fits return by circuits, neither give any thing, nor think of
any thing; but substract all food from them until the Crisis be over.

CHAP. II. Of Diet convenient according to the Ages.
Sect. 1. Aph. 13.
OLd men can most easily endure fasting, next to them such who are arrived at
their full Age; Young men worst of all; but among all, Boys chiefly, and among
them such as are active and more prone to action.

Sect. 1. Aph. 14.
They which grow most abound with natural heat, and therefore want most
nourishment; for otherwise their bodies would waste. And seeing that in old men
there remains but little heat, therefore they need but few nutriments, for by
many that heat is extinguished. And by the same reason also, because their
bodies are cold, acute Fevers do not frequently happen to old men.

CHAP. III. Of Diet for the seasons of the year.
Sect. 1. Aph. 15.
IN the Winter season our Stomachs are hottest, and sleeps longest, during
those seasons therefore we may use most plentiful diet; because then there
being more natural heat we need the more nutriment.

Sect. 1. Aph. 18.
[You have this Aphorism in the preceding Chapter of Diet convenient in
Diseases, Sect. 1. Aph. 18. unto which I refer the Reader.]

CHAP. IV. Of the quality, manner, quantity, and other conditions, required in
Diet.
Sect. 2. Aph. 8.
THe body which after recovery from a Disease does not regain strength by his
Diet, does overcharge nature with food; but if it happen to one which eats
not much, it signifies that evacuation is necessary.

Sect. 2. Aph. 10.
The more you nourish foul and impure bodies, the more you offend them.

Sect. 2. Aph. 11.
Our bodies are more apt to be refreshed with drink, then with meat.

Sect. 2. Aph. 16.
It is inconvenient to labor when hunger oppresses.

Sect. 2. Aph. 18.
Such meats as nourish universally and quickly, soonest digest and turn to
excrements.

Sect. 2. Aph. 22.
Evacuation cures those Diseases which are caused by Repletion, and Repletion
takes away such distempers as are caused by emptiness; so in other things
contrary, is a Remedy.

Sect. 2. Aph. 31.
It is an ill Sign if the body be not strengthened by food taken orderly, after
the recovery from a Disease.

Sect. 2. Aph. 32.
Usually all sick persons which have a good appetite to their meat at the
beginning of their Sickness, and are not benefited thereby, afterward
nauseate and loath their meat; but they which at the beginning of their
Sickness, do very much loath their meat, and afterward recover their Stomachs,
do live in a more healthful condition.

Sect. 2. Aph. 38.
Meat and drink something worse, but if it be better rellish'd, is to be
preferred before that which is better and less pleasing.

CHAP. V. Of Milk.
Sect. 5. Aph. 64.
IT is hurtful to give milk to such which are troubled with the Headache; It is
bad also for Feverish persons, and such who have a murmuring in the
Hypochondries; For those also who are always dry and thirsty. It is hurtful
also for such whose excrements are Choleric, or are troubled with an acute
Fever, and for those who have voided much blood by stool. But it is convenient
for such as be in a wasting condition, if they are not much Feverish; and it
may be allowed in long Fevers, and to faint persons, so that none of the
aforementioned Symptoms are present. It may be given also to such as are
extremely wasted.

CHAP. VI. Of Wine.
Sect. 2. Aph. 21.
DRinking of Wine takes away hunger.

Sect. 7. Aph. 56.
Wine mixed with an equal proportion of Water, and drunk, takes away sadness,
yawning, and horror.

CHAP. VII. Of Water.
Sect. 5. Aph. 26.
Water which is soonest hot, and soonest cold is most light.

CHAP. VIII Of Thirst.
Sect. 4. Aph. 19.
THey who having taken a purging Potion, and do not thirst while they Purge,
will not cease Purging until they do thirst.

Sect. 5. Aph. 27.
It is a good Sign when they which have a desire to drink in the night time,
fall to sleep while they are thirsty.

Distinction the third, containing the Aphorisms respecting the general way
of Curing Diseases.
IT is as requisite for a Physician to Cure the Diseases of the body, as to
keep the same in strength and ability. To the performance whereof he ought to
be armed with a judgment Curative and Preservative, the latter whereof he is
enabled to perform by those Aphorisms, which inform him, whom, what, which,
how much, where, how, and when he ought to Purge; or Revell offensive humors.

CHAP. I. Of Indications in general.
Sect. 1. Aph. 3.
THe healthful state of strong bodies arrived at its perfection, when it has
attained its extremity of fulness, in regard it cannot abide nor rest in that
same state and condition, is unstable. Now seeing it cannot rest, nor make a
progress to a better condition, it remains that it must lapse to a worse. For
these very causes therefore it is expedient to release that more full habit of
body without delay, whereby the body may assume a beginning of another kind of
nourishing. Neither must we proceed so far that the vessels may fail (for that
is dangerous) but we must regulate our course according to the nature and
ability of him upon whom this change is to be wrought. By the same reason
extreme evacuations, and too hasty refections or nourishings are equally
dangerous.

Sect. 1. Aph. 19.
[You may be satisfied of this Aphorism in the Chapter of Diet in Diseases the
(last Aphorism) whether for brevitie sake I refer you.]

Sect. 2. Aph. 20.
[You have this Aphorism in the Chapter of the Signs by the Flux of the belly,
the third Aphorism.]

Sect. 2. Aph. 37.
Physic is tedious and irksome to those who are of a good habit of body.

Sect. 2. Aph. 7.
Those bodies which are attenuated by long intervals, must be refreshed slowly;
but such as were suddenly wasted, we may nourish speedily

Sect. 2. Aph. 9.
The body ought to be prepared and made soluble, before it be purged.

Sect. 2. Aph. 22.
As Evacuation does Cure Diseases caused by Repletion, so Repletion takes away
such distempers which come by emptiness; so in the rest contrarily.

Sect. 2. Aph. 50.
Those courses which we are accustomed unto by long use and continuance,
although worse, are less troublesome unto us, then those unto which we are not
used. Wherefore we ought also to make a change also to such things unto which
we are not used.

Sect. 2. Aph. 51.
It is dangerous to empty or fill, to heat or to cool the body too much on a
sudden, or to alter the body violently by any other motion; For every excess
is an enemy to nature. But those alterations which are effected by little and
little, are secure, and then most especially when we make our progress from
one degree to another.

Sect. 2. Aph. 52.
If all things are performed according to reason, although the success answer
not thereunto, we may not alter our intention, if there be the same condition
which seemed at the first.

Sect. 4. Aph. 3.
If such things are purged, which ought to be purged, it is conducible, and the
patient bears it easily; but otherwise they bear it grievously.

Sect. 4. Aph. 2.
In using purging Medicines, we may with security and benefit to the patient,
purge such things out which being voided of their own accord are profitable,
but restrain such things which come forth after a contrary manner.

Sect. 5. Aph. 18.
Cold is an Enemy to the bones, teeth, nerves, brain, and the marrow of the
backbone, but heat is profitable.

Sect. 5. Aph. 19.
We must heat all cold parts, unless such which do send forth blood, or will
shortly send forth blood.

Sect. 5. Aph. 22.
Heat causing suppuration does not exhibit unto us the greatest Sign of
security, in every Ulcer it softens the Skin, extenuates, takes away pains,
rigors, mitigates distension of the nerves, takes away heaviness of the head,
but is very much available for broken bones, and especially those which are
bare, and most of all to those who have Ulcers in their head. It is profitable
for such who are child with cold, or exulcerated parts, and corroding humors,
either in the Fundament, Privities, womb or bladder. To all these, heat is
acceptable, and causes a Crisis, but cold is unfriendly and destructive.

Sect. 5. Aph. 23.
But we must use cold things, where there is, or is like to be a Flux of blood,
not upon the parts themselves, but they must be applied about those parts. And
if there be inflammations, or fiery redness tending to a bloodish color,
caused by the fresh Flux of blood, apply them thereunto; For it induces a
blackness to inveterate sores. It helps an Erysipelas which is not ulcerated,
and hurts it when it is ulcerated.

Sect. 5. Aph. 24.
Cold things, as Ice and Snow, are enemies to the breast, they cause coughes,
eruptions of blood, and distillations.

Sect 8. Aph. 6.
Those distempers which Medicines cannot Cure, are remedied by Incision; what
the knife cannot cure, actual Cauteries will perform. But those which are not
Cured by Fire, we must judge incurable.

CHAP. II. Of Purging in general.
Sect. 1. Aph. 2.
IN the purgations of the belly and vomitings, which are not forced, if such
excrements are purged as ought to be, it is conducible, and the Patient does
bear them easily; but if not, it succeeds otherwise. The like also is in the
emptying of the vessels; if such evacuation be made as ought to be, it is
convenient, and it is easily born; but if not, it is otherwise. Therefore we
must consider the place, time of the year, age, and the Diseases in which these
evacuations ought to be procured or not.

Sect. 2. Aph. 36.
They which are of an unblamable constitution of body, when they are purged by
Medicines, do soon faint, so do they also which use an ill diet.

Sect. 2. Aph. 37.
Medicines are troublesome to those who are of a good habit of body or
constitution.

Sect. 6. Aph. 47.
They who have need of Phlebotomy or Purging, ought to open a vein, or take a
purging Medicine in the Spring season.

Sect. 2. Aph. 29.
If any evacuation be requisite, do it at the beginning of the sickness, for in
the state thereof it is better to rest.

CHAP. III. Of what quality, and what things ought to be Purged.
Sect. 1. Aph. 20.
NEither stir those humors which are under their Crisis, or which have
perfectly past it, either by Medicines or any other provocations, but let them
rest.

Sect. 1. Aph. 22.
Thrust forth concocted humors by a purging Medicine not undigested, neither
at the beginning of the Disease, unless the humors tend of themselves to
excretion, which hardly happens.

Sect. 1. Aph. 25.
If such things are purged as ought to be purged, it is profitable to the
Patient, and he does bear it easily; but contrarily, if the contrary happen.

Sect. 2. Aph. 9.
Before the taking of purging Medicines, the body ought to be prepared and to
be made soluble.

When purging Medicines are made use of, if such things as are voided without
provocation, are profitable, we must assist nature, and draw forth such by
purging, but we must prohibit and hinder those things which proceed after a
contrary manner.

CHAP. IV. Of the Quantity of Purging.
Sect. 1. Aph. 23.
WE are not to judge of the matter purged by the quantity altogether, but
whether those which are purged are expedient, and whether they are for the ease
of the Patient; and sometimes, when occasion requires, we may empty the body to
a Syncope or sounding, and must do it, if the Patient can suffer it.

CHAP. V. Of the Place by which we ought to Purge.
Sect. 1. Aph. 21.
WHen you intend to Purge, observe whether the humor tend of it self, and
there draw it forth by the convenient places.

Sect. 4. Aph. 6.
Spare bodies and such which vomit with facility and ease, must be Purged
upward with a Purging Medicine, but be fearful of the winter.

Sect. 4. Aph. 7.
But gross Bodies, and such as vomit with pain and difficulty, must be purged
downwards, and be fearful of the Summer.

Sect. 4. Aph. 8.
Consumptive persons are very seldom, and with great circumspection to be
Purged by vomit.

Sect. 4. Aph. 9.
Bodies abounding with Melancholy may be Purged more plentifully downward, by
the same reason we must observe the contrary way of Purging other bodies.

Sect. 4. Aph. 12.
It is inconvenient Purging those by vomit in the winter season which are
troubled with a Lientery or smoothness of the bowels.

Sect. 4. Aph. 13.
Prepare such bodies with a plentiful and moist diet, and with rest before the
exhibition and taking of their potion, which having taken black Hellebore are
not Purged easily by the upper parts.

Sect. 4. Aph. 14.
After the taking of Purging Medicines, rather move and stir the body, then
admit sleep and rest. For even Navigation upon the Sea, does demonstrate unto
us, that that our bodies are provoked by motion.

Sect. 4. Aph. 15.
If you would have a Purge to work force motion to the body, but if you desire
it should cease working, let the body sleep, and move it not.

Sect. 4. Aph. 16.
Hellebore given to sound and healthful bodies is danger for it induces a
Convulsion.

Sect. 4. Aph. 17.
When you observe an abhorring of meat in one that has no Fever, if there be
a gnawing of the mouth of the Stomach, a dizzinesse with a dimnesse of sight,
and a bitterness in the mouth, we must then conclude that to such bodies
Purging upward by vomit is necessary.

Sect. 4. Aph. 18.
Griefs happening above the midriffe, which need Purging, instruct us that in
such distempers Medicines which Purge upwards are necessary.

Sect. 4. Aph. 19.
They which do not thirst (having taken a Purging Medicine) while the Physic
does work, will not cease Purging, until they do thirst.

Sect. 4. Aph. 20.
If a tormenting pain of the Bowels, a heaviness of the knees, and grief about
the Loins be present without a Fever, these Signs do show unto us, that there
is a necessity of Purging the body downward,

CHAP. VI. Of the time of Purging.
Sect. 1. Aph. 24.
IN acute Diseases we must very seldom, or at the beginning, use Purging
Medicines; and if it be convenient to use them, we must be wary and circumspect
in using of them.

Sect. 2. Aph. 29.
If moving of the body be convenient, do it at the beginning, but in the state
of the Disease it is better to let it rest.

Sect. 4. Aph. 4.
In the Summer time cleanse the upper Belly with Medicines, but in the winter
rather Purge the lower.

Sect. 4. Aph. 5.
Medicines are troublesome to the patient, either in the dog days, or a little
before them.

Sect. 4. Aph. 10.
In extreme acute Diseases, if the humor of its own propensity intend to
excretion we may and ought to purge the same day; For in such cases delays are
dangerons.

CHAP. VII. Of Purging of Women with Child.
Sect. 4. Aph. 1.
WOmen with Child may be purged, if the violence of the humor tend to
expulsion, in the fourth month unto the seventh, but in the latter less. But
in riper and younger issues, we must be very fearful and cautious.

Sect. 5. Aph. 29.
[This Aphorism is the same with the former, therefore to avoid a tedious
repetition, I have forbore the inserting of it.]

Sect. 5. Aph. 34.
If a Diarrhaea or strong flux of the belly, seize a woman with Child, she is
in danger of abortion.

CHAP. VIII. Of judgment by Purging.
Sect. 4. Aph. 19.
IF they who having taken a purging potion, do not thirst while they are
purged, they will not make an end of Purging, until they do thirst.

A Convulsion occasioned by a purging potion is mortal.

CHAP. IX. Of Phlebotomy or Letting Blood.
Sect. 5. Aph. 30.
PHlebotomy or opening of a Vein does cause Women with Child to abort, and then
chiefly if the Child be of any maturity or bigness.

Sect. 5. Aph. 68.
The opening of the straight Vein in the Forehead, profits him which is
troubled with a pain in the hinder part of his head.

Sect. 6. Aph. 47.
If bleeding or purging be requisite and needful the Spring is the most
convenient time to use either means.

Sect. 7. Aph. 46.
The means to Cure the pains of the Eyes, after the exhibiting of a potion of
Wine, and the using of a bath of warm water, is by Phlebotomy.

Sect. 7. Aph. 48.
The dropping of Urine (which is called the Strangury) and the difficulty of
making of water, is Cured by a potion of wine, and the opening of a vein. But
the inward veins are to be breathed.

CHAP. X. Of the application of Cupping-glasses.
Sect. 5. Aph. 50.
THe most compendious and ready way to stop the flowing of the terms in Women,
is by applying Cupping-glasses to their breasts.

Distinction the fourth, containing such Aphorisms as unfold and and declare
the preternatural affects incident to the body of man, and distributed to it
according to the Ages, winds and seasons of the year.
HItherto we have taken a view of such Aphorisms which have treated of the
General Cure of Diseases, in this Distinction we shall expose to the Reader
those Aphorisms which speak of or mention all the preternatural affects, as
they have respect unto particular parts, the times of the year and ages, etc.
And begin first with the Diseases of the Ages, and seasons of the year.

CHAP. I. Of the Diseases of several Ages.
Sect. 2. Aph. 39.
OLd men generally are less Sick then young men, but if they are taken with
any continual Disease, they usually accompany them to their graves.

Sect. 2. Aph. 54.
A long and tall stature of body in young men is decent, and not unseemly, but
in old men it is unprofitable, and worse than a lower stature.

Sect. 3. Aph. 18.
Concerning the seasons of the year, Children and such as are next to them in
years, live best, and are most healthful, in the Spring and the fore part of
the Summer; but in the Summer and so to the Autumn, old men. But for the
remainder of the Autumn, and part of winter, such as are of a middle age
between the two former live best, and are most healthful.

Sect. 5. Aph 9.
Consumptions usually happen to man from the Age of Eighteen years, unto the
Age of Five and Thirty.

CHAP. II. Of the Diseases of Children.
Sect. 3. Aph. 24.
DIseases of this nature happen to Children and new born Babes, creeping Ulcers
of the mouth (called Aphthae) Vomitings, Coughs, Watchings, Tremblings,
Inflammations about the Navil, and moistness of the Ears.

Sect. 3. Aph. 25.
When they come to breeding of Teeth, Itchings and prickings of the Gums,
Fevers, Convulsions, scourings, and then especially when they begin their
sharp Teeth called Dogs Teeth; and these Evils happen to those Children
especially who are of a Corpulent body, and are usually costive.

Sect. 3. Aph. 26.
But when they are somewhat elder, Inflammations of the Tousills called the
Almonds of the Ears, beatings upon the inward part of the Vertebra which is in
the hinder part of the head, difficulty of breathing, the Stone, Round-wormes
and others, thin and small, called Ascarides, in the straight bowell. Warts,
continual standing of the Yard, swellings about the neck, called Kernels, with
other small pustles or pimples, but especially such before mentioned.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases of Young men.
Sect. 3. Aph. 27.
MAny of the aforementioned Diseases are also incident to those who have attained
to riper years, and the age of Fourteen years; but now more especially
continual Fevers, Fluxes of blood out of the Nostrils, are common to this Age.

Sect. 3. Aph. 29.
Diseases usual to young men are spittings of Blood, Consumptions, acute
Fevers, the falling Sickness, and other Diseases, but these especially.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of Men.
Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
BUt to those who have past their youth, frequent Asthmaes, Plurisies,
inflammations of the Lungs, Lethargies, Phrensies, burning Fevers, continual
Fluxes of the Belly, Choler, Dysenteries, and Lienteries, and the Flux of the
Hemorrhoide veins are usual.

CHAP. V. Of the Diseases incident to Old Age.
Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
BUt to Old men difficulty of breathing, Catarrhes causing Coughs, the
Strangury and difficulty of making water, pains in the joints and Reins,
Vertigoes, Apoplexies, and ill habit of the body, it chings over all the body,
watchings, moistness of the Belly, Eyes and Ears, redness of the Eyes, and
difficulty of hearing.

We should here set down such Aphorisms which touch the Diseases of Women, but
we shall refer the Reader to the Chapter which speaks of the affects of the
Womb hereafter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Diseases of the times of the year.
Sect. 3. Aph. 1.
THe changes of the seasons of the years, breed Diseases chiefly. And in them
there are great mutations of heat and cold, and other things are contingent
according to their alteration and change.

Sect. 3. Aph. 4.
Throughout the seasons of the year, when in the same day there is sometimes
heat, sometimes cold, we must expect Autumnal Diseases.

Sect. 3. Aph. 8.
When the air is in a good order and settled, and the seasons are well
constituted, such Diseases are caused which easily come to their state, and are
easily dissolved. But in a bad constitution of the air and seasons, such
Diseases which hardly come to their state, and are not easily dissolved.

Sect. 3. Aph. 19.
Diseases of all kinds do afflict man's body at any time of the year, but some
special Diseases are both caused, and expressed at particular times and seasons
of the year.

CHAP. VII. Of Diseases happening in the Spring.
Sect. 3. Aph. 9.
IN the Autumn most acute and deadly Diseases do arise, but the Spring season
is most wholesome and less destructive.

Sect. 3. Aph. 18.
Children and boys live best, and are most healthful in the Spring, and the
first part of Summer, but in the Summer until the Autumn Old men; and in the
remainder of the Autumn and Winter, such as be of a middle age.

Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
In the Spring season, madness, melancholy, the falling evil, fluxes of
blood, squinancies, rhumes, hoarseness, coughs, leprosies, dry Itches, the
Disease called Elephantiasis, many ulcerated pustles, small swellings, and
pains about the joints, do appear.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Diseases happening in the Summer.
Sect. 3. Aph. 6.
IF the Summer season be constituted as the Spring was, then we must expect
Fevers accompanied with much Sweats.

Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
But if the Summer be extraordinary dry, and the North winds blow cold, and if
the Autumn be extreme wet with South winds, expect that about the winter men
should complain of Headaches, coughs, hoarseness, heaviness of the head
occasioned by Rhumes, and some of Consumptions.

Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
Some vernall Diseases may appear in the Summer, and Quotidian Fevers, burning
Fevers, and very many Tertian, and Quartans, Vomitings, Diarrhaeaes, Sore
Eyes, Pains of the Ears, exulcerations of the mouth, putrid ulcers of the
Privities, and red angry pimples caused by bilious Sweats.

CHAP. IX. Of the Diseases happening in the Autumn.
Sect. 3. Aph. 9.
THe Autumn does produce most acute Diseases, and mortal, but the Spring is
most wholesome and less pernicious.

Sect. 3. Aph. 10.
The Autumn season is naught for Consumptive persons.

Sect. 3. Aph. 14.
If in the Autumn the wind be North and the air very cold, and without rain,
the season is convenient for moist constitutions, and women; but to other
constitutions it occasions bleer eyes, acute Fevers, Quotidians, and to some
Melancholy.

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
Many Aestival Diseases do arise in the Autumn, and Quartane Fevers, and
Erratick Fevers, tumors of the Spleen, Dropsies, Consumptions, Stranguries,
Lyenteries, and Dysenteries, Sciaticaes, Squinancies, frequent Asthmaes, Iliack
passions, the Falling evil, Madnesses and Melancholy.

CHAP. X. Of the Diseases happening in the Winter.
Sect. 3. Aph. 11.
If the Winter be extreme dry and cold, and the wind North, but the Spring very
wet, with South winds, of necessity we must expect acute Fevers, soreness of
the eyes, excoriations of the bowels the next Summer, but especially to the
Female Sex, and to men of a moist constitution.

But if the winter be very rainy, and mild and calm with South winds, but the
Spring extraordinary dry with North winds, women with Child which expect
deliverance in the Spring, will abort upon every slight occasion. And if they
are delivered, they will produce weak and sickly Children, such as will
suddenly dye, or if they live will be always sickly and small. But to other
people excoriations of the bowels, and bleer eyes will arise; but to elderly
persons, Fluxes killing in a small space.

Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
A very dry and cold summer with North winds, and a moist Autumn with South
winds succeeding, does produce head Aches, in the winter coughs, hoarsenesse,
heaviness in the head, and to some Consumptions.

Sect. 4. Aph. 23.
In the winter Plurisies, inflammations of the Lungs, Lethargies, Rhumes in the
head, hoarsenesse, Coughs, pains in the Breast, Sides and Loins, Headaches,
Megrimes, and to some Ptisicks are occasioned.

CHAP. XI. Of Diseases caused by the Winds.
Sect. 3. Aph. 5.
SOuth winds produce dullness of hearing and sight, with a heaviness of the
head, they make the body dull and faint, when such winds are prevalent, we must
expect such accidents in Diseases. But North winds cause coughs, exasperates
the jaws, hardens the belly, suppresseth the Urine, stirs up cold horrors and
pains of the sides and breast. When such winds are prevalent, sick bodies
suffer such things.

Sect. 3. Aph. 7.
Foggs and fowlnesse of air, produce acute Fevers, and if the year shall be so
disposed for the most part, we must expect Diseases answerable to the condition
and season so constituted.

Sect. 3. Aph. 8.
A good and seasonable constitution of the air, produces such Diseases which
are easily consistent, and easily cured. But ill constituted seasons, such as
are not easily consistent nor easily cured.

Sect. 3. Aph. 14.
North and dry wind in the Autumn are commodious for moist constitutions, and
women; but to others they beget soreness of the eyes, acute Fevers,
Quotidians, and to some also Consumptions.

Sect. 3. Aph. 15.
Amongst all the seasons of the year, great droughts are more wholesome and
less destructive, then continual rains, and frequent showring weather.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Diseases for the most part are caused by continual Showers, as long Fevers,
Diarrhaeaes, putrid Fevers, the falling evil, apoplexies, and squinancies. But
by great droughts are occasioned Consumptions, Bleer eyes, Sciaticks, droping
of Urine, and Dysenteries.

Sect. 3. Aph. 17.
Continual North winds do condense the pores of the body, renders men stronger,
nimbler, better colored, and better liking, dryes the belly, causes prickings
of the eyes, and if the breast be possessed by any preceding grief, they stir it
and provoke it: But South winds dissolve the body and moisten it, they cause
dullness of hearing, heaviness of the head, and vertigoes, they produce
difficult motion to the eyes and body, and moisten the belly.

Distinction the fifth, containing the Aphorisms pertaining to Fevers.
THat a Physician may satisfy and perform all his intentions required, find
out all requisite Medicines, and apply them seasonably, it is not sufficient
only to preserve the strength of the Patient, and remove morbifick causes, but
it is also necessary that he know the nature of the Disease, and the part
affected very exactly, which will the better be performed, if he be thoroughly
acquainted with those Aphorisms which declare the Diseases of the whole body
in general, and those also which respect the praeter natural affects of the
particular parts of the whole body. The first where of the Aphorisms of the
Discovery of Fevers with their Accidents, will manifest; the second will be
discovered by the following Aphorisms.

CHAP. I. Of Continual Fevers.
Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
IN the Summer continual Fevers, and burning, very many Tertians and Quartans
do arise, etc. [See the third Aphorism in the Chapter of Summer Diseases.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
Continual Tertian Fevers which have their Paroxismes every third day, and no
intermission are more dangerous; But if they remit by any means howsoever, they
signify no danger to the Patient.

Sect. 4. Aph. 46.
If frequent rigors happen in Fevers, the sick being weak without intermission
of the Fever, it is a mortal sign.

Sect. 4. Aph. 47.
Excreations or spittings either wa^ of color, bloody, stinking or bilious,
are all bad in a continual Fever; but if such are voided which are of a good
condition, it is good, whether they are voided by stool, or Urine; but if any
of these things are voided and ease not the Sick, they are bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 48.
In continual Fevers if the external parts are cold, and the internal are
inflamed, and the Sick be extreme thirsty, it is deadly.

Sect 4. Aph. 49.
In continual Fevers, if the lip, eye-brow, eye or nose be perverted, or
convulsive, if the sick hear not, or see not; which soever of these do happen,
do signify death approaching

Sect. 4. Aph. 50.
Difficulty of breathing, or a delirium happening in a continual Fever, is
mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 56.
Sweats happening in a not-intermitting Fever, if the Fever do not intermit,
are bad, for the Disease is prorogued, and much moisture is thereby signified
to be in the body.

Sect. 7. Aph. 72.
[This Aphorism is the same with the fifth Aphorism of this Chap. Sect. 4.
Aph. 48.]

Sect. 7. Aph. 73.
[This Aphorism nothing differs from the 49. Aphorism in the fourth Section
mentioned before in this Chapter.]

CHAP. II. Of Acute Fevers.
Sect. 2. Aph. 19.
PRedictions of life or death in acute Diseases, are not altogether certain.

Sect. 2. Aph. 23.
Acute Diseases are judged by their Crisis within fourteen days.

Sect. 3. Aph 7.
Foggs and stinking mists generate acute Diseases, and if the year continue in
the same constitution, we must expect Diseases of the same nature.

Sect. 3. Aph. 9.
Most acute Diseases and destructive are most usual in the Autumn, the Spring
is more wholesome and less pernitions.

Sect. 3. Aph. 11.
If the winter be extraordinary dry with North winds, and the Spring very rainy
with South winds, acute Fevers, sore Eyes, and Dysenteries, must of necessity
arise the following Summer, especially in women and in men which are of a
constitution more than ordinary moist.

Sect. 4. Aph. 37.
Cold Sweats in a very acute Fever, signify death, but in a more mild
Disease, the prolixity thereof.

Sect. 4. Aph. 66.
Convulsions, and vehement pains about the bowels, in acute Diseases, are bad.

Sect. 5. Aph. 64.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of Milk.]

Sect. 6. Aph. 54.
Breathings with groans in acute Diseases with a Fever are ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 1.
Cold or chillness of the extreme parts, in acute Fevers, is bad.

CHAP. III. Of Burning Fevers.
Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
TUrn to this Aphorism in the Chapter of Diseases of the Summer season.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 54.
They who have dry coughs, lightly provoking in burning Fevers, are not
usually very thirsty.

Sect. 4. Aph. 58.
If a rigor or very cold fit happen to him which has a burning Fever, the
Fever is thereby dissolved.

Sect. 6. Aph. 26.
Trembling happening in burning Fevers, are taken away by a Delirium or Raving.

CHAP. IV. Of Intermittent Fevers.
Sect. 1. Aph. 11.
ALL meat is to be avoided in the fits and Paroxisms of Fevers, for it is
hurtful to give meats then, and we ought to fear such accident in the accesses
which grow more painful or worse and worse in the circuits or intermissions.

Sect. 1. Aph. 12.
The Diseases, seasons of the year, and the changing of the circuits, being
compared together, whether they are every other day or by longer intervalls of
time, will declare the accessions and conditions of Diseases. Moreover the same
judgment may be given by such Symptoms as presently appear, of that nature is
spittle in Pluretick persons, the which, if it appears at the beginning of the
Disease, praedicts its brevity; but if later, the prolixity thereof. The Urine
also, the excrements of the belly, and the sweats when they appear, do signify
unto us by Judicature, whether the Disease will be easy or hard, short or long.

Sect. 4. Aph. 30.
Those intermittent Fevers are hard to be judged of wherein the Fever returns
the next day, at the same hour wherein it left the Patient the day before, at
what hour soever it were that the dismission happened.

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
Fevers which afflict the Patient more violently every third day, and have no
intermission, are more dangerous. For intermissions after what manner soever
contingent, do signify the Sick to be without danger.

CHAP. V. Of Tertian Fevers.
Sect. 3. Aph. 2.
SEE this Aphorism before in the Chapter of Diseases incident in the Summer,
Sect. 3. Aph. 2.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
[See this Aphorism before in the Chapter of Intermittent Fevers, Sect. 4.
Aph. 43.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 59.
An exquisite Tertian is judged in seven fits at the longest.

CHAP. VI. Of a Quartane Fever.
Sect. 2. Aph. 25.
QUartan Fevers which begin in the Summer are usually short, but such as begin
in the Autumn are long, especially if they continue unto the winter.

Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of Intermittent Fevers, the same Section
and Aphorism.]

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of Autumnal Diseases, the same Section and
Aphorism.]

Sect. 5. Aph. 70.
Men sick of quartan Fevers are seldom taken with Convulsions, but if they
were convulsive before, they are freed by a succeeding quartan fever.

CHAP. VII. Of Quotidian Fevers.
Sect. 4. Aph. 63.
QUotidian Fevers are dissolved by daily, rigors.

CHAP. VIII. Of Long Fevers.
Sect. 2. Aph. 25.
QUartan Agues beginning in the Summer, are usually short, but Autumnal are
long, especially if they continue until winter.

Sect. 2. Aph. 28.
It is an ill sign when bodies exercised with strong Fevers do stand at a
stay, and are nothing diminished, or wasted, or else are extremely and beyond
reason wasted by the Disease; for the one signifies a long continuance of the
Disease, the other the weakness of the Patient.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Daily showers, do cause Diseases for the most part, as of long Fevers,
fluxed, putrid Fevers, the falling sickness, apoplexies and squinancies. But
great droughts do cause Consumptions, sore eyes, pains of the Joints, droppings
of the Urine, and excoriation of the bowels.

Sect. 3. Aph. 27.
Moreover to those of riper years, about the fourteenth year of their age, many
of the former Diseases and continual Fevers and Hoemorrhagies, or issuing of
blood out of their nose, are incident.

Sect. 4. Aph. 36.
Sweats in Fevers are beneficial if they begin upon the third, fifth, seventh,
ninth, eleventh, fourteenth, seventeenth, one and twentieth, seven and
twentieth, thirtieth, or four and thirtieth days, for such sweats are
critical and judicatory. But sweats which do not express themselves upon some
of the aforenamed days, signify the long continuance of the Fever, and the
reversion thereof.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
Small tumors or pains of the joints grow upon such bodies, which have had long
Fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 51.
Such Fevers which do intermit, if they are not dissolved within few Crises at
the beginning, signify a prolonging of the Disease.

Sect. 4. Aph. 53.
Those Fevers are most vehement, wherein clammy or gluttinous humors by
reason of the Fever, grows to the Teeth of the Sick.

CHAP. IX. Of Sweats in Fevers.
Sect. 1. Aph. 12.
THe Urine, excrements of the belly, and Sweats, when they appear, do
demonstrate unto us whether the Diseases will have an easy or hard Crisis, or
whether they will be long or short.

Sect. 4. Aph. 36.
[You may Read this Aphorism in the same number of Section and Aphorism in
the preceding Chapter of long Fevers.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 37.
Cold Sweats in a very acute Fever, signify death, but in more mild and
benign Fever, the prolixity or long continuance thereof.

It is an ill sign when sweats are contingent to a Feaver-sick person without
intermission of the Fever, for the Disease is prolonged, and such sweat argues
much humidity in the body.

CHAP. X. Of Rigors in Fevers.
Sect. 4. Aph. 29.
SUch Fevers have a difficult Crisis wherein Rigors are contingent the sixth
day.

Sect. 4. Aph. 46.
Often Rigors incident in continual Fevers, the body being weak, are mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 58.
A Burning Fever is discharged by the contingency of a Rigor, or exceeding
cold supervening.

Sect. 4. Aph. 63.
Fevers which have daily rigors, are every day dissolved.

Sect. 5. Aph. 17.
The frequent use of cold things, causes convulsions, distensions of the
nerves, blackness, and feverish rigors.

Sect. 5. Aph. 20.
Cold things cause a gnawing in ulcers, hardens the skin, hinders from
suppuration, causes blackness, Feverish rigors, convulsions and distensions
of the nerves.

CHAP. XI. Of Convulsions in Fevers.
Sect. 2. Aph. 26.
IT is better that a Fever should come upon a Convulsion, then a Convulsion
upon a Fever.

Sect. 4. Aph. 57.
A Succeeding Fever frees him that is taken with a Convulsion, or the cramp.

Sect. 4. Aph. 66.
Convulsions and vehement pains happening about the bowels in acute Fevers
presage ill.

Sect. 4. Aph. 67.
Tremblings and Convulsions happening to Feverish persons in their sleeps, are
bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 68.
Interception of spirits in Fevers is naught, for it is an argument of a
Convulsion.

Sect. 5. Aph. 5.
If a drunken person be suddenly Speechless, he dies convulsive, unless a
Fever succeed, or he recovering his Speech the same hour that the humor is
usually digested.

Sect. 5. Aph. 70.
Those who have Quartane Fevers, are seldom taken with Convulsions, but if
they are first taken a succeeding Fevers frees them.

CHAP. XII. Of the rest of the Symptoms happening in Fevers.
Sect. 4. Aph. 27.
THey which have lost much blood by Fevers, from what part soever the slux
was, have soluble bodies when they are refreshed, or have recovered their
strength.

Sect. 4. Aph. 31.
They which have a sense of Laziness or indisposition caused by Fevers, have
tumors about their joints, and chiefly about their mandibles or jawbones.

Sect. 4. Aph. 34.
A sudden strangulation happening in a Fever without any preceding tumor in
the jaws, is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 35.
If the neck be perverted on a sudden, so that the Sick can hardly swallow,
and if no tumor do appear, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
Tumors or pains about the joints, do accompany those who have had long
Fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
Extremity of cold in the external parts, and burning heats in the internal,
with a vehement thirst, is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 49.
In continual Fevers, if the Lip, Eyelid, Eye, or Nose, be turned aside, if
the Sick see not, neither hear, and be very weak; which soever of these Signs
happen, argue death approaching.

Sect. 4. Aph. 50.
Difficulty of breathing, and raving happening in a Fever which has no
intermission, is deadly.

Sect. 4. Aph. 51.
If Intermittent Fevers are not dissolved by few Crises at the beginning, they
argue the length and continuance of the Disease.

Sect. 4. Aph. 52.
Voluntary tears argue no inconvenience to the Sick either in Fevers, or other
Diseases; but tears falling unwillingly, are more inconvenient.

Sect. 4. Aph. 53.
Those Fevers are most vehement by which a clammy or gluttinous humor does
grow to the Teeth.

Sect. 4. Aph. 54.
They which have dry Coughs, lightly provoking, if they continue long in
burning Fevers, are not much troubled with thirst.

Sect. 4. Aph. 55.
All Fevers proceeding from the Inflammation of the Glandules or Kernels are
bad but Diaries.

Sect. 4. Aph. 60.
An Hemorrhagia or bleeding at the Nose, or a Diarrhaea or Flux of the belly,
does take away deafness caused by Fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 62.
It is not good if the Yellow Jaundies appear, in Feaver-sick persons, before
the seventh day.

Sect. 4. Aph. 63.
Daily Fevers are dissolved daily by Rigors.

Sect. 4. Aph. 64.
The Jaundies coming upon a Fever is good if they appear upon the seventh,
ninth, eleventh, or fourteenth day; unless the right Hypocondrium be hard,
then it is not good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 65.
A vehement heat about the Stomach, and a gnawing in the mouth of the Stomach
in Fevers is not good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 69.
Those Urines in Fevers are advantageous, which being thick, curdled, and few,
do turn to thin and many, especially if they be such as have a Sediment at the
first, or not much after.

Sect. 4. Aph. 70.
Urines very much troubled, like those of kine, do signify a pain of the head
either present, or suddenly to succeed.

Sect. 4. Aph. 73.
They which have a murmuring about the midriffe, with a succeeding pain in the
Reins, have soluble and moist bellies, unless plenty of wind be voided
downward, or much Urine be made, and these Symptoms are contingent in Fevers.

Sect. 5. Aph 55.
All women with Child, if they are taken with a Fever and are very much
extenuated, without a manifest cause, have hard and dangerous Travail, or fall
into hazard of abortment.

Sect. 6. Aph. 26.
A raving frees from tremblings in a burning Fever.

Sect. 6. Aph. 44.
The Iliack passion succeeding a Strangury kills within seven days, unless
plenty of Urine be made, and a Fever succeed.

Sect. 6. Aph. 50.
A Fever and bilious vomitings must of necessity succeed, when the brain is
hurt or perished.

Sect. 6. Aph. 54.
Painful breathings with groans are bad in acute Fevers.

Sect. 7. Aph. 52.
A succeeding Fever does take away the vehement pain of the Liver.

Sect. 7. Aph. 65.
Meat exhibited to one sick of a Fever, does nourish the Disease, but it gives
strength to a healthful and sound body.

Distinction the sixth, containing the Aphorisms which respect the particular
Diseases of the whole body, from the head to the foot.
AS the parts of the body, so are the Diseases thereof divided into external
and internal, those which speak of the internal Diseases are interpreted in
this Distinction, those which touch the external in the following Distinction.

CHAP. I. Of the Diseases of the head.
Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
A Summer more than ordinarily dry and cold, and a very wet and warm Autumn, do
cause headaches, Coughs, Hoarsenesse, Rheums in the Winter, and to some
Ptisicks.

Sect. 4. Aph. 70.
Troubled water in Fevers, like those made by Kine argue a headache present,
or shortly to come.

Sect. 5. Aph. 28.
Suffumigations of sweet odors bring down the monthly evacuations of Women, and
were often profitable for other purposes, if they did not cause a heaviness of
the head.

Sect. 5. Aph. 64.
It is hurtful to give milk to those who are troubled with pains in their head,
etc.

Sect. 5. Aph. 68.
The breathing of the straight vein in the forehead, takes away the Headache
of the hinder part of the head.

Sect. 6. Aph. 10.
Matter, water, or blood, flowing out of the Nose, the Mouth or Ears, does take
away the Headache, and the vehement pains thereof.

Sect. 6. Aph. 51.
If sudden pains of the head happen to healthful bodies, with loss of speech,
and snorting in sleep accompany, they dye within seven days, unless a Fever
lay hold on them.

CHAP. II. Of the Lethargy, Dead sleep, and Congelation.
Sect. 2. Aph. 3.
EIther sleeping or waking if they exceed a mean, are ill.

Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
In the winter, Plurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, and Lethargies, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Apoplexy.
Sect. 2. Aph. 42.
A Confirmed or strong Apoplexy is incurable, a light one is easily cured.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Diseases for the most part are caused by continual rains, as long Fevers,
Diarrhaeaes, Rottenness of humors, the Falling Sickness, and Apoplexies.

Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
The Diseases of the winter season, are Plurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs,
Lethargies, Rheums, Hoarsenesse, Coughs, pains of the Breast, Sides, and Loins;
Headaches, Megrims, and Apolexies.

Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
Diseases incident to old men, are difficulty of breathing, distillations
causing coughs, Stranguries, difficulty of urine, pains of the joints and
reins, Megrims, and Apoplexies.

Sect. 6. Aph. 51.
[See this Aphorism in the last Aphorism in the Chapter of the Diseases of
the Head.]

Sect. 6. Aph. 57.
Apoplexies do most usually take men from the age of Forty to Threescore.

CHAP. IV. Of Melancholy, and Madness.
Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
IN the Spring time melancholy, madness, the falling sickness, profusions of
blood, squinancies and rheums, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
Many of the Aestival Diseases do also happen in Autumn. Quartane Fevers, and
Erratick, Diseases of the Spleen, Dropsies, Consumptions, Dropping of Urine,
Lienteries, and Dysenteries, Sciaticks, Squinancies, frequent Asthmaes, Iliack
passions, the Falling Evil, Madness, and Melancholy.

Sect. 4. Aph. 9.
Melancholy persons are to be purged liberally downward, observing the
contrary way in contrary affects.

Sect. 6. Aph. 11.
The Haemorrhodes (that is a Flux of blood by the veins in the Fundament, by
which blood is commonly voided) are conducible and profitable for Melancholy
affects, and the Diseases of the Reins.

Sect. 6. Aph. 21.
If Melancholy blood be disposed to its proper veins, or if the Haemorrhodes
appear, Madness is thereby taken away.

Sect. 6. Aph. 23.
Continual fears and sadness, are signs of Melancholy.

Sect. 6. Aph. 56.
The insults and prevailings of Melancholy Diseases, are dangerous, for they
foretell a deprivation of some part of the body, a Convulsion, Madness, or
Blindness.

Sect. 7. Aph. 5.
Excoriation of the Bowels, a Dropsy, or a vehement commotion of the mind,
coming of Madness, a good sign.

Sect. 7. Aph. 40.
It is a sign of Melancholy if the Tongue suddenly be loose and useless, or
if any part of the body be deprived of sense and motion.

CHAP. V. Of a Frenzy.
Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
BUt to such as have passed that Age (that is their youth) these Diseases are
incident Pursinesse, Diseases of their Sides, Inflammations of the Lungs,
Lethargies and Phrensies.

Sect. 4. Aph. 72.
Very clear and white Urines are bad: but it especially appears in Phrenetick
persons.

Sect. 7. Aph. 12.
A Frenzy proceeding from an inflammation of the Lungs, is a bad Messenger.

Sect. 8. Aph. 1.
They do seldom perfectly recover which are Phrenetical after the age of
forty years: For they are less endangered to whose nature and age the Disease
is familiar.

CHAP. VI. Of Delirium or Raving.
Sect. 2. Aph. 2.
IT is a good sign when raving is appeased by sleep.

Sect. 6. Aph. 53.
Those alienations of mind which come with laughter, are more safe; but those
which come by seriousness or study, are more dangerous.

Sect. 7. Aph. 7.
A rigor and raving caused by drink, are bad.

Vomiting, the Hicket, or a Convulsion or Raving occasioned by the Disease of
the thin gut, called Ileum, is bad.

CHAP. VII. Of Dotage.
Sect. 7. Aph. 9.
EIther a Convulsion or Dotage caused by a Flux of blood, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 14.
Stupidity or Dotage occasioned by a blow received upon the head, is ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 18.
A Convulsion or Dotage caused by watching, is naught.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Falling Sickness.
YOung men are freed from the Falling sickness chiefly by the mutations of
their age, the change of air and diet.

Sect. 5. Aph. 7.
They who are troubled with the Falling Sickness before the age of Fourteen
years, are recoverable; but if the Disease take any at the age of Five and
Twenty years, it commonly does accompany them to their death.

CHAP. IX. Of Convulsions, and other affects of the Nerves.
Sect. 2. Aph. 26.
IT is better that a Fever come upon a Convulsion, then a Convulsion upon a
Fever.

Sect. 3. Aph. 25.
But when they are come to breeding of Teeth pricking pains of the Gums,
Fevers and Convulsions, it is bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 16.
It is dangerous giving black Hellebore to sound bodies, for it causes
Convulsions.

Sect. 4. Aph. 57.
A Disension of the Nerves or Cramp, or a Convulsion, is cured by a succeeding
Fever.

Sect. 4. Aph. 66.
Convulsions and violent pains about the bowels, are bad signs in acute
Fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 67.
Tremblings and Convulsions happening to Feverish persons, are naught.

Sect. 4. Aph. 68.
Interception of Spirits happening in Fevers, is bad, for it shows a
Convulsion.

Sect. 5. Aph. 1.
A Convulsion caused by black Hellebore, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 2.
A Convulsion happening upon a wound received, is deadly.

Sect. 5. Aph. 3.
A Convulsion or Hicket coming by a copious Flux of blood, presageth ill.

Sect. 5. Aph. 4.
A Convulsion or Hicket succeeding profuse Purging, are bad.

Sect. 5. Aph. 5.
If a Druken man be taken with loss of speech on a sudden, he dies
convulsive, unless a Fever seize him, or return to his speech at the hour
when the distemper uses to be digested.

Sect. 5. Aph. 6.
They which are taken with a disension of the Sinews, dye within four days,
the which if they escape, they recover.

Sect. 5. Aph. 25.
Abundance of cold water cast upon them which have tumors in their joints,
griefs not ulcerated, gouts and convulsions, for the most part, diminishes the
pain, and takes away the grief; for a moderate stupefaction has a power to
take away pain.

Sect. 5. Aph. 56.
A Convulsion or Syncope happening to women, in the time of their Purgations,
is bad.

Sect. 5. Aph. 65.
They which have tumors with Ulcers, are seldom taken with Convulsions, or
droop into Madness. But if they vanish backward, the parties are Convulsive,
and have distensions of the Nerves. But if they vanish forward, either
Madness, Plurisies, Apostemes, or Dysenteries succeed, if the tumors were red.

Sect. 5. Aph. 70.
They which have Quartan Agues are seldom taken with Convulsions. But if they
were Convulsive before, they are freed by a succeeding Quartan.

Sect. 6. Aph. 39.
A Convulsion arises either from emptiness or fulness, so does the Hicket.

Sect. 6. Aph. 56.
The assaults of Melancholy Diseases are dangerous; for they foretell either
sideration of some part of the body, Convulsions, Madness, or Blindness.

Sect. 7. Aph. 9.
Doting or a Convulsion by a Flux of blood, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 10.
Vomiting, Hicket, Convulsion or Delirium, caused by the Iliack passion, is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 13.
A Convulsion or Cramp caused by vehement Inflammations, are bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 18.
A Convulsion or raving caused by watching, are bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 25.
A Convulsion caused by a Purging potion, is mortal.

CHAP. X. Of Stupor or Numnesse of Senses.
Sect. 7. Aph. 14.
A Numnesse of the Senses, or dotage caused by a hurt on the head, is dangerous.

CHAP. XI. Of the affects of the Eyes.
Sect. 3. Aph. 14.
IF North winds blow much in Autumn, and the season be without rain, such a
season is most commodious for bodies of moist constitution, and to women; but
to other constitutions it will produce Sore eyes with bloodshed in them, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 17.
North winds condense the body, makes them stronger, nimbler, of a more lively
color, and in a better plight, dryes the belly, and grieves the Eyes, etc.

Sect. 6. Aph. 31.
A potion of wine, a bath, somentation, breathing of a vein, or a Purging
Medicine, do take away the pains of the Eyes.

Sect. 6. Aph. 52.
Regard must be had to such things which apappear out of the Eyes in sleep. For
if any thing appear from the White, the Eyelids being not shut, and it does
not happen by a Flux of the belly or a purging potion, it is a bad sign, and
very mortal.

Sect. 7. Aph. 3.
The Hicket and redness of the Eyes caused by vomiting, is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 46.
The Diseases of the Eyes must be cured by Phlebotomy, draught of Wine being
first exhibited, and a plenteous bath of warm water.

Sect. 8. Aph. 2.
Voluntary tears in Diseases, are good signs, but involuntary, are not good.

Sect. 8. Aph. 15.
He that has a Vertigoe with a dark glimmering of his Eyes, and is taken with
a Coma or much sleep, and extreme heat, is in a desperate Condition.

CHAP. XII. Of the affects of the Ears.
Sect. 3. Aph. 5.
SOuthern winds do produce dullness of hearing, dimnesse of sight, and
heaviness of the head, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 17.
Southern winds do dissolve our bodies, moisten them, and induce difficulty of
hearing, heaviness of the head, and Vertigoes, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
In the Summer season are continual Fevers, burning Fevers, very many
Tertians and Quartans, Vomitings, Diarrhaeaes, sore Eyes, and pains of the Ears.

Sect. 4. Aph. 49.
In continual Fevers, if the lips, eyelid, eye or nose be perverted, or
turned away, if the sick neither see nor hear, and if he be weak in body, death
is at hand.

Sect. 4. Aph. 60.
Deafness caused by Fevers, is taken away by a succeeding Flux of blood out
of the Nostrils, or motions of the belly.

Sect. 6. Aph. 10.
Matter, Water, or Blood issuing forth by the Nostrils, by the Mouth, or by the
Ears, does take away headache, and the vehement pains thereof.

Sect. 8. Aph. 14.
Cold Ears, shining, and contracted, are signs of death.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Affects of the Nostrill.
Sect. 2. Aph. 40.
HOarsenesse, and the Flux of humors to the Nostrils, called in very old men
are not concocted.

Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
If the Summer be more than ordinary dry, and the wind Northward, but the
Autumn exceeding rainy and wet, headaches arise about the winter, coughs,
hoarsenesse, stuffings of the head, and to some also consumptions.

Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
In the Spring season, madness, melancholy, the falling Evil, Fluxes of blood,
Squinancies, Stuffings of the Head by Rheums, and Coughs are incident.

Sect. 3. Aph. 27.
When they have accomplished riper years, and have attained to the Age of
fourteen years, many of the former, but rather continual Fevers, and bleeding
at the Nose will follow them.

Sect. 4. Aph. 74.
When there is an Expectation that tumors should arise about the joints,
plenty of Urine thick and white frees from the Abscess. Tumors of this kind do
begin in some every fourth day in Fevers with a laziness. But if blood issue
forth of the nostrils also, then the solution will be in a very short space.

Sect. 5. Aph. 33.
Bleeding at the nose happening to Women in the Deficiency of their monthly
purgations, is good.

Sect. 6. Aph. 2.
They are of a more sickly Constitution which have their Nostrils, and parts of
Generation extraordinary moist: but they which are of a contrary constitution
are more healthful.

CHAP. XIV. Of Sneezing.
Sect. 5. Aph. 35.
SNeezing is good for Women that are troubled with a suffocation of the Matrix,
or who have very hard labor and travail.

Sect. 6. Aph. 13.
Sneezing, happening to one that is troubled with the Hicket, takes away the
Hicket.

Sect. 7. Aph. 45.
Sneezing is either caused, the brain being over heated, or the empty part of
the head being over moistened: For the air there included, is dispersed abroad;
but the noise made by sneezing is occasioned, because the included has its
passage by straight and narrow instruments.

CHAP. XV. Of Rheums.
Sect. 2. Aph. 40.
HOarsenesse and Rheums in very old men, are not concocted.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Affects of the Mouth and Tongue.
Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
IN the Summer season, Diaries, Burning Fevers, and very many Tertian and
Quartans, Vomitings, Diarrhaeaes, Bleer eyes, pains of the Ears; Exulcerations
of the mouth, putrid Ulcers about the Privities, and Pimples caused by
Choleric Sweats.

Sect. 3. Aph. 24.
Spreading Ulcers of the mouth called Apthae, are a Disease common to young
Infants and Children.

Sect. 6. Aph. 32.
Stammerers are most of all taken with a long Flux of the Belly.

Sect. 7. Aph. 40.
It is a sign of black Choler when the tongue is loose and useless on a
sudden, or when any part of the body becomes benumbed or dead.

Sect. 8. Aph. 9.
If the Tongue be neither black, nor bloody, if either of these Signs be
absent, it is no very bad Sign. For hereby is signified a lesser Disease.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Affects of the Teeth.
Sect. 3. Aph. 25.
BUt when they are come to breeding of their Teeth, Pricking, Itchings of the
Gums, Fevers, Convulsions, Fluxes of the belly, and then chiefly when they
begin to breed their Dog Teeth, and to those who are of a gross constitution,
and who are costive.

Sect. 4. Aph. 53.
Those Fevers are most vehement, whereby a clammy gluttinous humor does grow
to the Teeth.

Sect. 5. Aph. 18.
Cold things are offensive to the bones, teeth, nerves, brain, and marrow of
the backbone, but hot things are profitable.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Affects of the Lips and Gums.
Sect. 4. Aph. 49.
IN continual Fevers, if the Lip, Eyelid, Eye or Nose be perverted and
turned, if the sick neither see nor hear, and his Body be weak, then death is
nigh at hand.

Sect. 8. Aph. 13.
Wan lips or pale, or resolved, turned in and out, and cold, are mortal.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Affects of the Throat, Squinancy, and Asthma.
Sect 2. Aph. 43.
AMongst those who are strangled, and dissolved, and are not quite dead, they
seldom or very rarely return to life, which have froth gathered together about
their mouth.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Diseases are usually caused by continual showers, as long Fevers, Fluxes of
the belly, putrid Fevers, the falling sickness, Apoplexies and Squinancies,
etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
In the spring season, Melancholy, Madness, the Falling-Evil, profusions of
blood, and Squinancies, etc.

Sect. 4. Aph. 34.
A Strangulation happening to him that is Sick of a Fever, no tumor appearing
in the Jaws, is deadly.

Sect. 4. Aph. 35.
In Fevers a sudden perverting of the neck happening, so that the Sick can
hardly swallow, no tumor appearing, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 10.
Humors falling down to the Throat, if they turn not to the Squinancy they
settle upon the Lungs, and the Sick dies within seven days; but if he escape
that time, the matter turns to Impostumation.

Sect. 6. Aph. 37.
It is a good Sign if in a Squinancy, a Tumor do appear in the neck, for then
the morbifick matter is sent forth.

Sect. 6. Aph. 46.
They which are made Crook-back'd by an Asthma, dye before they come to the Age
of Fourteen years, or soon after.

Sect. 7. Aph. 49.
An impostumation or redness happening in the breast of him that has a
Squinancy, is a good sign. Because the matter is excluded to the external
parts.

CHAP. XX. Of the affects of the Breast and Lungs, and first of the Difficulty
of Breathing.
Sect. 3. Aph. 43.
IN the Winter season, plurisies, inflammations of the lungs, lethargies,
rheums, hoarsenesse, coughs, pains of the breasts, sides, and loins,
headaches, megrims, and apoplexies, are common.

Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
Difficulty of breathing, catarrhes causing coughs, the strangury and
difficulty of Urine, are Diseases familiar to old Age.

Sect. 4. Aph. 50.
If difficulty of breathing, and dotings happen in continual Fevers, it is
mortal.

CHAP. XXI. Of Hoarsenesse and the Cough.
Sect. 2. Aph. 40.
HOarsenesse and rheums in very Old men, are not concocted.

Sect. 3. Aph 5.
But if the season be dry and cold, it causes coughs, exasperates the jaws,
hardens the belly and suppresseth Urine.

Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
But if the Summer be more then usually dry and cold with North-winds, and the
Autumn rainy with South-winds, expect headaches, in the winter, coughs,
hoarsenesse, rheums, and to some consumptions.

Sect 3. Aph. 20.
But in the Spring, madness, melancholy, the falling sickness, profusions of
blood, squinancies rheums, hoarsenesse and coughs will follow.

Sect. 3. Aph. 24.
These Diseases happen to infants and children newly born, spreading Ulcers of
the mouth, called Aphthae, vomitings and coughs.

Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
Difficulty of breathing, and distillations inferring coughs do happen to old
men.

Sect. 4. Aph. 54.
If dry coughs lightly provoking happen in burning Fevers, and persevere long,
the sick is not then much troubled with thirst.

Sect. 5. Aph. 24.
Cold things, as ice and snow, are offensive and enemies to the breast, they
cause coughs, eruptions of blood, and catarrhes.

Sect. 6. Aph. 35.
A Cough happening in a Dropsy is a bad sign.

Sect 6. Aph. 46.
If crookedness were occasioned by an Asthma, the party thus affected dies
before he attain the age of Fourteen years, or presently after.

Sect. 7. Aph. 47.
If a cough do hold him that has a Dropsy, he is in a desperate condition.

CHAP. XXII. Of hurt of Sp^ech.
Sect. 5. Aph. 5.
IF loss of Speech happen on a sudden to a Drunken man, he dies convulsive,
unless a Fever lay hold on him, and his Speech return to him at the hour when
nature uses to digest the Surfeit.

Sect. 6. Aph. 52.
They which are taken with sudden pains of the head, and were not sick before,
and if their Speech fail or leave them, and a snorting comes withal, dye
within seven days, unless a Fever lay hold on them.

Sect. 7. Aph. 58.
Loss of Speech must necessary ensue presently if the brain have bin hurt by
any occasion.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Inflammation of the Lungs.
Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
BUt in the winter plurisies, inflammations of the lungs, and lethargies.

Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
But to those who are in their youth, thickness of breathing, Diseases of the
Sides, and inflammations of the Lungs are incident.

Sect. 6. Aph. 16.
A Diarrhaea or Flux of the belly, succeeding the plurisie or inflammation of
the lungs, is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 11.
Inflammation of the lungs succeeding a Plurisie, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 12.
A frenzy occasioned by an inflammation of the lungs, signifies ill.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Empyema, or Suppuration of the Lungs.
Sect. 5. Aph. 8.
IF pluretick persons are not cleansed within Fourteen days, the matter turns
to impostumation.

Sect. 5. Aph. 10.
Humors falling to the Throat, if they turn not to a squinancy, settle upon
the Lungs, and the sick dye within seven days, but if they escape that time,
the matter turns to suppuration.

Sect. 5. Aph. 15.
If pluretick persons being suppurated are purged and cleansed within forty
days, they are freed, otherwise do grow consumptive.

Sect. 5. Aph. 65.
They, in whose bodies ulcerated tumors do arise, are neither taken with
convulsions, nor driven into madness; but these tumors suddenly vanishing,
they to whom it happens in the back parts have convulsions and distensions of
the Sinews; but if it happen in the fore part, ragings and acute Diseases of
the sides, impostumations, and dysenteries do follow.

Sect. 6. Aph. 27.
They certainly dye, who are either burnt or cut for an impostumation of the
breast, or for a Dropsy, if matter or water slow forth upon heaps.

Sect. 6. Aph. 41.
When an impostumation is in the body, and it gives no signification of it
self, the want of that discovery is either caused by the thickness of the
matter, or place wherein it is contained.

Sect. 7. Aph. 15.
Spitting of suppurated matter from spitting of blood is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 38.
Distillations upon the upper ventricle are turned into suppuration within the
twentieth day.

Sect. 7. Aph. 44.
When suppurated persons are cauterized or lanced, if pure and white matter
issue forth they escape, but if it be somewhat bloody, filthy and ill favored
they perish.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Ptysick or Consumption.
Sect. 4. Aph. 48.
A Dry and cold Summer with North winds, and a wet Autumn with South winds,
cause headaches in the winter, coughs, hoarsnesse and rheums, and to some
consumptions.

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
Many Diseases which are usually in the Summer, appear in the Autumn, as
quartane and erratick Fevers, diseases of the spleen, dropfies, consumptions,
lienteries, and dysenteries, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 29.
Young*men are afflicted with spittings of blood, consumptions, acute fevers,
the falling evil, and many other Diseases, but especially those mentioned.

Sect. 4. Aph. 8.
In purging consumptive persons, we must be very wary, and fearful in
exhibiting vomitive medicines.

Sect. 5. Aph. 9.
Consumptions happen especially from the eighteenth year of our age, until the
five and thirtieth year.

Sect. 5. Aph. 11.
It is a mortal sign when the spittle of such as are in a consumption being
cast upon the coals sends forth a grievous smell, if the hair of the head fall
off likewise.

Sect. 5. Aph. 12.
It is an argument of death when the hair of the head of consumptive persons
falls off, if a looseness of the belly succeed.

Sect. 5. Aph 13.
Frothy blood cast forth by spittle, is voided from the Lungs.

Sect. 4. Aph. 14.
A Flux of the belly is mortal to consumptive persons.

Sect. 6. Aph. 12.
In the curing of the Hemorrhoids or piles, unless one vein be left open,
there is danger that a dropsy or consumption will succeed.

Sect. 7. Aph. 16.
A consumption, and flux are caused by spitting out suppurated matter. But when
the spitting cease, the sick dye.

Sect. 8. Aph. 7.
[You have this Aphorism before in the same Chapter. Aph. 5. whether I refer
you.]

Sect. 8. Aph. 8.
All things which incline or tend to consumptions, are vehement, but some are
mortal; but it would be advantageous if the Disease should seize the body at
such a time when the season did afford some help for the Disease, as the Summer
for a burning Fever, the Winter for the Dropsy; for that which is according
to nature does obtain the victory, but in the Diseases of the Spleen, it is
rather cause of fear.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Plurisie.
Sect. 3. Aph. 23.
BUt in the Winter season, plurisies, inflammations of the lungs, and apoplexies.

Sect. 5. Aph. 8.
If Pluretick persons are not cleansed within fourteen days, the matter turns
to impostumation.

Sect. 5. Aph. 15.
Pluretick persons being suppurated, if they are cleansed within forty days
after the impostume is broke, are freed, otherwise they grow into a consumption.

Sect. 6. Aph. 5.
We must learn whether the pains in the sides, in the breast, and in other
parts do differ much.

Sect. 6. Aph. 6.
A Flux of the belly succeeding a plurisie, or the inflammation of the lungs, is
a bad sign.

Sect. 6. Aph. 33.
They which have sour belchings, are not much troubled with plurisies.

Sect. 7. Aph. 11.
An inflammation of the lungs coming upon a plurisie, is bad.

CHAP. XXVII. Of spitting of Blood.
Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
YOung men are troubled with spittings of blood, consumptions, acute fevers,
the falling sickness, and many other Diseases, but especially these.

Sect. 4. Aph. 25.
Any blood whatsoever voided upward, is bad, but if black blood be voided
downward, it is good.

Sect. 5. Aph. 13.
Frothy blood cast forth by spittle, is brought from the lungs.

Sect. 6. Aph. 10.
Matter, water, or blood, voided by the nostrils, the mouth, or the ears, take
away the headache, and the vehement pains thereof.

Sect. 7. Aph. 37.
Vomiting of blood happening without a fever is good, but bad with a fever,
and the distemper must be cured with such Medicines which have a cooling and
restringent quality in them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the affects of the Heart.
Sect. 2. Aph. 36.
MEn of unblameable and perfect health, do quickly faint when they are purged,
and such also who use ill diet.

Sect. 2. Aph. 41.
Such as are often and violently taken with a Sincope or Swounding without some
manifest cause, dye suddenly.

Sect. 4. Aph. 17.
Abhorring of meat, gnawing of the mouth of the stomach, a vertigoe
withdrowsiness, and a bitterness in the mouth, without a fever, do instruct us
that purging by vomit is necessary.

Sect. 5. Aph. 56.
A Convulsion, or Sincope happening to women in the time of their purgations,
is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 8.
Faintings, vomitings, and swoundings, are caused by the rupture of a tumor
inwardly.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the affects of the Breasts.
Sect. 5. Aph. 37.
IF the Breasts of a woman with Child, grow slender on a sudden* she is in
danger of aborting, or miscarrying.

Sect. 5. Aph. 38.
If one of the Breasts of a woman with Child with Twins, grow slender, she will
abort with one of her Children; and if the right Breast grow slender, she will
miscarry a Male, if the left, a Female.

Sect. 5. Aph. 39.
If a woman which neither is with Child, nor never had Child, have milk in her
Breasts, her monthly purgations have failed.

Sect. 5. Aph. 40.
When blood is gathered together into a tumor of swelling about the Breasts,
raging or madness, is thereby signified to those women.

Sect. 5. Aph. 50.
If you would stop the flowing of women's courses, apply very large
Cupping-glasses to their breasts.

Sect. 5. Aph. 52.
Plenty of milk running forth of the Breasts of women with Child, argue a weak
Child; but if the breasts are solid, they argue a more strong Child,

Sect. 5. Aph. 53.
They which are like to miscarry, will have slender breasts, but if their
breasts grow hard, they will have a pain in the breasts, or in the hips, in
their eyes, or in their knees, and will not miscarry.

CHAP. XXX. Of the affects of the Stomach.
Sect. 1. Aph. 15.
IN the winter and spring our stomachs are most hot, and our sleeps most long,
therefore in those seasons our meals ought to be more plentiful, because when
there is most natural heat our bodies need more plentiful nutriment, which
Ages, and Wrestlers signify unto us.

Sect. 2. Aph. 21.
A draught of Wine takes away hunger.

Sect. 4. Aph. 65.
A vehement heat of the Stomach, and a gnawing of the mouth of the stomach in
Fevers, is naught.

Sect. 6. Aph. 7.
Pains of the Stomach, which are in the upper part thereof, are more light, and
not so vehement as those which are in the lower part thereof.

Sect. 6. Aph. 18.
It is mortal, if the bladder, brain, heart, midriffe, any thin intestine or
bowel, the stomach or liver be peirced or divided.

Sect. 7. Aph. 54.
When Phlegm is included between the midriffe and the stomach, if it cause
pain, and have no passage either way, if it be turned into the bladder by the
veins, the Diseases are dissolved.

Sect. 7. Aph. 6.
Abhorring of meat and sincere dejections in a continual Fever, fortell ill.

Sect. 8. Aph. 18.
When the vital spirits above the navil ascend above the Diaphragma, all the
humor is burnt up then death is come. But when the lungs and heart, having
lost their radical moisture, the heat being gathered together into mortiferous
places, breath forth the spirits of heat altogether. Moreover partly by the
flesh, partly by the pores of the head, by which we say we live, the Soul leave
the Cottage of the body, yields up this cold and mortal Effigies, together with
the choler, blood, phlegm and flesh.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Thirst.
Sect. 4. Aph. 19.
THey which having taken a purging potion, and are not thirsty while they
purge, will not leave purging, until they do thirst.

Sect. 4. Aph. 48.
To have the outward parts cold, and the inward burn with a vehement thirst, is
mortal in continual fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 54.
If one sick of a burning fever, have a long dry cough lightly provoking, he
is not much vexed with thirst.

Sect. 5. Aph. 27.
It is a good sign, if such as have a desire to drink in the night, do fall
asleep while they are thirsty.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Vomiting.
Sect. 1. Aph. 2.
IN vomitings and going to stool, which come of their own accord, if such
things are voided which ought to be purged, it is conducible, and it is born
with ease; but if not, it succeeds otherwise, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 24.
Diseases common to Infants and young Children are spreading Ulcers of the
mouth, vomitings, coughs, watchings, tremblings, inflammations about the navil,
and moistness of the Ears.

Sect. 4. Aph. 4.
It is most convenient to purge by Vomit in the Summer, in the winter, by stool.

Sect. 4. Aph. 6.
Thin bodies and such as vomit with ease, are to be purged by vomitive
Medicines, being very watery and fearful of the winter season.

Sect. 4. Aph 7.
But such as vomit with difficulty, and are moderately gross, ought to be
purged down^ard, but we must be very cautious in the ^mmer.

Sect. 4. Aph. 8.
We must be very wary and fearful in purging consumptive persons by vomit.

Sect. 4. Aph. 12.
It is very inconvenient to purge such as have a Lientery by vomit in the
winter time.

Sect. 3. Aph. 13.
Bodies which do not vomit easily after they have taken black Hellebore must be
moistened with plenty of meat and rest before they take their Physic,

Sect. 4. Aph. 17.
Abhorring of meat, gnawings of the mouth of the stomach, a dizzinesse in the
head, with a dimnesse of the eyes without a Fever, if the mouth be bitter,
show unto us that a vomit is necessary.

Sect. 4. Aph. 18.
Pains above the midriffe, if they ought to be purged, tell us that they ought
to be purged by a Medicine that will purge upward. But if they are beneath the
midriffe, then they must be purged downward.

Sect. 4. Aph. 22.
It is a deadly sign if melancholsy blood be voided either upward or downward
at the beginning of any Disease whatsoever.

Sect. 4. Aph. 25.
Any blood cast forth upward is bad, bu^ if black blood be voided downwards, it
is good.

Sect. 5. Aph. 32.
Vomiting of blood is stayed and taken away by the eruption of the monthly
purgations.

Sect. 7. Aph. 3.
The Hicket and redness of the eyes occasioned by vomiting, is a bad sign.

Sect. 7. Aph. 8.
Faintings, vomiting, and swoundings, are caused by the rupture of a tumor
inwardly.

Sect. 7. Aph. 10.
Vomiting, Hicket, or Delirium, caused by the Iliacke passion, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 37.
Vomiting of blood, if it happen without a fever, is wholesome, but bad with a
fever, and it must be cured with cooling and restringent Medicines.

Sect. 7. Aph. 70.
When we intend to purge the body, it ought to be made soluble; if you would
have them fluxible upwards, you must stay the belly, but if downward, it is to
be moistened.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Hicket.
Sect. 5. Aph. 3.
A Convulsion or Hicket coming by a large effusion of blood, does foretell ill.

Sect. 5. Aph. 4.
The Hicket succeeding over much purging, is naught.

Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
The Strangury succeeds an inflammation of the womb, and of the straight gut,
and suppurated Reins. But the Hicket succeeds, if the liver be grieved with an
inflammation.

Sect. 6. Aph. 13.
If sneezings happen to him that has the Hicket, they take away the Hicket.

Sect. 6. Aph. 39.
A convulsion arises of too much fullness or emptiness, so also does the
Hicket.

Sect. 7. Aph. 3.
The Hicket or redness of the eyes, caused by vomiting, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 10.
Vomiting, hicket, convulsion or dotage caused by the Iliack passion, portends
ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 17.
The Hicket coming by the inflammation of the liver, is very bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 41.
It is no good sign if the hicket happen to elderly persons, being over much
purged.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the affects of the Midriffe.
Sect. 4. Aph. 64.
IF the yellow Jaundice come to a Feverish person, the seventh, ninth,
eleventh, or fourteenth day, it is good, unless the right Hypochondrium be
hard, otherwise it is less good.

Sect. 4. Aph. 73.
They whose midriffe is elevated and rumbles, with a succeeding pain of the
Loins, have moist bellies, unless wind break forth backward, or plenty of
urine be voided, these accidents are contingent in Fevers.

Sect. 5. Aph. 64.
Milk is inconvenient for those who have the headache, neither is it to be
allowed in Fevers or to such whose Diaphragma being elevated have rumbling
noises, etc.

Sect. 6. Aph. 40.
When there are griess about the Midriffe without an inflammation, a succeeding
fever does take away the grief.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the affects of the Liver.
Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
A Strangury succeeds an inflammation of the straight intestine, and of the
womb and suppurated Reins, but the hicket succeeds when the Liver is inflamed.

Sect. 6. Aph. 18.
If either the bladder, brains, heart, midriffe or any thin bowel, stomach, or
liver be peirced or cut, death ensues.

Sect. 9. Aph. 42.
A Stirrus of the liver succeeding to them which have the yellow Jaundies, is
naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 17.
The Hicket coming by the inflammation of the liver, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 45.
If any man be cut or burnt for the suppuration of the liver, if pure matter
and white follow, they survive, but if matter like the Lees of Oil proceed,
they perish.

Sect. 7. Aph. 55.
If the liver full of water empty it self upon the kell, the belly is filled
with water, and the sick dies.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Dropsy.
Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
IN the Autumn many Estival Diseases happen, and Quartan and Erratick Fevers,
Diseases of the Spleen, Dropsies, Consumptions, etc.

Sect. 4. Aph. 11.
When the bowels are wound and wrested about, great pains about the navil, and
grief of the Loins are concomitant, the which if it be not cured by a purging
Medicine, nor any other means, is confirmed into a dry Dropsy.

Sect. 6. Aph. 8.
Ulcers arising in the bodies of Hydropical persons, are not easily cured.

Sect. 6. Aph. 11.
In the Dropsy if the water flow forth of the veins into the belly, the
Disease is dissolved.

Sect. 6. Aph. 27.
Empiecal, or Hydropical persons being burnt or cut, if either water or
suppurated matter abundantly flow forth, the sick certainly dye.

Sect. 6. Aph. 35.
A cough happening to him that is sick of the Dropsy, is naught.

Sect. 7. Aph. 5.
A dysentery, Dropsy, or a vehement commotion of the mind, succeeding raging
or madness, is good.

Sect. 7. Aph. 55.
If an Hydropical liver issue violently forth upon the kell, the belly is
filled with water, and the sick dies.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Jaundies.
Sect. 4. Aph. 62.
IT is no good sign if the Yellow Jaundies do succeed a Fever before the
seventh day.

Sect. 4. Aph. 64.
If the Jaundies coming upon a Fever do appear the seventh, ninth, eleventh,
or fourteenth day, the Crisis is good, unless the right Hypochondrium be hard,
otherwise it is not good.

Sect. 5. Aph. 72.
Icterical persons are not much subject to wind.

Sect. 6. Aph. 42.
It is an ill sign, if he that has the Jaundies have a Scirrhus of the Liver.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the affects of the Spleen.
Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
MAny Diseases frequent in the Summer happen also in the Autumn, and Quartan
and Erratick fevers, and Diseases of the Spleen, etc.

Sect. 6. Aph. 43.
When suppurated matter is in the body, and does not exhibit any signification
of it self, the cause either is from the grossness of the matter, or of the
place where it resideth.

Sect. 6. Aph. 48.
A Dysentery coming in spleenetick persons, is good.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Flux of the Belly or Diarrhaea.
Sect. 2. Aph. 14.
CHanges of the excrements in the flux of the belly are good, unless they
change to bad.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Diseases are usually caused by continual showers, or rain; as long Fevers,
Diarrhaeaes, putrid fevers, the falling sickness and apoplexies.

Sect. 3. Aph. 25.
When Children are breeding their teeth, itching and prickings of the gums,
fevers, convulsions, fluxes of the belly do afflict them, and then more
especially when they have begun to put forth their dog teeth, and to those most
chiefly, who are of a more gross constitution, and have their bellies hard.

Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
But to those who are now past their youth, frequent Asthmaes, plurisies,
inflammations of the lungs, lethargies, phrensies, burning Fevers, continual
Diarrhaeaes, choler, dysenteries, lienteries, and flux of blood by the
Haemorrhoidical veins in the Fundament.

Sect. 4. Aph. 21.
Black excrements like dreggish or black blood proceeding without provocation
either with a Fever, or without a fever, are very bad, and so much the worse
by how much the more their color are many and bad. But if they are caused by a
medicine, they are so much the better, by how much their colors are many, and
not bad.

Sect. 4. Aph. 22.
An issue of black blood, either upward or downward at the beginning of any
Disease whatsoever, is deadly.

Sect. 4. Aph. 23.
If voiding of black choler, like dreggish or black blood, shall follow to such
whose bodies are attenuated, either by acute fevers, or continual Fevers, by
wounds or any other means, the patient dies the day following.

Sect. 4. Aph. 24.
A dysentery caused by melancholy blood, is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 26.
If little pieces of flesh are voided by stool, by him that has an
exulceration of the bowels, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 28.
Bilious dejections cease if deafness ensue, and deafness is taken away by
bilious dejections succeeding.

Sect. 5. Aph. 12.
When the hairs of consumptive persons fall off, a flux of the belly succeeds,
and they dye.

Sect. 5. Aph. 14.
A Diarrhaea coming upon a consumptive person, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 34.
If a woman with Child be taken with an extreme looseness, she is in danger of
aborting.

Sect. 5. Aph. 65.
They to whom tumors with ulcers do appear are neither taken by convulsion,
nor driven into rage or madness. But they presently vanishing, to such to whom
this happeus backwards, convulsions, and distensions of the nerves are caused;
but if it happen forwards, ragings, acute diseases of the sides, suppuration of
humors, or a dysentery does happen, if the tumors were red.

Sect. 6. Aph. 3.
Abhorring of meat in long dysenteries is not good, but worse if it come with a
fever.

Sect. 6. Aph. 15.
A Diarrhaea which* has continued long, is taken away by a voluntary vomiting;
succeeding.

Sect. 6. Aph. 16.
A flux of the belly coming upon a plurisie or or an inflammation of the lungs,
is naught.

Sect. 6. Aph. 17.
It is beneficial for those which are troubled with sore eyes, to be taken with
a looseness of the belly.

Sect. 6. Aph. 52.
We must observe what things appear from the eyes by sleep, for if from the
white, the eyelids being open any thing appear, and not caused by a flux of
the belly, or a purging* Medicine, it is a bad sign, and very mortal.

Sect. 6. Aph. 43.
Splenetick persons which are afflicted with a dysentery, after a long
succeeding dysentery, a dropsy or lientery happens, and they dye.

Sect. 6. Aph. 48.
A dysentery coming upon the Spleen, is good.

Sect 7. Aph. 5.
A dysentery, dropsy, or an Exstasis coming upon raging or madness, is good.

Sect. 7. Aph. 23.
A dysentery succeeds sincere dejections.

Sect. 7. Aph. 29.
A vehement flux of the belly cures that kind of dropsy which comes of white
pituite, and is called Lecophlegmatia.

Sect. 5. Aph. 30.
Frothy excrements voided by stool come from the brain.

Sect. 7. Aph. 75.
A dysentery succeeds a Diarrhaea.

Sect. 7. Aph. 76.
A lientery succeeds a dysentery.

Sect. 8. Aph. 5.
A flux of the belly succeeding a long Disease, is bad.

CHAP. XL. Of a Dysentery or Excoriation of the Bowels.
Sect. 4. Aph. 24.
THat dysentery is mortal which was caused by black choler.

Sect. 4. Aph. 26.
In a dysentery, if small pieces of flesh are ejected by stool, the Disease is
mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 43.
Splenetick persons afflicted with a dysentery, after a long excoriation of the
bowels, a dropsy or lientery succeed, and they dye.

CHAP. XLI. Of a Lientery or levity of the Bowels.
Sect. 4. Aph. 12.
IT is dangerous purging lienterical persons by vomiting Medicines in the
winter season.

Sect. 6. Aph. 1.
If sour belchings, which were not before, succeed a long lientery or levity
of the bowels, it is a good sign.

Sect. 6. Aph. 15.
A voluntary vomiting happening to him which has had a long flux, does take
away the flux.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Iliack Passion.
Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
MAny Aestival Diseases happen in the Autumn, and Quartan and Erratick Fevers,
Diseases of the Spleen, Dropsies, Consumptions, dropping of the Urine,
Lienteries, Dysenteries, pains of the Hips, Squinances, frequent Asthmaes,
Iliack passions, the Falling Evil, Madness, and Melancholy Diseases.

Sect. 6. Aph. 44.
If the Iliack passion succeed a Strangury, the Sick dies within seven days,
unless plenty of urine be voided, and a fever succeed.

Sect. 6. Aph. 10.
Vomiting, Hicket, a Convulsion or Dotage occasioned by the Disease of the thin
bowel called Ileum, is bad.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the pain of the Belly.
Sect. 4. Aph. 11.
When the Bowels are wrung or wrested, pains are felt about the navil, and
grief of the loins, is present; if the distemper be cured neither by a purging
Medicine, nor any other means, it is confirmed into a dry dropsy.

Sect. 4. Aph. 65.
A vehement heat about the belly, and a gnawing of the mouth of the Stomach, is
a bad sign in Fevers.

Sect. 6. Aph. 5.
We must observe and learn whether the pains of the breast, sides, and of other
places are much different, or not.

Sect. 6. Aph. 7.
Pains which are caused about the belly, if they are high and sublime, are more
light and easy, but if they are not sublime, they are more vehement.

Sect. 6. Aph. 40.
A succeeding Fever dissolves such pains which arise about the Diaphragme,
without an inflammation.

Sect. 7. Aph. 22.
Suppuration or impostumation is caused by a continual grief of those parts
which appertain to the belly.

A coldness or chilness of the extreme parts, caused by a vehement grief of the
parts which belong to the belly, is bad.

Sect. 7. Aph. 29.
He that pisseth blood, and stuff like curdled milk, and has the Strangury;
if the grief extend it self to the Rorinaeum; lower belly, and parts about the
privities, has a defection in those parts which appertain to the bladder.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Tenesmus or often desire to go to stool.
Sect. 7. Aph. 27.
IF a Tenosmus or an often and vain desire of going to stool, without voiding
any thing, happen unto women with Child, it will cause abortion or miscarriage.

CHAP. XLV. Of the affect of the Fundament and Hamorrhoides.
Sect. 3. Aph. 30.
THey which are beyond their youth, frequent Asthmaes, plurisies, inflammations
of the lungs, lethargies, phrensies, burning and continual fevers,
Diarrhaeaes, cholers, excoriations of the bowels, lienteries, and profusion of
blood by the veins in the fundament, called the Haemorrhoides.

Sect. 4. Aph. 25.
Evacuations of blood upward, be the blood of what condition soever, is bad;
but if black blood, be cast down beneath, it is good.

Sect. 6. Aph. 11.
The Haemorrhoides, or a flux of blood by the mouth of the veins in the
fundament, whereby nature does usually ease it self, are convenient and
beneficial in melancholy affects and Diseases of the Reins.

Sect. 6. Aph. 12.
In the cure of the Haemorrhoides, or continual flux of blood, by the veins in
the Fundament, unless one vein be preserved and kept, there is danger that a
dropsy or consumption may succeed.

Sect. 6. Aph. 21.
If the veins do swell with melancholy blood, or if the Haemorrhoidical veins
flow and empty the body of blood, madness is thereby dissolved.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the affects of the Reins.
Sect. 3. Aph. 3.
DIseases accompaning old age, are difficulty of breathing, Catarrhes causing
coughs, stranguries, difficulty of pissing, pains of the joints and the reins,
etc.

Sect. 4. Aph. 75.
An exulceration of the reins or bladder, is signified by blood or suppurated
matter, sent forth with the Urine.

Sect. 4. Aph. 76.
Small pieces of flesh or something like hairs carried out with the Urine, are
sent from the reins.

Sect. 4. Aph. 78.
Blood issuing forth freely with the Urine, does signify the rupture of a vein
in the reins.

Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
A Strangury succeeds an inflammation of the straight intestine, an inflammation
of the womb, and a suppuration of the reins.

Sect. 6. Aph. 6.
The vices of the reins and bladder in old men are hardly cured.

Sect. 6. Aph. 11.
The Hemorrhoides or blood sent forth by the veins in the fundament, is
beneficial in melancholy affects and Diseases of the reins.

Sect. 7. Aph. 34.
Bubbles standing on the top of the Urine, do signify a Disease of the reins,
and the length thereof.

Sect. 7. Aph. 35.
When the upper part or superficies of the Urine is fat and greasy, thick and
gathered together, then is signified a Disease of the reins, and that a sharp
one too.

Sect. 7. Aph. 36.
But when the aforesaid signs do happen in those whose reins are Diseased, and
pains are felt about the Muscles of the back bone, if they are carried to the
external parts, expect that the abscess will be external; but if they tend more
to the inward parts, it is to be feared that the abscess will be inward.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Affects of the Privities.
Sect. 3. Aph. 21.
IN the Summer time some of these Diseases, and continual and burning fevers,
very many tertians and quartans, vomitings; fluxes of the belly, sore eyes,
pains of the ears, exulcerations of the mouth, corruptions of the privities,
and small pustles caused by choleric Sweats.

Sect. 4. Aph. 42.
A small Ulcer growing in the Yard, if there happen a suppuration, and break, a
solution succeeds.

Sect. 5. Aph. 22.
Heat causing suppuration does not exhibit unto us the certainest signs of
security in every ulcer, it softens the skin, extenuates it, takes away pain,
aswage rigors, convulsions, and cramps, dissolves heaviness of the head, is
very much available for broken bones, and for such especially which are bare of
flesh, and for those chiefly who have ulcers in their head, for such also who
are stupefied with cold, or are ulcerated for creeping, and eating sores in the
fundament, yard, womb, and bladder; to all these things heat is acceptable,
and does cause a crisis, but cold is an enemy, and destructive.

Sect. 5. Aph. 62.
Women which have cold and condensed wombes, do not conceive, nor they whose
wombes are overmolst, for in such the seed is extinguished, neither such who
have extraordinary dry wombes and very hot, for in those the seed is corrupted
for want of nutriment. But such who have naturally a moderate temperature,
between those two extremes, do prove fruitful.

Sect. 5. Aph. 63.
There is the same reason also in men, for either by reason of the rarity of
the body, the spirit is diffused abroad, so that it cannot send forth the seed,
or by reason of its constipation or thickness the humor cannot be sent forth,
or by reason of its coldness, the seed is not heated, so that it may be
gathered to its proper place, or the same may happen by heat.

Sect. 6. Aph. 19.
If a bone, a grissel, a nerve, or any small particle of the jaw bone, or the
foreskin of the yard, be divided or cut a sunder, it is neither nourished,
neither does it grow together again.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the affects of the Bladder.
Sect. 3. Aph. 5.
IF the season of the year be cold with Northwinds, it causes coughs,
exasperates the jaws, hardens the belly, suppresseth urine, causes horrors,
and pains of the sides and breast; when it so prevails such accidents are to
beexpected in Diseases.

Sect. 3. Aph. 16.
Great Droughts cause consumptions, sore eyes, pains of the joints and
stranguries, with Diseases of the bowels.

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
In the Autumn many Summer Diseases do happen, and quartan and erratick
fevers, Diseases of the spleen, dropsies, consumptions, the strangury,
lienteries and dyfenteries.

Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
These Diseases are contingent to old men, Asthmaes, catarrhes, the strangury,
stopping of urine, and pains of the joints and reins.

Sect. 4. Aph. 69.
Urines in Fevers, if they change from thick, and such as have curdled stuff
in them, and few, too many and thin do ease the patient, especially if such are
made wherein there appears a sediment at the beginning, or not long after.

Sect. 4. Aph. 70.
Troublesome Urines, like those of kine in Fevers, argue either the headache
to be present, or to ensue.

Sect. 4. Aph. 71.
When a Crisis does happen the seventh day, the urine has a red cloud the
fourth day, and other things answerable thereunto.

Sect. 4. Aph. 74.
When an abscess is expected to the joints plenty of urine thick and white,
frees from the abscess, etc.

Sect. 5. Aph. 72.
Clear and white urines are all bad, but that appears chiefly in Phrenetick
persons.

Sect. 4. Aph. 73.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of the affects of the Hypocondries.]

Sect. 4. Aph. 75.
If blood or corrupt matter be sent forth with the urine, an exulceration of
the reins is thereby signified.

Sect. 4. Aph. 76.
When small pieces of flesh, or things like hairs are carried forth with the
urine, they are brought from the reins.

Sect. 4. Aph. 77.
When things like bran are voided with the urine, the bladder has a scab.

Sect. 4. Aph. 79.
Blood issuing forth wilfully with the urine, shows a vein to be broke in the
bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 79.
Sandy sediments seething in the urine, argues the stone in the bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 80.
He that pisseth blood and matter like curdled milk with his urine, and if he
has a strangury and the pain fall to the Perinaeum, and the lower belly, has
a Disease in those parts which belong to the bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 81.
He that pisseth blood and corrupt matter, and small scales with an ill odor in
the urine, has an ulcer in the bladder.

Sect. 4. Aph. 82.
If a tumor grow in the conduit of the urine, if that suppurate, and break, a
solution happens.

Sect. 4. Aph. 83.
Very much urine made in the night, argues but few excrements by stool.

Sects. 5. Aph. 22.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of the affects of the Privities.]

Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
The strangury succeeds the inflammation of the the straight intestine and the
womb, and suppurated reins, but the Hicket the inflammation of the liver.

Sect. 6. Aph. 6.
The affects of the reins and the bladder, are not easily cured in old men.

Sect. 6. Aph. 18.
If the bladder, brain, midriffe, or any thin bowel, stomach, or liver be cut
into or divided, it is deadly.

Sect. 6. Aph. 44.
The Iliack passion succeeding a Strangury, kills within seven days, unless
plenty of urine be made with a succeeding Fever.

Sect. 7. Aph. 32.
Urines with bilious sediments but thin at the top, do signify an acute
Disease.

Sect. 7. Aph. 34.
Urines with bubbles at the top, argue a Disease of the reins, and a long one
too.

Sect. 7. Aph. 35.
But when a fatness is gathered together upon the top of the urine, it
signifies an acute Disease of the reins.

Sect. 7. Aph. 39.
[This Aphorism is the same with Sect. 4. Aph. 18. in this Chapter.]

Sect. 7. Aph. 48.
Drinking of wine and breathing a vein, does take away the strangury or
difficulty of making water, but the inward veins must be opened.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Testicles.
Sect. 8. Aph. 11.
IF the right Testicle be cold and convulsive, it is mortal.

CHAP. L. Of the affects of the Womb.
Sect. 3. Aph. 12.
IF the wind be Southward in the winter, and the season very wet, and the
spring extraordinary dry, with North winds, women with Child which expect to be
delivered in the spring, do abort upon any occasion; and they which are
delivered produce but weak and sickly Infants, so that either they dye
presently, or if they live, are small and sickly, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 14.
A dry and cold Autumn with North winds, is commodious for those who are of a
moist constitution, and for women, etc.

Sect. 3. Aph. 28.
The Diseases of Children, are usually dissolved by their Crisis, some within
forty days, some within seven months, and others within seven years, or about
the time of fourteen years. But those Diseases which continue to children, and
do not leave them at the age of fourteen, to Males, and to Females all the time
of the eruption of their monthly purgations, usually are of a long continuance.

Sect. 4. Aph. 1.
Women with Child may be purged, if the humor incline of it self to
evacuation, in the fourth month unto the seventh, but in these less. But when
the issue is newly conceived, or very big, we must be very wary and circumspect.

Sect. 5. Aph. 28.
Suffumigations of sweet Odors, does bring down the courses in women, and were
also profitable for other things, if they did not cause a heaviness in the
head.

Sect. 5. Aph. 30.
Phlebotomy or opening a vein, does cause women with Child to abort, and then
most certainly if the issue be very big.

Sect. 5. Aph. 31.
If a woman with Child be taken with an acute Disease, it is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 34.
A Diarrhaea or flux of the belly, does endanger abortion to great bellied
women.

Sect. 5. Aph. 45.
If women of a rare texture or thin habit of body, do miscarry or abort in the
second or third month, without a manifest occasion, the vessels of the womb,
called by the Greeks (...)* are full of corrupt matter, so that by reason of
their fullness and burden, they cannot sustain the Infant, but are burst in
sunder.

Sect. 5. Aph. 47.
If the womb be suppurated in that part which extends it self to, and rests
upon the hip-bone, the cure must be wrought by Linements dipped in convenient
Medicines.

Sect. 5. Aph. 49.
Medicines causing sneezing do expel the afterbirth, but after the taking of
them, the Nostrils and the mouth of the Patient must be close stopped.

Sect. 5. Aph. 51.
When women have conceived and are with Child, the Orifice of their womb is
contracted and shut close.

Sect. 5. Aph. 54.
If the Orifice of the womb be hard and solid, it must of necessity be close
shut.

Sect. 5. Aph. 55.
If women with chiid fall into a fever, and are emaciated or made lean without
some manisest cause, they have difficult and dangerous travail, or else are in
danger of abortion.

Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
A Strangury succeeds an inflammation of the straight intestine of the womb, or
suppurated reins; but the Hicket an inflammation of the liver.

Sect. 5. Aph. 62.
They which have cold and thick wombes, or else if their matrix be overmoist,
do not conceive, for the genitive matter is extinguished in them; neither they
which have over dry and hot wombes, because the seed is corrupted for want of
nutriment. But they are most fruitful, which are of a middle and moderate
constitution and temperature.

CHAP. LI. Of the Menstruum, or Women's Purgations.
Sect. 5. Aph. 32.
VOmiting of blood is stayed by the breaking forth of the monthly purgations in
women.

Sect. 5. Aph. 33.
An Haemorrhagia or bleeding at the nose, is beneficial to women in the
deficiency of their monthly courses.

Sect. 5. Aph. 36.
Ill colored purgations of women, and not proceeding always at their
appointed seasons, signify a necessity of purging.

Sect. 5. Aph. 39.
It is an absolute sign of the deficiency or failing of her monthly purgations,
if a woman who neither is with child, nor never brought forth child has milk
in her breasts.

Sect. 5. Aph. 50.
If you would stop the menstruous flux in women, you must apply great
Cupping-glasses to their breasts.

Sect. 5. Aph. 56.
A Convulsion happening to women in the time of her menstruous purgations, is
naught.

Sect. 5. Aph. 57.
Both the overflowing of the monthly Terms, and the suppression thereof, do
cause Diseases.

Sect. 5. Aph. 60.
If a Woman with child have her courses, it is impossible that her child should
be healthful.

Sect. 5. Aph. 60.
If a woman have not her monthly purgations, and neither horror nor fever
succeed, but a nausea or abhorring of meat happens unto her, believe her to
have conceived with Child.

Sect. 6. Aph. 29.
A woman is not troubled with the gout, until her monthly purgations have left
her.

CHAP. LII. Of Conception.
Sect. 5. Aph. 41.
IF you would know whether a woman have conceived with child or not, give her
water and honey mingled together when she goes to sleep, and if she have
wringings and gripings of the belly, she has conceived, otherwise she has not.

Sect. 5. Aph. 42.
If a woman be with child with a male, she is better colored than if she were
with child with a female.

Sect. 5. Aph. 43.
An Erisipilas in the womb of a pregnant woman, is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 46.
They which do not conceive by reason of a preternatural grosseness, have the
Orifice of their womb pressed by the Kell, neither will they be pregnant or
conceive until they are extenuated or grown thinner.

Sect. 5. Aph. 59.
If a woman do not conceive, and you desire to know whether she be fruitful or
will conceive, apply suffumigations to her beneath, she being very well wrapped
close with Clothes; and if the sent or smell be perceived to pass to her
nostrils and mouth, you may conclude her not to be unfruitful of her self.

Sect. 5. Aph. 61.
[See this Aphorism the last but one in the sore-going Chapter of Women's
monthly purgations.]

CHAP. LIII. Of Abortion or Miscarriage.
Sect. 5. Aph. 30.
BReathing of a vein does cause Abortion, but more especially if the birth be
somewhat big.

Sect. 5. Aph. 37.
If the breasts of a pregnant woman grow thin and slender on a sudden, there
is danger of abortion.

Sect. 5. Aph. 38.
If either of the breasts of a pregnant woman with child with Twins, grow thin
and slender, she miscarries with one of her burdens; if her right breast grow
thin, she aborts a male, if the left, a female child.

Sect. 5. Aph. 44.
Women which are made lean by some preternatural cause, do abort until they
grow more full bodied.

Sect. 5. Aph. 45.
They which abort the second or third month, without some especial occasion,
have the vessels of their womb filled with filthy matter, so that by reason of
that burden they do break, and cannot contain the issue.

Sect. 5. Aph. 55.
If pregnant women fall into a fever, and are very much wasted without some
sensible cause, either have difficult and dangerous labor, or else fall into a
hazard of abortion.

Sect. 7. Aph. 7.
A Tenasmus, or a frequent and vain desire of going to stool without any
performance, coming upon a pregnant women, does make her abort.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Issue and the Birth.
Sect. 5. Aph. 35.
SNeezing happening to one troubled with the suffocation of the Matrix, or else
to one in hard travail, is commodious.

Sect. 5. Aph. 48.
Male Children are born in the right, and females in the left side of the womb.

Sect. 5. Aph. 52.
Store of milk flowing forth of the breasts of a woman with child, signifies a
weak child, but solid and firm breasts argue a stronger and more healthful
child.

Sect. 5. Aph. 53.
When the child is like to dye in the womb, the breasts of the mother grow
slender, but if they become hard, she will have grief either in her breasts,
her hips, in her eyes or knees, and she will not corrupt her issue.

Sect. 5. Aph. 55.
Fevers and extreme wastings happening to women with child, argue either a
difficult and dangerous travail to them, or a hazard of abortion.

Sect. 5. Aph. 6.
It is impossible that that child should be healthful which is bread by one who
has her monthly courses in the time of her Childbearing.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the affects of the Joints.
Sect. 2. Aph. 46.
WHen two pains are felt at one and the same time in different places of the
body, the one does very much obscure the other.

Sect. 1. Aph. 16.
Great droughts cause consumptions, sore eyes, pains of the joints, difficulty
of Urine, and excoriations of the bowels.

Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
In the spring season, madness, melancholy, the falling evil, fluxes of blood,
squinances, rheums, hoarseness, coughs, leprosies, tetters, dry itches,
ulcerous pimples, small swellings, and pains of the joints do afflict men's
bodies.

Sect. 3. Aph. 31.
Difficulty of breathing, catarrhes, stranguries, difficulty of making water,
pains of the joints and reins, vertigoes, and apoplexies are incident to old
men.

Sect. 4. Aph. 20.
Extreme gripings and twistings of the bowels, heaviness of the knees, and a
pain of the loins without a fever, tell us that purging downward is necessary.

Sect. 4. Aph. 31.
When a sense of wearyishness occasioned by Fevers, is present, then tumors
do arise about the joints, but especially about the mandibles.

Sect. 4. Aph. 32.
But if any part be full of pain after the recovering from a Disease, the
abscesses are made to that part.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
Small tumors and pains of the joints do appear to such who have had long
fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 45.
They who have tumors, and pains about their joints after long Fevers, do
feed more plentifully.

Sect. 4. Aph. 74.
When there is a probability that some matter will be sent to the joints,
plenty of urine and white being made, does deliver from the abscess. Such as
usually begin to be conveyed every 4th, day in fevers with a wearyish
indisposition; and if a flux of blood break forth by the Nostrils also, then
the solution of the Disease will be very shortly.

Sect. 5. Aph. 25.
Plenty of cold water cast upon the tumors of the joints, griefs without
ulcers, the places affected with the gout and convulsive members, for the most
part eases them, diminishes and takes away the grief; for a moderate numnesse
has a property to take away pain.

Sect. 6. Aph. 28.
Eunuchs are not afflicted with the gout, neither do they grow bald.

Sect. 6. Aph. 29.
A woman is not troubled with the gout, before her monthly purgations cease.

Sect. 6. Aph. 30.
A boy is not troubled with the gout before he use the act of Venery.

Sect. 6. Aph. 49.
The gout Diseases do stop within forty days, the inflammation being taken away.

Sect. 6. Aph. 55.
The affects of the gout usually express themselves in the Spring and Autumn.

Sect. 6. Aph. 59.
In Sciatick pains when the hip bone falls out of his place, and is received
again, filthy matter is engendered therein.

Sect. 6. Aph. 60.
They which are troubled with a continual Sciatica, if the head of the hip bone
fall out of its place, have their thigh wasted, and they halt unless they are
cured by cauterizing.

CHAP. LV. Of the affects of the Fingers and Nails.
Sect. 8. Aph. 12.
IF the nails grow black, and the fingers and toes either contracted or
remiss, argue death approaching.

Distinction the seventh, containing such Aphorisms which respect external
Diseases of the body.
THe Physician which desires to be complete and absolute in his practice, must
not only have the knowledge of those Aphorisms which respect the internal
Diseases of the body, but must also have those Aphorisms in his memory which
do treat of external Diseases, and they are these which follow.

CHAP. I. Of the Affects of the Hair.
Sect. 5. Aph. 11.
IF the Spittle of consumptive persons being cast upon the coals send forth an
ill smell, and if the hairs of the head fall away, it is mortal.

Sect. 6. Aph. 28.
Eunuchs neither have the gout nor grow bald.

Sect. 6. Aph. 34.
They which are bald have not their veins swelled with melancholy blood, but
they to whom such swellings so happen being bald, have the hair of their head
grow again.

CHAP. II. Of Pimples.
Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
IN the spring season, madness, melancholy, the falling evil, fluxes of blood,
squinancies, rheums, hoarseness, coughs, leprosies, tetters, the dry itch, very
many ulcerated pimples, small tumors, and pains of the joints, do arise.

Sect. 6. Aph. 9.
Broad wheals do seldom itch.

CHAP. III. Of Preternatural Tumors.
Sect. 4. Aph. 34.
IF a sudden strangulation seize him which has a Fever without a
praeexistent fever in the jaws, it is mortal.

Sect. 4. Aph. 35.
If the neck of one that has a fever be on the sudden perverted and turned,
so that he can scarce or hardly swallow, without a conspicuous humor, it is
mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 25.
Abundance of cold water cast thereon, eases, diminishes, and takes away the
pains of tumified and painful places without ulcers, the affects of the gout,
and of convulsed Members; for a moderate stupefaction has a power to take away
grief.

Sect. 5. Aph. 65.
They which have ulcerous tumors conspicuous, are neither convulsive, nor mad;
but they presently vanishing; if the abscess be backward, they are taken with
convulsions and cramps; but if the abscess happen to the foreparts, they are
troubled with ragings, acute Diseases of the sides and suppuration of humors,
if the tumors be red.

Sect. 5. Aph. 66.
It is a very great mischief when no tumor is seen acompanying great and shrewd
wounds.

Sect. 5. Aph. 67.
Soft tumors are good, crude naught.

Sect. 6. Aph. 37.
A tumor arising in the neck of him which has a squinancy, is a good sign,
for then the Disease is thrust outward.

Sect. 6. Aph. 49.
A swelling or tumor appearing in the breast of him which is sick of a
squinancy, is a good sign, for then the morbifick matter is secured to the
external parts.

CHAP. IV. Of Inflammation.
Sect. 5. Aph. 23.
THese Diseases are common to Infants, creeping ulcers of the mouth called
Apthae, vomitings, coughs, watchings, tremblings, inflammations about the navil,
and moistness of the ears.

Sect. 5. Aph. 23.
We must make use of cold things in these cases, when either there is a present
flux of blood, or when one will presently ensue, but they must not be applied
upon but about the place from whence the flux is, and if an inflammation or
fierinesse incline to a somewhat bloody or red color, caused by a flux of
fresh blood, appear, apply them thereunto, for they cause blackness to
inveterate sores. They help an Erisipilas not ulcerated, but offend an
ulcerated.

Sect. 5. Aph. 58.
A strangury succeeds an inflammation of the straight bowel of the womb and
suppurated reins; but the Hicket succeeds an inflammation of the liver.

Sect. 6. Aph. 40.
A succeeding fever takes away such pains which arise about the midriffe,
which are not accompanied with an inflammation.

CHAP. V. Of an Erisipilas.
Sect. 5. Aph. 23.
SEE this Aphorism in the preceding Chapter of Inflammation.

Sect. 5. Aph. 43.
An Erisipilas happening in the womb of a pregnant woman, is mortal.

Sect. 6. Aph. 25.
It is a bad Symptom if an Erisipilas being once thrust forth turn back to the
inward parts, but if it come to the external from the internal parts, it is
good.

Sect. 7. Aph. 19.
An Erisipilas is caused by the laying bare of a bone.

Rottenness, or impostumation caused by an Erisipilas, is bad.

CHAP. VI. Of Mortification and a Gangrena.
Sect. 7. Aph. 2.
Wan and pale flesh occasioned by a pained bone, does signify ill.

Sect. 7. Aph. 50.
If the brain be suddenly stricken or mortified the sick dies within three
days, the which if he survive, he becomes sound again.

A bone decays by mortification or a gangrene.

CHAP. VII. Of a Cancer.
Sect. 6. Aph. 38.
IT is more safe not to cure then to cure hidden and secret Cancers, for if
they are cured, the sick dies quickly, but if left uncured he continue^ longer.

CHAP. VIII. Of spreading Ulcers.
Sect. 5. Aph. 22.
SEE this Aphorism in Sect. 5. Aph. 22. in the Chapter of Convulsions.

CHAP. IX. Of the tumor called Struma.
Sect. 3. Aph. 26.
BUt when they are a little more in years, inflammations of the Almonds of the
ears, impulsions toward the inward part of the vertebra in the hinder part of
the head, frequent Asthmaes, the stone, maw-worms, round-worms, and others thin
and small, breeding in the straight gut, swellings in the neck, and other small
tumors, but especially these.

CHAP. X. Of Impostumes about the Privy parts.
Sect. 4. Aph. 55.
ALL Fevers coming of an inflammation of the glandulous parts are bad, but
Ephemeraes.

CHAP. XI. Of small Tumors.
Sect. 2. Aph. 15.
WHen pains in the jaws, or small tumors arise in the body, the excrements
must be observed, for if they are choleric, the body is also sick, but if such
are voided as come from healthful bodies, you may nourish the body without
danger.

Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of the Affects of the joints.

Sect. 3. Aph. 26.
[See this Aphorism in the third Chapter of the fourth Distinction, in the
Chapter of Diseases incident to Children.

Sect. 4. Aph. 44.
Small tumors and pains in the joints, do succeed long fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 45.
They feed liberally who have small swellings or pains in their joints arising
after long fevers.

Sect. 4. Aph. 82.
If a small swelling arise in the conduit of the urine, when that is suppurated
and broke, a solution happens.

Sect. 7. Aph. 8.
Faintings, vomitings and swoundings are contingent, by the breach of an
impostumation inwardly.

Sect. 7. Aph. 57.
[You have this Aphorism verbatim in this Chapter, Aph. 82.

CHAP. XII. Of the swelling of the veins by melancholy blood called verrucae.
Sect. 3. Aph. 26.
I Refer the reader for this Aphorism, to the Chapter of the Diseases of
Children, where he may be satisfied.

CHAP. XIII. Of Wounds.
Sect. 5. Aph. 2.
A Convulsion chancing suddenly upon a wound, is mortal.

Sect. 6. Aph. 18.
If the Bladder be cut or wounded, the brain, heart, midriffe, or any thin
bowel, either stomach or liver, it is mortal.

Sect. 5. Aph. 66.
If no tumor appear in great and naughty wounds, it is a very great mischief.

Sect. 6. Aph. 19.
A bone wounded or cut, a grissel, nerve, or any small particle of the
mandible, the foreskin of the yard called the praeputium, does neither increase
nor grow together again.

CHAP. XIV. Of Abscesses or Impostumations.
Sect. 4. Aph. 31.
WHen there is a wearishness or indisposition of the body occasioned by long
fevers, an abscess or impostumation will arise about the joints, but
especially about the mandibles.

Sect. 7. Aph. 36.
When in the pains of the reins besides other symptoms there are pains felt
about the muscles of the back bone, because the matter is carried outward, we
must expect the impostumation outward. But if the pains tend more to the
internal parts, it is to be feared that the impostumation will be rather inward.

CHAP. XV. Of Ulcers.
Sect. 3. Aph. 20.
SEE this Aphorism in the Chapter of Hoarseness and coughs in the fifth
Distinction.

Sect. 3. Aph. 22.
[See this Aphorism in the Chapter of Autumnal Diseases in the fourth
Distinction.

Sect. 3. Aph. 24.
Moreover these Diseases happen to Children, creeping ulcers of the mouth,
vomitings, coughs watchings, tremblings, inflammations about the navil, and
moisture of their ears.

Sect. 4. Aph. 75.
Blood or suppurated matter voided with the urine, does signify an
exulceration of the reins and bladder.

Sect. 5. Aph. 20.
Cold corodes ulcers, obdures the skin, hinders suppuration, causes blackness,
rigors in fevers, convulsions, and cramps.

Sect. 5. Aph. 21.
Yet sometimes in a distension of the nerves without an ulcer, to young and
well proportioned bodies in the middle of Summer, a pouring on of cold water
does cause a Revocation of heat, but heat must cure these distemperatures.

FINIS.
Books sold by R. Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane, where you may have all
sorts of Plays.
OFficium Quotidianum: or a Manual of private Devotions. By the most Reverend
Father in God Dr. William Laud late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Young Clerks Tutor; being a most useful Collection of the best Presidents
of Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale,
Warrants of Attorney, etc. As also all the Names of Men and Women in Latin;
with the day of the Date, the several Sums of Money, and the Addition of the
several Trades or Employments in their proper Cases, as they stand in the
Obligations. Together with Directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus, Writs of
Error, etc. to the inferior Courts in Cities and Towns; the whole Work newly
corrected and augmented. Likewise the best Presidents of all manner of
Concords, of Fines, and Directions how to sue out a Fine; with many judicious
Observations therein. There is also added several of the best Copies both of
Court and Chancery Hands now extant; by Edward Cocker.

The Young Clerk's Copy-Book: Containing the best Presidents for Court and
Chancery Hands extant. And all other Hands proper to Clerkship. By Edward
Cocker.

Old Law, a Comedy. Marriage Night, a Comedy. Politician Cheated a Comedy.
Spanish Gypsies, a Comedy. Careless Shepherdess. Loves Mistress. Fathers own
Son. Duchess of Malfy, etc.


