TWO SERMONS Preached before the Judges of Assize.

1. At Reading, on Cant: 7.4.

2. At Abingdon, on Ps. 82.1.

WITH, Two other Sermons, Preached at St. Mary's in OXFORD.

1. On, 1 Cor. 15.10.

2. On, Psalm. 58.11.

To which are added MATRIMONIAL Instructions to PERSONS of HONOR.

By JOHN HINCKLEY, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Colleshill BERKS.

The fear of the Lord, is the beginning of knowledge,

Prove. 1.7. Nemo sapiens nisi fidelis,

Tertulli. Unam sciontiam novi timere Deum,

Naz. Ora. 13. Prima sapientia est vita proba and Honesta,

Ib. Orat. 26. (...),

Just. Mart. ad Grae. OXFORD, Printed, by HEN: HALL, for RIC: DAVIS. 1657.

To the Right Honorable the Lord JOHN GLYN, Lord Chief Justice of the Upper
Bench.
My Lord!
THese following Sermons treat of justice, and judgment: who therefore can lay
a better claim to them then your self? who are so famous for both; since you
have been advanced to be an Eminent Ruler in our Israel. The first is yours by
right of primogeniture, being first preached unto your honor, and the first
venturous Essay that ever the preacher made in this kind. In the second, your
Interest is greater, then you are aware. The truth is; the Materials are
yours: the stones came from your quarry: the beams, and rafters from your
forest; and if I have not bin a Bezaleel skillful enough, to hew, polish, and
compact them into a Fabrike worth your owning; let that be set upon my account;
who knew not how to weld, and manage such rich Notions, as you suggested, by
putting them into a dress suitable to the degree of their excellency.

My Lord! when I applied my self withal diligence (I had almost said
curiosity) to observe your acute examinations of the Felons, and offenders
convented before you; I noted, how by your searching questions; your dextrous,
and sudden Replies, you brought their hidden works of darkness to light, in
spite of all their subterfuges, and all the webbs of their fained pretenses. So
that I could not but conclude -- that certainly you were extraordinarily
assisted, by some divine intelligence, whilst you were in Cathedra, upon the
Bench, about such weighty employments; and whilst I was thus museing: behold!
that of David came into my mind. God Psalm. 82.1.
stands in the Congregation of the mighty; he judges among the gods; So that
being importuned to preach at the next Solemnity of that kind, I chose those
words for the subject of my discourse.

It is not my design, to blazon your worth, or write a panegyrike of your
praises; though here is field-roome enough to make an orator. Yet such an
Enterprise, as it is no way suitable to your Christian Moderation, (...). Bas.
p. 239.
who had rather act, then hear gloriously: so the dimensions of your honor
would be in as great danger to suffer by the low, and narrow veins of my
Rhetoric, as I should be from the imputation of Malevolent Censures, who grudg
at all the tribute of respect (though never so due) which is paid to great
personages, as if it proceeded from a spirit of Flattery, or tended to a
Courting of their Fortunes, or blowing them up with ambition. I shall dawb with
no such mortar; But what is said of the Rev. 2.15.
Nicolaitans doctrine, the same say I of such dealing, (...), which things I
hate. My intention is more sincere, viz. to make out clearer yet your title,
not only to what follows here, but to whatever shall own me for an unworthy
Author hereafter; As he that is saved from drowning, or redeemed from bondage,
owes all his future endeavors to his deliverer, and in all justice ought to
Exo. 21.6.
nail his ears to his door. This is the very bottom of a Christians
devoting, and Consecrating himself to Christ alone; because he has rescued us
from our spiritual Pharaoh, the Devil, and absolved us from the guilt of sin
in our Justification, 1 Cor. 6.20. To. 12.1. 2 Cor. 5.15.
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, for ye were bought with a price.

But if I have hitherto bin in the Clouds, and left your Lordship under the
intanglement of a Riddle; I shall come down in the next part of this
Narrative, and lend your Honor a Clue to wind your self out of that Labyrinth.

My Lord! when providence brought you, and me together at Reading: my mind did
scarce move upon its own hinges: For but a little before; The Cant. 5.7.
watchmen had wounded me, and the Keepers of the wall had taken away my veil
from me; and as if a single, Civil death had not bin sufficient; I mean, in
respect of Temporalls: in the first place, and in order thereunto, like that
vestall virgin, I was to be ravished of my most precious Repositum, my only joy,
and glory, my Interest in Jesus Christ, the only Rock of my salvation, degraded
from godliness; divested of grace; Separated (had it bin possible for any
principalities, and powers) from that life, which is hid with Christ in God,
and sent a grazing (pudet haec etc.) with Nos utinam vani etc.
Heathens, and Pagans, so that for a time, I saw little but the When those that
have an interest in God, Say there is no peace to thee it should make ones
heart to quake. M. Buroughs Mo. Chapter p. 224.
dark side of the Cloud; and I had no rest in my spirit, lest I should be like
the builders of Noah's Arc: lest I should 1 Co. 9.27.
Preach salvation to others, yet I my self should be (...), a Castaway. I
began also to question my ministerial call, and as Luther used to do, I
trembled to ascend the Pulpit. My thoughts were, missusne ego? am I not an
usurper, going upon my own Arrant? one of them that run's, and was never sent?
quis me Constituit? who made me a preacher? yet I have learned, that the (...).
1 Cor. 4.3. Aliter in Coelo, qua^ Norimbergae hoc de negotio erat conclusum.
Luther.
resolves of men, are not always the Determinations of God: for whilst I was
hot upon this dispute, behold! Elias-like, you stepped in to solve all these
doubts, as if you had bin sent from Heaven to heal the brokenhearted, and to
preach deliverance to the Captive. A good Samaritane indeed, to power wine, and
oil into such wounds. Reading to me was 2 Samuel 10.4, 5.
Jericho: for there my beard grew out: and instead of my veil, there I was
clothed with the garments of praise, out of the wardrope of your Charity. I was
not only encouraged by your religious, exemplary, awefull, and thirsty
attention: dictat auditor, such a Hearer, listening with both ears to the
sermon, puts life into the preacher, but as he told Domitian, Val. Mart. in
Lib. octa.
tu famam, (i. e.) vitam dedisti, you did even animate, and confirm me in my
office, by that incense you were pleased to sprinkle upon me in your charge,
and that in the face (I hope I may add too) with the approbation of my
Country. The sweet spices of yours were not like the meal cast upon the head
of the sacrifice, or the Mat. 26.12.
woman's ointment upon Christ, for my death, and burial; but for my life, and
resurrection. This was a Consolation, and it shall be for a Consolation.

It is not my drift, in the least to reflect, or glance upon those watchmen
mentioned before: for I have gained by that loss; and I am Parum abfuit quin
calamitati gratias ha^ beam. Naz Orat. 25.
beholding to that affliction. I have gathered grapes of those thorns, and
honey out of that rock. My God has so sanctified, and ordered that
crosse-dispensation, that I read in it the Return of my own prayers. I have
seen the outgoings of God in the Cloud; and the Lord has walked a turn or two
in the wilderness with me, that he might the better speak unto my heart. Had I
sat at the stern, or had the reins of affairs bin in my own hands, I could
not have contained them better. Glory be to God on high! and in the next place,
on earth Thanksgiving to your self!

Now my Lord! some sacrifice their labors to great Mecaenas's, that they may
be atoned, to shield them from potent Antagonists: these sermons being the
truths of God; I hope need no arm but his. Others dedicate books to their
Patrons, and Benefactors; to whom they owe, some parcells of their estate, or
some common favors, I owe more to you, that is my Philemon, v. 9.
self; I mean, in restoring my mind to its wonted calm; therefore what
Aeschines said to Socrates, the same say I to you; I have nothing to offer unto
you, which may bear a proportion to your desert, (...). Laert. l. 2. p. 111.
or my engagement; but I give you my self back again in any service I am
able; or if that be not worth acceptance, one thing you shall not refuse, by
all your power, and oratory; and that is, the constant prayers, My Lord! of
your most engaged, and Humbly devoted servant.

JOH: HINGKLEY.

ERRATA.
IT was thought fit not to trouble you with any Errata, the faults being for
the most part literal, and such as we hope, the candid reader may dispense
with, and not impute them to the Authors mistake.

Cant. 7.4. Thy neck shall be as a tower of Ivory: thine eyes as the
fish-pooles in Heshbon by the gate of Bath-rabbim.


WE are come up this day to the gate: and first we are come to this gate of
Sion, the place of Gods own delight: where the Lord keeps court in an especial
manner: for the Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob Pl. 87.2. this is the gate of Bath-Rabbim too, in the text; Here is filia
multitudinis (so Jerome reads it, and so the word signifies) here is a daughter
of a multitude, and may the doves always flock to these windows: that the
abomination of desolation may never stand in these gates: that we may still
Praise God in the midst of the congregation: and sing praises unto him in the
ports of the gates of the daughter of this Sion.

And it is well you take these gates in the way whither you are going: for it is
the only way to the (...), or consistory of judgment, to go through the gate of
Sion; to go from the Altar to the Tribunal; as the Romans went into to the
Temple of Honor, through the Temple of Virtue, A Jove principium.
that as ye judge for the Lord, so you may begin with the Lord, and take him
along with you, to be present with you in the judgment, as Jehosaphat told his
judges 2 Chronicles. 19.2. so you may hope for better speed when you come to the
other gate, the gate of judicature: so gate is frequently taken in Scripture.
The elders sat in the gate Deuteronomy. 22.15. and the rulers were commanded to
establish justice in the gate Amos 5.15. The gates of the Jewish cities, being
places of greatest refort, so that justice being impartially executed there, it
was like to be most exemplary, both to terrify offenders, and to strengthen
and encourage the hands of the innocent. Justice as well as truth seeks not to
be cornered: such good works must be done publicly, that men may see them,
and glorify their father which is in Heaven, who has given such gifts unto
men.

This is the gate of Bath-Rabbim too: Here is the daughter of a a multitude; A
little Parliament: A Representative of the whole county. We are come from
Bethell, Gilead, Mizpeh; from Dan to Bersheba. But Matthew. 11.8.
what are we come forth to see? we are come to see the majesty and luster of
justice: our hearts are toward the governors of Israel, Judge. 5.9. We are
come to behold the pure and Ivery necks of our magistrates, lifted up as a
lofty tower; a tower of defense and sanctuary to those that are wronged,
wearied, oppreso't: but of offense and battery to the troublers of our Israel:
such towers are of Gods own setting up: such, Christ himself approves of in
his Church. Thy neck shall be as a tower of Ivory etc.

Luther being transported with an unadvised In contentionibus nimis vehemens
and violentus fuit. Melch. Adam. in cjus vita.
heat (some call it zeal for free grace) calls James his Epistle straminea
epistola; I am ashamed to English it: and he himself seems afterward, in
some measure to retract it: but fowler spirits there have bin far, who have
not blushed to call this song of Solomon's, a lascivious, a wanton song; as if he
being enamored with Pharoahs daughter, and moved with the principle of (...).
Plut.
carnal love, indicted this Sonnet: but the Church in her latter ages has
work't forth this scumme, and exploded such impostors; so that it goes for
Canonical, as inspired by the holy spirit, even without contradiction; and
well it may: for it is a most divine, and mystical Epithalamium, or Marriage
song: not t'wixt Solomon and Pharoahs daughter, but t'wixt Christ and his
Church, by way of a sweet and spiritual dialogue: as Sisera's mother, and the
other Ladies sang one to another Judges 5.28, 29. or as the women after David's
return from the slaughter of the Philistims, took their parts; and answered
one another, Saul has killed his thousands, and David his ten thousands, 1 Samuel 18.7. So here are ravishing expressions; a holy kind of courting, banded
betwixt Christ and faithful souls, as if they strove to outvie each other in
mutual praises: yet as these are (...), wrapped up in Allegories, and coucht
under figures, and Metaphors; so they are (...) too, in a ridle; in mysterious,
and dark speeches, especially to such as are without, and have not their senses
exercised to discern pleasant fruit, lying under the leaves of Tropes.

Gregory Nyssen entering upon his commentary on this book, says, none are fit
to read it, but such as are stripped of the rags of carnal imaginations,
spiritualized, and made free of the bridegrooms bedchamber.

The spouse had admired the excellencies that are in Christ capa-pe Chap. 5. v.
10. to the end. My beloved is white and ruddy; his head is of most fine gold
etc. Now Christ to requite his church, extolls her graces, which she had by
reflection from himself, in a general manner Chap. 6. More particularly in
her several lineaments and members, in this Chapter: but in another method,
then Christ had done before, viz: beginning at the bottom, and so ascending
upwards, V. 1.
How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, thou princes daughter! These feet of
the Church do signify that readiness which is in the faithful to harken to,
and comply with the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This is to be Ephesians. 6.15.
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: as their feet which bring
glad tideings, i. e, of such as preach the Gospel are Romans 10.15.
beautiful; so do their feet shine that walk in the paths of the Gospel. And
as they are beautiful, so they are noble too; clad with shoes, i. e.
ingenious and freeborne, and so distinguished from slaves, which use to go
barefoot Esa. 20.4. All good Christians are These were more noble then. those
of Thes^alonica Acts 17.11.
Bereans, borne of an immortal seed; their pedigree is from heaven, who can
declare their generation? and borne to an immortal weight of glory; borne not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, or of the will of man but of God Jo.
1.13.

Next Christ commends the Navell of his Church, V 2.
as a round goblet, which wants not liquor; noteing the nutritive faculty of
the soul: that pipe or channel whereby grace is conveyed into the heart; as
the oil flowed from the olive trees, through golden pipes into the
candle-stick Zach. 4.12. or as the child in the womb is nourisht by the strings
of the navell, whence the Metaphor is immediately taken.

The breasts. V. 3.
of the Church are compared to two young Roes which are twins: these breasts are
the sincere milk of the word, contained in the two testaments, which are the
breasts of consolation, which we must suck, and wherewith we must be satisfied
Es. 66.11. They are said to be as the clusters of the vine, v. 8. because of
the sweet promises therein, which cherish and refresh the hearts of men: They
are called twins because of that likeness, and harmony which is betwixt
them; the law is (...), the law veiled, Iustine Martyr.
and clothed in types and figures: the Gospel is (...) the law revealed and
fulfilled.

The next step brings us to the text; which describes the neck and eyes of the
Church. I shall not hold you in suspense what my thoughts are concerning these
members. By neck I do not only understand the power of faith, whereby we are
utited to our head Christ Jesus; and whereby the life of grace is conveyed unto
his mystical members, as the spirits flow from the head through the Called the
silver cord Eccle. 12.6.
nerves, and sinews of the neck into the other parts of the body; I say,
though this neck is a tower of Ivory, which will not bow to the yoke of sin and
Satan; yet by neck, with the Caldee paraphrast and others, Ainsw. Hall etc.
I understand Magistrates who by their authority support the very frame of
government: are pillars to uphold order, and keep a decorum in the Church of
God; and are pipes to convey justice and equity, into all parts of a nation; as
the sun transmits her influences to us by her rays, which are her Mala. 4.2.
wings.

By eyes I shall not so much understand, the eye of knowledge, or of faith
whereby we see him that is invisible: or of repentance; when weeping for sin,
the eyes are blubberd, and become a fountain of tears Jer. 9.1. Or as the
pooles of Heshbon in the text: but by eyes I mean the Seers in the Church i.
e. the ministers of the word and Gospel. Gregory Nyslen.
Adducimur ut statuamus says a commentator on the text, we are persuaded as
it were by invincible reasons, that eyes in this place point forth those
speculatoys, i. e. watchmen, which are placed on the turrets of Gods house:
such as Heb. 13.17. Ezekiel. 33.6.
watch for souls as those (I quake to utter it} that must give an account, and
at whose hands (I tremble again) the blood of souls lost by their negligence
shall be required.

necessity of Magistrates and Ministers in the Church and state: even as the
neck and eyes are necessary members of the body natural.

pure, upright, beautiful, strong, and conragious, as a tower of Ivory.
Ministers must be clear and unblemish's both in life and doctrine; as the
fish-pooles in Heshbon.

Magistrates and ministers, are necessary members of the Church. Obs.
The body would be monstrous without a neck, and eyes: so would both Church and
State be, without these: But first let us observe, that the spirit here joins
them both together: and happy it is, where there is so near relation t'wixt
necks, and eyes; where the neck supports the eyes, and the eyes stand
Centinells, to watch, and look out for the good of the neck: it can not go well
with either of these, if there be not a mutual aid and assistance afforded to
each other, the Ecclesiastical power would quickly be contemned, and trodden
under foot; these eyes in the text, would even quite be scratche out, should
not the neck bestirre it self; should not the Magistrate stretch, forth his
sword to defend them: nay the secular power it self would be much impaird:
this neck would have a palsy; this tower would totter; if the Ministers should
not brandish their sword, the sword of the spirit which is the word of God, and
vindicate rulers from those sons of Bichri, I had almost said those sons of
Belial, Ester. 6.2.
Bightan, and Teresh, who are ready to cry with those Donatists in Optatus,
Quid nobis cum regibus?
what have we to do with rulers? Never Magistrates fared worse, then such as
were enemies to the prophets, as Saul, Ahab, etc.

None prosper'd better then such as were nursing fathers to Gods Ambassadors,
as David, Hezekiah; and Joash did what was right in the sight of the Lord, all
the days that Iehoiada the priest lived 2 Kin. 2.12. Iovinian protected truth,
and truth protected him: what made Theodosius and Constantine so famous among
the Roman Emperors, but their tenderness to those that waited at Gods Altar.
Moses knew this well when he went to Pharaoh, he made excuses, and demurres
Exodus 4.10. I am not eloquent. v. 13. O my Lord send by him whom thou will
send: until Aarons keys were added to the sword of Moses; till Aaron was made
to Moses instead of a mouth, and Moses to Aaron instead of a God, v. 16. Then
they go sweetly, and comfortably together Chap. 5. v. 1. Ps. 74.3.
The mountains shall bring peace, the mountains i. e. the rulers; so they are
called in the prophets, as Es. 41.15.
shady mountains, and God will thresh the mountains; the little hills shall
bring righteousness unto the people, The little hills i. e. the praco's and
cryers which preach the word of righteousness: but these little hills must sit
under the shadows of those mountains; these preachers must sit under the
command and protection of this Cant. 4.4.
tower of Ivory in the text; then righteousness and peace shall kiss each
other: when Magistrates and Ministers like the Elm and vine, are twisted
together, by a certain sympathy; they both thrive the better. The neck must
not say to the eyes, I have no need of you, nor the eyes to the neck I have no
need of thee. A Schism here would prove dangerous, to the dashing of Dum
singuli pugnant universi vincuntur. Tac.
both in pieces. Therefore let as many as have good will to Sion, pray that
these may go hand in hand; not as if we claimed an equality with you, or
exemption for your authority, much less, like so many popelings, a superiority
above you; no, we desire to be subject to Gods' Vicergerents; and that not for
fear but for conscience sake. Neither have we an itch to be tampering with
your chariot, or to thrust our fingers into temporal jurisdiction: much may
be said in this case, Rex Annius, rex idem hominum Phoebique sacerdos.
Sacerdotes enim in supremum senatum lecti fuere and cum summo populi ductore
consultabant de Rep.
from the example of Solomon, Melchisedech, the first borne among the children
of Israel, Eli, Samuel; the history of the Church for many ages, the
constitution of the Sanhedrim among the Jews: but I was never found of this
doctrine. I am sure we have business enough besides to take up the whole man:
and (...).
who is sufficient for these things? tractent fabrilia fabri, let every man
continue in that calling, wherein he is called; if called to the ministry, lets
wait on our ministering: those that are called to ruling, let them do it with
all diligence Romans 12.7, 8.

So much of the members jointly, as they cast a mutual aspect on each other.

The necessity of Magistrates 1. In respect of the whole state, a strange body
without a neck, a stranger state without rulers: we should quickly be resolved
into a paralitike body, if not held together by these nerves and sinews: as a
ship floating on the sea without a pilot, or like the sea it self without
banks: were it not for this tower of Ivory, we should all be as the tower of
Babel: This Olbion, this happy Island, would revolve, and degenerate into a
Saxony indeed, and become the mother of a cruel, hard hearted people, every
county would be commune latrocinium, a common robbery; instead of flowing with
milk and honey, it would flow with streams of blood; Non hospes ab hospite
tutus.
one man would be a Wolf, and Tiger to another: nay (...), like fishes, the
greater would devour the less: we should be as those barbarous Scythians who
did (...). Basil.
end their controversies, not in civil courts, as at this day, but in the
fields; not by the power of argument, but by the dint of the sword. The high
ways would be unoccupied as in the days of Anath Indg. 5. when men went
through byewaies. (...), Homer Iliads.
Pandarus where is your bow? should be our salutation instead of God speed! or
peace be with you! no walking safe without being clad in steel, as men travel
through forests with bills on their shoulders, for fear of wild beasts, Lam.
5. v. 12. The faces of the elders were not honored v. 14. The elders have
ceased from the gate, neither Assizes, nor Sessions; what then? the young men
ceased from their music: the joy of our heart is ceased, (...) Arist. Rhet.
our dance is turned into mourning v. 15. In the laws of a Nation consists the
safety of a Nation: therefore the gates of the Jewish Cities, as they were
seats of justice, so they were the Magazines and Armories of their strength;
hence are those phrases of meeting the enemy, and resisting the enemy in the
gate: the gates of Hell, and the gates of death: to show that the strength of a
Nation or City, does not more consist in the number of men, and arms, then in
the vigorous execution of Non extimui unquam homines quibus vacuus est locus in
media urbe i. e. forum, as Cyrus said foolishly of the Lacedaemonians Herod ot.
lib. 10.
justice; in cutting off rotten, gangrened, leprous members. The Kings throne
is established by justice, and Christ ordered his Kingdom in justice and
judgment Es. 9.7.

Such judgment is only condemned in scripture which is Amesius in casibus
conscientiae.
private and rash: and such going to law as is with scandal, and before
heathen judges; not when it is used as some medicines, for the last refuge, when
other means and ways will not prevail: (...).
not as pleasing sau^e; as too many spirits do sport themselves in this fire of
contention, like so many Salamanders, and never triumph more, then when they
get a victory in this civil war, though commonly the advantage will not
equal the loss: like two milstones, or like the flint and steel they spend
and wear out each others, to enrich and warm the pleaders box.

In respect of the Church too: two Rev. 11.
witnesses, or as poor infants scrawling in the streets; if Magistrates should
not carry them in their arms, by becoming nursing fathers, and nursing mothers
unto them, as Calvin understands that of Esa. 49.23. Alas! were it not for
these towers we should be exposed to wind, and weather; were it not for these
bulworkes, we should be overrunne with Atheism, Heresy, and Idolatry: when
Moses was gone to the mount, the Israelites were liberal in casting in their
Jewels, to make a molten calfe. Micah had an house of Gods, an Ephod, a
Teraphim, and to complete his Idolatry, he consecrated his son to be his
priest: Who was of the tribe of Ephraim and not of Levi; which fault he
rectified v. 13.
the circumstance of time is famous, in those days there was no King in Israel
Judge. 17.5, 6. As rulers are custodes utriusque tabulae the maintainers of
religion to God; of peace, and charity toward men, so ecce duos gladio^, Loel
here are two swords, one to cut off serpents, and w^olves (So De jure belli and
pacis lib. 2.
Grotius calls malefactors, that infest the civil state) another to strike
through the jaws of those Bears, and to restrain those petulant Foxes, that
would lay the Church wast. But as our eyes behold our teachers, so may we long
behold our rulers! that the scepter may not depart from our Judah, nor a
lawgiver from between her feet, till Shiloh shall come the second time, till
all power shall be resigned up to Christ, when he shall come to judgment! 1 Timothy 2.2.
And good reason we have to pray for those that are in Authority, that we may
live a quiet and peaceable life, (...)
in Espencaeus.
godliness and chastity; as if loosnesse and carnal licentiousness would
break in like a mighty torrent, Amos. 5.10.
if the gates of authority were flung off their hinges; if there were none to
reprove in the gate, sin would soon have an impudent, whorish forehead. And as
we must pray for them: so we must honor them too. They are Abimelecks, fathers
of their country, and so may claim honor by virtue of the fifth commandment,
they have on them Gods own stamp, Elohim. gods, therefore Exodus 22.28. Thou
shall not revile the gods, nor speak evil of the rulers of my people. Thou
shall not blaspheme the gods, so some read it: such Shimei's as dare bark at
all that is called God shall one time or other be met withal.

Now as we have seen the necessity of Magistrates, and what our demeanor
should be toward them, let us see also how they must carry themselves toward
such as are under them.

neck must be as a tower of Ivory.

1. They must as Ivory be pure, straight, 2 Kin. 19.17.
fair, transparent. Solomon's throne was of Ivory. The Curules among the Romans
sat in Chaires of Ivory, Sceptro innixus eburno.
which might be Emblems of innocent, and upright judgment: as the houses of the
gods were feigned to be roof't and sealed with Ivory Ebur nitidum fulgentia
tecta tegebat, and Jupiter had an Ivory scepter, to show that purity which was
thought to be amongst them: or as judges are still clothed in scarlet which is
of a deep, perfect, lasting dye, to put them in mind of integrity, and
conscientious constancy in the administration of justice.

Magistrates must be pure and clear in their lives and profession of religion,
as men. Let Machivilians, and Achitophels say what they will, those men are
like to be the best Magistrates, who are the best men; and that government
prospers best, which is grafted on the stock of religion; those rulers will
warpe with any base compliance, they will steer their course, according to the
Card of self interest, popularity, and sinister respects, who are not poised,
and principled upon religion, Luke 18.2.
and conscience: they will do injustice for a piece of bread: Amos. 2.6.
they will sell the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.

Constantine coming to the throne: Eulebius.
first made proclamation, that whosoever would not renounce the Christian
religion, and sacrifice to devils (supposing that some would serve the devil
himself to save, or get preferment) they should be none of his court; no
officers of state under him, but when he saw who would forsake. Christ to
cleave unto this present world; he discharged them, and retained those that
kept their constancy to the Christian religion; How shall they said he be
faithful to me, to their country, who are faithless to their God? The
application is easy.

All that profess themselves true members of Christ if they be not Cancers,
and excrescencies of that body, must be clothed with a wedding garment, with a
virgin tire of purity, and sincerity; casting away all sulli'd rotten rags,
which stink of the plague sore of sin, hating the very garment spotted with
the flesh, we must keep our garments undefiled here, if we hope to walk in
white hereafter Rev. 3.4. O how ugly is any private Christian swelling with a
Tympany of pride, envy, anger? burning in the flame of any lust? wallowing in
any uncleanesse, or vomit? eaten up with strange, heretical doctrine, Myrthe,
Alloes and Cassia were to be kept in Ivory palaces. i. e. wardropes: no sullied
things were to come there Ps. 45.8.
which eat as a canker? but how monstrous is a ruler roling in any Lerna's or
sinkes of filthyness; they should exceed others in piety and religion, as much
as they do in power and authority; others must be of Ivory, they, as towers of
Ivory, Inter eburna cupressi, as Saules among the people, in holiness. It Is an
arrant absurdity that men should be public governors; Annot.
and private slaves; at the beck of base lusts. (...) Basil.
The lives of rulers are very exemplary, David was called the light of Israel 2 Samuel 21.17. We count in genus obsequii a kind of duty to imitate their very
failings. They do live upon the pinacles of the world, In excelso vitam agere.
all men have an eye to their actions: Cyrus commanded the chief officers to
keep a strict reine over themselves, Xenophon
that was the way to keep the whole army in order. (...). Lucian.
Menippus reading of the incest, adulteries, murders of the gods, could say
presently, that the gods would never have done thus, Plurimos secum perdunt.
and thus, had they not known it to be lawful: thus wicked Magistrates
seldom fall alone, they draw many after them, as the Re. 12.4. (...)?
Chrysostom. (...). p. 22.
dragon, or Lucifer falling from heaven, drew the third part of the stars
after him, or as Sampsons death was accompanied with many of the Philistims.
But let such know, that occasion the falls of others, that their falls shall be
the more grievous, others falling upon them; their sorrow shall be aggravated
by the sorrow of others; As their sins affect their subjects with judgments.
Manasses filled Jerusalem with blood, so that Jerusalem was delivered to the
Caldeans, 2 King. 21.

As Magistrates, so they must be clear and pure as Ivory.

1. From acceptance of persons in judgment; friends, and kinsmen must not then
be known; as Zeleucus is stori'd to sentence his own son: Judges must be
like Melchisedech, without father, mother, allies; or as the Athenian judges,
who judged by night, when the faces of man could not be seen.

2. From rash judgment, Number. 9.4.
stand still said Moses, and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning
you; so God himself went down to Sodom, to see whether things were according
to their cry: Shaptim judges, comes from Shaphat, to measure, to lay a thing to
the line, to show what sober debate, what deliberation rulers should use before
passing sentence either in civil matters or criminal Nulla cunciatio longis
est. Vita hominum non est talorum ludus.


Yet 3. They must not be too dilatory, as long in bringing forth their verdicts
as the Elephant her young making suits as long as the Trojane war; this
protracting; and spinning out of time is complained of in every corner; poor
men say, they lose their right, because they have not means to follow the suit
May it not be said to such judges as the woman to Philip, ^^^lite re^nare, come
down from the Tribunal, and be no judges at all.

4. They must be clear and pure as Ivory from wresting and perverting of
justice by any sinister means. 1 Samuel 8.3.
I hope there are none amongst us like Samuels sons (...) who turned aside
after lucre, and perverted judgment, or Balaam the son of Basor, who loved
the wages of unrighteousness, but rather I wish them all like Samuel himself,
1 Sa. 12.3.
who made that challeng. whose Ox or Ass have I taken? whom have I oppressed
of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind my eyes therewith?

(...)
The word in Hebrew signifies a rock or a tooth, and by Synecdoche the bone or
tooth of an Elephant; (though I read of Ebur fossile dugge out of the earth:)
now as this beast's tooth is strong, so is he himself very daring, as those
can tell who have read how the Romans, Livie. Florus.
were disordered by the Elephants of Pyrhus; as here Magistrates are compared
to a tower of Ivory, Esa. 2.13, 14, 15. Rev. 8.8.
so elsewhere to the horns of a Unicorne, Cedars of Lebanon, Oaks of Bashan,
high towers. This strength and courage is requisite.

1. To curb the power of the sturdiest offenders; not to fear the faces of
men, Hoc reges habent magnificum, and ingens; nulla quod rapiat dies: prodesse
miserissupplices fido lare protegere. Sen. Trag.
though they have the faces of Lions. I call to mind that the stepps to
Solomon's throne were supported with Lions, to show that such as ascend the
bench should have Lion-like courage to rescue poor lambs from those (...),
those oppressing Canniballs, that would eat the flesh and break the bones, and
drink the blood of the poor and helpless.

For their own sakes to support Tres labores difficilimi, regentis, docentis
parturientis, Melanchton in ejus vita. Melch Ad.
vexations, and all the murmurings and repinings of the people: the words in
the text imply this, the word neck in the Original imports, to be pressed
down as the neck with burdens. A tower which lies open to wind and weather,
to show that government is a burden; and though rulers are high as towers, yet
they are more exposed to thunder and tempests; therefore the vine and olive
would not leave their fatness, Summas feriunt fulmina turres. Sinistris
oculis. Tacitus.
and sweetness that they might reign. Saul being elected to the Kingdom hid
himself among the stuff 1 Sa. 10.22. We are too apt to look a squint on those
in high places, Quanta bellua esset imperium? Sueton.
and too thirsty are all after power; yet as Tiberius told his friends, we
little know, what a Leviathan a Kingdom is, Aeneae fidus Achates, from (...)
dolor.
how the pillowes of great ones are stufft with thorns, and sleep flies from
their eyes; the poor cottage harbors more sweet rest, then the greatest
palace; the shepherds crook more pleasant then the Kings Scepter. (...).
Ruling is a neckworke, his government shall be upon his shoulders. The earth
said David is out of course, I bear up the pillars of it; therefore raise up
your braewny necks, that they may not sink under such a burden; gird up your
swords upon your thighs, O ye mighty in majesty, ride on prosperously, Psalm.
45.3, 4.
because of truth, meekness, and righteousness; let your arrows be sharp in
the hearts of the King of heavens enemies; let your necks be as a tower of
Ivory. I mean not that you should have stiff necks, as wedded to your own
wills, or necks strecht out with haughtiness, as some of the other Sex, do
openly glory in their Ivory and Alabaster necks; but strong and courageous in
the business of the day. Eze. 7.26.
Whosoever will not do the law of God, or the King, let him have judgment
without delay; whether to death, banishment, confiscation of goods or
imprisonment.

The necessity of Ministers in the Church together with their qualification, in
a word: thine eyes shall be as the fish pooles in Heshbon.

What Centinells are in an army, what shepherds are to a flock, what nurses are
to little infants, what architects to apile of building what the Levites to the
Arc, what the eyes are to the body; that are the Ministers of the Gospel to
the Church; Sublapsa ruunt subductis recta columnis. (...). Ignatius ad
Trallianos.
they are (...) Gal. 1.9. Pillars, and take away these props, the whole
fabric goes to ruin, the Church is no elect, no perfect Church at all. God
has given some prophets, some evangelists, for the perfecting, and polishing
the saints for the edifiing or building up of the body of Christ. They are
ordained, to bring men from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God,
Acts 20.16. D. Reinolds
Therefore before the destruction of a place, it is observed, that God does
either remove, or infatuate these eyes. As the world would be a wilderness
without rulers: so without ministers too; we should swarm with serpents,
lions, (...). Cle. Alex.
oppressors; swine, (i) voluptuous; wolves, (i) ravenous persons: were they not
softened and tamed by the preaching of the Gospel, which causes the lion and
the lamb, the leopard and the kid to ly down together, and makes persecutors
be as Saul's among the prophets.

When I speak of the necessity of these eyes, I would be understood of these in
the text, which are as the fishpooles in Heshbon. Fishpooles i. e. fruitful,
and multipliing (as fishes) in all acts of holiness: pooles i. e. clear and
christalline in life and doctrine, powerful and diligent in the work of the
ministry, so that men might see the faces of their consciences, in the glass
of their sermons. Such as had remarkable blemishes might not serve in the
Sanctuary, that's a sad text Cant. 5.7. The watchmen and keepers of the wall
themselves, smote and wounded the Church, and tooks away her veil, the badge
of modesty and subjection, as if she had been a strumpet or the subject of
reproach. Genesis 24.65. 1 Cor. 11.10. Eze. 23.25.26.
Far be it from me to speak in the behalf of eyes blinded with ignorance, as
blind as beetles, Seeres per Antiphr^sin, eyes that are bl^er^yed, nay blood
shotten with Heresy and blasphemy; eyes full of adultery, covetousness or any
uncleanesse; that have in them not only the motes, but whole beams of sin;
eyes like those of Basiliskes, charming and bewitching eyes, red with wine, and
distorted with envy, sparkling with anger; better my tongue should cleave to
the roof of my mouth, or my eyes start out of my own head then be an advocate
for such eyes as these; where ministers are bad; they are like Origin, when he
wrote amiss, none worse; Jer. 24.3.
or like the basket of naughty figs in Jeremiahs vision, very naughty. Yet as
I will not be their proctour, so I need not be their prosecutour. They have
their vigilant Judges also tiding their Circuits, Mal. 3.5.
who are swift witnesses against them; like the flying role Zach. 5, to out off
such rotten members from the sanctuary of the Lord, that with Hymenaeus, and
Alexander they may learn, not to blaspheme. Only I pray; that such as act in
that Authority, may be actod themselves with a spirit of moderation, lest the
sound, and rotten; Sarah, and Hagar; Rachell, and Leah should suffer together:
lest Sion, and the High places be covered with mourning; and the sons of
Levi, instead of purgeing, and purifying, should be Confounded.

I have but one thing more to leave with you, Judges.
my Lords. 1. viz. where you find eyes qualified as these in the text; for Gods
sake! for the Churches sake! Tunica cornea, Chri^^allina, palpebrae,
supercilium. Nyssen.
for your own souls sake, be gentle and tender toward them. Imitate Nature
it self, which has wrapped the Eyes in several Covers; set skulls, lids, and
brows, to shelter, and guard them from injuries.

Indeed I do not wonder in these times, that men do so bandy against the
ministers of the Gospel: their deeds are very evil, and therefore they hate
the light: they are deformed, and so care not for the glass of the word; they
are light, and chaffy, and so loath to be fanned, and winnowed; nay rotten and
loathsome, and therefore they startle at this two edged sword of the spirit,
lest they should be dissected and bleed under reproves; whereas they are
settled on their lees, and hate to be reformed. Sin is almost full and come to
its (...), grown ripe, and calls for the sickle of Gods judgment, Adulta
vitia. Omne in praecipiti vitium.
to cut us down. The Master of the house is called Beelz^bub; Christ is robbed
of his due, and clothed with reproach, and shall his meniall servants go free?
when persecution begins at the house of God? nay lets comfort our selves,
Magnificentissimum cum Deo periclitari. Nazians Si nos ruimus ruet Christus.
Luther.
that we are imbark't upon the same bottom, and are fellow sufferers with
Christ himself; I say again let us praise our God, who has set banks to the
fury of men, to restrain it, seeing they are so wrathfully displeased against
us; cursed be their wrath for it is feirce, and their rage for it is cruel.

This has bin Satan's stratagem in all ages, as of the Philistims toward
Sampsons; and the wolves in Demosthenes toward the sheep; first to demand
their dogs, and then make a covenant with them; or as the foul which carries
dust into the air in her claws, and then lets it down with the wind, that it
may fall into the eyes of that beast, whereon she desires to prey; so Satan
presumes, he can more easily captivate, and worry the souls of men; when their
seers, and leaders are taken out of the way.

Though I do not wonder at this; yet I should wonder that Christian Magistrates
should stand by, Davenant Quaest. 17.
and stand still to see those eyes pulled forth; seeing the next stroke is most
like to be at their throats; if Jesuited Papists, according to their
principles, cannot be good subjects to Protestant princes, I leave it with
knowing men; whether Leyden and Munster, may not send forth as dangerous
Emissaries to governors as Rhenes and Doway.

As for you right worshipful Justices of the peace; Justices.
it was the saying of a King of this Nation, K. James his speech in the star
Chamber.
that he did respect a good Justice of the peace, as he did those next his
person, as much as a privy counselor. I am sure good laws are but dead
ordinances, a bell without a clapper, except you put life unto them; they are
but notionall, and in the Theory (...) if you do not execute them, and reduce
them unto practice, and act the Acts of Parliament. I am not come to blame your
backwardness herein; I know your zeal (I speak of those I know) against
Alehouses, sabbath breakers, swearers, revells in our parrishes, when by
complaint we address our selves unto you; you dare own and countenance the
ministers of the Gospel: Even in this very age, you are ready to compose and
umpire differences, in these contentious days: Go on still, as you need not
doubt of encouragement from the honorable Judges here; so may you less fear,
to be rewarded by the judge of heaven and earth, quick and dead hereafter.

I hope you of the honorable profession of the Law, Lawyers.
will save me a labor; Mihi tam familiare est omnes cogitationes meas tecum
co^ municandas, i^sde^que te vol praeceptis vel exemplis monere quibus ipse me
moneo, Plinius. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 24.
your own hearts cannot but dictate unto you, what mine has suggested unto me;
viz. to be so much the more cautious, and circumspect; by how much the world is
more clamorous, and querulous against us; this is the best way to confute the
calumnies of men, even by our integrity; I say our integrity; because you are
called sacerdotes justitiae, the priests of justice, and so you will come under
the compass of my text, and must be as the fish-pooles in H^shbon.

It was a grievous complaint in Cyprians time; Innocence was not, Innocentia
non est ubi defenditur. In Epis: ad Donatum.
where it was pretended to be defended, and men were lawless amidst the laws:
whilst they pleaded the law of men, they brake the law of God: Solomon long
before had observed the like Eccle. 3. 16. I saw under the Sun, the place of
judgment, and unrighteousness was there: I saw the place of righteousness,
and lo iniquity was there; now that it may not be so amongst you; let me give
you one Caveat; Cyprian. Ibidem.
take heed of that prostitutae vocis venalis audacia, of painting a rotten
cause with the varnish of Sophistry and Eloquence: Nazis
this is to cast the flowers of Rhetorike upon a sepulcher: This is cum lingua
scortari, to constuprate; nay murder justice, when by your Midwifry, you should
bring it to light. Alas! what good shall all fees do you? when the great judge
shall frown, and your own consciences shall vomit up all ill gotten goblets;
then the clearer you have bin in your practice here; the more comfort shall you
meet at another bar, and the brighter shall you shine in another firmament.

You of the several Juries: Jury.
Be faithful in the discharge of your oaths this day: be neither partial, nor
rash: steer your course twixt rigorous severity, and foolish pity; for (...),
to be prodigal of mercy, is as dangerous to a Commonwealth, as too much
rigor: As a Tyrannical governor is better then at none all. A little blood
seasonably shed, does prevent a greater torrent afterward; therefore endeavor
to temper mercy and judgment together: Be not meal mouthed in concealing, or
mineing the abuses of the County, bring them to the physicians of the State
that they may be healed, be not indulgent to swearers, and drunkards: say not
all is well, when sin eccho's so loudly, like the Amalekites cattle in the
ears of Samuel: this is to exempt them from the answer of men, and to expose
both your selves, and them to the vengeance of God.

As for those that wait on either Court to give in their Testimonies; Witnesses.
I need only to mind them of the awful Majesty of God, by whom they are to
swear; even the almighty God of truth; therefore take heed of invoaking him to
justify a lie. Solemn oaths were to be taken before the Altar. 1 King. 8.31.
which was a sign of Gods presence; that the greater fear, and reverence might
be wrought in men; therefore still, we lay our hands on the book: a false oath
will recoyle into your own bosoms, and the venom of it will drink up your
own spirits; the greatest mischeife will be to your own souls. D. Zouch.
Perjury says a learned Civilian, is worse then Atheism; the Atheist denies
there is a God, and lives accordingly; but the forsworn man acknowledges there
is a God, swears by him, yet derides him; such persons make this land to
groan and mourn. Let these words Jer. 4.2. be always in your thoughts, in
your hearts; Ex. 28.36.
thou shall swear in truth, in righteousness, in judgment, so shall
righteousness unto the Lord be set up in the midst of you: The gates of
Bath-Rabbim shall this day shine; and you shall make preparation to enter
through another gate: you shall pass from the gate of Sion, to the gate of
heaven; from the Areopagus, or Hill of justice, to the holy Mount of eternal
mercyes. From Bath-rabbim, the daughter of a multitude, to Rabbim a multitude
indeed; from one assembly to another; from a mixed Assembly, of an handful of
men, to the general Assembly, and Church of the firsthorne; nay to an
innumerable company of Angels, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.
And now me thinks, I am so rapt up, and ravished with this advantageous
exchange, of rags for robes, and dirt for gold; that I find my spirits quite
moved into another channel; I must leave preaching, and begin to pray, that
God of his infinite mercy, would in his good time, make us all free of that
Jerusalem which is above.

Ps. 82. v. 1. God stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among
the gods.


THere was no Nation under heaven to be compared with the children of Israel,
for happiness and glory: in that God was so nigh unto them, in all things that
they called to him for; as Moses makes the challenge in their behalf Deu. 4.7.
And indeed happy are the people that are in such a case, yea blessed are the
people (which after this manner) have the Lord for their God; and David gives
the reason: for in his presence there is fullness of joy Ps. 16.11. Are not we
happy upon this account, at this present? if we knew but our own happiness:
may not we take up Moses his gantlet? and answer his challenge? May not we
confront our Goshen, with the Israelites Canaan? and compare the Lords going
out before us in his word, and spirit, with his going before them in a pillar
of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night? We have not only a title to
Gods general presence, as he fills heaven and earth; For so he is always
about our paths, and about our bedds, either to smile Ubi non est per gratiam,
ibi est per vindictam.
or frown upon us: Act. 17.27.28.
for in him we live, move, and have our being: Whither shall I go from thy
spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? Ps. 139.7, 8, 9. But now, I
hope we are all met together in the name, and fear of God, here at the mercy
seat, at the A^ks of the Testimony, and then God will not only treat with us
by his delegates, his Angels; but God himself will vouchsafe to give us a
meeting. We have his own promise for it Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are met
together in my name, there am I (...) in the midst of them: there is his
special, gracious, propitious, saving presence: He stands in the Congregation:
(...) Herodian.
so that it is no paradox to affirm, that this place is heaven it self. Rome is
there where the Emperor is; the court is there where the supreme magistrate
does reside; and Heaven it self is there, where God vouchsafes his special
presence; and therefore the Church of God is so often called, the kingdom of
heaven in the Gospel. But we have another advantage of Gods presence at this
juncture of time. The gods are come down unto us, in the likeness of men; and
where these gods upon earth are assembled, the God of heaven will not be far
off. -- God stands in the Congregation of the mighty: he judges among the
gods.

Basil speaking of this book of the Psalms, (...), p. 55.
calls it a common treasury, or storehouse of all wholesome doctrines; standing
in the middle or center of the scriptures, as if the lines of the whole book of
God met in the book of the Psalms: Here are seasonable lessons for men in all
conditions.

Art thou under the harrowes and sawes of outward affliction? art thou roaring
with Heman under spiritual desertions? art thou stretching thy self upon thy
bed of languishing? art thou oppressed, imprisoned, derided? Here are Elegies,
mournful dities, whereby thou may empty thy soul, or allay thy sorrow.

Art thou elevated or dilated with inlargements of heart? do thou flourish as
the palm tree, or sprout as the cedar in Lebanon? from the sense of heavenly
grace? from the sent of the waters of the sanctuary, or from the comfortable
looks of Gods cheerful countenance? do thou wash thy stepps in butter?
Job. 29.6.
and do the rocks pour thee out rivers of oil, do^st thou wallow in
prosperity, and swim with a continued tide of success? Here are Tehillim
whole Rapsodies of hymns, to set forth the praises of God for these mercyes,
is any merry let him sing Psalms, James. 5.13. and it were well if the fumes
and vapors of rotten songs, and Enthusiasticall raptures, might give place to
this (...) Basil.
spiritual incense, this heavenly, and ravishing converse with God.

Is any ensnared with sin, and would he like Samson cast from him these
Philistian cords, and break off his sins by repentance; Here are
poenitentialls, psalms of repentance suitable to men in such a penitent
condition. In a word: are you rulers, public persons: and would you know how
to discharge a good conscience toward God, and men? that when you may pass
from forum soli to forum poli, Matthew. 19.28.1 Cor. 6.2.
from your benches to thrones; from judging an handful of men, to judge the
twelve tribes of Israel, nay the whole world; from judging of men to judge
Angels: Know you not that we shall judge Angels. 1 Cor. 6.3.

Would you have the end of your Circuits, to be the beginning of eternal rest
and Vos cum statione peracta praelati regia coeli ex cipier gaudente polo.
Lucan. Oquisquis voluit impias caedes, and rabiem tollere civicam, and ind
omitam audeat refraenare licentiam, clarus post genitis. Hor. lib. 3. Ps. 78.72.
glory? would you have your scarlet gowns, to be turned into the whit^ robes
of the Saints? come, and sit down at the feet of my Kingly prophet; let him be
your Gamaliel: He has the best politickes in the would; he was a ruler
himself, and indeed he was a very good one: He fed his people according to the
integrity of his heart, and he guided them by the skilfulnesse of his hands;
and from his experience in the mystery of government, he bequeaths (...) a
Kingly gift indeed to those who succeed him in power and authority: This he
does in many other Psalms, but ex professo in this: It was sung before the
Judges as they went to the Judgment Hall. Judicibus consessuris praecinebatur.
Do but read it over (right honorable) and the preachers labor may be saved;
for therein is a complete Judges Sermon, apples of gold in pictures of silver,
most apposite, and pertinent Mementoes for all sorts of Magistrates: Every
verse does execution upon some, or other. Are any Corrupt? How can I say more,
then what is set down, v. 2. How long will ye judge injustly, and accept the
persons of the wicked? Are any Ignorant, they may find themselves reproved, v.
5. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darkness.

Are any proud and haughty' let them ruminate on v. 6, 7. I have said yet are
goas, and children of the most high, but ye shall dye like men, and fall like
one of the Princas.

Are any lawless, and tyrannical? let them ruminate on v. 8. There lies an
appease from them to Heaven; Arise, o God, and judge the earth, for thou
inherit' shall Nations.

Would I study for a seasonable charge to give unto you at this present? all my
skill and industry cannot compose a better, then what is made to my hands v. 3,
4. Defend the poor, and fatherlssse: do justice to the afficted and needy: rid
them out of the hand of the wicked. What can I say more? but that I must say
all over again, in the words of my text; from whence, as from the maine
doctrinall head, the following verses, as so many excellent uses, are all
derived. God stands in the congregation etc.

1. Here is something affirmed concerning governors, they are mighty, they are
gods, as they look downwards, or as they stand in relation to us.

2. Here is something concerning the All-mighty, or the God of gods, and what
his actings are toward these mighty gods; He stands among them, he judges
among them. Though they are mighty and gods, yet they are not absolute, and
uncontrollable, they are deo minores, more inferior, and subordinate unto him,
then we are to them; for their Jurisdiction extends but to men's bodies, and
estates, but he restraines the very Spirits of Princes, and their very hearts
are in his hands.

Take the whole sense of the text in this.

Obs. That God is present in an especial and powerful manner among
magistrates, when they are solemnly assembled for the decision of
controversies, and the administration of justice and judgment. As Paul told the
Corinthians, when they were convented to excommunicate the incestuous person,
when ye are gathered together and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Cor. 5.4.


For the fuller handling of this proposition, lets resolve and take it asunder
into these particulars.

1. The power and strength of rulers, El, mighty. 2. Their honor and dignity,
Elohim, gods; and these parts are in the first General.
In Gods actings toward rulers, there are also two particolars.

1. He stands among them. 2. He judges among them; and what these expressions
do import we shall see in their proper place; of all these parts, I shall speak
as Chrysostom begins an oration of his, (...). Tom. 52. page 680.
not aiming to delight and tickle your ears and fancies, but to instruct your
hearts and consciences.
1. Their power and strength El, mighty.

There are two interpretations which put fair to exclude rulers out of the
former part of this text.

First, by mighty, some would understand Angels; The Rabbis go this way; and
indeed mighty is a proper and common Epithete for Angels, they are (...)
s;trong or mighty Angels Rev. 10.1. They are (...), the Angels of his power,
or his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7 They are the valiant of Israel: In the old
Testament, they are called Cherubins, and Serophins, in the new, Ephesians. 3.10.
principalities, and powers. When they are spoken of figuratively and
mystically, they are called by the names of Eagles, Lions, Horses, Ezekiel. 1.10.
Rev. 4.7.2 Kings. 16.17.
and Chariots of Fire; therefore this very word El, mighty, is a usual affixe,
or termination of their names, as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael: you may guess at
the might of Angels, by what one of them did, in the camp of the Assyrians; He
smote in one night an hundred fourscore and five thousand: Esa. 37.36.
Good reason then had our Savior to inform Peter, that he was not apprehended
of the Jews through weakness, as if he could not have rescued himself out of
their hands, seeing he could pray to his father, and he would presently give
him more them twelve. Legions of Angels, Matthew. 25.63. God stands among these;
they always behold the face of God; (...), his nuntio's to go for the
protection of his people, or the destruction of his and their enemies.

Secondly; by mighty, may we not understand the righteous and faithful people
of a Nation? who are as so many Bullewarkes, all spiritual Kings, the Israel
of God: you may see the Etymology of Israel, Genesis 32.28. Thy name shall not be
called Jacob, but Israel, for as a Prince have thou power with God and men, and
have prevailed.

They have power with God, to wrestle with him; to extort blessings from him;
and as if he did yield the field to these Champions, Ex. 32.10.
as one over-powred, he cries out to Moses, Moses let me alone.

1. They are mighty with God to ward off his judgments from nations, Genesis 18.32.
Cities, families; as if ten righteous persons could have been found in Sodom,
they should have been sheltr'd from that storm of fire and brimstone: If one
man could have been found in Jerusalem, that did execute judgment, the Lord
would have pardoned it. Jer. 5.1. Israel shall be ablessing in the midst of the
land: Esa. 19.24.
But if the righteous can not safeguard others, they shall secure themselves;
Ite ad Pellam Josephus. Eze. 14.14. Justa precatio res inexpugnabilis:
Eusebius. page 184. James. 15.16. Ut tela hostium in eos qui jecerant,
retorqueret. Ruffinus, page 203. lib. 2. c. 33.
when the worst comes, Lot shall finds a Zoar; and the faithful in Jerusalem a
Pella to fly unto: Though Noah, Daniel and Job were in the city they should but
deliver their own souls through their righteousness. The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much; It Is even irresistible, (...): prayer,
wrought in us from heaven, ascends as high as heaven. Famous is the story of
Theodosius in his war against Eugenius, when he procured such a storm, that
that cloud of arrows which was shot at him, was beaten back again into their
own faces.

2. They are mighty to prevail with men too; not through the might of their
own swords, and bows; but in that the Lord does secretly fight their
battles, by striking a terror, and a Panike fear into their adversaries. Ex.
23.27, 28.
He sent Hornets before the children of Israel, to drive out the Canaanites
before them. Though they were Giants, and their towns, in a scripture
Hyperbole, walled up to the Heaven, yet the inhabitants of the land fainted and
melted before the wel-night tired Isrealites; Josh. 2.9.
and their walls came tumbling down with the noise of rams horns, as if
they had been enchanted. Out of weakness the children of Israel became strong,
waxed valiant in battle, and put to flight the armies of aliens. He. 11.34.
The Lords band has not been shortened in latter times, for when the insolting
enemy has come in as a flood, and Goliah-like, even defied the host of Israel,
and had thought to have eaten up our flesh, they stumbled and fell; and by poor
and despicable instruments in appearance, did the Lord thrash these mountains:
God stood among them, and was a wall of brass to defend them; but a flame of
fire to lick up their enemies: as in his light we see light, so in his might
we are made mighty, more then conquerors. God is our refuge and strength, a
present help in trouble. Psalm. 46.1. But neither of these senses (how
plausible soever, or true in themselves) are to be grafted upon this text: We
must seek for a third, viz: by mighty we understand Magistrates, as appears by
the tenor of the whole Psalm.

These are mighty, Romans 13.4.
in that they are girt with the sword of justice, to execute wrath upon them
that do evil: this sword is keen and glittering, not to be borne in vain, not
to rust in the scabbard, but to be brandisht against Malefactors. When private
men will be tampering with the sword, they shall perish with the sword, as
Christ told Peter; but when guilty persons fall by the hand of lawful
authority, they are not cruelly murderred, Dum rependit magistratus rependit
dominus Spanhem. Dub. Evang. (...) from Anak.
but justly sacrificed. We read of Scanderbergs sword, and other worthies; but
this is longer and reaches far her then theirs; as Rulers have many eyes to see
by, so they have many brawny arms to weld, and manage this sword withal:
Strip the Magistrate of this sword, and then like Sampson, when his locks were
cut off; He will become the sport of the Philistims.

This sword has two edges. 1. Of awe, majesty and authority, which we call
(...) or potestas; as the very roaring of the Lion, makes the beasts of the
field to tremble, and where the word of a King is, there is power. Eccl. 8.4.
Good men will worship and fear God, though there were noe day of judgment, nor
any Hell fire, out of very conscience to the will of God; so good subjects will
keep within the bounds of piety, and charity, not only for fear, but for
conscience sake, as the Ruler has upon him the image of divine authority: but
if the roaring of the Lion, or the word of a King will not serve, then 2. The
Lion has claws to tear in pieces; the King has a mighty sword, to restrain
men from violence and injustice, that so, formidine poenae, they may learn
their duty to God, and men. As the Judicial law among the Hebrews, was a hedge
or fence to the Moral law, Non est religionis cogere religionem. Tertul.
Religione^ impetare non possemus, quia nemo cogitur ut credat invitus.
Cassiodorus. Var. lib. 2. cap. 27.
so the law of the land well executed is a good gaurd to the law of God; and
though compulsion cannot make men truly good as they ought to be, yet it may
keep them from being so bad as otherwise they would be.


There is good reason that Magistrates should thus have swords with two edges,
the sword of the Lord, and the sword of Gideon, both for the preservation of
themselves, and their people.

It is true, God forbids the King to multiply horses to himself, Deu. 17.16.
Not as if it were unlawful to provide for the strength and safety of a Nation.
but,

1. He must not multiply horses to trust in them, or to depend upon them: for
so the strongest horse will be but a vain thing to save a man, and the arm of
flesh but a broken reed; This was David's fault, not his simple numbering, and
mustering his people, but his relying on their strength.

2. A ruler must not multiply horses, either to oppress his people, or to put
them to excessive, and unnecessary M. Latymers first Sermon, before K.- Edward
6. Non tondere sed deglubere, Sucton, Tyberius.
tribute for to maintain them, lest they should not only fleece them, but flay
of their very skins, Mic. 3.3.

I never Christianus nullius est hos^ is, nedum Imperatoris, Tertul: ad
Scapulam.
envied at the State and might of Magistrates; when they flourish, it will be
the better for us, the greater is their strength, the more will be our
security: we shall be safe under the shadow of their wings, and breath as it
were with the breath of their nostrills. Troy was safe, whilst the Palladium
continued there; Salva Roma, salva patria, salvus est Germanicus: Rome is safe,
our Country is safe, for Germanicus is safe; murmuring, and tumultuous
sedition against the head, does commonly end, as that mutiny of the members
against the belly; the hands would not work, nor the feet go, nor the mouth
eat, because the belly devoured all; till at last, these members were so
feeble, that they could not help themselves.

The shrubs in the fable being over-topt with some Oaks, which grew amongst
them, petitioned that these Oaks might be cut down, and all might be made
level; well, annuit Jupiter, it was so, what then? the Winter storms came and
beat them to the ground, and the summers heat scorcht them up; the Moral is
very plain.

Once more: Aelian. de Animal. l. 5. cap. 11.
(...) etc. So long as the Master Be commands, the whole swarm is at peace;
the drones rest in their Cells, the young Bees in theirs, and the old ones in
theirs; but if h^ miscarry, (...) etc. no Be knows his own Cell; so it is in a
Commonwealth, all things are full of disorder and confusion, where the sinews
of government are loosened: our very lives are bound up with theirs that rule
us.

As might is necessary for rulers, so it is to be wished that they would temper it
with mildness and gentleness, that they might not so much force, as win
obedience. Where is there a better decorum of obsequiousness, then among the
Bees? yet the Leader there is (...), mild and without any sting at all, says
the Naturalist: nay; this is to be like God himself, who is (...), All-mighty;
yet chooses to draw his servants after him, Cant. 1.3.
by the sweet odours, and ointments of his graces: He makes them a willing
people in the day of his power, Ps. 110.3.
so that they can say, 2 Cor. 5.14.
the love of God constraines us. Constantine thought it a reproach to his
government, that any of his subjects should appear before him with a Domisso
and lugubri vulcu. Euse. page 159. lib. 4.
sad and discontented countenance. As this will beget mutual love, and
cheerfulness; so it will add to the might of Magistrates: No such
Fortresses, as the hearts of the people, was our good Debora's Maxim.
Dioclesian thought he had upbraided Constantine, when he called him poor and
beggarly Prince; Euse. page 121. lib. 1. de vita Constantini.
but Constantine sends for his rich subjects, tells them, he wanted money;
they presently fill his Exchequer up to the brimme, and confirms this truth,
that the cords of love draw with greatest strength.

2. Their honor and dignity, Elohim, gods. And might when it is rightly derived,
and well managed is always a good step to honor: Men of courage and might are
famous in the Congregation, men of renown; but to heighten their esteem among
men, they have a title above men, above humane Herauldry; as if when they are
translated from private men to become rulers, (...). Hom.
they receive an (...), and are consecrated unto gods.

Q. Is not this contrary to Hezekiahs prayer? thou art God; thou alone, 2 Kings
19.15. To that of Moses. Hear O Israel! the Lord thy God is one; to that of
God himself He is jealous of his honor, and will not communicate it to
another. Has not he expressly forbid our having more gods than one?

A. To reconcile these differences; Saint Paul must be the Umpire, 1 Cor. 8.5,
6. To us there is but one God, the father: of whom are all things, and we in
him; so far by way of concession: Though there be that are called gods,
whether in heaven or in earth, as there be gods many, and lords many: This is
by way of distinction, (...), as Chrysostom glosses upon the places: They are
not gods indeed, but in title; not by nature and essence, but in office; not
Jehovah, but Elohim, which is sometimes communicable to angels and men, as the
learned observe.

1. Rulers are gods by deputation, anointed to be his Vicegerents, his
Lieutenants, and representatives here upon earth, having Commission from him;
he calls them gods, to whom the word of God came; the word of God, Jo. 10.3.5.
(i. e.) by an Hebraisme, his warrant and authority. For as the judgment of the
great day, is attributed unto Christ; We shall stand before the judgment seat
of Christ: Act. 17.32
and he has appointed a time to judge the world in righteousness, by that man
whom he has ordained; because Christ has a body, and so will be visible to the
world: so does God now judge among us, in a visible manner by men, like our
selves; In this respect Peter calls Magistracy (...), a humane ordinance,
because it is exercised by men, and vers't among men, though the commission it
self is from God.

2. They should be gods in imitating the judgment of God, judging deliberately,
uprightly, boldly, severely, and mercifully, as occasion shall serve: not
sparing fat Agag's; rich and potent Benhadads, and in the mean while
neglecting or oppressing the widow, and fatherless, which will do them the
most mischeife at the throne of Grace; 1 Cor. 4.14.
I speak not these things to shame you, but as my beloved friends, I warn you.

1. By way of caution to rulers themselves; Appli.
lest this glorious title should swell them up with ambition; as Alexander,
Domitian, the King of Babel etc. Ezekiel. 28.2
Esa. 14.14. would have bin taken for gods indeed, Dan. 6.7, 9
and so be worshipped with divine honor. Herod would thus rob God of his glory,
by owning and assuming to himself that blasphemous acclamation; The voice of a
God, and not of a man; but you may read his doom Act. 12.23. (...), he was
eaten up of worms.

Neither must rulers think, because they are called gods, they may do what they
list; and have a privilege for looseness and licentiousness, Qui selecti
erant nobilitate criminum, non dignitate virtutum. August. de Civitate Dei lib.
7. cap. 33.
as too many turn the grace of God into wantonness: This is to be like the
heathen gods, who were deified not for their virtues, but for their crimes.
Magistratus virum, power will show what is in man; as a manis truly that which
he is in temptation.

By way of direction unto them. If gods; how should all their carriage, and
courses be like unto Gods, and answerable to this glorious title? What a strong
engagement should this be, to lay forth all your interest, for the glory of
God, and promoting of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Shall I take my body, which
should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and make it the member of an harlot?
God forbid; So may you say, shall I that am a God, do any thing that is
corrupt, and divelish? God forbid. Shall I be like a Marble Sepulcher, which
has upon it the superscription of such a Prince, or such a Noble man, and
within there is nothing, but stench and rottenness.

Tertullian speaking of the Pallium, Sub hujus recogitatu mali mores vel
erubescant. p. 8. de pallio.
or grave robe says; wicked manners should even blush to lurk under it: so me
th^nkes, what is divelish should blush to be in a Magistrate, seeing he has
upon him the name of God. As God has honored rulers more then other men: so
they should honor him, more then others: I will get me to the great ones,
Jer. 5.5. They should know the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God:
What a shame is it then, if these should break the bonds of Christ, and cast
his cords from them? What a vile speech was it of that Judge, Luke. 18.4. I
fear not God, nor regard men, I hope you tremble to hear it, not as Falix
trembled, out of guilty fear, but from the fear of guilt. I am sure he was a
fool for saying so. Religion supports the Throne; if this be despised, down
comes that. The ruler stands surest, when he stands upon the holy Hill of Sion.
Ps. 2.6.
If rulers are negligent in the service of God, they are weary of their places,
and become the greatest traitors to themselves, and their posterity. As Latymer
in a sermon of his before King Edward the sixth, from Deuteronomy. 17.19.20. He shall
learn to fear the Lord his God, to the end he may prolong his days in his
Kingdom, he, and his children in the midst of Israel; even as there is a
promise annexed to our obedience to superiors, in the fif^ commandment.

3. By way of information to our selves. If they be Gods, then they may
challenge reverence, and honor from us. When Paul called the High Priest
whited wall, he said he knew not what, therefore he recanted. I knew not,
Colimus Imperatorem solo Deo minorem. Tertullian.
said he, that he was the High Priest. We reverence the Emperor, said the
primitive Christians, next and immediate to God himself.

Methinkes these solemnities, occasion aweful thoughts of the day of judgment;
the Satellites or Spearmen may put us in mind of those thousands of Angels,
which shall minister unto him; the sounding of the trumpets, of that last
trumpe; the cross-pleadings, of the accusing or excusing of our own
consciences; the judge, of Christ him self; and his Co-assessors, of the
Saints that shall sit with Christ upon thrones.

I know that attributing so much honor to the Magistrate, will sound ha^sh
with the Advocates of Rome; and we have too many of that Antichristian spirit
among our selves, that are envious and libellous against all authority, as if
they would enjoy, as much liberty in Civil, as in Ecclesiastical affairs that
they may as freely injure men, as they do dishonor God, I, do not think
they would have all superiority abolisht; this is against the very light of
nature in the beasts of the field, and the birds of the air, the very locusts
have a King, nay the Devils themselves have a Prince of darkness: But would
not these men have the reins of power translated into their own hands; if so
you that have read former Histories, may more then guess at the tragical
Annals, and bloody Chronology of time to come. Sure I am, such as immoderately
gape after high places seldom manage them well; as might be instanc't, in
some of the Roman Emperors. Do you think Absalom would have made a good
Judge? yet how passionately does he desire it? O that I were made Judge in the
land, 2 Samuel 15.4.
that any man, who has any suite or Cause, might come to me, and I would do
him justice: How would Elies posterity have discharged the Priests office,
after God had cursed his whole house, yet how earnestly do they sue for it? 1 Samuel 2.36. Quaratur cogendus rogandus: recedat. D. Zouch de jure Sacro p^rte
prima: Sect. 2. Indignus sit Sacerdotio nisi ordinetur invitus.
Put me I pray thee into the Priests office, that I may eat a piece of bread.
The Civil law provided that none should be Bishop who sought it, or bought it;
He was to be brought to his See, as the Romans brought home their wives, viz:
by a seeming violence. The state of Rome was very corrupt, cum omnia Romae
venalia, when high places were set to sale; for not only unworthy, frothy men
came to be exaltated, but men made Merchandise of justice, and sold it by
retayle.

2. General. Gods actings in relation to rulers.

1 Particular. He stands in the Congregation of the mighty (...), Septuagint.
Jerome.
in the Synagogue; in Coetu, in the Assembly: This does not exclude Gods
presence from particular Magistrates, officiating in their private Charges; God
is not absent there; yet he is more specially present, when there is a whole
Session or Constellation of Magistrates, met together. I make it plain by this
instance When thou art meditating upon God in secret; when thou art chattering
like a Crane, and pouring forth thy soul in thy closset; God is there present,
even in thy recesses, and private retirements, he delights even in such
corners; yet I may boldly say, he is present in a more especial manner, when
the Saints flock together by bands and troops into the Congregation, the
house of prayer, and assault him with a holy violence, Coimus in coetum, ut
Deum quasi mamanu facta, praecationibus ambiamus orantes. Tertul page 47. Aug.
de civitate Dei. lib. 5. c. 26. Psalm. 27.4. Ps. 42.2.
and scale the walls of heaven, with groans which cannot be uttered.
Theodosius took more joy, that he was a member of the Church, the^ that he was
the Emperor of the world; and the Saints have had more pleasure in the
Assembly, then in any meetings else whatsoever. I rejoiced when they said unto
me, let us go to the house of God; and when they were debarred thence, how did
they thirst after it? my soul is a thirst for God, yea for the living God,
when shall I come to appear before the presence of God; How did they greive? I
am cast out of thy presence. Genesis 4.14. i. e. excommunicated from the visible
Church, as some understand it. Esa. 6.3, 4, 5. Nay when they could not go to
Jerusalem, they prayed with their faces thitherward, and with their windows
open to Jerusalem, to show the tendency of their hearts that way. The Church of
God is compared to a flock, Bishop Lake.
now if a flock be tame, and not salvage, they keep together, and if a lamb be
excluded the fold, it bleates and cries till it comes to his company;
therefore such as stray, and do not complain, it may be doubted whether they
be sheep, or no. (...)
Public Assemblies have the best claim to the presence of God, and the Saints
have had most experience of it there; therefore the people met together in
prayer, to hear the word, and to break bread. Acts. 4.24.8.6.46. David desired
to praise God in the midst of Jerusalem, whereupon Basil cries out (...),
Vid. Basil. page 129.
(...), this sounds better in Greek, then it would in English, therefore I
forbear to translate it. I had rather pray, that as we have but one foundation
Jesus Christ, Bishop Andrews Ser. page 599.
so we all had but one roof; that we might all drink, and be baptized into
one spirit: for division of places, Will not long be without division of
minds: As we all pretend to be of one family, so let us feed at one table.

We may judge of the power of Gods presence in the congregation, by the horrid
effects, of his absence from them, that wilfully desert the congregation: for
as if they were fallen into a quag-mire, they sink, sink still; they go on
from error to error, and like Africans abound still in new Monsters; Genesis 8.9.
or like Noah's dove, which being sent out of the Arc could find no rest for
the plants of her feet. O that they would imitate that dove, in returning back
again to the Arc!

Some may disrellish this, as a digression, but I look upon it as a needful
illustration of this truth viz. that as God is specially present in the
congregation of his Saints, so he stands in the Congregation of the mighty.

The efficacy of gods standing among the mighty is very various, God stands.
as the motion of the Sun in the firmament has diverse operations, in
communicating light, heat, and several influences among all bodies round
about it. Or as God promises his people in his Covenant that he will be their
God, that is, what is in him shall be theirs; his power to protect them, his
mercy to save them, his grace to sanctify them, and his wisdom to instruct
them. This I take to be the meaning of that reasoning, you are Christ's, 1 Cor.
3.23.
and Christ is Gods; God by standing among the mighty imparts unto them the
virtue and benefit of his attributes.

1. He inables and qualifies them to govern, though unfit and undisposed
before. When a Cardinal is made Pope, they say he is quite changed, he becomes
Domin^^^ Deus Papa; and he is changed indeed, Mat. 23.15.
but it is into a Lucifer of pride; He is twofold more the child of Hell then he
was bofone. But when God installs men in the seat of government; be many times
fits them for their places; you may see this in the Judges of Israel, they were
no sooner separated for that employment, but the Spirit of the Lord, Jud. 3.10,
11, 29, 13.25.
the spirit of government, and the spirit of fortitude, came upon them; as upon
Othniel, upon Jephtah, upon Sampson, upon the seventy elders, God took of the
spirit of Moses and put upon them Number. 11.25. The Spirit of the Lord came upon
Saul, and he was another man after his anointing, 1 Samuel 10.6. What was Gideon?
He was threshing wheat when the Angel came unto him; As the Roman dictator
was fetchr from the plow; but the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and then
he thresh't the enemies of Israel, with as much dexterity, Judge. 6.11 34.
as ever he thresh't wheat in the floor.

Use. As this may hold up our spirits though rude and unexperienc't men be
exalted to govern, because God stands among them: so it should teach
Magistrates themselves to pray for this spirit of government: God has given i^
to others, and why may be not to them? He can discharge no calling well, that
does not pray for aid from above, much ^esse this high calling of government.
You have an excellent example in Solomon after the death of David, 1 King. 3.7,
8, 9.
O Lord my God! thou have made thy servant King, I am but a child, O give thy
servant an understanding heart, And how was the Lord pleased with this prayer?
go thou and do likewise.

2. In particular; God stands to impart wisdom, to unravell and make plain
many difficult causes, which are intricated and twisted by Satan's policy; and
to extricate the truth out of those Meanders, and Labyrinthes, wherein it is
concealed. It is the honor for Kings to search out the matter. Prove. 25.2.
The woman of Tekoah told David; 2 Samuel 14.17.
as an Angel of God; so is the Lord the King to discern good and bad. When
Caiphas said it was expedient that one should die for the people, This spoke he
not of himself says the text, Jo. 11.51.
but as High Priest that year. How wonderful was Solomon's judgment in
deciding the controversy t'wixt the two women, 1 King. 3.25.
concerning the child? A divine sentence is in the lips of a King, Prove. 16.10.
or as the Hebrew word signifies, (...)
there is divination in the lips of a King. Genesis 44.15.
Wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine? Sacer quidam instinctus
no^ defuit septuaginta lembus, adeo ut Magiae peri^i existimarentur. Curaeus de
Repub. p. 85.
When I consider the Almost miraculous discovery of the Gunpowder treason, by
a letter, which none could understand, but the rulers of that time; and when I
call to mind that small experience, which I have got in these solemn meetings,
by observing how the Judge by his acute and searching reasonings, has stripped
the guilty prisoner, off all his fig-leav'd pretenses, and beat him out of all
his trenches, Perforabat judicium montem: Maimonides transla, p. 63.
until he has sifted and bolted out the very truth; though the prisoner at the
bar has endeavored by all his turnings and windings, by raiseing a mist; or
like that fish, which being in danger of taking, casts out of his mouth a black
humor, Soepiae. Tertullian
to mud the water, that so he may the be^ter escape; I say when I consider
these things, I can not but attribute a more divine energy to the arguings of
rulers, then of other men; As there is more efficacy in the heat of the Sun,
then in the warmth of the fire: when the Lord had rejected Saul from being
King, the Spirit of the Lord departed from him 1 Samuel 16.14.

3. He stands to bestow upon them, Prove. 8.15.
that power which they have. The powers that he are ordained of God: By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: He translates the Kingdoms of the
world: Psalm. 73.6.
God is Judge himself, he sets up, and pulls down. Even wicked rulers derive
their power from him; Thou could have no power against me (said Christ to
Pilate) except it were given thee from above. Jo. 19.11.
Qui regnum Augusto ipse Neroni commisit. Auguste de civitati dei l.b. 5. c. 21.
He that made Constantine the Christian Emperor, he gave power to Julian the
Apostate: But here we must distinguish of power, as we use to do of sin in
relation to God, viz. He is the cause of its materiality, as it is a physical
action, but not of its obliquity and sinfulness: He is the Efficient cause of
what is good, He is the permissive or deficient cause, as the Sun of darkness,
of what is evil; so the power it self in evil rulers is from God, though the
sinister way of coming by it in some, or the abuse of it by pride and cruelty
in others, is from their own corruption, Rev. 13.12.
or the Devil; as the keys of the beast was from the bot tomless pit, and he
received his power from the dragon.

Now seeing your power is from God; against him, that put these into your
hands.

4. He stands to protect and defend them. How many black designs have been
laid as low as Hell, and been managed with all secrecy against these Gods in
the text? yet as if a bird of the air had told the matter, they have brought
forth the whirlewind: those treacherous fowlers have been taken in their own
gins, and these gods have been delivered. Could rulers but behold those
spiritual guardians, that watch about the^, 2 Kings. 6.16.
they may say with Elisha; they that are with us, are more then they, that are
with them.

As God protects them, so he Funestus ille annus quo primi consules crea^i sunt
expulsa regia potestate. Aust: civ. l. 3. c. 16. Certe violata potestas invenit
ista Deos.
avenges them on their enemies. Had Zimri prace that slew his master?

5. He stands to restrain their fury, if they should be bent to ruin their
people, as he that wished the people, of Rome had but one neck: He puts hooks
into the jaws of these Leviathans; and sets bounds, as to the raging sea;
hitherto shall ye go and no farther, which leads me to the second particular
of the second general.

2. He judges among the gods 1. (...): Septuag. Jerome. Esa. 10.1, 2.
dijudicat deos, He judges the gods. As the Judges come to judge the people, so
God comes to judge them; if there shall be obliquitie, or irregularity in their
judgment, if they shall go (...) by a crooked, Arist. Rhet.
Lesbian rule, if they shall (...); if they shall warpe with anger, Sr. H. W.
Of the Duke of Buck:
envy, or ungrounded pity: Magistrates should be like that statesman, of whom
it is said (how truly I cannot tell) that he carried his passions in his pocket.
When Joshua gave judgment on Achan, he said my Son, etc. Josh. 7.19. to show
that he was free from all rage. Annota. Lex est meus sine cupiditate.
They must take heed of Calculating justice according to the Meridian of
particular interests, or of looking upon causes through a falsifying glass;
turning one end of the perspective upon some offenders, that may extenuate
Mountains into Mole-hills, and the other end upon others, which may aggravate
and swell up motes into beams, and lapses into piacular offenses: noe; Tros,
Tyriusve, let them be what they will, let them have justice impartially; and
endeavor yet to be as indifferent as the Aequinoctial betwixt the two Poles;
that men may see you condemn crimes; and not men. O remember the judgments of
God on Saul, Vid. Constantini orationem ad sanctorum coetum, cap. 24. apud
Eusebium. Potentes potenter cruciabuntur.
Ahab, Joram, Oreb, Zeb, Zeba, Zalmanah; and if you turn over other stories
you shall find -- Rara in nobilitate senectus; few have lived out half their
days; neither have they dyed sicca morte, upon their beds; so that the
Specimen Historiae Arabum. Herodotus l. 5. L^timers sixth Se^mon before King
Edward the sixth.
Arabians meeting their King, saluted him thus; abunas maledictionem, take heed
of a curse. I read it of Camebyses, that he commanded an unjust Judges skin to
be flayed over his cares, and to be put upon the chair of judgment that others
siting in that chair might remember justice and equity. It Is reported also of
Senacherib, that being dead he thus spoke; I mean he had this inscription upon
his statue or monument (...); look upon me, and consider the judgment upon me;
then learn judgment and piety: It is time for rulers to learn righteousness
by the sad examples of others, lest they also should fall under Gods Scepter,
and be dashed in pieces. Discite justitiam moniti.

2. He Judges among the Gods by approving and confirming their judgment, (...).
and entering it into the Court-roles of Heaven: He sits upon the bench, votes,
and passes sentence with them, as one of their fellow judges. As the
afflictions of Gods people come immediately from second causes, as Joseph's
bannishment from his brethren; Jobs losses from the Caldeans, and Sabeans; yet
they come mediately and principally from God himself; the Lord sent me hither
said Joseph in Egypt: the Lord gives and the Lord takes away, said Job,
overlooking the Caldeans; so the sentence of a malefactor, though it proceed
from the mouth of the Judge, yet therein his voice is but the Echo of Heaven;
as Joshua told Achan, that the Lord should trouble him; and therefore he was
commanded to give glory to the God of Israel. Josh. 7.19, 25.

1. Now right honorable; To the Judges.
would you have Gods presence and his suffrage? would you vouch the Lord for
what you do? you must strive to resemble him; now (...) etc. Cle: Alex: page
61.
God is most just, and in nothing are we more like unto him, then by executing
justice.

2. You must strike most at those faults which God hates most. Look to the
first table, piety toward God; you have the law of God, and the law of land to
bear you out. Idolatry, blasphemy, sabboth-breaking must not go without
control; a gentle reproof will not serve turn; so Eli reproved his sons,
and yet you know what became of Eli: As faint asking does but teach to deny, so
a cold reproof does but encourage sin: let them know, Qui omnes vetat
peccare cum posset and debet; jubet.
that as you are Gods Vicegerents, so you must not see your God dishonored,
unless you will bring the guilt upon your own heads. When Basil was accused,
that he was not of the Emperors religion, he answered. Hoc non vult Imperator
meus. My Emperor, Nazianzen Orat. 3.
meaning God, will not allow that; so should you say, when any crave pardon for
iniquity; Our superior will not like that; Our superiors upon earth, I hope
you may truly say so; but I am sure your superior in heaven will not take it
well at your hands.

As love toward God should make you zealous for the Lord of Hosts; so love to
your country, to others, your selves, should put flaming swords into your
hands, to guard the second table, in maintaining a due reverence to superiors,
in drowning the voice of blood (that's a loud crying sin) with blood; that our
land may not be defiled; that the innocents under the Altar may not cry against
us; Rev. 6.10, 16, 6. Vide D. Beard. p. 200.
as some have tenderly feared, that the blood shed in Queen Mary's days, is
not yet silent but does still call for the judgments of God against our nation,
as Eclipses and fiery Comets show their dismal effects in after times; but I
may save this labor, our Rulers have even bound their own hands from this
cruel mercy; and date say to the greatest offendour in this kind, as that
Queen said to Cyrus when she cut off his head, and threw it into a whole
Cauldron of blood. -- Satia te sanguine Cyre, now Cyrus take thy fill of blood.

But should I go on thus to lay before you what lies under your censure, (...).
Arist. Rhet. Judex instar medici, qui primo adhibet alimenmenta, medicamenta
dulcia, and syrupos, and si morbus invalescat, amara, ut aloem. Maimonides
transla. p. 63.
I should wrong your judgment, as much as I have wearyed your patience. Give me
leave only to beseech you, that the manner of your judging may be like David's
song Psalm. 101.1. I will sing of mercy, and judgment. Where offenders melt
with contrition, and are capable of mercy, here strike softly, here have Ladies
hands; but where they are stubborn, refractory and dangerous, here you must
have Cour de lion, the heart and courage of a lion. In a word; take Solomon's
counsel; strive to understand the fear of the Lord, and to find the knowledge
of God; then shall you understand righteousness, judgment, and equity, yea
every good path, then shall righteousness dwell in our Nation, Prove. 2.5, 9.
and salvation shall be our Walls, and bull-warkes. I need not study for
particular cautions suitable for every state and order of men, To pleaders
Jurours, Witnesses.
attending upon either Court; there is one in the Text which like the Cherubims
turns every way, Genesis 3.24.
and eyes, (like some well formed picture) every soul here, viz: God standing
and judging among the gods; this is a seasonable Antidote against all
exorbitances in Pleaders, Jurours, Witnesses. Will any commit murder before
the Judge of life and death? and will any adulterate their consciences, swear
falsely, or do any thing that is corrupt, before the Almighty God of truth, that
is Jehovah^iireh and sees every turneing and winding of the soul? who can
forbear to lament the too usual custom of false and rash swearing in
witnesses, when for this very sin the land mournes? An oath should be the end
of all strife, and it is too often the cause of endless strife, and remediless
undoing to many families: for as another man's life is at his mercy, that cares
not for his own: so he that minds not the precious life of his own soul,
may easily master, nay ruin the estates and lives of others, O consider,
consider therefore that God stands in the congregation of the mighty: it is a
short sentence, but like those upon the doors of the Oracle, full of matter. I
can give you no better advice; then what Seneca gave Lucilius, when thou go
about any weighty enterprice. Suppose some grave Senator, as Cato, or Lelius
stood by thee, and tanquam illo vidente omnia facere, so do thou that pleadest,
that servest thy country, that bear witness, remember that God stands and
looks upon thee. Quid pro dest non habere consciam habeati conscientiam?
Lactantius.
What though no man can find out thy naughtiness, seeing thou have a
conscience within thee, which is Gods Notary, his Amannensis, or Register, and
God himself self standing round thee. Say not with that Atheist, tush God
does not see, for if thou art not as blind, as blind Balaam, thou may see him
in every corner of the court, for God stands in the Congregation of the
mighty: He judges among the gods.

Two SERMONS, preached at St. Mary's in Oxford,

by JOHN HINCKLEY M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Colleshill Berks.

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL, for RIC: DAVIS, 1657.

To the Right Worshipful Doctor RICHARD ZOUCH Professor of the Civil Law,
and Principal of Alban Hall in OXFORD,
Worthy SIR!
YOU may justly wonder to see any thing come from me, habited in this dress,
and wearing these colors: methinks I read your thoughts, Hac sunt vestimenta?
are these the garments of my late Scholar? what does such a stripling mean to
creep abroad into the Camp? How dare any but Eagles now venture into the light,
and fly abroad in the open Sunshine? Is not a Cell safest in a critical age?
and will not prudent men keep silence in that time? A^. 5.13.
It Is not enough for the bells of Aaron to sound within the walls of the Temple?
Are not Sermons likely to do most effectual execution upon the souls of men,
when they have the advantage of a (...) Arist. Rhet. l. 3. c. 7. Auditores
accipie^t affectum queuscunque orator induerit. Tacit. de Or.
warming, vigrous elocution, and are conveied to the heart through a silver
Trumpet, or upon the wings of a powerful utterance? Are not the same Sermons
in a book, as bells without clappers, as fishes on dry land, very carcasses,
sine succo and sanguine, without life or heat? Is it not as easy to draw forth
an Echo to the life, as to print a Sermon in it is full grace, and luster? nay,
has not this bin the means to make more preachers than Scholars, -- picdsque
docuit
verba nostra conari?


Sir, I cannot deny, but many of these Notions have bin mine heretofore; and if
yours now, I will not enter the lists of dispute with you, who are such a
Master of that Art. Besides, there is so much awe upon my spirit, since I was
among the Children of the Prophets, under the excellent discipline of your
Government, that methinks I dare no more reply upon you, than the Scholars
upon Pythagoras, as if you spoke nothing but principles, or were the highest
Court in the Commonwealth of learning, from whence there lies no appeal.

But since I have considered your excellency in several sciences, especially
in that which you profess, my thoughts are sadded with melancholy, that our
age should be so improvident of posterity, as to suffer such a considerable
Judge. 21.3.
Tribe to be lacking in our Israel: to suffer such a branch to be broken off
from the tree of knowledge. I mean for want of Encouragement, to permit that
ancient and useful Law of Nations (the profession of the Civil Law) so famous
beyond the Seas, so helpful an handmaid to Divinity, to fall to the ground,
and as it were to die with your self. What the Jewish Church spoke long since
of the Gentiles, Cant. 8.8. upon this occasion has often run in my mind: We
have a little sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister
in the day when she shall be spoken for? But I am transported beyond my scope,
which is to give you some account of the publication, and dedication of what
follows.

First, these Sermons come not to you, as if they set forth any Art; or could
confer any further degree of understanding upon Scholars, in the points
handled therein: you cannot expect that, from the Quis aut egenus divitibus,
aut peregrinus civibus, aut agrestis and ignarus studiosis conferat? Chrysol.
Ser. CCXXXVIII.
meannesse of my parts, and the tumults of daily employments. No, they are
plain, and tend to the edification of the meanest capacity: -- Et Coenae
fercula nostrae.
Mallem convivis, quam placuisse cocis.
Neither is here any humouring of parties, by holding up the cudgels, or haling
at the saw of controversies. Happy were it for our Jerusalem, if it were a
quiet Habitation, free from the noise of axes and hammers; if it were in the
Lew, safe from storms and tempests; if the waters of the Sanctuary ran softly,
like those of Siloam; divinity become a football, and tossed up and down
according to the strength of the assertors. Enter not thou my soul into the
secrets and practices of such Ishmaelites, whose hands are against every man,
and Genesis 16.12.
every man's hand against them. More expert at the Nehemiah, 4 17.
sword then the trowell: very Salamanders that delight in the fiery elements of
contention: as if Religion consisted in the froth of arguing, censuring,
starting of novelties; in aerie, Valentiniani suos h^hebant Atones, and Bythos,
tota in adytis divinitas; per ambiguitates bilingucs. Tert. page 316. Cum
Familia amoris ex Hollandia damnatas harcses Ecclesia Anglicanoe instillaverit,
portento so, and novo loquendi gen^re utebatur, quod homines magis mirarentur
quam intelligerent. Cambden. Eliza. p. 301.
Cabbalistical notions; in Non est convell^ndum temere, quod a pluribus
statutum est; quippe ub^ hoc fit, periculum est, ne omnia perversad innovandi
libido. Cunaeus. p. 308.
receding from received truths, and the form of sound words, in casting forth
the dirt and mire of reproaches into each others faces; which has even
extorted from me a subscription to that of Tertullian, Plus togae laesere
Rempublicam, quam loricae.

But hitherto I have been in the negative, and I have showed what my design is
not. Now Sir, give me leave to tell you what it is.

I have observed, with indignation, shall I say? or grief? how in our days,
the grace of God has bin slighted by proud Naturallists on the one hand, and
turned into wantonness, by loose libertines on the other. I have observed
(Hear O ye heavens, and be astonished) how the God of all grace has suffered
in his Glory, Attributes, and Providence; would to God I might not say in his
very essence and being; by a generation of men, who are without God in the
World; Swarms of Atheists arising daily from the bottomless pit. In this case
who can be silent? nay, who is not bound to bring his bucket, though never so
shallow, to extinguish this flame? and to confer something to prevent such a
dangerous torrent of Atheism, about to break in upon us like a flood; though
with Curtius that noble Roman, it were with the sacrifice of one's self.

Secondly, As for the Dedication; It is but your due, and my debt. The streams
do but run back to the fountain from whence they flowed at first. My studies do
but return home to pay some public homage to him that first set them up:
that put life into them by the influence, and warmth of encouragement; and has
handed them up from their very infancy. Sir, since I set the first step into
your Hall, I found you a faithful friend, a kind Patron; I had almost said a
tender Father: And as if kindness and bounty knew not how to go backward, but
you still delighted to see the first seeds of your love to thrive and Seneca de
Beneficiis.
prosper, you have followed me with a continued tide of kindness, as if you
would over-whelme me with the cataracts of love. O Bernardus epist. CCLXV ad
Petrum Clumiacensem Abbatem.
beatum quod diligor a te, quod diligo te; quanquam non video in me unde tantum
diligi meruerim, prefertim a tanto. Yet these favors have been sweetened to
me, as I look higher, and have seen them coming toward me from the good
hand of providence, by way of answer unto prayer: And that you may see how
subservient you have bin to Heaven herein, give me leave to lay before you the
whole golden chain of such like merciful dispensations. The linkes cannot
well be viewed apart, nor the flowers of this garland separated. My Apology
shall be that of David to Eliab, Is 1 Samuel 17.29.
there not a cause?

By the blessing of God, I was borne of, and educated by religious parents,
Pater erat (...) matter (...), as Nazianzene said of his, which extraction to me
is better than from a long series of Caesar's. Though grace be not extraduce,
entailed: Thirsitae similem producat Achilles. Hezekiah may have a Manasseh, as
Amon may have a Josiah; yet to charitable persons it is a Topicall Argument of
hope, until the contrary appear. (...) am 2 Timothy 1.5.
persuaded, said Paul to Timothy, that the unfaigned faith, which dwelt in thy
Grandmother Lois, and Mother Eunice, is in thee also.

My next advance, was to the race of a pious, and learned M. Josiah Packwood.
Schoolmaster, who read me, as I did my books: until he acquainted himself
so well with my genius, and inclination, that when some friends and allies
would have translated me to a more thriving profession, he wrote his earnest
and effectual letters, to befeech them still to continue me in the way of
learning: and that he did this by divine suggestion, I am the rather convinced,
because of the bent of my soul that way, and because, in those days of my
minority, I had wrestled with God frequently, even unto tears, that he would
so dispose of me, that I might wait at his Altar, and serve him in a more
immediate manner in the great congregation.

In order thereunto, I came almost miraculously to Naioth: my journey was
something like to Abraham's faith, who against hope, believing in hope: yet God
will bring about his own ends, though we behold not the means. By the way, I
met with a dear M. Wi^ Eales minister of Hatford in Berkes.
kinsman, as faithful he was to me, as Jonathan to David; as if I had been his
own bowels. He was to me the valley of Achor, the first door of hope, that
opened to me, and let me into that famous University, and put me into that
healing pool of Bethesda. As he was a burning and shining light in his
generation, so is he now (...), a star of a great magnitude in the firmament
of Heaven- Nobile perpetua caput amplectente corona. Well: now the Lord raised
me up whole Clouds of Friends, as he brought Daniel into favor in Babylon, and
gave Joseph favor in the sight of Pharaoh in Egypt. I was delivered there, as
Moses by Pharaohs Daughter, into the arms of a Mother indeed. My Dr. Francis
Cheynel
Tutour was such a Gamaliel, that I could gladly have sat under his feet,
until this very day; of whom to speak, either but a De Carthagine filere
praestat, quam pauca dicere.
little, or in the language of my oratory, would but detract from his worth.
(...) Basil. p. 239.
And to complete all, I had your Countenance, Counsel, and assistance all
along, which was as dew upon the herbs. Now Sr. if I have been either vain,
or indiscreet, pardon me this once; and let the blame be upon a vehement
impulse within, which would not be smoothered: If guilty of boasting; I can say
in some sense with the Apostle, I have been compelled. The primitive Christians
wrote their Negligere quid de se quisque sentiat non solum arregantis est, sed
etiam omnino dissoluti. Cicero. Quid prodest quod vivunt homines, and occisi
sunt honores; valent quidem membris, sed erepta portant funera dignitatis.
Opta. l. 2. p. 68.
Apologies; and none ought to bemore tender of their calling, and fame, then
the Qui infamiam suam injustam negligit, cum alierum scandalo, is non tam
patiens babendus est quam prodigus and crudelis, nee potest fama contimni, nisi
virtus etiam contemnatur. Amesi. de Cas. Consci. p. 311. 312. See. Dr.
Sanderson Ser. of the first Edition. page 47. of his latter the 5. page 95.
Ministers of the Gospel; This conduces much to the Honor of their Master, and
the winning of souls, as Alexanders very name, and the report of his valor
procured him many a victory. (...) (...). Basil. The dignity and integrity of
the Preacher makes the doctrine pass the more current; as sails to make it
swifter; and as the head of the arrow to pierce the deeper. Therefore the
Apostles were careful (...) to look out, and ordain men of good, and honest
report,(...) men approved by testimony, Acts. 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.7.

I am not ignorant, that all this while, I have been arguing, and plunging my
self into a deeper engagement unto God and men. The cords of Josh. 23.8, 9. 1 Samuel 12.24.
love should draw with the greatest force; Therefore (by the assistance of the
Spirit of Grace) I shall strive to lay my self forth the more, both in the
service of the Tabernacle, the the Church of God in general; and in particular
to your self; and so shall remain your Faithful Servant to be commanded in
the Lord

Jo: Hinckley.


1 Cor. 15.10. But by the grace of God, I am what I am.


I Look upon this Chapter? as the very looking-glass of the resurrection;
wherein it is represented so clearly, that the luster of its rays, and
reflections may even dazzle the eyes of all, that are not wilfully blind: the
letters are so Capital, that a man may run and read.

The Apostle well knew how difficult it would prove to flesh and blood, to
believe that bodies demolisht into dust, and passeing through several changes,
should again return to their former being: The Epicureans and Stoickes do
openly Act. 17.18.
deride this doctrine: Thomas himself, though one of the twelve cannot fly
such a high pitch; Joh. 20.25.
his faith flagges and faulters, being weighed down with no less then two
negatives (...), I will not believe: It was not easy to St. Paul himself; If
by any Philip. 3.11.
means we can attain to the resurrection of the dead; as if he had been
almost out of breath, before he could clime to the top of this Carmel;
therefore he is the more earnest in this Chapter, to back his doctrine with
several arguments, drawn from sense, reason, and Scripture both to convince,
and prevent the growing Sect of the Sadduces; and good reason that a truth so
necessary to be believed, and known, should (...) Chrysostom.
be thus fenc't, and fortified: for it is the very principal pillar of our
religion, the very hinge on which turns the whole frame of Christianity: it
is, spes omnis in Deum sperantis, all the hope, and confidence Fiducia
Christianorum resurrectio mortuorum. Tertul.
of a Believer. And therefore it is called (...), the Gospel it self, in the
first verse of this chapter, brethren I declare unto you the Gospel; as if all
the lines of the Gospel met in this very point. Alas I what have we to carry on
our spirits, through all the rugged passages, and cross dispensations of this
life, but only our hopes in reversion? Here we must cast anchor amidst all our
storms, this must hush, and silence all our doubts, that we A veteribus
exponitur hic locus de futuravita qua^ sententiam non reprobo. Musculus in
Psalm. 27. v. 13.
verily believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. If
(...), etc. Justin Martyr. p. 215.
I shall not be hereafter, what I am now; what difference will there be, twixt
those that have fried in the flames of martyr dome, and those that have made
bon-fires with their bodies? Religion would be our loss (...) Cle. Alex Stro.
4.
profaneness and injustice, great gain: If in this life only we have hopes in
Christ; we are of all men most miserable; who would care to do (...) Cyr. Hic:
p. 210.
well? who would fear to do amiss? the Atheists cursed resolution, would be
true divinity; let us cate and drink for to morrow we shall die. An Ancient has
observed it to our hands, and we find it too true that none live Tertul. p.
409. Ne. motam carnaliter vivit quam qui negat carnis resurrectionem.
so fleshly, as those that deny the resurrection of the flesh. Now should I
burst forth into lamentation; that an Article so fundamental should in our
days, amongst them that would be accounted Gospel Christians, be denied by
some, stager'd at, and disputed of by others; sure I should find a sympathy
with you to bear a part with me: but I have far to go and but a little
time, therefore I must not stay to descant any longer upon the whole chapter:
what has been spoken, is more to the time, then the text: now by the assistance
of Gods grace, I must treat particularly of the grace of God: By the grace of
God I am what I am. St. Paul the Penman and subject of my text, was once as
grand a persecutor of the Church of God as afterward, he became a great
Doctor of the Jews; and did with as much vehemence breath out threatening
against all those, that called upon, or worshipped the name of Christ, as after
he was zealous in preaching, and maintaining the Gospel of Christ: Habemus
confitentem reum, we have his own word for it in a penitential acknowledgement
of his misspent life Act. 22.19, 20. Lord! they know, that I imprisoned and
beat in every Synagogue them that believed in thee, and when the blood of the
Martyr Steven was shed, I also stood by, and consented to his death; thus he
made havoc of the Church of God, and puts the Lord himself to the cry Act 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? so that after farther illumination, verse.
8. of this chap. he confesses, that he was borne (...), as an abortive under an
unhappy planet; in an unlucky hour. Though God had made choice of him, as a
chosen vessel, to bear his name before the Gentiles, yet the guilt of his
former actions made him vilify all his preferment, I am the (...).
least of the Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I
persecuted the Church of God. verse. 9. nay as if there wanted a new Grammar,
and there were a degree, lower then the lowest, he styles himself less, (...).
then the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. but what S. Paul was heretofore, or
what now in his own humility, and conceit, it matters not: old things are done
away; he is become a new man; immutatus abillo, quite changed from what he was;
raised from the gates of Hell to the third Heaven; of a lion he is become a
lamb, of a bloody tyrant, a blessed saint: so the molfe shall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard, shall lie dewne with the Kid, Esa. 11.6. and whereas in
modesty he calls himself the least of the Apostles, yet afterward being
constrained to boast, least his meannesse should be any disparagement to his
preaching, he styles himself Coryphaeus, verily I suppose, that I was not
inferior to the chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.15. Thus out of the eater came
forth meat: Paul of the tribe of Benjamin in the morning of his days, did
ravin as a wolf, and devour the prey, by his cruelty; but toward the evening
of his riper age, he did divide the spoil, or as the septuagint renders it,
(...), he gave out his nourishment, by feeding the Gentiles with the word of
the Gospel, as Franzius Hist. Any. par. 1. cap. 20. Tertall, adversus
Marcionem lib. quinto. p. 562.
some understand that prophecy Genesis 49.27.

But how was this wonderful change wrought? who was the means of this his
strange conversion? I must return the same answer, as the Father in the
Gospel, concerning his Son that was borne blind! He is of age, let him answer
for himself; and so he dos punctually in the text: He was not altered by any
power of nature, or industry of his own -- but by the grace of God, I am what
I am.

Obs: Grace alone makes us gratis ous. or, The business of our Conversion is
the sole work of Gods grace. As we receive our natural being from the power of
God, so we derive our spiritual well-being from the Faith our chiefest grace
is called (...), in that our true being stands in the union with Ged, and
communion by grace.
grace of God. If I forbear what is evil, it is from grace, restraining,
preventing grace; If I do what is good, it is from grace; sanctifiing, renewing
grace. By the grace of God, I am what I am.

I shall not handle grace here in its full extent, (...) gratia gratis data.
and latitude, as it comprehends every free gift of the spirit proceeding from
the common, and inferior working thereof, even in wicked men; which is called
the grace of edification; for there are diversity of gifts, but the same spirit
1 Cor. 12.4. All the operations of the spirit are not salvificall: I know no
absurdity to affirm, that the Acts of Morality in the very Heathen, are the
gifts of the spirit in them; as knowledge and understanding, which are got by
study, Exodus 31.2.3.
and industry, are yet called the gifts of God Dan. 1.4.17. and Bezaleel, a
cunning workman in gold and silver, was filled with the spirit of God; the
sonns of concubines had gifts bequeathed unto them by their fathers, though the
legitimate children went away with the inheritance: Genesis 25.6. Judge. 11.2.
I am not ignorant, that some understand grace in this sense signifying gifts,
to be B. Lakes sermon, on 1 Cor. 15.10. p. 265.
principally intended in this text; as that of John chap. 1. v. 16. of his
fulness we have all received, and grace for grace, is interpreted also this
way; we have received M. Jo: Light foot, 2 part. Har. of 4. Evan. p. 58.
grace of Apostleship, that is, Eminent gifts; for grace, that is, for the
propagateing of grace in the hearts of others: but without contradiction to, or
detraction from any, I shall treat of grace in this place, as that which
renders us (...) gratia gratum ficiens
acceptable to God; the grace of adoption, whereby our souls are stamped, and
marked out by the spirit, as belonging to the Election of grace, and entitled to
the inheritance of the Saints in light. And that I may not be mistaken in the
prosecution of this subject, I shall further enlarge and describe the nature of
saving and sanctifying grace.

This grace is as myrrh dropped into our hearts from the fingers of Christ; as
sweet incense, fragrant spices, precious ointment, and spiritual eyes salve;
whereby the wheels of our souls are oyled, our dead hearts imbalmed,
animated, and quickened, as by beams darted forth from the healing wings of
the Sun of righteousness, and from the moving of the spirit of God upon all
our faculties.

By grace, I understand a supernatural power of Gods spirit, diffused and shed
abroad into the soul, whereby the ruins of gods image imprinted in it at the
first, are in some measure repaired; all our faculties innobled and elevated
above their natural picth; reason refined; our understandings enlightened to
see what is good, our wills and affections enabled to embrace and love it, and
the whole man to practice it, where there is this sweet Harmony, sure there is
the grace of God. This is called by diverse names in scripture, as light, life,
wisdom, love, obedience, as it does exercise its virtue, upon the
understanding, will, memory, affections, the inward, or outward man; now that
we may see, that this grace is all in all with a Christian, and makes us all in
all with God; lets first take a view of our state and Condition what we are
without grace, then we shall better discern how all our spiritual
excellencies, in thoughts and actions, inward, and outward do flow from this
spring, and principle of grace.

1. Negatively, There is an utter vid. Doctor Field on the ch^ in his Appendix
to the third book page 252.
indisposition, and disability in our natural estate to think or do any thing
that is truly good, and acceptable to God; I say in our natural estate, for
the power of man's will varies according to the several states, Epoche's and
circumstances of time, wherein it is considered.

10. There was a time when man had power and liberty not to have sinned; but
this lasted not long; no longer then Adam stayed in innocence, which by all
Computation was not long; this was a state of integrity.

20. There shall be a time, when we shall be so strong, that we shall not be
able to sin: our wills shall no way be inclined to evil: we shall be beyond
the Gunshot of Satan; His floods of temptations shall not reach us: nay were
this bold intruder admitted again into Paradise, He should find nothing in us,
no tinder or Gunpowder to catch the sparks of his fiery darts. This shall be a
state of glory, or glorious state.

30. There is a time when man is partly inclined to evil, partly to good, as
the spirit draws him one way, and the flesh dragges him another. When there is
a Civil war, a motion of trepidation within us: the regenerate part mounts
toward heaven, sed trahit ^invitum nova vis, but our indwelling corruption,
like Anselmes boy, or the plummets of a Cork pull us down again to the earth;
this is a state of regeneration.

40. There is a time when man's will is wholly inclined to what is evil, and
that continually; before our (...), our new birth; before Christ come into our
souls by grace, seasoning, and taking possession of them to himself, by
breaking the bars, and locks of our native opposition, and subduing that
enmity which is in us against his Kingdom and Scepter, mellowing and melting
our hearts into a willingness to receive him as our Lord and King, by
submitting to his yoke, and rules of government. Now whilst the Amorites of
sin are in their ruff of pride within us, unbroken and unconquered, and we
at their beck and Command, this is a state of corruption, wherein a man can
neither think or do what is spiritually good.

For this we have the authority of Christ's own word, without me ye can do
nothing Jo. 15.5. except we are ingrafted, and incorporated into him by faith,
and so drawing Sap, Life, and virtue from him. Alas we are impotent,
helpless Creatures, stark lame, not able to move one foot, or go one step
toward Heaven, unless he take us in his arms: we are blind until he open
our eyes; deaf until he pierce our ears with an Ephat (...). vid. Mr. Sam.
Ward. de usu magne^is.
of power; nay dead in trespasses and sins, until he raise us up: until he
overshadow us, put his mouth on our mouth, and his eyes on our eyes, as Elisha
on the Shunamites child 2 King. 4. 34. that as the iron does not point toward
the North, until it be touched with the loadstone: from whence say some, there
flows some spiritual Emanations which seizing on the iron, turns it about.
So are we acted and moved by the spirit of God at our conversion; there went
virtue out of Christ to cure the Woman of her bloody issue; and if we are the
living members of Christ, and not only nominall, and aequivocall, as so many
wooden legs contiguously fastened and patcht unto him; I say, if we are true
members, we receive vital spirits, through the arteries of faith from him our
head. That as the Philosophers say of sublunary bodies, that they could not
move, were it not for the motions of the Heavens, if they should standstill; so
we could have no tendency to what is good, but by virtue of that influence and
cherishing warmth of grace, which we derive from the God of heaven; did not he
renew right spirits in us, and put his fear into our hearts; for D. Tho.
Tailor, on the parable of the sower p. 215.
no ground so stony as our hearts, no soil so full of thorns as they; no such
Antipathy and aversness in one creature toward another, as there is in us
against the power of religion: our hearts nauseat it; they rise and swell and
startle at it, as much as at a toade, or the sudden pranseing of an enemies
horses; though our mouths may draw near unto God, yet our hearts are far
from him. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the spirit Jo. 3.6. we
can neither confess, praise him, pray unto his name or obey him by faith;
without the special gift of grace.

We are all evil trees: now an evil tree cannot bring forth good Fruit; it
will bring forth sower wildings to the worlds end; unless the property be
altered, and the natural sap sweetened, and changed by letting into it some
buds, or grafts from a better stock: so it is wi^h us; we are un savory, and
crabbish, like trees of the Forest, until we be transplanted, and inoculated
into the root of Jesse, into the Branch Jesus Christ, and be watered with the
comfortable dewes, and moisture of his spirit, even as Egypt was made fruitful
by the inundation of Nilus; until then, we shall bring forth sour grapes, the
grapes of Sodom; I mean brattes like our selves, deformed, loathsome, the
pictures of death. Moses took away the bitterness of the waters of Marah by
casting in a Exodus 15.25.
tree into them; and Elisha healed the unwholesome 2 King. 4.41.
waters of Jericho, by casting in 2 King. 2.21.
salt into the spring head: He cast meal also into the pot, and took the
poison out of it: this grace of God in the text is as the tree, or this salt
and meal to take away the bitterness, poison, and brackishnesse of our
souls; that is, the averseness, and stubbornness which is upon our spirits,
to what is good. As there Synop: purioris Theolo. cap. XXX.
is not a native power in cold water to heat it self, without the help of
fire, so there is not any seed or principle in us, converting us unto the
living God, without an extraordinary, and supernatural assistance of grace:
Eccius Melch. Adam in vita Lu^he. page III.
himself was forced to yield this to Carolostadius, viz. that there is not in
us bonum aliquod (...), any genuine power to produce what is good, but vis
ascititia tantum, a power from without only.

1 It is very unlikly any thing we can do, should have a sweet savor in Gods
nostrils: for we are all as an unclean thing, our righteousness as filthy
rags; we are polluted in our own blood, Ezekiel. 16. where a man in his
natural estate is compared to a child newborn, which is impure, silly, and
can do nothing to help it self; and this blood, this leprosy of sin
cleaves so fast unto us, that no soap or nitre can scour it off; all the
waters in Jordan cannot cleanse us. Who Job. 14.4.
can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean? He that makes the question,
returns the answer Nemo Hercule, nemo; no body at all; no natural agent I am
sure; this is beyond the sphere of its activity: God must take the matter
into his own hands, else it will never be done. Where the Deuteronomy. 32.5.
spot is not the spot of Gods Children, that is where men offend not out of
infirmity, but an habituated malignity, there it is as easy for the Ethiopian
to change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, as it is to cross out those
black lines drawn over their hearts, and remove that veil which is upon them.

2. How can our actions be good when our very thoughts, out of which they are
hatched, are tainted and poisoned; all the immaginations of man's heart, are only
evil, Genesis 6.5.
and that continually: we are not sufficient to think a good thought, of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Had we such bodies now as
some say we shall have at the resurrection, corpora chrystallina, bodies made
of transparent crystal, that our eyes might pierce through, and through them;
what swarms of locustes? what cloudy fumes of cursed thoughts, and Sinful
contrivances arising as it were from the furnace, and bricke-kilne of our
hearts, might be discerned as smoke arising from the bottomless pit? and can
such vapors and fumes engender any thing, besides Serpents, and Scorpions,
vile, and irregular actions? besides our actions depend upon our wills, as our
wills do upon our understandings, now these are as a drunken and frantic
Pilot; they cannot direct us: we are (...), darkened in our understandings,
Ephesians. 4. 18. nay we are (...), darkness it self in the abstract, the light
shined in darkness; and where the blind lead the blind, both fall into a
ditch. We are brutish in our knowledge; the very wisdom of the flesh is
earthly, sensual, divelish, James. 3.15. We are full of Egyptian horrid,
palpable darkness, before this day star of grace shine in our hearts.

Now though, I intend to refer the applicatory part to the conclusion; which,
as it is the life of the Sermon, so it is most likely to be remembered, when it is
repeated in the parting words; yet because we are apt to lean too much upon
our own strength; we are prone to elevate our crests, and strut in the midst
of our own plumes, as if still we had some secret thoughts, that we are able
to win and ware salvation, by observing the tenor of a Covenant of works;
therefore by the way, let us throw down these pinacles of our overweening
opinion, by looking on our black feet; let us humble our selves, in the sense
of our estate by nature: upon a narrow search, we shall find all our supposed
excellencyes, to be as daintyes in a dream, or the glorious colors in the
rainbow, only (...), fantastical, and imaginary: for as without Christ, we
are fools, guilty, unclean slaves; except he be our wisdom righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption: so without grace from Christ; though we had all
the gold of Ophir; insight into all the mysteries of nature; all the scepters,
and preferments of the world at our dispose; all sumptuous robes, from the most
magnificent ward-ropes of the richest Prince, yet should we be poor, and
blind, and miserable, and naked. Do thou find thy self to puff and swell
by reason of thy knowledge, and parts? Consider how ignorant thou art in the
things of God, how the Gospel, which is the Key of Heaven, and the power of God
to salvation, is a ridle, or foolishness unto thee Art thou proud of thy noble
blood, and extraction? see how that blood boyles, and fomes with concupiscence;
remember thy traduction and pedigree from the first of thy line, thy great
Grandfather Adam; and what was he but an Quisquis fuit ille duorum, etc. Juve.
Amorite? Have thou an exact Symmetry and proportion of parts, with the
sweetest mixture of most lovely colors, like Absalom, Paris, Ganymed? O turn
thy eyes inward! there shall thou see a most ugly Thersites, a monstrous shape,
a strange Centaure, or Chymaera, (...).
a Lion, a Dragon, a Wolf, a Goat all coupled and growing together, one part
swollen with pride, another meager with envy, another flaming with rage; all
speckled over with variety of lusts, and running with the botches and plague
sores of sin: now look upon thy self, and be proud, if thou can. What the
Lord said to the Prophet Ezekiel. 43.10. thou Son of man, show the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; as being
disjoynted, torn, and defaced by reason of their sins; so do thou behold the
image of God in thee shattered; the ground of thy heart overgrowne, and overrun
with briars and thorns; then blush and be confounded: If Austin thought the
Sepulchers, and ashes of entombed Princes, might preach succeeding Monarchs
into humility; so also our blindness, rebellion, ataxie, exorbitancy, may be a
constant memento unto us, not to think more highly of our selves, then we
ought to think; wherein we 1 Cor. 4.7.
differ from the worst of men, we received it by way of gift from God: neo
Fulgent. p. 242. Art. 10. Eccle. Anglica^ae, and art. 13. If the preserving me
from evil, and bestowing on me good depend not entirely, for principal
efficacy, on God farewell all religion. M P. Bayne on Ephesians. 1.11.
esurire possumus, we cannot so much as hunger and thirst after a better
condition, except God works in us to will, and to do: which leads me to

2 The affirmative part: what ever spiritual good thing we either think or
do, it proceeds from grace.

The holy Ghost is very punctual in ascribing the whole work of our second
birth to God alone, of his own will begat he us: every good and perfect gift
comes down from above, from the Father of lights, James 1.17, 18. He is the
God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. we believe according to the working of his
mighty power, Ephesians. 1.19. Grace is noe quality of our own acquiring, but it is
the grace of God: we are not Concausae, fellow-workers, and Coajutors wi^h God
in this business, but he gives, Pravenit impium ut fiat justus, subsequitur
justum ne fiat impiu^ Fulgentius, p. 260
continues, perfects it, neither is it with the production of spiritual life in
our souls, as with that of natural forms, from any power that is in us:
indeed there is a passive capacity, and an obedientiall power in respect of
God, who can make dead bones live, and raise stones unto Abraham, but there is
no such activity in us as to reduce any such power into Act. David knew this
doctrine well, when he prays for grace in this form; create in me a clean
heart o Lord! Now Creation is whereby a thing is brought out of nothing;
therefore as the soul comes into the body, so grace comes into the soul,
creando infunditur, we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2.10. Christ is called a light that inlightens every man that
comes into the world; quia August de Civ. dei l. 10. cap. 2. (...). Cyril. p.
136. l. p. 138. Quantulacunque vir tus quae dicitur nostra, dei bonitate est
nobis concessa. Aust. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c. 22.
nist ab illo nullus illuminatur, because except he inlighten us, we are in a
state of darkness. As Christ had two birthes, so have we, but here is the
difference as I Fulgentius observes; Christ's first birth was of his Father from
eternity, his second exhomine of the Virgin, in the fullness of time; but we
are first horn of our natural parents, and then in the second place, we are
borne of God by his spirit.

Qu. If all our sufficiency be of God, why does he call upon us to repent, to
believe, to do all manner of good works, and to work out our own salvation?
A. These precepts do not imply our ability, as there was not a power in
Lazarus to rise out of his grave, when called, Joh. 11.43. but our Multa
imperantur quae impossibilia, nihil quod indebitum, aut injustu^. Creditori jus
suum non perit in obaeratum, qui bona sua decoxit Soanhe. Dub. Evan.
duty; they do not conclude what we can do now, but what we could have done
in Adam, and though we have lost that power, yet God does justly challenge
obedience at our hands; as we require money from our debtors, though they are
turned bankrupts; Neither are such commandes in vain; but that we seeing our
duty, and also our infirmity to execute it, we might have recourse unto God, to
be made able: da Domine quod jubes, thou have commanded, said David, that we
should diligently keep thy commandments; O that my ways were made so direct,
that I might keep thy statues! I am not ignorant, what absurd inferences by way
of comparison, some draw from hence; as if such commandes were as if a man
should be called upon to write without hands, or run without legs: here is
Elenchus parium, a wide disparity, twixt a command of running without legs,
and exerciseing Arts of grace, because that was never in our power, nor any
part of our duty; but this was once under the verge of our power, and is still
within the compass of our duty.

4. But what? are we as stocks, and stones in the business of our salvation?

A. No, by noe means: for although we can do nothing by way of concurrence in
the first infusion of the Habit of grace, and the first Act of conversion; yet
I deny not, but that after we have once received the spiritual life of Grace
into our faculties that then we may, and must work together with the spirit of
God, in the progress of our regeneration, and in the practice of
sanctification, Phil. 2.12.13.
but still subordinatly unto God, work out your own salvation: for it is God
that works to will and to do. Acti agimus, God that made us without our
selves, in this sense, will not save us without our selves; and thus the
preaching of free Grace, may sweetly consist with the exercise of holy duties;
in una sede morantur, free grace is so free from excluding or superseding
duties, Ephesians. 4.23. Ezekiel. 18.31.
that it does enliven and direct them. Gods absolute promises do include our
conditional performances; God will be sought to by the house of Israel. Peter
has a promise his faith should not fail, yet he must watch and pray: therefore
what God promises in one place, he commands in another.

Hitherto you have heard, that Grace is the sole work of God, it remains to
consider.

1. The proper causes of grace, that we may know how to get it. 2. The manner
how we partake of grace. 3. The peculiar effects of it, that we may try our
selves whether we have obtained it or no.
1. The Impulsive cause, whereby God is moved to bestow his grace on us; and
that is not in us, but in God himself; It proceeds not from our free wills,
but his free love; not from the ability of our nature, but the mighty working
of his spirit: not from our merits of Congruity, but from the Acting of his
mercy; we are borne not of blood, or the will of the flesh, or the will of man,
but of God, John. 1.13. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it
know^n unto you, be ashamed and Confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel Ezekiel. 36.32. We are all (...), as a Confused lump, or mass of clay, all
a like, before God cast a look of his love upon us; and if that great potter
make any vessels out of us unto Honor, it is only for his own sake; that he
might make known the riches of his glory, upon the vessels of mercy, which he
has prepared for glory, Romans 9.23. We are all cut out of a rock: look unto the
rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole, of the pit whence ye are dug Esa.
51.1. Now as all stones in a quarry are impolisht, and unfit to stand in the
wall, until the Artificer stretch his line upon them; so are we rugged, and
uneven; no way fit to stand in the rank of living stones, or to be members of
that building, whereof Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone, until we be
carved and squared by a wise Bezaleel; until our cragginess, or
protuberancyes, and Camels, bunches be knock'^ off by the two edged sword of
the spirit.

2. The efficient Cause which produces grace, and that is the Holy Sicut
corpora nostra vivu^ thalitu, itatacit^ Spiritus Sancti afflau vivificantur
animi.
Ghost, who does effectually call, convert, and sanctify us: therefore such
souls as are fraught and replenisht with grace, are called the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, and goodness, righteousness, truth etc. are called the Nomine
spiritus nonnunquam dona spiritali^ gratiae nuncupa^tur, ut in Elijah duplicem
Eliae spiritum postulante. Fulg. p. 336.
fruits of the spirit Gal. 5.22. Sometimes we are compared to vessels of wood,
or earth, and then the spirit is compared to water, to rinse and purge us from
that soil and filth, which our natures have contracted from the dust of the
world; I will pour clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all
your filthiness, and idols Ezekiel. 36.25. And what that water means, we are
given to understand verse. 27. I will put my spirit within you: these are the
waters of Siloe, flowing from under the thresholds of the sanctuary, and are a
fountain of living water springing up unto eternal life.

Sometimes we are compared to vessels of brass, or some other metal, and
then the spirit is compared to fire, to fetch out our rust, and to purge us
from our dross; He is the spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning; and
we are said to be baptized with the holy Ghost, and with fire; and though our
former faculties are not and hilated, and their office wholly supplied by the
spirit; though the substantialls, the posts, and beams be the same; yet the
spirit adds such new furnitures of new qualities unto the soul, that an old,
and new heart inhabited by the spirit of God, differres as much; as an old
house full of Cobwebs, dust and dirt, differrs from it self, when it is clean
swept, seeled, hanged with tapestry, and Gemmantes prima fulgent testudine
lecti.
garnished with all manner of rarities. Now there is a new face of things: now
the soul has new aims, and new ends; as those at Mentemque priorem Expulit,
atque hominem toto sibi cedere jussit Pectore; Lucan. lib. 5.
Delphos, who were accounted inspired, were altogether at the devotion of
Apollo: now the soul, like the Adder, has cast her slough, and her youth is
renewed as the Eagles.

3 The isntrumental cause or means, whereby God works grace in us, is the
word, my sheep hear my voice; such as feed by the waters of Comfort, are
acquainted with the whistle of Christ. Sibilabo illos: Jerome. Zach. 10.8.
The Saints are styled the called of the Lord, and our Conversion, a holy
Calling, because by the voice of the word, we are singled, and called forth,
out of the corruptions of the world to the Communion of grace and glory, the
word is called the word of grace Act. 20.32. Those that would go for beleivers,
and be taken for gracious, and Evangelicall persons, and yet overlook and
slight the word; they tread the path of a new, and unheard of way to grace,
and glory, by drying up those breasts, and cutting those pipes, and veins that
God has alloted to convey grace into us here; and also pulling those wings,
whereupon, we should mount into a state of glory hereafter.

Lets take heed of those wild, and dangerous Consequences, which some, not
being wise unto sobriety, draw from the free disposal of Gods grace, and Gods
decrees; as if the use of means were to no purpose; 2 Pet. 1.10
but let us make our calling and election sure, first our calling, and then
rise upwards, to our predestination, or Election: this is to begin at the right
end of the ladder, though Paul's planting, and Apollos watering be nothing,
except God give the increase; although grace be not entailed on the means; yet
let us use the means, and trust God with the success: no man shall serve God
for naught: no man ever did constantly, and faithful frequent the posts of
wisdoms Temple, and was a looser in the end; but were I sure, that
notwithstanding all my use of the means, I should never attain to saving
grace; yet I would not cease to apply my self unto the means, so far as I
could; that though I dye, I might dye at the feet of God: though he kill me,
yet will I put my trust in him: for though I could not purchase heaven, yet by
this means, I might mitigate the torments of Hell: but now me thinks (
Cynthius aurem) I hear a voice saying, magnapetis, you soar too high, above
your strength and activity; well, let this suffice; I speak with submission to
graver judgments. As I would not derogate, or detract from good works, and holy
duties: for they are necessary, and beautiful in genere suo, in their proper
rank, and place. So I would by no means entrench upon the prerogative of
grace, by abating the luster, or weakening the power thereof.

2. The manner how the spirit breathes the life of grace into the soul: this
is intricate and difficult, like the Angels name who conferred with Manoah,
Secret: The grace of God is like the peace of God, past our Comprehensive
understanding: for as the wind blows where, so how it fifteth: thou art
ignorant Eccl. ii. 5. which is the way of the wind, and how the bones are
formed in the womb. and then no wonder, we know not how the new man is
fashioned In the womb of the soul: O that we may say with the blind man in
the Gospel; one thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see; so we were
all blind in the things of God; but now our senses are exercised spiritually to
discern them, although we are not privy to the time, or acquainted, de modo,
with the manner how that light first sprang in into us. Is that soul in a
delusion, or a dream, that reasons thus within it self? I was once a leper,
but now I am clean, yet cannot I tell the punctual time when this change was
wrought; I know not the ultimum quod non, and the primum quod sic, the last
instant of my leprosy, and the first point of my cleansing. I once read the
scriptures, but they were as a book sealed, as a dead letter; they were edita,
and non edita, published, and not publish^; read, and not read; that is, with
understanding, and comfort; I lickt this rock, but I could suck no honey out of
it; yet now I can expatiate in these feilds with comfort, now I can smell a
sweet savor, as of Myrrh and pomegranates, as in a well wa^ered garden, or
from a field, which the lord has blessed: now I can read, and understand the
mysterious secrets of the Gospel: how I prize one page in my Bible, before all
the volumes in my study: but I can say of this knowledge, as he said of old
age, obrepsit non intellecta, it came upon me insensibly; or as we say of
trees; we may perceive, that they have grown, but we cannot see them grow, and
shoot forth; no doubt, but grace comes diverse ways into diverse persons: For
the spirit is not only a most Free Agent; but the persons of men, are as
subjects diversely capacitated, disposed, and qualified, some as dry, some as
green wood; some more moralized with virtuous education, and discipline; borne
of religious parents, and so inured to religious exercises from their tender
years that their passage from a state of nature, to a state of grace is less
to be discerned: the voice and whispers of the spirit are so still and softly,
that it is not heard: it is behind them, Esa. 30.21 Act. 9.8.
no man sees they live, but their life is hid with Christ in Goa

Some are more profane; Habituated, and hardened in sin, and these are many
times borne again with bitter plunges, and anguish of soul; they fall into a
holy frenzy, and ecstasy, accounted by the world as mad men; whereas they are
only pregnant with the spirit of God, and in travail, undergoing the panges
and throws of a second birth: these can date the very time of their conversion:
Saint Paul can tell the moment, that he was smote down to the ground, and his
eyes dazzled with a greater light: He had bin a seirce and stubborn
perseqoutor, and therefore was to be dealt withal more roughly, and so by
Consequence, the more sensibly. Austen also in his Confessions acquaints us
with the method of the spirits working in him: He heard a voice saying. Title,
and lege; take up thy book and read; and after this had bin ingeminated unto
him, he snatches up his Bible, and the place that offered it self to his
reading was Romans 13.13, 14. not in gluttony, and drunkenness, not in
chambering, and wantonness, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, by which
words, he was so deeply affected, that he left off his former lewdenes. In
like manner Junius, who was nuzled up in Atheism in his minority, tells us
that the was converted, by reading those words of Joh. 1. In the beginning was
the word, and the word was with God; as the Eunuch was enlightened, by reading,
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, as a lamb dumb before the shearer,
so he opened not his mouth, Act. 8.32, 33. Thus some can tell the time,
together with the particular occasion of their conversion whether by reading,
hearing, Conferrings, or by other occurrences, as sickness, afflictions. etc.
but all are not to be accounted reprobates, who cannot thus particularize the
time and manner of their new birth, so we should contradict the experience of
many, Gods dear children, and Condemn the generation of the just.

This I shall confirm farther by these arguments. 1. Some are sanctified in
the womb, and have the seeds of grace sown in their hearts, in their infant
minority; some are renati antequam nati, graciously newborn, before naturally
borne: so the Lord says of s Jeremy, Jer. 1.5.
before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee, and before thou came out of
the womb I sanctified thee; and if any by sanctified here, understand a
designing or setting a part, for some imploiment, and not the infusion, or
collation of grace, as it may be taken, Esa. 13.3. Yet there is no evasion for
the of John the Baptist, Luke. 1.15. He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost
from his mothers womb; now for such to give an account, how grace came into
them, is all one as to tell what God did before he made the world; how he
balances the clouds, or how he laid the foundations of the earth, Job 37.16,
38, 4.5. Can an infant when he is become a man, relate all the passages of his
infancy? yet some are holy from their childhood, 2 Timothy 3*15.
1 Cor. 7.14. and t Timothy knew the scripture (...), from an infant: What God
has done unto some, his arm is not shortened, but he may do it unto others;
else why do many religious parents not only pray for their children when
borne, that God would pour on them the spirit of grace, but even before they
are born, that they may be sanctified, in the womb, as Samuel was then
dedicated unto the Lord, and may not these godly, praying parents, look for a
return of such prayers? 2. Many are regenerate in baptism; they are borne of
water and the spirit, Joh. 3.5. which water Expositors Art. Eccl. Aug. 27.
(...). Chrysostom. in locum.
understand to be that of baptism. (...). Naze.
As the Apostle calls it the laver of regeneration, Titus. 3.5. So the Latins
call it Renascentia, a second birth; and the x Greeks an illumination, and a
putting on of incorruption; therefore look not on the water of baptism, as
simple, naked water, but as accompanied with spiritual grace, says one of the
(...), etc. Cyril. of Hicrus. page 16.
Ancients: and Bp. Lake page 116.
Modern Divines say we receive our new birth ordinarily in baptism: baptism
is not only a sign, but a, The Assemblyes larger Carech. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Romans
4.11.
scale of our regeneration, and adoption; these are but commentaties on Colos.
2.12. we are buried with Christ in baptism: baptismo nulli regenerantur, 1. e.
none are regenerated in baptism, is such a Gloss, that few will own, In
Cateches. Ra Infants are capable of grace.
besides those blasphemers of Racovia; therefore if some are regenerated in
baptism, and they baptized in infancy, Annota. in Luke 1.15. Nemo audeat
que^vis eorum nonregeneratum pronuntiate. D. San. coutra Tomb. p. 35.
all cannot tell how grace comes at first into their hearts: indeed how this
grace does afterward in the progress of Conversion exert, and show it self
in we aning us from this, or that corruption, and carrying us out to this or
that duty, is far more easy and Common. Do not the heavens by their
influence work wonderfully on bodies, God gives infants sanctifying grace. Mr.
Paul Bayne on Epht. 1 v. 19. p. 356.
and yet are not commonly discerned; and may not the spirit of God insinuate it
self into as without our observation? That the operations of the Spirit, are
thus secret; and that few can give an account of the entrance, and advancing of
grace in themselves, is a truth so universally received, that it is most easy
to call in a whole The birth of a Christian unto Christ is secret and undiscer.
ned as dew falls in small and insensible dropes, Dr. Edw. Renolds, on Ps. 110.
* The work of grace, is rather s^lt, and perceived by him that has it, then
that which can be expressed, or made known to a man's self or others, it being
a wonderful secret and bidden life. An to. Burgess on Joh. 3.8. The direct act
of faith may be without the reflex act; it is on thing to believe, another to
know that I believe. Natha. Culverwel on 2 Pet. 1.10. To have grace, and to
know that we have it, are two distinct benefits; the spirit works grace, yet
does not always show us the things he has given us. The Church does not
always take notice of her own graces, and the right she has to comfort Dr.
Sibbs on Cant. 5. set forth by Mr. Nigh. We know not how conversion is wrought
in us, in its first moment. Despaigne Vulgar errors, p. 11.12. Many are drawn
by grace yet know not the Mathematical point of time, Rutherford on John. page
276. Opera Spiritus sunt interna, and imperceptibilia, Solique Deo and
possessoribus nota, R. Cross in Conc. page 7. Inchoatae regenerationis tem.
pus non semperscitur aut discernitur ab ipso regenito, vel alio quovis
inspectante, ut experientia docet in aliquibus, qui a pueritia in exercitiis
religionis educati sunt, in quorum conversione, nulla notabilis mutatio
perspici potuit; in his verum compertum est Christi dictum. Non venit regnum
Coelorum cum observatione, etc. David Dicsonus. Therapeu^ica sacra. page
128.and 172. Grace is often received an childhood, and is then ordinarily
wrought by the teachings and instructious of parents: So that few believers can
name the time or Sermon when they were converted. Mr. Baxier in his thirteenth
direction for peace of Conscience. Many are eminent in sanctification, whose
growth in grace is seen and yet the beginnings not known. M. Blake of the
Cove. page 464. M. Bayne on Ephesians. 1.13. page 209.
clonde of wituesses, men famous in their generations, to assert it, and to set
their seals thereunto.

3. I come to the notes and Symptoms of saving grace. O that out of a sense,
feeling, and true experience of these in myself, I may draw forth a
counterpane, and demonstrate them unto you!

What through ignorance, selfe-flaterry, and presumption, most men count
themselves in a state of grace, though men be never so vile, yet they will take
it for a great disgrace, to be called graceless persons. Some come to this
persuasion, because they are not as bad as the worst in committing gross
sins, as the Pharisee, I thank thee O God! I am not as other men are, these
men are only negatively religious, tell such men of their faults, and if your
reproose does not rebound back into your own face, they will soon tell you,
others are worse then they: as if the way to make themselves clean, were to
cast dirt into others faces, or because others go to Hell, therefore they will
go for company. Others are eminent in knowledge, civil honesty, moral virtues,
and so they mistake a cloud, for Juno; the wildings of the wilderness, for
the clusters of Canaan: A tympany or confluxe of ill humors, go for the
living birth of grace: Ahabs humbling of himself, for true repentance;
Achitophels Counsel, for an oracle of God. Such men have need of an Heavenly
perspective, that they may discern wheat from such chafe; true grace indeed
from such glorious sins, and gilded abominations; all is not gold that
glittereth: all gifts; and parts, all knowledge; all good affections, and
motions of heart, are not infallible marks of grace.

Qu: But how may I know whether I have true grace, or no?

An: Have thou faith? thou have grace; for this is her eldest daughter: this is
one of the chiefest branches of the stem of grace: but this is obscurum per
obscurius; this is to illustrate one obscurity by another: how may I know that
I have faith? by love: faith Gal. 5.6.
works by love; love toward God, love toward the brethren who have on them
the image of God, now love toward God is known by our obedience to him, if we
love him, we will keep his Comma^dements; positivly, by doing what he comands,
negativly, by abstaining from what he forbids: our love to the brethren is
known by the opening of our bowels to any, upon this consideration; that they
belong unto the household of faith; by our (...), Arist. The. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Hominibus innovatis datur, Spanhe.
rejoyceing at the prosperity of the Church, remembering Jerusalem in our mirth;
and also hanging up our harpes, when the servants of God are brought low,
through tyranny, and persecution: this is called a new commandment, Joh. 13.34.
Because those only who are renewed by grace, can fulfill it, Herein we know
that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren; thus, ab
ultimo ad primum, by the truth of our obedience unto God, and love unto his
servants, we may try the sincerity of our grace: As by our Romans 6.29.30. 1 Pe.
1.2.
Conforming to the image of Christ, and by our obedience expressed in our
sanctification, which is the lowermost round in the Jacobs ladder of our
salvation, we ascend upward to our justification, and vocation; until at
length we arrive to the knowledge of our election and predestination, as we may
pursue rivers to the springhead, from whence they flow: more particularly.

1. True grace begets a watchfulnes against sin, even smaller and more secret
sins, as well as those which are scandalous, and bring shame, and reproach
along with them. It cannot dispense with fat Agags, or pleasant Dalilahs, but
proclaims open war and defiance universally against all corruptions great
and small. The gracious soul deliberates with Joseph, upon any sinful
suggestions: how can I do this and sin against God? It dashes the very
bratts of Babylon apeices; our very sinful thoughts and imaginations are
charmed, suppressed, and smoothered: the flesh is crucified with the affections,
and lusts; nay it makes us run counter, and find out our former sins, before
they find us out; that we may be avenged of them, before they take vengeance on
us; as Joseph's brethren many years after the fact committed, cried out,
verily we are guilty concerning our brother: thus, whosoever is borne of God
sins not, because the seed abides in him, neither can he sin, because he
is borne of God, 1 John 3.9, 10. That is; he is not absolutely freed from sin;
but he sins not with a Complacency, and a full swing, or consent, without
any regret, and reluctance.

2. Those that have true grace will always be improving of it, Joh. 6.34.
and thirsting after more: Lord evermore give us of this bread! they have
tasted that the Lord is gracious, and it will be as easy to restrain them from
their ordinary food, as to take off the edge of their desires, after the savor
of those good ointments which slow from Christ, after that Nectar, and
Ambrosia, those Can. 2.5.
Flagons of wine, that heavenly Manna, whereby they are not only refresht, but
nursed up unto life eternal: no man having drunk old wine, strait way desires
new; for he says the old is better Luke 5.39. All the former delicacies, and
Curiosities of the world, are but as so many empty husks; as pudle water, or
filthy trash. A longing desire after Rutherford 2. part. Survey of Anti. c. 4.
grace, proceeds from grace, and is the fruit of it: ignoti nullacupido: those
that are unacquainted with the excellencies of grace, are never ravished with
the eyes of her beauty. To those that have, to them shall be given, they shall
receive grace for grace. It is not like painted fire, or land-skippes, trees
drawn with a pencill, which never increase or grow, but like trees planted by
the water side, they send forth their boughs, like a plant, through the sent
of the waters of the sanctuary: they have the blessing of Joseph, to be a
fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well Genesis 49.22. neither do
gracious souls dilate, and thrive in their own persons; but their hearty
prayers, and endeavors are extended to the whole Israel of God; they
strengthen their brethren, and wish that all men were even as they.

3. As grace is diffusive, so it is alterative.

First, Of the inward man: there is new light in the understanding to see the
ugliness of sin, and the beautiful grace of grace; new obsequiousness in
the will, new fidelity in the memory to record what is good. All the Affections
are sanctified: our joy; we can rejoice more in the smiles of Gods countenance,
in his Word, in prayer, in the practice of religion, then in the increase of
corn, and wine, and oil: more, for treasures of wisdom, and knowledge; that
we have strength to subdue corruptions; that we can stop our selves in our
careeres of sin, and deny our selves in our bosom and darling lusts; then
though our houses were full of gold and silver; or we had power to conquer all
our outward enemies, and master all their magazines, and fortresses: our fear;
we are more afraid to offend God, then men; his displeasure is more dreadful
to us, then all the frowns and threats, of the greatest potentates upon earth:
our anger; we are more provoked, (...). Acts. 17.16.
and our spirits more stirred within us, to see the glory of God impaird, to
see him to suffer in any of his Attributes, then to be wounded in our
ownecredits, persons profits.

Secondly, It works a Change in the whole outward man. He can say, when I was a
child, I did as a child, I spoke as a child, I thought as a child; before I had
familiarity with grace, I was as forward to run into any, excess of riot, to
break the sabbath, to accent oaths with as full a mouth, to neglect holy
duties, as the profanest person, that is an outscast from Israel, and estranged
from the Covenant of promise; and Marches in the forefront of the black
Regiment, under the prince of darkness; but now ^go non sum ego; when I became
a man, a new man, I put away childish things, my tongue, my hands, my feet are
become weapons of righteousness: my delight is among the saints, the precious
ones, that excel in virtue: the sabbath is my joy, and delight, my speech
seasoned with grace; and my time paies tribute to holy exercises; the love of
God constraines me to all these: my Conscience is sprinkled, and purged from
dead works: my former ways of sin are hedged up with thorns; I dare no more
proceed in my exorbitant Courses, then Balaams ass when he saw an angel
before him with a drawn sword in his hand: I can as well swallow flagons of
molten lead, as Carouse in bowls of intemperance. Thus, as the life of the
body is known by the panting of the heart, the breathing of the mouth, and
beating of the pulse; so those that have the life of grace, their hearts are
busy in forging good thoughts; their breath employed in good words; their
hands exercised in just, merciful, and holy actions: these are ready to act,
what their hearts indite and contrive; and as grace works out the scum of
naughtiness from within; so the streams without run clear and pure: now
loqueris ut videam; their spiritual, and heavenly discourse declares them to
be borne from above: Judge. 12.
they can now pronounce Shibboleth, without lisping, or stammering: their
language shows them to belong to Canaan, as the damsel told Peter, that he
was of Galilee; his very speech bewrayed him. This may save me a labor, for
laying down a Caveat, that we do not abuse the doctrine of grace, by making it
a cloak for our licentiousness, and wantonness: As if free grace, gave us a
freedom to do what we list; as if this chaste, pure, and heaven borne virgin,
did degenerate into a pandor to our lusts, shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? Romans 6.1. Grace indeed is free, as from God, in opposition to
our procuring merits; the name carries so much in the very front: otherwise
grace were no more grace: (...). Gratia non est gratia ulla modo, nisi sit
gratuita omni modo. Aug.
It does also removere prohibens, role away the tombstone of sin, that it
may no longer press us down by reigning over us; and this day of Gods power
also makes us a willing people; Ps. 110.3.
to offer sacrifice unto God freely, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
as the Fathers of Israel, offered freely, for the house of God, to set it up
in his place, where the spirit of the Lord is, Ezra. 2.68.
there is liberty: but true grace never allows a toleration of sinning: such
liberty is Malus etiam si regnet servus est tot dominorum quot vitiorum.
August. Civi. dei. lib. 4. cap. 3. We should improve our endeavors, as if we
were Pelagians, and no help of grace afforded. Bl^ke, on the Coven. page 71.
perfect bondage. It is a manumission dated from Hell. It makes us free among
the dead; therefore such as plead for free grace in this sense, and to this
purpose; may be justly deemed, never to have had the experience of saving
grace. Now waving any further search concerning the conquering efficacy of
grace, Dr. Pria deaux lect. 3a. 4a. 6a.
whither it be b irresistible, concerning the extent, and latitude whether it
be Dave. nant. veter. 49.
universal; and concerning the perseverance, and duration, whether it may be
finally, and totally lost: For a full discussion of these, is not only beyond
my strength, but neither can these dimensions be fathomed, in such a minute of
time, as is left me: nor are such polemicall discourses suitable to this place.
Controversies sound better out of the chair, then the pulpit. As Saint Paul,
had rather speak five words in the Church with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.19.
then ten thousand words in an unknowen tongue: so one practical, edifying
Sermon, tending to the advancement of devotion, and the power of religion, is
better unto me, then many empty, and notionall orations, sine succo, and
sanguine, without the marrow, and fatness; the life, and heat of edification.
Alas! this is only to raise a dust; to perplex men's heads with doubts, rather
then settle, and establish their hearts, and consciences; to feed them with
chafe, and pibles, instead of (...), the sincere milk of the Word: and
therefore it is no wonder, that such ill diet, begets so many raw humors, and
windy vapors, which threaten to overturne the Church with a terrible
Earthquake of division. It Is no wonder to see men, that have turned all
religion into jangleing, reasoning, and disputing, to become lean, and meagre
like Pharaohs kine, and to be barren of goodness, like some parched Heath, or
neglected wilderness: Gnostickes in their heads, but Atheists in their hearts.
My parting words, shall therefore be spent, in bringing home the former
doctrine to our own doors, by such deductions, and Corollaries as arise from
it, even as the river in Eden parted it self into several Heads, that it
might water, and refresh diverse Countries; and the sun expands her wings, Genesis
2.10. and 3.24.
and darts forth her beams, like the Chirubims sword, which turned every way.

Cum callidus Serpens persuadere fluduit me propter fidelter obitam ministerit
legationem; vel ipsum Coelum and immortalitatem mereri; been dictus Deus mihi
suggessit hunc scripturoe locum quo ignitum hoc jaculum extingueren so: gr^^ted
Dei sum id quod sum inquit Cnoxus. Me^h dam. p. 141.
1 Use. To discover the vain pride and arrogance, of the Champions of nature;
who had rather lean on the broken reed of their own depraved and perverse
wills, in the business of their salvation, then upon the mercy of God. Such
were the Pelagians, and semipelagians, of old; of old did I say? It were
well, if their Ghosts did not still walk in our streets; at least, some as
like them, as if they had started out of their sepulchers, or sprang out of
their ashes; such I mean, as would feign part stakes with God, and be sharers
with him in that, which is so essentially his own, as grace; ascribing to
themselves such incomprehensible strength, as to undo their own
grave-cloa^hes, and raise themselves from the death of sin. How loath are they
to speak of, or to acknowledge grace? As Homer is observed not to have used
the word (...), but (...) often; and Plato is noted to use the word (...),
which signifies virtue; but he was afraid to name grace, or the holy spirit
lest he should offend the Graecians; (...). Just. Mar. ad Grae. p. 30.
so grace, special grace, is little spoken of by many, lest thereby they should
disparage the power of nature: or if grace, and infused Habits, be taken any
notice of do not some endeavor to be joynt-purchaser of it and them? and by
Scholasticke tricks, or Arminian Sophistry, go about to distinguish God out
of his right? but let God have glory, and every man shame; and let us say with
the Chruch? thou O Lord have wrought all our works in us, Esa. 20.12. and then
it is fit he should have all the glory: not unto us, O Lord! not unto us, but
unto thy name be all the praise: All that is within me praise his holy name.
Though our own reason be sometimes non plust: and the ability of our wills
impaired, yet, that doctrine, to me, is true, which ascribes most glory unto
God.

2 Use. Here we may see the miserable estate of the Heathen, that knew not God,
but were vain in their immaginations, and ignorant of this saving grace: An
illuminating, or assisting grace they might have; but seeing they were without
Christ, and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, they must also, according
to scripture principles, be destitute of sanctifying grace. It is true; they
had many excellent virtues, as temperance, Been facerunt, quia aliter facere
non potue, rant.
chastity, patience, etc. And these were even incorporated into their natures,
by a constant, habituated practice; wherein they went beyond many Christians;
and I fear will rise up in judgment against us: yet these were but moral
virtues, obtained by strict discipline, and long custom, whereby their natures
were much rectified, and reformed: yet they came short of special grace both
in their Alpha, and Omega, beginning, and end. They were defective in respect
of the principle from whence they flowed: they proceeded from nature, and not
from the Spirit of grace: Now a line, if it be crooked at the first; draw it
forth (if it were possible) into an infinite length, it will be crooked still.
The primogeniall virtue in seeds, and plants, will never be changed: thorns
will never bring forth grapes to the worlds End. Their persons were not
sanctified, and so their sacrifices could not be accepted. And as there was a
fundamental error in the terminus a quo, from whence they sprange; so there
was much obliquity in respect of the end; they were not done out of conscience,
and obedience to the law of God, nor levelled at the white of his glory, but
either out of love to their Country, or an Insatiable desire of their own fame.

What though they might have some knowledge of God, as a Creator, or first
Cause of all things; his eternal power and godhead, being understood by the
things that are made, To. 1.20. yet they knew him not as man's redeemer in
Christ. All the creatures could not spell this. The two Diptyches, or volumes
of Heaven, and earth would not afford this truth. This is a mystery which has
been hid from ages, and generations, but now is made manifest unto the Saints,
Colos. 1.26. The Angels themselves did pry and peep into it, as it were from
under the veil: 1 Pet. 1.12. (...).
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Here I could
even take my mantle upon my shoulder, and go backward to cover the nakedness
of some charitable errors, Clem. Alex. Stro. 6. Tertul. Just. Mar. Apol. pro
Christianis 2. p. 83. Antequam ad nostram caulam se contulisset, noster crat,
morum quippe provitas cum nobis vendicabat, sidem moribus antevertens ac solo
Christi nomine cavebat cu^us rem ipsam Na^ de panesuo crat. 28.
in some of the Ancients; As if any could please God by the power of
philosophy; or were natural Christians; or as if Socrates was a Christian,
because he lived (...), according to the dictates of reason: Now though I
reverence Antiquity more, then to detract from it, yet I cannot swallow all the
Ancients say, without distinction. I cannot admire their very moles and wennes
for beautyspots; and like flies, suck nourishment out of their very sores. No
man's honor consists in this, to have his errors transcribed, or to have his
deformities to be made exemplary. The great Apostle desired to be followed no
farther, then he wrote after, or kept pace with Christ himself, 1 Cor. 11.1.
be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. We are not of them, who do
peremptorily censure the poor Heathen: 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
for what have I to do to judge them that are without? they must stand, or
fall to their own master; but we pity them as not knowing the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent: Though their negative insidelity, and
their ignorance of the Gospel should not damn them; yet they have sins more
then enough, to answer for, against those (...), that very law, that is written
in their hearts: but above all things, let us praise God, that we our selves
are born within the pale of the Church, which is the subject of grace; and in
the days of salvation, and years of grace, that we are planted by the rivers
of waters, and live under the sunshine of the Gospel: O that we could bring
forth fruit accordingly! that we might walk worthy of that vocation, wherein we
are called; as children of the day, and of the light.

3. Use. This may teach us, to whom we must be thankful, when we feel any
fruits of a new birth, or anny motions of grace within us: we must not
sacrifice to our own drag, or our own net. It is not through our own sword, or
our own how, that we get the victory over our own corruptions: but when we see
a murderer dangling upon a gibbet as high as Hamans, let us magnify the grace
of God, that we are not in his place, seeing that we also had the same seeds of
rebellion in our natures, common with the worst of men; then say, as it is in my
text; by the grace of God, 3 Cor. 4.7.
I am what I am, who made me to differ from him? and what have I that I have
not received? Thanks be unto God who has given me the victory over all my
gyant-like lusts that war in my members, 1 Cor. 15.57. Sidebeo to^um pro me
facto, quid debeo pro me refecto? Aug.
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Alas! what miserable wretches
shoud we have been? How should we have groped in Egyptian Cimmerian darkness
of ignorance, and profanensse here, and dwelt with everlasting burhings, (which
also contrary to nature are accompanied with thick, and horrid darkness)
hereafter? Had not the day star of grace dawned in our hearts, and the
dayspring from on high visited us. Therefore when we feel our selves in some
measure wash from our uncleanness by the living, and pure streams of grace,
when we can rejoice in the Communion of Saints, and our hearts burn with a
holy Zeal in the midst of or dinances: when we have received the earnest of
the spirit of promise, and find our selves sealed to the assurance of
everlasting life; then say what is man O Lord! that thou art so mindful of
him? The Lord has dealt bountifully with me: Ps. 161.12, 13.
what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord; which leads me to a

4. Use. Hence we learn to depend upon God for all grace, and in all our
wants, to have recourse to his fullness for a supply. Do thou want faith,
patience, wisdom, he is (...), Rev. 3.18.
the God of all grace: He is no niggard, in the dispensation of gold tried in
the fire, out of his treasury; or of raiments of needle work out of his
wardrope: Hoe! every one that thirsts, come to the waters; Esa. 55.1.
go therefore unto him upon the bended knees of thy heart, beg a look from his
countenance, and a glimpse, or shine from his face: as she prayed for children,
give me children or l^dy; So do thou pray for grace; give me grace, else I
shall perish; and if thou can obtain the least measure of Grace, thou art
richer, then Though all the gold of Ophir, or all the cattle upon a thousand
hills were at thy command. Grace carries in the womb of it all spiritual
blessings; therefore the Apostle begins his Epistles, with grace and peace;
whereby he wishes to them all Spiritual, and temporal comforts.

Now for a conclusion of all that we may not speak of grace by rode, or by
hearsay, ut psittacus suum (...), as birds are taught to pratle they know not
what; lets put the sermon into practice, and turn our discourse into
supplication (...) lets pray to the throne of grace, for that grace concerning
which, we have been speaking all this while

O most gracious Father! thou that art the God of all grace; without whole
special Assistance we are able to do nothing that is spiritually good: by
nature we are children of wrath; A seed of evil deers and heirs of eternal
death: we beseech thee change our natures; make thy face to shine upon us, in
the face of Jesus Christ, put a new frame of spirit within us. As our body is
decay, so let our minds be renewed from day to day. Instead of these proud,
darkened, worldly, depraved minds, give us enlightened, Heavenly, humble, pure,
and holy minds: make us to watch over our bosom finnes; sanctify our
affections: enable us to thirst and breath after spiritual things: pers wade
all our hearts to dwell in the tents of S^m, that we may have communion with
thee, and thy Saints, and grow from to grace; until thou shall be pleased to
crown thy own graces in us, and satisfys us with that fullness which is in
thy self, in whom all fullness dwells. To whom etc.

Psalm. 58.11. So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the
righteous: verily there is a God that judges in the earth.


THough the Courses, and Motions of this inferior wourld, may seem sometimes
so exorbitant, and eccentricall, as if the very foundations of the earth were
out of Course, and all things were blended, and jumble together, by a blind
kind of Contingency. Though judgment for a time, may be turned into wormwood,
and righteousness into gall; nay though sin it self may be throned, and
oppression sit at the sternes so that men of religion, and conscience, may be
made a prey, and become the objects of scorn, and cruelty; as if there were no
God in Heaven to overruled, nor eye of providence to dispose of Affairs here
below: yet when the earth is thus full of darkness, and cruel habitations:
when all things are made like unto a wheel, and seem to run (...)
at random, in a round of Confusion; so that men's hearts either fail them for
fear; or else are tempted to a secret kind of Atheism; then will God cause
the sun to break forth out of all these Clouds; and dispell all these mistes:
He will bring light out of all this darkness; Harmony out of this discord;
order out of this Confusion: beauty out of this rubbish, honey out of this
carcass. He will at last comfort Sion; and build up her wast places. The godly
man shall be rewarded: and the staggering Christian shall be established -- So
that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous; doubtless
there is a God, that judges in the earth.

1. Here David first draws up a Charge, and an indictment against unrighteous
judges, who did either immediately oppress the people themselves, or esle did
Calumniate them to Saul, and so did incense and exasperate the prince against
his subjects: This he expostulates with them in the five first verses. Do ye
indeed speak righteousness, O ye Congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye
sons of men? their mouths were corrupted, and poisoned with wrong sentence,
acquitting the guilty, and condemning the innocent; or else out of a
mealy-mouthed partiality, they betrayed the Cause of the widow and fatherless
by their silence; therefore some read the words thus. Are ye silent indeed? or
of a truth do ye speak dumb justice? (...) obmutuit.
And, no wonder; that the hand of Justice points the wrong way; and the motions
thereof are irregular: for the maine spring is out of order, out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks: now they were rotten at the core:
their very hearts were forges of naughtiness; yea, in heart, you work
wickedness, verse. 2. And where heart, and mouth are tainted; the hands will
not be sincere: as are our thoughts, and words; so commonly are our actions;
therefore the same men, are taxed in the same verse, to weigh the violence of
their hands in the earth, they seem to put the demerits of malefactors in one
scale, and their rewards in the other; as if there were temperamentum ad
pondus, a most exact proportion in their administration of justice; yet they
wilfully mistake wrong for right; and such as should be fostered, and
encouraged, feel the heaviness of their loins, and the stinges of their
Scorpions; they dispense, and weight forth violence in the earth. now their
tyranny was so much the more cruel, and abominable, by how much they did more
Revera nonest nocentior ulla iniquit as, quam quae spec^^; u^ stitiae grassatur
Muscu in Locum.
pretend weights, and balances the emblems of righteousness and justice, and
went about to establish wickedness by a Law; as an ape is the more deformed,
even wherein he does resemble the shape, and image of a man; and differences
in, religion are the more inveterate, amongst whom there is a similitude; as a
Christian is more bent against a Jew, then a Turk; and therefore these Judges
were earnest and-zealous, in their violence, and injustice; their (...). Septs
Furor illio, Jer.
poison is like the poison of a Serpent verse. 4. As false worshippers are mad
upon their Idols, compassing sea and land to gain proselites, and Serpents
swell with venom, and spit it forth with fury, and vehemence; so wicked rulers
are in pain, until they give a vent to their malicious designs, and like
Aetna and Vesuvius belch forth some flames of destruction; and which is the
worse: no torrents of better advise, will slack, or assuage their fury: for
they are stubborn and refractory to good Counsels; and so, still run parallel
with Serpents. They are like the deaf adder, that stops her ear: which
will not harken to the voice of the charmer, charming never so wisely, verse.
4.5. Adders did much mischeife by biting and stinging, therefore there were
inchanters, to tame and restaine them therein. Frigidus in pratis cantando
rumpitur anguis.
Surely the serpent will bite without Enchantment, Eccl. 10.11. and the Lord
threatens to send strange Cockatrices, which should not be charmed, Jer. 8.17.
To which custom, Balaam alludes Numb. 23.23. Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: but now in after
times, the Serpent be came so subtle; that as Ulysses stopped and sealed up the
ears of his companions, that they might not be bewitched with the Sirens
songs; so the Serpent would lay one ear to the earth, the other she stopped
with her tail, that so she might evade the charms of inchanters: so it is with
wicked Judges, refuseing good Counsel, and with most men refusing the voice of
the Gospel -- they will not hearken to the voice of the charmer.

Secondly, David breaks forth into imprecations, devoting these unjust and
rebellious men to the judgments of God; appealing to Heaven against them, in
the 6, 7, 8, 9. verses, break their teeth O God, in their mouths, break out
the great teeth of the young Lions O Lord. Such merciless men, as use to prey
upon their brethren, are compared to savage beasts; to Lions, or young Lions;
as they are chief, or subordinate in executing cruelty: He prays, that they
may be disarmed of the instruments of their fury. Break their teeth, that they
may be enfeebled, and languish, and not find their hands, when they are set
upon mischeife let them melt away as water, as a snaile, or as an untimely
fruit of a Woman: nay let their destruction, be sudden, as crackling thorns,
or a whirlewind; in the midst of their full vigor, living and in their wrath,
verse. 9. Let the^ go quick into Hell, Ps. 55.16.

Thirdly, Here is the result and Consequent of these transactions in the
righteous; He shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, and wash his feet in
the blood of the wicked. The metaphor is taken from conquerors, who triumph in
the blood of their enemies: that thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine
enemies, Psalm. 68.23. Or else from hunters; who sport in the blood of their
game. Yet these did not simply rejoice in blood, and vengeance; nor as it was
the blood, and vengeance of their enemies; but as it was the blood of the
wicked, who had dishonored God verse. 10. And as they rejoiced to see the hand
of God lifted up against the enemies of God, so they heard the voice of his
rod, and learned judgment. The wicked man's correction, is the godly man's
instruction: He triumphs as much over his own doubts, and incredulity; as over
his enemies: He looks, as it were through a casement of the sanctuary, Psalm.
73.3.17.
and discovers with one eye in what slippery places they stand, who prosper in
sin, and abuse their power, and authority; with the other, he beholds the
happiness of the righteous; together with the verscity of God, both in respect
of his being, and his providence, and so breaks forth into this Epiphonema of
the text, So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous:
verily there is a God that judges in the earth.

In this triumphant song, observe.

1. The preface, or introduction: so that a man shall say. 2. The matter, or
substance of it, consisting of three parts; wherein are three fundamental
points asserted:
1. No man shall serve God for naught; verily there is a reward for the
righteous, or there is (...) Sep.
fruit for the righteous. 2 The Diety is put out of all doubt, and
controversy: doubt less there is a God: Elohim, in the plural number, to note
the mystery of the persons in the unity of the divine nature; like creavit dii.
Genesis 1.1. 3. This God does not neglect the affairs of the world; but though
Heaven be his throne, yet he does providentially dispense equity, and justice
among the sons of men: He keeps his sessions and rids his circuits here below:
He Judge sin the earth.
But before we speak of these parts in the body of the text, there is something
worth noting, from their connection with the context, and is employed in the
first word, so that, which joins this verse with the former parts of the
Psalm, and shows this to be an illation from them: what? did God so suddenly,
as with a whirlewind, overthrow those wicked Judges, who Lorded it over his
people? did He make those Lions melt like snailes? did he confirm the joints
of his people, which were a little before trembling, and smiting one against
another; as if they had been so many forlorn wretches exposed and cast forth;
and no eye to pity them; as if they had been floating with Moses upon the sea,
in a basket of bulrushes, without any pilot to guide them; and even ready to
cry out with the disciples: Master, carest thou not that we perish? did he then
command a calm, and bring them to the haven, where they would be? did he turn
their howling like dragons, and chattering like cranes, under the whipps and
sawes of tyrannical taskmasters, into a song of joy, and triumph? did he
dismantle himself of that cloud, wherein for a time he had so inveloped
himself, that he seemed not to behold the pressures of his people? did he, I
say, then step in to his peoples rescue, by breaking their yokes as in the day
of Madian, and Kissing them with the Kisses of his mouth? So that a man shall
say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God,
that judges in the earth.

Obs: Though the passages of Gods providence may seem so rugged and uncouth;
as if they were destructive to his Church, and likely to put out the eye of his
own glory; yet our God will so dispose of them in the close; that they shall
have an advantageous tendency, to the setting forth of his Honor, and our
good. What could seem of more dangerous consequence to the world, then the
fall of Adam, the death of Christ, and the commission of sin? yet Adams fall
made way for Christ, who was the Savior of the world; and put us into a
better, a more certain condition, then we were in the first Adam. When Satan
had thought to have Cut off this Savior, and prevented him, that he should not
accomplish the work of our redemption, by combining the Jews against him, and
putting it into the heart of Judas to betray him: yet herein they did but Non
fiunt praeter dei volunta. tem, quae contra ejus voluntatem siunt. Call. Insti.
lib. 1. cap. 18.
further the work of our Salvation, and fulfill the determinate Council of God
concerning the same Act. 2.23. In shedding his blood. they did but Compound a
plaster for our wounds; for by his stripes, we were Healed. Nay God can so
order, and dispose of sin it self; that thereby also he will get Dei
consiliis militant, qui ejus consiliis repugnant.
Honor to his justice; and the manifestarion of Gods Justice, in the exercise
of his severe judgments, may make way for the declaration of his mercy; not
only unto others; Rom 11.11.
as through the fall of the Jews, salvation came unto the Gentiles: the
Rebellion of Absalom tended to the stablishment of David's throne; as Seneca
says of the sturdy oaks; the more they are tossed with the wind; the more
firmly the are tooted in the earth: and the destruction of i the four great
Empirs of the world, the Lion, the Bear, the Leopard, the dreadful beast with
iron teeth and terrible Horns, Dan. 7.4, 5, 6, 7. etc.
was to this end that thereby a way might be made for the Ancient of days;
that out of their rubbish a stone might be brought forth without hands; and
therefore it is observable, that the revolutions and tumblinges down of those
mountanous kingdoms were not casual, but directed, and ordered by the
providence of God; even those wheels were full of eyes round about, Eze.
10.12. Moreover; Gods Cross, providence bring forth peace and comfort to the
same persons: Joseph Negotiatio est aliquid amittere, ut majora lucretis. Tert.
page 136. Galli faces Romae intulerunt: Sed civit as non deleta nec obruta; sed
expiata; sed lustrata videatur. Flor. lib. 1. cap. 13.
had not been raised to that preferment in Egypt, had he not been sold to the
Midianitish Merchants. Ruth had not been married to Boaz, had there not been a
famine in her own country; periissem nisi periissem; If I had not been undone;
I had been undone indeed, may many a man truly say: All my fiery trialls, have
served to refine me, and make me the more glorious and resplendent. Awake, O
North-winde, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof
may flow out, Cant, 4.16. was the prayer of the Church: not only the l warm
Southern gales of prosperity, D. Sibbs in locum.
conduce to the welfare of the Church; but even the nipping bo^sterous blastes,
from a contrary Coast, from the North do often make the graces of Gods people
more fragrant, and vigorous.

1 Use. Let Us admire the wisdom and power of God, whose ways are thus past
finding out: who can bring health out of sickness, and life out of death: who
is such an excellent Physician, as can D. Renolds on Psalm. 110. v. 1. p. 126.
Let us deny our own wisdom, and give glory to God acknowledging that there is
wiser counsel in every thing we suffer, then we can attain, M. Paul Bayne on
Ephesians. 1.11. Rev. 19.6, Ps. 46.2.
temper the most poisonous herbs, and make the most unlikely means, and
instruments to work forth most glorious ends: though nothing but gall and
wormwood be in the premises, yet the conclusion shall be sweer and
comfortable: though the Assyrian Sennacherib breath forth nothing but rage and
tumult against the Lord and his people; yet he shall feel a book in his nose,
and a bridle in his lips, and be turned back by the way, by which he came,
Esa 37.29. The Lord reigns, though the earth be never so unquiet: the
multitude shall cry, Alleluja: for the Lord omnipotent reigns, therefore will
we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the mountains be cast into
the midst of the Sea.

The Church can never be in a desperate, and deplorable condition which has
such a Chemist always at hand, who can bring gold out of dross? Although the
Habak. 3.17, 18.
Fig Tree shall not blossom; neither shall fruit be in the vines: yet I
rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation. Though events be
never so o black and dismal, As when Juno persecuted Cal^sto the Daughter of
Lycaon, Jupiters harlot upon earth, Jupiter took her up into heaven, and made a
star of her.
unanswerable to our expectation. Though -- Vrceus Exit: when we look for
peace, behold war, and confusion! when we look for beauty; behold baldness and
ashes! yet there is such a potter sits at the wheel; there is such a Moderator
of all successes and issues in this valley of tears, who can file and polish
the most deformed lumpes; and make all things whatsoever (...) to work together
for the best to them that love God, Romans 8.28. What can be of greater force to
compose and setle our distracted spirits amidst so many amazing dispensations
as we have met with all in latter times, then to consider, that when we see the
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a
province, that he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be
higher then they Eccl. 5. 8. Providence is full of mysteries; let the way be
shame, the crown is glory; and the present condition be Hell, the end is
Heaven. Blood, Ruthera ford on John, page 147. and 179.
wars, confusions, oppressions, crushing down of Christ, and his Church are
congruous means when they have the vantage to be handled by omnipotency:
murmur not then at those tragical changes, and passages, which thine eyes have
beheld under the Sun; for could thou behold the further end of them; thou
would say, all the policy of man could not have contrived them better: the
Lord is wonderful in all his works; in his works of judgment, and vengeance, as
well as of mercy, and kindness: (...). 1 Cor. 12.22, 23.
And though many things come to pass by Gods permission only, and not by his
approbation, and allowance; yet as toades and serpents contribute to the
perfection of the Universe; so these harsh and rugged events, conduce to the
Harmony and beauty of divine providence: Say not thou, what is the cause that
former days were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely
concerning this, Eccl. 7.10. let us run with patience the race that is (...).
Heb. 12.1.
set before us; and still trust in, and depend upon God though he kill us. The
Stoicke could say, we do but Act (...). Epicte. cap. 23. (...). idem c. 13.
that part upon the stage of the world, which our Master has appointed for us,
and therefore we should not be our own carvers, but endeavor to sui mit our
wills to the present occurrences. Nay; the the poor M. Full^rs Holy sta^e.
Shepherd could say, being asked by the Travelour what weather we should have,
that we should have what weather pleased him: not as if he (as it is reported of
the witches of Lapland) could raise winds, and change at his pleasure: but we
shall have, says he, what weather pleases God, and that weather shall please
me: so, it were well, if we could truly say with old Eli when the clouds
gather; and the heavens wax black, 1. Sam. 3.18.
and gloomie. It is the Lord: let him do what seems him good: For what
seems good to the Lord; will at last prove good to his Church. If any have
been so profane as to account religion fruitless and barren, and so be
startled in the same; If any have been so foolish, (upon the prosperity of the
wicked) as to mutter in their Hearts, that there is no God; they shall at last
be so far convinced, that they shall sing another tune; either with David in
the text -- so that a man shall say: verily there is a reward for the
righteous; doubtless there is a God: or else with Solomon; He has made every
thing beautiful in his time. Eccle. 3.11. And since I have mentioned these
words of Solomon; me thinks I hear a Monitor within my breast, prompting me to
break off the thread of this discourse; seeing I can speak nothing on this
subject, quod non fuit dictum prius, which has not, after a more D. Wilkins.
(...)) his sermons of providence on Eccl. 3.11.
accurate manner, been delivered, not long since from those words, and this
place. I come therefore to modulate and begin unto you the first part of this
song, expressed in the text.

1. The Proem, or introduction on. So that a man shall say.

2. Obs. The works and judgments of God are done for this purpose^ viz. to be
taken notice of, by our talking, and speaking of them. -- So that a man shall
say. There is a Canker, and Gangrene, which commonly runs through the veins of
our discourse; either it is spent idly, and profanely; or else it is versed
in impertinencies like the Athenians, in telling or hearing of news. Seldom a
word of the judgments, or mercies of God, toward our selves, or others. Never
did any age abound with more monuments and presidents of both kinds; and never
any people took less notice of them. As the noise of Nilus falling from the
mountains, makes the people inhabiting thereabouts to become deaf; and an
object applied too close to the Organ takes away, and prevents the act of
seeing; so the commonness, and frequency of Gods judgments, has even made us
dumb, and deprived us of the sense of them.

It was far otherwise with David: He was never well, but when speaking of the
works of God. When the Lord had made any gracious discoveries unto his heart,
Scire tuum nib^l est, nisi te scire hoe, sciat alter. Pers.
he was even in travail until he had reveald these experiences unto others:
Come^ says he, I will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul. If God
did show himself eminently in his works toward others, he could not let them
pass without observation; and having observed them, he could no more be
restrained from speaking of them, then gunpowder from giving a Crack, when
once it has tasted of the fire: for to this he seems to allude Ps. 39.3. Jer.
20.9.
My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I
with my tongue. And what did he say in this case? why, the Lord is terrible in
his doings to the children of men. Ps. 66. 5. Men shall speak of the might of
thy marveilous works: and he will bear his part too, he will make one; and I
will also tell of thy greatness. To this end he calls upon others: Ps. 145.4,
5, 6.
Talk of all his wondrous works. Ps. 105.2. Nay he accounts them beasts, and
Idiots, that apprehend not the language of the rod, or the dialect of mercies,
O Lord how great are thy works! a brutish man knows not, neither does a fool
understand this. Ps. 92.5.6. though sometimes the works of God are so
transparent: and illustrious that men, who are otherwise purblind in the things
of God, cannot but take notice of them; therefore the first words of the text
are read thus. Aynef worth on the text.
A man of the earth shall say. The Jews were but men of the earth; yet when
they saw those wonders at the death of Christ, as the renting of the temple,
opening of the graves, and darkness in the heavens, they could not but say,
that the God of nature suffered: This was none else but the Son of God. The
miracles also which Christ wrought, extorted the same confession from the
Devil himself: Thou art Christ the Son of the living God; therefore it is
that the Devils believe, and tremble. What was Balaam, and the old Prophet, but
men of the earth? yet the one was so convinced of the blessedness of Israel,
that he Wished his latter end might be like theirs, after he had endeavored to
curse them in his life time; the other gave order that his dead body should be
buried in the Seputcher of the man of God, whom he had deceived a little before
by tempting him to disobedience to the word of the Lord, and so expoling him to
a Lion 1 Kin. 13, 31. The very Heathens Justin. Mar. ad Graecos p. 20.
Plato and Aristotle, beholding the works of Nature, Creation, and Providence;
learned to call him (...), or Ensentium, the Author of all Being; whom Moses
called Jehovah, or I Am.

1. Particularly, when we see the works of Gods mercy toward us; we must talk
of them, with the Accent of Praises, Glory, and thanksgiving: who is a god like
our God? Honor, and praise be given to Him that sits on the Throne. Moses and
Barak had their (...), there solemn souges, to celebrate the goodness of God,
in overthrowing their enemies. What pompous, and costly triumphs, do we red of
among the very Heathen, when they rode in their victorious charriots, and
devoted the enemies spoils, and sang their 10 Poeans to some imaginary god or
other; to whom they acknowledged the glory of their conquest to be due? But
what need we have recourse to their moth eaten and fained Annals? we have
examples enough in the book of life: when the Angels poured out their vials
upon the Beast, and such as had his mark, Rev. 15.3, 4. and 16.5, 6, 7.
immediately you have Gods faithful servants singing the song of Moses, and
the lamb, who shall not fears thee, O Lord! and glorify thy name? for thy
judgments are made manifest: they have shed the blood of Saints, and thou have
given them blood to drinks.

2. The works of Gods judgments must be talked of, with trembling, Psalm. 119.120.
and humility. The Lord is to be feared for his judgments. As David trembled
when he saw Vzzah smitten, 2 Samuel 6.9. The Heathen mariners feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offered sacrifice, when they saw the wonders of the Lord upon
the deep sea, Jonah. 1.16. No greater sign of senseless stupidity, then for a
man to hug himself, to snort in security, to stretch upon beds of Ivory, and
to drink wine in bowls; when all things are in a flame round about, when the
very beams of the Temple crack, the pillars of the state totter, and poor
Joseph either begging or running for his life. Wise men will lay these things
to heart, and speak of them too; not with the sound of the Vial, but with the
tone of the Bitterne, to the tune of Hadadrimmon.

Use. Are Gods works of providence, whether of mercy, or judgment to be spoken
of? spoken of among our selves, and to our children, that they may also tell
them that come after, from generation to generation, that they may be had in
Everlasting remembrance? let this reprove our backwardness herein, Ps. 28.5.
as if we regarded not the works of the Lord, or the operation of his hands.
Our own Acts, we are prone to trumpet forth, and proclaim to the world; we
could be content, they should be registered in brass, or marble; but the works
of the Lord, we either swallow into a gulf, or write in water.

3. Obs: No man shall serve God for naught. Or, He that sowes the seed of
righteousness, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, and bring his
sheaves with him -- verily there is a reward for the righteous.

There is no trade, merchandise, or profession so thriving, and brings in so
much increase as religion, and a Conscionable walking with God and men. I know
this truth is looked on as a paradox by most; who catch at what is present; but
lay not up a good foundation for the time to come; nor provide for an estate in
reversion. Righteousness is accounted barred, and fruitless; attended with
continual trouble, and expense of duties, without any income, or Harvest of
reward. Tell men, that by grasping the pleasures, and profits of this world,
they hazard the loss of that recompense of reward, which shall one day be
distributed to the faithful; and that they shall have neither lot nor portion
in the Inheritance of the Saints in light. Alas they look upon that recompense,
and this Inheritance, as mere Chymaera's, and fictions. A mess of pottage is
better to these Gadarens, then such birthsrights, let them alone to chew the
sweet gobbets of iniquity, and to surfeit upon the desires of their own hearts,
and the ways of their own eyes; and then they think they have got the start
of all strict, and Conscionable enoches: As for the preferments, and joys of
Heaven, Credat Judaeus: let who will believe; for they do not valeat amicum
lumen: farewell the hopes of that unspeakable light, and pleasant manna in
heaven; if they may but sport themselves in the works of darkness, and feed
upon husks here. Give them a Palace in Paris, and then with that French Duke,
The Duke of Burbone.
they care not for paradise: give them but ground which is pleasant and rich,
and then with the Rubenites, they will gladly take up their rest on this side
Canaan, so Brutish are they in their understandings; as if their souls within
them, served only for salt to keep them from stinking: but I must let these
sensual Epicures, and gross Infidells know; That Godliness is great gain --
verily there is a reward for the righteous.

The Scriptures are very copious in asserting this point; as it were on purpose
to hold up our spirits, amidst all discouragements. Blessings shall cover the
head of the righteous, Prove. 10.6. And not only their heads shall be covered
with blessings; but they shall be surrounded with an affluence of all comforts;
mercy (...). Sept.
compasses them about, Ps. 32.10. They shall be satisfied with marrow, and
fatness, and they shall drink of the rivers of the pleasures of God. Since,
the beginning of the world men have not seen, nor perceived by the care, what
God has prepared for him that waits for him, Esa. 64.4. How can it be
otherwise? seeing they are betrothed, and married to God himself; and can they
want any thing that have such a head? such a husband? I will be thy everlasting
reward, said the Lord to Abraham, and in him to all beleivers, Genesis 15.1. they
cannot want, for he is Eleshaddai, the Lord All-sufficient: and he cannot forget
them; for they are engraven upon the palms of his hands. Ps. 144.12, 13, 14.
Happy are the people that are in such a Case, yea blessed are the people, who
have the Lord for their God. As the Lords people are his portion, and his (...).
Inheritance; all that he delights in, in the whole world; so on the other
hand, Gods people have bin content to see all their happiness laid up in God:
the Lord Ps. 16.5, 142.5.
is the portion of my inheritance, and again; the Lord is my portion in the
land of the living.

1. The righteous are rewarded with the things of this world. And now me thinks
I see you attending with both ears, how this shall be made good. 2 Arist.
Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 14.
This position is like that Demonstration, which Prodicus told his scholars,
he would acquaint them with, which should be worth forty groates the learning;
that so he might rouse them up, and whet their attention when they were almost
tired, and weary. So me thinks I hear you say, will God reward his servants:
with the things of this world? then we will be all his disciples; will Christ,
the son of David, give 1 Samuel 22.7.
us fields, and vineyards, and make us Captains of thousands, and Captains of
Hundreds? then we will all follow his Colors, and be his soldiers. If the
Kingdom of Christ were a temporal Kingdom; as the mother of Zebedees
children dreamed; then it were worth seeking, that we might sit on the right
hand, and left hand of Christ in such a Kingdom: moriar mudo imperem. I would
struggle hard to have some place of preferment in that Kingdom. But alas! the
righteous for the most part are like Noah's dove; they can Genesis 8.9.
sind no rest for the soles of their feet: the Foxes have holes; and the Birds
of the Air have nests; but the son of man himself, had not where to lay his
head. How are the righteous then rewarded with the things of this life? to this
I answer, It is true, If we measure the things of this life by the acre, and
weigh them by the pound, the righteous for the most part have the least share:
but yet that Prove. 15.16. and 16.8.
little which they have, is far better then the great riches of the ungodly.
Godliness with content is great gain: brown bread, and the Gospel (said the
Martyr) is good cheer. Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry,
my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and shall howl for vexation of spirit Esa. 65.13, 14. How many darlings of the
world are vexed with a cursed thirst, though they swim in golden streams; and
are lean and meagre, amidst the fat of the earth? as Pharaohs lean Kine, were
lean still, after they had devoured the seven fat ones. And though, as God
gives them riches, and wealth, so he should give them power to ea^e thereof,
and to rejoice in their labor, Eccles. 5.19. Yet it is their portion; in the
same verse, though their bellies are filled with hid treasures, and they leave
the rest of their substance to their babes. Yet this they purchase at a dear
rate; for in the same place again, they are said to have their portion in this
life, Ps. 17.14. Verily I say unto you they have their reward, Mat. 6.2.
Therefore Christ bid the rich man remember, that he received his good things in
his life time. Now the righteous are as Heirs under age, though they differ
not from servants for the present, yet they are princes in a disguise, and have
a title to a boundless Inheritance hereafter; Great Mat. 15.12.
shall their reward be in heaven: Hereafter did I say? and in Heaven? nay the
righteous shall inherit the earth, Psalm. 37.20. they have a title to both
worlds, Godliness 1 Timothy 4.8.
has the promises of this life, and that which is to come, whether things
present, or things to come, all are yours. Having nothing, yet possessing all
things. Their title to what they have not is better, then the wicked man's to
what he has. I mean not, as if all right, and power Dave. Deter. 30.
were founded upon grace; or according to levelling principles, as if the
Saints might spoil the wicked of their inheritances, as the Israelites did the
Egyptians: no doubt, but wicked men have a Civil right to what they have, to
fence them from plundering; They receive their goods ex largitate, from Gods
common mercy and kindness to them: but now the righteous have a divine right
unto, and a sanctified use of the Creatures. They have them not by usurpation,
but ex promisso, by virtue of Gods promise; to them are the promises made Gal.
3.16. Although we must needs say, God takes his own time, to fulfill his own
promises; seeing that he is not a physical, but a most free agent; every
Individual righteous person does not presently taste the sweetness of Gods
promises especially concerning temporal things, David kept sheep for a time,
after he was anointed to the Kingdom: through patience we inherit the
promises. Heb. 6.12 Heb. 10.36.
After ye have done the will of God; ye have need of patience, that ye may
receive the promise. Though the Lord says; Re. 22.12.
Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me: yet he speaks like himself:
Hag. 2.6, 7 Rev. 1.1. (...).
for with him a thousand years are but as yesterday: or he spoke, as the
prophets by his spirit wrote; who spoke of things to come, as already done; to
us a son is borne, and what was many hundred years after to be accomplished,
was said shortly to come to pass. It is little while, and I will shake the
Heavens, and the desire of all Nations shall come; yet he came not till above
four hundred years after.

After the Angel had proclaimed, that such as worship the beast, and his
image, and receive the mark of his name, should be tormented with fire, and
brimstone; that their smoke should ascend up for ever; and they should have no
rest day or night: it follows at the next verse. Here is the patience of the
Saints: one would have thought, he should rather have added, here is the joy,
and triumph of the Saints, to see their enemies destroyed: but because this
promise was not presently to take place, but in many, many generations after;
and in the mean space Babylon was to sit as Queen, and permitted to make havoc
of the worshippers of the Jam be. Therefore it is said immediately here is the
patience of the Saints, Rev. 14. 10, 11, 12. they must stay, until the time
come, that the Lord make inquisition for blood; then he will remember them
Psalm. 9.12. And as the Lord does not presently take vengeance of the wicked; so
does he not presently reward the righteous, He looks into the records of
Heaven, his book of remembrance first, wherein all their righteous acts are
written: as Mordecai was near the Gallows, though he discovered the Traitors,
and so saved the Kings life, till Ahasuerus read in the Chronicle where this
was recorded, Ester. 6.1, 2, 3.

2. God rewards the righteous with Honor. Prove. 10.7. Esa. 65.15.
The name of the wicked shall rot; and they shall leave their name for a curse.
They are as chafe, as scume, as refuse silver; And though they ruffle never so
much in the gaudy plumes of glorious titles; yet it may be said of them, as it
was of Naaman, but they are Lepers; but they are sinful wretches: this degrades
them: this spoils, stains, and dashes their honor; and lays it in the dust:
as it is said of the Eagles feathers, Francius part 2. c. 1.
that if they are mixed with the feathers of other foul; those will consume and
devoute these; so, where there is the worm of a predominant sin, it will
undermine the gourd of aspiring glory. Reuben shall not excel, though he was
Jacobs firstborn, and the beginning of his strength; because he was incestuous
and went Genesis 49.3, 4.
up into his Fathers bed. They that despise me shall be lightly esteemed:
though they be never so great, they stink in the nostrils of God, and good
men. 1 Samuel 3.30.
According to that tradition of an Angel walking by the way, meeting a proud
gallant, in sumptuous apparel, all to perfumed, and going in such a stately
garb, as if he would strike reverence in those that saw him even to adoration:
This Angel started out of the way, and held his nose, as if he had passed by
some stinking carcass, or nasty dunghill; to show that as God sees not as man
sees, 1 Samuel 16.7.
for man looks to the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart:
So, Holy men see not, as the men of the world see, these turn the eye of
respect after tall Eliabs, and after the glittering objects of riches and
power; as the Sun-flower, and marrigold turn after the Sun, but the other
honor those most, who excel most in grace and goodness. As when Jonathan saw
the prowess, humility and other transcendent qualifications in David, it is
said, the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan
loved him as his own soul. 1 Samuel 18.1. It is true; we must honor even wicked
men according to their places, authority, and relations; but herein our honor
is to be terminated upon the image of Gods power in them, and not upon their
personal abominations.

But now the righteous are honorable even in rags: their faces shine with
rays of majesty reflected from God himself; though every Balaam cannot
discern them. As the blind Jews could see nothing in Christ himself, that
was desirable, Esa, 3.2.3. But the Eastern wisemen saw the divinity sparkling
in him amidst the straw, and the litter, and therefore they came many a weary
step to worship him; this they Aurum regi thus Deo, morituro myrrham Chrysol.
Ser. 158.
acknowledged by their mystical gifes, gold, myrrh, Frankincense: so the
generatio of the righteous have beenillustrious and glorious when under the
sawes and harrowes of persecution. Russinus. l. 1. cap. 4.
Constantines eyes saw such luster in Paphnutius the Confessor, when Maximian
had plucked out one of his eyes, that he fell upon him, and kissed him; and he
kissed that place most, where his eye had been plucked forth, that as the heart
of Christ was ravished with one of the Spouses eyes; understand it of her
faith, or love; My Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart with one of
thy eyes, Cant. 4 9. So the good Emperors heart was ravished with the very
hole, wherein one of the Confessors eyes had been. The Roman Senators were
very awful in their gowns; so a Christian clothed with the garment of
holiness, looks as if he were clothed in purple, since thou art precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, etc. Esa. 43.4. He is honorable in his life;
A king, a Priest: guarded with Angels: He has a new, and royal name, better
then of Sons and Daughters, Esa. 56.5. Honorable after death. His very name
shall carry a sweet savor with it.

A good q name is better then precious ointment: The memorial of the Just is
blessed, Eccl 7.1. Ps. 112.9.
Prove. 10.7. His horn shall be exalted with honor. We are most of us very
Aerie: we would feign fly through the mouths of men, upon the wings of fame:
let us conquer our own Corruptions; so we shall be more famous, then Alexander,
or Caesar. Let us express the power of religion in our lives, and our names
shall out ^ast brass, and marble: such a reward have all the righteous: such
honor have all his Saints. Ps. 149.9.

3. God rewards the righteous with security and protection. He is round about
his people, as the Hills stand about Jerusale^: Ps. 125.2.
the Church is a garden enclosed, God is a wall of fire about his servants in
the wilderness of this world; so that no Lion or Tiger can assault them,
without Commission from him; nay without assaulting him himself: In touching
them they touch the apple of his eye: In their afflictions, he is afflicted,
therefore he is said to carry his people upon Eagles wings, standing betwixt
them and danger. He bears them in his bosom, and compasses them with his
everlasting arms: His left hand is under the head of his Church, and his right
hand embraces her: she is hid in the clefts of a rock. The Angels stand about
her with their flaming swords. Behold his bed, which is Solomon's (this bed is
the Church) threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiants of Israel,
(that is of Angels) Cant. 3.7. If he suffers them to fall into dangers; he
keeps them from being infected with the venom and malignity of them, that they
tempt them not to sin; and from the bitterness and extremity of them; that
they be not swallowed up in the gulf of anguish and pain. He will walk with
them in the furnace. He will not forsake them, when they pass through fire and
water: as their tribulation abounds, so their consolation shall abound. 2 Cor.
1.4.
There is none like the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the heavens for thy
help, and in his excellency on the sky. Happy art thou. O Israel: who is like
unto thee, O people! saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the
sword of thy excellency; thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread on their high places: Deuteronomy. 33.27, 29.

4. God Will reward the righteous hereafter With everlasting glory.
Righteousness is pregnant, and teeming with many excellent rewards in this
life. It becalmes and Hushes the conscience with a lasting serenity, which
renders a righteous man unshaken, though the mountains fall into the midst of
the sea. As learning and Knowledge would be desirable, though there were no
preferments in the world to attend them. Virtus est virtutis praemium.
They would be their own reward. So righteonsnesse would be a recompense to it
self, though no reward were expected her eafter. The strictest walking is full
of joy: and the hardest rock of Christian duties, (as fasting, humiliation and
mourning for sin) has its honey and sweetness. The heart of a godly man is
affected with secret exulting and comfort, when his eyes are blubberd with
tears, his face pale, and his knees smite one against another: even as the
trees have sap within them, when they are made naked and deprived of their
fruit, and leaves. Christ had meat which his disciples knew not of; and the
Saints have a spring of joy flowing in them, which is above the envy of the men
of the world They have fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans
6.22. Ps. 19.11.
In keeping thy commandments there is great reward: yet the fruit of holinesle
in this life, is but as the first fruits, or as the bunch of grapes which the
spies brought from Canaan, which were pledges of an after harvest, and of a
country fl^wing with milk, and honey. God deals with his servants, as Jacob
with Rebekah, and Boaz with Ruth: Jacob gave jewels to R^bekah first, and
married her afterward. Boaz left more then ordinary gleaning to Ruth, and
afterward, gave himself unto her: so the Lord refreshes the hearts of his
people, with some glimpses and dawnings of comfort, as it were through the
lattice, in this world, as an earnest of that unspeakable light, which we shall
enjoy, when we awake out of the sleep of death. we shall be satisfied with his
likeness! we shall so behold the image of the Lord, Ps. 17.15.
as to be changed into the same image, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. When
we shall attain this eternal weight of glory; so as to enjoy the blessed
presence of God; the communion of Angels, and the souls of just men made
perfect: when these bodies shall shine like the stars in the firmament, and the
high praises of God shall be in our mouths to all eternity: when all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, and all sin from our souls, then and not till
then, shall we receive the bulk of our reward, the accomplishment of our
happiness.

Then a man shall say verily there is a reward for the righteous.
Aspice venturo laetentur and omnia seelo.
Caution, Though God does reward the righteous, yet it is not out of strict
justice, as if there were such merit in our righteousness, whereby we could
lay claim and challenge to such a reward: when we have done all, we are but
unprofitable servants. All our merit consists in, It is due also Justit^a
promissi, says M. Mede on Noh. 13 p. 330. M. Barrough's Mos. Chapter
and rests upon the divine dignation, the mercy of God, and the merit of
Christ. Eternal life does not belong to us in respect of our works, but as we
are ingrafted into Christ, and so have a title to that inheritance, which he
has purchased for us. It is called a reward in one Mat. 5.44.
place, and a free Luke 6.32. compared.
gift in another.

Q. But may we Act with relation to this reward?

A. I am not ignorant, what the Family of love answer to this question. They
account it below a truly sanctified soul to aim at any thing besides God
himself, and his glory: It argues a servile (say they) and a mercenary spirit,
and indeed primarily in all our enterprises, and performances, we ought to eye
the glory of God; Omnis amor mercedis non est amor mercenarius: Dr. Pressed.
but in the second place, we may also respect our own salvation; and herein
also we may aim at the glory of God: seeing Gods glory, and our salvation are
interwoven together. God is glorified by our salvation, therefore Moses had an
eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. Though some have said it, and it is
true, we should serve and worship the Lord, were there no Heaven at all; yet
seeing we are flesh, as well as spirit, for our encouragement, we have the
joys of heaven set before us, at which we may level all our actions, in a
holy subserviency, and subordination thereunto: even as the Archer aims at the
white in the But; (...), 2 Cor. 4.18. Whilst we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen.

Use. Is righteousness so beneficial? shall it be rewarded here, and
hereafter? above all things, let us labor for righteousness, which is so
gainefull a profession. He Prove. 21.21.
that follows after righteousness, finds life, righteousness and honor.
That rich man is a very beggar, whose stock lies wholly in perishing riches,
and is not rich toward God, nor has the reward in my text in bank. That beggar
is richer then Croesus in Non potest vir bonus esse non beatus Salvi.
all his glory, who has the garment of righteousness under his nasty rags.
In the keeping of Gods Commandments, there is great reward. Religion is more
profittable to us, then it is to the Lord. All our praying, bearing, fasting
adds nothing to the perfection of the Almighty: He had bin completely glorious
in himself, had we never bin, and so he would be, should we all perish; but in
serving the Lord, we serve our selves: we get the greatest (...). Cle Alex.
Stro. 4. p. 535.
advantage to our selves by our worshipping of God: we lay up for our selves a
treasure in heaven; that when these tabernacles shall be dissolved, we may be
received into Everlasting habitations above. As that Viceroy sent provision
into an Island, that he might live like himself, when he should be banished
from his own kingdom. No wonder the primitive Christians did venture so much
to meet together in woods, and Cavernes of the earth, and that before day;
before the sun rose upon the mountains, to worship God in sincerity, and to
offer the sacrifice of prayer to him; when they were in danger to have their
blood mingled with their sacrifices; when there was a snare Hos. 5.1.
on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, And the Amal^kites lay in the way to
intercept them, and cut them off, that they should never return to their own
homes; why did they run such hazards? certainly they had an eye, with Moses,
to the recompense of reward: they did verily believe to see the goodness of
the Lord in the land of the living. Though heaviness might endure for a night,
yet joy would come in the morning; therefore they did not regard their lives,
nor their Genesis 45.20.
stuff: for with an eye of faith, they saw the good of all the land of Canaan
before them.

There is no Enterprise, but the Consideration of the reward puts life into it.
The scholar studies; the Physician rides early, and late; the soldier fights;
the husbandman digges and delves in the bowels of the earth; mercator ad
Judos, the Merchant passes many storms and tempests in dangerous seas, which
they would not do, preamia si tollas, ^f there were no preferment, no honor,
no riches and advantage to be got thereby. But now what a shame is it, that all
these should be animated to their indefatigable pains and great hazards, by
such poor and inconsiderable rewards, and yet we sit still, and neglect the
work of righteousness and holiness; as if the face of God were not worth
beholding; the crown of life worth fighting for; nor the (...), the price of
our high calling in Jesus Christ did deserve our diligent, and constant running
in the race of Christianity: they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we
an incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25.

It is said of Genesis 29.20.
Jacob, that he served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed but a few
days, for the love he had to her; she was so amiable. And the Trojans could
say; It (...). Hom. Il. 3.
was no wonder, that there was a ten years war for Helena, seeing she was a
woman so beautiful. Much less should we be discouraged by any hard-ships;
from the duties and practice of Religion, seeing the reward there of is so
great, and the joys of heaven so joyous, our light affliction which is but for
a moment, works for us a more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
4.18.

If this reward do not move us, and prevail with us to live righteously, to
walk upright, and religiously; there is, 1. Either infidelity at the bottom of
our hearts: we can believe men (if they be not notoriously naught) in their
asseverations, and promises; we are apt to believe Satan's allurements, and to
take him at his word, when he says, all these things will I give thee; though
he be a liar from the beginning, and instead of a fish give Blanditur ut
fallat; arridet ut nocear; illicit ut occidat. Cypri.(...).
us a scorpion: there is a reward indeed due unto sin, but it is an unwelcome
one, The wages of sin is death: yet though we are credulous to men and
devils, yet we will not Homini ab homine creditur, sed non creditur Deo. Salvi.
believe the promises of God: though he say verily there is a reward for the
righteous; yet our sleighting the paths of righteousness, show we contradict
the veracity of God: his verily is not authentic, 2. Or else we have hard
thoughts of God, and his service, like him in the Gospel, we are ready to say
Mat. 25.24.
Master, we know that thou art an hard man, or with them Mal. 3.14. It Is in
vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? All is lost time, which is spent in this
worship: when will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? Amos. 8.5.
they are carnal, and so neither see nor value any reward, but what is present,
and visible. 3. Or lastly, they are down right Atheists; and so deny both the
gift and the Honor, as if there is no God in heaven, to give gifts and rewards
unto men; unto whom I oppose the next assertory part of my text, Doubtless
there is a God. Which is a complete doctrine in it self, and without any
variation of terms, shall be my next observation.


Obs: Doubtless there is a God. And did ever any call this into a doubt? Is
not this one of those principles, which in Logic we call (...), that is taken
for granted, and by reason of that evidence, and light, which it carries along
with it, needs no demonstration? As snow is acknowledged white without any
dispure. It Is true quid sit deus, what God is in his essence, is above the reach
of men, and angels. As the peace of God passes our understanding so the God of
peace much more. Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out the
Almighty to perfection? Job. 11.7. Famous is that story of him De natura deorum.
in Tullie, who being ask't what God was, desired time to bring in his answer,
and when that time was expired, he desired a double proportion of time; and at
last was feign to return with non est comprehendus. He is not to be fathomed
with the short and finite line of our understandings: to see God as he is, must
remain until we see him face to face. Here we know him only in a negative
sense, that is, we know what he is nor, not what he is. It is (...). Basil. p.
127.
as easy to empty the vast ocean with a nut-shell, or the palm of ones hand,
as perfectly to know this absolute, and eternal being, which we call God: yet
as we must not deny the being of the Senti animam. quae ut sentias efficit.
Tertul. p. 89.
soul, because we cannot fee it; so, non est Fulgentius, p. 40.
ignorabilis deus, we are not to be ignorant of God, cum sit inenarrabilis,
although his nature, and generation none can declare. If we cannot see his face
and live, yet we may look after his backeparts: we may safely (without peeping
beyond the veil, or prying into the unsearchable secrets of God) show, quod
sit deus, That there is a God, and that is my task. Doubtless there is a God.

Although it has bin disputed, whether ever there has bin any speculative
Atheist, any, who has bin fully convinced in his judgment, that there is no
God at all; and some have affirmed it, that no such person has ever bin found;
yet we shall find other Atheists more then enough, too too rise in our days;
which was in a manner forseene by a holy, M. Greenham.
and grave man in his generation; who frequently said; That Atheism was more
to be feared in England, then Popery.

1. There are Socinian Atheists, who deny with open face, the Godhead of
Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, as if Christ were a constituted god, and not of
the same substance with the Father from all eternity; not a God by nature, but
by donation in time. As there are many of this rank, so God has raised up
champions in his Israel, to disarme them of all their subtilties, and to heat
them out of all their trenches, though they were dug as low as Hell.

2. There are witch-hunting Atheists; such as after losses, in times of
extremity, when lawful means will not serve their turn, when the Lord will
not answer them, neither by dreams, nor Vrim, nor by prophets, 1 Samuel 28.6.
Then they will go to Flectere si nequeo superos, Atheronta movebo.
Endor, to some wizard, or sorcerer, to try how propitious the devil will be
unto them: Now this is an high Affont to Heaven: A dethroning of the Almighty,
and a setting up of Lucifer in his room; and therefore I may well call it
Atheism. When (...) Ahaziah sent to Baal-zebub, to know whether he should
recover of his disease: the Angel of the Lord sent Elijah with this message.
Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of
Baalizebub the god of Ekron? 2 King. 1.2, 3.

3. There are swarms of practical Atheists, who in words profess there is a
God, but in works deny him? God is not in all their thoughts, Ps. 10.4. without
God in the world: they set not the holiness, nor glory, nor power of God
before their eyes to restrain them from sin: as if God had eyes, and saw not;
nay in the Act of sinning, they either believe there is no God, or Quod
metuunt, periisse expetunt.
wish there were none. Now cross to these; It is the first Article of my
faith, that there is a Father Almighty, maker of Heaven, and earth: that there
is a God; and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. And this I shall make appear even from nature, and reason; which are
only classical, and Canonical to Atheistical wretches.

1. From the natural notion and Idea of a God, which resides in the mind of a
man, so long as it is not crazed. God has set his stamp upon us in an
indelible character, whereby we cannot but own him, and pay the tribute of
homage to his awful Majesty; and that especially, when he frowns, and inflicts
upon us some memento's of his Hi su^t quque trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura
pallent Cum tonat, exanimes, primo queque murmr Coel 1. Juve. Sat. 13. Per
hoc te^pus, sc: sub imperio Constantii, sava, and continua terra concusiones,
quasi quadam prodigia, coelestem iram ost entantia, religionem aliquam humanis
pectoribus incusserunt. Sigonius. l. 5. p. 110. Afflictio dat intellectum.
power, then the profantst varlet will cry out O God! O Lord! who in time of
prosperity did hang out his flagge of defiance against God, and against Heaven.
The pround, daring Emperor could hide himself at a clap of thunper; and the
Babyllonish Monarch, who did affront the Almighty, by drinking wine in
sacrilegious boles, was struck with a trembling palsy, at the apparition of an
hand writing on the wall. Those Heathenish Mariners, that were wasting Jonah
unto Tarshish; when they were tossed with a Euroclydon a violent, and
tempestious wind, so that they were all in danger of drowning, they found
everry one a God to pray unto, Jonah. 1.5. when he sl.W them, then they sought
him: and they returned, and enquired early after God: and they remembered that
God was their rock: and the high God their Redeemer, Ps. 78 34, 35. So it was
with the Israelites themselves, who in time of liberty, plenty and health had a
tang of Atheism: So it was with David, who said in his prosperity that he
should never be moved. When Manasses made groves, caused the children to pass
through the fire in the valley of Hinnom, and used witchcrafts, and
enchantments; did he ever think upon a God? at least on the true God? But when
the King of Assyria bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon, then
Moses invenit Deum in rube inter spinas, quem pro tempore amifit Solomon in
thalamo inter rosas. Maria retinet Christum in Aegyp to, quem amisit in festo.
D. Pride. 2. Conc.
Manasses knew that God was the Lord, 2 Chr. 33.12, 13. There was the sparkle
of the knowledge of God in him before, but so raked under the ashes of
dissolute thoughts and practices, that it could scarce be discerned, yet not
quite exstinguish'^ and smothered. Now affliction did so fan, and winnow away
those ashes, that the notion of God implanted in his breast, did shine forth in
its genuine, and primogenial luster. Thus Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4.32.33, 34.
knew, that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, after he had gone to
school for some months to the beasts of the field.

It is reported of a famous Carver, who making a curious image of Minerva, did
secretly ingrave his own upon it: so the Lord of Heaven (if it be lawful to
make such a comparison) has interwowen his own image in us, which remains as
a mark, whereby we may be known to be his Workmanship, his people, and sheep
of his pasture: And although the glorious lineamens of his draught are much
defaced, yet there are such relics and remainders left behind, that as in an
old sullied globe, or map, we may guess at the former lines; so there is so
much of Gods image left in us, which will serve to spell, or find out a God.
What is Conscience? but a divine faculty in the soul, which is the Lords spy,
or Lieutenant in us, and over us? why does it smile upon us, after we have done
well, though the world foame, and rage? why does it fly in Cui frigida men's est
criminibus tacita sudant praecordia culpa. Juve. Sat. 1. Scclus aliquis tutum,
nemo Sccurum tulit. Sen. Hyppo.
our faces and pull us by the throat when we do amiss, though no eye behold
us, nor any law can punish us? our own thoughts either accusing, or excusing
us, Romans 2.15. And so man keeps a complete Court of Assize within his own
breast, and passes sentence upon himself. This is the Book which shall be
opened at the day of judgment: This is the candle of the Lord, which searches
the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. Why could neither Cain, nor Heman,
nor Spira, appease the fury of their own Spirits? What does this argue, but a
superintendent principle, to whom we are all subordinate, before whose
tribunal, we are to appear another day; and are as it were summond, and bound
over to answer for all misdemeanors, by the verdict of our own Consciences
here?

Moreover: that there is such an impression of a God naturally; appears from
the Devils themseves, who believe and tremble; and from the most 1 King.
17.30, 31.
paganish and most barbarous people, and nations, who have acknowledged some
god or other; and worshipped him accordingly. As the Sun, the Moon, the stars,
some Friend or Benefactour; some beast or other, that has been profitable to
them; Nascuntur in bortis numina.
or else their very leekes and onions, or if they knew not what God to worship
in particular; rather then they would own no God at All, they Inscribed their
Altars (...), to the unknown God, whosoever he was: Act. 17.23.
as the Romans had their Pantheon, a Temple for all Gods whatsoever. Now as the
hot, and various disputes concerning Religion, show that there is such a thing
as religion, and that there is an excellency in religion: so those different
opinions concerning God, shows that there is such a transcendent Being as God,
who is the very source and Fountain of all our happiness, and should be the
object of all our worship and praises. This is the first lesson a servant of
God is to learn, to wit, that there is a God; and that he is A rewarder of
them that fear him. We cannot come to God with fiducial, or justifying faith,
before we have attained this Historical, or dogmatical faith; he that will come
to God, must believe that God is, Heb. 11.6. As I have demonstrated the latter,
-- verily there is a reward for the righteous. So I shall proceed to show --
that doubtless there is a God.

2. From the book of the creatures. Now this book is very large and voluminous,
consisting of the two Dyptyches of Heaven and earth; which, as they make up one
great globe, so they constitute A vast Folio, wherein all the Creatures, from
the Sun and moon in the firmament, to the Ant, and Hysop upon the wall, are so
many Capital letters, which both single, and joint set forth the wisdom, and
power of God. Any illiterate men, that know not one letter of the Alphabet, may
run and read: without offense, what the Papists say of Images, we may justly
say of the Creatures, that they are Laymens books. Neither are they so many
dead letters, or silent Hieroglyphickes; but as great Scholars are said to be
walking libraries, and Holy men are living Bibles; so the Creatures are
speaking bo^^^s.

As we have read of a vocal grove, where the trees spoke, and gave answers:
Quaere supra nos: nam ipse fecit nos. as Austin brings in the Creatures
answering him, enquiring of them whether they were his god, in his consess.
so the whole world is such a Grove. All the creatures in their several ranks,
and places set forth the glory of their Creator. The Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, Ps. 19.1. neither is their
voice intelligible in such, and such Countries, only, like other languages;
but their Dialect is universally the same to all Nations: There is no speech or
language where their voice is not heard, Ps. 19 3. Pythagoras thought the
Heavens made a musical Harmony in their motion; but sure I am; David calls
upon the Heavens to praise the Lord; and to praise the Lord, is the most
excellent melody in the ears of God, and good men; they proclaim the Honor
of him that dwells in the Heavens. Thou have set thy glory above the Heavens,
Ps. 8.1. or as Aynsworth says the word will bear it: thou have set thy glory
upon the Heavens. As the painter shows his skill by setting forth some
Curious, and almost breathing portraiture; and exquisite, and accurate
needle work sets forth the Art of her that made it; So The pictures of stars
are said to be in the stones at Shugborough, being the arms of a Family of the
Shugboroughs there: so the arms of God; his wisdom, power and goodness are in
every Creature. M. Fullers Ho: sta.
the Lord has set his glory upon the Heavens, as upon an excellent piece of
imbroiderd work: they are said to be drawn forth by line, Job. 38 5. and to be
the word of Gods Fingers, Ps. 8.4. because of the curious, and wonderful
wisdom, which is expressed in the structure of them: He stretches out the
Heavens as a Curtain or Canopy, Esa. 40.22. By his spirit he has garnished
the Heavens, Job. 26.13. Therefore the Lord sets himself forth by such names,
and titles, as relate to the Creatures: As Jehovah, which comes from a root
signifying Being, because he has his Being from himself, and is the cause of
all Being in the Creatures: In imitation whereof, it is thought the Heathen set
this Motto Plutarch.
(ET) thou art) upon the Temple at Delphos. He is called, The God that made the
Heavens: 1 Chro. 16.26. Josh. 3.11. 1 Samuel 12.17. Job. 26.7.
The Lord of all the Earth. And by a periphrasis; He that sends the thunder,
and the rain: and Hangs the earth upon nothing.

Orpheus himself could say; If any claim the title of a god, Deum non alias
manifestum est esse, quam quia totum condidit hoc. Tertul. p. 448. Saepe mihi
dubiam traxit sententia mentem, Curarent superi terras, an nullus in esset
Rector but after when, Dispositi quaesissem foedera mundi tune omnia rebar
Consilio firmata dei. Claudian. Tanta eventuum similitudo, and ad certum sinem
quasi conspiratio, indicium est providae directionis: nam in alea Venereum
aliquoties jaccre, casus esse potest, at centies si quis eundem jaciat, nemo
erit qui non hoc ab art aliqua dicat proficisci. Grotius de Relig. Christiana.


besides one; let him make another world like this, and then say (...) This is
my world, and then we will believe He is a god. Thus the works of nature do
manifestly discover the god of nature: From second causes, and inferior
effects, we may easily arise unto, and acquiesce in the First Cause, and the
First Mover of all things; even as we may pursue a River to the springhead,
and Fountain, from whence it flows. The invisible things of God from the
Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, Romans 1.20.

Who can be ignorant of a God, that observes the constant motion of the
Heavens; the orderly vicissitude, and succession of Summer, and Winter; the
wonderful ebbing and flowing of the sea. If we should see a ship upon the sea
sailing directly to the Harbor, we might conclude, that there is a pilot in
that ship, to steer her Course; Theophilus in fine Justi. Mar.
(...) etc. So we may resolve, that there is a supreme moderatour and
Governor, who orders, and disposes of all things in their seasons.

Quaelibet herba deum. Singula animantiu^ genern deum esse demonstrant. Nazi.
p. 63.
Who can be ignorant of a God, that veiwes the Herbs of the Field, and sees
with what beauty they are clothed, and tastes the different virtue that is in
them: who ponders the stupendous properties of beasts, and birds, and fishes;
with what instinct they propagate their kind, and provide for their sustenance,
and safety? who can forbear even to cry out Altitudo! O the Height, and depth
of the wisdom, power, and mercy of a God; that reads those Natural Histories
of Pliny, Aelian; and above all; that reads the book of Job, and considers the
wonderful observations there, even from nature her self? Hereupon I have not
a little wondered with my self at that imputation (I hope it is no better)
which is commonly cast upon Physicians, as if their very calling did incline
them to Atheism. Whereas, that necessary and excellent Cum si^ mortalis non
est mortale quod optas
profession may furnish a man with arguments enough, to convince and reclaim
the greatest Atheist. These are supposed to have a narrow inspection into the
secrets, and mysteries of nature; which may prove a sufficient Antidote or
preservative against the poison of Atheism, and a charm to allay all
tumultuous and doubting thoughts concerning a God. Physicians, me thinks,
should be like Merchants, who go Ps. 107.23.24.
down to the sea in ships: that do business in great waters, who see the
works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. So these may evidently behold
the deep things of God, even in the very fabrik of the body of man: this is
Commentum Dei mirabile, a wonderful Commentary upon a God, as Lactantius calls
it, who largly Ex ipsis membrorum officiis, and usibus partium singularum,
quanta vi providentiae quis que factus fit, intelligere nobis licet. Lactantius
de opificio Dei.
proves the existence of God, from the beauty, and usefulness of our bodily
members. The sight of a (...); to see how harmoniously the bones are knit
together; is a loud sermon of a Diety; and every Anatomy, may be a divinity
lecture; and therefore Galen, one of the Fathers of Physicians, contemplating
the curious structure of man's body, could not but acknowledge, that it was
composed by no less then a divine Artifice, and cried out in words, like those
of David viz. That we are fearfully, and monderfully made, How degenerous
should the sons of Galen be? if they should terminate, and immerse their
thoughts in the things that are seen, and forget God; who though he cannot be
seen; yet is he always about our paths, and we also in him; In him we live,
and move, and have our being. Those study nature aright, that use her as a
handmaid to lead unto the Almighty; and break forth into the praises of Gods
wisdom, power, and goodness, amidst their natural speculations; David was
such a Divine Philosopher, When I consider (says he) thy Heavens, the work of
thy fingers, the Moon, and Stars, which thou have ordained. He adds by way
of admiration; what is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man
that thou visitest him? Ps. 8.3, 4, As the covetous man, that rests in his
riches, and sacrifices to his gold is an idolater; so also is such a
naturalist, that looks not at the living God, through second causes.

3. God is manifested by his judgments. Though God delights not in judgment: it
is opus alienum, his strange work, to rise Esa. 28.21.
up as in Mount perazim, and to be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon. He is not
such a God, as the Poet describes Jupiter, one that delights (...). Esa. 57.16.
Si quoties peccant homines, etc.
in thunder; for then the spirits should sail before him, and the souls which
he has made. If the Lord were as ready to power down his judgments upon us,
as we are to provoke him, or to take vengeance on them that provoke us, the
whole Armory of heaven might ere this have been emptied upon our heads; but it
goes even against him, to execute his wrath: Hosea 11.^1.
His very heart is turned within him, and his repentings are kindled together.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall
I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? yet the Lord is not so
sparing of his judgments, but that he may be known by the judgments which he
executes, Psalm. 9 16. This I shall show more fully, when I come to the last
words of the text, He judges in the earth: but here we may see his indignation
displayed against blasphemers: It is easy to reckon up many See D. Beards
Theater of Gods judgments.
examples of this kind; as also of murders which have been miraculously
discovered: in which, he that does not see the finger of a God is altogether
blind: but in a particular manner, Diagoras, Pherecides. Lucian. Olympius, and
Julian.
Atheists have felt the strokes of that God whom they have denied. Some have
been burnt: some eaten up of lice: some devoured of Dogs: Others Thunder-shot
from Heaven, and that in their very Act of challenging, and blaspheming God. O
quake and tremble all ye that forget God: All ye, that never think upon God,
but when ye swear profanely by his name: O fear, lest you become the next
monuments of his wrath, For the repressing of Atheism, an inquisit^ion were
merciful justice, Bp^. L^k. Se^. p. 146.
and so be cured of your Atheism by ^he torments of Hell: and become the
D^vels Converts, and together wi^h them believe and tremble: for though,
through the indulgence of God, and Princes; Atheists for a time enjoy a cruel
libe^ty and exemption from torments; yet this patience shall one day add to
their plagues.

1. Use. To confute the mistaken wisdom of some luxuriant wits of this age,
who by wisdom, know not God, 1 Cor. 1.21. Such as are ingeniose nequam, witty
and subtle, Proctors, Pandars, and Decoyes for Hell it self. Wisdom and
learning in such wretches, is as a diamond set in dirt, or a jewel in a swines
snout. The Lord complains, that he gave his people corn, Hosea 2.8. Jer. 5.7.
and wine, and oil, and multiplied their silver and gold; yet they prepared
them for Baal: He fed them to the full, and they committed adultery: the same
complaint is too just against some (I hope not many) of refined, and elevated
parts, who employ those very parts, which God has given them, against God
himself: He has given them a mouth, and wisdom; and their mouths they set,
and level against heaven, as if they would batter it down with the volleyes,
of their blasphemous speeches; And their understanding, they use as an engine
to undermine, and subvert the throne of God: but this God will bring to nothing
the understanding of such prudent ones, 1 Cor. 1.19.

(...). Chrysostom. in cap. 12. ad Romans
Better they had never been borne; or been natural fools, then to have
received great abilities, and parts, and not to have spent them, and drawn
them forth to the honor of their Creator. How shall these miscreants be
confounded another day? what can they plead for themselves? will it serve their
turns, to say, they had thought all things had been made, by a contingent
meeting together of Atoms? no, the beautiful harmony of the world; the even,
and constant motions of the same without monstrous productions, may confute
such a dream, though the book of Genesis were quite abol she, and lost. Better
they were dashed a pieces themselves, and broken into atoms, never to be
gathered together again, then to appear before God with such a Fig-leav'd
excuse, which he shall consume as so much stubble, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. What can they say they were ignorant
of God, and could not by all their industry find any footsteps of a God in the
world? Alas! then all the Creatures (though Ministers were silent) will swarm
about them, and tell them to their faces; they would have taught them, but they
would not learn; and their own Consciences must needs subscribe to such an
indictment, that whether they were Scholars, Mariners, (...). Cle. Alex. p. 63.
Husbandmen, or of any other caling whatsoever, they could not be destitute of
arguments to convince the^, that doubtless there was a God. Let these men boast
of their wisdom never so much, yet they are the veriest (...). ibid. p. 15.
fools in the world: methinkes Chrysostom does excellently school, and taunt
one of these (...); why do thou stretch forth thy neck? and walk on
tip-toes? (...); why does thy breast swel with a conceit of thy own knowledge?
do but consider says he, that thou can not make one hair white or black.
If the fear of God be the beginning of wisdom, then the root of the grossest
folly, is to be ignorant of the Lord. A Poet durst once say (...); o the folly
to believe that there is any God at all! but we may truly say, (...); O madness
to think other ways. We read indeed of one that said there was no God; but it
was in his heart only; he did not eructare, belch forth this poison for very
shame; and he stands branded upon record for a fool for his labor; dixit
Nabal, dixit Nebulo; the fool has said in his heart; Ps. 14.1. and Ps. 53.^1.
there is no God. There was another also, who went beyond this fool; 2 Samuel
16.22.
he bewrayed his folly with his lips, and proclaimed his sin as Sodom, or as
Absalon, when he lay with his Fathers Concubines in the s^ght of all Israel. It
was Pharaoh. And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice?
Exodus 5.2. But as the Prophet said of the succeeding Pharaohs, Kings of Egypt;
that the Princes of Z^an (a city of Egypt) were fools, and the Councillors
of Pharaoh became brutish. So this Pharaoh went beyond them all, as in his
folly, so in his punishment: for when he ask't who is the Lord? He that sat in
the Heavens laughed; Ps. 2.4.
the Lord had him in derision: He got himself honor on this very Pharoh: for
as the stars in their Course fought against Si^era; so the waves of the Sea
fought against Pharaoh: He Exodus 15.5.
sanke into the deep as a stone; so that Moses sang, who is like thee, O Lord
among the Gods! v. 11.
who is like thee, glorius in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. Be
wise therefore, O ye Inhabitants of the earth, Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Ps. 2.11.

2. Use. To reprove practical, and life Athtists; who acknowledge there is a
God; they are all for God, and Godliness in their words; but they worship him
not as God. They cry Hosannah unto God at present, and the next moment, by
their ungodly practices, they crucify their own confession. Such a personaled
godliness; (whilst men look one way, and row another; they pretend for God,
and act for Baal) has hardened many men in sin, and given the enemies of the
Lord occasion to blaspheme. How ridiculous is it, to speak of the glory of the
true God? and yet hold a confederate correspondency with Satan himself? to
cry, the Temple of the Lord; and yet sacrifice to the Idol of preferment, to
fly aloft in aerie, empty, and notional expressions, and yet with the fowl, to
have their eyes wholly upon the carrion of this world; who can otherwise think,
but that gain is their godliness? When men act lewdness in secret, and then
say tush God cannot see; God will not remember; or God will not punish; (for
Atheism is at the bottom of every sin) what a pageantgod do they make him,
robbing him of all his Attributes? They give him the title of a God; but
trample his majesty under their feet; as the Frogs in the Fable leapt upon
the logg, which Jupiter deputed to be their god; or as the Soldiers dealt with
Christ; they bowed the knee, Mat. 27.29.30.
and cried hail King of the Jews; yet they spit in his face, and smote his
head with a reed. Herod had the worship of Christ in his lips, when he sent
executioners to slay him. It was a sad complaint of old that Arrianisme (which
was a kind of Atheism) came on so fast, that the world wondered at it self;
that it was so soon overspread with the contagion of that poison: I wish this
part of the world, neither in our days, nor in the days of our posterity
after us, may never have an occasion of wonder; that it is overrun with a
torrent of Goths, and Vandals, I mean barbarous and Atheistical wre^ches:
let us take heed, lest there be in any of us an evil heart, in departing from
the living God, Heb. 3.12. And what we know of God, and his fear; let us be
more industrious to transmit it to our offspring, then to provide lands, and
livings, which are but perishing portions.

As it is most evident, that there is a God; so let us worship him as God, in
spirit, and in truth; let us constantly give him the tribute of prayers, and
offer unto him the incense of praises, and thanksgiveing, for all the mercyes
we enjoy. If I am a Father, where is my Honor? If I am a Master, where is my
Fear? Mal. 1.6. So may he say, If I am a God where is my worship. The very
Heathen set apart Festival times to the Honor of those gods, whom they
acknowledged. Bacchus had his Bacchanalia; Flora her Floralia: and in the
observation of these they were most strict and diligent. The worshippers of
Baal did even cut and lance themselves: parents did not with hold their own
children from Moloch: Pass over the Isles of Chittim, and see, and send unto
Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing, has any
nation changed their gods which yet are no gods? Jer. 2.10, 11. Shall not the
very Scythians and Americans rise up in judgment against us, if we grudge to
spend any time in the service of the true God? if we observe his sabbaths
formally, and perfunctorily. If we profane his Qui per-Deos jurant, and eos
colunt, Christiani non sunt. Tertul. p. 91.
name by horrid execrations: the very Turks, says the Sands in the survey of
Religion.
Travailour, punish their christian prisoners the more, if they hear them
blaspheme the name of Christ; as thinking it both unreasonable, and intolerable
to own Christ for God, and yet by rash and frequent oaths to dishonor his
name. It will be an aggravation of our misery to have known any thing of God,
if we bury that knowledge under the ashes, and rubbish of ungodly practices,
the smoke of Gods judgments never ascended higher from any place, then where
God has vouchsafed the knowledge of his name, and that knowledge has bin abused:
witness Palestine, which is become an habitation for dragons, and every
unclean bird: the ostritches cry there and the Satyrs dance there: witness
Germany, with her desolations; and let England hear, and fear, and do no more
wickedly. The sins Aquinas 2da 2dae. Ubi major est prerogativa, major est
culpa. Salvi. de Guber.
of Christians in some sense, are worse then the infidelity of Pagans, and it
is less guilt to be ignorant of God, then to despise him, or prevaricate with
him. You have I known of all the Familyes of the earth, therefore will I
punish you for your iniquities, Amos. 3.2.

3. Use. To Comfort all the true Worshippers of God, that having an Interest in
him, may fly unto him upon all occasions: such can never be plunged over head
and ears in misery. If an Alderman could say, concerning the Metropolis of
this Nation, when the Court was threatened to be removed from it, that it
mattered not; so long as the Thames ran in its wonted channel; so we cannot be
utterly comfortless, amidst all our Crosses, losses, and disappointments in
this world, seeing God is still the same, and where he was from the beginning:
whatsoever we are plunderd off, we cannot truly say of the true God, what Micah
said of his Idols, or Mary Magdalen of the body of Christ. Ye have taken away
my God, and my Lord, and what shall I do? when the Amalekites had spoiled
Ziklag, and carried David's wives away captive, yet then David 1 Samuel 30.6. 2 Samuel 22. throughout.
encouraged himself in the Lord his God, In the Lord put I my trust, how say
ye then, that she flee as a bird to her mountain? Ps. 11.1. He is a sure
Refuge, and mountain of eternity to his servants; but a Rock to dash in pieces
his, and his peoples enemies: who ever fought against God, and prosper'd? all
weapons formed against him shall be shattered to pieces: Acts. 5.39.
the Counsel which is of God cannot be overthrown. The wife of Haman could
tell him; If Mordecai were of the seed of the Jews, before whom he began to
fall, then he should not prevail against him, but should surely fall before
him, Esther, 6.13. Whole Kingdoms, and Nations have come See Dr. Thomas Goodw.
Ser. preicht before the Parl. 1646 on Psalm 105.15 Touch not my anointed.
tumbling down, and have bin demolished, when ever they set in array and
mustered up their forces against his people: blessed are the people that are in
such a case, yea blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God. Are
they in want? His are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. Are they oppressed? He
is the Lord Almighty, who has the host of all Creatures ready pressed to fight
his battle, and therefore can rescue us from the paw of the Lion, and the
Bear. Are they sick? His are all the herbs of the field, and with him are the
issues from death: he kills, and makes alive. Are they in prison? and
sequestered from the society of men, and the enjoyment of other Comforts? God is
a faithful friend; he will visit them there: he will spring in unto them,
though the darkness cover them; and walk many a sweet turn with them, Maugre
the malice of men and devils: though they be stopped up in the hottest Furnace,
or cast down into the lowest dungeon Darkness with God is no darkness, Ps.
139.12. So the prison is no prison to the servants of God: for where the Lord
is, and h^s Spirit, there is freedom. Hell it self would be no hell, if God
would vouchsafe his gracious presence there: therefore I cannot but repeat
that of David again, Blessed are the people, which have the Lord for their
God. Who need wonder to see a profane Ruffian, who in prosperity, might seem
to be above the teach of vengeance, and to make others tremble at his oaths,
and lewd courses; yet (when he is once arrested by death, or falls under the
wheel of some natable judgment) to be utterly Manasses being conquered, bides
his bead among thorns and b^shes, 2 Chro. 33.11. as Adam did after his sin.
dejected, and dispirited; to have his heart die within him, and become as a
stone; as it is said of Nabal, when his wine was gone out of him? 1 Samuel 25.37.
Alas! He had no God then to depend upon: He had no strong hold, no City of
refuge to retreat unto; and in such a case; the least misery will worry us, and
tear us in pieces: mifortune shall slay the ungodly, Psalm. 34.21. but the
righteous, who have a part in David, I m^ane, an Interest in God, and in
Christ, are as bold as a Lion, Pro. 28.1. The righteous has hope in his death,
Prove. 14.32. When David's soul began to droop within him, how does he cheer up
himself? and fetch an argument of comfort from this very Topicke? why are thou
cast down O my soul? Ps. 42.11.
and why are thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God.

Who can blame poor weather, beaten souls in a state of desertion? when they
are debarred from having communion with God, if they have chattered like
Cranes, brayed and roared after God? when shall we come to appear before the
presence of God? will the Lord absent himself for ever? did ye see him whom my
soul loves? the greater joy is in the fruition of God, the greater is the
loss to be deprived of him.

4. Use. By way of Caution. 1. Not to have communion and fellowship with
Atheists. Do any make a doubt of that, which the text puts out of all doubt?
mark such men and avoid them: men did I call them? they are more dangerous
then Serpents, or savage beasts; I will not reckon them with the Ox, Esa. 1.4.
and the Ass; for that knows his owner, and this his masters crib; but these
know not their Lord and master, the Lord of Lords, and therefore may justly be
degraded of that honor, which they have forfeited, If thou know not (what
Nebuchadnezzar was ignorant of) that the most high bears rule in the kingdom
of men; what then? got Can. 1.8. (...).
thy way forth in the footsteps of the flock, (so the z Septuagint) as most
suirable to the Society of flocks and herds; but the vulgar latin brings him
lower yet, abi post vestigia gregum, go behind the footsteps of the flock, as
being inferior to the very beasts: or if these monstrous Sadduces may be
rank't among men, they must come in below Turks, and Jews, for these will submit
to these words of the text. -- doublesse there is a God Therefore I may well
resume my former caution; Avoid them as the Orthodox ran from Cerinthus,
Ebion, Photinus, Arius. Avoid them, as thou would run from persons infected
with the plague, lest thou be infected; for as false doctrine eats like a
canker, so Atheistical principles will run like a gangreene; Fugies cathedram
pestilentiaariam ipsumque acrem seclestis vocibus constupratum, Terrul. p. 156.
Morbus capitis morbus capitalis.
and if men's heads be once leavened with loose principles, their lives will
soon favor of the same: such influence has the understanding upon the will,
affections, and so upon the outward Conversation; these will warp and reele
like a drunken man, if that be paralytical, and unsteady. When the fool said
in his heart there was no God, Psalm. 14.1. It follows immediately, corrupt are
they, and become abominable in their doings. Therefore what the Lord said to
his people among the Babylonians, when he was ready to empty the vials of his
judgments on their heads; Rev. 18.4.
Come from amongst them; so say I to as many as are mingled in society with
Atheists, and take a complacency in their company: Come from amongst them: be
ye separate, lest the storm of their judgments overtake you, and compass your
heels. Noe doubt but vicious men delight in the company of men like themselves.
Otho was welcome to Tacit. hist. lib. 10.
Nero, aemulatione luxus, because he was addicted to luxury like himself: and
Tiberius advanced an obscure fellow to the Quaestor-ship, cb Suctoni. in
Tiberio.
epotam vini amphoram, because he was strong to drink strong drink, and could
empty a great flagon at a draught. But woe to them that buy the favor of
profane persons at so dear a rate, as a compliance with their sins. A wicked
person, said David, will I not know; do not I hate them that hate thee?
therefore he will have nothing to do with them, but his delight shall be among
the Saints, who delight in virtue. There is not a more Noscitur excomite qui
non cognoscurit exse.
infallible (...), or badge of a loose and wicked person, then to associate
with them that are such. Esau delights to dwell in mount Seir, a vile and
heathenish place. Augustus understood the disposition of his Daughters, Julia
and Livia, when he brought them to Court, and observed that grave Senators
addressed themselves to the one. andw antons to the other; so those may justly be
suspected to be well-willers to Atheists, who most frequent their fellowship.

2. Caution. Beware of those things which lead into Atheism, as 1. scepticall
and wanton disputes, and doting about questions; from whence comes blasphemies,
and whereby men are destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. This is the way to
raise a dust about the clearest truths, and shake the faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, when all the Articles and points of Religion must come
under the scanning of our reason, and stand to the courtesy of our decisions.
The very landmarkes and fundamental mere. stones in divinity are in danger to
be removed, and the very tenure and title of God himself to fall under debate,
when men for sake the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
and take a liberty to discuss the very mysteries of religion. Away therefore
with this noise of axes and hammers: what means the lowing, and yeliing of so
many bold disputations in our ears? where will this madness end? As this
Disputandi pruritus peperit scabiem in Ecclesid.
itch of dispute has already so defaced the Church, that it is totum vuluns
and cicatrix, all full of scabs, and botches and wounds; so it to be fesred, if
it proceed, it will make us a generation of seekers, and at last make this
Island (like that which I have read off) to swim and floate up and down in a
Sea of uncertainties. O! that we could truly say non dicimus magna: we speak
not swelling words of vanity we draw not at the saw, and cart-rope of
contention; we jangle not away our precious time in the Devils sophistry sed
Vivimus magna; our life's are as exemplary, our pithes more strait, our prayers
more servent then the loudest disputant of them all, though our devotions are
not so trumpeted forth, but like the waters of Siloam run in a still, and a
silent channel. As he said in the History, though he could not dispute for
Christ, yet he would dye for him; so let us say, though we wrangle not so much
for religion as many do, yet we will worship the Lord God of our Fathers, and
live to his glory. So should we see Jerusalem, not only a quiet but a holy
Habitation. So should we see the whole Armado of Hell defeated: and the
Emissaries of Satan dissappointed; who would feign see Jerusalem in the dust,
that they might build up their Babel; and would feign fling all religion from
off their hinges, that they might foist in Atheism and all impiety.

2. Take heed of a cold formal profession of religion, for this dead devotion
carries a man often into the dead sea of Atheism. Such as worship God
perfunctorily, and carelessly, at last they will not care whether they worship
him at all. A Time-serving State. Religion, which will turn to every point in
the Compaste to please men, will quickly degenerate into irreligion, if that
should be most in fashion. Simon Magus was such a formal Believer, Acts 8.13.
He had a heart, and a heart; a heart for God, and a heart for the Devil; his
heart was not right in the sight of God, v. 21. Demas was such another; He will
follow Paul and the Gospel, so long as it may consist with his advantage, but
if the 2 Timothy 4.10.
world offer him better preferment, he will turn Apostate, and forsake both Paul
and the Gospel too. Ecclesiastical History is full of examples to this
purpose: Every wind of persecution will shake down such rotten fruit, and
scatter such chafe as these. They are not mortis'd, and riveted into Jesus
Christ by a living faith; but like the Church of Sardis, they have a name that
they are alive, but are dead, Rev. 3.1. They Rev. 2.9. Jo. 15.2.
say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan; like those
titular branches in the vine Jesus Christ which bare not fruit, they are
pointed at in the parable by that seed which fell upon a rock, which withered
away, because it lacked moisture, Luke 8.6. Jo. 7.38. 1 Jo. 2.27.
There are no rivers of living water in their bellyes, nor the anointing of the
holy one abiding in them. Or as the same parable is related Mat. 13.5. The seed
upon stony ground was scorcht by the beams of the Sun, because it had not
deepnesse of earth. So formal professors will soon be blasied into so many
black Atheists. The blossoms of their naked and empty profession will fall to
the ground, like so many untimely figs, when either shaken by adversity,
inveigled by impostors, or tempted by preferments: let us therefore wash off
the paint of Hypocrisy from all our religious performances: let us study to
know the truth as it is in Jesus, that we being (...), rooted and built Col.
2.7. (...). Cle. Alex. p. 531.
up In Him, and stablished in the faith, we may not be tossed up and down with
every wind of doctrine; above all, not with that wind of Atheism, which
blows from the bottomless pit. Whatsoever part of Gods work we go about,
whether hearing and ruminating upon his word. enlarging our souls by prayer,
celebrating, and sanctifying his day, or any other of his ordinances; let us
unite all our nerves, and sinews, and gather together all our scattered
affections into one channel; let us valde agere, do the Lords business with
all our hearts, that we may express not a form, but the very power, and
energy of godliness it self. How intense are the endeavors of men in the
pursuit after the vain, and fleeting shadows of this life! there is rising
early, running, and sweating: O that we could go some degrees backward in this
earthly race, and abate of our worldly vehemence, that we might drive on the
more zealously, and press forward more earnestly to the mark of our high
calling in Jesus Christ! O that our spirits did even burn (...), To. 12.11.
within us, with a fire, (like that of the vestall virgins) which may never go
out, but may still be flaming forth at our mouths, in setting forth the
praises of God; that so we may not only babble forth vain, and unsignificant
words, or fumble in the things of God, as if we were out of our Element, and
unexperienc'^ in heavenly, and spiritual matters; but that our tongues herein
may be as the pens of ready writers; as if one of the Seraphims had touched them
with a live coal from the altar, Esa. 6 6. As if the holy ghost had fallen on
them in fiery tongues: or as if, both our hearts, and tongues were in the same
frame as David's was, Psalm. 39.3. my I am not ignorant, that some understand
this text, as rather setting forth the passion and perturbation of David then
his Zeal.
heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spoke I with
my tongue. When we are thus pregnant with groans, which cannot be uttered:
when we cast off all cloakes and vizards of dissimusation, and serve the Lord
in truth, in sincerity, and from the bottom of our hearts; come Heretic, come
Tyrant, come devili; ignes, cruces, bestiae, come fire, sword, wild beasts, we
shall remain unshaken; and be able to say with those holy Martyrs, confounded
be they that worship carved images; come what will, we will worship God in
Jesus Christ: that Brightman on Rev. 3.
so, by our holy, constant, and regular zeal, we may confute their
interpretation, who maintain that the Church of England is intended, and
pointed at by the lukewarm church of Laodicea.

3. Take heed of Enthusiasmes. Believe not every spirit: for there are false,
and erroneous spirits gone out into the world. The poets speak of Pandora
sending a box to Epimetheus, which being opened, filled the earth with all
manner of diseases and maladies: who can think but the foul spirit has opened
such a box, and let gone abundance of unclean spirits into the world? they must
needs be many, seeing one Demoniack was possessed with legions; and some are of
opinion that the air wherein we breath, is full of devils. And they are so
much the more dangerous, in that they counterfeit the holy spirit of God: They
are habited with Samuels: Mantle: They are transformed into so many Angels of
light; and to complete the danger, they use the voice of Jacob; so that if it
were possible they might deceive the very Elect. Satan was ever an M. Blake of
the Sacra. c. 2.
Ape of the true God, in most of his dispensations; and as art sometimes
imitates nature so lively, that the works of Art, are taken for the effect of
nature, as Zeuxis his grapes painted on the wall, invited the birds, as if they
had been true, living grapes; so the juggling impostures of the old Serpent,
have passed for the operations of Gods own Spirit. The Prophetess of Delphos,
-- mentemque priorem expulit otque hominem toto sibi cedere jussit -- pecture
Lucan, l. 5.
when she was inspired with a cold wind out of the Cavernes of the earth,
breathed from the Devils own nostrilles, she was said to be plena deo, full of
Apollo, full of God; but the world was wonderfully delivered from this cheat
(as Chronology observes) when the Virgin was delivered of her Son Jesus
Christ: then the voice of Oracles was silenc't, and those spurious inspirations
expired The Harlot Philumene would persuade men, that she was numine afflata,
inspired from above; whereas page 235.
Tertullian says of her, that a juventa habuit Doemonem familiarem, she had
familiarity with the Devil from her youth. Famous was the method of Mahomet,
which the Devil put into his head, to put granes of Corn into his ear, and
then accustom a Dove to pick them forth, that so he might cosen a great part
of the world with an opinion, that his Hotch-potch of innovations, was dictated
and indicted by the Spirit of God in the shape of a Dove. No doubt but Rome owes
much of her trumpery, and idolatry to this subtle stratagem. Germany laments
this delusion to this very day: And I wish we might not come nearer yet to our
own doors. Alas! how many in our Anabaptistarum furor ublin teneras Christi
Ecclesias Jese instar Scrpentum insinuat. M^lch Ada in vita. Musculi. page 376.
days have laid aside the Scriptures, which were indicted by the Spirit of God,
2 Pet. 1.19. And forsaken the ministers of the Gospel, who were set over the
slocke by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. As those that brandish a leaden sword,
and preach a dead letter: and all this under a pretense of immediate teachings,
and Revelations from above; and so they have fallen like lightning from heaven;
from Professors of Religion, to become professed Ranters, razeing and levelling
the very foundation of Religion: denying the Resurrection, Heaven, and Hell.
Far, far be it from me to derogate from the efficay of Gods spirit, which the
Lord has promised to power forth in Gospel times. It is the very life of our
souls, as our souls are of our bodies; the Spirit of our Spirits, witnessing
to our spirits that we are the adopted children of God. The Spirit of
supplication, whereby we cry Abba Father. Which moving upon our hearts, makes
them fruitful in goodneste, warmes them with secret glances, and comforts them
by hidden impulses, and whispers, as it were by a voice behind us.

Only, let us try the Spirits by bringing them to the touchstone of the word:
to the law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
there is no light in them, Es^. 8.20. It has been unhappy Sophistry, to argue
a been conjunctis; as if those glorious promises of the Covenant of grace,
(that we shall all know the Lord; and Taught of God (i) by Christ who was God
in a humane shape whereas before, they were taught by Prophets who were men
only. So D. Lightfoot. 3. par. Har. p. 166.
all be taught of God) did oppose, or exclude other means of knowledge, as
altogether useless; whereas they are subordinate. God, and his Spirit teaches
by his word, therefore whatsoever suggestions sprout forth from our own hearts,
or what injections come from without, let us weigh them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, before they pass for the Auchentike, and genuine issues of the
Spirit. If we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other doctrine, let him be
Anathema. Things revealed belong to us, and our children. If any shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book, Rev. 22.18. If we should give scope to our wild, and luxuriant phansies,
and then fall down to, and adore the deformed Chymera's and Brats of our own
brains, as those that are (...), divine, or falling down from heaven; we
should soon adulterate the worship of the true God, and kiss the Calves of our
own imaginations; this is to open a flood gate to let in a torrent of Atheism.

3. Assertion: Which is an Argument to confirm the Being of the divine nature,
a posteriori, from the exercise of his power, and justice here below. He
judges in the earth. He commands over all things, and Persons by his
Sovereignty. He defends the good, and punishes the evil in the execution of
justice. He does not only reside in Heaven, and take his ease and pleasure
there; although the Heavens (being the chiefest part of his workmanship) do in
a special manner set forth the glory of God, and God is therefore said chiefly
to dwell in the Heavens; yet I say he is not so in Heavens; yet I say he is not
so in heaven, as not to mind the affairs of this inferior world, ut nec ira,
nec gratiatangi; as not to be provoked with the insolences, and profaneness
of the wicked, or not to favor the righteousness of the just; as the
Lactantius, lib. 3.
Epicureans said of their gods. David teaches far sounder Divinity, Psalm.
121.4. Though God be on high, yet he humbles himself to behold the things
both in heaven, and in earth; and here in the text. He judges in the earth.

This judging here does not refer to the judgment to come, at the last day,
when there shall be a general convention of quick, and dead, before the Lords
dreadful Tribunal: though so it is most true affore tempus, that there will be a
time when God will ride his circuit here in a solemn manner; so that a man
shall say verily there is a God that judges in the earth: but that is not the
scope of this place. It Is in the present tense (...), that now judges, or is
now judging the earth, and the inhabitants thereof; and therefore it must be
understood of a Judgment on this side the Judgment of the great day; and so God
judges the earth, or in (...) Sept.
the earth three manner of ways. First, By a providentiall ordering, and wise
disposal of all the affairs of all creatures. Secondly, In releiving the
oppressed, and pleading the cause of the innocent. Thirdly, In overthrowing,
and plaguing the wicked doers.


1. God judges in the earth, by a providentiall ordering, and wise disposal of
all affairs, and all creatures. The earth it self receives strength, and
virtue from his providence, to bring forth fruits for the service of man, and
grass for the Cattle; and after See Dr? Hackwells Apol.
so many thousand of years teeming, is not yet exhausted, made feeble, or
barren! nay, it is supported only by the word of Gods power, as if we should
see a vast globe of iron, or lead dangling in the air, without any visible
engine to hang upon, or any pillars to support it. Job asks the question,
whereupon were the foundations of the earth fastened? chap. 38.6. And he
returns an answer, chap. 26.7. He hangs the earth upon nothing. So also has
he dealt with the sea, that is moderated, and kept within bounds, that it
should not return to Cover the earth, Ps. 104.9. He that made the Red sea a
wall on the right hand, and a wall on the left hand to the children of Israel,
and made the swellings of Jordan to stand on an heap; by the same wonderful
providence, has he shut up the sea (which Naturalists say is higher then the
land) with doors, and said hitherto shall thou go, and no further, Job. 38.8,
10, 11.

God did not make the world at first, and then left it at random to stand or
fall, by chance, and fortune; but by the same power he still supports it: He
goes about the Circle of all the Earth, and tells all her walls, and bulworks.
He sees all under the whole heavens, and looks to the ends of the earth, Job.
28.24. His eyes run to, and fro, throughout the whole earth, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
Therefore the earth is said to be made continually. He looks not only upon the
rulers, and great potentates of the earth; but he has respect to the poor and
needy; to the meanest Israelite. that is wronged by the mightiest Egyptian in
the world. Nay, the least, and most despicable things are under his ken: He
disdaines not to look after the hairs of our heads, or to observe the very
sparrowes that fly in the air. We are so short-sighted, that we cannot judge
of, nor discern the just quantity, or quality of the vast heavenly bodies;
much less can we distinguish the Inhabitants of the Coelum Empyraeum, the
heaven of heavens. But he that dwells in that inaccessible light, can judge of
the least creature that crawles upon the earth, or the smallest atome that
moves in the air.

Use. Let no extremity extort from us any doubting, or repining complaints; as
if God did at any time cast us out of the compass of his care; as David once
lamented, that he was cast out of the sight of his eyes: let our condition be
never so deplorable, let the commotions of the earth be never so violent, and
confused; yet let us rest our selves, and stay upon this, that -- God judges
in the earth: we are under his eyes, that sustaines all creatures by his power:
that feeds the young ravens, and clothes the lillies of the field by his
merciful providence. And as this Doctrine rightly applied will dispossess us,
and empty us of all carking, and distracting cares; seeing we are under
Covert-barne; we have a rich and powerful husband to provide for us: we are
not orphans exposed to the wide world, but we have a faithful guardian, and a
merciful Father to take care of us. So let us take heed, lest we fall into the
pit of fools, I mean, the quite contrary extreme of security, and
presumption; as if we need not take care of our selves, and use means for our
own preservation, seeing God provides for us, and judges for us; this is to
tempt God, without any warrant at all; as if a man should throw himself into
the sea, and depend upon the providence of God to keep him from drowning. All
the devils Rhetoric, together with his great promises could not persuade
Christ, to cast himself from the pinnacle of the Temple, upon these terms.

2. God judges in the earth, by releiving the oppressed, and pleading the cause
of the innocent. In this sense, we often find David, in his appeals to God:
lift Ps. 94.2. and 43.1. Judge and avenge our blood, Rev. 6.10. Ps. 68.5.10.18
up thy self, thou judge of the earth! judge me, O Lord, and plead my cause!
He is acknowledged to be the judge of the widows, the fatherless, and the
oppressed: And indeed this is the maine end of judging, and executing
malefactors; that the innocent may be secured, and defended from danger; as
foxes, wolves, and other wild beasts, are hunted, and taken, that the
harmless sheep may not be made a prey to their teeth. It would be too long,
to trace the children of Israel through all difficulties, and disputes with
their enemies, and to show how the Lord judged their Cause, against Pharaoh,
against the Canaanites, and others: He fought their battles, He was a sun, and
a shield unto them, He snatched them as a firebrand out of the burning, when
their enemies were ready to tune their song of triumph. See this in the body of
that people: when the Midianites came against them like grasshoppers, they were
all discomfited by three hundred that brake pitchers under Gideon, Judges, 6.5.
See it in David, in particular, when Saul had compassed David in a mountain in
the wilderness of Maon, He made no doubt to swallow him up: then the Lord
judged for David, by disappointing Saul, in diverting his forces another way on
a sudden, a messenger came to Saul saying: Come, make have, for the
Philistims have invaded the land, 1 Samuel 23.26, 27. The time would fail me to
tell of Joseph, and Paul, how the Lord Judged for them upon several
exigencies: other stories are not barren of instances, and examples to this
purpose. Athanasius was once accused for cutting off the arm of one Arsenius.
The Arrians who brought in this indictment, made sure (as they thought) of the
Cause, by sending Arsenius into a far Country. But see the providence of God
in clearing the innocence of this servant, when this Criminal matter was in
agitation: the same Arsenius did suddenly appear in the Council, and held up
both his arms, to confute that calumny. The Arrians have not yet done. As the
Devil set upon Christ with three several temptations, one after another: so
these set upon Sigonius de occidentali imperio. lib. 4. p. 96.97.
Athanasius again; He must be impleaded as guilty of whoredom. An harlot is
suborned to affirm it: she was furnished with a ring, which she pretended to
be the hire of her uncleanesse; yet, notwithstanding all this conspiracy, the
Lord judged for Athanasius, and made his innocence, as clear as the noone day,
thus: one Tymotheus, a friend of Athanasius stands up, and speaks after this
manner to the harlot, Egone? What did I ever enter into your house, and had I
familiarity with you? this harlot (having her forehead brazed with impudency)
answered presently, yes; you are the man, and holds up the ring, as the wages
of her iniquity, and so Athanasius was acquitted again from this undeserved
scandal. How observeable is that which is recorded of Eusebius Eccl. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 29.
Aurelian? He had almost subscribed an Edict for the destruction of the poor
Christians: but on a sudden his hand, and his arm were so benumbed, and
deaded, that he could not write one letter more: here God judged for the
Christians. Nay, afterward, when Diocletian had sealed such a bloody decree:
and the Christians were brought forth, to be devoured by wild beasts; yet these
Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 7.
beasts would not fasten upon the naked bodies of these Saints, but recoyl'd
back upon those instruments of cruelty who would have set them on; even as Dan.
3.22.
Shadrach Meshach, and Abednego were delivered from the fiery furnace, when
those that cast them in, were slain by the very flames of that furnace: our
own Speed. p. 398.
story reports of Emma the mother of Edward the Confessor that was accused of
incontinency, and according to the law ordalium, she must walk on hot irons,
fire hot; which she did (being innocent) and was not hurt; as the bitter water
of Numb. 5.19, 21.
jealousy, which made the guilty woman's thigh to rot, and her belly to swell;
yet the same water being drunk by one that had not gone a side to uncleanesse,
was free from the bitter water that caused the curse. -- doubtless there is a
God, that judges in the earth -- to defend the innocent. And to make his
judging in the earth, in the behalf of his servants, the more illustrious; he
takes opportunity commonly to help in such a juncture of time, as when they
are in the greatest extremity. In the Mount will the Lord be seen, Genesis 22.14.
When the knife is close at Isaackes throat, then is the time for the Lord to
step in for his rescue. With this very argument, David pleads with God for
his Church, when at a low ebb; even because it was so. It is time for thee
Lord to work, for they have made voiae thy law, Psalm. 119.126. When judgment
was turned away backward, in the Jewish Church, and justice stood a far off:
truth was fallen in the street, and equity could not enter. One would think it
could not be worse: yet it follows, that then the Lord put on righteousness
as a breast plate, and a helmit of salvation upon his head. Esa. 59, 14, 15, 17.
And in the same chapter v. 19. there is a prophecy of Christ's coming: when was
that? when the enemy of the Lord shall come in like a flood, the spirit of the
Lord shall lift up a standard against him: and if we turn to the second
chapter of Lukes Gospel, we shall find this fulfilled: for when Augustus sent
forth his decree that all the world should be (...).
taxed (i. e.) pay tribute, and so acknowledge themselves captives and slaves
to the Roman Empire; then did an Angel verse 10. publish the glad tidings of
the birth of Christ who should be the Savior of the world. Israel must see the
Egyptians behind, and the sea before; no way, but be slain by the sword, or
perish in the water, before God prepare them a way through the sea. The
Disciples that sailed with Christ in the ship. Mat. 8.24. were first suffered
to be almost swallowed up in the sea; so that they came crying Master we
perish, we perish; and then verse. 26. he rebuked the wind, and the sea, and
they obeyed him. The match was near the gunpowder, before the intended Tragedy
of England was discovered and disappointed. How easy were it to reckon up a
whole cloud of Martyrs; whom God suffered to come to the stake, and then showed
himself to them; either by giving them courage against the terrors of death,
or by taking away the sense of their sufferings; so that they fell a (...).
Basil.
leaping and skiping for joy; and laid themselves down in the flames, as in a
bed of roses. Strike, says Anaxarchus, when they were battering him with
clubbes; for ye do not (...). Cle. Alex.
beat Anaxarchus, but only his caske, or outside; as if with Steven, they then
saw heaven opened, and Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father: Now God
does thus judge for his people, when they are reduced to the greatest exigency.

First, exercise our faiths that we may know how versari inter aspera, to
depend upon God, though we see nothing nisi pontus and aequor, but sea and
tempests; to believe that he will be merciful to us, though in outward show,
he may seem bent do destroy us. This is the very height of faith, to be like
Abraham, Romans 4.18. Above hope to believe in hope; or like Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles.
20.12. When a numerous host came against him, we have no might against this
great company; but our eyes are upon thee; this is to trust God though he kill
us.

Secondly; that he may get himself the more glory. It is a great deal of
glory for a Physician to cure a disease when grown desperate, and in the eye of
man past cure; so for God to help, when in a helpless condition, makes more
glory to redound to him; therefore the Lord quickened Sarahs Womb, when dead;
and our Savior raised Lazarus when he had layen four days in the grave. When
David had showed, that the Lord is a present refuge in time of trouble, Psalm.
46.1. It follows verse. 10. I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be
exalted on the earth, So Esa. 59.19. after the Prophet had showed, how the Lord
releiveth his Church in a desperate condition, it follows; so shall they fear
the name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from the rising of the Sun.

Use. Lets not be dismayed, though we be placed on the very pinnacle of dangers:
though there be troubles without, and terrors within: though we sit in
darkness, and have no light, yet as it is, Esa. 50.10. Let us trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay upon our God -- for doubtless there is a God that
judges in the earth. I have read of one, who was used to say, when the Church
was at a low Ebb; be of good cheer, for now God is working some great work
for his people: for when men are at a stand, and gaze one upon another, then
God takes the matter into his own hand: then it is good to stand still, to see
the salvation of God. He will be a Guardian, and a Champion to his Servants
against all the Potentates of the earth, that shall foame, and swell against
them. Therefore let us carry our selves innocently, and justly to God, and men;
and then let us commit our causes to the Lord, as a faithful Judge.

3. God judges in the earth; by overthrowing, and plaguing the wicked doers,
and taking vengeance of them: therefore the Septuagint reads the text, (...),
judging them in the earth, that is those cruel and wicked Judges, mentioned in
the former part of the Psalm. To judge is most frequently taken in this sense:
So he is said to judge 1 Samuel 13.
Elies house. He is said to judge Jerusalem, Ezck 16.38.
as Women that break wedlock, and shed blood are judged, when he gave her
blood in fury and jealousy: but to transcribe a multitude of texts to this
purpose, would be to guild gold; and to seem to suspect your ignorance in the
Scriptures. Now both the matter, and the manner of Gods judging the wicked, and
his taking vengeance on them, will appear by these two theses following.

1. God judges the wicked, when they are in the ruff of their pride; and in
the height of their presumption: Pharaohs Chariot wheels were taken off, when
he was in the heat Ex. 14.
of his pursuit after Israel. I will pursue, I will pursue says Pharaoh. Not
Israel; but they own ruin says the Lord. When Dan. 4.30.
Nebuchadnezzar was boasting of his great Babel; and Belshazzar quaffing in the
bowls of the Temple; the one was doomed to eat grass with the beasts of the
field; the other did but cast up his eyes, and reads his own sentence upon the
wall. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram have no sooner let go their proud, and
rebellious words against Moses and Aaron; but the Lord provides them a grave,
with a trap door, or a posterne gate to let them down quick into hell. When
Lucifer was aspiring above the Esa. 14.14, 15.
stars, saying I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like
the most high; then he received an answer that he should be brought down to
hell, to the sides of the pit. Acts, 12.
Herod was stroke with a stinking and nasty disease, when in his royal robes
he owned the Acclamation of the people, that made him a god. Julian opened his
mouth to blaspheme Christ, and e're he could shut it, it was stopped with an
arrow shot into it from heaven: therefore in this 58 th Psalm. v. 9, The Lord is
said to take away the wicked as with a whirle wind both living, and in his
wrath; in the midst of his fury, whilst he is grinding, and gnashing his teeth
against the poor, and innocent: therefore Fret not thy self because of evil
doers, neither be thou envious (rather pity them) against the workers of
iniquity; for they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the
green herb, Psalm. 37.1, 2. and verse. 35.36. I have seen the wicked in great
power, magna vi erumpentem, Jerome: breaking forth like lightning, and spreading
himself like a Cedar in Libanus; what becomes of that lightning, and this
Cedar? why, both vanish away, like some meteor, some mushroome, or like Jonahs
gourd: He passes away, and was not; I sought him, but his place could no where
be found. Sic confundantur domine! So let thine enemies perish O Lord! but let
them that fear thee be as the sun when it goes forth in its strength.

2. God so judges in the earth; that often he pays the wicked in in their own
coin; 1 King. 8.32.
and brings their ways upon their own heads, the iniquity of their own heels
compass them about. So that their sins may be read in their punishments:
this the Lord threatens, Joel. 3.6, 7, 8. The children of Judah, and of
Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Greaclans; and I will sell your sons, and
daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and Esa. 33.1. Those that
spoil, shall be spoiled; and those that deal trecherously, it shall be dealt
trecherously with them. A tooth, for a tooth; An eye for an eye, yet stands
unrepealed: God himself does frequently put it in execution; and that, not
only among the damned spirits in Hell, in apportioning their plagues, according
to their several sios; As by abasing and treading under foot the prond; by
crushing the Quae maxima turb^ est. Virg. Aeno. 6.
Covetous with the weight of their own wants; by devouring the glutton with
ravenous hunger; by scorching the drunkard with thirst, or filling him with
flagons of brim stone. By wrapping the unchaste in the embraces of stinging and
stinking flames; by making the merciless to become endless, and bootlesse
suitors for a drop of water; who regarded not the poor, crying for a crum of
bread etc. And as this is like to be the Method of Gods judgments in Hell; so
also -- He judges Dr. Reynolds on Ps. 110. v. 1. p. 125.
in the earth. If we compare our sufferings, with our sins; the language of the
rod will commonly interpret the dialect of our transgressions, and point at the
very Achan, which troubles our Camp. Those Capital plagues, War, Famine, and
the pestilence, may easily be foreseen (without a spirit of divination) in
their roots, and Causes; I mean, in the abuse of peace, plenty, and health.
When the Lord thunders out of heaven against any of us, let us discover by the
flashes of his displeasure, the bratts of sin lying at our doors, which
before, like so many atoms, lay undiscerned, that so at least by this means,
we may 1 King. 17.18.
call our sins to Remembrance.

In my reading of the scriptures, with other authors, and stories; with
special notice, I have observed the dealing of God in this kind, in the
dispensation of his judgments.

1 To begin with scripturall examples. Joseph's brethren dealt hardly with him;
no entreaties would serve, but he must be sold to the Ishmeelite merchants for
a bond slave. Well, about fifteen, or sixteen years after; they do art
perire sua; they go to Egypt for corn in a time of famine, and so are detained
as prisoners, for coming as spies; And they are so ingenious, as to Justa dei
ultione fieri agnoscunt, ut suppliciter deprecando nihil obtineant, quia
inexorabiles ipsi fuerint erga fratrem. Calvinus in locum.
acknowledge their fault, in the midst of their sufferings. And they said one
to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not here: therefore is
this distress come upon us. Genesis 42.21. Adonibezek had cut off the thumbs and
toes of no less then threescore and ten Kings, and when he became a Captive
to Judah, and Simeon, they cut off his thumbs, and his great toes; so that he
confesses. As I have See Mr. Joseph Mede on Judge. 1.7. p. 171.
done, so God has requited me. Judge. 1.6, 7. Nadah and Abihu offered strange
Fire, which God did not Lev. 10.1.2. See also Number. 16.35.
Command; and God Commands strange fire to consume them. Sodom Genesis 19.24.
burned with unnatural lusts, and the Lord burns them up, with the flames of
a supernatural fire. The Ammonites offered up their 2 Samuel 12.31.
own Children as a burnt sacrifice to Moloch; and David when he had subdued
them, he made them pass through the Brick-kilnes. Nay, the valley Jer 7.32. and
19.6.
of Hinnon, where the Jews burnt their sons, and daughters with fire, was the
very place, which the Lord chose to be the valley of slaughter for the Jews
themselves. Pharaoh commanded the Exodus 1.16.14.27.
male children of the Israclites to be drowned, and the red sea swallowed him
up, together with his whole numerous army. Ahab and Jezebel were so prodigal
of poor Naboth's blood that they shed it; to the intent the dogs might lick
it up: And they become dogs meat themselves; the Lord will not abate them the
circumstance of the place. The 1 King. 21.23.2 King. 9.26.
dogs shall eat Jezebel, by the wall of Jezreel. Agag the King of Amalek had
killed many a mothers child; and when his turn came to be hewed a pieces,
Samuel puts him in mind, that 1 Samuel 15.33.
as his sword had made women childlesse, so should his mother be childlesse
among women. 2 Samuel 3.27.
Abner killed Asahel under the fifth r^b, and just in the same place did Joab
let out the life of Abner. Esther. 7.10.
Haman set up a lofty Gallows for Mordecas, and he was exalted to the top of
it himself. Sampsons wise was treacherous to him, in expounding his riddle to
the Philistims, that so she might preserve her self, and her Fathers house
from fire, and this was the occasion that both Judge. 14.15. and chap. 15.6.
she, and her Father perished by fire, by the treachery of those very
Philistims. Judge. 9.5
Abimelech slew his Brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, verse. 53. and Judge. 19. The
Levites wise, through lightness straggled from her husband, and she was
forced to death by the men of Gibeah.
being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and a certain woman cast
a piece of a millstone, upon Abimelech's head, and all to brake his scull.
Hezekiah prided himself in his treasures; his heart was even wrapped up in his
wardrope; and therefore when the Babylonish Ambassadors came to visit him
after the recovery from his desperate sickness; instead of magnifying the
Lords goodness to him in that deliverance, he showed 2 King. 20.13.
them the house of his precious things, his silver, gold, spices, precious
ointments, and all the house of his armor. But all these things were taken
from him afterward, and carried into cap. 24.
Babylon. Eli did not bow the stubborn necks of his Sons with the yoke of
discipline; and correction; and he falls 1 Samuel 4.18.
from off his seat backward, and his neck brake, and he died. David also was
inordinatly fond, and affectionate to his Sons Adonijah, and Absolon; and they
scourge him for it, by their disobedience; and rebelion: And now we have begun
to speak of David; we may see this Talio in most of his sufferrings: they do
evidently resemble the Complexion of his sins. How did he see his own
adultery punished in the Incest of his own Daughter? His Son defiles his 2 Samuel 16.22. Annotat.
Concubines, in the sight of all Isral, upon the top of the house; and it is
thought with good reason, in that very place, where David first let fly his
lustful darts toward Bathsheba, when from the top of his house he spyed her
washing herself. His murder was punished by entailing the sword upon his
house; and his confidence in the arm of flesh, showed in the numbering of the
people, was infeebled by a great plague, and overthrown by the arrow that
flies at noonday. Thus men fall Ps. 7.15, 16.
into the ditches, which they make for others: their mischeife returns upon
their own heads, and their violent dealings come down upon their own pates.
Had I time; this might further be made good by those famous examples of 2 Chronicles. 21. V. 4. and 17.
Joram and Jer. 22. cum 26.
Jehojakim; the one slew his Fathers Sons, and his own were shine by the
Aramites; the other denied decent burial to Vriah the Prophet, and he himself
had the burial of an Ass.

The new Testament is not barren of examples, to illustrate this truth. The
rich Luke 16.24. Gum in tormentis crucialundus flammae cremantis ardoribus
aduratur, inter omnes cortoris parts magis or ejus and lingua poenas dant;
quia plus s^i licet lingua sua, and orc peccaverat. Cyprian. Epist. 55.
man being tormented in flames cries to Abraham to have mercy on him, and to
send Lazarus, that he might dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool his
tongue. His tongue, no doubt, had been most faulty in blaspheming God, and
reproaching the poor: it had been set on fire of Hell; and hellfire did most
torment that member.

The Whore of Babylon did even reele, and stagger, being drunk with the blood
of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and with Cyrus she had
her fill of blood; and hereupon an Augel inlarges this observation, whereof I
have been treating. Thou Rev. 16.6. and 17.6. compared.
art righteous O Lord, because thou have judged thus; for they have shed the
blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink --
doubtless there is a God that judges in the earth.

2. Had you the patience a little to leave the Paradise of Scripture, and to
walk a turn or two in the groves, and spacious fields of other stories, we
might see the evidence of this truth sparkling in our faces, from a voluminous
Induction of several examples, in several ages and places. Not to speak of
Arius, Cyricius, Otho, Bishop of Mentz, and many others: lets begin with that
notorious Apostate Julian. He had belch't forth blasphemies against God out of
his mouth; and that wicked mouth of his became the passage of his own
Theodori. tus. lib. 4. cap. 13.
excrements; his wife in the mean time calling upon him, to learn against
whom he had fought, by the punishment which was inflicted upon him. Valerian
showed an exquisite cruelty against the Servants of the living God; and Sapores
King of Persia took him captive, and commanded his skin to be pulled over his
ears, and his raw flesh to be seasoned with salt. Eusebius in Constantini
orat. c. 24.25.
Diocletian was furious in his thundering persecutions against the Church of
God; but he escaped not unpunisht; for he, and his house were both destroyed by
thunder, and lightning sent from heaven. Decins, and Aurelian are also sad
monuments of the judgments of God: but I have to that monster Maxia minus; He
made a law, that the Christians eyes should be pulled forth, and his own eyes
started out of his head. He abused his body to the satisfaction of his lust,
and that Euschius. l. 9. c. 17. and de vita Constantini. l. 2. c. 52.
part, which he most abused, became the subject of such a stinking imposthume,
that the Physicians chose rather to be put to death by him, then to approach
near him. Josephus. l. 13. c. 19.
Aristobulus killed his Brother Antigonus, and after he fell a vomiting of
blood; and it is observed by the Historian, that his own blood was shed in the
very same place, where he had shed his Brothers before. Charles the ninth also,
King of France committed Horrible but cheries in his reign, and at last his
own French History p. 764.
blood gusht out at all the Conduits of his body. It were easy to enumerate
many other Kings of See the preface to Sr. Walter Rrawleighs History.
France, together with several Kings of Spain, and of this nation also, who
after their tyrannical reigns, had experience of the same measure of cruelty,
which they meted to others. Our own stories may furnish us with instances; of
swearers, whose tongues have swollen so big in their mouths, that they have
not been able to speak; and of D. Beard. of Gods Judgments
drunkards, who have been inflamed with that drink, which they have
intemperatly swallowed down, so that it could find no passage out of their
bodies. O^ what exemplary judgments has the Lord manifested against
sabbath breakers! what Christ said to the Jews, Luke 17.32. Genesis 19.26.
Remember Lots Wife, who for her disobedience was turned into a pillar of salt:
So say I to such as profane the Lords day, either by sports, or unlawful
labor; Remember such as have frequented plays, and beare-baitings on that
day, and in the midst of their Theaters, have come tumbling down, overwhelming
and killing one another, the very scaffold whereon they stood breaking in
pieces, as it were out of indignation, and disdain to support such profane
wretches: Remember that Nobleman, who Hunted so long on the Sabbath day, until
his own Wife conceived, and brought forth a child with a head like a dog.
Remember that Coveteous Woman, who spent her time on that day in dressing
Flax, till at length the flax took fire, and burnt her. Remember; and again I
say Remember the several judgments of God: For what the Apostle says
concerning the overthrow of the ungrateful children of Israel in the
wilderness; the same say I of the judgments of God upon others; These things
are our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they
also lusted, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6. And were I worthy to interpose my advice
concerning the no less profitable, then pleasant study of Histories, I could
wish, we did not only aim to furnish our selves with matter of discourse out
of them; or to look back into the Callender of former times, with an eye of
speculation only, or at least to satisfy our Curiosity; but withal, that we
would narrowly observe, in all transactions, the footsteps of divine
providence, in the just dispensations of his judgments; how all along in all
ages -- He has been a God judging in the earth: but, had we noe benefit of
Histories, were all ancient Records, and Annals lost: we that are but of
yesterday, who have seen the outgoings of God in these nations, within a
small compass of years last past, may easily discern this method in the way
of his judgments. How manifest are the tracts of his Chariot wheels? How has
the cup of his fury been handled from one troubler of Israel, to another? How
fresh, and how wonderful have the works of God, in this kind, bin in our eyes?
The Lord has been known by the judgment which he executes: The wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands, Psalm. 9.16. We can say; and posterity
shall say -- doubtless there is a God that judges in the earth.

Obj. Me thinks I hear the whispers of some wicked heart, endeavoring to
Confute the truth of this doctrine, by its own impunity. Thus, I have bin a
traitor, and rebel to heaven; I have abused the name, and the day, the
Ordinances, the Ministers, the Saints, and creatures of God; yet I am lusty,
and strong, I never came into any misfortune: my bull gendereth, Job. 21.10.
and fails not, my cow calveth, and casts not her calfe. I am troubled
neither with headache, nor heart-ach: I wash my very foot-steeps in butter. Who
is there among all the strict, and precise worshippers of God, who ever enjoyed
more affluence, and health; more prosperity, and success then I have done?
where then is the execution of his judgments? how is God, a God judging in the
earth?

1. It Is true: this very thing, to see the wicked prosper, and increase in
riches, did not only perplex devout Salvian, and made him cry out, cur probi
jaceant, improbi convalescant? why are good men trodden under foot, and the
wicked insult, and triumph? But it made even David himself to stagger, Ps.
73.2, 3. My feet, said he, were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. When
I saw the prosperity of the wicked: until verse. 17. He went into the Sanctuary
of God, and then he understood the end of these men, namely how they are set in
slippery places, to be cast down into destruction. Alas! notwithstanding all
their jollity, and all there thriving in the paths of sin, though they take
the timbrell and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ: though they put
far from them the evil day, yet they know not, but in a moment they may go
down to Hell.

2. God does not punish every sinner with severe punishments in this life; but
as a B. Cowper.
Divine observes; sometimes he singles out a sinner, to make him the example of
his Justice, and to show that there is a God. Others he lets go for the
present, to assure us of the judgment which is to come. Now, as for such who
are repreived from the judgments of God here, and yet reserved for eternal
burning hereafter; they have no cause to hug, and Flatter themselves in such
a suspension of their sufferings: For God is sometimes most angry, when he
seems not angry at all; He will recompense the slownesse of his coming, with
the vehemence of his blow. Israel was in a most deplored Condition, when the
Lord said, I will not punish your daughters, when they commit adultery; nor
your sons, when they commit Whoredom, Hos. 4.14. This is a terrible (...)
Ignati. ad Ephesios. p. 38.
kind of lenity. Misericor diam hanc Nolo. I tremble at the thought of such
mercy: such longanimity, and patience will undo us: Let God rather smite me
here, then destroy me hereafter.

3. The worst of men, are not (...), in all Chrysostom.
respects wicked; but they have some moral good, or some Common graces in
them, which God is pleased oftentimes to reward with temporal blessing; and
for this cause also, the judgments of God are respited toward them: As Ahab
was a bloody wretch, a very Hypocrite, yet because outwardly be humbled
himself, God adjourned the judgments which he pronounced against him, and
promises that he will not bring the evil in his days, but in his Sons days,
1 Kings. 21.29.

Use. To wind up all in a word of application. Does God judge sinners
proportionably to their sins, so that their sufferings carry an analogy with
their sins? then lets not only be circumspect and wary that we provoke not
the majesty of our sinerevenging God, lest he make us the next monuments of his
indignation: lest we kindle a fire, and he compass us about with sparks, and
make us lie down in the fire we have kindled, Ela. 50.11. And with his hands,
he ingrave our sin, though never so secret, upon our very foreheads, in the
execution of his judgments upon us.

But Secondly, lets study the nature of our Calamities, and the judgments
whether National, or personal, that are upon us in the days of our
distress, that so we may the better find out that Achan, which troubles our
camp; I mean, that sin, which had a more immediate Causality, and influence
into our sufferings; that so, in the days of our humiliation, we may fight
neither with small, or great; but set our selves in array especially against
that Agag. that master-sin, which made most havoc of our peace, and was the
maine engine to pull down our judgments upon us.

THE END.
Seasonable Instructions, for the Right Worshipful G. P. Esquire and the
Honorable Lady, the Lady K. B. directing them how to make their Matrimonial
Yoke Easy, Light, Sweet, and Comfortable.
Your name Sir, in French, signifies pure Faith; and yours, Dear Madam, in
Greek, imports pure Manners.

O happy Mates, to whom all things are pure,
Whilst Purefoy and Katherine endure:
How can there breach of Promise be, or strife,
Whilst pure Faith meets with purity of life?
Noble Sir, and Elect Lady,
IT would be almost a sin to sever your names, whose hands have been so lately
joined; whose hearts so long: long, long, may they so continue! It was my
Happiness, and Honor both, to be the instrument of the first: It was the power
of Heaven alone which did the last: And as the Heavens did both begin and
consummate your happy union; so let their sweet influence, and propitious
aspects for ever preserve that Knot inviolable, and make the Ocean of your love
to flow with the Crystal streams of mutual Complacency, without the least
tincture of discontent, or any mixture with the waters of Marah.

Let living, purling fountains cease to run,
Before this Knot be raveld, or undone:
Out-vy the Constant Doves: let your Rings prove
The perfect Emblemes of your endless love.
But on a sudden, me thinks I am surprised with trembling, and begin to quiver,
out of a jealousy of my self, lest this address should seem to flow from
boldness, flattery, or any pragmatical humor; yet, these vapors are no sooner
raised, then scattered: for why should such black thoughts interrupt my Pen?
These suggestions are but the untimely issues of a sick fancy. I never
traveled with such monstrous births; nor was I ever vexed with those Furies:
the passage I am now steering, has been trodden by worthy Divines both Ancient,
and Modern. Nay, the great Doctor of the Jews himself leads the way, and in
several Epistles lays down instructions, how those that are married ought to
carry themselves. But would you know yet more, why I undertook this task. Thus
Originally we breathed almost the same air; besides, most men delight in the
prosperity of their own handy-works; therefore this being one of the most
memorable Acts of all my days, that I joined such a gallant Couple as your
selves into one: I thought your happiness would be an addition to mine. This
put me upon doing what I never did: to chalk out such lines, and set forth such
Meres; which, if observed, will make every day as pleasant as your Wedding day.

So your chaste flames shall like the Vestals glow,
And with fresh Springs of joy your hearts shall flow.
Thus every day ^'th year shall be to you
The last of February -- fifty two.
Purblinds Astrologers ^^go^clem your eyes.
And then confess you could not read the skies.
All the Conjunctions which you understood
This year, were fatal; spelling War and blood.
Come see this Couple breathing naught but joys,
And damn your pedling Arts for forgeries.
First, If you would have a calm passage of Comfort here, and arrive at the
Haven of eternal Reft hereafter, you must sail by the Card and Compass of
Religion. As God is the fountain of love, nay, love it self, so he must be the
principal object of our affections: If He be that third and common person in
whom we meet, we shall soon agree amongst our selves. Then we shall derive from
him, as by reflection, continual supplies of love. Your love to each other will
be fresh every morning, when the Springs thereof are in, and from him: when it is
bottomed upon conscience to Gods Ordinance, and flows from the Ocean of his
Love. Religion signifies a bond, because by it we are bound to God; and this
does also bind us one to another; without this Cement we shall soon shatter,
and like so much sand fall asunder; even as the members of our bodies are
loosened and disjoynted when they are not compacted, and held together by
nerves coming from the Head. Such flames of love, which were never kindled by
any sparks from Gods Altar, are like those of crackling thorns, quickly out:
like those flashing Meteors in the air, which are as soon vanished as seen; or
if you will, like untimely blossoms, soon blasted. When Beauty proves the only
motive and cord of love; if sickness draw her pale Mantle over those Rosy
Cheeks, or Age make surrows in those faces. (Alas) that cord will crack; then
Beauty and Love will be canceled, and expire together. If riches raise our
affections, if our hearts are intoxicated with a Love potion of molten gold,
and our Livers smitten with the darts of Dowry, when these slippery companions
shall make themselves wings, and fly away, such love will go for company: but
those that marry in Domino, in the Lord, in all changes their love will be
unchangeable; and like the righteous themselves, Psalm. 92.14.
shall bring forth most fruit of love in old age. There was good reason why St.
Paul, Col. 3. did in the former part of the chapter teach men their duty to
God, before he instructs them concerning their several Relations, because he
knew that husbands and wives, fathers and children, could not discharge their
devoir and duty one to another, without being first initiated, and principled
in the fear and service of God. Give me a Servant that is truly Religious, and
I dare warrant him a true Israelite, and become bound for his sidelity. How can
such Courtiers be faithful to me, said the Emperor, who are faithless to their
Maker? If Abraham command his household after him, and teach the members thereof
to keep the way of the Lord; we may well expect to hear of an humble, obedient
Sarah, a dutiful Isaac, a wise and faithful Eleezar. When I see the Scepter of
Religion lifted up in any Family, O what a luster does it put upon it! that's
more glorious then all the buildings, and better furniture then the richest
Tapestry. I cannot forbear to say, Either peace to that house, or else, How
beautiful are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy gates O Israel! when I shall see
Reformation enter at this door, and begin at private families, then, and not
till then, shall I hope to see a blessed Church, and a flourishing State. Take
this advise therefore from your unworthy Servant; set up the Standard of Piety
in your Chambers, Closets, and Heart; Let all the houses of your abode, be so
many Oratories, consecrated to Heaven, and persumed with the incense of daily
prayers: Choose all your Servants by this Shibboleth; let them speak this
dialect, and wear this Livery; that as Laban prospered the better for Jacobs
sake, so may you for theirs. Profane Attendants will demolish the strongest
walls, and loosen the firmest rafters, and bring the greatest houses to ruin.
Season the tender years of your children (when God shall send you those sweet
pledges of his love) with gracious indowments, that so they may grow up as the
young plants and be as the polisht corners of the Temple: Let your resolution
be that of Joshuahs, We and our houshola will serve the Lord. So shall your
names, and memories be imbalmed in the succeeding generations of posterity,
better then with all the spices of Arabia, and your family shall be built upon
so sure foundations, that like Mount Sion it shall never be moved. Though our
houses were as lofty as the Pyramids, and we could build our nests in the
clouds, yet sin will undermine them, and bring them tumbling down, even as the
worm did the gourd of Jonah, or the Beetle the eggs of the Eagle, though laid
in the lap of Jupiter. But if you honor God, God will honor you: He shall set
you beyond the Gunshot of men, and devils; all the Furies in Hell shall not be
able to imbitter your joys, nor eclipse the Sun of your comforts.

Stand in this posture toward the Deity;
How twixt your selves lets in the next place see.
Secondly, Study each others temper, and strive to comply with the bent of one
another minds. This will create a sweet harmony, and sympathy of Affections:
for there are several complexions of the mind as well as of the body. Account
it the greatest victory to overcome your own passions, and the most generous
magnanimity to yield to, and conceal one another infirmities. Where iron meets
with iron, there is clashing; but if iron fall upon a pack of wool, there is no
noise at all; so controversies die when they meet with soft answers, and are
not banded up and down by indiscretion on both sides. It was well said of him
that professed he would beat his Servant, had he not been angry; and it was as
well done of another, that would never take notice of any provocation, before
he had first told over all the Letters of the Alphabet; knowing that time will
mitigate, and cool the boiling surges of unruly passions. It Is even unnatural to
see how some Couples do even cut and mangle their own flesh, by vexing each
other. The very Heathens threw out of doors the galls of such Beasts as were
killed in sacrifice at Weddings, to signify that no bitterness should remain
there.

But I forget my self. I am not writing to some Nabal, some Zipporah, or
Xantippe, but a pair of sweet Consorts, who have but one soul divided into both
their bodies. I see no cranny of suspicion, I fear none; yet men gird their
swords about them, though they fear no enemy; and it is no absurdity to hear a
Lecture of Physic in perfect health: These directions are not for the curing
of maladies, but to prevent them. Pardon me you gallant hearts! if observing
many Noble Families in this Nation (which is not the least reproach of our
Native Country) to be even torn, and rent asunder with Domestic discords, I
wish unity, and lasting joys, without any distraction to your selves. Alas!
what distemper will there be in hands, feet, and other members, when the very
vitals themselves are pestered, and swollen with ill humors? what disorder, and
confusion will there be in the inferior orbs, and wheels, children and
servants, when the Primum Mobile, and chief Spring it self, Husbands and Wives
are out of tune with continual jarring? What peace, what goodness is to be
looked for in such Houses, where Masters and Dames lay the black rods of
jangling, and daily examples of naughtiness before their several Relations, and
make them to sin as it were by authority?

Give me leave to speak a word or two to you apart, and then I shall no longer
interrupt your sweet embraces.

SIR, Me thinks I can be as bold with you as if we were still reading Lectures
together; and indeed your humility is the same as it was then in your minority;
so far is the eminency of your birth, and fortune, from swelling you up with
the bladder of Ambition. I shall not trouble you with rules of Frugality, or
take upon me to direct you how to manage and steward that large portion of
Temporals, which the great GOD has cast into your lap. Only consider, the
greater your portion is, the greater advantage and opportunity you have in your
hands of doing good, in feeding the hungry, and promoting Religion; and the
greater shall be your reward, or punishment another day. As you are free from
the baseness, and idolatry of Avarice; so men in your condition who are full of
earthly comforts, have need sometimes of seasonable, and faithful Memento's,
that Satan tempt them not to split against the other Rock, or turn aside to the
other Tropike of wasting and prodigality. This age is not ignorant of his wiles
herein: He paints, and dimples the face of pleasures, and sends his Emissaries,
and Proctors, I mean, evil Companions to entice and allure them, to gaming,
intemperance, luxury, and to follow fantastic fashions, until they hazard the
ruin of their estates, and souls to boot. How many are there in every County,
who received large patrimonies from their forefathers, and yet have transmitted
and bequeathed nothing but beggary to their posterity? I was once almost
tempted to look upon Naboth as another Nabal, churlish and peevish in not
accepting a better vineyard from A hab for his own, or the worth of it in
money; until consulting with other Scriptures, Numb. 36.7. Ezekiel. 46.18. I
found it was utterly unlawful for the children of Israel to alienate the
inheritance of their Fathers. Had there been such a Law in England, we should
not have seen so many Gentlemen prisoners, and Highborn beggars at this day. It
is not fear of your self, but indignation to others which has raised me to
this pitch: next, I shall return to what concerns your self.

Sir, your extraction is very ancient, your Allies noble, your education
ingenuous; and you have met with a Lady in all these like your self: Now I need
not tell you, that these thoughts must needs prompt you on to generous, and
honorable enterprises; Shall such a one as I fly? said Nehemiah: shall such a
one as I do any thing ignoble, and stain the fame of my Ancestors? may you say.
Nay, what was not unseemly when a single person, may no ways be expedient now;
for Marriage puts an addition of Honor upon the greatest Hero. Marriage is
honorable in all men: some of the very Indians marry at seven years of age (if
their own Stories deceive me not) lest they should be so unhappy as to die
before they partake of that blessedness: others have a custom, that if any die
before Marriage, they procure some man's son or daughter to be matched to the
party departed, accounting the state of Marriage, as a means to bring them to
happiness in another world: you see my scope; it is to wind you up to
excellent employments, and high achievements from the consideration of your
elevated condition. When the Romans beheld the Images of their forefathers,
though in cold, and breathless Marble, and read their noble Acts in Stories,
they were inflamed with a desire to imitate them. Not to go backward to former
Ages, you have still before your eyes a worthy Father: an excellent pattern of
temperance, gravity, affability. A loving Husband, a tender Father, a vig^lant
master of his Family, and every thing else; in one word, a good Christian.

Now Sir, you are the Heir of his body; strive also to inherit the graces of
his mind, that you may have as large a portion in his virtues as in his Lands.
You have traveled over the greatest part of Christendom; what you have seen
which is good, either in Religion, or manners, by imitation make it your own
what was evil avo^d. Sad it is to see some (after great experiences of time,
and moneys) to give no other testimony of their travels, besides some Antic
gestures, French Fashions, or Italian Oaths; as if they had swallowed the very
puddles of other Countries, and like flies, had sucked forth their corruptions:
Its well too if they forsake not their first faith, by falling in love with the
gaudy pageantry, and painted face of the Romish Jezebel. You have kept your
integrity, As the River Arethusa.
the freshness of Religion, amidst all the brackish waters of Idolatry; --
Quamvis fluctus subterlabere Sicanos, Doris amara suam non intermiscuit undam.
and after your crossing of several Seas, have arrived to a pleasing harbor,
the bosom of a gallant Spouse. Here you must set up your staff, and sit under
the shade of your own So Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, by
Vine understands a Wife, expounding it by Psalm. 128.3. Thy wife shall be as a
fruitful vine.
Vine. All your scattered thoughts must now be called home, and meet in your
noble Lady, as so many lines in a center. All your acquaintance, and companions
must now give you leave, to let her have the greatest share of your society and
time. It would almost amount to Sacrilege, to deprive her of either, that does
so well deserve both. Let her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe: Let her
breasts satisfy you at all times, and be you always ravished with her Love,
Prove. 5.19. Or if you will have another Epithalamium, take that, -- Vnanimis
Consortia ducite somni,
Mutuaque alternis innectite colla lacertis.
As the kind Vines do clasp the Elms about,
So twist your arms and hearts, your years throughout.
Let no cares break your sleep, and let us see
A numerous offspring for posterity.


I have but one wish more, to wit, that you may live with your Consort as
Pomponius lived with his mother, who was never reconciled unto her, because he
never fell out with her.

Madam, your sweet disposition encourages me to this boldness, and your
clemency does further my presumption. Although, when I consider your refined
parts, your excellent Library of choice Books not of Romances, but Divinity,
and your great industry in reading and perusing the same, Me thinks I may save
this labor: you well know, that by Creation you were made A Helper, and my
charity tells me, you will always prove so, both by your counsels in
distractions, your moderation in prosperity, and cheerfulness in any adversity;
that as you are the delight of your Husbands eyes, so I am assured, you will
prove a Crown of honor unto his head. Those Scripture-terms of obedience, and
submission go harshly down with some lofty spirits, who will not take notice,
in what state God and nature have placed them in. But you are a Friend of
order, and will be contented to move in your own sphere. Woman at the first was
taken neither out of the head, nor the feet of Adam, but out of his side, to
show that Husband and Wife should walk hand in hand, in a sweet equality; but
pardon me, I beseech you for detaining you so long from your Honored Consort.
I will now take my leave of you both, that you may take your fill of Love
together; And cursed be their Fate that grudge to see
Your Hearts thus linkt in perfect Amity.
When Death shall loose this Knot of your true Love,
Then shine as glittering Stars in the orbs above.
I have but one wish more, accept this Mite
From him, whose glory it is himself to write


Your humble and and devoted Servant, Jo. Hinckley.


A Prayer to be said by the same Persons.
O Most merciful God! Thou that art the fountain of all goodness, in whom all
fullness dwells, from whom we acknowledge to have received even all the mercies
and comforts which we enjoy; Teach us we beseech thee, to look up toward thee,
with hearts brim-full of thankfulness for the same; and make us look downward
upon our selves with all care and circumspection, that proportionably to the
engagements of thy great Love, we may adorn both our own lives and thy Gospel.
Make us to walk wisely, soberly, and devoutly all our days, that we may shine
as lights in the World, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, and
may be constant and faithful unto the^, in these days of Apostasy and
Rebellion. As thou have been pleased by thy providence to call us into the
Honorable estate of Matrimony, so do thou sanctify us by thy Spirit, by
giving us frames of heart suitable and fitting for this condition. Enrich us by
thy grace, that we may perform the duties, enjoy the comforts, under go the
cares, and resist the temptations which accompany this estate. Make us the
means to further each other in the great business of our everlasting salvation.
Grant good god, that as thou have plentifully bestowed on us the gifts of thy
lefe hand; so thou would also give us the blessings of thy right hand; make
us as gold tried in the fire, that we may be rich toward thee: Cloth us with
the Wedding garment of thy Sons Righteousness. O let Jesus Christ be made unto
us wisdow; righteousness; sanctification, and redemption: Be thou, O Lord, a
Head and a Husband unto us both; Contract, and espouse us to thy self, by the
earnest and Love Tokens of thy Spirit here, that we may be fully married to thy
self in thy own Kingdom of glory hereafter, and all this we beg upon the
Account of Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and to be sold by Richard Davis at his shop
near Oriell College in Oxford.
A Paraphrase, and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, by Hen.
Hammond D. D. in folio.

The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of Hen. Hammond. D.
D. in two volumes in 4o.

Dissertationes quatuor quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum, Authore
Henrico Hammond, in 4o.

A Letter of Resolution to six Quaerier, in 12o.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the late
Controversies of our times, by Jasp. May. D D. in 4o.

A view of the Threats and Punishments Recorded in the Scripture,
Alphabetically composed, with some brief Observations upon several Texts, by
Zach. Bogan of C. C. C. in Oxon, in 8o.

Fides Apostolica, or, A Discourse asserting the received Authors and Authority
of the Apostles Creed: together with the Grounds and Ends of the Composing
there^ of by the Apostles, the sufficiency there of for the Rule of Faith, etc.
With a double Appendix, 1. Touching the Athanasian, 2. The Nicene Creed: by
George Ashwell, B. D. in 8o.

Ailmeri Musae Sacrae, seu Jonas, Jermiae Threni, and Daniel Graece redditi
carmine, in 8o.

Ad Grammaticen ordinariam supplementa quaedam. Editio 2. multis auctior, in 8o.

A Guide to the Holy City, or Directions and Helps to an Holy-life, by John
Reading, B. D. in 4o.

Theses quadragesimales in Scholis Oxonii Publicis, viz. Quod Coeli sint
Fluidi. viz. Quod Terra Moveatur. viz. Quod Terra Centrum Vniversi non sit.
viz. Quod Luna sit Habitabilis. viz. Quod Radius Luminosus sit Corporeus. viz.
Quod Sol sit Flamma.


A Carolo Potter, in 12o.

Contemplationes Metaphysicae ex Natura Rerum and rectae Ration is lumine
deductae, Auctore Georg. Rieschels Bohemo, in 8o.

The Amorous War, a Play in 4o.

Adi^us ad Logicam, Authore Samuele Smith, in 8o.

Elementa Logicae, Authore Edwardo Brer^wood, in 12o.

Johan. Buridani Quaestiones in octo Libros Politicorum Aristotelis, in 4o.

Robert. Baronii Philosophia Theologiae Ancillans, in 8o.

The hurt of Sedition, by S. Jo. Cheek, in 4o.

Scripture Vindicated from the misapplications of M. St. Marshall in his Sermon
entitled Meroz Cursed; by Ed. Symmons, in 4o.

The Christian Race, a Sermon on Heb. 12.1. by Tho. Barton, in 4o.

A Sermon on the 2 of Timothy, chap. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. by Will.
Chillingworth, in 4o.

A Funeral Sermon on Phil. 1.23. by John Millet, in 4o.

A Funeral Sermon on 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31, by Tho. Hauskins, in 8o.

A Nomencl^tor of such Tracts and Ser^^ns as have been printed or trans^ted
into English upon any place or book of the Holy Scripture, now to be had in the
Public Library in Oxf. by Jo. Vernevill, in 12o.

The Vaulting. Master, or the Art of Vaulting, illustrated with Sixteen brass
figures, by Will, Stoaks, in 4o.

The Mirth of a Christian Life. And the sorrows of a Wicked Life, by Zach.
Bogan of C. C. C. Oxon. in 8o.

Ramus Olivae, Concio habita ad clerum in Templo Beatae Mariae Oxon, 8o. Junii
pro inchoando Termino. A Joh. Wall, T.D. and Col. Aedis Christi Praebendario,
8o.

A brief Treatise touching the preservation of the Eyesight, by Walter Baley,
sometimes Fellow of N. College, Regius professor in Physic, and Physician to
Queen Elizabeth, in 8o.

Essaies and Observations, wherein many of the humors and diseases of the age
are discovered and characterized, by a student in Theology, in 8o.

Portae Mosis, sive Differtationes aliquot a R. Mose Maimonide suis in Varias
Mishnaioth sive textus Talmudici parts, Commen^oriis praemissae, quae ad
univer sam fere Judae^rum disciplinam aditum operiunt. Nunc primum Arabice
prout ab ipso Autore conscrip^ae sunt, and Latin ^ditae. Vna cum Appendice
Notarum Miscellanea, opera and studio Edvardi Pocockii Linguarum Hebraicae and
Arabicae in Acad^mia Oxon, Professoris, in 4o.

Idea Trigonometriae Dem^^ stratae. Item Praelectio de Cometis. Et Inquisitio
in Bullialdi Astronomiae Philolaicae Fundamenta, Authore Setho Wardo, in Acad.
Oxon. Astronomiae Professore Saviliano, in 4o.

-- In Thomae Hobbii Philosophiam exercitatio Epistolica, 8o.

Delphi Phoenicizantes, five, Tractatus, in quo Graecos, quicquid apud Delphos
celebre erat (se^ Pythonis and Apollinis Historiam, seu Poeanica certamina, and
praemia, seu priscam Templi formam atque inscriptionem, seu Tripodem, Oraculum,
etc. spectes) e Josuae historia, Scrip^isque Sacris effinxisse rationibus haud
inconcinnis oftenditur, etc. Authore Edm. Dickinsono, Med. Doc. and Mertonensis
Colleg. Socio, in 8o.

Logicae Artis Compendium, Editio 5. Authore Rob. Sanderson, Coll. Lincoln, in
alma Oxoniensi quondam Socio, and in Eadem Academia Sacrae Theologiae postea
Professore Regio, 12o.

A Paraenesis, or seasonable Exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of
England; wherein is inserted a Discourse of Heresy, in defense of our Church
against the Romanist, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 12o.

Nine Books of late Controversy in defense of the Church of England, by H.
Hammond, D. D. in two volumns, in 4o.

A Christian Legacy; consisting of two parts. 1. A Preparation for Death etc.
2. A Consolation against Death etc.
by Edw. Hyde, D. D. sometime fellow of Tr: Col: in Camb: and late Rector
Resident of Bright well in Berks, in 12o.

A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on All the Books of the New
Testament, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 8o.

FINIS.

