Die Jovis 27. Julii, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that Master Hill has
hereby thanks given him from their Lordships, for the great pains taken by him
in his Sermon he made in Saint Margarets Church Westminster before the Lords
and Commons on Friday the 21. of this instant July, at the public Humiliation;
And he is hereby desired to cause his said Sermon to be forthwith Printed and
Published.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamen.

Die Veneris 21. Julii, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, that Mr. Salloway do give
thanks to Mr. Hill, who at the desire of the House this day Preached before the
Commons at St. Margarets, Westminster, it being an extraordinary day of
Public humiliation, and that he be desired to Print his Sermon. And it is
Ordered that no man shall Print his Sermon, but whom the said Mr. Hill shall
Authorize under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint John Bellamie and Ralph Smith to Print my Sermon.

THO. HILL.



THE MILITANT CHVRCH, TRIVMPHANT OVER THE DRAGON AND HIS ANGELS.

Presented in a SERMON, Preached to both Houses of Parliament assembled on
Friday the 21. of July, 1643. BEING An extraordinary day of publik Humiliation
appointed by them, throughout London and Westminster, that every one might
bitterly bewail his own sins, and cry mightily unto God for Christ his sake,
to remove his wrath, and heal the Land.

By THO. HILL, B. D. sometimes Fellow of Emman. Coll. in Cambridge, and now
Pastor at Tychmersh in the County of Northampton.

Published by Order of both Houses of Parliament.

In their affliction they will seek me early. Hos. 5.15. I said not unto the
seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. Isa. 45.19. I said I would scatter them
into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men,
were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy. Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. LONDON,
Printed for John Bellamie and Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at their shop, at
the three golden Lions in Cornhill near the royal Exchange. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF LORDS, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS
Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Never delighted in Pulpit Apologies, else I might have prefaced with an
excuse from the extreme shortness of the warning to perform this solemn
service. Your Christian attention in hearing, and candide acceptance of my
mean endeavors, has now likewise prevented my Apologizing Epistle. Let
rather my pen second my tongue in provoking you and my self to bless the
Lord, who invites poor sinners to seek to him in the day of trouble. Psalm.
50.15.
Now (will blasphemers say) they are glad to run to their prayers, we are
indeed; desiring humbly to rejoice that we have such precious promises, sealed
with the blood of such a Mediator, in whose Name we may boldly seek our
heavenly Fathers face, even when he has a rod, a sword in his hand. We would
shame our selves for our many sins, and justify God who is glorious in
holiness, in all the judgments that lie upon us. If this be to be vile, we
will with David (when Gods hand calls for it) be more vile then thus. 2 Samuel
6.22.
Let stupid Atheists take that portion, Isa. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is
lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed for their envy
toward thy people. If God style himself a God hearing prayers, Psalm. 65.2.
good reason we should run unto him as a people making prayers.

Let us now therefore approve our selves Christians indeed, not multiply
groundless jealousies, which are almost as troublesome in the State as unsound
opinions in the Church, not quarrel discontentedly with the defects of second
causes, but meekly improve the hand whereby the first cause disposes all
events. Nothing comes to pass in time, but what was decreed from Eternity.
Luke 12.6, 7.
If a few Sparrowes cannot fall to the ground, then surely Armies, Cities,
Countries, cannot be lost without his providence. If he condescend to number
his childrens hairs, then certainly much more their heads. He who has a
bottle for their tears, a book of remembrance for their words and thoughts
upon his Name, will not forget his own promises unto them: Mal. 3.16.18.
but when discriminating times come, then shall ye return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not.

There are now many veins opened in England, it is in the body Politic, as in
the Natural, much bad blood cannot be let out, Isa. 23.9.
but we shall lose some good. The Lord of Hoasts has purposed to stain the
pride of all our glory. Much honorable blood has been shed amongst us since
these sad troubles began. When the judgment comes by Famine or Pestilence,
ordinarily most great persons escape, the vulgar sort of people fall by such
Arrows. God has now sent a sword, which has done execution upon diverse of
our Nobles, and many of our Gentry. The good Lord help you* and all whom it
most concerns, to hear what this rod, this sword says, and who has
appointed it. Micah 6.9.
We all acknowledge it was drawn for the sins of this Nation; and will it be
sheathed again without repentance?

It was a strange prophecy of Robert Grosthead, that great Bishop of Lincoln
in H. 3. time, who prying much into the abominations and spirit of Popery, said
a little before his death, The Church shall not be delivered from the servitude
of Egypt, but by violence and force, Nec liberabitur Ecclesia ab Egyptiaca
servitute nisi in ore gladii cruentandi, Matthew. Paris. See Fox Martyrolog.
and with the bloody sword. We have found this too true as well as other
Churches. Is there not a generation amongst us, who, rather then they will have
Christ reign over them, rather then Doctrine, Worship, Government, and
Discipline, should be reduced to the simplicity that is in Christ, will hazard
King and Kingdoms, involving one after another in bloody troubles.

Me thinks we may hear groaning England speaking the language of the woman of
Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14.4. Help O King, and upon her ground; her two sons strove
together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the
other and slew him, v. 6. It will be your High Honor (O Noble Worthies) to be
so faithful to your Savior, and to your Sovereign, as to put hereunto your
helping Heads and Hearts, Counsels and Prayers. When God suffered his Church to
be brought very low, to be a flock of slaughter, Zach. 11.7.
yet then he took unto him two staves, the one he called Beauty, and the other
he called Bands, and he fed the flock. Be pleased to improve your utmost now as
good followers of the Lamb. Call for the help of the Reverend Assembly, who
will study to advise you according to the Testimony of Jesus.
Church-Reformation may prove a compendious way to compose State-commotions;
Hereby poor distracted England may yet find two supporting Staves, Beauty and
Bands, a Beautiful union established in Church and State.

The Lord delight to employ you to these happy purposes; so shall our mourning
be turned into Hallelujahs.

Your Honors to serve You faithfully, for the honor of the Lamb. THOMAS HILL.

Errata.
PAge 18. line 11. for pulls read puts, page 23. l. 5. and all maintain r. and
all to maintain, page 23. l. 19. for Papists read pupils.

THE MILITANT CHVRCH, TRIUMPHANT OVER THE DRAGON AND HIS ANGELS.
REV. 12.11.And they over-came him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.
THEY who study the Providence of God, about his people, will find all his
dispensations toward them full of Wisdom and Love. If being provoked by their
sins, he let loose Oppressors amongst them, withal he provides Saviors for
them; even when they feel a smarting rod, they may see it in the hand of an
indulgent Father; so sweetly is he pleased to intermingle refreshings with
troubles, and to put some Sugar into their bitterest potions. Thus kindly dealt
he with his Ancient People, stirring up Ezekiel and Daniel, whom he sent
captives with them, to be their comforters in that dark captivity: and thus
tenderly dealt he with the Christian Churches, when John and they were under
persecution, revealing such rich secrets unto them by him, as might strongly
support them, and all suffering Saints, under the most bloody troubles that
should succeed.

This is the very tenor of this Prophetical History, and Historical
Prophecy, the Revelation of Christ to John: The revelation (...) Christ ^o
J^^n the Churches cordial in the last age.
intending doubtless by him to send unto the conflicting Churches, such a
standing and Sovereign cordial as might cheer them, when they were at the
lowest, with hope of triumphing over their most potent adversaries. And is it
not pity, any Christians should have this cordial withheld from them, for
whom it was by God himself provided? If Christ say, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he
that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy; why should any
under pretense of difficulty, fondly imitate and exceed the superstition of the
Jews, who permitted none to read the beginning of Genesis, Hieron. p^^oem. in
Ezekiel.
Canticles, the beginning and end of Ezekiel, before thirty years of age; but,
ours, the Book of the Revelation publickely scarce at all? Admit it be true,
that in this Book, Quot verba, tot sacramenta, as many mysteries as words;
this may awaken study, and quicken prayer, but not take off our inquiry into
these secrets intended for us. But though Prophesies may be aenigmata, riddles
to others before they be fulfilled; we have the advantage of many events and
accomplishments to be our Interpreters. Yea, we have reason to hope, most of
the bitter passages concerning the Churches of Christ, are already fulfilled;
that there is much Sugar at the bottom reserved for these last ages, which may
animate us to seek (with all humble sobriety) a revelation of the Revelation.

And that which may embolden us to look for more glorious victories hereafter,
we find in this 12* Chapter of the Revelation, even the infant Primitive
Church becoming triumphant, when opposed by the fiercest of those heathenish
Emperors.

In the six first Verses, Gods dealings with the old Israelites, and with the
Primitive Christians seem to run parallel. They for a time were in the
Egyptian bondage under Pharaoh, who sought to devour them. At last, Gods
mighty hand brought them out into the wilderness, where though unsettled for a
while, yet he preserved and fed them graciously, and at the last brought them
into Canaan.

Thus did the Lord dispense himself toward his Church, who is represented v.
1. as a Woman clothed with the Sun. ^
Chr^sts spouse is made glorious by his beams, who is the Sun of
Righteousness. Mal. 4 2.
This Woman is travailing with Christ mystical, under sharp throws and pangs
of persecutions, for three hundred years together, v. 2. and all this while
the red Dragon, like a bloody Pharaoh, stood before the Woman which was ready
to be delivered, ^or to devour her child as scone as it was bo^ne, v. 3. and
4. Yet she brought forth a Man Child, v. 5. a Masculine birth, vigorous
Christians; who in Constantines time were caught up to God, and to his Throne,
were advanced to bear much sway.

Yet when the Church was set at liberty from the oppression of the Heathen, she
fled into the Wilderness, v. 6. where she had a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her there one thousand two hundred and threescore days,
Prophetical days, ( i. e.) so many years. It pleases God to keep us in the
dark for the punctual beginning of these days, God feed^ his Church in the
wilderness, and will punctually according to his promise, lead them ^^^th
(...) Canaa^.
as he did his people about the beginning of the Babylonish captivity. It was
easily known it should continue but 70. years, yet there being three steps of
it, one in the days of Jehoiakim, a second in the days of Jechonias, a third
under Zedekiah, it was very hard, without special direction, where to fasten
that beginning, which should terminate the 70. years. We may be confident the
Christian Church shall be in the Wilderness but one thousand two hundred and
threescore years: and had we so much divine Wisdom, as to know exactly where
to begin to reckon them, we might speak more than conjecturally of the time
of the Churches deliverance.

In the five following verses you have a more full amplification of this story
from several passages and circumstances.

Wars betwixt Michael and the Dragon; Christ and the Devil; and their Angels
on both sides, v. 7.

issue; The Dragon and his Angels prevailed not; but was cast out, and his
Angels with him, v. 8, 9. The Devil was cast down from that open rule, he had
under Heathen Emperors.

The Churches acknowledgement of her success, v. 10.

means by which the Devil and his party were conquered, v. 11.

1. Principal, by the blood of the Lamb. 2. Organicall, which is twofold.
First, By the word of their Testimony;
Herein they were sincerely active.
Secondly, They loved not their lives unto death;
Herein (...) were resolutely passive.
Here you have first, not only Christ himself overcomming, but also his
Angels* as he engages his people in the They overcame. Yet secondly, so as
Christ is their overcomming was by the blood of the Lamb. Thirdly, Something
his Soldiers contribute: Devils Angels may carry on their designs by lies,
equivocations, reservations for a time; yet in conclusion, their Testimony, and
that especially when it is held forth, by a zealous self-denial; And they
loved not their lives unto death.

These four Generals, as they lie in the words, will afford us four natural
Observations, flowing from them.

In the War betwixt Michael and the Dragon, and their

In the field of the Church behold two potent Armies, under two Generals,
Michael and the Dragon* Michael, Quis sicut Deus? Christ Jesus that great and
powerful Captain of the Host of God, Head of the Angels and his Church: The
Dragon, who has many black names, suitable unto his nature, v. 9. A great
Dragon, for his terrible fierceness; an old Serpent, grown experimentally
subtle; the Devil, being an accuser of the Brethren before God day and night;
Satan, an implacable adversary to the Saints, a Seducer; it is his trade to be
mis-leading Souls.

Both Generals have their party. Christ has his Angels, ministering Spirits,
and Christian Princes, Magistrates, Confessors, with troops of Saints. The
Devil has his Angels; unrighteous Magistrates, exasperated by Heretics and
corrupt Teachers, and strengthened by other wicked instruments. Betwixt these
(...) parties there will be irreco^ciliable wars; (...).
for albeit the personal sufferings of Christ are ended, yet the warfare of his
body, of his Subjects will continue. Col 1.24.
God has appointed them thereunto, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. And upon these terms, Christ
proposes glorious rewards in the closure of all the Epistles written to the
seven Churches: (...), to him that is over-comming will I give, not to him who
has fully overcome; implying the Churches must be militant: but however though
their conflict be troublesome, yet their victory will be glorious and certain,
Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even
as I also overcame, and am sat down with my Father in his Throne. The Romish
Babel, the Masterpiece of carnal policy, built and underpropped with all
possible care; and is indeed the greatest mountain raised against Michael, and
his Kingdom; yet how tri^mphantly did the Angel speak concerning its ruin
long ago, See F^^pae Speculu^, p 30 31, 32, 33. etc.
Rev. 18.2. He cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen? the ingemination and present tense, infer an undoubted
certainety of its falling.

cause of the true Church is a prevailing cause, and therefore doubtless the
Church will be triumphant. The Churches cause is a prevailing cause.
What is the Churches cause, but the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ,
which was the great design of the three glorious Persons in Trinity from
eternity, wherein they will not suffer themselves to be disappointed! Upon this
divine Project, the Attributes of God, the Offices of Christ, the Influences of
the holy Spirit, lay out themselves. All other things stand or fall with
subserviency hereunto. In reference to this the Lord appointed Watchmen, that
might give him no rest, till Jerusalem was made a praise in the earth Isa.
62.6, 7. This is clearly revealed twice in the Book of Daniel; first to
Nebuchadnezzar, in a glorious image of four metals, Dan. 2. signifying the
four great Monarchies succeeding one another; who also saw a stone cut out
without hands, v. 34. which smote the image, and became a great Mountain, and
filled the whole earth, v. 35. This Regnum lapidis became Regnum montis, which
alone shall never be destroyed, v. 44. And to Daniel himself in a vision of
four diverse beasts, importing likewise the succession of four Kingdoms, all
swallowed up in the everlasting dominion of Christ, Dan. 7.13, 14.

The name of the Almighty Jehovah, is so much interested The Church has an
Almighty friend engaged for it.
that he will carry it on in a triumphing way. Having given himself to his
Church in Covenant, Jer. 31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my
People; what God is, and what God can do, stands engaged for their good. Fear
not, Isa 54.4, 5.
for thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hoasts is his Name. He is pleased to
make himself his Churches debtor, by his promise, Isa. 60.^5. Whereas thou
have been forsaken and hated, I will make thee an eternal excellency, the joy
of many generations. Possibly the wisest Parliament, and most potent Army may
be reduced unto a nonplus, and cannot visibly carry on the cause and Kingdom
of Christ, yet the work will not miscarry; The zeal of the Lord of Hoasts
will perform this, Isa. 9.7.

The true Churches Adversaries are the worst of Angels and men; and so the more
obnoxious to destruction. The Churches adversaries not invincible.
The Job 27.7 Let my enemy be as the wicked, and he that rises up against me,
as the unrighteous. The more by their wickedness they fight against God, the
more they provoke him to fight against them; and admit the Church has a great
party against her, if they be the sinning side, they are the sinking side, 1 Samuel 12.25. The Church was the more victorious against Babylon, because Babylon
was so sinful against God, Rev. 14.8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
City, because she made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.

1 Use o^ Instruction.
Shall the Militant Church be Triumphant over the Dragon and his Angels? Then
Christ's Soldiers have no reason to repent, who have given up their Names unto
him, and taken press money from him: His side will be the prevailing side; and
who does not adore the rising Sun? ^is people may suffer, but when the Lord
has performed his work upon Mount Zion, and on Jerusalem, I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high
looks, Isa. 10.12. When God has wrought for his people the good which he
intended, he is wont to cast the rod into the fire. He knows how to make his
people more then Conquerours, even when they are conquered by their enemies,
(...), supe^vi^ ^i^egtegie (...). Piscat.
Romans 8.37. The Lord has a Sovereignty as well in the lusts and passions of
his adversaries, as in the graces of his people, Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath
of man shall praise thee, the remainder thereof shall thou restrain. Qu^d
(...) in (...) Deus in (...) Aug. This apparent in the success of Scottish
troubles.
By his providence the enemies plots do prove the Churches advantages. The
most glorious deliverance and reformation have been the happy event of most
wretched designs. As there was a blessed transaction in Heaven between the
Father and the Son for the salvation of the Elect, Joh. 6.39. so is it
expressly concluded betwixt them for the confusion of the Churches enemies,
Psalm. 110 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. Christ is not alone in these Wars: the
Father is with him, engaging himself against the enemies of his Son: and
will make the highest of them much lower then the meanest of his faithful
Soldiers.

Beware then of deserting Christ and his Church by dull neutrality or wilful
apostasy: Of Caution:
you cannot be guilty of either against him, without betraying your selves. He
accounts neuters his enemies, Matthew. 12.30. Judge. 5.23.
He that is not with me is against me: they are cursed bitterly who come not
out to help the Lord against the mighty. Our policy cannot protect us, if we
desert the cause of God and his people* our sins will find us out, as Moses
told the Reubenites and the Gadites upon the like occasion, Numb. 32.20, 21,
22, 23. And as for Apostates from him and his cause, they are no less odious
unto him* witness Heb. 10.38, 39. If any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him. It is our dear Saviors employment in Heaven, as to
appear in the presence of God for his friends, Heb. 9.24. so to sit down at
the right hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his enemies ^e made his
footestoole, Heb. 10.12, 13. He has now no sacrifice to offer: he is there
above suffering, being entered into the fellowship and fruition of the glory of
his Godhead, to exercise his power and authority for the good of his Church,
and overthrow of his enemies. He sees their day is coming, Ezekiel. 5.13.
Psalm. 37.13. when he shall have contentment and comfort in his enemies ruin,
triumphantly trampling upon them who shall everlastingly inherit the shame of
their own sins, and lie under the pressure of his just displeasure.

Be encouraged in these shedding and discriminating to take part with the true
Church, Of exhortation
and to adhere firmly to Jesus Christ and his Angels. Look about you, as in
Joshuah 5.13. may you not see Jesus Christ coming down from Heaven, with his
sword drawn in his hand? Go to him with Joshua's question, Art thou for us, or
for our adversaries? Will not his answer be; Nay, but as a Captain of the
Host of the Lord am I now come? Then you must be sure to be of the Lords
host, or else he is not for you, but for your adversaries.

The fight of faith a good fight.
Take therefore Paul's seasonable counsel, 1 Timothy 6.12. fight the good fight of
faith. Such have the best cause; It is Gods. Such fight the Lords battles, 1 Samuel 25.28. The best Jesus Christ the Captain of their salvation, Heb. best
fellow soldiers, Stephen, Paul, and the rest Tim. 4.8. Henceforth there is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to them also that love his
appearing. This is more then the greatest Champions of the world can promise
themselves.

Quest.
But may not Christ's soldiers be foiled?

Israelites, when they fought against Benjamin, Judge. 20. yet was the cause
holy and good. But what with their over-confidence in the goodness of their
cause, and greatness of their numbers, and want of humiliation they were twice
discomfited. Again, consider the Cause may prevail, when the persons
miscarry; and grow great out of the ruins of such as suffered for it. Suppose
that discouraging question, Whether the witnesses be already slain, Comfort,
if the witnesses are not yet slain.
cannot so comfortably be answered, by a peremptory affirmative: Yet, however;
better be one of the witnesses, though dying; then one of the killers of them,
though triumphing. There will be a speedy resurrection of them and the cause,
Revel. 11.11. But remember to allow the Lord his Prerogative, to carry on his
Churches cause in his own method, and in his own time. See Deuteronomy. 32.35, 36.
His enemies feet shall slide in due time though his peoples power be gone.

By the blood of the Lamb.

The Militant Churches victories over the Devil and his Angels, are obtained
by the blood of the Lamb Jesus Christ.

This is clearly held forth in that mother fundamental promise which was most
graciously intimated to fallen Adam, even before the sentence passed upon him,
Genesis 3.15. The Woman's seed shall break the Serpents head. Of this Daniel had
comfortable experience when Michael helped him, Dan. 10.13.21. which is further
confirmed, Rev. 17.14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Reasons why
victories are attributed to the blood of the Lamb.


First, by the blood of the Lamb divine justice is satisfied, God appeased,
Romans 3.25. and the Church reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.19. Her sins being done
away which betray her to her enemies, she becomes victorious, sharing Christ
over the Devil and his Angels, Rev. 1.5.
Gol. 2.12, 13.

Secondly, by the blood of the Lamb we obtain that Devil and his Angels. For
no pieces of the spiritual armor will be armor of proof, unless they be
dipped in the blood of Christ, Rev. 7.14. And how was Paul enabled to do all
things, but by the might of Christ that strengthened him? Phil. 4.13. Whose
blood has an eternal efficacy, Rev. 13.8.

The Churches victories are therefore ascribed to the blood of the Lamb,
because the Oeconomicall Kingdom which Christ has over his Church is a
Priestly Kingdom, which he possesses as the fruit of his bloody sufferings.
For though he were prepared and made capable of his Kingly glory by the
hypostaticall union, yet the holy Scriptures invest him with it, Psalm. 110.7.
as the reward of his sufferings and humiliation. He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every name, That,
(...), in the Name of Jesus, (not, at the Name Jesus) every knee should bow.
And his Church likewise being a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. conquers through
the blood of her King.

Of humiliation
Then, why should not we debase our selves this day before God, for all our
vain confiding in creatures, or magnifying them upon any good successes?
Hereby we proudly encroach upon the honor of Christ, to whose blood we owe all
our Victories. It is fit we should humble our selves, when God has humbled
us, Eccles. 7.14. In the day of adversity consider. We must bless God for good
Instruments, but may not admire them to the disparagement of the principal
cause.

Habb. 1.16.
Though ignorant wretches did sacrifice unto their own net, and burn Incense
to their dragge; this is most unworthy of Christians, who should live by faith
in Christ, Gal. 2.20. not only pray in faith, but work, fight by faith,
expecting all from Christ, and resolving all into Christ.

Christ should be all in all in our victories.
Improve the hand of God, (which occasioned this extraordinary Assembly) for the
Prophet Haggai his purpose, To consider your ways; or, (as in the Heb.) Set
your heart upon your ways, Hag. 1.5.7. Too many like Hannibal, who though
victorious, knew not how uti victoria, and so lose themselves in their
victories, not acknowledging the blood of the Lamb therein. The Lord make us
more wise for time to come. We may use means, but must not rest upon them; we
ought to bless God for second causes, but must not idolize them. 2. Sam.
12.27.28.
It was a modest strain in Joab, which might make us blush, he sent to David,
that he would gather the people together, encamp against the City and take it;
lest I take the City (said he) and it be called by my name. Let such as are
isntrumental for the public have all due acknowledgment, but it may cost us
yet much dearer, if we baptize any with the name of Conqueror, but only Jesus,
Isa. 9.6. The government is upon his shoulder, his Name shall be called
Wonderful. Him we may admire to eternity.

Oh then take heed of abusing the precious blood of this Lamb by your sins,
Of caution.
lest he prove to you a devouring Lion. This Lamb has wrath when he is
provoked, and who shall be able to stand in the day of his wrath? Rev. 6.17.
Especially beware of sinning directly against the blood of Christ. Backsliding
professors abuse the blood of Christ.

See Dav. Dick. Comment. on this place.


That's a dreadful thunderbolt against many Professors, when they count the
blood of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, Heb.
10.29. Though they have not internal sanctification, by renovation of nature,
and inhabitation of the Spirit of grace; yet they have an external
sanctification, by consecration and dedication to Gods Service, by calling and
covenant, common to every member of a visible Church, and this by the blood of
Christ: but when by their backesliding they shall disavow Christ and his
Gospel, they do interpretative, in effect say his blood has no value in it,
is no better than the blood of a common malefactor, and so make themselves
obnoxious to the sorest punishments.

But there is another sin against the blood of Christ, Unworthy Communicants
abuse the blood of Christ.
very dangerous, and more epidemicall, by profaning his holy Sacrament, the
memorial of his blood, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. The Lord knows how deeply guilty
many here present are, having their hearts and hands imbrued in the blood of
their Savior. Rivers of tears of blood, are too little to bewail this one
provocation. There is now a most bloody sword drawn in England; does not the
Lord bring it upon us, as to avenge the quarrel of the Covenant? Lev. 26.25.
So the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.25. Doubtless as God will make
inquisition for the blood of his Saints, so for the blood of his Son, Psalm.
9.12.
and if now he should search England, as once Jerusalem with candles, Zeph. 1.
12. would not many of our Nobility and Gentry, Magistrates and Ministers, as
well as common people, be found guilty of the blood of Christ? Chrysostom was
very sensible of this evil: whereupon he professed, I will rather give my life
than the blood of Christ to any unworthy one; Chrysostom in Mat. Hom. 64.
and I will rather suffer my own blood to be shed, than give that most holy
blood to any but him that is worthy. Ambrose expressed the same zeal against
this sin in Theodosius. Will thou (faith he to the Emperor) reach these hands
dropping with the blood of Innocents, Theod. l. 5. c. 17.
to receive the most sacred body of the Lord? will thou put that precious blood
of his to thy mouth, which in a rage spilt so much Christian blood? depart
rather and heap not one sin to another. But alas! how great is our Ministers
misery? The Ministers sad straights, about the Lords Supper.
we lie under a kind of necessity of suffering this evil among our people.
Our straights are most uncomfortable.

The Laws and constitutions of England, require the body of England to come to
this Sacrament after sixteen years of age; That they may prove themselves no
Papists, they must communicate.

The Scripture denounces judgment against them if they eat and drink
unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Pastors and Churches want that power of the Keys, whereby they might do
their duty therein.

All you who love and follow the Lamb, help England by your Prayers, that all
old leaven may be purged out, 1 Cor. 5.7. Ye Members of the Assembly contribute
your Counsel with Jehojada, 2 Chronicles. 23.19. that such Porters (such Church
Discipline) may be set at the Gates, that the unclean enter not in. And
improve your power, ye Parliament Worthies, for setting up such spiritual
railes in our Churches, such a due order, that Scripture dogs be not
suffered, to the hazzarding of their own souls, and the dishonor of their
Savior, to rush upon these holy things.

3 Use of Exhortation.
The third Use is, of Exhortation, in two Branches.

blood of the Lamb, then as you desire to prevail, make peace with Christ.
How can we in England expect He should fight for us, if we fight against him*
It is wise counsel, Psalm. 2.11. for Kings, for Judges, for all, Kiss the
Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled
but a little: not with a treacherous kiss as Judas, but with a kiss of loving
loyalty of humble subjection, of peaceable reconciliation. That Question is
frequent among us, which J^ram proposed to Jehu, 2 Kings 9.22. Is it peace? may
not we return the same answer, What peace so long as whoredoms remain, and
many other abominations? Jehojada took a right method to peace and quietness,
2 King. 11.17.18.20. The Scripture Method of Englands peace.
And Jehojada made a Covenant between the Lord and the King, and the people,
that they should be the Lords people: between the King also and the people.
And all the people of the Land went into the house of Baal, and brake it down,
his Altars and his Images brake they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Mattan the
Priest of Baal, before the Altars; And the Priest appointed Officers over the
House of the Lord. This very place was not long since the valley of Berachah, 2 Chronicles. 20.26. here solemn praises for the discovery of most destructive plots.
It may now be called a Bochim, as Judge. 2.5. (oh that there were more tears
among us!) we should all appear before God this day as mourners in sense of
his displeasure. If we would have it a day of atonement; as Levit. 23.28. a
peacemaking day both between King and People, and between Christ and England,
let it be a thorow-reforming day, as v. 18. They brake all Baals altars and
images in pieces thoroughly. Let every one say, What have I to do any more with
my Idols? Let it be a day of serious protestation against our sins, and
renouncing all those weapons, whereby we have fought against Jesus Christ, then
may all the people hope to rejoice in quietness, v. 20.

appeal from second causes unto Jesus Christ, and the merit of his blood. In
all our straights, let us speak Jehoshaphats language, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. We know
not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. Interest of Princes, p. 55.
It is the observation of a Politician, England is a mighty animal, which can
never dye except it kill it self. Among our other crying sins we are now
involving our selves in the guilt of Selfe-murther. Here is an unnatural sword
most unhappily drawn amongst us, Is not this Englands condition
as Isa. 9.19, 20, 21. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hoasts is the Land
darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire, no man shall spare
his brother. He shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry, and he shall eat
on the left hand and not be satisfied, they shall eat every man the flesh of
his own arm. Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, and both against Judah.
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Fighting or treating can not yet end the controversy, we have importuned the
sword to be quiet, as Jer. 47.6. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be
ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard* rest, and be still: and
as yet England has received the same answer with Ashkelon, v.. 7. How can it
be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against
the Sea shore? There has he appointed it. The Lord has given it Commission to
ride circuit in several Counties of England; and who knows how long? Our
best Remedy.
what now remains? we read Mark. 5.25. of a certain Woman which had an issue
of blood twelve years, and v. 26. had suffered many things of many Physicians,
and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew
worse: could never be healed, till she touched Christ. We are this day in a
solemn manner drawing nigh unto Christ. O that our bloody issue might drive us
to improve the blood of the Lamb! Could we fiducially put our selves, our
Church and State, our Religion and Liberty, into the hands of our Savior, who
knows but we might have as comfortable an answer, as this woman had, v. 34. Thy
faith has made thee whole, go in peace and be whole of thy plague. The good
Lord vouchsafe an Amen.

They overcame by the word of their Testimony. Christ's Soldiers carry on the
Churches victories, against the

If you desire to know what is This word of their Testimony, it will appear v.
17. Christ's Soldiers are described to be such as kept the Commandments of
God, and have the Testimony of Jesus; and Rev. 1.9. John was banished for the
Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Evangelium non utique
scriptum aut pictum in Tabulis. Parae.
which doubtless was the Gospel; And this, not as written in your Bibles
only, and comprised in your Books.

But having this Gospel of Christ rooted in your hearts by Faith, holding fast
the profession thereof without wavering, Heb. 10.23. Resist the Devil, 1. In
Heart.
being steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. whereas Heb. 4.2. The Word Preached
did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. The
Gospel will not join with corrupt opinions, but with Faith: it will be
received not as a conjecture or possible truth, but for a Divine or infallible
truth, then it profits and strengthens.

Bearing witness to the Gospel of Christ, who is the Amen, the faithful and
true witness, Rev. 3.14. 2. In Mouth.
Openly with your mouths, Romans 10.10. by Preaching, if Ministers; So Paul,
Romans 1.16. He was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; and by confession,
which concerns all Christians when called to it for the glory of God, and
edification of the Brethren, 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready to give an answer to every
man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. Be ready (...), be
ready to make an Apology for thy Religion.

3. In doing.
Justifying the Gospel in life and conversation. All wisdoms children should
be so ingenuous and mannerly as to justify Wisdom, Mat. 11.19. This will be a
prevailing Testimony when you walk worthy of the Gospel of Christ. Express
the Gospell-graces in an active Gospell-conversation.

4. In suffering.
Commending the Gospel by your patient and cheerful suffering for it. It is a
great confirmation of the truth, and pulls honor upon it, when Christians will
rather suffer for the Gospel, than the Gospel should suffer by them. Our
losses in this case will be the Gospels advantage, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. All
things which happened unto Paul, were for the furtherance of the Gospel; by
his bonds others waxed confident.

Such a good Soldier was Timothy, who, 1 Timothy 6.12. witnessed a good
confession before many Witnesses; having learned this prevailing method from
his Captain Jesus Christ, who, v. 13. before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession.

It clearly appears how the Churches victories are carried on by the
Testimony of the Gospel.

Gospels adversaries lies not in the goodness of their cause; but in the
ignorance of peoples minds and mere mistakes thence arising: 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
What is Paganism, Mahumetanisme, Popery; but a Rapsody and heap of gross
mistakes raised in the dark? The Devil uses the same method ordinarily to
carry on his designs that he took in the Council of Ariminum. The Arrians
having procured the exile of the most worthy and learned Bishops, Ruffin. Eccl.
hist l. 10.
and perceiving the company that was left, though they were very unlearned, yet
would not be persuaded directly to disanull any thing which had been concluded
before in the Council of Nice, did abuse their ignorance in proposing the
matter: for they demanded of them whether they would worship (...) or Christ?
these not understanding the Greek word, rejected it with execration, being as
they thought opposed unto Christ. Thus have the Prelaticall party surprised
many ignorant Congregations with their innovations, and easily misled them
while they kept them in the dark. But when the Sun of righteousness arises,
when God sends abroad John Baptists as burning and shining lights, John 5.35.
they by the beams of truth will discover the most subtle errors, and by the
spiritual weapons of their warfare cast down the strong holds of the Devil
and his Angels. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.


Where the Testimony of the Gospel of Christ is held Cor. 14.15. His own power
is there displayed, Romans 1.16. the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation.
There is the mighty presence of Christ, whose Arrows are sharp in the hearts
of his enemies, whereby the people fall under him, Psalm. 45.5. There the Spirit
of God breaths so powerfully, that by the Word alone, which is the sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. the Apostles, though but a few mean men, were much more
victorious then the greatest Alexander or potent Caesar's, conquering by the
word of their Testimony so many opposite Kingdoms, subduing so many thousand
spirits and consciences, and that in so short a time, without shedding one drop
of blood.

Indeed when we are to deal with Papists and sons of violence, which
illegally invade our persons, Religion, Liberty, and endeavor to take away our
birthright from us, the very Law of nature teaches us to defend our selves
against such injustice; But for the overcomming of Popery, we need not other
weapons to consume it, but the spirit of Christ's mouth, 2 These. 2.8. It is the
word of their Testimony, by which Christ's soldiers prevail against the Devil
and his Angels.

Information.
Then whose champions are they, who in stead of bearing witness unto, employ
their power and policy to suppress the Testimony of Jesus? Doubtless none but
the Dragons regiment will fight against Christ and his Gospel. Elymas the
Sorcerer is wont to withstand Saul and Barnabas, Acts 13.8.
seeking to turn away the Deputy from the faith. Men of corrupt minds, of no
judgment concerning the faith, resist the Truth as Jannes and Jambres did
Moses; 2 Timothy 3.8.
But Paul will keep back nothing that is profitable for their souls,
teaching them publicly, and from house to house, Acts 20.20. And also charge
Timothy that he preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season, 2 Timothy
4.2. Do the work of an Evangelist, fulfill thy ministry. Oh how unlike to
Paul and Timothy, are many of the Prelatical Tribe, whom yet they pretend to
succeed! What successors of Paul and Timothy, by preaching against preachings,
and using their power to undermine the Testimony of the Gospel! No rather they
unhappily tread in Jesuiticall steps complying with Contzens rules, whether
occasionally or intentionally they best know, See Adam Contzens politic. l. 2
c. 18. Who might not easily reduce the Puritanes in England into order if he
could extort from them the approbation of the Bishops, says the Jesuit?

Compare this with our late Convocation Oath, for the establishing Episcopacy.


for the overthrowing of the power of the Gospel; His very engines have they
used to pillage our Churches of afternoon Sermons, of weekly Lectures, and to
turn praying into bidding of prayer, etc. and according to his subtle
counsel, were extorting such an approbation of the Prelacy amongst us as would
soon have plundered England of many of her faithful Ministers, or at least
their consciences of their sweet peace, if not of their liberties. And are too
like those soule-murdering Jews, 1 These. 2.16. enemies to Christ and to the
salvation of others, forbidding the Apostles to speak to the Gentiles that
they might be saved. No wonder they lie under so much contempt. God makes good
his own word by Malachi, chap. 2.9. Therefore have I also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my
ways, but have been patriall in my Law. They who smother the Testimony of
Christ, taking away the key of knowledge, do the most dishonorable work, and
must expect answerable wages here and hereafter, Mat. 23.13. Luke 11.52. For
selfe-judging.
Do the Soldiers of Christ carry on the Churches victories by holding forth
the Word of their Testimony? Then if we prevail not against the Devil and his
Angels in these Gospel conflicts, we may blame our selves and our own
remissenes, as not being valiant for the truth, which was their defect, Jer.
9.3. We are too ready to translate the fault to others, (an old prank our first
Parents taught us as soon as they had fallen.) Parliament complains of the
army; Army of the Parliament, City against both, and Country will spare none
of them. Thus most unhappily (by the secret policy of Malignants) jealousies
are fomented, and multiplied to the prejudice of all; our hearts and hands
thereby weakened in the Churches cause. It were more like Christians upon a day
of mourning, to be bewailing our own coldness and want of appearing as active
soldiers, under so good a Captain.

God forbid it should be verified of us, what the Lord said, Jer. 8.6. I
harkned and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? Oh that you would call your selves to a
particular account (it is opus diei, a work suitable to the day) saying, How
much evil have I done to inflame these wars; and how little good have I done
to extinguish them? Might not some Nehemiah contend with many of our Nobles,
Neh. 13.17.
and say, What evil thing is this that you do, and profane the Sabbath day?
But is this all? though too much? Might not some Peter contend with many of our
Gentry, who walk in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquettings, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
and abominable idolatries, thinking it strange that others run not with them
to the same excess of riot? And might not some Jeremiah complain, A
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, Jer 5.30, 31.
and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Many bless God heartily for that Religious Ordinance of Parliament set forth
some months since, to stir up England to repentance for national and
personal sins. Did you more exemplarily commend it to us by your own
practice it would have a more commanding influence upon us. In Febr. 1642.
What though we talk against Atheists, if we still wallow in profaneness,
cry out against Papists, and still continue lukewarm Protestants, inveigh
against Malignants, and yet remain full of Malignant Antipathy against Scripture
Reformation; This is not to hold forth the Testimony of the Gospel as becomes a
good soldier of Christ. The Lord lead us all into our own hearts, and teach
so to judge our selves that we be not judged.

3 Use of Exhortation for Parliament Worthies.
Do the soldiers of Christ carry on the Churches victories by the Testimony of
the Gospel? As ever you desire they should prevail in so good a cause, it
concerns you who are the grand Counselors, betrusted with so much
superintendency for the liberty as well of our Religion, as of our persons and
estates, that you improve it faithfully for the advancing and propagating the
Gospel of Christ, so will you be fitted to give a more comfortable account of
your great Stewardship, when your Master calls for it, Luke 16.2.

Here 4. hints. for Parliament men in reference to the Gospels advancement.
Be pleased ( worthy Senators) to accept these few hints for this purpose.

Patronize, protect, reward, prefer faithful witnesses of Christ. If a
Prophet come with a word of reproof, though sharp, if seasonable; do not
therefore count him your enemy, as Ahad did Elijah, 1 King. 21.20. because he
dealt plainly with him: nor send him away as Amaziah did the Prophet, when he
came to discover his sins, Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.

Check, restrain, disable, Diotrephes, Demetrius, and that Parliament
Ordinances, but even the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, making no small stir in
England about the way of Reformation; and all maintain their own Diana, as
Act. 19.23, 24. etc.

Have a vigilant eye upon such intemperate Preachers Writers as pervert truth
and disturb peace. Papists would take away the Cup, and leave us but half a
Sacrament; Antinomians would abolish the moral Law, and leave us but half a
Bible. If such be suffered, our Religion will grow lame and licentious.

Forget not, I beseech you, forget not the purging and pruning of the
Universities, the Nurseries of piety and learning. If Satan have a seat there;
if there be such that hold the doctine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication, what Papists such Tutors are like to send
abroad, we have found by too much unhappy experience.

And they loved not their lives unto death. Christ's soldiers first pleaded the
Churches cause by the word of their Testimony, and by such Gospel weapons they
promoted the victory: Then, this Testimony of Jesus representing unto their
own spirits, as well as unto others, the infinite excellency of the Lamb,
raised their hearts to such a pitch of love to Him and to his cause, that they
loved not their lives unto the death, and so grew more completely victorious
over the Dragon and his Angels. (...) They overcame, as by the strength of
their Testimony, so by the constancy of their resolution to hazard their lives
for Christ and his Gospel.

In the Churches conflicts they prove victorious soldiers, who love not their
lives so dearly, as they love Christ and his cause.

Two things being cleared we may the better improve this observation in the
application of it to our selves.

The degrees of this love to Christ and his cause, by which they

The influence such love has into the Churches victories.

1 The degrees of love to Christ.

1 Loving Christ so as to hate their best beloved sins.


First, Victorious soldiers in the Churches conflicts, must love Christ better
then their best beloved sins, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate
evil. Love is a prime radical affection: when the heart cleaves to any good
by love, it hates that evil which is most contrary to it. How will they submit
their lives unto a violent death, who have not so much love unto Christ, as to
make them willing to die a carnal death, to die to sin for him? will they
lose their lives, who cannot leave a lust for Christ?

2 Loving Christ better then their most beloved worldly comforts.
Secondly, victorious soldiers for Christ, must love him better then their most
beloved worldly comforts; when he made that promise to us, Mar. 10.29, 30.
There is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, etc. He thereby intimated what
he expects from us, even, Gerson.
amare Deum usque ad contemptum mundi. We may use the world as a servant, but
not grow into league with it as a friend, Jam. 4.4. Know you not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? and that is a searching place, 1
John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things in the world: if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 Cor. 9.25. 2 Timothy 2.4.
These two are inconsistent, and therefore, certainly he will never be a good
soldier of Christ in whom love to any worldly excellency is predominant. 3
Loving Christ so as to deny our dearest selves for him.


They must deny their dearest self. It is hard to protest against our bosom
sin, though grossly evil in it self; it is harder to renounce our alluring
worldly comforts, which in themselves are lawful; hardest to deny our selves,
which nature and Religion (in a due order) teaches us to love: Yet Christ makes
this a distinguishing character of his Disciples, and doubtless is a proper
badge of his soldiers, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, Compare Luk^ 14.26.
with Mat. 19.37.
and hate not his father and mother, wife and children, and brethren and
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple; Comparatively,
love them all, less then Christ, as appears, Matthew. 10.37.

When friends or self come in competition with Christ, or stand in opposition
to him, in this case says Jerome, we must Patrem calcare, etc. Here solum
pietatis genus crudelem esse. We must exercise an holy cruelty to our friends
and self. And indeed Christ has no more true Disciples or faithful soldiers
in this Assembly, then such only as love not their own lives in comparison of
their Savior.

Such is the nature and working of love, 2 The influence it has.
that it swayes much with the soul, like sails to the Ship, it carries one
forward even against the stream and tide. It was love that brought Christ from
Heaven to the Cross, and will draw any, where it prevails, from a Palace to a
Stake, for Christ and his cause.

Love to Christ and his cause is ingenious and full of consideration how to
carry on its designs for his advantage, 1 Love is a contriving affection.
1 Cor. 13.5. Love thinks no evil; rather it studies and plots how to
communicate it self in all good offices. The Spouses love cost her many
serious thoughts how she might enjoy and serve her Beloved. Hence some persons
are much more useful to Church and State then others, because their love to
Christ puts them upon the best improvement of their parts, honors, interests
and influence for his service.

2 Love is a bountiful affection.
Love to Christ and his cause, will be at any cost and charges to gratify him,
it runs over to Christ himself, and toward all Saints, Phil. 6.5. It was
love in Paul that made him willing to spend his strength, his spirits, his
blood for the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend, and be spent
for your souls: and for his Philippians, Phil. 2.17. be off^red as a sacrifice
for the service of their faith. Christ's love to his poor servants thinks
nothing in Heaven or Earth too much or too good for them: true love to him will
be reciprocal, giving up to him, Bern.
sua, suos, se, thinking all best bestowed on him.

Nothing makes a Christian so unweariedly operative as Love. 3 Love is an
industrious affection.
In 1 These. 1.3. Paul blesses God for their work of faith, labor of love,
patience of hope. True love to Christ is laborious for him: so expressly, Heb.
6.10. For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love which
ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints and
do minister. One cord of this love will draw more then a Yoke of Oxen, and
carry you with a pleasing violence from service to service.

4 Love is a tolerating affection.
Amongst many other sweet discoveries Paul makes of love in that short chapter,
1 Cor. 13. there are diverse expressions to show you how patient love is,
enduring any thing for the person it loves, v. 4.7. When the heart is full of
love to Christ, it makes us willing to forsake, to undertake, to undergo any
thing for Christ and his cause. This no question made Ignatius so cheerfully
to invite and meet killing sufferings, having such burning love to Christ that
was crucified for him. (...) Ignat Ep. ad Romans


Be pleased to give me leave this day in behalf of the Lamb, to put in a
Caveat against carnal self-love, which so much blunts and weakens the love of
Christ's soldiers in the Gospels Conflicts. Caution.
If you love your souls better then the Lamb, you will never be victorious
for him. They overcame which loved not their own lives unto the death.

All men naturally love themselves, Carnall-selfe-love, a dangerous weed
growing in every man's garden.
and consequently may have some kind of selfe-seeking love to Christ, as being
the chiefest good, and so congruous to their necessities. But Christians must
go further; we should love Christ for himself, as the primum diligibile, for
his own infinite excellencies, and then love our selves and all other things
with reference unto him.

Paul was a true Prophet, 2 Timothy 3.1. Carnal self-love, the head of all the
factious.
In the last days perilous times shall come; (...), thorny times, full of
difficulty: because then such a confluence of wickedness. Eighteen several
factions he names, and the head of all those factions is self-love. Men shall
be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud* etc. Whilst Adam was
in innocence, the Image of God inclined him to act according unto God, seeking
him and his glory in the first place. Since the fall, the Image of God being
lost, Self is perkt up; we seek our selves in the first, and God only in the
second place. Few seek God for himself, out of love to him: most seek God
only in reference to themselves: this is carnal self-love, and so indeed by
seeking lose themselves, Matthew. 16.25. For whosoever will save his life shall
lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

Much time has been spent in the Great Senate how to find out and punish
Delinquents. Carnall-selfe-love the greatest incendiary.
Allow me the liberty in the Name, not only of Church and State, but also in
the Name of Christ, to impeach One Incendiary, who has been too long winked
at. It is a Bosom Incendiary, a domestic adversary which dwells within us, I
mean, Carnal Self-love, the loving our own ends and interests better then
the public good, and better then Christ himself.

3 Articles against carnal self-love.
It is easy to prove these three Articles at least against carnal self-love.

Carnal self-love is the greatest underminer of Parliament proceedings.
Whence so many neuters, whence so many back-friends to the Public, but because
so many sick of Baruchs disease, Jer. 45.5. seeking great things for
themselves?

Carnal self-love is the most treacherous betrayer of our Military
undertakings, making too many Judas-like, to sell Christ and his cause for some
few pieces of silver, Mat. 26.15.

Carnal self-love is the strongest obstruction of Scripture Reformation in the
Church; so, many seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil.
2.21. and therefore will rather hazard the ruin of all, then suffer their own
Dianaes to go down. By this craft we have our wealth, Acts 19.25. then Diana
must be cried up, what ere become of the Gospel of Christ. Amongst all other
Jonahs that endanger the Ship of Church and State, throw out carnal
self-love, let it no longer sleep within you, lest the storm continue and
grow more tempestuous. Amongst all other Achans that bring a curse upon our
undertakings, let justice, justice be executed upon your own carnal
self-love. Pass on sequestration to regulate that in your selves which is so
great an en^my to Christ and his cause.

victorious soldiers in the Chu^ches conflicts (which would put a most
glorious luster upon your Nobleness, Exhortation.
and add many Pearls to your Crowns) get hearts more enflamed with love to
Christ and his cause. Much encouragement to love your Savior and his cause
better then your own lives.
How lovely is your Savior in himself, in the beauty of his Person, in the
glory of his graces! Cant. 5.10. the chiefest among ten thousand. He has
been admirably loving unto you, in discovering plots against you, and in
wonder-working providence for you. Should not the love of Christ constrain
you as it did Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14. to be active and passive for him? O press the
Lord with his gracious promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. that he would circumcise your
heart, that you may love him with all your heart and with all your soul. This
he expects from you, Luke 10.27. that you should love him with all your
strength, give him the utmost emprovement of the whole and best-selves. We
look at you as Stars in this our Heaven. God forbid our Stars should fall,
that any of them should prove Comets: let your light, motion, and influence
animate others.

Do not say your task is so difficult, your sufferings are so sharp that you
are discouraged. Get more love to Christ, that will allay the difficulty, and
facilitate the work; you may with comfort commit the keeping of your souls to
God in wel^doing, who knows how to sweeten the bitterest troubles by his own
refreshing presence. 1 Pet. 4.19.
If God call you forth as Champions, possibly, yea probably you may have the
same support which that Heroical woman found, of whom story relates, That
being condemned for Christ, not long before she was to suffer, fell into
travail, and having sore labor, cried out grievously; whereupon being asked
how she would endure Martyrdom, that was so ready to sink under these pains,
she answered to this purpose. I suffer now as a daughter of Eve, I shall suffer
then as a child of God; my Father will help me.

Never say, because the event is uncertain, therefore it is not best to
appear for Christ and his cause. Do thy duty, what becomes a good Soldier,
trust the Lord of Hoasts with the success. It is true we live in trying
discovering times. A wise course the Emperor took to try the Courtiers.
Who knows but the providence of God may be now making the same discovery in
England, and with the same success, that the wisdom of Constantius Chlorus
the Roman Emperor made in his Court. He having a mind to try the sincerity
of his Courtiers, made this proposal to them. All they who would sacrifice to
Demons (the superstition of those times) should continue at Court, and all
that refused should be cashiered. Hereupon some soon professed their
readiness to sacrifice, others publicly denied it. Such as complied, the wise
Emperor chides sharply, ut proditores Dei, and banishes them as unworthy to
remain at the Emperors Court, who would betray God himself. He commends them
who were conscientious, and would not sacrifice; pronouncing, tales solos
dignos esse quos Imperator inter amicos muneraret. Such only were worthy to be
accounted the Emperors friends who were true to God and his cause.

What though for the present you should be disparaged as factious, rebels, and
traitors, etc. The Lord knows who are most loyal to their Sovereign, and
most faithful to their Savior. Be not dismayed, the time may come when
Christ's true hearted soldiers in England, may be vindicated, justified, and
honored as much as now they are disgraced. Our Brethren of Scotland were
cursed in too many Churches as Rebels, yet afterward by concurrence of King
and Parliament, upon the day of Thanksgiving acknowledged as good subjects.
Remember Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. being condemned, were cast
into the Furnace, v. ^1. their malignant adversaries consumed, v. 22. yet they
preserved in the midst of the fire, v. 24. their God justified, v. 29. and
afterward they promoted by the King, v. 30.

And consider I beseech you, that you may encourage your selves and one another
in the cause of the Lamb, the Court Parasites having obtained the Kings decree
against Daniel, whereby he was cast into the Lions Den; The Lord most admirably
turned the stream, v. 24. the King commanded, and they brought these men which
had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the Den of Lions, them, their
children, and their wives, and the Lions had mastery of them, and brake all
their bones in pieces, or ever they came at the bottom of the Den. Yet zealous
Daniel who loved the cause of God better then his own life, was delivered with
honor to his God, to his Religion, together with his own advantage, v. 26.
27, 28.

Such as have set their love upon God, may in the encouragement of a most
precious promise, consult and pray, do and suffer, Psalm. 92.14, 15, 16.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set
him on high, because he has known my Name, he shall call upon me and I will
answer him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him;
with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. The Lord grant
you the experimental taste hereof in all your exigents. Amen.

FINIS.

