NATVRALL and ARTIFICIAL CONCLVSIONS. Compiled first in Latin, by the
Worthiest and best AUTHORS, both of the famous University of Padua in ITALY,
and diverse other Places.

^nglished since, and set forth by THOMAS HILL, Londoner, whose own Experiments
in this kind, were held most excellent. And now again pulished, with a new
addition of Rarities, for the practice of sundry ARTIFICERS; as also to
recreate WITS withal at vacant times.

LONDON, ^^inted by Jane Bell, dwelling at the East end of Christs-Church, 1650.

A TABLE for the ready finding out of every Conclusion and Receipt contained in
this BOOK.
THe sundry properties of the Adamant-Stone. 1. The secret properties of the
Egg. 2. A Conclusion of an Hasell Stick. 3. A proper practice to make a Capon
to bring up young Chickens. 4. To make any Fowl, of what condition soever the
same be, to have feathers all white. 5. A Conceit to make a Candle burn in
the Water. 6. To make a Woman that she shall not eat of the meats set upon the
Table. 7. A proper secret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone burn without
fire. 8. To make one see fearful sights in his fleepe. 9. To turn Water into
Wine, a proper Sec^et. 10. To make a light or Candle to endure burning* without
going out by any wind, so long as the substance endur^th. 11. How to make
quarters of wood to hang so fast together, that they cannot be shaken asunder
without breaking: or to lay Knives or Tobacco-pipes triangular. 12. How to make
a color like to gold, in understanding this Secret. 13. To make Silver like
any metal, which shall so continue a long time. 14. How to stick an Iron or
Steel Bodkin into the head of either Cock, Hen or Chicken. 15. To make a
Candle that will not go out until the whole substance thereof be wasted. 16.
How to make Iron soft. 17. To make a Sword, Dagger or Knife to cut Iron so
easily as Lead. 18. How to keep weapons clean and fair for a long time. 19.
A very excellent and easy Conclusion to make steel soft as paste. 20. An
experienced and apt Conceit, how to make Hens lay Eggs all Winter through.
21. A rare and strange device how to make thy Chamber appear full of Snakes
and Adders. 22. How to make Letters perfectly appear of the color of Gold,
Copper or Silver. 23. How to make any piece of Iron to appear like Gold. 24.
How to have fresh Roses at all times of the year, sundry ways taught. 25 How
to make Beans and other seeds to grow up within the space of four hours.
26. To make a Candle of Ice, to burn like unto another Candle. 27. How to make
Flesh seem to crawl full of Worms. 28. To make a light in the night time,
that all things about thy Hall or Parlour shall appear in sight both black
and green. 29. How to make Roots to have what proportion you will on them.
30. How to break a stone with the fist, of the thickness of ones hand. 31. To
make an herb to grow, which shall have many savours and tastes. 32 How to
make sundry devices or Arms or such in a Rose, Carnation, Flower-deluce, or
Lilly. 33. To write what you list on a Steel Dagger or Knife. 34 How to break
a new and big Rope with the hands only. 35. How to make white Flowers, to
become red. 36. How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it self, a proper
secret. 37. To make Glue to hold together so hard as a Stone, a proper secret.
38. How to make an Apple move on the Table, a proper secret. 39. To make Roses
and other Flowers that be red, to become white. 40. How to write Letters on an
Egshel, that the same Letters may appear within on the Egg. 41. How to kill
Fleas diverse ways. 42. How to make a Pot of glass not to sink in the water,
a proper secret. 43 To make a Bottle or a narrow mouth^d pot full of water or
milk not to spill or shed forth. 44 How to make a thin Glue, very profitable,
a proper Secret. 45. How to draw a Ring off: being very hard thrust on, and the
finger swelled therewith. 46. To make fruits, as Apples, Pears, Quinces, and
such like, to have what proper form you will on them. 47. A Device how to cut
a Glass; a proper Secret. 48. A rare experiment how to walk on the Water. 49.
How to soften Crystal, to imprint what you list thereon, a proper Secret. 50.
To make a Candle after strange manner to burn, a proper secret. 51. How to
draw many Candles the one after the other, being laid a foot distance, or more
asunder. 52. How to cut an Apple into many pieces without harming of the skin
or paring. 53. How to make a Cup of Glass being set in the fire not to burn.
54. How to make Quicksilver, in a manner so hard as Silver. 55. A pretty
Conceit, to catch Fowls without a Net. 56. How to make a Candle to be
marvailed at, a proper secret. 57. How to see many wondrous and strange signs
in, an Urinall. 58. How to make a Loaf of bread new set upon the Table to leap
off. 59. How to make an Egg fly about, a merry Conclusion. 60. How to make an
Artificial Fire diverse ways: which will seem very marvailous. 61. How to
know a natural precious stone from a counterfeit. 62. How to make a Man appear
on a flame burning, without any harm. 63. A new conceited Conclusion to make a
Chamber appear as light by night as by day. 64. How to make two Dogs fight
together, a proper secret. How to make a Bitch that she shall not after be
desired to be covered with any Dog. 66. How to cast forth any Worm or Snake
entered within the body. 67. An experiment how to make a blown bladder to dance
and skip about from place to place. 68. How to make a Hen run away with great
fear. 69. How to find a person drowned that has been sought for. 70. How to
deal with Iron, many ways right profitable. 71. To light a Candle at the
mouth of an Image painted on the wall. 72. To take fish by night, 73. How to
make that no Dog shall bark at you. 74. A Secret to make Birds come to your
Culver-house. 75. An excellent conclusion how to put an Apple into a Violl. 76.
To put an Egg into a Violl. 77 To make folk seem black. 78 To prove if a
Maiden be clean. 79. To know if a Sick Person shall die or not. 80. To make
Salt Water fresh. 81. To see by night as by day. 82. To kindle fire at the
Sun. 83. To make Flesh cleave in the Pot. 84 An easy way to take Birds. 85.
To make Silke-wormes. 86. How to take away hairs. 17. To fat Hens or Capons.
88. That one shall not be drunk 89. To make a good bait for Fish at all
seasons of the year. 90. A Conceit to make an Egg go up to a Spears end.
91. A Device to make the Pottage run out of the Pot. 92. To make Fish or Flesh
seem raw. 93. To kill Hens or Docks. 94. How to make Coals that they shall
last a great while. 95. Ad capiend^m Pisces. 96. A receipt, whereby a man shall
not be weary of going. 97. To make Yarne and Linnen-Cloath become white. 98.
How to make that a Horse may not go through a Street. 99. To know if a Woman
be with a man-Child or not. 100. A true experiment to ease thy feet for going.
101. To preserve your teeth fair, white and clean. 102. A pretty device to
take Fleas. 103. How to make abundance of Nails, or other pieces of Iron to
hang one upon the other by the Lodestone. 104. How with a Lodestone to make
pieces delivered on a Shovell-board, to be Dewces or Traies at pleasure. 105. A
new Receipt for a Cook, how with one Spit, and with one equal fire to keep
one Capon raw, the second to boil, and the third to roast. 106. To make one
that they shall not sleep, or to sleep when you please. 107 How (by a new
secret) to make a pair of Bowls to lie as near the Jacke as you please. 108.
An excellent experiment, to make Artificial Cloves. 109. A rare device to make
a Walnut, that when you crack it, there shall be Biskets and Carawaies in it,
or a Poefie written in a Paper. 110. A neat Conclusion, whether a Man and Woman
shall marry or not. 111. A Conceit to find whether of the married couple die
first. 112. An approved Perfume. 113. A Conclusion, to find out whether a man
shall win or loose at play. 114. To make Steel or Crystal soft. 115. How to
set a varnish or color on Iron or Steel. How to gild upon Iron or Steel.
117. An Artificial experiment, to cast Sugar into the form of either Birds
or Beasts, in whatsoever posture you are disposed. 118. A very useful Secret
for the making of diverse Inkes. 119. How to make one speak in their sleep,
whatsoever you would demand. 120. An easy Conclusion for the making of
Gumme-Water, 121. How to make a Thief afraid to come into your house. 122.
How to cast a perfect silver color upon any Copper. 123. A spo^tive Conclusion
to make a whole Heard of Cattle to fly from you or follow you when you
please. 124. To make hair shine like Gold. 125 How to make a Receipt that
neither Rat nor mouse shall eat or gnaw of your Cheese. 126. A very easy and
merry Conceit to keep off Fleas from your Chambers. 127. How to make of Paper
a Bird, Frog, or other Artificial Creature to creep on the ground, fly, or
run upon a wall or post. 128. How to make sport amongst Duckes, Hens, or
other Poultrey. 129. An easy way to make discord or peace between any
parties. 130 To make a sportive Conclusion with a Cat, by putting her into a
small Washing bole, in a Pond, River, etc. 131. How to make a pretty
House-sport with a Cat. 132. To make a Cat piss out the fire. 133. How a Wager
may be laid that a Catte shall draw a simple fellow over a Pond, Mote, etc.
134. An approved Artificial Conclusion for making of Past-royall, white. 135.
Of an herb which will make one to be very forgetful. 136. How to drive away
all Enchantments, or VVitchcraft. 137. How you may do to serve a Tapster such
a trick, that he shall not be able to froth his Cans or Jugs. 138. An
experien'd natural means to preserve your house in safety from Thunder and
Lightning. 139. A good drink for Travelers, or such like, when they shall
happen to want Ale or Beer in their Inn. 140. How to keep Beer or Ale from
sowring in the heat of summer, or when it begins to be dead. 141. How to
take Crows, Kites, Magpies or Jack-dawes alive. 142. To hang a Gourd,
Cowcumber, or great Apple up in your House, that you may have Wheat, Barley,
Rye or Pease to grow out thereof. 143. How to find out a Delusion of the
Vinteners, in mixing Water with their Clarets and Whites, or honey with their
other sweet Wines. 144. To preserve a man from being drunk, or make a drunken
Man to become again sober. The Virtue of a rare Cole, that is to be found but
one hour in the day, and one day in the year. 146.
The end of the Table.
NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL CONCLVSIONS.
I. The sundry Properties of the Adamant STONE.
FIrst, if any how the Adamant Stone in his hand, under a Goblet or silver
Bowl, or under a Table, and that the same be moved to and fro in the hand;
then in the like manner will the Iron or Needle lying in the Goblet, or one the
Table, move to and fro and round about. Also the Adamant sometimes with the one
corner will draw Iron unto it, and with the other corner put the Iron from it.
Also if any anoynteth this Stone with Garlike, it does then hinder the Stone
from drawing any Iron or Needle unto it, although the Needle should be laid on
the Stone. And some write that this Stone will also draw Glass unto it, in
like manner as it does the Iron.

II. The secret properties of the Egg
ANd first, the round Egg set under the Hen brings forth a Hen Chicken,
and the long Egg set under the Hen, brings forth a Cock Chicken. Also the
Egg with the shell laid to steep in Vinegar for three days space, does after
so soften it, that any may work the same at length like unto Wax. And the
same Egg afterward laid in the water, does come again unto the former state.
Also, if an Egg be painted with sundry Colors, and the same set under a Hen
to bring forth, she shall hatch a Chicken having such feathers, like unto the
colors painted on the Egg. Also the Egg laid for three days to steep in
strong Vinegar, and after for one whole Month laid to dry again in the Sun,
shall after (by degrees) come to the hardness of a stone.

III. A proper Conclusion of an Hasell Stick.
FIrst, take an Hasell S^cke of a yard long, being new cut off, and cleave the
same just in the middle, giving the one end so cleaved unto thy companion to
hold in both his hands, and the other end hold your self in both your hands
after such sort, that both the inner parts of the stick may look one right
against the other, in the laying down on the ground, and must also be laid
asunder unto the breadth of two fingers, in such sort that they may touch
together at some one place, by an overthwart manner; and within a while after,
you shall see them draw and join together again of themselves. And this
understand, that the stick must be new cleaved soon after the cutting up of
it, for otherwise this stick works not the proper effect.

IV. A proper practice to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens.
FIrst, to do this, take a Capon and pull the belly bare of Feathers, and
after rub the naked place with Nettles, setting young Chickens under him, and
he will then miraculously cherish them, and bring them kindly up. And the
rather, if you accustom to use the Capon the like for a time. For by that
means he is moved the willinger to cherish, bring up, and feed, yea and to
love them so well, as the Hen naturally would do. And the reason of this is,
in that through the pricking of the Nettles, he is thereby the rather desirous
to touch the soft down and fathers of the young Chickens sitying under him.

V. To make any fowl of what condition soever the same be, to have feathers all
white.
TO do this, take the Eggs and roll them in the juice of the herb called
Mouse-eare, or in the herb called Houseleeke, or otherwise in Oil (after the
mind of Cardanus) and after put the Eggs again in the nest, and after the
hatching, their feathers shall grow white.

VI. How to make a Candle burn in the Water.
ANd to do this, take Wax, Brimstone and Vinegar, of each a like quantity;
boil these all together over the fire, until the Vinegar appear all
consumed; and then after of that Wax remaining make a Candle, and you shall
see the proper effect as avove is written.

VII. To make a Woman that she shall not eat of the Meats set upon the Table.
TO do this, take a little of the green Bas^ll, and when one brings any
Dishes of Meat unto the Table, then put the same Herb secretly under one of
the platters or dishes, that she epsy it not and as long as the herb so lies
on the; table, the Woman shall eat nothing of that meat in the platter or
dish, which covers the herb.

VIII. A proper se^ret of the Philosophers, to make a Stone to burn without
fire.
ANd to do this, take Calamit, Brimstone, un^^aked L^me. Pitch, Ceruse, of
each of these three Drames, of Camphora one Dram, Asphaltum three Drammes; all
these make in powder, and put the same in a strong Pot, well stopped, and
after make a fire under the Pot, increasing the same by little and little,
until the powder in the Pot become so hard as a stone; and when you will have
it burn, then rub the same well with a Cloth, and it will burn suddenly:
and when you will put the same out, then spit upon it, and after set the same
in a moist place, and it will go out.

IX. To make one to see fearful sights in his sleep.
ANd to do ^his, take the blood of a Lapwing, and therewith anoint the pulses
of thy forehead, before thy going to rest, and then after in thy s^eepe thou
shall see both marvailous and ^earefull ^ightes, as Vitalis Medicus writes.
Also he writes, that if a man eats in the Evening before his going to Bed of
the herb named Nightshade, or Mandrake, or Henbane, he shall see in his s^eepe
pleasant sights.

X. How to turn Water into Wine, ^a proper secret.
IF thou will convert or turn* Water into Wine, then fill a brass Pot with
the best Wine, ^etting upon the head of the Pot a Limbecke, and distill the
Wine out, and the Lees remaining after the distillation, dry them, and bring
them into fine powder, which equally mixed with the Water, does so cause the
Water to have both the color and taste of the same Wine. And the like unto
this may be wrought and done in a Rose Limbecke. Also a Loaf of Barley Bread
hot drawn out of the Oven, and broken into great pieces hot, and laid so to
soke in good Wine; which pieces when they shall be well s^ken in the Wine,
let them dry in the Sun, and after ^oke of that bread in fa^re water, and it
will after receive both the color and taste of that Wine.

XI. To make a light or Candle to endure burning without going out by any wind
so long as the substance endures.
TO do this, make a week after thy discretion, which infuse in the Oil of
Hemp-seede, and after into molten Tallow, as you would properly make a week or
Cotton Candle, letting the same to hang somewhat until it be cold, then light
it in the like sort as you do a common Candle, and it will not after go out
with any wind so long as the substance endures. And in like sort may light be
made to serve in the night time, if so be that ^ine linen rags be first
soked in the Oil of Hemp Seed, and after dipped into molten Tallow; which so
bound or wrought on a staff^ end, to carry about, or otherwise lying on a
staffes end in an iron plate.

XII. How to make quarters of wood to hang so fast together, that they cannot
be shaken asunder without breaking: or to lay Knives or Tobacco pipes
triangular.
TO make quarters ^old and hang togegether thus without tying, must be done on
this wise. First, lay one of the quarters down, as these two letters A. and B.
do instruct, on the which lay the other quarter, even as these two letters C.
and D. do here represent, and one that C. and D. lay the third quarter, as the
letters E. and F. do here express, and in such sort, that E. and F. must lie
under A. B. And being then thrust hard together they cannot fall away without
breaking, in that A. and B. is stayed and held of E. and F. and E. and F. of C.
and D. and C. and D. holden of A. and B. so that none of them can fall asunder,
the one from the other. Also that place where B. D. E. is holden or stayed
together, and does the like hold together, as by trial of the same shall more
manifestly appear. Also, the more and harder they be thrust rogether, the
longer they continue so hanging together. And a like ^riall unto this may be
assayed and proved, either with three sticks made flat for the nonce, or with
three knives being alike, or three Tobacco-pipes, if they be orderly used.

XIII. How to make a color like to gold, in understanding this secret.
ANd to do this, take of Aloes Hepaticke, and of Salt Niter, of each s^xe
ounces, those grind, and perfectly mix together on a smoothe Marble, or other
hard stone; that being so labored together they can after be separated by no
means, and after distill the same in a Limbicke of glass well luted about,
that you may so draw out all the moist substance that will come. And with this
you may gilde what you list, understanding how to draw this liquor* Also by a
shorter way and lesser pain, may you do the like, although not so perfect as
the other abovesaid, which indeed is right marvailous. And now this is on this
wise: First, take of aloes Hepaticke three ounces, of Rosen six ounces, and of
Oil of Lin-seede well boiled, a pint and a half, these set over the fire in a
pot, and mingle them well together, after strain the same liquor through a
Linen cloth, putting it into a Pot, which you must stop close, and so keep
the same until you have need to gild any thing therewith.

XIV. To make Silver like any metal, which shall so continue a long time.
TO effect this, take half an ounce of Aquafortis, and a scruple of
quicksilver, and a little of the Tarter made of the White Wine, and a little
Salt: These put all together in a Pot or earthen Pan, working and laboring the
same together over hot Imbers, which so done, you may after (with this
composition) make ^ilver like any metal you list, and to continue so a long
time.

XV. How to stick an Iron or Steel Bodkin into the head of either Cock, Hen,
or Chicken.
TO do this, write first these words following, that is to say, Gibell, Got,
Gabel, in a S^role, and bind the same about the Bill of the Cock, Hen, or
Chicken, to color this secret withal; which so done, then pierce the head of
the Bird just in the middle as you can guess, with a very sharp pointed
Bodkin; and after set the Bird down, and you shall see the Bird so lustily
run away from you, as if nothing were sticking in the head, if the Pullet be
big, unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. And now the reason of
this is, in that the head and brain of the Pullet, is divided into two parts
in the bone, and the bone also doubled in in the midst, so that the Bodkin
may easily enter without danger, and of this the brain so pierced, the Pullet
nevertheless lives; which if the ignorant see, they will perhaps believe, and
think that the words only does the same, which is nothing less.

XVI. To make a Candle that will not go out, until the whole substance
bewasted.
ANd to do this, take the best Wax and the purest Brimstone, of each a like
portion, which take and melt together, and after make a Candle thereof, which
being lighted, set the same in a Candlestick to burn. And the same Candle so
lighted, will not go out until the whole substance be spent. Thus Cardanus
writes.

XVII. How to make Iron soft, a proper Secret.
ANd to do this, take the juice of the Hemlo^ke, and quench the Iron in it,
being well beated three or four tims, letting it there remain every time
until it be thoroughly cold. Also Cardane writes, that if you take Oil,
putting into it molten Lead seven times together, and after quench your Iron
red hot into that Oil, for four or five times together, and it will so make
the same soft to work,

XVIII. To make a Sword, Dagger, or Knife to cut Iron so easily as Lead.
OF this thing Hermes writes, if a Sword, Dagger or Knife, being only Iron and
fashioned, and being red hot, if the same be afterward quenched into, the juice
of the Radi^h, mixed with the Liquor of the fresh worms of the ground, or
rather the water of Artely distilled, being before somewhat bruised: such a
Sword, Dagger, or Knife, says he, shall after have such a strange edge, if the
same red hot be quenched four or five times in it, that with the same you may
cut Iron so eas^ly as if it were Lead. Also he writes, that if Steel be often
molten in the Furnace, and be purified, until the sam^ be so white as Silver
in a manner, and then after of the same fashion, graving Instruments with their
edges and points orderly, like as to the Art of graving belongs; which
Instruments being red hot, quenched after into the juice of Radish, and the
distilled water of the worms of the earth, mixed together: Or else with the
water of the worms, drawn through a clean linen Cloth; so that there be so
much of this water, as of the juice of the Radish, and then those Instruments
quenched four or five times, in the abovesaid Liquor; And after will the edges
and points of the Instruments be so hard, that you may cut and grave in any
stone and Iron, so easily as the same were Lead.

XIX. How to keeqe weapons clean and fair for a long time.
ANd to do this, take Barrows grease, common Oil, new wax, Ceruse, of each a
like, these temper togethee very well over a soft fire, until they be thoroughly
incorporated, and after you have so done, anoint the burnished weapon with this
Ointment, and it shall so continue in the same brightness, In secula
seculorum. And there cannot be a greater Secret invented, for the keeping
bright of Weapons thn this is, if these words be well understanded.

XX. A very excellent and easy Conclusion, how to make steel soft as paste.
Do thus: take the gall of an Ox, Man's Urine, Vergis, and the juice of the
Nettle, of each of these take a little quantity, and mix them very diligently
together; then after quench the Steel red hot in this liquor, four or five
times together, and it will after become so soft as paste: and this is a right
proper and necessary secret to be understood of all such Workmen as do any
matters in Steel, as graving and such like, if these words be well marked.

XXI. An experienced Conceit, how to make Hens lay Eggs all Winter through.
TO do this, take the tops of the Nettles, when they begin to come unto s^ed,
and dry them: which so dried, give a little of the same, with Bran and
Hemp Seed mingled together, to your Hens, and they shall every day after lay
you an Egg apiece.

XXII. A rare and strange Device, how to make thy Chamber appear full of Snakes
and Adders.
TO do this, kill a Snake, putting the same into a pan with Wax, and let it so
long boil, until the same be through dried; and of that Wax make a Candle,
lighting the same in the Chamber; and within a while after shall appear, as
though there were a thousand creeping in thy Chamber.

XXIII. How to make letters appear of the color of Gold, Copper or Silver.
ANd to do this, take very clear Crystal, and word the same into
marvailous fine powder, on a Marble Stone, and after mix the same powder with
the white of an Egg, until this be so prepared to write with: and after with
this confeccion, write what letters you will letting the fame dry: and after
rub a Gold Ring, or any piece of Gold on the same letters, and all the letters
shall appear like Gold. And in the like sore may you make the Letters appear
like Silver or Copper.

XXIIII. How to make any piece of Iron to appear like Gold.
ANd to do this, take four butte^ of Rain water* into which put ten Drams of
Roach Alum, and ten Drams of Ointment, of Roman Vitrioll, and Salt Eemme, of
each one an ounce, and a scruple of Coppera^^; and these boil together* after
put therein a quart of Vinegar and* Ta^^er, and ^ommon Salt finely beaten to
powder, of each three ounce^, all these inc^^p^^ate again over a soft fi^e
very well* and after occupy the same which makes a color like unto Gold.

XXV. How to have fresh Roses at all tim^^ of the year sundry ways taught.
ANd first if you will have fresh Roses at any time, so well as in the Month
of May, then gathe^ the buds half o^^n in a manner, in the Evening, when as
the Sun is set and touch them not with thy hand in the ga^hering, but with a
sharp knife properly ga^her them, after lay the Roses upon a Board, letting
them to lie abroad in a fair night, all the night through, and then after have
in readiness a new earthen* Pot well glased within and without* into which put
the former Roses before the Sun be un in in the morning, and stop close the
mouth of that Pot with clay being mixed with Horse dung and flocks, all
tempered well together before, whereb^ no air of the Ru^^ may pas^ or breathe
forth. After, set the same pot into the ground, covering it in dry sand; and
let no moist place be (...) about the same. And now on this ^ase may you have
fresh Roses at any time of the y^r.

Also, take of the Rose-buds in the Springtime, when they begin first to open,
and put those into a green Cane yet growing; cleaving the same by little and
little, until you may handsomely put in those buds; and after (...) that place
with a thread, stopping the same about, that no air breathe out; and after,
cover that piece of the Cane or ^ee^, so ^^und and stopped about, under the
earth, bowing down the same stalk by little and little, that the same break
not; and cover the same well with the earth, letting it there remain so long as
you li^t: and when you be m^nded to have them forth, then cleave the Cane by
little and little, that you spoil ^ot the buds; and after set them in the Sun,
or in lukewarm water, and they shall be open and fair in a s^ort space, as in
the midst of (...).

Also, if you will have dry Roses to become fresh, then take a new glased pot,
and wet the same within with Rose Water, and after shut that pot with the Roses
very close, letting it so to stand for five days, and they shall be fresh.

XXVI. How to make Beans and other seeds to grow up in the space of four hours.
ANd first, to make Beans grow up in an hours space, take the Beans, and put
them in hot oil; let them there remain for eleven days, and after dry them. And
when you will make proof of them, then set the Beans, and go to dinner; and by
that time you rise again from the table, and go look on them, you shall find
them grown up well a s^an high. And the like you may do with Gourds.

And now to make the Gourds grow up in the space of four hours, both with
leaves and flowers, take the seeds of the Gourd, and let them lie in the blood
of a ^anguine young man, and let them there remain for Fifteen days, in a moist
place, and in a pot well stopped; and after take them forth, and let them be
dried well in the Sun: and when you will sow or plant them, then take a
dish-full or two of good earth, and dry the same well; after wet the same with
a little fresh water* and after have warm water, pouring the same upon this
earth until it become sufficient soft, and then plant your seeds in it* and
within three or four hours after you shall have Gourds grown up together
with leaves and with flowers.

And the like may you do with the (...), (...), and diverse other green seeds.

XXVII. To make a Candle of Ice to burn like unto another Candle.
TO do this, make a Candle of Brimstone, which with the Powder of a Coal
smeared about, and after in the Winter time drown the same in water, but cover
the head of it with a paper, and after hang the same at the mouth of some
gutter which droppeth fast, whereby it may so be covered with half a finger
thicknnesse of Ice in the Morning, and after being lighted, it will then burn
unto the wonder of such as shall see the same. Also take pure Wax and fine
Brimstone purified, of Earth alike: melt these together, making thereof a
Candle; and after take the powder of a C^ale finely beaten, and Brimstone the
like in powder, these sift through a Serfe or linen Cloth, and after heating
the Candle, smeare the said Candle about, so long until it have (as it were) a
thick crust round about the same, like unto the thickness of the back of a
Knife: which after cover about the ^ead of it with a Paper, and then hang the
same at the mouth of a Gutter, which droppeth fast, until the Ice cover it
about a finger thick, then light the same, and it will burn like as if it were
all ^f wax.

XXVIII. To make flesh seem to crawl full of Worms.
ANd to do this, take Harpe-strings, and cut them into very short pieces,
which straw upon Meat, being taken hot out of the Pot, and those pieces will
then move and stir about, like unto living worms.

XXIX. How to make a light in the nightime, that all things round about thy
Hall or Parlour shall appear both black and green.
TO do this, take the black juice or ink of the Fish named Cuttle, and the like
quantity of Verdigrease: these mix well together, putting the same into a Lamp,
and dipping a week in that liquor; then light the same, putting out the other
Lights in that room, and then shall all things round about that place, and the
walls also, being white, appear both black and green, unto the marvel of such
as shall see the same.

XXX. How to make Roots to have what proper form you will on them.
TO do this, take such green Roots which ^e big, like as be the Briony-roots,
Radish-roots, and Rape or Navew-roots, and of any of these Roots carve and ^ut
as you li^t, and after put the same into the earth, letting it there so long
remain, until the same carving be covered with a skin. And on such wise may you
make the counterfeit Mandrakes, in fashioning in the Briony-root, as both
Mattheolus and Cardane do write, the form of a man with a Penknife; and
setting the same Root again into the earth, with the head of the Root turned
downward, and a little Barley put under it, which after will cleave and hang
fast into the head of the Root, and appear like unto hair growing out of the
same.

XXXI. How to break a stone with the fist, of the thickness of ones hand.
ANd to do this, first raise the edge of a flat stone upright from a plain
board; or rather, from a big smoothe stone, in such sort, that it stand of it
self, without any under-bearing or help; and after, with thy fist sna^e hastily
or quickly that part standing upright, w^^th falling together fl^^ on the
plain board or stone: does to break in so many pieces. And if the fist be
fr^^^ li^r smi^^en, then the end of the stone touches the boords in the
falling, (...) that stroke in vain: and breaks not the same at that time.
And in like manner may^ Life be eas^ly broken with a small and easy stroke of
the hand, (...) that through the weight of the stone in the falling and help
of the quick stroke, it does of this so lightly break, even as it were done
with the vehement stroke of a (...).

XXXII. To make an herb to grow, which shall have many savours and tastes.
TO do this, first take one seed of the Lettice, one seed of Endive, one of
Smalledge, one of the Ba^ll, one of the Leeke, and of the Parsley, all these
put together in a hole in ^^ich sort, that one ^eede may touch another: but
this remember, that you plant these together in the dung of an Horse or an Ox,
without any earth at all with them. And then after of these seeds shall grow
up one proper herb, which will have so many savours and tastes, as there were
seeds sown together.

XXXIII. How to make sundry devices or Arms of such like in a Rose, Carnation,
or Flower-de-luce, or Lilly.
TO do this, take Sal Armoniacke grind^ the same on a Marble Stone, with fine
Vineg^r, and a little Sugarcandy, and keeepe the same in a narrow-necked Pot or
Glass, and after take your Rose and dress the Leaves, fastening them with red
wax, that they may so lie plain and even: which so done; then take a fine
Pencill, with the licour drawing on the leaves, what proper matter (...) Arms
you list, and after let the same dry of it self, putting upon of the
leafe-gold, or the leaf silver: and after pressing it lightly or gently down
with Bombasse, and that which sticks not then fast, falls of^ in the doing,
and so your work^ will remain ^rim and fair.

XXXIII. To write what you list on a steel Dagger or Knife.
TO do this, take an ounce of Saltpeter, and an ounce of green Copperas; beat
these grossly together, and after put the same into a strong battle of glass,
distilling a water of it; which water use on this wise: First, take yellow or
red Wax, stretching the same upon the Dagger or Knife, so far as you will draw
or write thereupon, unto the thickness of a paper leaf, and somewhat more;
after, draw or write therein what you list, drawing or writing unto the Steel;
and then fill that hollow drawing or holes with the distilled water, which
within a day and a night will have eaten it sufficiently. And the like may you
draw and do on any other piece of Steel.

XXXV. How to break a new and big Rope, with the hands only.
TO do this, take and fasten the one end of the Cord or Rope, either ^ith a
nail driven fast into it, or about ^ strong hook of Iron, and after wind (...)
same three or four times, or of^ner, ^out thy hand, and the other end of the
lord or Rope wind about by the top of (...) Palm, ^etween the forefinger and
he ^umb, that the one part of the Cord ^^y reach unto the Nail, and the head,
(...) other end, unto the bottom of the Palm, by which it must be again wind^^
about, and after that winded again ^nce or twice about. And this so done, ^hen
with a vehement p^uck and force ^^ay in the same part by which it is so
^^der-winded, or r^n with the Cord, for that the substance of the Cord or Rope
which is under, both defend, that the ^^nd can take no harm by the hasty and
^trong pull: and take heed that the utter-^ost fold of the Cord ^^ide not (...)
thy ^^nd. And to conclude, this (...), that in the n^^hty and hasty pluck
together, the one fold of the Cord does to cut the other in sunder* and then
especially, ^hen as that part shall be set soft, which is between the hand and
the nail, and that both the hand be strong, and then pluck outright and quick.
And now if ^

XXXVI. How to make white Flowers, like as the Lilly, white Rose, and such like
to be red.
^ Tubbe, where you mind ^o plant your white Flowers to become re^, and after
they be so planted in the (...), then let them not be watered at any time with
any other water then this, which is made on this wise: Lake water, putting
therein a certain^ quantity of Brasill finely (...) and boil the same unto a
third part, which water after take, and being through cold^ water by little
and little the same Earth* as both at morning and evening and water it at no
time with any other water then this* until you see that the same water first
have taken effect.

XXXVII. How to make a hollow Ring to dance by it self, a proper secret.
TO do this, take a Ring round about hollow, into which put Quicksilver and
stop the same fast that it run^e no^ forth: After h^^re the Ring somewhere in
the fire, or let it (...) the fi^e, and being (...) lay the (...) on a Table or
Stool, which by and by after will begin to dance of it self, until it be
cold again.

XXXVIII. To make Glue to hold together so hard as a stone: a proper Secret.
ANd to do this, take unstekt Lyme, and quench the same with Wine, and beat the
same into fine powder, mixing therewith both Figs and Swines grease, and after
labor them well together: for this (as Pliny writes) passes the hardness of
a stone. Also, take Greek Pitch, Rozen, and the powder of Lyle-stones; these
mix together: and when you will occupy of the same, then heat it over the
fire, and work therewith* for when the same is cold, it holds them together
so hard as any nail. Also, take of Spuma ferri one pound, of Lyle-sheards two
pound, of unstekt Lyme four pound, of Oil of Linseed so much as shall suf^ice
to prepare and work them together: for this Glue is mavelous strong, and
indeed neither fears nor yields to water nor fire.

XXXIX. How to make an Apple move on the Table; a proper Secret.
TO do this, take an Aple and cut the same in the midst, and in the one
half make a round hole, putting therein a black Beetle, and so lay the half
on the Table, and it will then move.

XL. To make Roses and other Flowers that be red, to become white.
ANd to do this, take Brimstone beating the same into fine Powder, which
powder burn on a new tyle-stone, holding such red flowers or Roses over the
smoke of it, whiles it so burns, and they will after become white; and on
this wise you may make your Roses half white and half red, or one leaf
white, and another red, by a cep of paper so cut for the nonce.

XLI. How to write letters on the Egshell, that the same Letters may appear
within on the Egg.
TO do this, take a little quantity both of Galls and Allome, which work
together with Vinegar, and after write with this liquor what you will on the
shell, and that dried, lay then the Egg in Urine, else anoint the Egg about
with wax, unto the thickness of a Paper or somewhat more, and with a fine
bodkin write deep letters, that the holes may be open, and the letters
apparent, into the which holes power of this liquor, and when the same is dried
on the Egg, then sees the Egg until it be hard, and after lay the same to
soke in sharp Vinegar, through the which soking the letters will so pass
through the shell, that the letters may be easily discerned on the Egg after
the shell is pulled off from it.

XLII. How to kill Fleas diverse ways.
FIrst, to gather all the Fleas of thy Chamber into one place, anoint a Staff
with grease of a Fox, or Hedghogge, and lay the staff again where you list
in your Chamber, and it shall so gather all the Fleas by it. Also fill a dish
with Goats blood, and set the same by the bed, and all the Fleas will come to
it round about. And the like will they do by the blood of the Hedghog. Also
take the fat of a Goat, and anoint what you list therewith, and set the same
under your bed, and all the Fleas will gather unto the same. Also take Lupines
or flat beans, and boil them in water with Wormwood, and that water sprinkle
well about the Chamber, and all the Fleas shall avoid that Chamber. Also take
an Apple of Coloquintida, and infuse the same in water, and in that water boil
Wormwood, which cast about the Chamber, kills all the Fleas. And the like
does the Peach leaves, or Vervine, or Coliander boiled in water, and so cast
about.

XLIII. How to make a Pot of glass not to sink in the water, a proper Secret.
TO do this, first fill a glass Pot full of Water, or Wine unto the brim, for
otherwise it sinketh down, and is drowned in the setting of it in the water:
the reason of which appears by this demonstration. Imagine that the Pot be D.
whose neck is A. B. C. that vacant part of it A. B. in that A. B. does bear
above water, through the very air which is contained therein; and the weight
of the glass A. B. draws toward the Center, and A.B. C. can not descend by
straight line down, for that it shall labor in vain. And therefore the
signifier D. voweth in that D. when as wine is set in the water, it resists
not, and therefore A. B. does descend until it come unto the upper face of the
water, but when A. B. shall be in the upper face of the water, the part E. is
then drowned, in that it is the nether part, and all the neck of the pot.

XLIIII. To make a Bottle or a narrow mouthed pot full of water or milk not to
spill or shed forth.
TO do this: take a Bottle or narrow mouthed Pot, and fill the same unto the
brimme, after cover the mouth with a Paper, and then turn the mouth downward
on the mouth of an other Pot, and nothing shall shed forth, as by a trial in
filling the one Pot with milk, and the other may be seen.

XLV. How to make a thin Glue, very profitable; a proper Secret.
TO do this, take the Glue made of fishes, beating the same strongly on an
Anvil, until it be thin, which after lay to soke in water until it becomes
very soft and tender, which will be within five or six hours, and then work
it like paste to make small roles thereof, which when it is like unto paste,
stretch it or draw it out very thin, and when you will work with it, then put
of the same into an earthen pot with a little fair water over hot embers, and
skim the same very clean, and let it so sees a little while, after work with
the same, keeping it still over the hot embers, until you have done with it,
for so it fasteneth and binds the stronger. And in such sort, that it
fasteneth pieces of glass together.

XLVI. How to draw a Ring off, being very hard thrust on, and the finger
swelled.
IF either man or woman has thrust a Ring so hard on their finger, that he or
she cannot draw the same off, through the swelling of the finger: then thread a
needle, and draw the same under a Ring, and wind the thread about the thread
on the other side, and so often wind the thread about, and diligently consider
that the whole joint and part of the finger, lying or being between the joint,
and the Ring, be covered about with the thread, and that no part be ^eene of
the skin, through the close covering of the thread, and even draw the Needle
again under the Ring, and wind the thread like about on the other side, and
that speedily, whereby the Ring drawn and removed on the thread by little and
little may so pass over the joint and come off. But whilst you are in the
doing of this, make no tarriance or delay, for that the finger does so lightly
swell, that without great pain the Ring cannot be drawn off.

XLVII. To make fruits, as Apples, Pears, Quinces, and such like to have what
proper form you will on them.
TO do this, counterfeit on a piece of wood, being in bigness to the fruit
which you desire, what form you will? Or else cut Roman or other fashiond
letters in it, to express (if you list) some proper words; which so done, then
make a mold with water and Chalk, unto the thicknes of thy little finger, the
same part into just the half. And when this mold is dry, which soon dries,
separate then the same from the wood with oil before. And when you have gotten
off the mold from the wood, and parted it in two just halfes, then take the
same mold, and bind it most close unto the fruit, being grown unto his half
bigness, and let it so continue until the fruit be come unto his full
bigness, and then take the mold away, and you shall see the trial of the
former taught.

XLVIII. How to cut a Glass; a proper Secret.
TO do this, steep a thread in Oil and Brimstone mixed together, and compass
the Glass with the thread, in the place where you would have it parted, and
after kindle and light the same, and often do thus, until the place be hot,
and after compass the same with a thread wet in cold water, and it will part
so clean a sunder, as if the same had been cut with a sharp pointed Diamond.

XLIX. How to walk on the Water.
FOr to do this, take two little Timbrels, and hind them under the soles of
thy feet, and at a staves end fasten another; and with these you may walk on
the water, unto the wonder of all such as shall see the same: if so be you
often exercise the same with a certain boldness and lightness of the body.

L. How to soften Crystal, to imprint what you list, a proper Secret.
TO do this, take the blood of a Lamb, and the blood of a Weather, mixing
these together, after take the Crystal Stone, heating it in the fire burning
hot, and then quench it in the blood, which after will become as soft as paste,
then with a copper Print work therein what you list, and after set the same
abroad in the air, and it will come again unto the former hardness.

LI. To make a Candle after a strange manner to burn; a proper secret.
FOr to do this, first make a week of Silk, and infuse the same in the Oil
of Hempseed, and when the week shall be sufficiently soked; role the same in
Snow, until it be of the bigness of a great Candle, whereby it may so be well
wrought together, and after light the same, setting it in a stick, and it will
give the like light as a wax Candle. Also make a Candle of Parpen Stone and
wax together, about the which roll Snow* and the Snow will burn until it be
all wasted. Also take Snow, and mix therewith the powder of Camphire, and of
the same make a Candle, and it will burn being lighted.

LII. How to draw many Candles the one after the other, being laid a foot
distance or more asunder.
FOr this, take Brimstone, Orpiment, and Oil, these labor together, and make
thereof an Ointment, after take so many Candles as may well serve your Table,
which lay on the Table a large foot asunder, and all a row, the one behind the
other as long as you lift to lay them, yea, an hundred may you lay down on
this wise a length, if you lay them strait, then ^ake a long thread, and
anoint the same in this ointment, which after lay along on the Candles, and
after drawing ^he foremost, all will follow by order.

LIII. How to cut an Apple into many pieces without harming of the skin or
paring.
TO do this, take a most fine Needle, with a small thread, and thrust the same
by little and little under the paring, and thrust it in again right against
the place, until you have so gone round about the outside of the Apple. And
this also remember that you thrust the needle through the paring at strait
corners one against the other of the Apple, and this so often do until you
come again unto the first place where you began.

And if so be you would divide the same in six or eight pieces, then draw the
thread again by a like distance, always taking heed to divide the Apple
under the skin, and when you have thus done with the Apple, and the pieces yet
covered with the skin, then draw out the ends of the thread, and you shall
after divide the Apple within without harming of the paring or skin into so
many pieces as you list. And when you have thus drawn out, and taken the
thread quite away, you may keep the Apple so long as you think requis^te.

LIVE. How to make a Cup of Glass being set in the fire not to burn.
AND to do this, take what Cup or Pot of glass you list, and seethe the same
in common Oil, by the space of five hours, and after take it forth, and it
will be then made so strong that the said Cup of glass or pot, will endure the
heat of the fire.

LV. How to make Quicksilver, in a manner so hard as Silver.
ANd to do this, take the strongest Vinegar, and whites of Eggs well beaten
together, and three ounces of quicksilver, unto one of the other: these first
distill together in a Limbeck well luted, and in that distilled water put the
quicksilver, and it will be after so hard, that you may work it with the
hammer. Also take Quicksilver, and wash it in the distilled water of man's
blood, and every time you wash the same, let it dry, and in the end it will
come to be so hard as silver.

LVI. A pretty conceit, to catch Fowls without a Net.
TO do this, take Arsenick, putting the same in water, and in that water boil
wheat, or any other grain, and cast the same forth unto Fowls, and so many as
eat thereof, will not be able afterward to fly away. And take the juice of
Celidone, and infuse wheat in the same, letting it there remain for three
days, after give the same to Fowls to eat, and such as eat thereof you may
after take with the hand. Also take wheat, putting it in wine Lees, and let the
same remain there eight days, after that put it into the juice of Celandine
and horehound, to steep, which so done, then give of the same unto the Fowls
to eat, and such as ea^e thereof cannot fly away.

LVII. To make a Candle to be marveilud at. A proper secret.
ANd to do this, take four ounces of salt Niter, six ounces of fine
Frankincense, three ounces of brimstone, six ounces of Oil, and six ounces
of the Milk of Cataputia; all these beat fine, and mix together, after take
three ounces of Wax, and make them a Candle of altogether, in the end of which
Candlestick, stick deep a needle, and after set the same in a narrow mouthed
glass full of water, and you shall see after what the same will do.

LVIII. How to see many wondrous and strange signs in an Vrinall.
And to see these, take a new and clean washed Vrinall, into which power
either clean water, or other running water, after take the white of a new laid
Egg, and a little Saffron binding it in a clean linen cloth, after that
power a little of the water into a dish, and put the cloth with the Saffron
into it, so long until it have colored it somewhat, and being on this wise,
then beat the white of the egg with this water seven or eight times with thy
finger, and then power the same into the Vrinall, and you shall after see in it
Towers, Castles, Hills, and many other strange sightes.

LIX. How to make a Loaf of bread new set upon the Table to leap off.
TO do this take a Quill, filling the same with Quicksilver, and stopping it
close, thrust the same after into ^ hot Loaf, new drawn out of the Oven, and
the Loaf will by and by dance upon the Table.

LX. How to make an Egg flee about: a merry Conclusion.
TO do this, take a Goose-Egge, and after the opening and cleansing of it, take
a Bat that flies in the Evening, which put into the shell; then glue it fast
about on the top, and the Bat will fly away with it; which perhaps will be
thought of some to fly about in the air of it self.

LXI. How to make artificial Fire diverse ways; which will seem mavelous.
ANd first, to make a flame of fire to pass suddenly out of the mouth of a pot
full of water, take an Egg, making a hole in the head, and draw out all the
substance of the same: which so done, then fill the same with the powder of
Brimstone and un^^ekt Lime mixed to^ether, shutting the mouth with Wax, and so
let it fall to the bottom of a Qu^^tpot full of water, taking quickly your hand
away, and suddenly will issue forth a flame out of the mouth of the pot. And
also, if thou will spit fire out of thy mouth without pain, and to do thee no
harm, take the powder of the Willow-stick, finely beaten and ^er^ed, with the
which ^oyn a little new Silk, making it ^ound up, like unto a ball; into which
^ut this powder, wrapping the silk well about it; and after, put within it,
with the powder, a little fine Flax, and then properly stitch it up round
about: which so done, then cut it open a little on the one side, putting a
quick cole or a light Candle unto it, to set it on fire a little: then put it
again into thy mouth, holding the same softly with thy teeth, and turning also
the part cut inward in thy mouth; and when thou will spit fire out, then hold
the ^all strongly in thy mouth, and blow, and the ^ookers on shall see then a
great flame i^sue forth of thy mouth, and do thee no harm at all. Also, to make
fire fly up in the air, T^^e Towe, and wet the same in Aqua vitae; and after
put fire to it, and blow the same away, which after will fly up in the air,
and burn.

LXII. How to know a natural Precious Stone from a counterfeit.
TO do this, rub the same on Lead; and if it change the color, then it is
counterfeit; if it change not, then it is a natural Stone. Also, if the Stone
have like unto a Bladder within, then it is counterfeit.

LXIII. How to make a Man to appear on a flame burning, without any harm.
FOr to do this, take Brimstone, Or^iment, and common Oil; of these make an
Ointment, with the which anoint thy garments all about, and thy head and hands;
and after light the same, and it will burn all at once, without harm. Also,
take juice of Adders tongue, the juice of March-Mallows, or other Mallows, and
the white of an Egg; these mix together, anointing therewith all about thy
body; and then cast the fine powder of Brimstone on the same, setting it over a
fire, and it will strangely bur^^, and yet neither harm hands nor garments
which shall be anointed therewith.

LXIV. A new conceited Conclusion, to make a Chamber as light by night as by
day.
TO do this, take that part which shines of the Night worm, and bruise them
well; which after set in hot Horsedung in a Glass stopped, and let it there so
stand for fifteen days; and after, distill the same in a Limbeck of Glass, with
a soft fire: the which water so drawn, stop close in a narrow-neck'd Pot of
Chrystal-Glass, and h^ng the same in the entry of the house, and it will so
give a very bright light.

LXV^ How to make two Dogs fight together: a proper Secret.
TO do this, take the Seelifset of the Wolf, and cast the same between two
Dogs; and they shall so long fight together, as they lie there between them:
and when you will have them to cease fighting, then take them away.

LXVI. How to make a Bitch that she shall not desire to be covered with any Dog.
ANd to do this, take Bees, and prepare them orderly, which after give unto the
Bitch with bread, or with meat, and she will not after suffer any Dog to touch
her.

LXVII. How to cast forth any Worm or Snake entered within the body.
ANd to do this, boil the herb Basil over a soft fire, in Vinegar; which so
boiled, give unto the patient to drink, and it shall cast the same up
forthwith. And if the same be a Snake entered within the body, then you may take
writing Ink, and good Wine, mixing them together; which after drink, and it
will cast up whatsoever evil be in the body.

LXVIII. How to make a blown Bladder to dance and skip about from place to
place.
TO do this, put Quicksilver in a Bladder, and lay the Bladder in a hot place,
and it will after skip from place to place, without handling.

LXIX. How to make a Hen to run away with great fear.
FOr to do this, take the head of a Kite, and tie the some a^^ut a Hens neck,
and she shall never ^ease running here and there, until you have taken away the
same from her neck: and when you will take the same from her ne^k, she will
t^en move from you nothing at all.

LXX. How to find a person drowned, that has been sought for.
TO do this, take a white lo^f, and cast the same into the water, n^er the
suspected place, and it will forthwith go directly over the dead body, and
there still abide; by which you may well find the dead body.

LXXI. How to deal with Iron many ways right profitable.
FIrst, to make Iron as soft as paste, take Vitriol, and salt Ni^re, of ^ach
alike, beating these to powder; which after distill in a Limbeck of Glass; and
in this Water lay your small pieces of Iron for a day and a night; which after
cover in (...) dung for fifteen days, and the same will become very soft, like
unto ^aste: and with the same Iron you may make seals, or g^ave, or otherwise
imprint what you list on Iron, so easily as into Earth: and you may also beat
and work the same Iron so easily as Lead. Also, make a Water of Roch-Allom, as
is abovesaid, and in the same Water quench your Iron seven times, and it will
make the Iron so easily break as Glass, and to make powder thereof. Also,
quench the Iron in the dung of an Ox or Cow, tempered. with Honey, oftentimes,
and it will become so soft, that you may work the same like Lead, with the
hammer. Also* take salt Armoniack well beaten, and mix the same with uns^ekt
Lime, and temper the same with cold water, like unto a thick Broth; and in this
water temper the Iron, and it shall after become white, fair, and very strong.
Also, take the juice of the Herb named Palma Christi, and with the same anoint
thy hands; and thou may after handle Iron fire^hat, without harm. And the
like may youd^ with the juice of Hemlock.

Also, take red Arsenick, and red Allom, of each alike; these grind into fine
powder, mixing the ^ame with the juice of Seng^^en, or House-leek, and the gall
of a Bull, and anoint thy hands with the same; and thou may after handle
burning Iron; and anointing thy feet, thou may go on hot Grates of Iron, or
Coals, without any danger.

LXXII. To light a Candle at the mouth of an Image painted on the wall.
TO do this, take and put Brimstone to the mouth of an Image, and take a
burning Candle, and blow it out; an^ ere the week be out, set it to the Images
mouth, and it will burn. And so ye may do against a Glass.

LXXIII. To take Fish by night.
TAke a Lantern of Glass, and put a burning Candle in it, and set the Lantern
on the water, and the Fishes will come to light. Or else take Nettles and
Housleek, and make juice of them, and put it in a Pond, and all the Fishes will
gather there: and if your hands be anointed therewith, you may take them at
your pleasure.

LXXIV. How to make no Dog shall bark at you.
TAke an Herb called Serpentine; and by virtue thereof, no Dog shall bark at
you.

LXXV. How to make Birds come to your Culver-house.
CAst Barley steeped in Honey, where they do feed; and they will gather to your
Culver-house.

LXXVI. An excellent Conclusion, how to put an Apple into a Vial.
HAng the Vial on the twig of an Apple Tree, and put a young Apple in the mouth
of the Vial, and it will grow therein. And so ye may do with Grapes, or other
fruit.

LXXVII. How to put an Egg into a Vial.
STeep the Egg two days and two nights in Vinegar, and then roll it on a Table
softly, and it will stretch as Wax; and then may you put it in the Vial, or
draw it through a Ring.

LXXVIII. To make folk seem black.
PVt Oil-Olive in a Lamp* and put thereto fine powder of ground Glass, and
light it; and all that be above it, will seem black as Egyptians.

LXXIX. To prove if a Maiden be clean.
BVm Mother-wort* and let her take the smoke thereof in at her nose; and if she
be corrupt, she shall presently piss, or else not. Otherwise, take gray Neti^es
while they be green, and let her pi^s on them: if she ^e no Maiden, they will
wither forthwith; otherwise not.

LXXX. To know if a sick person shall die, or not.
TAke gray Nettles, while they be green, and put them into the patients Urine:
and if they remain green, he shall live; and if they wither, not.

LXXXI. To make Salt water fresh.
TAke Clay, and put it into a bag, and strain it through until it b^ clear, and
it will be fresh.

LXXXII. To see by night as by day.
ANoint your eyes with the blood of a Bat; and by this means you may effect
your desire.

LXXXIII. To kindle fire at the Sun.
TAke a very bright Basin, and put a new Looking-glass therein, and set the
Basin in the hottest Sun, and lay about it very dry Towe, small ^hop^ed, and
the Towe will take fire with the heat of the Sun.

LXXXIV. To make flesh cleave in the Pot.
TAke Dwall or Nightshade, and stamp it well, and put it in the Pot with meat,
and the meat will cleave together.

LXXXV. An easy way to take Birds.
PVt Barley in the juice of Rue, and Vinegar, and cast it where the Birds do
haunt or come; and as soon as they have eaten it, they cannot fly: and then ye
may easily take them.

LXXXVI. To make Silkworms.
TAke the brain of a Calf, and put it in a pit of Mader, and let it lie three
weeks, and they will breed of the brain, and ye may feed them with Mulberries.

LXXXVII. How to take away hairs.
ANoint the rough place with the blood of a Bat, after that it is shaven; and
hair shall never grow there.

LXXXVIII. To fat Hens or Capons.
MAke a deep pit in the earth, and make therein a b^d of dung, and a bed of
Nettles; and do so, till it be full, and there keep your Pullen, till the herbs
begin to g^ow; and then let them out: and w^t^in a short while, they will be
very fat.

LXXXIX. That one shall not be drunk.
DRink the juice of Yarrow, fasting, and ye shall not be drunk for no drink:
And if ye were drunk, it will sober you. Or else (...) the marrow of (...)
fasting, and by this means ye shall not be drunk.

XC. To make a good bait for Fish, at ali seasons of the year.
TAke Wheat Flour, and Tallow of a new-slain Sheep, and the glair of an Egg,
and beat them all together, and vait them all therewith.

XCI. How to make an Egg go up to a Spears end.
EMpty the Egg at a little hole, and fill it full of May-dew, and stop the
hole close with a little Wax and Parchment glued, that the dew go not out. Then
stick a spear in the earth, in the heat of the Sun, and lay the Egg by the
Spear, and it will mount to the top thereof, by the heat of the Sun.

XCII. To make Pottage run out of the Pot.
TAke Soap, and cast thereof into the Pot, and it will run over.

XCIII. To make Fish or Flesh seem raw.
TAke the blood of a Wat, or of a Kid, and dry it, and keep (...) from the air;
then cast on Fish or Flesh that is hot, and it will seem raw.

XCIV. To kill Hens or Ducks.
CAst to them the seed of Henbane, and (having eaten thereof) they will fall
down as they were dead.

XCV. How to make Coals to burn a great while.
MAke powder of S. John's Wort; and when the Coals are wasted, and the fire near
out, cast it thereon, and let it lie.

XCVI. Ad capiendum Pisces.
REcipe luce Mullage, vel scolares sortas collectum ci^ca medium Maii. Quando
Luna sit plena, distemperata cum nigro sale, and serva in Olla terrea; and
quando vis occupare, unge manus tuas, and lava in aqua vel loco ubi sunt Pisces.

XCVII. That a man shall not be weary of going.
DRink of the juice of Mugwort, and bear the herb about him, with the herb
Pedelion and Crowfoot.

XCVIII. To make Yarn and Linen cloth become white.
TAke a Herring-barrel, and fill it nigh full of good Ale-dreggs, and stop it
fast: but ye must have a good dish-ful of parcht beans, and put them in a linen
bag, and very hot put them to the dreggs, till they be cool; and shut it fast,
for the space of a quarter of an hour. Then take two pound of Allom, ground to
subtle powder, and cast it therein; and let it lie four days naturally well
closed: then wash your Yarn.

XCIX. To make that a horse may not go through a street.
TAke the guts of a Wolf, and lay them overthwart the Street, and cover them
with earrh or sand, and he will not go that way as long as the guts do lie
there. Probatum est.

C. To know if a Woman be with a Man-child, or not.
TAke a di^h, and put water in it, and then let her milk her breast into the
water; and if it be a Man-child, it will fleet; and if it be a Woman-childe,
it will sink.

CI. An easy Experiment to ease thy feet for going.
ANd to do this, take the leaves of Plantine, and stamp them well, and strain
them, or otherwise preserve the juice thereof, and anoint your feet therewith,
and it will remove away the grief. Also, upon the going of any great journey,
if you put within each of your shoes or boots a leaf of Plantine, it will both
cool and refresh your feet, and likewise make you hold out mainly in travel.

CII. To preserve your Teeth fair, white, and clean.
FOr the fair and neat keeping of the Teeth, take Barley-meal, Honey, and Salt,
and mingle them together, and use therewith to rub your Teeth at sundry times,
especially in the Morning; and (by this means) they shall become very fair and
white.

CIII. An easy Device to take Fleas.
ANoint a Pot with the grease of a Buck, and set the same on your Bed, and all
the Fleas will gather thereunto. Or else the grease of a Goupil, and anoint the
place of the house therewith where ye would have them come, and they will be
drawn thither. Or else take leaves of Dan, and lay them under your Coverlet, or
where ye will; and when they be among the leaves, they cannot come away by any
means.

CIV. How to make abundance of Nails, or other pieces of Iron, to hang one upon
the other by the Loadstone.
FIrst, take a Nail, and knock it a little way into a Bean; then touch the head
with a Loadstone: then put the point of another Nail to that, and it will hang.
Then touch the second Nail on the head, and put to the point of a third: and so
you may do till you come to the ground, let the beam be never so high, to the
great admiration and amazement of all the beholders. This Conclusion, and
natural dependency, may be further amplified and extended with other several
pieces of Iron or Steel, which have only formerly been touched wi^h the
Loadstone; whence comes their contingencie.

CV. How with a Loadstone to make pieces delivered from your hand on a
Shovel-boord, to be Deuces or Trays at pleasure.
YOu must have Pieces of your own, in which you must drive points of Needles,
and then break them off smoothe and neat: Then, at the end of the Table (close
by the Box underneath) cover a Loadstone, and there your Pieces will rest. But
be sure then you do throw as near the Tables end as you can: so shall you with
the more convenience and the less suspicion effect your desire.

CVI. A new Receipt for a Cook, how, with one Spit, and with one equal fire, to
keep one Capon raw, the second to boil, and the third to roste.
PRovide a long Spit, and put thereon three Capons, Chickens, Pigeons, or what
you please, (only three:) then make a long fire, and lay them thereto, and let
one turn the Spit: Then, on that you would keep raw, pour continually cold
water; and on that you would boil, pour scalding liquor; and that which you
would desire to roast, baste it with Butter, and so bread it.

As by this Figure is more plainly declared, thus:

Let A be the raw Capon, whereon pour cold water. Then let B be the boiled
Capon; on which pour scalding liquor. And let C be the roasted; which expose to
the fire, and baste with Butter. This is (being punctually performed) a very
pretty Secret. But be sure you have in readiness provided sever^l pans or
vessels to receive each basting or liquor by it self.

CVII. To make one that they shall not sleep, or to sleep when you please.
IF you lay the heart of a Crow or Bat upon a party you would not have to
sleep, the said party shall take but little rest. Also, the head of a Bat
brought to powder, and bound to the right arm, does the like. But if you put
the same upon the stomach of one that is asleep* it is said that the party will
not awake till it be taken away.

CVIII. How (by a new Secret) to make a pair of Bowls to lie as near the Jack
as you please.
Diverse men peg, and put in peggs of of Lead into their Bowls on their wheeling
or running side: Now in stead of those leaden peggs, kn^ck in points of nails,
or else horse-nail heads very neat and handsome, so that it does not make the
Bowl to rub.

Then in the toe of your shoe (beforehand) put a piece of a Loadstone, and
then throw your Bowl as near the Jack as you can: when the Bowl is out of your
hand, run before it, and with that foot draw before your Bowl; and it will
follow it: then, where you would have it lie, quickly take away your foot, and
there the Bowl rests.

CIX. An excellent Experiment to make Artificial Cloves.
TAke what certain quantity you will of the finest Gum-Dragant, and infuse it
in Rose Water: then strain it, and beat it in a Mortar with a little fine
sersed Sugar: then take of the powder of Cloves, and beat it amongst your
paste; and when it is somewhat stiff, take it forth, and roll it somewhat
small, to the form of Cloves, and likewise cut them to the length of Cloves:
Then take a knife, and cross the heads, and print them with natural Cloves: and
being so in the right form of Cloves, dry them in your Oven or Stove, and serve
them.

CX. A rare Device to make a Walnut, that when you crack it, there shall be
Biskets or Caraways in it, or a Poesy written in a paper.
TAke a quantity (as you think meet) of Paste-royal, white, being beaten with
Gum-Dragant, and mix it with a little fine sersed Cinnamon, and that will bring
your Paste to the right color of the Walnut-shell: then roll it thin; and
having a mold of a Walnut-shell which is in two halfs, print it therein; and
being molded before, put what you please therein, and so close it up, and dry
it; and when you are disposed, present them thus formed to any company of your
friends, or strangers, at your pleasure. This Device will seem mavelous to
all who are not by their own usual practice and profession inured to the
forming and molding of sundry Devices and Experiments of this rare and strange
nature.

CXI. A neat Conclusion, whether a Man and Woman shall marry or not.
TAke the number of the Man's name, and three; and likewise of the Woman's, and
divide them asunder by Nine: if the man's name exceeds the Woman's, they shall
marry; otherwise not.

CXII. A Conceit to find whether of the married couple die first.
TAke the number of the Marriage-day, as what day of the Month it was, and the
number of the Sign that the Moon was in on that day: Then divide these by
Thirty; and if the number remaining be even, the Woman shall die first; else
not.

CXIII. An approved Perfume.
TAke Rose Water and Vinegar, of each a like quantity as you please, whereunto
likewise put a proportionable quantity of Bay Leaves, and Cloves, and let these
boil all together in a Pot, or rather in a Perfuming-pan; and this will yield
about the house a most excellent savor, and sweet perfume.

CXIV. A pretty Conclusion, to find out whether a man shall win or lose at
play.
MArk the name of the Man, and one for the place on the one party, and the
number of the day, and the age of the Moon on the other party: Divide each
number by Nine; and if the Man's number exceed the other, he wins; or else
not.

CXV. To make Steel or Crystal soft.
TAke a quantity of ^nquenched Lime, and as much Sope-ashes, and thereof make a
^y after this manner. Strain it through a Strainer nine times: then take your
Steel or Crystal, and lay it therein for a night and a day, and it will be
soft: if you will have it hard again, quench it suddenly in cold water.

CXVI. How to set a vernish or color on Iron or Steel.
ANd to do this, take the gall of a Calf, and after let your Steel or Iron be
clean vernished over: then take the gall, and stick it thereon with a cloth;
and so let it dry well in the sun, and it will appear plain like a gold-colour.

CXVII. A pretty Device, showing how to gild upon Iron or Steel.
ANd to effect this, take a quantity of Wine-stone, with as much Sal-Armoniack,
and the like of Verdigrease, and some Salt; then seethe all together in
White Wind: then strike all over your burnished metals; let it burn into the
same, and ye may gild thereon with common gold.

CXVIII. An artificial Experiment, to cast Sugar into the form of either Birds
or Beasts, in what posture you are disposed.
TO effect this Secret, take to what quantity you will of the finest Sugar,
being clarified, and boil it until it will roll betwixt your fingers: Then take
your Molds, being double, having lien in water two hours before, and stop them
close with lome or paste, lest the Sugar should come forth: and then cooling
your Sugar a little, pour it into your Molds; and let it so stand, until it be
fully cooled: Then open your Molds, of what form soever; and having taken them
forth, you shall find them alike shaped, according to the figure of your Mold,
whether of Man, Bird, or Beast, etc. So you may, for further ornament,
afterward gild or paint them; and so prefer them to the service of your
friends, at any Feast or Banquet, or otherwise bestow them in gifts, as you
shall find best occasion of their acceptance.

CXIX. A very useful Secret for the making of diverse Inks.
1. For the Golden Ink.
TAke Crystal beaten, and temper it with the white of an Egg, and write; and
when it is dry, rub it over with a gold Ring.

2. For Silver Ink.
Take Black-lead, temper it with Eum-water, and write upon a black paper; and
when it is dry, wipe it with a linen cloth, and it will shine like silver.

3. For Yellow Ink.
Take Saffron and Argil, and temper them with Gum-water, and it will appear a
perfect Yellow.

4. For Green Ink.
Take Verdigrease and Argil, grind them together on a Marble-stone with a
Moller: then temper it, and it will produce a perfect green color.

CXX. To make one speak in their sleep whatsoever you would demand.
TAke the tongue of a water-Frog, and lay it on the head of one that is asleep,
and it causes them to speak in their sleep. Also the heart of a Toad, or
night-Crow, or the fat of a Hare put upon the breast of one that is sleeping,
causes them to tell whatsoever shall be demanded of them: whereby pretty sport
may be raised to the demander and others, when the party is awaked.

CXXI. An easy Conclusion for the making of Gum-water.
TAke to the quantity of a dish-full of fair water from the Conduit, and put
thereto an handful of Gum, and let it stand three days; after which, temper it
well; and when you have occasion to make use thereof, you shall find it
perfect to your desire.

CXXII. How to make a Thief afraid to come into your house.
IT is credibly reported, that the Gall of a Cow, hid in some pri^ie or unknown
place, will fear and astonish any that shall adventure to approach that place.

CXXIII. How to cast a perfect Silver-colour upon any Copper.
TAke of Wine-stone, of Allom, and of Salt, of each a like quantity: then
grind them all together on a Painters stone; and withal, put thereto a leaf of
Silver, and so grind it well with the rest of your s^uff: Having so done, put
it in a Leaden pot of Earth, and therein put likewise your Copper a little
while: then scrape it with a Wire Brush, and you shall see the strange
alteration thereof. But in case it come not, upon the first view, is its
perfect change, you must let it lie a while longer th^rein, till it comes to a
more absolute color of Silver.

CXXIV. A sportive Conclusion, to make a whole Herd of Cattle to flee from you
in a Field, or follow you when you please.
AS thou passest at any time through the Field, having about thee either a Cloak
or Coat; approaching before a Herd of Cattle, suddenly s^oop down forward, and
run backward at them, and they will flee from you, as so many Lambs from a
Wolf: but presently again change your posture, and walk upright, and they will
all follow you with wonder: But do the like again, (as before) and they will
still be startled therewith, till you surcease, and leave them. This you may do
to the fiercest Bull, Cow, or Ox, and daunt them.

CXXV. To make Hair shine like Gold.
TAke Colwint stalks, dry them, and burn them, and with their ashes make Ly,
and wash therewith your hair.

CXXVI. How to make a (...), that neither Rat nor Mouse shall eat or gnaw of
your Cheese.
THe Weasel, the Rat, and Mouse, are at such deadly hatred one with the other,
as that, if you ^ut the brain of a Weasel into the (...) or Curds whereof you
intend to make your Cheese, neither Rats nor Mice will ever came to taste or
eat thereof.

CXXVII. A very easy and merry conceit, to keep off Fleas from your beds or
chambers.
Pliny reports, that if when you first hear the Cuckoo, you mark well where
your right foot stands, and take up of that earth, the Fleas will by no means
breed, either in your House or Chamber, where any of the same earth is thrown
or scattered.

CXXVIII. How to make of paper a Bird, Frog, or other artificial creature, to
creep on the ground, flee, or run upon a wall or post.
TAke a piece of Paper, and cut it with a knife or cizers into the form of the
Figure before, (or what other you please:) then take a little piece of Wax,
Pitch, or other glutenous stuff; and on the backside, where you see the letter
A, place it: Then warm it at the fire and stick thereon a Fly, Beetle, or what
other such small voluble creature you shall think fit: and you shall hereupon
behold a very pretty conceited motion, with content sufficient, and a kind of
pleasant admiration.

CXXIX. How to make pretty Sport amongst Ducks, Hens, or other Poultrey.
FOr the effecting of this Conceit, take a piece of Thread about some two foot
long; and at the one end thereof, tie a little piece of Red cloth, or of some
other color that is light; then, at the other end, tie a piece of the pa^i^^
of Cheese so big as they may well swallo^, and throw it amongst them, with
other meat* and they that take it down, (as one of them will) will thereby make
pretty Sport.

CXXX. A way to make Discord or Peace between any Parties.
MAny learned Authors do relate of the strange operation which is to be found
in the stone of a mad Dog, and how the same, being put into drink, is said to
move a great Dissension between those Parties who shall happen to drink
thereof. The like (on the contrary part) may be averted concerning the validity
which consists in the heart and brains of the Turtle-dove, viz. that if any
do in their drink or otherwise partake of either, they shall thereby be
inclined to peace, and moved with true affection.

CXXXI. How to make a sportive Conclusion with a Cat, by putting her into a
small Washing-bowl in a Pond, Thames, or other River.
BRing forth a small Washing-bowl, and put therein a Ca^: then shove the Bowl
and Cat into a great Pond, the Thames, or other River, (in a calm:) when you
have so done, manage your Spaniels or other Dogs that will take the water, or
be apt to bait a Cat, and you shall have dainty sport: For the Dogs with their
feet will turn the bottom of the Bowl upwards; the Cat being in the water, will
still flee to her little Pinnace she first boarded, namely, the Washing-bowl;
betwixt which will appear a terrible Sea Fight in fresh wat^r.

CXXXII. How to make a pretty house-sport with a Cat.
CAtch your Cat, and take a Hawk^ bell, or the like: then tie a thread to the
bell; and about half an inch from the bell, tie a knot: then bind it fast to
the end of her tail, and let her loose; whereby you shall see pretty sport.

Also you may take Walnut-shells, when the kernels are out, and put therein a
little ^rum of Pitch, and warm them against the fire: then shoe her on all her
four feet: Then put her into a dark room, and she will never rest quiet, but
keep her self so trampling, that the noise thereof, to those that only hear,
not knowing what you have done, will seem strange, and indeed delectable.

CXXXIII. How to make a Cat to piss out the fire.
TAke a Cat* and, with a glove on your hand, hold all her four feet together:
then hold her head fast between your legs: when you have so d^ne, go to the
fire, and hold up her tail, and you shall see her spout forth presently.

CXXXIV. How a Wager may be laid, that a Cat shall draw a simple fellow over a
Pond, Moat, etc.
TAke a long Rope, and tie it about the fell^ws middle very fast: then get the
other end of the Rope on the other side of the Pond: when you have so done, tie
the Cat with a small Packthred to the Rope. Now you must imagine, that the Rope
must reach a good way from the Cat, and put it through some bushes or weeds,
behind which you must have two or three Confederates, (so that the fellow see
them not.) Then, when all is ready, one must whip or beat the Cat, and then
your Con^orts must pull the Rope quickly over: and when he is come to the
shore, they may (...) convey themselves away; for he will have small mind to
eye them.

CXXXV. An approved artificial Conclusion, for the making of Paste-royal, white.
TAke of your finest Gum-Dragant, and infuse it in Rose Water; which (being
dissolved) strain it through a fine linen cloth, and beat it with a little fine
sersed Sugar: it will require beating the longer, because by this means it
grows the whiter: When it is grown somewhat stiff, (as it will do by adding
Sugar unto it) then take it forth, and put it in your Mold very thin, and dry
it in your stow, and you will find it useful for best occasions.

CXXXVI. Of an Herb which will make one to be very forgetful.
SOme do write, that there is a Tree or Herb called Lutos, that if any do eat
the fruit thereof, they shall quite forget all sorrow; nay, it will make them
forget their own Country and birth.

CXXXVII. How to drive away all Enchantments, or Witchcraft.
ALl Beasts do naturally detest the female-Pimpernel, but not the male, as
sundry Authors affirm. And it is credibly witnessed, that this Pimpernel, laid
under the threshold of the door, drives away all manner of Enchantments and
Witchcraft.

CXXXVIII. How you may serve a Tapster such a trick, that he shall not be able
to froth his Cans or Juggs.
PRovide but in readiness the skin of a Red Herring, and at some time or other,
when the Tapster is absent, do but rub a little on the inside of his Pots,
Cans, or Iuggs, and he shall not in any wise be able to froth them for a long
time after, although he would. This is a Conceit to cozen the Tapster, when he
would cozen you.

CXXXIX. A natural means to preserve your house in safety from Thunder and
Lightning.
AN ancient Author recites (among diver^ other Experiments of Nature which he
had found out) that if the herb (...) Syn^reen do grow on the hou^^ (...), the
same house is never stricke^ with Lightning or Thunder.

CXL. A good Drink for Travelers, or suchlike, when they shall happen to want
either Ale or Beer in their Inn.
TAke a quart of good fair Water, and put into the same some half a dozen
spoonfuls of Wine-vinegar; or, for failing, as much Aqua vitae, a little Sugar,
Borage, Time, and Rosemary: then brew them well together out of one pot into
another, and you shall find it a good and wholesome drink, especially in
Summer.

CXLI. How to keep Beer or Ale from sowring in the heat of Summer, or when it
begins to be dead.
TAke Mugwort, and put it into Ale or Beer in the heat of Summer, so that you
put in a quantity according to the proportion of your Drink: for the greater
quantity requires also the greater quantity of this Mugwort.

Otherwise, put a handful or two of Oatmeal, or else of ground Malt, into your
vessel of Ale or Beer, and afterward stir the same well together, and let it
settle a little, and it will become fresh. Or else put into the vessel the
roots of Ireos, Organy, and Barberries.

CXLII. How to take Crows, Kites, Magpies, or Jackdaws, alive.
TAke any piece of raw Flesh, or Liver of a Beast, and slice it into small
morsels, that they may swallow it: then take the powder or slices of Nux
vomica, and (making holes in the flesh) put it into the same, and lay it where
they haunt; and presently after they have eaten of it, they will take to a tree
as soon as they can, and suddenly totter and fall down; where you may with your
hands easily take them: but they will quickly recover again.

CXLIII. To hang a Gourd, Cucumber, or great Apple up in your house, that you
may have Wheat, Barley, Rye, or Pease to grow out thereof.
TAke a Gourd Cucumber, or great Apple, and with a skewer or Butchers prick,
make holes therein a little way, and in those holes put the slender ends in of
Wheat, Barley, or Rye, so that they may be buried: Then take a Packthred or
Brown thread, and tie it cross the Gourd, and so hang it up in your house, and,
in short time, your seed of these several sorts will sprout and grow forth, and
(for the Conceit) seem very rare.

CXLIV. How to find out a delusion of the Vintners, in mixing Water with their
Clarets and Whites, or Honey with their other Sweet Wines.
IF you suspect your French Wines (as Clarets or Whites) to be mingled with
Water, (which you may partly perceive, by the thinness about the verge or brink
of the Glass;) the best way to find out the delusion thereof, is, to put a
Pear pared into the Glass; and if it does swim aloft upon the Wine, it is a
pregnant evidence that the Wine is perfect, and unmingled; but if it sink to
the bottom, then of a certain Water is mingled therewith.

If you likewise have any suspicion of your Sweet Wines, (as Canaries,
Maligoes, etc.) that they should be mingled with Honey; you may find out the
trick in this manner: Take a few drops of the Wine, and pour them on a hot
plate of Iron, and the Wine will soon dissolve, but the Honey remain and
thicken.

CXLV. To preserve a man from being drunk, or make a drunken man to become
sober again.
HE that will preserve himself from being drunk, let him drink, in a morning
fasting, Sallet-oil; or eat the marrow of Pork fasting.

Otherwise, if a man (being drunk) would become sober, let him eat Coleworts,
or drink a good draught of Vinegar, or wash his privy members therewith.

CXLVI. The virtue of a rare Cole, that is to be found but one hour in the day,
and one day in the year.
Diverse Authors affirm concerning the verity and virtue of this Cole, viz. That
it is only to be found upon Midsummer-Eve (being the Eve of Saint John the
Baptist) just at noon, under every root of Plantine and of Mugwort: The effects
whereof are wonderful; for whosoever wears or bears the same about with
them, shall be freed from the Plague, Fever, Ague, and sundry other diseases.
And one Author especially writes, and constantly averreth, that he never knew
any that used to carry of this mavelous Cole about them, who ever were (to
his knowledge) sick of the Plague, or (indeed) complained of any other Malady.

FINIS.
This may be Printed.

July 26. 1688. Rob. Midgley.


