AN OLIVE BRANCH OF PEACE AND ACCOMMODATION, BUDDING In a SERMON preached at
Basingshaw Church, TO The Lord Major Alderman Atkin, together with the
Representative City, Anno Dom. 1645.

On a Day of Humiliation, appointed on purpose to seek the Lord for the
repairing of Breaches, and the preventing of further Differences growing in the
City.

By Thomas Hill B. D. then Pastor of Tychmersh in Northamptonshire.

2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, The testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world.

Zech. 8. 19. Love the Truth and Peace.

Non piget me (inquit Augustinus) sicubi haesito quaerere nec pigebit, sicubi
erro deserere; Quisquis ergo hoc audit and legit, ubi pariter lectus est poigat
mecum, ubi pariter haesitat quaerat mecum, ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat
ad me, ubi meum revocit me, istum ingrediamur simul charitatis viam tendentes
ad eum de quo dictum est quaerite faciem ejus semper. S. Augustini, Epist. ad
Vincentium.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, 1648.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Wollaston, Alderman of the City of LONDON, A
true friend to Religion and Learning, Abundance of Spiritual Blessings in
Christ.
SIR,
YOu who live in the upper end of the world, as you have the highest Truths, so
have you the richest Opportunities of cherishing, and thereby engaging many.
Therein indeed you resemble the Celestial bodies, which by beams and motion
convey a quickening influence downwards, which naturally occasions a reciprocal
reflection upwards. Unthankfulness to God (whether he communicate himself to us
immediately, or mediately by men and means) was an hateful sin, even in the
Gentiles; and the more ingenuous of Romans 1. 21.
the Heathen much decryed it. The unthankful man is a Compendium (...). Arist.
Eth. l. 5. c. 5.
of all evils.

It behooves the party gratified, to be proportionably serviceable to him that
gratified him, and to begin again, says the Philosopher: And that which is
much more, The Apostle Paul charges it upon his Colossians, Let the peace of
God rule in your hearts (scil. peace with one another, which is from God, as
warring and fierceness amongst Saints is certainly from the Devil) to which ye
are called in one body, and be ye thankful: Col. 1. 15.
But alas, where shall I begin to say or do any thing proportionably? (...) cum
insurgunt in cordibus nostris turbidi affectus irae odii vindictae, etc. haec
pax Dci debet instar agonothetae lites dirimere and omnia ad pacem deducere.
Daven. in Locum.


Yet, I hope, I shall never be a Sepulcher to bury by unthankful forgetfulness
the extraordinary and unexpected Kindenesses (I must speak in the plural
number) with which you were pleased to surprise me, when you were Lord Major:
Herein you acted like the primus Motor, who does great things where there is no
praevious preparation in the subject, I being a mere stranger to you.

And now I have a more deep Obligation to make public acknowledgement, and to
provoke the whole University of Cambridge, together with my self (whose
advantage is wrapped up in theirs) to study how to make suitable expressions of
our real thanksgiving.

Your most seasonable intention and execution, of enriching us with a
Mathematique Lecture (a rich Treasure indeed, to us who had but a Four pound
stipend per annum for our Mathematique Lecturer) which is the more noble in
you, and welcome to us, because one little intimation by me to you, did but
meet, and give a vent to your full inclination, which was ready to overflow.
Something to purpose you would do for Cambridge, to advance Learning, only you
waited for a fit occasion, to have it determined to a proper Channel. How
greatly indebted is the Universty of Cambridge to the City of London, That two
of their Alderman should contribute so liberally to maintain such necessary
Lectures? Alderman Adams (to whom the University is much obliged for public,
and I for personal favors) has bestowed means to support a Reader of the
Arabic Mr. Abr. Wheelock a very industrious man, and able man in many parts of
learning.
Tongue, and the other Oriental Languages: The mercy of God raising his heart
thereunto, is the sweeter to us, because we hope it may in time, by Gods
gracious dispensation, be a means of communicating the Gospel, in stead of the
Soul-deceiving Alcaron, and recover many from under Mahomets Impostures, and
other poor seduced souls from under the power of darkness, and hardness of
heart.

Confusion of Languages was a curse, whereby one could not Genesis 11. 7.
understand another how to build their Babel: But such a multiplying of
Languages, that the Apostles might communicate Gospel-secrets to various
Nations, was a great Blessing, and Act. 2. 3, 4, 8.
much advanced the building of Jerusalem, and pulling down of Babylon.

And without doubt there is much of God in it, that now there should be a more
then ordinary instinct, both in young Students to mind such Studies, and
Benefactors to encourage them; and especially when both meet with staggerings
amongst some of the learned Doctors of the Jews, who begin to publish their
doubts and fears, that all this while they have been deluded, and used their
wits and learning to cloud those Scriptures, whose light now begins to shine
into their minds, and I trust in Gods time will into their hearts. 2 Cor 4. 4.


I have it related from very good hands, That a Citizen of London being in
Aleppo, heard a very learned Jewish Rabbi, being sick, call his people
together, who wished them very seriously to consider the diverse former
Captivities they had undergone for the hardness of their hearts, and now one
for above One thousand six hundred years, the cause of which is doubtless our
unbelief and hardness of heart. We have long looked for Note.
the Messiah, and the Christians have believed in one JESUS of our Nation, who
was of the seed of Abraham and David, and born in Bethlehem, and (for ought we
know) may be the true Messiah; and that we have suffered this long Captivity,
because we have not believed, but rejected him: Therefore my advice is, as my
last words, That if the Messiah which we expect, do not come at or about the
year 1650. accompting from the birth of their Christ, then you may know and
believe, That this Jesus is the Christ, and you shall have no other: And within
a little time after this old Doctor dyed.

And now, much honored Sir, that the Lord should ennoble your Spirit to settle
a Mathematique Lecture here, is the more welcome to us, because as Alderman
Adams his worthy Donation will help to polish our Tongues, enable us to receive
and communicate the choycest secrets, Your bounty will help to enlarge our
minds, to consolidate our judgments. Hence it may be it was the Ancient
Philosophers taught their Pupils Mathematiques very soon (as appears by
Aristotle and others) they confirming their Propositions by Mathematical
Demonstrations, the knowledge whereof must be presupposed. And hence the witty
and learned Lord Verulam would have featherheaded young men study the
Mathematiques, there being the most clear and certain Demonstration to compose
and settle young heads.

I hope your new Mathematical Lecturer will read the University such a Lecture,
wherein he may like a good Arithmetician, number the many favers comprised in
this one of yours, and like a skilful Geometrician and Astronomer, take the
Dimensions and Altitude of your Intentions herein, to your perpetual Honor.

And shall likewise expect, That many (by the blessing of the Lord) will
inherit the fruit of this Donation. The wise God has denied you Children, How
can you do better, then make so public a good at least part of your Heir?

I conceive there is much in that of the Lord Verulam, The Essay 7.
noblest works (says he) and foundations, have proceeded from Childless men,
which have sought to express the Images of their minds, where those of their
bodies have failed: So, the care of Posterity is most in them that have no
Posterity.

I know well Children are, in Jacobs language, pledges of Gods grace; yet I
will be bold to tell you what has much satisfied Genesis 33. 5.
my Spirit (my condition herein being yet, by the Alldisposing hand of God, the
same with yours) in the want of such a mercy.

1. This has often been the portion of the dearest Servants of God, to want
Children.

2. No one child of God has reason to expect all mercies; some want Estates,
some want Health, and to some he denies Children.

3. Children are but Temporal mercies, and therefore no infallable marks of
Gods electing love: Here all things come Eccles 9. 2.
alike to all.

4. It is a greater mercy to be a child of God, then to have a child from God.

5. When God denies such a blessing, he can give contentation of Spirit to be
without it, which makes it no affliction.

6. It may be God intends to honor such, in making them the more serviceable,
and liberal to some public uses; whereas for the most part, their minds who
have children are more narrow contracted and confined to make provision for
their Posterity.

If the Lord vouchsafe thus to use you, and draw so from your Spirit this way,
though you want Children; (...) may have such Heirs, as will help to enrich you
(...) of Judgment.

You will please (Honored Sir) to accept this, together with a plain Sermon,
which you would have had made public immediately after the preaching of it. I
now finding it transcribed by him who took it in Characters, and when as I had
often withstood importunate motions to that purpose, yet still being threatened
with the publishing of it, by some who might probably prevail with him, I
rather chose to overlook his Notes (so much as my Ague would allow me) and to
answer your desire and theirs, though it has nothing to commend it, but the
plainness and and peaceableness of it.

And were reconciling Sermons ever more seasonable then now, when there are so
many Incendiaries in City and Country, yea, such as would blow the coal, and
put both the Kingdoms into a new flame? He who is great in counsel, and mighty
in work, go on still (as he has most graciously) to discover and curse such
Plots, and blast such Machinations, according to his gracious promise, Isa. 54.

What ever others say or think, I am convinced, we ought to be so far from
quarrelling with our Brethren of Scotland, that we should rather provoke one
another to bless God for them who first appeared with much zeal in the cause of
Reformation, which awakened us who were in a deep sleep of security, and, I
doubt, should have swallowed that Service Book which they so resolutely opposed.

Again, they came in most seasonably to help us, when we were very low upon the
loss of Bristol.

Lastly, They who are indeed our Brethren in and of Scotland, do now throw
water upon that fire of Contention which so many would enkindle, otherwise
(probably) we might have been in Blood and Confusion before this hour. And
shall we suffer our selves, by the policies of selfish men, to be engaged
actively to join with such who would destroy both us and them, and hazard the
ruin of that Cause, the maintaining whereof has cost so dear. God forbid that
ever we should so much scandalize and weaken the Protestant Churches abroad

There is an old Prophecy in Poly Chronicon, That England shall be overco^^
three times, by Danes, by Normans, and then by Scots; I hope the Scottish
Conquest will not be Military, as from sons of Violence, but only Moral and
Faederal, bringing us under the bond of the same Covenant with them.

You have also an ancient Historian, who says, London is one Niceph.
of the three Cities of the world which shall never be absolutely Conquered. I
hertily wish you may have no other Contention amongst you, but that of the
Apostle Jude, Contend earnestly Ver. 3.
for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints; and striving by an holy
emulation who should most advance to holy Union of Truth and Love, of
Righteousness and Peace, and who shall most magnify Jesus Christ in their
Places and Relations.

This, I doubt not, is the every-days work of you (Honored Sir) and of your
good Lady; wherein, that you may abound yet more and more, he prays, who is
very much

Your Worships obliged Servant, Thomas Hill.
From my Study in Tr. Coll. in Cambridge, May 29. 1648.
THE BEAUTY and SWEETNESS Of an OLIVE BRANCH of PEACE, AND Brotherly
Accommodation.
1 John 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. My little children, let us not love in word nor in
tongue, but in deed and truth.

And hereby we know that we are of God, and shall assure our hearts before him.

For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
things.

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.


THe words themselves are an excellent Sermon, without any further enlargement,
and especially upon such a day as this is, A praying, and An uniting day; And
as Father Latimer began before King Edward the sixth, and his Honorable Council
Anno Dom. 1550. if I should say nothing for three or four hours together, but,
Take heed, and beware of covetousness, it would be thought a strange Sermon to
a King, yet might prove seasonable: So if I should only take the Apostle John's
Sermon, as story relates of him, That when he was grown old, and not able to
preach largely, he was carried into the Assemblies, and he would only repeat
these words, Little children, love one another. Had you no other Sermon this
day, but those words repeated over and over, if God would bless it, that it
might make impression upon your spirits, I hope, though a short and unexpected
one, yet it would prove a sweet, at least a very useful Sermon: Thus the
Apostle begins here, My little children, let us not love in word, The Scripture
speaks many things negatively which are to be understood only comparatively.
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. Not in word only, there is a
great deal of Lip-love: Not in tongue only, there is a great deal of
Complemental-love, where there is no hearty, no Real-love: But how should we
love? In deed and in truth, that men might speak their hearts, and act their
hearts, and express their hearts, in the love they do pretend; this is
Christian love indeed.

Three Arguments the Apostle now here uses, to engage this reality of their
affection one to another.

1. Hereby we know that we are of the truth: All Gods children are such
children as do indeed love one another, they have an instinct that carries them
to it, and this will be a clear discovery that you are of the truth; true
children indeed, no hastards, truly begotten again by the Spirit of God: Hereby
we know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren
(says John) Ephesians. 1. 3, 14. yea Christ goes higher, Joh. 13. 35. Hereby shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another; that is
one very strong argument that might bespeak your mutual affection: To have a
clear evidence that you are Gods children, whatsoever sad news you should hear
upon earth, if you had but a demonstration from heaven of that this day, it
would be worth more prayers and tears, then I doubt you or I shall pour out
before the Lord.

A second Argument is this, And shall assure our hearts before him: Have a
sweet confidence, a stability of Spirit, though there be a sea of trouble
without, yet here will be a bosom-ark, something within that will fix and
settle the soul; there thou may cast anchor, and lie safe, having a
persuasion, having an assurance before God, however unsettled before men, and
ebbing and flowing, and rising and falling, now good news, and then bad news,
that damps, that dashes all; yet do but love one another in deed and in truth,
as you ought to do, and you shall have assurance before God.

A third Argument he uses in the 22. Verse, And whatsoever we ask, we receive
of him: This would be an admirable hint this day, if you and I could gather
such an evidence out of the Word of God, that we may be assured, That
whatsoever we ask, we shall receive: We come to ask great matters, and to beg
great things of God this day, and now to have an earnest-peny from Heaven, that
as sure as you make prayers, so sure your prayers shall be answered; would not
this be an excellent advantage? He tells you upon what terms, If you do but
love one another in deed and in truth. These are the three Arguments to
demonstrate this truth, and quicken to this duty.

But now for the 2. Argument, as the Apostle amplifies it, and indeed those are
the words that I shall insist upon. What a very great advantage now is it to
have this assurance before God (says he) in the 21. Verse, Beloved, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God: If you have clear
hearts before God, if you have not a self-condemning heart, but upon the
examination of your selves, and weighing your own spiritual condition in the
balance of the Sanctuary, you can find your love is weight, it is not
counterfeit, copper love, when you bring it to the touchstone; but you are
indeed taught of God to love one another, you may have confidence toward God;
But on the other side, if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart,
and knows all things: But when you come to examine your hearts, your hearts
cry guilty, and have a self-condemning heart, Oh! woeful is your condition! If
your heart that is dark and ignorant, and knows but a little of your selves, if
it condemn you and fly in your face; you must know you have to deal with the
great God of heaven and earth, Amos 4. 13.
he knows all things; and if your own heart condemn you, you will be condemned
with a witness, with a vengeance indeed, if not only your own hearts, but God
himself should condemn you.

And so you have some short and general resolution of the words, out of these
two Verses.

I have four short Propositions, and I will name them, and upon every one of
them very briefly speak something, as near as I can (as God shall direct)
suitable to this day.

The first Proposition is this,

That the heart of man has a self-condemning, and a self-absolving power.

Secondly, That God knows our own very hearts, yea, and more by us, then we
know by our selves.

Thirdly, If our own heart do condemn us, it is an evidence of greater
condemnation from the All-searching God.

Fourthly, If our own heart do absolve us, it is an evidence of acceptance
before God.

These four Points lie obviously above ground in the words:

And we will begin with the first. I have but a very little to say on that,
only to use it as a Key to open the door to what follows:

The heart or conscience of man has a self-condemning, and 1. Obser.
self-absolving Power.

If our heart condemn us not, that is, excuse us, absolve us; the heart of man
or conscience, for they are doubtless the same Conscientia est judicium hominis
de semet ipso pro ut subjicitur judicio Dei. Isa 5. 3. 3 Cor. 11. 31 Ames. cas.
Consc l. c. 1. (...) conscientia.
here: Conscience (that is) a practical power of the soul, bearing witness of
our selves and actions, according to the knowledge of Gods Law: God has given
to man, not only a power of knowing, but likewise a conscience; a power of
knowing together with God, a recoyling and reflecting upon our own actions, and
upon our estates; the judgment of man reflecting upon himself, as he is under,
and subject to the judgment of God; this is that conscience here, the heart!
The Lord gives us a practical understanding, a practical knowledge, and
principles; does enable us to make an application of those practical
principles, to our own particular case: And hereupon it is, that every man,
though never bred up to be a Logician in the Schools, yet knows how to make
Syllogisms, either pro or con, for or against himself: Every body will be able
to say this, He that walks uprightly, he that lives the life of faith, he shall
be saved; there is a general principle laid down in the word of God; then the
heart does assume, but I through the grace of God desire to walk uprightly, I
am taught to believe on Christ.

In the first proposition, there the heart is (as it were) a book a volumn full
of Principles; Here in the second proposition, there Romans 2. 15.
it is a witness, it bears witness together with God, knows with him, what its
own condition is, or what its actions are; and therefore in the conclusion it
is a Judge, I shall be saved, and I shall be accepted by him: Every one that is
unrighteous, and so lives, 1 John 3. 20.
and so dies, against him God is thus provoked; but I am so and so, therefore
against me: No unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of God; but I am
unrighteous, therefore I cannot come there: Every man or woman, be they never
so ignorant (in this or in any other Assembly) has such a power within them,
God has implanted in their minds such a power, set up such a light in thy
soul, as that thus far thou may be Judge of thy self, and thy own actions,
that thou can either condemn or absolve thy self.

If your heart, if your Consciences have a power of self-condemning, Applic.
and self-absolving;

Then it is good to observe your Consciences, and be sure 1. Use of
Instruction. Conscientia est naturals judicatorium. Ambr.
to make your Conscience your friend, and mind (likewise) as carefully, what
conscience says to you: As you in your City Transactions, I make no question,
but you preserve Records, and what Acts pass, or Orders, or Decrees (or
whatsoever you call them) at your meetings, at your Common Counsel with the
Court of Aldermen, because you would be able to read over the Story, to know
how justly things were done, and what may be a Rule for the time to come, etc.
Let us be as careful to keep Fraenum ante, flagellum post percatum.
the Records of Conscience, and to observe upon every occasion what your hearts
say, what conscience says: For be you sure of this, that Conscience has a
self-absolving, and a self-condemning power; and though it may be now thou
little mindest it, hereafter when thou come to dye, then Conscience will rub
up thy Memory; surely, you lived under such a Minister, and such Items you had
given you, and thus Conscience did work; and sometimes you were almost
persuaded, with Agrippa, and Acts 26. 28.
looked Heavenward, and saw your errors, and were almost persuaded to turn
over a new leaf; but still thou smotherest Conscience. O this will be a sad
thing, if thy Conscience comes in against thee another day, it will not only
be a thousand Witnesses, but a thousand Armies to destroy thee over and over;
Conscientia mill tests mill exercitus
look to it now, how you approve your selves, even to your own Conscience: And
let me here by the way suggest but this to you, Suppose you make a few Quaeries
to Conscience now, and allow Conscience likewise to make some Quaeries to you.

1. Quaere. What stewards have you been of all the Talents that God has
committed to your hands?

A steward (say the Lawyers) is a servant which is wont to set (...).
forth his Masters good for advantage: What says Conscience? Many of you are
crowned with gray hairs, and have been advanced to Places of great Power in the
City, and you have lived upon the goodness of your God, it may be some of you
fifty, sixty years, or more, and a great stock of Talents has gone It is
required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.
through thy hands, and thou should have been trading faithfully for thy God
all this while, what account now can you give to Conscience? Suppose you were
now to keep conscience counting house (for you will allow the word, to speak it
in your own language) I would it were more frequent to keep a Soulcounting
house, as well as for your Estates; a Closet for your consciences, and enter in
there: Thus long I have lived in the world, how much have I lived to my God (we
live indeed so much, as we act for God, and no more) what says Conscience?
There have many men been in the world a great while, and yet Diu suit parum
vixit, says Sen. of one. Stulti semper incipiunt viverc. Sen.
lived but a little while, and it may be scarce begun to live yet, but lived to
themselves, and to their lusts, and to the service of sin, and to the drudgery
of Satan all this while; Give an account of thy stewardship, suppose that were
thy word in Luke 16. 2. What says conscience now? I doubt it would almost
strike some of you dead, while you were alive, if you had but a real Summons
indeed, that this were your last day: O! then Conscience Acts 24. 25.
would work strongly, and make you tremble as Felix, and look pale, if you did
believe that God would break the thread of thy life suddenly: Suppose thou were
a dying man, what says Conscience? Have thou been a faithful steward? Can
thou give a good and sincere account of those Talents that God has betrusted
thee with?

2. Quaere. Let me put this as a second Quaere, what will thou say to thy
conscience,

How have thou answered all thy Vows, and Protestations, and Covenants, and all
the Purposes and Promises that you have made? And can thou say resolutely
with him, Psalm. 56. 12. Thy Vows are upon me, I will render praises unto thee?
Or that thou have done so?

Many of you might say, not only with the Psalmist, Thy Vows are upon me, but
thy Protestations and thy Covenants; yea (it may be) have entered into a curse
to walk in Gods Law, as they in Nehemiah, Chap. 10. 29. The Lord knows that
very great Obligations lie upon many of you: How many Public Fasting-days have
you had? not a day but you did, or should renew your Covenant with God: How
many Communion-days have you had? not a Communion day but you either did, or
should renew your Covenant with your God: Some of you are under some Obligation
or other, and under the Obligation of the Solemn League and Covenant: How have
you answered all these in advancing the glory of God, and the Public good, and
the carrying on the work of a Scripture-Reformation, what says conscience?

3. Quaere. Further, if this Quaere should be proposed, How can you wash your
hands of the guilt of other men's sins? What would you that are the
Representative City say to that now? Suppose that all the Drunkenness, and all
the Sabbath-breaking, and the uncleanness, and the prodigious wickedness that
has been committed in the City, and in the Suburbs up and down upon the
Sabbath Day, and in other places where the Government of the City has had, or
may have influence: Suppose this should all now be laid at your door this day.
I say, the Lord Major, the Court of Aldermen, the Common-Councel-men, and they
that had the Government of the City, they are accountable to God, for all the
Oaths, and Uncleanness, and wickednesses that they have known of, and have
not punished according to the Acts, and Ordinances, and Statutes that are to
this purpose. Give me leave to propound this in the Name of the great God to
your Consciences: What can you say to this? Can you wash your hands in
innocence? I doubt, besides all your by-Oathes that you may be guilty of
personally, and besides all your secret uncleanness, that others may be guilty
of, and besides the Injustice and Profaneness that your own hearts accuse you
of: Do you not think that many of the City-abominations (I mean those common
abominations that are committed by diverse in the City) may be charged upon the
remiss Government of the City, even in a great measure: It is good for you now
to ask conscience, when you come to humble your souls before God, and to deal
more seriously with him; and I hope you will now allow your Ministers to deal
faithfully and plainly with you, as in the sight of the Lord, who will judge
both Minister and people at the great Day; Had you not need pray with the good
old Father, Lord, forgive me my other men's sins?

4. Quae. Let me add this Quaere, what says Conscience of this? Many of you, I
think I may say (if I should be mistaken in the Affairs of the City, you will
pardon one that lives at such a distance) are all Public persons in some
degree, that have any thing to do with the Government of the City: What will
conscience say to this now? What ends, what ayms have you had in all your
public undertakings? Whether has Self or Public been most advanced? What
says Conscience to this plain Quaere? (remember your hearts, your consciences
have a self-absolving, or a self-condemning power) You are most happy souls, if
upon good grounds indeed, your consciences do now absolve you, and can say, O!
Conscience tells me I have been a good Steward; and Conscience tells me I have
observed my Vows and Covenants; and Conscience tells me that I am innocent I
have no other men's sins to reckon for, or at least I have put them off my self,
improving my power against them, or by my repentance for neglect thereof: And
Conscience does not fly in As Paul 2 Cor. 1. 12.
my face, I have had a Public spirit in Public Employment; happy are those
souls (would we had more such:) I am afraid there are but few that can indeed
wash their hands in innocence in this Assembly; but there is a great deal of
work for repentance. Know, that one of these two things will certainly be,
Either you must plead innocence at the day of Judgment, or plead repentance,
otherwise you are utterly and everlastingly undone: Conscience will never
absolve, unless there be an absolute innocence, or a sincere repentance and
faith in Christ, whereby you have made his righteousness yours: How the case
stands between God and you, Let God and Conscience be Judge. I propose but
these things briefly to you, that I may a little awaken you to consider your
selves: You expect I should come to the next Proposition.

You have heard, that the heart of man's conscience has a self-condemning, and
a self-absolving power: The second Observation follows;

That even the great God knows all things; take the words Observe.
(if you please) plainly as they lie: The great God has an allseeing, and
all-searching eye, He knows all things, even more then our hearts and
consciences do know by our selves.

If God has given conscience such a self-condemning power. 2 Use. Caution.
Then

Beware of Baffling your consciences, and of arming them against themselves.
Remember, O remember often with fear and trembling, the sad condition of Judas,
as set forth by Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5.
Matthew: His conscience was awakened when it was too late, then out of horror
ran and confessed his sin, to them who had Verse 3.
employed and involved him; He brought the thirty pieces to Verse 4.
the chief priests and elders, crying, I have sinned in betraying innocent
blood, and they said, What is that to us, see thou to that; did they pity him,
and endeavor to relieve him? no such matter. Note.
(Who would join with the Devils servants, who will leave us in the lurch, when
they have engaged and entangled us! How much Observe, Judas had all the three
parts of Popish repentance, Confession, Contrition, and satisfaction, yet not
saving repentance.
better to close with the servants of the most High, who will be found a
present help in time of need, Psalm. 46. 1.) They rather help to plunge him into
deep despair (which with his own terrified conscience, coming in as a swift
witness and impartial Judge against him) he hangs himself in a sullen
discontent, and with the swing fell asunder in the midst, and all his bowels
gushed out, Acts 1. 18. (which the learned conceive the best Exposition to
reconcile the seeming difference in Matthew and Luke about the manner of Judas
his death (and so he went to his own place, Gualther Harmon, on Acts 1. 18.
Damascen. cap. 13.
verse 25.)

Let me close this Use with a pertinent story out of Damascene, of a man who
had three Friends, one he courted much, and sufficiently gratified the other,
but the third he much neglected; and being afterward Arrested, he sent to his
two friends, whom he had entertained with so much kindeness, to rescue him;
they both refused: and then he was constrained to sly unto the third, his poor
neglected despised friend, or else he must to Prison, and there rot in misery.
Thou have humored Appetite, and pleased Strife (two very deceitful friends) and
abused poor Conscience wretchedly; and yet when God sends any Judge to seize on
thee (unless that be thy friend to God, and speak a good word by way of
testimony for thee) thou will eternally rot in Hellish torments. O be sure to
deal tenderly and kindly with thy Conscience.

This place will clear it, as to the heart, and the most secret turnings of it,
Heb. 12. 13. The word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents
of the heart: Heb. 4. 12, 13. Neither is there any thing that is not manifest
in his sight; but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom
we have to do, to give an account.

There are many people wonder when they come to hear a Sermon, how the Minister
comes to know their secrets; and sometimes you shall have a hearer, as he goes
out of the Assembly, say, This man, though a stranger to me, has read over the
story of my life, and as if he had been acquainted with my bosom secrets all my
time, I had them discovered to me in this Sermon; how comes this to pass? it
may be you will think (...).
some one has been conversing with the Minister, and he has consulted with
some of my friends; and this is the Calumny that is often raised: It cannot be
so; for sometimes a Minister comes to disclose the thoughts thou had in thy
Countinghouse, on thy horseback when alone, it may be thou shall have those
thoughts laid open in a Sermon; how is this? because Note.
the Minister brings the word that is quick and piercing, as the all-seeing God
himself, that pierces between the bones and the marrow, which you know are as
close together as you can imagine; yea and a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart: Where you see God does not only know what we do, but he
knows what we would do, he knows our very thoughts and intents. It is not an
ordinary service that you are now upon this day, an extraordinary Fasting-day,
and Praying-day, and upon an extraordinary occasion for Union: I do not
remember that ever you had such a one for the whole City before; indeed, one
Copy you had from the Honorable Houses of Parliament: what intents you have in
it, whence the motion came, what grounds, what desires, what you aim at in it,
God knows; although your Ministers that come to Preach, and all you hearers
that are present, know not one another's intentions, yet God knows; and whether
only Conscience, and Love to God, and to his Cause, and to Religion; and
whether it be not a complemental imitation, or what ever it be, God knows; and
the more sincerlty there is in it, the more comfort you have in it, for God
knows whatsoever is in the bottom of your Spirits, when you go to Prayer, and
frequent so many services (as there is much pompous Religion in London) as so
many Lectures in a week, and so many Fasting-days; God knows a great deal of
Hypocrisy in the bottom, but you cannot halt before the Sun of Righteousness;
the Lord knows not only what we do, but why we do it, and for what we do it;
what ingredients there are in all our actions, which we cannot always discover,
the heart being deceitful in all things, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9, 10.


2. God knows more by us in our actions, then all the men in the world can
know: For there are many closer-actions, many secret actions in our
retirements; and therefore well might the Apostle say here, God knows all
things, more then all men and Angels: The Devil watches you, and he knows a
great deal; and Angels may be Witnesses of many of your actions; and you may
have Friends that may watch over you, and know much by you; but God knows more
then all the men of the world, set them all together: and that will appear, it
may be, when you come to dye, then you read over a Story of your own life and
conversation, which you had forgotten, and your Minister or others could not
put you in mind of, only God stirs up Conscience, he that knows the heart,
all the issues of it, and the Conscience; knows more by you at that time
enlightened by God, then all men do: And therefore you find that some Murders
have been discovered (I had almost said) in a miraculous way, when they have
been concealed a great while, the Lord in a most wonderful way has brought
them to light: whence is this? God knows all things, all our actions; as, I
know thy works, seven times repeated in the Prefaces to the seven Epistles to
the seven Churches, Revel. the 2. and 3. Chapter.

3. Yea, that God knows more good and evil by us, then we know by our selves,
will appear at the day of Judgment: You shall find this most clear in
Matthew, there at the last Judgment, what says Christ, You fed me when I was
hungry, and you clothed me when I was naked; Come ye blessed of my Mat. 25. 34,
35, 41, 42, etc.
Father: And he says to the other, Depart ye cursed; for I was in prison, and
ye did not visit me, etc. God knows more good by his servants, then they know
by themselves; and God knows more wickedness by wicked men, then they know
themselves. I am persuaded there are Thousands of Prayers some of you have put
up, and you have forgotten them, God knows them every one, and has them all in
a Book of Remembrance; and Mal. 3. 16.
there is many a Sin many of us has committed, that we are so far from
Repenting of them, that we have forgotten them; but Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33, 34.
God remembers all those sins, unless we remember them so in the general, so as
to lay hold upon him by a lively Faith to repent of them, or they will come to
be remembered. Many a tear Job 14. 17.
have thou dropped in thy Prayer, and, it may be, set fall many a six pence to
poor people, and spoken many good words in good Meetings, and a little spark
fired the whole company, and one little grain of seed, came up to many a
hundred; thou have forgotten this, I, but God remembers it, He sees all things.
I must hasten.

And here, if you will give me leave to approve my self to Applic.
God, and to your Consciences, and to deal most nakedly and plainly with you;
and in the Application of this, to put you Use 1.
upon considering your own ways, and laboring clearly, and distinctly, and
impartially now to know your selves. God knows all things, and therefore I
heartily desire, that as ever you would find favor in the eyes of God, that
you may know your own selves so clearly, what is amiss by you, that you may be
brought to humble your selves, and to make your peace with God; God knows how
it is. The counsel the Prophet Haggai gives in Hag. 1. 6, 7. Now says the Lord
of Hosts, consider your ways, set your hearts upon your ways: It is part of our
business to preach to you this day upon a day of Humiliation, to put you upon
this, that you call back your hearts, and set them upon your ways. And I should
think it a great mercy of God, if he would please so far to accept poor
endeavors, as to whisper it into your ears, even the greatest person in the
Congregation, if God would but suggest somewhat to thy soul, to bring back thy
heart to thy ways, that thou might fix upon the story of thy life, from thy
minority, thy younger days, to thy gray hairs, opus diei, this is this days
work, God knows all. I confess, when I was first invited to this Employment, I
thought it had been only a private day, that the Representative City had been
only here present; and possibly I should then have spoke of some things, that
according to the Rules of Prudence will not be so fit now to lay open, here
being a mixed Auditory, and, it may be, some that will make advantage of the
discovery of your miscarriages. But you will give me leave to say what is
seasonable to lead you to know your selves.

And I will first begin with you in your own personal condition, and beseech
you to lay this thought by you, That God knows every man in the Assembly. Lord
Major, Aldermen, Deus est intimior nobis intimo nostro.
Common-Councel-men (for to you I address my self) God knows you in your
greatest intimacy.

In all your personal ways as you are men, as you are Christians; He knows you
in all your Family-relations, what sincerity there is in the bottom of the
heart therein: The Lord knows that it may be some of thy Neighbors may censure
thee for an Hypocrite, and think all thy Religion is but Ostentation, thou
make a great show: If thy heart be sound in Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119. 80.
be not discouraged, go on in thy way, God knows it, and thou need not be
ashamed. And on the other side, if thou be a glosing, complementing
Hypocrite, and if thou do but act a part in Religion, and have got thy tongue
tipped with some Gospel language, by hearing and out-living so many Ministers,
and if thou be still a rotten hearted professor, God knows this, and will
discover thee in due time. And in all your relations God knows what you are,
possibly some may be churlish Nabals to their Neighbors; God knows it if it be
so: Possibly some may be hard-hearted Pharaohs to their servants; God knows it
if it be so: Possibly some may be cruel Tyrants to their wives; God knows that
likewise: And possibly some may be fond Eli's to As 1 Samuel
their Children, indulgent to them in wicked and ungodly courses, and when they
should correct them, and whip them, only ask them, Why did thou so, my
child? O look upon your selves in all your relations, the Lord who with a
candle could search Jerusalem, can search every corner of your souls, and know
how it is with you.

God knows how it is with you in your shops too, whether you have any false
weights and measures, or any dark deluding windows, or any adulterate wares;
and though you will not swear (perhaps) God knows whether you will not
equivocate a lie in your Trading. You will bear with it this day, we come to
Ministers may be plain with hearers, especially upon days of Humiliation Act.
2. 46. 4. They did eat their meat with gladness and singlenes of heart, praising
God Tertul.
speak out, and to discover you to your selves and that as God knows all, you
may know all, and fall down before God when any thing shall be amiss. O where
is that Table-edifying discourse (the best sauce to your meat) The Primitive
Saints had three dishes which made them grow fat. O where is the sanctifying of
the Lords day, that has been in fashion amongst the Saints, yea, in reputation
amongst Christians in all ages. Go then from your houses, from your shops; Come
along to the Exchange; God knows what exchanges you have there, what passions,
what lies, what frothy discourses, what corrupt communication there is, God
knows all this; and how much precious time is misspent there, sometimes upon
the Lords day; God knows all this: And what Malignant Principles are sometimes
propagated there, and how men may leaven one another, even in their conversing
there together, they go and pretend to make bargains, and trade together: I
know not how to speak in a City-language, but others think many times they much
putrify one another, and drive the devils trade there; if there be any such
Design on foot, God knows it, and God grant you may know it.

And when you come to your Offices, it may be some are Constables, or
Sequestrators, or of the Excize-Office, etc. I cannot fall upon all, what
traffiquing there, whether you trade more for the State, or for your selves, or
when you are in public office, God knows it; Oh! and many a poor subject in
England knows it; how many estates have been undone, and in pretense (indeed)
we come to sequester for the Public, but God knows how little of this the
Public has had; it may be here is a fine Cabinet, then such a wife must have
it; and here is a fine There are many Adams still drawn away by their wives to
eat forbidden fruit, Latimer.
Looking-glass, my wife shall have this at such a price; and here is a goodly
bed, my Love shall have that; God and Conscience knows these things: And let
every one knock at their own doors. God knows, I speak in his sight, without
reference to any one, only there are such discourses as these, wherever it
falls.

Furthermore, when you have a great trust committed to you; it may be a
Public Officer in a Congregation will gather a great deal of Moneys, God
knows whether there has not been sometimes corrupt dealing; it may be we will
go and feast, and be thus jolly, and the poor Parish shall pay for all; and
then we will have the Poors Collections, that must make it up; God knows
whether there be not too much over-lashing many times in things of this nature:
But they that are in Office can bear it out, and know too often how to spare
themselves, and lay the greatest load upon the weakest horse. These things are
all naked before the All-seeing God.

And then when you come to make Levies, and gather Taxes, as you have been much
put to it, since these sad Troubles began, whether my Brother, Cousin, Friend
must not be spared, and many times a Parliament friend pinched more then a
Malignant; God knows all these things, and I wish you may enquire into your
selves, and take notice of it.

When you come (then) to your Churches, God knows what carriage there is
sometimes in the Vestry, when you come to choose a Lecturer; I must have such a
one, Oh, he is a friend of my friends; and one man will have him upon another
pretense, it may be because he thinks he will smooth him, and flatter him, and
keep him in generals only; and another man draws off, and will not have such a
man, because he thinks he will come too close; whether your hearts be faithful
and upright in your choyces of such natures: still I must tell you this, God
knows, and therefore do you look to it.

And then when you come to the Administration of the Worship and Service of God
in your Congregations, God knows how patient diverse of you have been at many
pollutions a great Rev. 2. 14, 15, 20.
while, that has cost England very dear; now God knows how ready you were when
the Prelates were in their ruff, to comply with them in their Altar-Prayers,
and Trinckets, and the like; that The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and the People love to have it so: Jer. 5.
29, 30, 31.
All these things are naked before God.

And God knows what a secret antipathy of heart there rises in many of you,
against the work of Reformation, and that there should be now strict
proceedings, and your Congregations purged of all Scandalous and Ignorant
persons, kept from polluting the holy things of God: Oh! how many invectives
are there made; sometimes men inveigh against Presbytery, and sometimes against
Independency, and the plain English of both is, because they cannot endure the
strictness of either, because they shall not have so much elbow room for their
lusts, nor be so impune wicked as formerly; but the Eldership and Minister will
now make a more exact Scrutiny then heretofore, and this makes them angry: And
because they have taken the Covenant, they will not appear against Reformation,
yet they like not this Way, and that Way; because this lies at the bottom, they
will not have a strict Reformation: God knows all this.

Come to the Representative City it self, to the Court of Aldermen, and
Common Counsel, God knows how things are carried there, what unsuitableness
there is many times betwixt your Spirits, and your Places; He sees there is
never a one of you but has a Public Place, and thereby advanced to some
degree of honor; and yet I doubt God may behold in diverse of you a change, in a
Public Place a Private Spirit: Oh! it were a most rare thing, London would be
Jerusalem indeed, and Jerusalem in its luster, if once it were come to this,
That all the Common-Councel-men, and all the Aldermen, when they meet together
in one place, in one Court, if they Publikeness of Spirit the beauty and glory
of the Representative City.
could come there with one heart, and with one Spirit, and all having no other
design but this in common, To advance the glory of God, and the best good of
the City: This were the way indeed to make you a City of Righteousness. But the
Lord knows, it may be many that before they were chosen Common-Councel-men,
sober, grave, active Christians for the Public good, great blessings in the
Wards, in the Parishes where they did live; and then being advanced, grow
Pragmatical, or it may be grow into something like Factions: Some probably on
the other hand, more heavily, and politiquely, and carnally complying out of
self ends: It may be some that have been exceeding active, when they moved in
an inferior Sphaere, when they come up to a higher Orb, are so worldly wise, it
blunts their Zeal. There was wont to be great complaints, he was a good
Minister, but an ill Bishop; he was an excellent Councellor, but a bad Judge,
advancement spoiled him: God knows whether any thing like this lies at any of
your doors; never so good as when Common-Councel-man, to say no more.

Now therefore, wisely and seriously consider, what Spirit acts you in your
City-meetings, what is the greatest Enginier that drives you on, whether it be
the Public good, the Lord knows it: And for the very Government of the City,
whether sometimes you be not more zealous in your own things, and more remiss
in the things of God; the Lord knows this: Whether sometimes you be not more
indulgent to the rich, and pinch the poor most; how much care you may spend and
exercise to maintain your own Privileges, and keep up the Honor, and the
reputation of the City, and it may be too exceeding faint, and flat, and dull,
when it comes to the Sanctification of the Lords day, and purity of the
Ordinances, and magnifying of Christ, there you moved (may be) as if your
Chariot wheels were knocked off: If it be so, God knows it, and will reckon for
it.

(Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Welbeloved) I beseech you now lay your
hands upon your own hearts, and seriously observe your selves, as in your more
private Sphaere, and in your several relations, so especially now, as you are
Citizens indeed, as you are part of the Representative City; what Oaths you
took then, I know not, or whether any or no; but I am sure of this, the very
thing it self carries with it an Obligation, if the City shall advance you to
that Trust, you are bound to be faithful to it, and then to act and move so, as
in all things you may discharge your trust. Now God forbid that ever People
should say thus upon any good grounds, Ship Money was aheav burden, but now
indeed it is only exchanged; there may be as much oppression in some Officers
in raising the Taxes, as ever there was in the Officers in the gathering of
Ship Money: God forbid this should concern any of you, look to it. Others may
say, we were wont to be called before the Council Table, and there we must wait
and attend, etc. and spend much money; and what if some should complain now, it
may be, some Committees in the City, where things are not rightly charged,
pinch as much as ever other places did: How justly, I know not, but I am sure
there are such discourses abroad. Oh! do you seriously and wisely consider, if
there be any such distempers; God knows all these things: You have a Conscience
that is a Witness against you, that will be a Judge; and as you would meet the
great God with comfort at the great Assize, keep a privy Sessions often in your
own bosoms, and set all right and straight there. Oh! let there be a
Conscience-Committee, let there be a Bosom-Committee, let there be a daily, not
Quarterly Session kept there. Great complaints there were heretofore, Such a
one he has a Monopoly of Soap, or Tobacco, Lace, and many things: And many
complain now as fast, Such a one has got a Monopoly of Offices and Places, and
Ingrosses all, and they will thus and thus interest themselves in every thing,
and when they have done all, it may be enrich themselves, and impoverish the
Public. How far these things are to be charged upon any one, I know not: But I
so far love the City, and would have you prize the comforts of your own
Consciences, as to take the advantage of this day, and reflect upon your
selves, and sweep every man before his own door. People that are abroad in the
Country have heard so much of the fame of London, since these things began,
that they come here with great expectation, hearing of the fidelity and courage
of London, and what you have done with your Purses, and how many have ventured
their lives, they have great thoughts of London; but when they shall come up
hither, and in some of your shops, and find as bad dealing here, as in the
Country; and it may be deal with some of their Officers, and find as partial
dealing here as in the Country; You know not what sad reports are cast upon
the City by this means: and if you would have a lovely picture drawn of London,
both at home and abroad, I beseech you, Let it not be in vain that the Lord
has put it into your hearts to meet solemnly this day, but let there be some
good fruit of it: And I hope every man will take some pains this Evening (or
soon after) that he may take some time to view all the Pages of his whole
course, and when he finds any Errata, or any thing amiss, as Lord Major, as
Alderman, as Common-Councel-man, or Officer, that in the consideration of this,
That God knows all things, you will fall down before him, and cry every one
Peccavi, and say, Lord, I know such a thing has been amiss, and I desire all
may be reformed.

And so I have done now with the second ground observeable in the words. I hope
I shall not oppress you.

You have heard that our hearts have a power of self-condemning, and
self-absolving; You have heard likewise, That God knows, the great God has an
All-seeing, an All-searching eye, knows all things, sees how it fares with us:
But then,

The self-condemning of our hearts, is a certain pledge of greater condemnation
from God. 3. Observe.


And why so? Because Conscience is but Gods Agent, it is his Vicegerent in our
breasts. That God might carry all things righteously at the Solemn and great
day of Judgment, he imploys this subordinate Officer here to Record all
things; so then two Books will be open, the Book of Gods Judgment, and the
Book of our Conscience; and they will agree like a pair of Tallies, there will
be a concurrence betwixt them in all particulars: God, he does employ
Conscience, if that condemn thee, and if that be not satisfied, but still
accuses thee, thou may tremble at the thought of it; God himself will
condemn thee at last. For this is certain, Conscience can never Note. There
must be purity in thy conscience to please God, else consciwill never be
satisfied from God by peace.
be satisfied, till God be satisfied in and through Christ; and when God is
first satisfied in and through Christ, then God will satisfy Conscience. I
confess, that many a man's conscience holds his peace, that is in a very ill
condition; but conscience never speaks peace, but when thou art in a good
estate before God through Christ. I doubt there may be many ignorant men here,
that may be bold, Why, Conscience troubles me not, and accuses me not; possibly
it may be so: but thy Conscience may be stupefied, and tongue-tyed, and thou
all this while in a most dangerous condition; thou art asleep in the Devils
Cradle all this time: but when once Conscience comes, not only to hold his
peace, but to speak peace, that is a great advantage to thee: (that thou shall
hear of by and by) But if nothing can satisfy thy Conscience; thou would
appease thy Conscience; and quiet it, and go to Prayer, and it may be come
to Sermons, and yet Conscience nibs thee, follows and dogs thee from place to
place, and thou can not rest: Certainly, if thou have such a mis-giving,
self-condemning heart, it is a clear sign that yet God himself is not at peace
with thee. Sometimes (indeed) a very honest heart may be troubled, and much
perplexed (I would not have any abuse this, for there is a troubled Conscience,
that is yet a good Conscience, because then troubled more for sinning against
God, then for any thing else) But if thy heart do Note.
condemn thee for a wilful living in such a sin, as being obstinately defective
(for here the Apostle speaks principally in this, in wanting love to the
Brethren) if your hearts condemn you in this, that you do not love truly one
another, you can have no solid peace: For I dare boldly say, That there is
never a man or woman in the world that has a good Conscience (though a
troubled Conscience, which may be good, when not comfortable) but they do love
the Brethren, and love the Saints, and they do not live in any gross sin, and
they do not allow themselves in any little sin. But now, if thy heart indeed do
condemn thee, as not having that which is an undoubted evidence of grace, not
Character of a good conscience.
the lowest degree of grace, as, thy not wallowing in any sin, not allowing thy
self in any the least wicked way, which is inconsistent with the truth of grace
thus explained, it is a certain sign, that thou can as yet expect nothing but
condemnation from God.

And therefore (by way of use) Beware, O beware of defiling, Applic.
of polluting your own Consciences; know this, Conscience is Gods servant, and
therefore cannot be bribed, will not be Caution.
corrupted, when once it has received its Commission from him, is awakened by
him: This is the very nature of Conscience (observe it) when other things
wither and dye, then (it may be) Conscience lives: when a man's teeth falls out,
his hair falls off, Note.
and his hearing is gone, and his eyesight lost, that he cannot see without
Spectacles, etc. according to that elegant description of old age by Solomon;
then his Conscience begins to live Eccl. 12.
more vigorously, when he comes to dye. It may be thou that have been an
Atheist and dull hearer twenty or thirty years together, and very little more
edified by all the Sermons thou have heard, then the seat upon which thou
satest; for this, when thou come to dye, thy Conscience will torment thee:
Oh! it is a dangerous thing to out live your Consciences; you may outlive your
Trading, and Honor, and yet overcome that (at least have comfort under it) but
to lose your Conscience; to be Plundered of a good Conscience, it is the worst
of all Plundrings: A man had better lose all the world ten thousand times over,
then to lose God, and Conscience; no enemy like to Conscience (besides God
himself, who does employ and act it) a million of enemies are not so much as a
terrifying Conscience. Divines have a great dispute (many of them) where Hell
should be; truly, you need never make an enquiry, God can make a Hell in any
one of your Consciences: and if God should Hell in a wicked man's conscience.
open any of your eyes at this time, that have lived in wickedness all your
days, and set Conscience on work to torment thee, thou would soon know where
Hell is: If God should but let one drop of his wrath fall upon thy Conscience
at this time, and discover what a secret wanton such a one has been, and what
a private Drunkard such a one has been; if he should in his holy Justice set
this upon thy Conscience, thou would have a very Hell in thy bosom: Before
God advances the souls of the Saints to heaven, he can bring down heaven to
their souls; Note.
even so he often makes a hell in wicked men's Consciences, before he condemns
them into hell.

And therefore I beseech you, because that a bad Conscience is a pledge, an
evidence of greater condemnation; Take heed how you baffle, abuse, break with
your Consciences. Give me leave to propose this short Dilemma to you here;
Instance in any sin, either you know it to be a sin, or not know it: Suppose
Drunkenness, or in Swearing, or in Lying, or in Uncleanness, or in
Sabbath-breaking, or in want of love, whoever you are, you know it either to be
a sin, or you do not know it; if thou do know it to be a sin, what a blind
Atheistical Conscience have thou? if thou do know it, and wilt still live in
it, then what a festred Conscience have thou? This is plain language, but it is
very wholesome; no danger to hear of it now, but if it be your doom to feel it
at that left hand when you come to Judgment, there it will be too late, then
you can never make your peace with Conscience, but art eternally undone. Too
many men do deal with Conscience (very unwisely) as men do with Bailiffs:
Suppose an Officer should have order to Arrest such a man, it may be he will
give the Officer, Bay lift or Sergeant, or what you call him, five shillings,
or ten shillings, and he spares him; but alas, poor man, the debt runs on, and
the Creditor will be at the charge of a new Writ: So, you come to a Sermon, and
it may be a spark of Truth falls upon your minds, and you go home a little
convinced; and what Never expect to compound with conscience, unless you first
agree with God himself
will you do? you will go to some company to rub it out, this Sermon came close
to me: but you have a jolly way in London, it may be get to a Tavern, and drink
away with a pint of Sack Twenty Sermons, and with a pipe of Tobacco blow them
away, so you can wear out those strokes that the Word of God has had upon you:
Oh! what call you this? there is a simple bribing of the Sergeant, but the
grand debt runs on still: And then it may be God will break thy Estate, and
take away Diverse in London have a jolly profession, and too great a latitude
therein.
they wife or children, or thou have lost so much at sea, but thou do comfort
thy self, I have so much left yet, and though you be sad for the present, yet
you may get up again; but then it may be a greater cross comes after this; and
if all this break not thy Conscience, it will break thy neck in the conclusion,
and send thee packing to Hell, out of whence there will be no Redemption:
Therefore, I beseech you consider it, if you have a selfcondemining Conscience,
it argues there is a greater condemnation to be expected: Conscience will join
with God as a Witness and Judge against thee.

Let me add this is the next place, and endeavor to set it a little more on:
Conscience, as it will never be bribed, so it is (indeed) such a worm as never
dies: In Mark 9. 44. you hear there of a worm that dies not, and a fire that
never will be extinguished. I believe some of you know what the head-ake, or
the Tooth-ake, or the Gout, or a fit of the stone means; suppose Eternity
should be added to one of these, if you should have an eternal Tooth-ake, or an
everlasting fit of the Stone, would not this be a sad thing? Add eternity to
an evil, and it Lessius de perfect Divinis, de Dei aeternitate.
makes it infinitely evil: What will it be to have an everlasting stinging
Conscience? a fire flaming in you that never will be extinguished? Oh! this
will be the woeful fruit of such a bad Conscience; and therefore take heed of
such a self-condemning heart.

If our heart condemn us not, then have we considence toward Verse 20.
God.

To have a self-approving, a self-absolving heart before Observe. 4.
God, is a pledge of our acceptance from God.

When thou shall come to read over the story of thy life, and find that God
has wrought this grace in thee, and that God has likewise taught thee to walk
conscionably before him, and to love the Brethren, and to love them in deed and
in truth: Oh! here is a pledge of Gods acceptance of thee; for that argues
indeed, That God is thy God, if he have given thee a self-approving heart, a
self-absolving heart; He has made some impression upon thy heart, something of
himself Note.
there, given something that is an evidence of thy sincerity, and of his
accepting of thee in Christ, and that he owns thee in him, who by his blood
has satisfied Divine Justice for thy sin, and then have thou grounded
confidence toward him: Why confidence toward him? He is thy God: For
doubtless (as I intimated before) if God has given thee a self-absolving, a
self-approving heart, a heart approving thy self to him, according to the rule
of the Word, God is thy God, and God being thy God, thou have confidence in
him, and may go and pray to him, as to the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and in him thy Father, and doubt not but God will hear thy Prayers.

I must forbear the further Confirmation and Explication of this, this being
the third Exercise, and the season hot, and diverse Applic.
ancient Citizens present, whose cheerful patience should not be discouraged.

And the first Use that I will make of it, is this:

You may please to look back to the former Observation, because we shall have
occasion (they having so great affinity) to Use 1.
link them both together a little in the Application: A self-condemning heart,
that argues undoubted condemnation from God; A self-absolving heart does
entitle us to acceptance with God.

1. Take heed then (in the first place) that you do not rest in such a
condition, wherein you have not your own hearts to approve you, and to absolve
you. And not to instance in any other particular, or to return to those
generals we mentioned before, I will keep to that that seems to be the Apostles
intention here principally, speaking of their heart condemning of them for want
of love to the Brethren.

As you profess your selves Christians, take heed that you be not found such,
that your heart does not condemn you, as indeed not loving one another in
truth, not loving one another in reality. This day, it is an Uniting day, as
well as a Praying day (so far as I understood the intent of it) it was in part
as to seek God, so to prevent and remove all Jealousies, and all Obstructions,
or whatever might hinder a happy Union betwixt the Court of Aldermen, and
Common Counsel, that you might preserve Love and Peace in the City. Oh!
therefore, I beseech you, Take heed of any thing that may give occasion to your
own hearts to condemn you.

I have some Arguments to prove (I should be glad if you will be well able to
answer them) that some are in a guilty condition; and that however you may
complement and bear it out, that your hearts are full of self-condemning, even
in this particular, that there is no more true love among you. My two Reverend
Brethren and Fellow-Laborers have commended Stedfastness, Activity and Unity;
Give me leave now to add Mr. Calamy on 1 Cor. 15. 58. Mr. Authony Burges on
Psalm. 122. 3, 4, 5.
a plain Emphasis to all that, to endeavor, as God shall enable me, to drive
this Nail to the head, that it may be fastened in every one of your hearts, and
to put you upon a self-examining, and self-considering, whether you are able
now to approve your selves thus to God, That you have Spirits settled and
composed, and effectually combined in this happy Unity; that this might be the
glory of London, to be a City compact within it Psalm. 122. 3.
self, which was the beauty of Jerusalem.

You have had Zeal for the Public, and have let go your Money (blessed be God
that has put it into your hearts to be so zealous) yea, have lost much Money,
and many of your Friends, and God forbid now you should lose your selves for
want of love.

A great Politician says, That England is a huge mighty Animal; (he tells you
also what he thinks of France and Spain) but he gives this Character of
England, That England is such an Animal, that will never dye, unless it kill it
self: Truly, I hope the same of London, that it will never dye (to speak as
men) unless it kill it self; And I know no more compendious method to stifle
and undo your selves, then for want of love: Oh! what a victory would this be
to the Blood-thirsty Adversaries? when all their plots could not break you, you
should break one another through your Divisions: What a triumph would there be
at Oxford? how would they insult? if that when they could not reach you, you
should bite and tear one another: Blessed be the Lord, that has put it into
your hearts to extinguish what sparks there are, before they come to Gal. 5. 15.
flame.

Too many Citizens (I doubt) herein do over much resemble Some Arguments, that
there is much want of this sweet flower of brotherly love in the Garden of
London.
their Gardens, which are full of goodly Tulyps, beautiful to the eye, but
neither good for pot or smell; so they have a pompous love, a specious
kindeness, in exchanging some Visits and Invitations, but little or no
conference to the good of one another souls, little or no usefulness to one
another in reference to the Public. This appears,

1. Because there is so much Envy in the City: Now certainly Envy proceeds from
want of love; for if you did love one another indeed, you would heartily
rejoice in one another good. Discovering Arguments of want of love.
But, alas, that such a one should have a Place rather then I, and such a one
should have more Power, and more Influence then I have, Oh! many men cannot
bear it: What call you that, truly it is want of love; such a man wants love to
his Neighbor that 1. Envy argues want of love.
he envies; and he wants also love to the Public, if he envies another man
that is abler to do the Service of the Public then he is: were there love to
the Public, if there were any man in the City more active, and fitter for the
work of the Public then he is, he would rejoice that such a one is called to
it; this would argue love indeed.

And then, that there is such a deal of censuring: Oh! that argues defect in
love too. How do Brethren censure and 2. Censuring one another argues want of
love.
tear one another: The Lord knows it is too much amongst Ministers; I wish All
whom it concerns may be humbled for it: And people censure their Minister, and
one another, because they do not all concur and comply; some are of different
Judgments, some are of one mind, some of another; in things of lesser
consequence, who condemn one another, I Will not say as much as Papists and
Protestants, but truly it is in danger to grow to it: As it is abroad now,
Lutherans and Calvinists both pretend to be for Religion and Reformation, but
it is a cause among them, that Religion much suffers, and the progress of the
Gospel is very much obstructed by it. Take heed of censuring; this is want of
love.

Further, here is another Argument, not only from Envy, 3. Oppressing others
argues want of love to them.
not only from Censuring, but indeed from your oppressing others in Taxes and
Levies, and such kind of ways, when things are carried on with extreme
partiality, and with unjust indulgence to some, and severity unto others; what
call you this now? it is want of love: Because, did thou love thy Neighbor as
thy self, thou would do nothing to thy Neighbor, but what thou would have
thy Neighbor do to thee, in the same posture, in the same juncture and
concurrence of circumstances, which our Savior makes the rule and expression of
real love. Mat. 7. 12.


And then likewise, when you are so selfish in your designs and undertakings,
and so far prefer your self ends before the Public; this is still want of
love. The Apostle was a Prophet, in 2 Timothy 3. beginning, In the last day shall
be perilous times; Why? Men shall be lovers of themselves. I know not any
thing that this day does endanger the Parliament party in England, the City
party, those that are hearty for God and his Cause, then the predominancy of
self-love; for men now love themselves better then the Kingdom, better then the
Church, better then the State, love their own Estates, their own advantages
more then all; and this exposes them to abundance of snares, because they love
themselves inordinately; O therefore, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
steer all Public Councels even according to this very rule. I beseech you,
you that are of the Court of Aldermen, and Common-Councel-men, consider, That
the less self-love you Note for Citizens.
bring with you to your City Transactions, the better you are to manage all
your Affairs: Oh! it were a happy thing, that every time you come to appear in
your Senate House, you could leave self-love behind you, and say, I will go
now, not as such a man, and such a man, and as I am at home, but I Will go as one
of the City, and as one of the Representative Body; and if Self would step up,
and put in it self, Stand by Self, the City must first be concerned, and the
Public must first be minded: The Lord put this into the hearts of them in
Government, thus indeed to prefer the Public good before themselves; we
should have more cause to rejoice in that, then for any Victory that ever yet
the Citizens had: And I am confident in this, If the Lord would help
Parliament, and Kingdom, and Assembly, and Armies to conquer this Bosom Enemy,
this that leads the Faction here, this predominant self-love, it would be a
greater cause of triumph, then ever we had yet for any Victory (though we have
had many glorious ones) as long as ever you are full of Envy, or full of
Oppression, or full of Censuring, or full of Selfishness, it argues you want
love.

Then give me leave in the next place, to bespeak your love; it is the work of
the day: and as you would Approve your selves indeed to God, and as you would
have confidence in God, and as you would expect acceptance to God, and would
be welcome to the Throne of Grace, when you go to Prayer, and find favor with
God; Then, labor to take out this Lesson, get a self-absolving heart in this
particular, that you are sure you have love to the Brethren.

If there were more love amongst all persons of quality; if Common-Councel-men,
and those in place of Power, did often meet together, not to nourish prejudices
one against another, nor foment differences, these things would be signs of
love, and incentives to it: You have heard sometimes talk of differences
between the Houses, Oh! what a sad thing were this? as that the House of
Commons, may be, should have some jealousies of the Peers, and the Peers
sometimes of the House of Commons; if there have been any such jealousies, or
misunderstandings, then you know Public things have not gone on so well: And
now truly men begin to speak of the City, you had better hear of it in this
place, then from other men who love you not: There is difference so between the
Court of Aldermen, and Common-Councel-men, and now they begin to dispute about
their Privileges, and there grows Debates and Contentions: The Lord, if it be
his good will, hear our Prayers this day; Oh! that there might be a spring
opened this day, that might wash away all prejudices, and jealousies, and
suspicions, that both Court and Council might be made one, in reference to the
Public. I know not any thing would joint you, and soder, and cement you
together better then a Spirit of Love: If there were but a Spirit of Love to
act the Common Counsel, and to act the Court of Aldermen, you would sweetly
embrace one another. And I beseech you take a word (though it be out of my
Sphaere) yet from a Minister of the Gospel take it, who desires to be faithful
to your souls, and to the City; It is plain and wholesome advice: When there was
some small divisions betwixt the Houses of Parliament, Oh! says one Citizen,
would to God they would leave disputing of their Privileges, and join against
the Common Enemy: And when there has been any clashing in the Armies, Oh!
would the Commanders would let them alone till they come to their Garrisons in
the winter, and then let them debate it, only now let us go on vigorously
against our Enemies. I beseech you (worthy Citizens) do so too: If there be any
disputes about your Court and Council, let them sleep; God forbid you should
betray or prostitute any of them, only be so wise, as to take the seasonablest
time to dispute them, if your disputing of them in this nick should set all on
fire; when you should join purses and hands, and all against the common Enemy,
for you to fall all to pieces amongst your selves, surely you will disparage
your selves, and deceive the world, that expects so much wisdom, and zeal, and
courage, and faithfulness to the public Cause from London, that if now
jealousies and misunderstandings should creep in, and scotch the wheel, how
would people be frustrated of their expectations, that have such thoughts of
London! Be pleased to suffer these things to enter into your most serious
thoughts, and make it appear that love does spring, and that you do not
over-love your own Privileges, or any thing that is your own, when it comes in
competition with the Public. I love every man should love that that is to be
loved, in a due proportion, according to its share, with reference to Christ
and his Cause: There are now great things on foot, and (blessed be God) we have
heard some welcome news this day; Is not this very comfortable, to hear good
news in our worshipping of God, and seeking for peace, as if God would
encourage us to pray, and endeavor more after it? What news is it? Seven
thousand persons in Taunton relieved, where were so many precious souls of the
country got together, and that now when Heaven was besieged with Prayers of
the Saints, God himself has been pleased to be overcome, and to raise the
Siege of the Enemy. Here is rich encouragement for the Psalm. 14. 6.
Generation of true Jacobites.

You have an Army on foot, and a great deal of prudent and speedy care is
required, to consider how it should be maintained, and how to manage these
public Affairs most dexterously: when there comes a winter season, when there
is no such time, nor need for such vigorous motion in these Enterprises, then
dispute your Privileges, and then write Books, and then debate what is between
the Common Counsel and Court of Aldermen; and then enter as serious and
deliberate consultation as you will, and set the saddle upon the right horse,
and let every man have his due; but take heed now you let not in your Enemy, by
making a Breach amongst your selves; when you keep Court of Guards that costs
you so many thousands a year, neglect not the Guard of Peace and mutual Love:
If you give up the City, this famous flourishing City, into their hands by your
division, how will Rome, and Spain, and all the World (that are Enemies to the
Cause of God) Triumph, that they have got a Victory over those that they
counted their greatest Enemies to their grand Design? Where is your love,
worthy Citizens! get this self-absolving heart: The Lord grant this may be such
a Uniting day, that this Church may be a grave to bury all the beginnings of
Division, and that you may go out of Gods presence glewed together. And why
should not we expect it, though there be so many defilements that may provoke
God to blast all, he being a God hearing Prayers? but all our work is not done
when our prayers are done; we will observe what good fruit is come of our
prayers: Psalm. 65. 2.
you will have it in every Book, The City had such a meeting, and they met
together; And for what? some will say, For to humble themselves, and to pray to
God that they may be United: Then the next week the question will be, What news
of it? how we bless God for it? If now the Court of Aldermen, and
Common Counsel might join as one man, then they should conclude, God has heard
their Prayers, and accepted of their endeavors: Certainly, this is a blessed
design, and most proper for this days work.

It will not be unseasonable to acquaint you with the prudent carriage of
Menenius Agrippa, who by a witty Parable (no wonder our blessed Savior
delighted so much in Parables, they being so prevalent to persuade) composed
the great Distractions amongst the Romans, The chief Magistrates were agrieved,
Livy Histor. Decad. 1. Book. 2.
thinking the inferior Commons had too many advantages: Upon a time (says he)
the other parts of the [natural] body complained, that all their care and
industry must be to make provision for the stomach, whilst that sits quiet,
enjoying the pleasures we bring in to it: Hereupon the other party combine to
tame the stomach by hunger, so that the hand would not reach meat to the mouth,
nor the mouth receive it, which suddenly brought the whole body to an extreme
Consumption: Hence the necessary use of the stomach did most clearly appear,
that as it received strength from their care, so by a reciprocal influx, it
helped to convey nourishment to the whole. There needs no Application. In the
Body Politic, whether of City or Kingdom Note.
, mutual Help is as necessary, let it be as acceptable, lest by your jarring
you breed a Consumption in the whole.

Give me leave to subjoyn that which I thought of, that in that holy man Ezra,
He proclaims a Fast at the river Ahava, Ezra 8. 21, 22, 23.
that they might seek of God a right way for themselves and their little ones,
and all their substance. And what was his reason? A very pious and worthy one,
and I would gladly think so well of this worthy City, that you had as good a
reason for this meeting; Because we (says he) had spoken to our King, saying,
The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; but his power and
his wrath is against all them that forsake him: I was ashamed to require of the
King a band of soldiers, and horsemen to help us against the enemy. Here was a
good man had spoke great things of his God; and now, if he should have gone and
desired the King, that was but a Heathen, Pray Sir, let us have Note his care
not to scandalize an Heathen Prince.
a party to guard us through the Countries, what would he have thought of them?
what, have you said such great things of your God, that he has sought you out,
and what need you my men to guard you? He thought this would blemish them, and
therefore he seeks God, that they might find out a way, and not bring a
scandal upon him, nor give advantage to the bloody enemy that stood watching
against them.

I hope this was the Design of the Right Honorable, the Lord Major, and the
Common Counsel, and whoever were Agents in this business; you begin to be
afraid of some heartburnings, and jealousies, and you thought if it should
break out, how the enemy would triumph, therefore you will seek God by Fasting
and Prayer, for a right way to unite you: The Lord be blessed for putting this
into your heart; surely the Scriptureway is the best way to conquer all those
jealousies that have been among you, namely, Real love one to another: and, I
hope you will have a good fruit of this days prayer, in some more sweet harmony
of Spirits, in the two grand points of Difference amongst you;

1. In Church matters. 2. In Civil matters.
First, for your love in Church matters; there is a great deal of need to
preach this Doctrine to London, you have had much said to you already
concerning unsetledness in Opinion: truly, it Unity in Church matters lovely.
is a sad condition, yet I would not have people discouraged at it, for it was
always so in Reformation-time, in Luthers time and others: As when the Sun
arises in its luster, there are drawn up a great many fogs and vapors; so it
is when the Sun of righteousness arises, there is a great deal of liberty many
take to themselves, and many wanton and wicked Opinions there are abroad; there
are in Gods garden many unsavory weeds (The Lord who knows it remove them)
What should we do? Oh! let us improve our utmost, how we may bring things to a
happy Union. And for the Church, I have but two things to say to compose all
the Differences:

1. You have heard already many seasonable hints concerning Unity, and the
commendation of it; it is a work like God himself, to be a Reconciler: God was
in Christ reconciling the world 2 Cor. 5. 19.
to himself. And I desire heartily, that Ministers, and Citizens, and that all
ranks and sorts of people now were Reconcilers: There are too many
Incendiaries, and I fear, not any one plot of the Jesuits against the City more
then this (and I am confident, if you have Jesuits among you) you have their
Plots and Designs, to raise up Divisions about Church Government. A great deal
of talk there is about Differences between those you call Presbyterians, and
Independents, and men use all their wits to heighten the Difference to the
utmost; and if there were but half the pains to lessen, as there is to greaten
them, I should hope we might join heads and hearts, and all without any such
formidable breach, as some think. What do people think? Surely, one party must
be absolutely broken, if God gives us the wisdom and sobriety that is from
above, first pure, and then peaceable; Jam. 1. 27.
I hope there may be a Reconciliation of both, without the Destruction of
either: Certainly (though there are, I believe, extremities on both sides) yet
both too good to be confounded. Now I would have this considered, many drive on
this Design, and God knows there is a great deal of animosity in it; some
Presbyterians, I doubt, would be willing to destroy the Independents, though
they ruin the Public in it; and, I fear, some Independents would do so for
them: Doubtless, there is too much rigor at least in diverse of both parties.
There is no such difference, for ought I know, between the sober Independent,
and moderate Presbyterian, but if things were wisely managed, both might be
reconciled; and by the happy union of them both together, the Church of England
might be a glorious Church, and that without persecuting, banishing, or any
such thing, which some months are too full of. I confess, it is most
desirable, that Confusion (that many people fear by Independency) might be
prevented: And it is likewise desirable, that the Severity that some others
fear, by their rigor of Presbytery, might be hindered; Therefore let us labor
for a prudent Love, and study to advance an happy Accommodation. Give me leave
to say two or three words to this purpose:

Is it not a sad thing, that when learned and godly men (for so you will allow
them to be on both sides) I say, First, When they shall agree in the Doctrinal
part, in the Confession of Faith; I hope you will hear of little or no
difference there.

2. When they shall agree likewise in the Practical part of Worship; for that
you see by the Directory, all have in a manner agreed there.

3. When they shall agree likewise in the Destructive part; as, for the ruin
of Episcopacy, and removing of the Ceremonies, and all that trash.

Here are Three wonderful steps: and I believe five years ago here is not a man
in this Congregation, did expect so much as God has already granted us: At the
beginning of the Parliament God has done much for us in Reformation
our hopes were but low, and modest in regard of what we have; and yet because
all things come not upon a sudden, we wrangle, and quarrel with this man, and
that man, yea and with Divine Providence; but let us look back and see what a
Sea we have got over, Your Common Prayer book is gone, and your Ceremonies and
Episcopacy has its deadly blow.

4. Nay further, Another step is taken, and if any thing reconcile disputing
Brethren, this is a very probable means, and it has past the Assembly a long
time since, and the House of Lords a great while ago, and now has almost the
House of Commons (the Vote of it, as I hear, is past) namely, An Ordinance,
taking care for removing of Offenses in Congregations, of ignorant and
scandalous persons, who sad the souls of the Saints by their Divisions, that do
pollute the things of God; and that there shall be an intrinsecal power in
every Congregation to keep away such: What would you have more? if this be
granted, set aside the word Independency (for who will own it) it is a word
neither fit for Creatures; nor for Churches, we must be all dependent, an
absolute Independency is no where to be allowed; but call it Classical and
Congregational. Let us begin in the right method, Every Congregation shall have
its power, there shall be a Pastor, and Elders with him; and they shall have a
power put into their hands, to enquire who are Scandalous and Ignorant in every
Congregation, and they shall An happy step.
be kept from joining with them at the Lords Table, till they have expressed
Repentance, and got competent knowledge, and given satisfaction for their
scandal: And this is the thing the Independents contest for, and the
Presbyterians concur in; and if this be granted, is not this a good step
toward our Agreement? But this is not all.

5. Here is somewhat more to gratify the Presbyterians: When there are six
Congregations, more or less, though every one has an intrinsecal power within
themselves, to order things that are proper and peculiar to them, yet they may
at least advise with a Presbytery; and things of difficulty and consequence,
and common concernment; may be transacted with Common Council: As suppose a
Congregation have Excommunicated a person, it may be he finds himself
agrieved, he will complain to the Consociation of those neighbor Churches in
that Classis: Those Ministers will require the Pastor and Elders of that
Congregation, to give them an account why they did Excommunicate such a man?
they will hear it; and when they have heard it, they will find they did well
or ill; and if well, they will confirm it by an accumulative power, and say,
You have done nothing but what we would have done, and according to the word of
God; and here this confirmation comes to strengthen This accommodation is much
nearer then when this Sermon was preach*
what the Congregation has done: or if they find they did in rashly and
incogitantly, and out of a spirit of Revenge, they will say, You are bound to
reverse this, and you had no ground to Excommunicate him; you must recall the
Sentence, otherwise we cannot maintain fellowship with you: Will not here be a
sweet communion together, and blessed conjunction, and (I hope in time) a
mutual satisfaction; and certainly, it were the best complexion, and would show
a great deal of real love. I wish I had such a temper, as not to be so far
obliged to an Independent, as to close with him in any thing that is not good;
or so far engaged to any Presbyterian, to close with him in any thing that is
evil* but that we might with unprejudiced minds and severe consciencces, go
with them both, so far as is agreeable to the Word of God, and here is a
blessed way to a firm and lasting Union. And now, that this is not my own
notion and fancy only, for I know nothing I have said, but is past the
Assembly long since: For in the Paper, if I very much mistake not, concerning
Accommodation, the power of Excommunication is so allowed to the Congregation,
and that he may be Excommunicated by the Eldership therein: What would you have
more? Here you do harmoniously link Congregational and Classical power both
together. And therefore away with all Jesuitical plots, to dis-sever those that
are in such a probable way of union. And indeed there were Two things that made
the breach at first: Why did our Brethren go to New England, or abroad to other
places? Either there was a form of Prayer imposed, or Ceremonies they could not
submit to (blessed be God that is turned out at the back door, and there is a
Directory for that) or else mixed Communion: And the Parliament has given
evidence, That they will take order for such a power in every Congregation,
that an honest heart may with much comfort there sit down, and so purge and
refine his own Congregation, that he may with much honor to Jesus Christ, and
satisfaction to his own Spirit, enjoy the Ordinances of God in much purity.
Therefore I beseech you, stir up your selves, and one another, that we study
how to lessen the differences, and do not give way to passionate dividing
invectives. God forbid there should be any such in Pulpits, or in Corners, or
at Tables: Let us all get reconciling Spirits, and speak uniting language in
our Sermons, in our Books, and upon all occasions, that if it were possible,
they that are like to dwell in one Heaven hereafter, might now dwell in one
England, and might serve God together, and jointly advance Jesus Christ
together in the purity of his Ordinances, and live in sweet peace and harmony
together.

2. As in Church matters, so I beseech you, show your love likewise in all your
Transacting Civil and City Affairs, manage all your meetings, your negotiations
with love: Let all things be done in love (says the Apostle) walk in love, not
only now 2 Cor. 16. 14. Ephesians. 5. 2.
and then, and speak in commendation of love, you hear a Sermon of love, with
approbation, but do all things in love; give counsel in love, and reprove in
love, and tax with love; and whatsoever affairs you are to transact, let all
still be done in love: when you come abroad in the streets, there you will meet
a company of poor people, a proper object for love of pity; it were worthy of
this City to consider them: Your love is principally intended, I confess, to
the Saints, to wit, a love of complacency; but love all, love your Enemies:
Love should be of a diffusive overflowing disposition. Love poor fatherless
Children, so as to bring them up at School (blessed be God that you have so
many Schools here) and I hope the City will both wisely and conscionably still
cherish those Nurseries, that young Children may be bred to write and read, and
so afterward bound Apprentices, that they may be set to good Callings, or
fitted for the University, those that have parts; and look to your poor. It
would be a project worthy the wisdom of this renowned City, that is famous for
many things: Many decayed Tradesmen there are, and many that were good
housekeepers before, are fain to go a begging, which they do in the night,
being ashamed to appear in such an habit in the day: What if you should choose
some one relieving Committee, to One Committee for relief of the poor, very
desirable.
give money to the poor, you have many ready enough to take it from them; to
consider how you should find out some way for the poor to get their living,
men, women, and young children, men that live idly; better give six pence to
one that is working, then a penny to one that is idle; you nourish them up in a
trade of temptation, as long as you nourish them up in idleness. For maimed
Soldiers, let your love be shown to them; but for those that are able to work,
take care to keep them in employments, but rather relieve them working, then
begging: This were like true love indeed, a Fasting-days fruit; as you heard a
word of it before out of Isa 58. what a Fast would you have? such a Fast as
there the Prophet speaks of.

Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the hands of wickedness,
Isa. 58. 6.
to undo the heavy burdens. If the Lord would show that mercy, to crown this
Fast with success, that if you have been too rigid in your Taxes, too severe
and partial in your Impositions, and put it into your hearts to loose burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and ease every yoke, though you have sown in
tears, you would reap in joy. Psalm. 126. 5.


And is it not likewise to deal bread to the hungry, and that Ver. 7.
thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house; when thou see the
naked, that thou coverest them; and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh: Here is work for a Fasting-day; and say not, It is putting up so many
Prayers, and hearing so many Sermons: The question is, whether you will act
over your own Prayers, and the Sermons you have heard this day; will you take
out this Lesson? Oh! how will you rejoice the heart of your praying servants,
the hearts of all the City, the wrestlers with God, if such visible fruits
should spring up after this days exercise, it would encourage others to creep
into corners upon such an occasion.

Here is a special promise, Then shall thy light break forth as Verse 8.
the morning, and thy health spring forth speedily. There is darkness in the
City, in many particulars now, sad darkness: how know you but light may break
forth, the light of comfort every way, if there were such real fruit of your
Fasting and Prayer: Then shall thy health spring forth speedily, God might heal
your Distempers, and keep you in a heavenly frame. It is an admirable mercy (I
am glad God has brought it to my mind) which the God of Salvation has shown
to you since the Parliament began, in preventing the Plague from spreading in
London, one Troop of destroying Angels might have done that, that all the
Armies against it could not have done: you have had it lingering amongst you
diverse Summers, but God has given you the comfort of your Prayers, and health
has sprung exceedingly in the City; and who knows but God may give an answer
to this days poor prayer, and health may yet spring more plentifully: And thy
righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. I know when the City has been called Traitors, and black aspersions
have been cast upon you; The Lord knows how to clear you; and no doubt, stick
close to God, and watch with your prayers, and act as well as pray, and trust
God with your credits and liberties, doubt not but he will make it good: Thy
righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. The Lord may take away your dross, and your tin; whereas it was said
of Jerusalem, Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water;
therefore 'Ile ense me of Isa. 1. 22, 34, 16
mine adversaries, says the Lord. There was a sad Judgment upon Jerusalem,
when they were in a degenerating condition: But I hope God will rather turn
your dross into gold, and you will become a City of righteousness, where God
might delight to dwell, and to show himself: Let there be but a good fruit of
your Fasting and Prayer, and see what you may expect from God.

And further, Then thou shall call upon me, and the Lord will answer; Here is
the very thing in my Text now, you have this Ver. 9.
confidence, if you love one another, that whatsoever you ask you shall
receive: Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, then shall thou cry,
and he shall say, Here I am. Oh, what an obligation is here, that you have Gods
ear, and Gods hand thus far engaged to you; that if you do but Fast and Pray as
God requires, no sooner shall you go and pray, but God shall say, Here I am;
What, would you speak with me? Would you knock at Heaven gate, I Will be found of
you! And truly, you Londoners have often had proof of it, most gracious returns
of your prayers: what evils others have felt, you have heard of; what miseries
poor Bristol and Exeter have undergone, that you heard related, and it has
been coming toward you; when some have come and told you, The Kings Army are
coming to London, you have gone to your prayers, and God has said, They shall
not come hither, but here I am. And yet this is not all, though I think I have
said enough (if God please to concur with weak pains, to leave somewhat upon
your, hearts) yet here is more behind: If thou take away from the midst of
thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity. Be
pleased, worthy Citizens, my Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and Common Counsel,
consider, what speaking of vanity there is, what putting forth of the finger,
where is any yoke that pinches poor men? Let us enquire in all our
transactions, where is any Tax pinches any man? where is any Sequestration
Officer that oppresses any man? And what follows?

And if thou will draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy Ver. 10.
the afflicted. Many a hungry soul there is come up to London, and blessed be
God that you have the honor to be the Grainary now for a great part of England;
and the Lord has with advantage paid you, for you have relieved others with
your Temporals, and they have relieved you with their Spirituals: For their
lights that did shine forth in the West, and in other Note.
parts of England, are now translated and set up in London. And whereas you
have been kind, and let others your Tables, and afforded them comfort, God
will not be behind hand with you: Go on therefore and show more love; then
shall thy light rise as in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day.
What, encouragements are here one upon the neck of another? Thy light shall
rise in obscurity; it lies sometimes under a cloud, and darkened with
aspersions, and it is true, a great disparagement lies upon you: Here are (say
they) many Heresies and Schisms, and the like, and I know not what to call
them: if you would take out but that lesson I named before, if the Lord would
be pleased to unite them they call Presbyterians and Independents, I doubt not
but the rest would in time fall off and wither; Anabaptism, and the like, that
take shelter under Independency, and that live by other Divisions and
Fractions, they would never stand, if the other were but accommodated, and
light of truth would arise in obscurity; and amongst the many staggerings that
are in the City, a glorious light of comfort would arise, and thy darkness be
as the monday: And what follows? And the Lord shall guide thee continually,
Ver. 11. Hebr.
and satisfy thy soul in drought: Suppose droughts should come, any hard
times, the Lord will satisfy thy soul, and make fat thy bones; and thou shall
be like a watered garden, and like a spring of waters, whose waters fail not.
Here is rich comfort indeed. Go into a garden when you have watered it, and if
you will tomorrow morning, first, it looks more amiably, secondly, smells more
sweetly, thirdly, springs more fruitfully. What a blessed thing were it to see
London in this posture after a day of Praying; that London might look more
beautiful in unity and purity then before. If a man went to draw the picture of
London now, to make it look more lovely, I would desire these three colors,
Purity in Religion, Equity in the administration of Justice Londons beautiful
picture.
and Unity, A sweet combination of your Spirits in both: This would make you
look more amiably, and smell more sweetly. If a man come into a shop to buy any
Commodity, He has it as cheap as I can afford it, and a little good counsel to
the burgain; no oaths, no lying or deceiving: this would make the reputation
of London very like a precious pot of ointment at home and abroad.

And then spring more fruitfully, all London all over green; go into the
streets, you shall not see a beggar there; go into the Hospitals, in one there
are poor fatherless-Children brought up for the Universities or Trades, and go
to another, there are all maimed soldiers taken care for: This were worthy of
such a City as you profess your selves to be, and after such an Extraordinary
day as this is professed to be: We look not only for a Covenant, and the like;
but as the day is Extraordinary, so we pray, and hope (surely God expects it)
that there should be some extraordinary fruit, some Monument erected after
this. When the Court of Aldermen and Common Counsel come together, they should
say, We were such a day met together, and upon a praying day, and when we were
praying, we heard news of Taunton relieved. Oh! let us do somewhat, and set up
some Marble Pillar of Reformation, to record such a mercy, endeavor to bring
forth some good lasting fruit.

There is one thing more, and that is the end of the Chapter, and so I have
done: The Argument is so seasonable, that I hardly know how to break it off;
but I must consider my self and you: And they that shall be of thee, shall
build the old waste places, and thou shall raise up the foundations Ver. 12.
of many generations, and thou shall be called the repairer of breaches, the
restorer of paths to dwell in.

I thank my God, I come not here to flatter you, yet I must speak the truth, I
know no Society (next the Parliament) I am sure no City in England bath so
great a share in the Reformation, as London bath had; and if you will but now
act your Prayers, God will intail this honor upon you: For here he says, They
that be of thee shall build the old waste places, and thou shall raise up the
foundation of many generations. And truly, the Courage of London, and the
Purses of London, the Piety of London, the Fidelity of London (blessed be God,
whose grace it is) I desire to honor God, and not to flatter you in it: Blessed
be God, you have had a very great share in it already, and there is more to
come, And thou shall be called a repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths
to dwell in: What ever others say, London is a rebellious City, a den of
thieves, and the like a yet if you put your prayers As of Jerusalem, Neh. 4.
12. The rebellious and bad City.
into action, God will put this honor upon you, you shall be called The
repairer of the breaches: Let others have this brand. They would make a breach
in the Houses, in the Assembly, in the City, they would break all to pieces,
but they themselves shall be broken in the conclusion, and God will make them
that are faithful to him, Repairers of the breaches.

FINIS.

