THE HISTORY OF CATILINE'S Conspiracy:

Faithfully related out of the Classical Authors.

WITH SOME General OBSERVATIONS For assisting the Interests of PEACE and VIRTUE.

Historia testis temporum, lux veritatis, vita memoriae, Magistra vitae, nuncia
vetustatis.

Cicer. de Orat. Lib. 2. Cap. 9. LONDON, Printed by Hen. Hills Jun. for Robert
Boulter, at the Turks-head in Cornhil, 1683.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
IT may be some satisfaction to the Reader, to have an account of the Method
and Design of this little History, before he engages in it; which has indeed
been written with such pure Love to all Men, that nothing need be concealed
from a Public view: He may therefore be pleased to know in the first place,
that the Author hereof has pursued the directions of that Oracle of Learning,
the Lord Bacon, in his advancement of it: A Work worthy such a Noble Pen as
his, and such a Royal Patron, as the first most Learned Monarch of Great
Britain.

There he gives us both invitation and advice: Lord Bacon's advancement of
Learning: Book 1. Page 88.
For if the invention of the Ship was thought so Noble, which carries Riches
and Commodities from place to place, and consociateth the most remote Regions
in participation of their Fruits: How much more are Letters to be magnified,
which, as Ships, pass through; the vast Seas of Time, and make Ages so distant,
to participate of the Wisdom, Illuminations and Inventions, the one of the
other?

In his advice for accomplishing this, he tells us: Advan. Learn. Book 2. Page
282.
It has much greater Life for Practice, when the Discourse attends upon the
Example, than when the Example attends upon the Discourse. For this is no
Point of Order (as it seems at first) but of Substance: For when the Example
is the ground, being set down in an History at large, it is set down with all
circumstances; which may sometimes control the Discourse thereupon made, and
sometimes supply it, as a very pattern for Action: Whereas the Examples alleged
for the Discourses sake, are cited succinctly, and without particularity, and
carry a servile aspect toward the Discourse, which they are brought in to make
good.

Though this may be of most Public use, yet certainly it is much more desirable
not to pursue any particular History at all; for fear of any mischievous,
though undesign'd, reflection: Especially in an Age so very factious. It would
be more safe to give only some general Theorems, of excellent Virtue and sordid
Vice; of sweet Peace, strong Unity, harmonious Charity; and on the other hand
of consuming War, desolating Divisions, murdering Hatred. But this, our Noble
Author, tells us will not be so effectual: For generally Men taste those
knowledges best, which are drenched in Flesh and Blood. When the Virtues
recommended, and the Vices disgraced are embodied in the reality of Persons and
Actions.

This History of Catiline's Conspiracy is chosen, as most fit to attain such an
advantage, and yet to avoid the danger: It will awaken our attention, as being
one of the most considerable and elaborate Treasons that ever was; acted by the
greatest Men, controuled by the wisest Politicians, written by the best Authors
that ever lived. It is also foreign as to all those Circumstances, which may in
any wise seem to reflect; Christianity it self was then unborn; so that no
Party of Men amongst us can suppose their Religion concerned here, otherwise
than in what is said to favor Moral and Eternal Truth: Then, the Roman Polity
was so vastly different from the modern Government of any Nation, that no
remarks can be made, but such as are common to every Man, as Citizen of the
World.

Yet is there (as our excellent Adviser warns us) Advanc. Learn. Book 2. Page
244.
A Gigantick State of Mind, which possesses the Troublers of the World, such as
was Lucius, Sylla, and infinite other in smaller Model, who would have all men
happy or unhappy as they were their Friends or Enemies, and would give form to
the World according to their own Humors (which is the true Theomachy,) this
pretends and aspireth to Active good, though it recedeth farthest from good
of Society, which we have determined to be the greater.

From those, who are possessed with this Spirit, who are tied up close to
particular Designs and Junctures, and so grown fierce with dark keeping, any
Design for Universal Good must needs expect a cast of Buffoon Raillery; but as
it is really an Honor to be hated by the Vile and Factious, so, to preserve
that Honor and our own Peace, it will be necessary to pass by (as men usually
do when they are upon business) and scorn the raving of such Animals.

If any serious good Man shall fancy a reflection, more than the general
Nature of Virtue and Vice does influence; the Author protests his innocence,
and flies to the Royal Motto, viz. Evil be to him, that Evil thinks; he thought
none.

Nor can it be any, to recount the Ancient Examples of Divine Vengeance: It Is
Piety to God, and Charity to our innocent Neighbor, when we glorify the
interpositions of Providence to support the Governments it has established,
when we give instances of impious Rebels brought to distress, of villainous
Incendiaries consumed in those Flames they kindled; of Prodigals, Adulterers,
Drunkards, and such like laid fast in that destruction, which their
Debaucheries first made way for, and then by oppressing wants drove them into
with a rash speed.

When ever we see this, it is a piece of Natural devotion, to lift up our Eyes
to Heaven, and acknowledge, There is a God that governs the World! And though
he is not pleased always to appear with an immediate stroke, such as would
compel the Wills of sensual Men (the Methods of his Government being agreeable
to that Liberty, which is proper to the Humane Nature) yet has his Sovereign
Justice been ever confessed, as we have one of their own Poets testifying:
Horat. Carm. Lib. 2 Ode 2.
Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede Poena claudo.


The Primitive Apologists for Christianity have always exclaimed against
devilish Idolatry and bloody Superstition, as creating the most barbarous
inhumanities, destructive Wars and fatal Treasons, the World was oppressed
with: Which on the other hand, Atheists, ancient and modern, do most
nonsensically attribute to true Religion (for what is more contrary them? The
Sun may as well be reputed a cause of darkness; and the fat Clouds of Heaven to
beget Famine.) I shall therefore add the observation of Minucius Felix, as well
for confirming this Truth as a particular passage in the ensuing History: Hodie
ab ipsis [Romanis] Latiaris Jupiter homicidio colitur: Et, quod Saturni filio
dignum est, mali and noxii hominis Sanguine saginatur. Ipsum credo docuisse
Sanguinis foedere conjurare Catilinam. Minuc. Fell. Page 99. Edit. O^^. 1636.
That the Romans did in his time worship the Italian Jupiter by Homicide, as
was very agreeable to the Son of Saturn (who devoured all his Male-Children,
and eat up (as 'twas said) a great Stone lapt in Blankets when he was cheated
of Jupiter) to be batten'd with the Blood of a Vicious, Villainous Man: He it
was, I believe, that taught Catiline, to frame his Conspiracy in a Covenant of
Blood.

'Twas also mischievous Superstition, that instigated Cornelius Lentulus, to
such a Tyrannical ambition, and such execrable Enterprises: And what this
History discovers of his the Histories of the World prove to be general.

But true Religion abets the Government of Heaven, and keeps Men in that
excellent Order, wherein the Divine Providence places them. The whole Creation
subsists by an inviolable Observance of those Decrees the Supreme Lord has
established; he has also given in the Sacred Records of Christianity as strict
Laws, and requires as strict an Obedience for the support of Kingdoms and
Nations; That Infinite Wisdom which framed the Earth, and overrules the annual
Circulation of Blessings, has not in the least neglected the Government of
Men, has not left them to injure and destroy one another. But he has there
with Eternal Rewards and Punishments secured our submission to Political
Ordinances; all his excellent Precepts are to persuade our affections into the
kindest influence upon the Actions of our Lives.

This the Divine Oracles, which may be read by all, sufficiently testify;
enquire of them: I shall add no more but the assertion of One, who in the first
Age of Christianity thus wrote to the very Rich, but very Factious City of
Corinth; (...). Clemens Roman. ad Corinth. Edit. Oxon. 1633. Page 4. and 5.
Let all Sedition, and all Schism be abominable to you. -- Hence it is that
Righteousness and Peace keep at such a distance from you, because every one is
so defective in the fear of God, so purblind in the Divine Faith; not walking
according to the Laws of his Government, nor acting agreeably to Christ; but
each pursues his own wicked Lusts, cherishing an unjust and impious
Concupiscence, by which Death it self entered into the World.

To that Architype, the Divine Law (whether Natural or revealed, for both are
fundamentally the same) do the most illuminated Sentiments of Heathens, and the
most Noble Actions of their Virtuosi, agree; amongst them may we find such
vigorous irradiancies of the Humane Nature, as will joyfully refresh the
Interests of Christian Piety, such Schemes of generous Actions as most
advantageously join forces with true Religion; for all solid Policy is built
upon Eternal Righteousness: And upon this account are these great Agents of the
World here called, in, that they may serve the present Generation, and pay the
just Tribute of their Testimony, to the Supreme illuminator of Mankind.

'Twould too much undervalue the Reader, and those excellent Authors, which are
here principally made use of, to suppose that they need any recommendation. The
most Judicious Plutarch, and most Accurate Dio, the two renowned Grecians we
are so obliged to, have been ever valued at the highest Rate: The Latin
Historian Crispus Romana Primus in Historia. Martial Epigr.
Crispus Salust (whose particular History upon this Subject required a
continual attendance) obtained the Dignity of Primate amongst the Romans: But
whether it was out of affection and complaisance to Caesar, or some invidious
unkindness to the most deserving Consul Cicero, he has left it so, that it is
necessary to insert the Catilinarian Orations at large: Which indeed deserve
their place, and challenge such a Glory, as nothing, but the too eager pursuit
of it in them, is able to obscure.

It may seem a rash attempt to venture upon Translating those incomparable
pieces of Roman Oratory, and the Author here is sensible how their great Spirit
often languishes in the Interpretation; but this must not be imputed to the
defects either of our Age or Language, which are now able to equal any thing,
the Soul of Man ever produced: And that the Imperfections here may not too much
reflect, this Author acknowledges and begs Pardon that he has allowed himself
to be sometimes weary of this, which is the more drudging sort of study, as
being too intent upon the real History, and the usefulness of Remarks: Yet it
may possibly appear by some places, that others might have been rendered with
advantage enough.

However were there nothing here but the defaced remains of Antiquity,
Monuments of Venerable Rust, yet we have amongst us, those English Heroes, who,
both for Learning and Virtue, for raised and excellent Spirits, do equal if not
exceed the Roman greatness: 'Twas their Honor to have riffled Greece, and
'twas justly acknowledged to them to have done so; we must not therefore be so
injurious to the present Age as to suppress that Glory which is due to it in
the Spoils of Rome.

(...), Plutarchi Cicero.
As Cicero returned home from the foreign Nurseries of Learning, he staid at
Rhodes, where lived the famous Orator Apollonius, who, having received some
reports of his much applauded Eloquence, longed to partake thereof, but not
well understanding the Latin Tongue, entreated him to declaim in Greek, this
Cicero readily yielded to, as supposing he might thereby, more fully receive
the advantage of his censure: When he had done the Company were all amazed,
and strove with the highest Encomiums to express his worth; but Apollonius sat
sad and silent: which, when he observed, that Cicero took amiss, he said, 'I
value and admire you, O Cicero, but in the mean time I must pity the fortune
of Greece; since those excellent Goods, Learning and Eloquence (which were all
that was left) are now by you brought over to the Romans.

It Is long ago that Rome lost all it is dominion over us, but now are the last
spoils of Learning and Eloquence most apparent; her own Language amongst us,
under the present happy Peace we enjoy, is at the same height it was under the
felicity of Augustus; our Britannick Academies perfectly triumph over all the
Schools of Modern Italy; We have also had such of late, who have merited and
obtained the Name of Cicero.

It was necessary for a full understanding of this History, sometimes to insert
the Original Constitutions of Rome, which a little interrupts the Narrative,
and creates some trouble to the Reader especially at first; and then keeping
strictly to the reports of so many Classical Authors will not allow such a
continued currency, as might have been maintained, if only that had been
arbitrarily picked out, which made to the present purpose.

But this Author designing the entire Truth and full account of the History,
that it might not be contaminated (as the excellent Mihi cujusquam salus tanti
esset, ut meam negligerem? Per me Ego veritatem patefactam contaminarem aliquo
mendacio? Cicer. Orat. pro P. Sylla. Cap. 16.
Cicero took care) with one falsity, and that the Reader might have the
satisfaction of knowing so, or else correcting it all along, as he goes; it is
not to be despaired of, that the inconveniences acknowledged should obtain a
favorable allowance with those, who chiefly aim at a solid advantage in what
they read, and to whom the principal regard is due.

Coenae fercula nostrae
Mallem convivis, quam placuisse cocis.
The Two chief supports of History are Geography and Chronology, which fix the
Reader's Memory, and much enliven his apprehensions: Here is therefore an
account of each place, inserted out of Strabo, who lived in that Age, and was
best able to describe, how the World was, when these things were transacted.
The timing of it, is according to the Tables of learned Helvicus, and the most
vulgar Computation in them; it not being of a Farthing concernment, whether the
World was Two Years Older or Younger, when Catiline was overtaken by the
Divine Vengeance: So long as the particular affairs have a due distance, and
proper consistency among themselves.

There might have been also annexed, the story of Cicero's Banishment, the
disgrace and misfortune of his Friends after they had been so very instrumental
in the preservation of their Country; and (when the Storm was blown over)
their happy Restoration: But these, not being of such Moral influence for
preserving Virtue, Peace and Government, may well stay and expect the success
of what is thus far attempted.

THE CONTENTS.
CAtiline's Character 1 His association 3 He murdered his Son, that he might
marry Aurelia Orestilla 5
Ann. ab urbe condita 686. Ante Christ. 65. Piso and Glabrio Consuls 6 Care for
good Magistrates and moderate Laws 7
Ann. ab urbe condita 687. Ante Christ. 64. Lepidus and Tullus Consuls 8 Petus
and Sylla Consuls elect found guilty of Bribery; their accusers Cotta and
Torquatus declared Consuls in their stead ibid. Catiline is prohibited to
canvase for the Consulship 9 The former Conspiracy between Autronius, Catiline,
and Piso 10
Ann. ab urbe condita 688. Ante Christ. 63. Cotta and Torquatus Consuls 11 The
Plot discovered and suspended from New-years-day to Feb. 5. Catiline's haste,
and the Consuls Guards disappoint the design ibid. The Tribune of the People
stops the prosecution of the Treason 12 An account of the Roman Government by
Kings, Consuls, and Tribunes 13 The restless ambition of the People. ibid. Piso
preferred out of the way and murdered in Spain 15 Different accounts of this
Conspiracy given by Dio and Suetonius 16
Ann. ab urbe condita 689. Ante Christ. 62. Lucius Caesar and Caius Figulus
Consuls 19 The Plot stifled for a year or two 20 The principal Conspirator's
names, both of the Senatorian and Equestrian Order 21 Catiline sacrifices a
Boy, as the Sacrament of the Conspiracy 22 Catiline's Speech to the
Conspirators 23 Their hopes and interest 25 The additional penalty of ten years
banishment, for bribery in Elections. 26 Fulvia Miss to Q. Curious, discovers
the Conspiracy 27 Catiline lost the Consulship for suspicion of the Plot; C.
Antonius; obtains it; with whom M. Tullius Cicero is preferred, as the security
of the Commonwealth 28
Ann. ab urbe condita 690. Ante Christ. 61. M. Tullius Cicero and Caius
Antonius 30 The State of the Commonwealth ibid. Cicero's happy correspondence
with Antonius 31 Catiline proceeds in the Conspiracy, makes Manlius Commander
in chief at Faesulae 32 Sempronia made chief of the female interest 34 The
Consul Antonius designed for a tool 35 The Praetor Lentulus, Catiline's friend
ibid. Cicero countermines all by Fulvia 36 Catiline plots the murder of Cicero
at the Consular election, and to make himself Consul 37 Cicero makes a
discovery to the Senate: Catiline owns himself Head of the Party 38 The
Catilinarian Massacre discovered by Crassus to Cicero, then to the Senate 41 A
Decree passed that the Commonwealth be secured by the Consuls ibid. Senius
reveals his intelligence from Faesulae. Q. Marcius Rex sent thither with an
Army 43 A Reward decreed to discoverers of the Plot 44 The Consult at Lecca's
House for the assassination of Cicero 46 Cicero's first Oration against
Catiline 47 Catiline's defense 63 He forsakes the City and goes toward the
Rendezvous at Faesulae 64 The Remonstrance of C. Manlius 65 The answer of Q.
Marcius Rex 66 The Sham-account of Catiline's retirement 67 Cicero's second
Oration against Catiline 68 Catiline's Letter to Q. Luctatius Catulus, read by
him in the Senate 83 Catiline and Manlius declared enemies 84 The Consul
Antonius to command the Army, the Consul Cicero to guard the City 85 The reason
of the present distempers 87 A. Fulvius executes his Son 89 The contest between
Cato and the chief Roman Patriots upon the bribery of Muraena Consul elect 91
Cornelius Lentulus animated by the Fortune Tellers 93 Lentulus designs to
destroy all, but the Children of Pompey, who was now returning from the
Conquest of the furthe st parts of the Earth 96 L. Bestia Tribune of the People
designs to transpose the envy of all upon Cicero 97 The assassination of Cicero
as a signal for the Conspirators to fire the City, divided into several
allotments for that purpose 98 The time of the Rising 99 The drawing in of the
Allobroges overdoes the Plot and spoils all ibid. Fabius Sanga Patron of the
Allobroges acquaints Cicero with the proposal: who bids him conceal his dis
covery and get all the evidence possible 103 Titus of Crotona pitched upon by
the Conspirators for Letter-carrier 104 The Letters seized at the
Milvian-bridge and brought to Cicero 105 Cicero's third Oration against
Catiline 106 The good Omen of Jupiter's Image then erected, and of the Vestal
flame 123 Crassus impeached by a new Evidence, L. Tarquinius, but he committed
as suborned 125 Endeavors, that Cicero would get C. Caesar accused 127 The
Discoverers rewarded 130 The Conspirators endeavor a rescue 131 The Senate
meets to pass judgment upon the Conspirators 132 Caesar's Oration, and Sentence
of confiscation and perpetual imprisonment 133 Cato's Oration, and Sentence for
capital punishments 139 Cicero's fourth Oration against Catiline, discussing
both Sentences 147 The Conspirators executed that Night in the Tullianum 162
Encomiums of Cicero 165 Cicero's troubles from the new Tribunes 167
Ann. ab urbe condita 691. Ante Christ. 60. Didius Junius Silanus and L.
Licinius Muraena Consuls 171 Catiline hearing the Conspirators were discovered
at Rome, endeavors to march into Gaul 173 He is prevented by Metellus Celer,
and marches against C. Antonius 174 Catiline's Speech to his Soldiers 176
Petreius the Lieutenant General ( Antonius being indisposed) engages Catiline
179 Catiline defeated and slain 181

ERRATA.
PAge 11. Line 9. Read, adjourn the execution. 20. 16. Cicero and Antonius. 22.
4. translated by Xylander. 23. 23. become homagers. 30. 2. 691. 47. 24. upon
the Consciences. 58. 22. ungovernable fury. 72. 31. They have spent. 105. 15. A
full Assembly. 129. ult. Safety lay groaning. 165. 12. the Consul wait. 167.
14. to the Consul Antonius. 15. marching against Catiline. 171. 7. Cassiodore.
175. 10. in the front. 176. ult. But if on

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Errata in the Quotations are not here collected, as being easily observed
and corrected by the learned Reader as he goes along: Nor need they be very
nicely looked into, since the Authorities were added only for collateral
security to the credit of the History, lest any thing should be imagined in it,
either Romantic or Modern.

It may also deserve Advertisement, that whereas many have of late sought an
understanding of this Conspiracy out of Sallust alone; He, though an excellent
Historian, full of succinct and nervous Sentences of the greatest advantage as
well as delight to a judicious Reader, yet cannot be depended upon for an
entire and impartial account: Since he was wholly devoted to the Caesarean
party, and all along most unjustly suppresses the Merits of Cicero. As has been
made appear by the learned Rivius in a Corollary written for that purpose, and
added to the Leiden Edition of Sallust.

THE HISTORY OF Catiline's Conspiracy.
L. Catilina, Nobili genere Natus, fuit magna vi and animi, and corporis, sed
ingenio malo, pravoque. Huic ab Adolescentia, bella intestina, caedes, rapinae,
discordia civilis, grata fuere: Corpus; patiens inediae, algoris, vigiliae,
supra quam cuiquam credibile est. Animus audax, subdolus, varius, cujuslibet
rei simulator, ac dissimulator; alieni appeteris, sui profusus; ardens in
cupiditatibus. Satis eloquentiae; sapientiae parum: Vastu^ animus; immoderata,
incredibilia, nimis alta semper cupiebat. Hunc post dominationem L. Sullae
lubido maxuma invaserat reipublicae capiundae: Neque id quibus modis
assequeretur, dum sibi regnum pararet, quidquam pensi habebat. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap: 5.
Lucius L. Sergius Catilina; Nobilissimi generis vir, sed ingenii pravissimi,
ad delendam patriam conjuravit, cum quibusdam claris quidem, sed audacibus
viris. E^trop. Lib. 6.
Sergius Catiline was Nobly Born; had great Endowments both of Body and Mind,
but a very Corrupt and Mischievous Ingeny: Civil War, Slaughter, and Rapine, so
soon as ever his Age was capable of them, were grateful to him; they were his
Youthful Exercises. His Body could endure Want, Cold, and Watching in an
incredible manner. His Mind was Bold, Subtle, Perfidious; Covetous of what was
another, profuse of his own; all his Affections Ardent.

He had also a great share of Eloquence and as little Wisdom. His Mind was so
insatiable, as to be filled, not only with the most immoderate desires, but
those that to common Reason seem incredible. From the time of Sylla's Tyranny,
( Lucius Sylla perfringi crura, erui oculos, amputari manus jussit; and quasi
toties occideret, quoties vulnerabat, paulatim and per singulos artus
laceravit. Quis erat hujus Imperii minister? Quis, nisi Catilina, jam in omne
facinus manus exercens? Dignus erat Marius qui illa pateretur, Sylla qui
juberet; Catilina qui faceret: Sed indigna Resp. quae in corpus suum pariter
and hostium and civium gladios reciperet. Senec. de Ira. Lib. 3. Cap. 18.
in whose Cruel Massacres he was a great Instrument,) a vast Ambition of
seizing upon the Commonwealth possessed him. Nor cared he how, so he might
prevail.

Upon this Character of another, every wise Man would look into himself and
consider his own Nature, that as we are made capable of Divine perfections, of
the Blessedness of Heaven, upon which account we are but little lower than the
Angels: So if these Excellent Faculties be enslaved by the Dominion of Vice, we
do not only become more vile than the Beasts that perish, but hateful, and
mischievous like the Devils: Every Accomplishment promotes our Ruin; by how
much more Excellent we might be, by so much more miserable do we make our
selves and others; a consideration which can never enough possess us, that so
we may maintain the Interest of our Excellent Beings against the destructive
In-roads of Vice.

Imperium facile iis artibus retinetur, quibus initio partum est, verum, ubi
pro labor desidia, pro continentia and equitat^ lubido atque superbia
invasere; fortuna simul cum moribus immutatur. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 2.
The Roman Empire had its rise and growth from an Extraordinary Valor,
Temperance, and Parsimony, and those same Virtues by which it so Gloriously
began, would have been its perpetual support. But Industry being laid asleep,
Ambition and Pride succeeding in the room of Modesty and Justice, the Fortunes
and Manners of the Empire were lost together.

Avarice and Luxury (those two most contrary, but usually Companion-vices) now
so seized its Vitals, that Quibus id nefas sociis aggressus est? Ipse
Patricius, sed hoc minus est. Curii, Porcii, Sullae, Cethegi, Autronii,
Varguntei, atque Longini, quae familiae? Quae Senatus insignia^? L. Florus,
Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
those who by Noble Birth, and Honorable Employments, were Obliged to secure
its Glory, would readily become the vile Instruments of its Ruin.

In tanta tamque corrupta civitate, Catilina, id quod factu facillimum erat,
omnium flagitiosorum atque facinorosorum circum se, tanquam stipatorum,
catervas habebat. Nam, quiounque impudicus, adulter, ganeo, manu, ventre, pene
bona patriae laceraverat; ad hoc, quos manus, atque lingua, perjurio, and
sanguine civili alebat, postremo omnes quos flagitium, egestas, conscius animus
agitabat, hi Catilinae proxumi, familiaresque erant. Quod si quis etiam a culpa
vacuus, in amicitiam ejus inciderat; quotidiano usu, atque illecebris, facile
par similisque caeteris efficiebatur. Sall. Bell Cat. Cap. 14.
Catiline Headed all the Debauchees of the Town, and in so great and corrupt a
City he was easily surrounded with numerous Troops of Flagitious Persons, most
agreeable to himself. Whosoever had Played, or Drunk, or Whored away his
Estate; whoever had his Tongue well hung for Perjury, or his Hand ready to shed
Blood: All whom Villainy, Want, or Fear of deserved Punishment, had brought into
a restless disquiet, became his Comrades, the fit Associates of his Conspiracy:
And when any one that was free from Vice, fell into his Friendship, their daily
Debaucheries, and continual Solicitations, reduced him to a sad likeness.

That he might augment the Numbers of his Party, Sed maxim adolescentium
familiaritates appetebat: eorum animi molles, aetate fluxi, dolis haud
difficulter capiebantur. Nam, uti cujusque studium, ex aetate flagrabat, aliis
scorta praebere, aliis Canes, atque equos mercari: Postremo neque sumptui,
neque modestiae suae parcere, dum illos obnoxios, fidosque sibi faceret. Ibid.
Catiline chiefly affected the Familiarity of Young Men, whose Minds were
softest, their Age most unsteady, and so most easily ensnared: These he
gratified according to their several Inclinations; some he laid fast in that
deep Ditch of Whoredom, for others he bought Dogs, and Horses, giving them the
more Airy Divertisements of the Field. He spared neither his Estate nor
Modesty, that he might render them Faithful and Obnoxious to him.

As likeness of Vice and guiltiness of Crimes, make the Flagitious fly to
those who are the greatest Protectors of them, so none at present more
notoriously deserved the Pre-eminence, than Catiline. Jam primum adolescens
Catilinae, multa nefanda stupra fecerat, cum virgin nobili, cum sacerdote
Vestae, and alia hujuscemodi contra jus, fasque. Postremo, captus amore
Aureliae Orestillae, cujus, praeter formam nihil unquam bonus laudavit: quod ea
nubere illi dubitabat, timens privignum adultum aetate; pro certo creditur,
necato filio, vacuam domum scelestis nuptiis fecisse. Ibid. Cap. 15.
When he was very Young, he was known to have Perpetrated many the most
nefarious Debaucheries: He is said to have Vitiated a Noble Virgin, a Vessal
Nun, violating all the Obligations of Religion and Honesty. At last, falling in
Love with Aurelia Orestilla, (in whom, besides Beauty, there was nothing well.)
He resolves to Marry her, which he was forced to accomplish by the greatest
Villainy: For she refusing to come into a Family, where there was a Son grown
up, who would not only Heir the Estate, but be continually troublesome to a
Mother-in-law: Catiline (as is certainly believed) Murdered this Son, to make
way for his Wicked Nuptials.

Quae quidem res mihi imprimis videtur, causa fuisse facinoris maturandi,
namque animus impurus, diis hominibusque infestus, neque vigiliis, neque
quietibus sedari potuit; ita conscientia mentem excitam vexabat. Ibid.
This our Judicious Historian, Crispus Sallustius, thinks to have been the great
Occasion that drew him into the present Villainous Conspiracy; for his Mind
being so horribly impure, so maliciously contrary both to God and Man, he could
neither sleeping, nor waking take any rest, but was driven on to the Execution
of the most dire designs.

Here we have not only the Fatal Progeny of Vice, what Monsters it is big of,
and brings forth at last, but of what Public Mischief it is to the World. For
though it be at first shut up in a private Breast, or Family, it will (if not
carefully suppressed by condign Punishment) rage like an Epidemick Plague, to
the Ruin of that Government which neglected it. But oh, Virtue! thou art the
Glorious and steady support of a Nation, thou ever Liberally Rewardest that
Protection thou receivest.

The Year from the Building of Rome 686. Before the Nativity of Christ 65.
Caius Calpurnius Piso, and Marcus Acilius Glabrio, Consuls.
THE first thing taken care of by the Patrons of the Commonwealth, was an
unbribed Election of good Magistrates, the Prosperity of Affairs depending upon
their just management of them. But of late, all things were Saleable at Rome;
the worst Men by Treats, and Money, got into the greatest Trust, and then by
private Advantages, repaid their Original charge.

(...). Dio Cassius, Lib. 36 Edit. Steph. page 20.
To prevent this, the Senate prevailed upon the Consuls, Acilius, and Piso, to
pass a Law against Bribery in Elections; and this they the more earnestly and
carefully promoted, because Caius Cornelius, Tribune of the People, had framed
another with such over-severe Punishments, that it was not likely any Body
should be found either to Accuse or Condemn the Guilty; for nothing but the
just temper of a Law can prevail, for a lasting Execution, the Penalty
therefore was made, only to become incapable of the Magistracy, and the
Senatorian Dignity, and to suffer a Pecuniary Fine.

The Year from the Building of Rome 687. Before the Nativity of Christ. 64.
Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, and Lucius Volcatius Tullus, Consuls.
THIS Year, Tullus the Consul holding the Consular Election, (...). Dio
Cassius. Lib. 36. p. 24.
Publius Autronius Petus, and Publius Cornelius Sylla, Nephew of the great
Dictator Sylla, were declared Consuls Elect, but both of them Accused, and
proved Guilty of Bribery, by Lucius Aurelius Cotta, and Lucius Manlius
Torquatus; who were so far Rewarded for their Accusation, as to be declared
Consuls in their stead.

The two first Elected Consuls, Publius Autronius, and Publius Sylla, deprived
of that High and Honorable Employment, to which they were once designed, did
each of them hear and receive their Sentence with very different Resentments.
Quae enim Autronii fuit causa? quae Sullae est? Ille ambitus judicium tollere,
and disturbare, primum conflato voluit gladiatorum, ac fugitivorum tumultu:
Deinde, id quod vidimus omnes, lapidatione, atque concursu. Sulla, si sibi suus
pudor, ac dignitas non prodesset nullum Auxilium requisivit. Ille damnatus ita
se gerebat, non solum consiliis, and sermonibus, verum etiam adspectu, atque
v^^tu, ut inimicus esse amplissimis ordinibus, infestus bonis omnibus, hostis
patriae videretur. Hic se ita fractum illa calamitate, atque afflatum putavit,
ut nihil sibi ex pristina dignitate superesse arbitraretur, nisi quod modestia
retinuisset. Cicer. Orat. pro P. Sull. Cap. 5.
Autronius got together a Company of Hectors, and other of the Rabble, who
Tumultuously endeavored to disturb the Court of Judicature; Invading it, not
only by Crowding, but also by throwing stones into it. Sylla sought no other
Aid, but what his own Modesty and Worth procured him. When Autronius was
Condemned, he Caball'd, Talked, and Looked as one enraged at the most
Honorable States of the Empire; Angry with all good Men, and as an Enemy to
his Country. Sylla was so Afflicted with the Public Censure, that nothing of
all his former Honors seemed remaining to him, except that Excellent
Behavior, which could not but still Powerfully retain them.

Catiline had at this time quitted his Province of Africa, that he might
Capacitate himself to stand for the Consul-ship; but Catilina pecuniarum
repetundarum reus, prohibitus erat petere consulatum; quod intra legitimos dies
profiteri nequiverat. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 18.
being Accused and Condemned for Extortion in his late Government, he was
prohibited to put up his Name: Nor was there then so many days remaining before
the Election as the Law required for every Candidate to make profession of his
Suit.

Erat eodem tempore Cn. Piso, adolescens nobilis, summae audaciae, egens,
factiosus; cum hoc Catilina and Autronius, circiter Nonas December. consilio
communicato, parabant in Capitolio Kalendis Januar. L. Cottam, and L. Torquatum
Coss. interficere: ipsi, fascibus correptis, Pisonem cum exercitu ad obtinendas
duas Hispanias mittere. Ibid.
There was also in the City another Person of Quality, Cneus Piso, Young, but of
the boldest Resolutions, very Necessitous, and Factious; him did Want and
Debauchery, continually stir up to trouble the Commonwealth.

Erat eodem tempore Cn. Piso, adolescens nobilis, summae audaciae, egens,
factiosus; cum hoc Catilina and Autronius, circiter Nonas December. consilio
communicato, parabant in Capitolio Kalendis Januar. L. Cottam, and L. Torquatum
Coss. interficere: ipsi, fascibus correptis, Pisonem cum exercitu ad obtinendas
duas Hispanias mittere. Ibid.
These three, Autronius, Catiline, and Piso, agreed together at a Consult, upon
the Nones (which is our fifth of December) this Year, that they would provide a
Force in the Capitol, upon the Kalends (which are our first day of January)
next ensuing, when the new Consuls, Cotta and Torquatus, entered upon their
Office, which might Murder the Consuls, and seize upon their Ensigns: That then
they would Govern the City, and Piso should be sent with an Army to possess
himself of the two Spains: These two, were the Northern part, being then
distinguished by the name of Tarraconensis, and the Southern, then called
Boetica: (...). Plutarchi Caesar. Edit. Franc. page 713.
But that part which was called Lusitania, now Portugal, being not reduced to
the Roman Empire till six Years after, when it was Subjected by Julius Caesar,
(from whence he came to Court both a Triumph and a Consul-ship,) is not here
reckoned.

The Year from the Building of Rome 688. Before the Nativity of Christ 63.
Lucius Aurelius Cotta, and Lucius Manlius Torquatus, Consuls.
Ea re cognita, rursus in Nonas Febr. Consilium caedis transtulerunt; Jam tum
non consulibus modo, sed plerisque Senatoribus perniciem machinabantur. Quod ni
Catilina maturasset pro curia signum sociis dare; eo die, post conditam urbem
Romam, pessumum facinus patratum foret. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 18.
SOme Discovery being made of the Plot, designed upon the Kalends of January,
which is our New-years-day, the Conspirators were forced to adjour the
Execution, to the Nones, [which are our fifth] of February, and by that time
they were grown so strong, as to design, not only the Destruction of the
Consuls, but of most of the Senators.

(...). Dio Cassius. Lib. 36. page 24.
Catiline was to give the Sign when they should fall on, which he did
over-eagerly, before the Court was met, and the Armed Assistants ready: So that
the Consuls, Cotta and Torquatus, having a strong Guard about them by Order of
the Senate, they durst not stir, and the Design was disappointed.

(...). Ibid.
So much of the Treason being apparent, the Senators presently proceeded to make
an Edict against the Conspirators; but it was stopped by one of the Tribunes of
the People, interceding with his irresistible Negative.

For understanding of this passage, it will be necessary to look back into the
Constitutions of the Roman Government, And therein we find that at first this
Imperial City was Ruled by Kings, with the Advice of a Senate. Auctis brevi
viribus, hunc Rex sapientissimus statum reip. imposuit. -- Concilium reip.
penes senes esset, qui ex auctoritate patres, ab aetate Senatus vocabantur. L.
Flor. de gest. Romans Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
The most Wise Romulus, so soon as ever he found his Commonwealth grown to
some greatness, appointing an hundred Ancient Men for its Council, who, for
their Authority, were called Fathers; for their Age, Senators.

In the 245th. Year from Building the City, which was the five hundred and
sixth before Christ, succeeded the Consular Government, Libertatis autem
originem inde magis, quia annuum Imperium Consulare factum est, quam quod
diminutum, quidquam sit ex regia potestate, numeres. T. Live. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
in which nothing of Supreme Regal Power was diminished; for the first Consuls
had all the Royal Prerogatives and Ensigns.

Quippe ex perpetuo annuum placuit ex singulari duplex, ne potestas solitudine
vel mora corrumperetur. Flor. Lib. 1. Cap 9.
And the Reason why the Romans thus changed from Perpetual, to Annual
Magistrates, from a single Person, to a Magistracy of two Colleagues, was, lest
long Possession, or private Design should Corrupt the Authority.

In sacrum montem plebs armata secessit, aegreque nec nisi. Tribunos plebis
impetrasset, revocata est. Ibid. Cap. 23.
But the People were not long contented so, for within Twenty Years after, their
Monarchy ceased; they Armed themselves, and withdrew into the Holy Mount, nor
could be prevailed upon to return, till they had obtained Tribunes of their
own; Concessumque est in conditiones, ut plebi sui Magistratus essent
sacrosancti. Quibus Concilii latio adversus Consules esset. Live. Lib. 2. Cap.
33.
Whose Persons were to be held Sacred; and by this one word, Vid. Live. Lib. 6.
Cap. 35.
Veto, might control the proceedings of the Consuls and Senate.

Anno trecentesimo decimo, quam urbs Roma condita erat, primum Tribuni militum,
pro Consulibus Magistratum ineunt. Live. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
Nor did they rest here, for in the three hundred and tenth Year after the City
was Built, which was the four hundred and thirtieth before Christ, they got
Tribunes, (Military, as they called them,) Elected, who entered upon the Supreme
Magistracy instead of Consuls. Not that these continued all along from thence
to the time of Catiline, but were now and then clapped into the Consuls place, as
the Popular Faction happened to be uneasy and Powerful. At present they had
only their own places, interceding with the Tribunitian Negative, yet so much
had they stretched their Authority, that notwithstanding what all the Fathers
Consulted, the most Supreme Legislative Power was got into the Assemblies of
the People.

This review, and this present juncture may inform any considerate Person, that
Popular Power, as well as any other, may prove Destructive to the Common
Safety. For who was it here that raked up the Embers of this Treason, but the
Tribune of the People? And we shall find, that two Years after, when it brake
out again, and raged, very near to the utter Destruction of the Commonwealth,
this same Power did all along clog and prevent its suppression; nay,
ungratefully punished the most Meritorious preserver of the Empire.

What would the impatient World have? Does not History, Reason, and our
continual Experience assure us, that there never are Changes in the Supreme
Power, without being attended with certain and present Miseries? Who but
Madmen and Vicious would undertake at any time, to violate that, which by the
Divine Providence is the Lawful Established Government?

(...). Dio, Cassius. Lib. 36. page 24.

Piso in citeriorem Hispaniam Quaestor pro praetore missus est, adnitente
Crasso; quod eum infestum Cn. Pompeio cognoverat, neque tamen Senatus
Provinciam invitus dederat. Quippe foedum hominem a repub. procul abesse
volebat: simul, quia boni complures praesidium in eo putabant, and jam tum
potentia, Cn. Pompeii formidolosa erat. Sed is Piso in Provinciam, ab equitibus
Hispanis, quos in exercitu ductabat, iter faciens, occisus est. Sunt qui ita
dicant, imperia ejus injusta, superba, crudelia barbaros nequivisse pati: Alii
autem, equites illos, Cn. Pompeii veteres, fidosque clientes, voluntate ejus
Pisonem agressos: Nunquam Hispanos praeterea tale facinus fecisse, sed imperia
saeva multa antea perpessos. Nos eam rem in medio relinquimus. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap. 19.


The Senate being not able to Decree any thing against the Conspirators, and
seeing Piso still as bold as ever, was glad to accept of the motion which
Crassus made, that he should, under the specious Title of a Government, be sent
Quaestor into the hither Spain, as well to prevent any present disturbance, as
to deliver the Commonwealth from the Influence of a Person so vile and wicked.

There was also another Design in it: The Interest of Cneus Pompeius then began
to be formidable to the Commonwealth, which was very much abetted by the great
Affection that Province of Spain retained for him. Piso therefore being a known
Enemy to Pompey, was sent thither to destroy the too great Power he had there:
Which however he effected, at last he was himself destroyed, (which was as
well) either by the Natives, who were not able to bear his Proud and Cruel
Government, or by the Faithful Clients of Pompey, out of Love to their old
Master.

De superiori conjuratione satis dictum. Ibid.

Vide Dio Cassium, ut supra, cit. Lib. 36. page 24.


This which by some is called the former Conspiracy, is by Authors a little
otherwise represented; but as this appears the most probable truth, so neither
shall the rest be kept from the Readers knowledge.

Dio Cassius Reports positively, that Publius Autronius Paetus, and Publius
Cornelius Sylla, the Great Sylla's Brothers Son, the Elected Consuls, who were
Convicted of Bribery, did both of them Conspire to kill Cotto and Torquatus,
who Accused them, and succeeded in their places. But the Excellent, and
unsuspected Behavior of Publius Sylla afterward, attested by Cicero himself,
is a great Evidence to prove him Innocent: And it is reasonable to believe, that
Autronius and Catiline were to have been Consuls after the Plot had succeeded,
for otherwise we find no Preferment assigned for that Arch-Traytor, which
without doubt he did in the first place take care of.

Siquidem ante paucos dies, quam Aedilitatem iniret, venit in suspicionem
conspirasse, cum M. Crasso Consulari, item P. Sulla, and L. Autronio, post
designationem Consulatus, ambitus condemnatis, ut principio anni Senatum
adorirentur: Et trucidatis, quos placitum ^ffe^, dictaturam Crassus invaderet,
ipse ab eo Magister Equitum diceretur, constitutaque ad arbitrium repub. Sull^e
and Autronio Consulatus restitueretur, Suet. Tranq. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
Suetonius Tranquillus, in the Life of Julius Caesar, represents other Great
Persons concerned in it. That a few days before Caesar entered upon the Office
of Aedile, Suntoque Aediles curatores Urbis, annonae, ludorumque Solennium;
ollisque ad honoris amplioris gradum, is primus adscensus esto. Cicer. De
Legib. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
(Which contained the care of all Public Edifices, (from whence the name of it
was derived) of keeping the Granaries, and management of all Public Shows made
for the Entertainment of the People,) he Was suspected to Conspire with Marcus
Crassus, who was of Consular Dignity; and with Publius Sylla, and Lucius
Autronius, designed Consuls, but Condemned of Bribery, to have set upon the
Senate in the beginning of the Year, and having Massacred whom they thought
fit, Crassus should be made Dictator, Caesar Master of the Horse; and the
Commonwealth being Arbitrarily Modeled by them, the Consul-ships should be
restored to Sylla and Autronius.

Suetonio Tranquillo Epistolarum Magistro, multisque aliis qui apud Sabinam
uxorem, injussu ejus, familiarius se tunc egerant quam reverentia domus aulica
postulabat, successores dedit. Aelii Spartiani Adrianus Caesar; Cap. 11.
But Suetonius Living in the time of the Emperor Hadrian, who began his Reign
in the 117th. Year after Christ, which was the 180th. after this present Year
of the Conspiracy, (under whom he was Secretary, though behaving himself too
unrespectfully toward the Empress Sabina, the Emperor turned him out of his
Place) could have nothing of this of his own knowledge, and Meminerunt hujus
conjurationis, Tanusius Geminus in Historia, M. Bibulus in Edictis, -- de hac
significare videtur and Cicero in quadam ad Actium Epistola, referens Caesarem
in Consulatu confirmasse regnum, de quo Aedilis cogitarat. Suet. ubi supra.
therefore quotes his Authors for it, Tanusius Geminus's History, Bibulus his
Edicts, with others: And Cicero in a certain Epistle to Actius, relating that
Caesar did confirm to himself in his Consulship that Absoluteness which he
proposed when Aedile.

This last (who is much the best Author) may well be understood of his giving
new life to the suppressed Faction of Marius, whose Triumphal Effigies and
Victories, Caesar in Public Shows exposed to the admiring City; (...). Plut.
Caes. page 710.
and upon which the Eminent Luctatius Catulus told him, that he did not so much
undermine, as openly batter down the Government. Siquidem ante paucos dies quam
Aedilitatem iniret. Suet. ut supra.
Besides, Suetonius himself says, that this Conspiracy happened a few days
before he was Aedile. And therefore Cicero's Testimony is not to be stretched to
it, since it relates to the time when he held that Office.

Tanusius adjicit, Crassum, paenitentia vel metu, diem caedi destinatum non
obiisse, and idcirco ne Caesarem quidem signum, quod ab eo dari convenerat,
dedisse. Convenisse autem Curio ait, ut togam de humero dejiceret. Suet. Jul.
Caes, Cap. 9.
Tanusius affirms, that Crassus's Heart misgave him, either through pity, or
fear, and so he appeared not on the day appointed for the Massacre; and
therefore Caesar, who (as he says) was to give the sign, omitted to do it.
Curio adds, that the sign was to have been the letting his Gown off his
shoulder.

Omnes hos Caesaris inimicos fuisse, nemo est in illorum temporum H^storia vel
leviter versatus quin sciat. Edicta Bibuli, illa ipsa sunt quorum in Pompeio
Plutarchus meminit and vocat (...). Causab. in loc.
But these Authors were all Caesar's known Enemies; Bibulus, his nameless
Colleague in the Consulship, most eminently; whose Edicts Plutarch affirms were
full of spite and scandal: Now, when Writers betray their slanderous
resentments, they cannot be depended upon.

The Common Judgment of Men will not accept the Evidence of an Interested
Party, nor common Reason regard it further than it is supported by a concurrent
probability. Now, that Caesar (who afterward proved such a Generous
Conqueror, and took such care that his Victories might not be stained by one
drop of needless Blood) should Conspire in that most Barbarous way of
Massacring the Principal Senators, was both contrary to his own Nature, and the
greatest contradiction to that Glory he designed.

The Year from the Building of Rome 689. Before the Nativity of Christ. 62.
Lucius Julius Caesar, and Caius Martius Figulus, Consuls.
THE Conspiracy had been smothered for above the compass of a twelve month, no
Punishment inflicted upon the Plotters, and (...). Dio Cass. lib. 37. page 38.
Catiline himself so far from Suffering for his late Treason, that he was
Acquitted of those old Murders and Cruelties he had committed under the Tyranny
of Sylla, and was this Year Impeached for: But Villainy is never Cured with
Kindness, he continually grew worse, and prosecuted his Attempts, till they
ended in his own (though not (as he designed) the Commonwealths) Destruction.

Favor is indeed due to the Virtuous and Peaceable, they are Obliged thereby,
and with Gratitude repay what they receive; but Mercy bestowed upon the base
and vicious, cherishes their Venom, till like the Viprous Brood, they become
ready for the Birth, and eat the way through those Bowels which gave them Life.
This is confirmed as much by Reason as Experience; for since it is the
disposition of the Receiver that modifieth the Reception, that which makes the
good better, makes the bad worse. The same Influences of Heaven nourish those
Plants which sustain our Lives, and those Poisonous Weeds which have a Fatal
contrariety to them.

Duae conjurationes abs te, Torquate, constituuntur; una, quae Lepido, and L.
Tullo Coss. patre tuo Consule designato, facta esse dicitur: altera quae me
Consule. Cicer. Orat. pro Sulla. Cap. 4.

Furorem incredibilem biennio ante conceptum, erupisse in meo Consulatu
scripsi. Ibid. Cap. 24.


Some Authors account two distinct Conspiracies, one in the Consulship of
Lepidus and Tullus, the other when Cicero and Autronius enjoyed that Dignity;
but Cicero himself looks upon the latter only as the breaking out of their old
Treason, which was conceived two Years before. Actors, Designs, and
Circumstances may be changed, and yet the same Mischief go on; we call it the
same Plague, though the first infected be all dead, and it rages every Month
upon new Persons; which is the present Case.

Igitur circiter Kal. Jun. -- in unum omneis convocat, quibus maxuma
necessitudo, and plurimum audaciae inerat. Eo convenere Senatorii ordinis, P.
Lentulus Sura, P. Autronius, L. Cassius Longinus, C. Cethegus, P. and Ser.
Sullae Servii filii, L. Vargunteius, Q. Annius, M. Porcius Laeca, L. Bestia, Q.
Curious. Praeterea, ex Equestri ordine, M. Fulvius Nobilior, L Statilius, P.
Gabinius Capito, C. Cornelius, ad hoc multi ex Coloniis, and municipiis, domi
nobiles. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 17.
For about the Kalends of June (which are our first day of the Month) Catiline
calls together all those, of whose Resolutions, and daring Courage he was well
assured. There were of the Senatorian Order, Publius Lentulus Sura, Publius
Autronius, Lucius Cassius Longinus, Caius Cethegus, Servius, and Publius (as
was suspected) the Sons of Servius Sylla, Lucius Vargunteius, Quintus Annius,
Marcus Porcius Leca, Lucius Bestia, and Quintus Curious. Of the Equestrian
Order, Marcus Fulvius Nobilior, Lucius Statilius, Publius Gabinius Capito,
Caius Cornelius. Besides many other Persons of the Free Towns and Colonies, who
were very considerable at home.

In abditam partem aedium secessit, atque ibi, omnibus arbitris procul amotis,
orationem hujuscemodi habuit. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 20.
These he conveyed into the most retired part of his House, and taking care that
none else might come near the Apartment, he proceeded to give them the Oath of
Secrecy in a dreadful manner. (...). Dio Cass. Lib 27. Cap. 48.
It Is said, Caius Antonius, (who was then aiming at the Consulship, and obtained
it for the ensuing Year) was among them, and partaker of the direful Ceremony,
which was thus performed.

Catiline killed a Boy, and all Swearing over the reeking Entrails to be true
to one another, they (if they did not together eat them up, as the words
Translated by Zylander, affirm) Additum est pignus conjurationis, sanguis
humanus, quem circumlatum pateris bibere: summum nesas, nisi amplius esset;
propter quod biberunt. Flor. Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
drank the Humane Blood carried round in Bowls. An Infernal Health, agreeable
to such a Devilish Design, the most horrid Impiety, except that for the sake
whereof they drank it. In which this seems to have been their Barbarous Policy,
that the Conspirators once dipped in such an execrable Wickedness, might never
after shrink at any thing that should be proposed to them.

Senatum confodere, consules trucidare, distringere incendiis urbem; diripere
aerarium, totam denique rempub. funditus tollere and quicquid nec Annibal
videretur optasse. Ibid.
The general Agreement was, to Massacre the Senate, to Assassinate the present
Consuls, to set the City on fire, rifle the Treasure-Chamber, and utterly to
subvert the whole Commonwealth, perpetrating what never came into the Heart of
Hannibal to wish.

Nonnulli ficta and haec, and multa praeterea existumabant ab iis, qui
Ciceronis invidiam quae postea orta est, leniri credebant atrocitate sceleris
eorum, qui poenas dederant. Nobis ea res pro magnitudine parum comperta est.
Sall Bell. Cat. Cap. 22.
Sallust does indeed say, that he could not come by any sufficient assurance of
the truth of this horrid Humane Sacrifice, and that it was suspected to be an
invention of Cicero's Friends, when he was overloaded with Envy for too severe
a prosecution of this Conspiracy. It must therefore rest upon the Credit of the
two forecited Authors, Lucius Florus, and Dio Cassius. But Omnibus arbitris
procul amotis orationem hujuscemodi habuit. Ibid. Cap. 20.
Sallust himself adds this ensuing Oration of Catiline to the Conspirators at
their secret Consult.

IF your Valor and Fidelity had not been sufficiently known to me, this
Opportunity had in vain presented it self, and we had in vain conceived any
hope of Rule; for I would never trust Sloth and Vanity so far, as to exchange
certain Possessions for Expectations built upon unsure Foundations: But by long
Experience I am satisfied that you are Valiant and Faithful to my Designs, the
assurance of which has caused me to undertake the highest and most Noble
Action: Your Fortunes and mine are imbarqued in the same Bottom, and, (which
makes the most indissoluble Friendship) our Hate and Love have both the same
Objects. What my Design is, you have all severally known; but that which daily
most inflames my mind, is, the consideration of what sort of Life we are like
to lead unless we vindicate our Liberty: For since the Government of the
Commonwealth is fallen into a few mighty Men's hands, to them the subjected
States are become Homages, to them the Provincial Governors pay their Tribute,
to these Men the rest of the Nobles are but as the common sort, without any
Authority, destitute of all Grandeur, and obnoxious to those Persons, to whom,
if the Commonwealth were rightly ordered, we should be a Terror. These engross
all Offices of Place and Power to themselves, or their dependents, and have
left us nothing but Hazards and Repulses, Executions and Distresses. How long,
my Valiant Friends, will ye suffer thus? Is it not better to dye gloriously,
than to draw out an Ignominious and dishonorable Life amidst the Pride and
scorn of our Enemies, and at length dye miserable? It Is but giving the onset,
and all is our own; our Age and Courage are vigorous, but they are grown old in
Years, and Riches: Let us then begin, and we may be assured Victory is within
our reach. What Person that is not destitute of an Humane Soul, can patiently
see them abound in all manner of Wealth, which they wantonly expend in making
Seas, and turning Mountains into Valleys, while we want Necessaries? They enjoy
their City and Country Houses, whilst we have scarce a Cottage to dwell in;
they have their Statues and Embroidered Beds, lavishing out their Money upon
every gay and costly Trifle; they possess bottomless stores of Riches, which
all the inventions of Expense are not able to exhaust. We have nothing but want
at home, and debts abroad; at present miserable, and hereafter like to be much
more: What have we left, but our poor Souls? Why do we not then awaken them out
of this Servile Lethargy? Behold that, that Liberty, which we have so often
wished for, besides Riches, Renown, Glory, all these are set before your Eyes,
these are the Rewards which Fortune proposes to the Victorious. The smalness of
our Estates, the dangers we are continually exposed to, the Neediness of our
Condition, and the abundant Spoils, and great Treasure we shall gain by War,
are certainly more powerful to prevail than any thing I can say.

Take me either for your General, or your Fellow-Souldier, I will not fail to
seek your welfare with the utmost endeavors both of my Mind and Body. I cannot
but still hope to be Consul, and to enjoy all these good things together with
you, and nothing can deceive me, unless you are more inclined to Serve than to
Command.

Opprimundae reip. Consilium coepit, in Italia nullus exe^citus: Cn. Pompeius
in extremis terris bellum gerebat; ipsi consulatum petundi magna spes; Senatus
nihil sane intentus: tutae, tranquillaeque res omnes. -- Tum Catilina polliceri
tabulas novas, proscriptionem locupletium, magistratus, Sacerdotia, rapinas,
alia omnia quae bellum atque lubido victorum fert. Praeterea esse in Hispania
citeriore Pisonem, in Mauritania cum exercitu P. Sitium Nucerinum, consilii sui
participes: petere consulatum C. Antonium quem sibi Collegam fore speraret, cum
eo consulem se initium agendi facturum. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 18. and 21.
He also gave them several other Encouragements, that the Commonwealth was
altogether unprovided to oppose them; there was no Army in Italy, Pompey at the
farthest extent of the Earth: That he himself had great hope of attaining the
Consulship, and that the Senate was very careless and secure.

Then were the state and Rewards of the War proposed; That all Debts should be
Cancelled, the Richest Persons proscribed, that Preferment, Plunder, and
whatsoever Conquerours could desire, would fall into their hands. That their
Assistance and Opportunities were very considerable. There was then in the
hither Spain their great Friend Piso, (who was Murdered about this time, but
the News thereof not yet arrived at Rome.) In Mauritania, there was Publius
Sitius Nucerinus, with an Army, who was a Partner in the Counsels of the
Conspiracy: And that if the next Year, Caius Antonius and he obtained the
Consulship, they should have the greatest Advantage to begin.

Wherefore Catiline and Antonius canvas'd for it to the utmost, not only with
all the Lawful Interest they could make, but to the most apparent violation of
those Laws, which were so lately enacted against Bribery. Moderate Punishments
will not serve, for Persons that have such grand Designs afoot; then a
probability of success is too weighty for an ordinary Penalty to over-balance.

(...). Dio Cass. lib. 37. p. 48.
The Senate discerning this, made an additional Penalty of ten Years Banishment,
to be undergone by every Person convicted of Bribing his Electors. Vid.
Pragmenta hujus orationis in toga candida habitae apud Ascon.
Which was principally promoted, and effected by Cicero in his white Gown,
being at that time himself a Candidate.

While these things were transacting, Sed in ea conjuratione, fuit Q. Curious,
natus haud obscuro loco, flagitiis atque facinoribus coopertus: quem Censores
Senatu probri gratia moverant. Huic homini non minor vanitas inerat, quam
audacia; neque reticere, quae audierat, neque suamet ipse scelera occultare;
prorsus neque dicere, neque facere, quicquam pensi habebat.

Erat ei cum Fulvia, muliere nobili, stupri vetus consuetudo. Cui cum minus
gratus esset, quod inopia minus largiri poterat, repent glorians, maria,
montesque pollicere, minari interdum ferro, ni sibi obnoxia foret: Postremo,
ferocius agitare, quam solitus erat. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 23.


Quintus Curious, a Conspirator, of the Senatorian Order, but for his
Debaucheries lately turned out by the Censors from that High Dignity, made an
happy, though undesign'd Discovery of the Plot. He was a Man that could not
well keep secret any thing that he either heard or did, being tickled with a
certain pleasure of Glorying in all his Villainies. He Had a great while kept
for his Miss, one Madam Fulvia, a Person of good Quality, though an infamous
Whore. This Lady of late very much insulted over her Gallant, and began to
scorn him, because his Estate failed, and his Presents were mean, but on a
sudden she found him begin to promise Mountains of Gold, and to Hector at a
much greater rate than he had ever done before.

At Fulvia, insolentiae Curii causa cognita tale periculum reip. haud occultum
habuit; sed, sublato auctore, de Catilinae conjuratione, quae quomodo audierat,
compluribus narravit, Ibid.
Fulvia admired what should be the cause of this change, and therefore wheadled
him to reveal the whole Conspiracy to her; but whether it were that the Bloody
and Barbarous Design was not agreeable to the softness of her temper, or that
some little remainder of Nobility still Lived under the Tyranny of Vice, or
some hopes of Profit might tempt her to it, Tanti sceleris indicium per Fulviam
emersit, vilissimum scortum, sed paracidii innocens. Flor. lib. 4. cap. 1.
she resolved not to be guilty of Treason, by concealing so great a danger
intended to the Commonwealth: Wherefore (suppressing the Name of her Author)
she told to several what she had heard of Catiline's Conspiracy.

Thus do the Vicious entrap themselves, and by the repugnancy of their Lusts,
necessitate their own Destruction. Treasons and Murders require Secrecy; Wine
and Women betray them: Besides the overruling Providence of God to hasten it,
Villainy has a Natural tendency to Ruin.

The Discourse of this Conspiracy quickly flew about the City, and made an
happy alteration in the sentiment of many with respect to the Consular
Election, which drew very near: They would by no means trust Catiline in that
High Authority; for though there was then no Proof, but only common Rumor of a
Plot, yet it had such a Foundation of probability, that they put by a Person so
very much suspected.

Caius Antonius was Chosen, being a more Masquerade Conspirator, and so less
liable to the Exceptions of undiscerning Men; but that which saved all, was,
the preferring so excellent a Person as Marcus Tullius Cicero to be his
Colleague. And this was brought to pass merely by the glimmering daybreak of
the Conspiracy, as our Excellent Historian, Sallust, tells us.

Ea res in primis studia hominum accendit ad consulatum mandandum M. Tullio
Ciceroni. Namque antea pleraque nobilitas invidia aestuabat, and quasi pollui
consulatum credebat, si eum, quamvis egregius, homo novus adeptus foret. Sed
ubi periculum advenit, invidia, atque superbia post fuere. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap. 23.
This was the cause that first stirred up the Minds of Men to confer the
Consulship upon Marcus Tullius Cicero, for most of the Nobility were inflamed
with an Envy against him, as if a Person, though Eminent, yet of so late
appearance in the Commonwealth, would debase so high an Honor by the
enjoyment of it: But now that danger came so near, Pride and Envy were laid
aside.

The Honor which was thus conferred upon Cicero in this Consulship, is by
himself thus expressed in one of his Orations to the People.

Est illud amplissimum Quirites, quod hoc honor, ex novis hominibus primum me,
multis post annis, affecistis: Quod prima petitione, quod anno meo ( viz. 43.
aetatis) sed tamen magnificentius, atque ornatius esse illo nihil potest, quod
meis comitiis non tabellam vindicem tacitae libertatis, sed vocem vivam prae
vobis indicem vestrarum erga me voluntatum, ac studiorum tulistis. Itaque me
non extrema tribus suffragiorum, sed primi illi vestri concursus, neque
singulae voces praeconum, sed una voce universus populus Romanus, Consulem
declaravit. Cicer. Orat. de leg. Agrar. Secund. Cap. Secund.
This was exceeding great (O Quirites) that I should be the first of those that
were lately risen, who for these many Years have been dignified with the
Supreme Honor. That the first time I stood for it, you were pleased to confer
it in the most Glorious and Magnificent manner: For at my Election, 'twas not
the written Roll that silently discovered your Choice, but your loud
Acclamations testified your desire and affections to me. Not the summing up the
Poll, but the view gave it; not the Report of Officers, but the whole Roman
People with one Voice Proclaimed me Consul.

The Year from the Building of Rome 690. Before the Birth of Christ 61. Marcus
Tullius Cicero, and Caius Antonius, Consuls.
Ego qualem Calendis Januarii acceperim rempub. Quirites, intelligo: Plenam
sollicitudinis, plenam timoris: in qua nihil erat mali, nihil adversi quod non
boni metuerent, improbi expectarent. Omnia turbulenta consilia contra hunc
reipublicae statum, and contra vestrum otium partim iniri, partim nobis
consulibus designatis inita esse dicebantur. Sublata erat de foro fides, non
ictu aliquo novae calamitatis, sed suspicione, ac perturbatione judiciorum,
infirmatione rerum judicatarum: novae dominationes; extraordinariae; non
imperia sed regna quaeri putabantur. Cicer. de lege Agrar. Secund. Cap. Tertio.
WHAT the state of the Commonwealth was, when these Consuls at New-years-day
entered upon the Government, Cicero himself tells us; that it was full of Care
and Fear, that there was nothing bad or dangerous, but good Men dreaded, and
ill Men were in hopes would come to pass: Counsels contrary to the Established
Government, repugnant to the Public Peace, were continually entered upon.
Fidelity taken from Courts of Judicature, not by the blow of any present
Calamity, but by Trouble and Suspicion: New Authorities sought after, such as
were both extraordinary and illegal.

To prevent all dangers, nothing could be more prevalent than a great and
virtuous behavior of those entrusted with the Lawful Power: Cicero was acted
by a generous thirst after Glory and the Public Good, which made him
sufficiently vigilant and courageous: But Antonius, a private favourer of the
Conspiracy, could not be expected to promote, if he would tolerate the
endeavors of his fellow Consul. And here the Commonwealth had been ruined if
those two Colleagues had clash'd at this time in so high a Magistracy: (...).
Plutarch. Cicero. page 866.
For though Antonius had no great abilities of his own to do either good or
hurt, yet he must needs give a great access of strength to which soever side he
took.

There is therefore perpetual Honor due to Cicero, not only for the great
Service he himself did, In quo collega sustinendo, atque moderando, si meam in
illum indulgentiam, conjunctam cum summa custodia reip. laudare vere solebatis.
Cicer. Orat. pro Sextio, cap. 3.
but for that Prudent Correspondence he held all along with Antonius, by which
that other Consul (being partly overcome with the Honor and Trust the
Commonwealth had reposed in him, and Ad hoc collegam suum Antonium pactione
provinciae perpulerat, ne contra remp. sentiret. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 26.
partly hired by Cicero's resigning his great Province of Macedonia to him) was
moderated and sustained in so good a temper, that he went quietly along with
him in the preservation of the Public Interest.

Quaestor hic C. Antonii, collegae mei, judices, fuit sort; sed societate
consiliorum meus. Idem, venit cum excercitu Capuam, and inde M. Aulanum,
Tribunum militum Antonii, Capua praecipitem ejecit. Idemque C. Marcellum
exterminandum ex illa urbe curavit. Cicer. Orat. pro P. Sextio. Cap. 3. and 4.
Another great happiness was, that Publius Sextius, who was Quaestor, or
Principal Officer under Antonius, Faithfully assisted Cicero in all his
Counsels; and Cashiered Marcus Aulanus a Tribune, or Colonel of a Regiment,
Caius Marcellus, with several others, who were of Catilines Party, but had got
Commissions under Antony; thereby preserving Capua, which had otherwise fallen
into their hands.

Quod factum primo populares conjurationis concusserat: neque tamen Catilinae
furor minuebatur; sed indies plura agitare. Ea tempestate plurimos cujusque
generis homines adscivisse sibi dicitur, mulieres etiam aliquot. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 24.
This Settlement of the Magistracy stunned the Conspirators, especially the
Populace, who now knew not how to stir: However Catiline's Rage was not in the
least assuaged, but by all means he promotes his Designs, and strengthens his
Interest. To this purpose he calls in the Assistance of both Sexes, makes
Manlius General of one, as Sempronia was his Principal Agent among the other.

(...). Dio Cass. lib. 37. page 49.
Manlius was an Old Expert Commander in Sylla's Army, and had profusely spent a
very large Estate, which made him long for a return of like Troubles, that he
might repair his decayed Fortunes.

Him Catiline sends into Hetruria, which is the most Western part of Italy, to
a Colony called Faesulae, very near the place where the City of Florence now
stands, and (...). Strabo. Lib. 5. page 227.
where the Apennine Mountains and Rubicon Anciently Separated Italy from the
Cisulpine Gaul.

Interea Manlius in Etruria plebem solicitare, egestate simul, ^c dolor
injuriae, novarum rerum cupidam; quod Sullae dominatione, agros, bonaque omnia
amiserat; praeterea, latrones cujusque generis, quorum in ea regione magna
copia erat, nonnullos ex Sullanis colonis, quibus lubido atque luxuria ex
maginis rapinis nihil reliqui fecerant. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 28.
The Inhabitants of this Country had been brought to great Poverty by
Sequestrations and Plunderings in the time of Sylla, and now the wants they
were at present under, and the Injuries they had formerly sustained, made them
very desirous of a Change. The Old Soldiers of Sylla had been planted among
them, who by Lust and Luxury having spent all that by Rapine they had got
together, were no less eager than they; so that Manlius his Solicitations had
great success among them, as might be well expected among Soldiers of Fortune,
and an Oppressed People: Both Enemies, yet both Friends in any Cause that
offers them common Advantage.

Igitur C. Manlium Faesulas, atque in eam partem Etruriae, Septimium quendam
Camertem in agrum Picenum, C. Julium in Apuliam dimisit, praeterea alium alio,
quem ubique opportunum sibi fore credebat. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 27.
Septimius, another Military Officer, was sent into the Country of the Piceni,
in the Neighborhood of Faesulae, extended upon the Adriatic Sea; its Cities
lay between Ariminum and (...). Strabo. Lib. 5. page 240.
Ancona, the latter of which gives the present Name of Marca Anconitana to it.

Caius Julius was also dispatched into Apulia, which lay next upon the
Adriatic, and still retains much of its Old Name, being the Modern Puglia.
Many more were dispersed into other places, as every Man's Interest led him.

Pecuniam, sua, aut amicorum fide sumptam mutuam, Faesulas ad Manlium quendam
portare, qui postea princips fuit belli faciundi. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 24.
But Faesulae was the Principal Rendezvous; and therefore all the Money that
Catiline and his Friends either had, or could be Trusted for, was sent thither
to Manlius the Commander in Chief.

Nor did the Grand Conspirator think fit to neglect the Feminine Intrigues,
their Power might enfeeble more than Force could subdue. Mulieres etiam
aliquot, quae primo ingentes sumptus stupro corporis toleraverant: post, ubi
aetas tantummodo quaestui, neque luxuriae modum fecerant, aes alienum grande
conflaverant. Ibid.
Accordingly, he insinuates into all those Ladies, who by making themselves
common, had got too great an Influence upon the Public Interest, but
especially those who by the decay of Beauty, and continuance of Luxury, were
brought into a Necessity of Advancing his Designs.

Per eas se Catilina tredebat posse servitia urbana sollicitare, urbem
incendere, viros earum vel adjungere sibi, vel interficere. Ibid.
By these did Catiline hope to draw in all of the Rascal Party that had not yet
been retainers to him; to get the City Fired, to have their Husbands brought
over to him, or killed out of the way.

Sed in iis erat Sempronia, quae multa saepe virilis audacia facinora
commisorat. Haec mulier genere atque forma, praeterea viro atque liberis satis
fortunata fuit: Literis Graecis and Latinis docta; psallere, saltare elegantius
quam necesse est probae: multa alia, quae instrumenta luxuriae sunt, sed ei
cariora semper omnia quam decus, atque pudicitia fuit. Pecuniae, an famae minus
parceret, haud facile discerneres. -- Luxuria atque inopia praeceps abierat.
Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 25.
The most Eminent of these was Sempronia, of good Birth and Beauty, Happy enough
at home in her Husband and Children, accomplished both in Greek and Latin
Learning: She could sing well, and dance better than was necessary for a Modest
Woman; but nothing was less valued by her than Virtue and Reputation. She was
equally Prodigal of her Fame and Money, till she at length arrived at a most
pernicious Impudence, fit for the present execrable purposes.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. page 48, 49.
But his most esteemed City-strength lay in the Consul Antonius, Catilina
nihilominus in proximum annum Consulatum petebat; sperans, si designatus foret,
facile se ex voluntate Antonio usurum. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 26.
whom he did not doubt, but (if he could get himself Elected to the Consulship
for the ensuing Year) he should be able to make an easy tool of. He had also
Publius Lentulus the Praetor his fast Friend, having been turned out of the
Senate after he had born the Consular Office, and was now got to be Praetor, in
hopes of being restored again; (...). Plutar. Cicer. page 868.
as was the Custom for those who designed to be re-elected into that Honorable
Assembly.

To Countermine all these Intrigues, the Vigilant Cicero kept continual
Correspondence with the Lady Fulvia, and by many Rich Presents engaged her to
reveal to him all the Councels of the Conspiracy. Some have suspected that the
Consul did condescend to the Familiarity of her Vices, but as to that, neither
Plutarch the Excellent and Impartial Writer of his Life, nor any other of our
Authors mention the least suspicion of it. Others may admire that Quintus
Curious giving her such constant and speedy Intelligence, Cicer. Orat. in Cat.
prima. cap. 2, 3.
so Publicly bragged of by Cicero, was not suspected to betray them: But then
if we consider that they had all of them their Fulvia's, and that their Vicious
intercourses gave every one of them the same private Opportunities of
Discovery, they could not well trace it out; and it would have dissolved their
mutual Trust, vainly to Impeach one another.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. page 48.
The Consular Election for the following Year approached, and Catiline again
professes himself a Candidate for it. Wherefore Cicero, to encumber him with
the greater Difficulties, Enacts (if it were not completed the Year before) or
at least Proclaims the Penalty of Ten Years Banishment if any Person were
guilty of Bribery in Elections; which sufficiently prevented him: For the
Vicious having nothing desirable in themselves, People will not without a great
deal of Money and Debauchery be persuaded to choose those, that are like to cut
their Throats who chose them.

(...). Ibid.
Catiline finding this so particularly designed against him, and so probable to
take effect, provides a Party to be ready at the time and place of the
Election, that should Murder Cicero and the Principal Persons present, and
immediately Create him Consul.

But this was not effected, for Cicero's constant Intelligencer quickly
acquainted him with the Design, however the Consul was in great difficulty what
to do; His own particular Care could no longer preserve the City, now the
Conspirators came on so fast; and to lay open all to the Senate, before he had
any Evidence that he could handsomely and advantagiously produce against so
considerable a party of the greatest Citizens, he thought might prove only a
matter of Envy to him, and an Occasion for them to sham it off.

Cicer. in Cat. Orat. prima. cap 3.
However, the Necessity of Affairs so requiring, he does just before the day of
Election, which was appointed to be XII Call. Nov. our 21st. of October,
acquaint the Senate, that to his knowledge there were not only private Designs
laid at home, but that before VI. Call. Nov. our 27th. of October, Caius Manlius
would openly appear in Arms: Tum igitur his rebus auditis, meministis fieri
Senatus eonsultum, referente me, ne postero die comitia haberentur, ut de his
rebus in Senatu agere possemus. Cicer. Orat. pro L. Muraena. cap. 25.
Upon which, the Decree past for putting off the Election, that these things
might be first Treated of in the Senate.

Itaque postridie, frequenti Senatu, Catilinam excitavi, atque eum de his rebus
jussi, si quid vellet, quae ad me allatae essent, dicere. Atque ille, ut semper
fuit apertissimus, non se purgavit, sed indicavit atque induit. Tum enim dixit,
duo corpora esse reipublicae, unum debile, infirmo capite: Alterum firmum, sine
capite: huic, cum ita de se meritum esset, caput, se vivo, non defuturum.
Cicer. pro L. Muraena. cap. 25.
The day after, in a full House, Cicero urged Catiline with an Accusation of his
whole Conspiracy, and commanded him to Answer what was alleged against him.

Catiline was so far from being concerned to clear himself, that he boldly
affirmed there were two several Bodies in the Commonwealth, one weak with a
crazy Head, the other strong without any Head at all; but that this latter,
which had well deserved of him, should never want an Head whilst he lived.
(...). Plut. Cicer. page 867.
which cunningly tending to raise a distinct Interest between the Senate and
the People, exceedingly perplexed Cicero.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. page 48.
Nor could he get those things to pass which he proposed to the Senate; there
being a general suspicion that the Accusations were not true, and that the
Conspirators were for some private grudges falsely Impeached.

The Election therefore was not put off any longer, His rebus commotus, and
quod homines jam tum conspiratos cum gladiis in campum deduci a Catilina
sciebam, descendi in campum cum firmissimo praesidio fortissimorum virorum, and
tum illa lata, insignique lorica, non quae me tegeret (etenim sciebam Catilinam
non latus, non ventrem, sed caput, and collum solere petere) verum ut omnes
boni animadverterent, and cum in metu, and periculo Consulem viderent, id quod
est factum, ad opem, praesidiumque meum concurrerent. Cicer. pro L. Muraena.
cap. 20.
but Cicero knowing what a design there was upon him, came attended into the
Field with a strong Guard of Faithful and Valiant Men, covering his Breast and
Belly with a piece of broad conspicuous Armor, not so much to prevent Catiline
(who would rather aim at his Head or Throat) as to make the People know in what
fear and danger their Consul was; that they might, as they Honestly did, get
together for his Defense and Assistance.

Ego tectus praesidio firmo amicorum, Catilinae tum and Autronii copias, and
conatum repressi. Cicer. pro. P. Sulla. cap. ^8.
Thus he represt all those Forces which Catiline and Autronius brought along
with them, and stifled all their Endeavors; for the (...). Plut. Cicer page
86^.
People with great concern surrounded him, and at last by a Majority of
Suffrages, putting by Catiline, chose Decius Julius Silanus, and Caius Muraena,
who were presently declared Consuls Elect.

Interea Romae multa simul moliri: Consuli insidias tendere: parare incendia:
opportuna loca armatis hominibus obsidere: ipse cum telo esse, item alios
jubere, hortari, uti semper intenti, paratique essent: dies, noctesque
festinare, vigilare, neque insomniis, neque labor fatigari. Sall. Bell. Cat.
cap. 27.
Catiline was so enraged at this Repulse from the Consulship, that he never
left prosecuting his Conspiracy with the greatest diligence; turns every stone
to make some Mischief in the City, provides for Firing it, lays wait for the
Consul, distributes Armed Men into the most Advantageous places, carries about
with him a desperate Weapon, exhorts all his Associates to be in continual
readiness, and to the greatest fatigue exercised all those endowments which
Nature had bestowed either upon his Body or Mind.

(...). Plut. Cicer. page 868.
The Soldiers in Etruria now began to draw together in a Body, and the
appointed time of their rising upon VI Kal. Nov. our 27th. of October,
approached; but in the interim one Night very late, the most Principal Persons
of the City came to Cicero's House, they were Marcus Crassus, Marcus Marcellus,
Scipio Metellus. The Porter being knocked up, and commanded to tell the Consul
who were there, they presently had admission: Crassus informed Cicero that
there was a Letter sent to him from an unknown Person, which he received since
Supper, acquainting him of a great Massacre intended by Catiline, and therefore
Advising him immediately to retire out of the City. That there were several
Letters to other Persons in the same Packet, all which he brought unopened
along with him; for being struck with an apprehension of so great a danger, he
was desirous to repair to him, and deliver the rest into his Hands; which he
did both to clear himself from all that suspicion his former Acquaintance with
Catiline might have raised, and to make the best Provision against the designed
Treason.

Cicero having Advised with them, Summoned the Senate to appear next Morning by
break of day, and there delivering the Letters to every Person, as they were
particularly directed, Commanded that they should be read publicly; which
being done, they were all found to contain Advice of the same Design.

Itaque quod plerumque in atroci negotio solet, Senatus decrevit, ut darent
operam Consules, ne quid respub. Detrimenti caperet. Ea potestas per Senatum,
more Romano, Magistratui maxima permittitur, exercitum parare, bellum gerere,
coercere omnibus modis socios, atque cives: domi, militiaeque imperium, atque
judicium summum habere, aliter, sine populi jussu, nulli earum rerum Consali
jus est. Sall. Bell. Cat. cap. 29.
Then, as was usual upon great Emergencies, a Decree passed, that the Consuls
take care the Commonwealth should receive no hurt, which did imply the
greatest Power (according to the Roman Custom) given by the Senate to them: To
raise an Army, to wage War, by all means to restrain Allies or Citizens: To
have Sovereign Command, and Judicature both Foreign and Domestic: Otherwise
none of these were in the Consuls Power without an Edict from the People.

(...). Dio Cass. lib. 37. page 49.
Presently there was such strict Watch and Ward kept throughout the whole City,
that the Conspirators could not get the least Opportunity either to Fire any
part of it, or to make any disturbance, which necessitated them to so great a
quiet, that they began again to make the People believe it was only a Plot of
Cicero's own inventing to destroy some of the Ancient Nobility, which he could
not pretend to, and ever bore a grudge against.

Post paucos dies L. Senius Senator in Senatu literas recitavit, quas Faesulis
allatas sibi dicebat; in quibus scriptum erat, C. Manlium arma cepisse, cum
magna multitudine ante diem VI Kal. Nov. simul, id quod in tali re solet, alii
portenta atque prodigia nunciabant: alii conventus fieri, arma portari. Capuae,
atque in Apulia servile bellum moveri. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 30.
But then it happened that Lucius Senius, a Senator, received Letters from
Faesulae, which he recited Publicly in the Senate, importing that Caius
Manlius had with a great Multitude taken up Arms upon VI Call. Nov. our 27th. of
October. There were also many other Informations brought, as is usual at such a
time; some gave an Account of Arms carried to them, and Musters which they
held, that in Capua, and Apulia a new Servile War was beginning to be stirred
up. Others related several Prodigies and Portentous Occurrences, by which
(...). Plut. Cicer. page 867.
(says the Judicious Plutarch) the Divinity was pleased to discover those
things which were a doing: They are true Indications in respect of Men, though
not of so particular application as to Convict such an Eminent and Powerful a
Person as Catiline.

Igitur Senati decreto Q. Marcius Rex Faesulas, Q. Metellus Creticus in
Apuliam, circumque ea loca missi sunt. Hi utrique ad urbem imperatores erant
impediti, ne triumpharent, calumnia paucorum, quibus omnia honesta, atque
inhonesta, vendere mos erat. Sed Praetores Q. Pompeius Rufus Capuam, Q.
Metellus Celer in agrum Picenum: hisque permissum est, uti pro tempore, atque
periculo exercitum compararent. Sall. Bell. Cat. cap. 30.
Upon this, another Decree of the Senate passed, that Q. Marcius Rex should be
sent with an Army to Faesulae, Q. Metellus Creticus into Apulia; Persons of
great Worth, but by the Interest of some few, who exposed to Sale both the
Honors and dishonours of the Commonwealth, denied Solemnizing those Triumphs
which were due to them.

The Praetors, Q. Pompeius Rufus was sent to Capua, Q. Metellus Celer into the
Picene Country, each of them permitted to raise Men, and provide every thing
as Occasion should require.

Ad hoc, si quis indicasset de conjuratione, quae contra remp. facta erat,
praemium decreverant, servo libertatem and H. S. C. Libero impunitatem ejus
rei, and H. S. C. C. Ibid.
'Twas also Decreed, That if any Person would come in, and make Discovery of
this Conspiracy against the Commonwealth, if he was a Servant, he should have
his Freedom, and an hundred Sestertia ( Dr. Hackwel's Value of the Roman
Sesterces, compared to the English Coin; prefixed to his Apology.
which of our Money are seven hundred eighty one pounds five shillings) if he
were already a Freeman, he should have his Pardon and two hundred Sestertia,
being 1562 l. 5 s.

Itemque decrevere, uti familiae gladiatoriae Capuam, and in caetera municipia
distribuerentur pro cujusque opibus; Romae per totam urbem Vigiliae haberentur,
eisque minores magistratus praeessent. Quibus rebus permota civitas, atque
immutata facies urbis erat: ex summa laetitia, atque lascivia, quae diuturna
quies pepererat, repent omnes tristitia invaesit, festinare, trepidare: Neque
loco, neque homini cuiquam satis credere: neque bellum gerere, neque pacem
habere: suo quisque metu pericula metiri. Ad hoc, mulieres, quibus pro reip.
magnitudine belli timor insolitus incesserat, afflictare sese; manus supplices
ad Coelum tendere; miserari parvos liberos, rogitare; omnia pavere: superbia,
atque deliciis omissis, sibi patriaeque diffidere. Sall. Bell. Cat. cap. 30, 31.
That all the Schools of Gladiators should break up, and be dispersed about the
Free Towns of Italy, according as they were best able to maintain them: That
the strictest Guards should be kept thorough the City, and the lesser
Magistrates be themselves upon the Watch.

By these Transactions were the People filled with the dread of the Plot, and
the face of the City was changed, from the highest Jollity and Wantonness which
a serene Peace had fostered, they fell into a sudden consternation; they did
not know what place or what Man to trust, they could neither tell how to think
of War, nor could they expect Peace. Every one took measure of the dangers by
his own Fears: But especially the Women, (who in the present greatness of the
Roman Empire, were wont only to hear of Wars in the farthest distant Nations,
and see the Triumphs at home) were now possessed with the greatest Amazement:
They lifted up their Hands to Heaven, wept over their Young Children, prayed
and trembled, forsook their Ornaments and delicacies, as being suddenly to be
destroyed with their Ruined Country.

For all this, Catiline's Cruel Rage was not in the least abated, he thought to
brazen out all by the most hardened Impudence and Dissimulation: (...). Dio
Cass. Lib. 37. page 49.
Notwithstanding all the Accusations that were against him, he (as most
Innocent) was willing to appear before any Tribunal, he was ready for a Trial,
he would deliver himself up to the Custody of Cicero himself (which the Consul
refusing) he went and dwelt with Metellus, then Praetor, and of good
Reputation, that none might think he affected the least disturbance. Cicer.
Orat. in Cat. 1. Cap. 8.
Though Cicero says, that Metellus also denied him, and he was at last received
by Marcus Marcellus.

Which of them soever it was, without being missed, he Quid tandem de illa
nocte dicet cum inter falcarios ad M. Leccam, nocte ea, quae consecuta est
posterum diem Nonarum November. me Consule, Catilinae denunciatione convenio?
Cicer. pro P. Sulla. cap. 18.
meets the Principal Conspirators upon the day after the Nones, being our sixth
of November, at the House of Porcius Lecca very late in the Night: (...). Dio
Cass. Lib. 37. page 49, 50.
And there chides them for their sloth and Cowardice; sets before them the
danger of more Discoveries, which would continually be made if they did delay
any longer, and what success they were like to have by a speedy execution: That
all things were ready, and he Seque ad exercitum proficisci cupere, si prius
Ciceronem oppressisset: eum suis consiliis multum officere. Igitur, perterritis
ac dubitantibus caeteris, C. Cornelius, Eques Romanus, operam suam pollicitus.
and cum eo L. Vargunteius Senator, constituere ea nocte paulo post, cum armatis
hominibus, sicuti salutatum introire ad Ciceronem, and de improviso domi suae
imparatum confodere. Curious, ubi intelligit, quantum periculum Consuli
impendebat, propere per Fulviam Ciceroni dolum, qui parabatur enunciat. Ita
illi janua prohibiti, tantum facinus frustra susceparant. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap.
27, 28.
very much desired to be gone to the Army: That if Cicero was but removed out
of the way, there would be nothing else to stop their proceedings. Being all at
a stand, filled both with Rage and Fear, Lucius Vargunteius, a Senator, and
Caius Cornelius, a Roman Knight, promise that Night (which then grew very near
Morning) with some Armed Men, they would, under pretense of a Visit, get Access
to Cicero, and stab him in his own House; but Quintus Curious did by Fulvia
presently discover the Treachery to Cicero, whereupon Admittance was denied
them, and so base an Assassination in vain undertaken.

For all this, Catiline ventures the next day into the Senate, which was held
(...). Plut. Cicer. page 868.
in the Temple of Jupiter Stator, whom the Consul M. Tullius Cicero Tum M.
Tullius Consul orationem habuit luculentam, atque utilem reipub. quam postea
scriptam edidit. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 31.
received with this Excellent Oration, the first of those that were written,
and are still extant against Catiline.

HOW long, Catiline, will you abuse our Patience? How long shall this your
boldness beat us off? Whither at length will your unbridled Impudence arrive?
Are the extraordinary Guards of the Palace nothing to you? The strict Watch of
the City, nothing? The Fears of the People, nothing? Does the concourse of all
good Men, this strong and Sacred place in which the Senate is met, the Presence
of this Assembly, nothing move you? Do not you see that your Counsels are
detected? Don't you perceive that the belief of your Conspiracy is written upon
the Countenances of most here? Do you think us ignorant of what you did last
Night? What the Night before? Where you met? Whom you called together? What
Result you came to? O Times! O Manners! The Senate knows all this, the Consul
sees it, and yet the Traitor lives. Lives! Ay, and comes into the Senate,
partakes of the Public Counsel, Observes, and Marks out with his Eye which of
us he designs to Murder. But we think our selves Courageous enough, and to have
given sufficient Satisfaction to the Commonwealth, if we can but avoid his
Rage and Weapons. No, this must not be all: You deserved, Catiline, long ago to
have been put to death by the Consular Command, to have fallen into the
destruction which you had been so diligently preparing for us all. Did that
Excellent Person, Publius Scipio the Chief Priest, being yet a Private Man,
kill Tiberius Gracchus, who made but a small disturbance? And shall we Consuls
permit Catiline who designed to fill the whole Earth with slaughter and
destruction, to go unpunished? I need not insist on that Ancient President of
Quintus Servilius Ahala, who slew with his own Hand Sp. Melius, for but
designing to alter the Government. This, this was the Ancient Valor in the
Common wealth, that our Heroic Ancestors would suppress a pernicious Citizen
with more severe Punishments than the fiercest Enemy. We have a Decree forcible
and weighty, already made against you, Catiline: The Commonwealth does not
want Counsel, nor this State Authority: No, no, I speak plainly, we the Consuls
are deficient.

2. It was formerly Decreed by the Senate, that Lucius Opimius the Consul
should take care that the Commonwealth might be Preserved; immediately upon
which he caused Caius Gracchus, descended of a good Family, to be Executed,
being but suspected of Seditious Practices: So also M. Fulvius, who was of
Consular Dignity, with his Children, were put to death. Another president for
this we have, when by a like Decree, the Commonwealth was committed to Caius
Marius, and Lucius Valerius the Consuls; and was there one Day passed, before
death and the just vengeance of the Commonwealth overtook Lucius Saturninus
Tribune of the People, and Caius Servilius the Praetor: Yet is this the
Twentieth Day that we have permitted the Power of these Laws and Examples to
languish. We have a Decree conformable to these presidents upon Record, which
yet lies dormant in the Rolls rusting in its own Sheath, by which it is
requisite for you Catiline to die: Yet you still live, and live, not to repent
of, but to increase your impudence. I desire, O Conscript Fathers, to be
merciful, but not slothful in so great dangers of the Commonwealth: And now it
is that I condemn my self of backwardness and neglect. A Rebellion is raised in
Italy upon the Confines of Etruria, against the State; the Number of the
Enemies increase daily: Yet does the Commander of all these Rebel-forces, the
Head of their Conspiracy, remain within the City Walls, and contrive our
destruction in the very Senate. If I should now seize you Catiline, and command
you to be put to death, I doubt not but all good men would look upon my
proceedings as too slow, not as too severe and cruel. But I will not do it yet;
I will stay a little longer, and will then deliver you to execution, (and not
till then) when there shall be no Man however corrupt, extravagant, and like
your self, that will not acknowledge it a just deed. As long as there is any so
stupid or impudent; as to stand up for your defense you may live: But it shall
be so as you now live, compassed about with such Guards, as you may not be able
to effect any thing against the public Safety. Many Eyes will be upon you,
many Ears employed to hearken out your designs, and not a few (as they have
always done) will still continue to observe your most secret machinations.

3. What is it O Catiline that you can expect, seeing neither the darkness of
the Night can obscure your horrid Designs, or keep your Seditious meetings
secret; neither the most retired place of your Houses conceal your
Consultations, and traitorous agreements? Seeing all of them are plainly
detected; all discovered: For once be advised by me; change your Mind, take
other Measures; blot the black Characters of Ruin, Murder, and Rapine out of
your Mind: We have you every way: Your Counsels, and intents are all perfectly
disclosed; which if you please you might now with me recognize: Don't you
remember that upon XII Call. Novem. I informed the Senate that on a certain Day,
viz. before the VI. Call. Nov. C. Manlius that Prodigy of Impudence, and your
Creature, would be in Arms: Did that intelligence fail me, Catiline? I did not
only discover so great, so cruel, so incredible an enterprise, but that which
is more to be admired, I exactly told the very Day. I said the same in the
Senate, that you intended the Massacre of the Nobility upon V. Kal. Nov. when
many of the chief men of the City should be gone from Rome, not so much for
their own safety as to defeat your Designs. Can you deny that when you saw your
self hemmed in with Guards, by my appointment, set to observe you; so that you
could effect nothing against the public safety, and perceiving that many were
gone out of the City, you said to some of your fellow Conspirators, that you
would be content with the slaughter of us who staid behind. What? when you
expected that Praeneste should on the Calends of November be surprised in the
Night time, did you then know that it was fortified and defended with strength
sufficient by my care? There is none of your debates, resolutions, and most
secret intentions, which I am not punctually informed of, and do not perfectly
understand.

4. Call to mind with me what was done the other Night, and you will soon
perceive that I am more diligent and watchful to preserve then you are to
destroy the State. I say that the night before last, you went with a Company of
armed Ruffians (for I will discover all) into the House of M. Lecca, that there
were also congregated several of your Associates in this wickedness; dare you
deny this? Or will you say nothing? I will prove every Tittle, if you have the
Confidence to contradict it. For I see several in the Senate who were there
with you. O immortal Powers! What an Age do we live in? How is the
Commonwealth governed? In what City are we. Here, even here among our selves,
O Conscript Fathers, in this most Sacred, most Grave, and most Wise Assembly of
the whole Earth, are those now sitting who Plot my death and the destruction of
us all, intend to raze this City, and in it the Empire of the whole World.
These I the Consul behold here, and ask their Counsel for the Commonwealth:
Those who deserved Death long ago I have not yet impeached. You were, O
Catiline, at Lecca's that Night; you then distributed Italy among your selves,
allotted to every one some place over which he should praeside; chose out some
to leave behind at Rome, others to take with you; divided the City into several
Parts for carrying on the Fire: Determined immediately to go hence; and declared
that nothing remained to be effected in order to your departure, but my Death.
For which, you soon found two Roman Knights, who to ease you of that care,
offered themselves, undertaking to murder me the same Night in my Bed. Your
consult was scarce broken up, before I was made acquainted with these resolves:
Whereupon I put my self into a posture of defense and fortified my House:
refused those entrance who came thither about break of Day, to give me the good
morrow from you: Having told several very considerable Persons what time such
would come, and what their Errand was.

5. Therefore I will thus advise you, Catiline, go on as you have begun; but
you must withdraw from the City: The Gates are open: None will compel your
stay. The Manlian Forces have too long wanted their General; go to them, but,
be sure, carry your whole party, (at least as many as you can) with you, purge
the City. If I once get these Walls between us, I shall be freed of my greatest
fears. I will allow you so much advantage, but that you should be any longer
with us, I cannot bear, cannot suffer, cannot endure. Let us give our most
hearty thanks to the immortal Gods, especially to Jupiter Stator the Defender
and Patron of this most ancient City, for that we have so often escaped so
dreadful, so horrible, so dangerous, and so pestilent a Conspiracy. The whole
safety of the Commonwealth ought not to be often hazarded upon the account of
one Man. 'As long as your designs were laid against me being only Consul Elect,
I did not defend my self with the public Arms, but by my own private care.
When at this last Consular Election you plotted to kill me being then Consul,
together with your competitors I defeated all your nefarious endeavors by the
help and assistance of my Friends without any Public stirs; as often as you
made attempts upon my Life, so often I opposed you with my own Strength:
Although I foresaw that my fall would give a great blow to the Commonwealth.
But now you openly seek the ruin of the whole State, design to destroy the
Temples of the immortal Gods, demolish this City, murder the Citizens, and lay
wast all Italy: Therefore seeing I cannot at present act according as (by
ancient presidents of the Empire) I might justly do; I will do that which has
less of severity, but is far more conducing to the Public good. If I cause you
to be executed, the Seeds of your Sedition will yet remain in the midst of us;
but if (as I have often exhorted you) you go away, your Comrades, the great and
noisome Sink of the Commonwealth, will be drained out of the City. What is it
that you stick at, Catiline? Are you unwilling to do what you had before
determined, now I command it? The Consul requires an Enemy to withdraw out of
the City: Do you enquire whether I command you into Exile? I enjoin it not, but
I would persuade you to it.

6. For what is it, O Catiline, that you can now delight in at Rome? Where
there is not one Person except such profligate Wretches as are of your own
Gang, but avoid and hate you. What Mark of private Wickedness is there which is
not conspicuously branded on you? Does not all infamy cleave to your Name? What
Lust ever escaped your Eye? What Villainy your Hand? What Vice is there that
has not seized your whole Body? What Youth, by you drawn into Vice, whom you
have not hardened in impudence, drenched in Lust, and inured to Murder? And even
lately upon the Death of your first Wife, did not you slay your own Son, and
heap one incredible Villainy upon another to make way for your second Nuptials?
But I shall pass by this, lest I should disgrace this City by mentioning such
an horrid Impiety to have been in it, and not to have been sufficiently
punished: I omit to mention the ruins of your Estate, which now hang over you,
and will quite crush you by the next Ides. I will only insist upon such things
as concern, not your own private Debaucheries, and filthiness, not your straits
and wants, but the safety and welfare of the Commonwealth, and every one here
present. Can you take any content in living here? Can this Air be pleasant to
you, when you know that there is none of us ignorant, that you came to the
Election upon the Day before the Calends of January, when Lepidus and Tullus
were Consuls, armed with a Dart, ready to slay the Consuls and Chief men of the
City? And that you were not prevented by any fear, or terror occasioned by the
horridness of the Fact, (no, there was no room for that in your desperate
Breast,) but by the good fortune of the Commonwealth? But I shall insist no
longer on these actions, they are known publicly and are still fresh in every
ones Memory. How many times did you endeavor to take away my Life when I was
Consul Elect? How often when I was actually in that Office? How many of your
attempts which seemed inevitable, have I frustrated, how often have I put by
the very fatal thrust? There are none of your contrivances, purposes, or
machinations, of which I have not a perfect knowledge; yet will you not cease
to meditate and endeavor our destruction. How often has your Dagger been
wrested out of your Hands? How often has it fallen, as it were slipped out of
your Hands by chance? Yet can you not be without it: What Ceremonies you have
used in the Consecration of it I know not, but sure I am, you esteem your self
under a necessity to murder the Consul therewith.

7. Now what sort of life do you think to lead? For I speak now not as inflamed
with hatred which you have deserved, but as moved with pity, which you have no
way merited. You came just now into the Senate: Who was there, in so great a
Company, among so many of your Friends and intimate Acquaintance, that afforded
you a Salutation? If the like never happened in the memory of Man; what need is
there of an open reprimand, seeing you are already condemned by great silence?
What was the cause that at your entrance, these Seats were left empty? That all
those of consular Dignity, marked out for destruction by you, as soon as you
sat down removed from the places which were near you, as infectious? How do you
think to bear this? Certainly if my servants did thus avoid me, as all these
worthy Citizens do you, I should believe it high time to leave my House: and do
you think the City a place for you? If I were so shrewdly suspected and
attainted by my Contrymen as you are, I should choose rather to go into a
voluntary Exile, than abide the hateful and estranged looks of my
fellow-Citizens. How can you be so bold as to continue in the presence of those
to whom you are so offensive, who are so disturbed at your sight; and whose
hate your own Conscience tells you is most justly fixed upon you? If your
Parents shunned and hated you, and would be reconciled upon no Terms, I believe
you would hasten out of their sight: Now your Country the common Parent of us
all abhors you, and looks upon you as designing nothing, but unnaturally to
destroy her, yet will you neither stand in aw of their Authority, obey their
commands, nor fear their force. And now, Catiline, she thus seems silently to
plead with you: No Crime has been publicly committed of late years in which
you have not had an Hand; no wickedness, but of your contriving: You have been
continually murdering your fellow Citizens, ruining and destroying your
Companions, yet are you unpunished; you have not only set your self to neglect,
but also to break and overthrow the Laws. All your past offenses, though
scarce tolerable, I bore as well as possibly I could; but now I am wholly
endangered for your sake alone; No designs laid against me, but what have their
rise from Catiline; this is not to be endured. Depart therefore and set me
free, from my fears; that if they have a just Foundation, I may not be
oppressed, if they are only groundless Suspicions I may be eased of them.

8. Now then that your Country does thus expostulate with you, ought she not
to obtain her request although she use no force? What? will you plead, that to
avoid Suspicion you proffered to reside in the House of M. Lepidus? by whom
being refused, you had the impudence to come to me, and desire that I would
keep you in my House. When I had told you that I could not be safe under the
Roof of the same House with you, seeing I was in such great danger from your
being within the Walls of the same City; you went to Q. Metellus the Praetor,
who also rejected you: Then did you resort to your old Friend, honest M.
Marcellus, whom you could not but think could diligently keep, carefully
observe, very courageously punish you. But how far can he be from Bonds, and
Imprisonment, who being conscious of his own guilt seeks to be taken into
Custody? Seeing affairs stand thus, and you cannot with any content remain
here, is it not your best way, Catiline, to go to some other Country, and
devote that life which is thus delivered from condign Punishment, to Exile and
Solitude? Move it you say, to the Senate, and if they command you into Exile,
then you declare you will be gone. I will not propose that, it being contrary
to my manner, yet will I do so much, that you may perceive what their judgment
is: Go out of the City, Catiline, deliver the Commonwealth from their fears:
if you expect I should speak plainer, depart into Exile: What think you now,
Catiline? Do you take notice of, do you consider the silence of all present?
They are of the same mind, none contradict the proposal Why do you expect that
they should speak to you, when you may perceive their Minds by their silence?
Should I speak thus to this brave Youth P. Sextius or to the excellent M.
Marcellus, the Senate would certainly, and might justly lay hands on Me, though
Consul, in this very place. But by not contradicting they approve of what I
advise you to; by suffering, they desire it, by silence they proclaim their
assent. Neither are the Senators, (whose judgment you pretend to value, but
whose lives you cheaply devote to ruin) only of this Mind, the Roman Knights
also, honest and brave men, the whole Body of the Citizens who attend the
Senate discover themselves: They get together, advise, threaten: As you may
have observed. These I can scarce withold from assaulting, and tearing you in
pieces, yet can I persuade them to bring you on your way when you depart from
this place (which you once thought to destroy and ruin,) unto the City Gates.

9. But what is it I am arguing? as if any thing could move you! as if you
could be brought to take better courses: is it possible to persuade you to
think of departing hence? Would the gods gave you such a Mind! Yet I foresee
that, if moved by my word, you should go into Exile, how great a Tempest of
Envy is like to fall upon us, which, though it be at present diverted by a
sense of your wickedness, may, when Posterity has forgot that, fall upon my
head. Yet does this private calamity nothing move me, so it be not accompanied
with public loss. It is in vain to exhort you to consider the heinousness of
your Vices, to fear the just punishments of the Laws, and yield to the
necessities of the Commonwealth; for you are such an one, Catiline, as neither
shame can withold from filthy deeds, nor fear deter from desperate
undertakings, neither can Reason moderate your unreasonable fury. Therefore (as
I have often advised you) depart; and if you will fasten your envy upon me, whom
you account, your most mortal Enemy, go into Exile, then shall I be scarce able
to stem the common censures; if you do go; and if it be by the command of the
Consul alone, I shall very hardly support the weight of that envy. But if you
had rather make an accession to my glory, go forth with the rest of your
debauched, bloody Associates; convey your self to Maulius; encourage those
miserable Citizens; separate your self from all good men; raise War in the
Heart of your own Country; triumph in your Plunderings, and Robberies, that
you may not be accounted thrust out by me among Strangers, but may seem
willingly to have retired to your own party. But why do I thus persuade? When I
know you have sent all things requisite before hand, and how many armed men
stay for you at the Aurelian forum? When I know the Day is agreed upon between
you and Manlius, and by you the Silver Eagle (which I trust shall be fatal both
to you, and your accomplices, which at your House, the Sanctuary of all your
Wickedness was consecrated) is also sent? Would you any longer want that which
you were wont to adore, when you went forth to your Murders? Before whose
Altars you were wont to lift up your right Hand, ready to be imbrued in the
Blood of the Citizens?

10. At length go thither, where your unbridled fury has been long hurrying
you; yet are you not at all grieved but much delighted. This madness you
imbibed with your Nature, nourished by consenting to it, and fortune by
favoring you in it has made it much greater; Peace was never like to please
you, nor could you love War except it were wicked and unjust. You have got
together a Rout of desperate miscreants, vile Persons, who have not only lost
their Estates, but are deprived of all hopes of a recruit. Among these in what
complete joys and pleasures may you carouse, when in all your number you shall
not have so much as the restraining look of one good Man? To this sort of life
you have inured your self, by your continual laborious Villainies: You have
taken up your Lodging upon the Ground, not merely to intrigue an Adultery, but
to perpetrate a Murder: You are accustomed to watch, not only to descry the
security of abused Husbands, but also to prey upon their Goods, when you have
slain them. You have an opportunity to show your great fortitude in enduring
Hunger, Cold, and Want, which you may sufficiently feel in a short time: I did
by putting you beside the Consulship gain this Point, that all your fury will
be spent in Banishment to contrive our ruin; but you will never have those
opportunities to effect it, which you must have enjoyed, had you carried the
Election: And that your rising will be rather termed Plundring than War.

11. Now, O Conscript Fathers! consider diligently, and revolve in your minds
what I say, while I endeavor to answer an Objection my Country might make
against me; if my Country (which is ever dearer to me then my life) if all
Italy, if the whole Commonwealth should thus accost me: What have thou done O
M. Tullius? Him whom thou have found the public Enemy, the Head of the
Conspiracy, who thou know, has Listed broken Citizens and the meanest
Vassals; and is the Author of all our Dangers; have thou thus sent him away out
of the City, that he might be the better enabled to come against it? Why did
you not secure him in the strongest Fetters? Deliver him to be put to Death,
and inflict the justest, that is, the greatest punishment upon him? What could
hinder you? not want of presidents; for how often have Traitorous Citizens been
killed by private men? Did the Laws concerning punishment of Roman Citizens
obstruct it? Never was any suffered to enjoy the Privilege of a Roman Citizen,
being convicted of Treason. Do you stand in fear of the envy of Posterity? You
do very worthily indeed, and gratefully requite the Roman People who raised
you, a private Man of mean Quality of a sudden through all the Degrees of
Honor to the top of Government, if for fear of Envy or Danger, you neglect the
public safety of the Citizens? But if you have any reason to fear Envy, is
that which arises from fortitude, and strictness, or that from sloth and
timorousness most formidable? When Italy is wasted, and destroyed with War, the
Houses demolished and Cities burnt, Do you think you will not then be more
hated?

12. Give me leave now to answer in a few words that Sacred Voice and those who
are of this Opinion. If I thought, O Conscript Fathers, that it were best for
the Commonwealth, the Traitor should not live an Hour; for if the bravest men,
and most famous Citizens, were so far from defiling themselves with the Blood
of Saturninus, of the Gracchi, of Flaccus and several others, that they got
reputation by destroying them; certainly I have no cause to fear the Censure of
Posterity for putting to Death this grand parricide. But granting that I should
incur their utmost Envy; it has always been my Maxim, that Envy procured by
Virtue, is Glory and not Envy. But there are many among us, who either do not
see our Dangers, or else dissemble what they see; who by soft Censures nourish
the hopes of Catiline, and by not believing, feed the Infant Conspiracy: Who,
followed by many well meaning, but unobserving men, if I should have acted
severely against Catiline would cry out of Cruel, and Arbitrary proceedings.
But if he go to the Camp of Manlius, as he did intend, none will be so foolish
as not evidently to perceive a Conspiracy, none so wicked as to deny it. So
that if we now cut off this one Head, it will be no more but only a short
suppression, not an utter extirpation of the mischief. But if he departs, and
takes his packed Company of profligate, necessitous Villains along with him,
not only this so ripe a Plot will he defeated, but the very Stock and Original
of all public evils will be eradicated and destroyed.

13. We have been a long time, O Conscript Fathers, perplexed with these
treasonable Designs, and lurking Snares, but (however it comes to pass) all
these old Intrigues, Impieties, and Treasons, are now come to Maturity in the
time of my Consulship. If we take off this chief of the Conspiracy only, we may
indeed flatter our selves with a temporary cure of it, but the poisonous
infection will still remain, as it were in the Veins and Bowels of the
Commonwealth. As Persons in an high Fever, seem at first refresht with a
draught of cooling Water, but the Disease does by and by rage, and burn the
more, so this distemper in the Commonwealth may seem a little abated by his
punishment, but soon recovering strength, will break forth more violently in
those who yet remain. Therefore, O Conscript Fathers, let these infected
Persons, withdraw from the Society of those who are yet sound, let the City
Walls, as I have often desired, be once between us, let all the Traitors herd
together, that they may at length cease to attempt the Murder of the Consul in
his own House, may no longer beset the Praetors Judicature, or with their
Swords surround the Senate, nor prepare Fireballs for burning the City. Let it
now appear, as if it were written in his Forehead, what every Citizen thinks of
the Commonwealth. 'Methinks, I can promise my self, and you, O Conscript
Fathers, such an indefatigable diligence in us Consuls, so prevalent Authority
in you, so great a Virtue and Valor in the Roman Knights, and so unanimous an
Agreement of all good men, that Catiline being once gone, all his designs will
appear unmasked, defeated, and revenged. With these Omens, go Catiline to that
impious and horrid War; go, and may it be to the safety of the Commonwealth,
but to thy ruin, and to the ruin of all those who have united themselves to
thee in this Treason. And now O Jupiter, whose Temple as well as this City was
Consecrated by Romulus, and whom we truly call the Savior of this Place and
Empire; exclude him and his Associates, from thy Altars, and all other Temples,
from the Houses, and Walls of this City, from the lives and fortunes of the
Citizens: All the Enemies of good men, Traitors to their Country, destroyers
of Italy, Covenanted and Associated among themselves by their Villainies, do
thou prosecute Living and Dead with thine eternal punishments.

Sed ubi ille assedit, Catilina, ut erat paratus ad dissimulanda omnia, demisso
vultu, voce supplici, postulare a patribus, nequid de se temere crederent; Ea
familia ortum, ita se ab adolescentia vitam instituisse, ut omnia bona in spe
haberent: ne existumarent, sibi Patricio homini, cujus i^sius, atque majojorum
plurima beneficia in plebem Romanam essent, perdita republica opus esse, cum
came servaret M. Tullus, inquilinus civis urbis Romae. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 31.
(...). Appian. Alexan. Lib. 2. de Bell Civil.
So soon as the Consul was sat down, Catiline begins (as he was well
accomplished for the purpose) to palliate and dissemble all that had been
spoken against him; he with a submissive Voice and Countenance humbly intreates
the Fathers, that they would not too rashly credit whatsoever had been said of
him; that it was by no means probable; he, who was Born of so ancient a Family,
so well educated, had such fair hopes before him; that he, a Patrician, who by
himself and his Ancestors had deserved so much of the Roman People, should now
want the destruction of the Commonwealth; while M. Tullius a stranger an
Inmate of the other day, pretended so zealously to preserve it.

(w) Proceeding to revile the Consul, many of the Fathers cried out, He was an
Enemy and a Traitor: Whereupon Catiline said as in an heat, that he was
circumvented by his Enemies, and if there was a flame he would extinguish it
with his own ruin. Then returning to his House, he considered how unsuccessful
his attempts had been against the Consul, how well guarded the City was, so
that it would be impossible to Fire any part of it: And therefore resolves
before the Consular Forces were increased to unite with his Army in the Tents
of Manlius.

Ad hoc maledicta alia cum adderet obstrepere omnes; hostem, atque parricidam
vocare, tum ille furibundus: quoniam quidem circumventus, (inquit) ab inimicis
praeceps agor, incendium meum ruina extinguam. Dein se ex curia domum
proripuit, ibi multa secum ipse volvens, quod neque insidiae Consul
procedebant, and ab incendio intelligebat urbem vigiliis munitam, optimum factu
credens exercitum augens ac priusquam legiones scriberentur, multa ante capere,
quae bello usui forent, nocte intempesta cum paucis in Manliana castra
profectus est; Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 32.
Sed Cethego atque Lentulo caeterisque, quorum cognoverat promptam audaciam,
mandat; quibus rebus possent, opes factionis confirment, insidias Consuli
maturent; caedem, inc^ndia aliaque belli facinora parent: sese propediem cum
magno exercitu, ad urbem accessurum, Ibid.
In the City he left Cethegus, Lentulus, and others, to whom (being assured of
their resolutions) he recommends all his Affairs, particularly that they would
strengthen the Interests of the Party, perfect some Plot against the Consul,
have things in readiness for Massacre and Firing: Promising as soon as
possible, to draw toward them with a great Army.

(...). Pluta. Cicer. Page 868.
Having got together about Three hundred Armed men, he, accompanied with them,
left the City about Midnight; and as if he had been an authorized General,
carried his Lictors, and his Axes with him, that arriving at the Rendezvous of
Faesulae, he might display the imperial Ensigns.

Dum haec Romae geruntur, C Manlius ex suo numero legatos ad Q Marcium Regem
mittit, cum mandatis hujuscemodi* Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 33.
But before this, C. Manlius finding that the Forces of Q. Marcius Rex drew
near, sends some of his Company to him, with this or the like following
Remonstrance.

Deos hominesque testamur, imperator, nos arma neque contra patriam c^pisse,
neque quo periculum aliis faceremus, sed uti corpora nostra ab injuria tuta
forent, etc. Ibid.
WE call God and Man to witness, O General! that we have taken up Arms, neither
against our Country, nor to do mischief to any Person, but to defend our
selves from injuries; who being made poor and miserable by the cruelty of
Usurers, are most of us deprived of our Country, all of us of our Goods and
Reputation. Nor is there left to any of us, that which is every ones
Birthright, the benefit of the Law, nor freedom for our Persons when we have
lost our Estates, such are the exactions of the Creditors, and the severity of
the Praetor. Our Ancestors, being compassionate to the Roman People, have often
succored their necessities, by favorable Decrees. And of late, even in our
Memory, when Debts were grown oppressive, then by the advice of all good men a
fourth part was deemed satisfactory, a Farthing to be paid for a Penny.
Oftentimes Common People either stirred up with a desire of Government, or
driven to it by the pride of Magistrates, withdrew their obedience from the
Fathers; but we neither seek Empire nor Riches: (which among Mortal men are the
only causes of War and contention:) all we ask for is our Liberty which no good
Man would lose, except he lose his life also; we conjure you and the Senate,
now to consult the good of undone Citizens, restore us the Protection of Law,
which the injustice of the Praetor has deprived us of; and that you would not
reduce us to a necessity, that we should seek by what means we may best avenge
our Blood, and perish.

Ad haec Q. Marcius respondit; si quid ab Senatu petere vellent, ab armis
discedant; Romam supplices proficiscantur: Ea mansuetudine atque misericordia
senatum populumque Romanum semper fuisse, ut nemo unquam ab eo frustra auxilium
petiverit. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 34.
To this Marcius answered, That if they had any thing to desire of the Senate
they should lay down their Arms, and go as Supplicants to Rome; that the Senate
and Roman People were of such mercy and goodness, as none ever in vain implored
their favor.

At Catilina ex itinere plerisque Consularibus, praeterea optumo cuique literas
mittit, etc. falsis criminibus circumventum, quoniam factioni inimicorum
resistere nequiverit, fortunis cedere, Massiliam in exilium proficisci. Ibid.
Catiline, so soon as ever he had left the City, does upon the Road write back
Letters to several Persons of Consular Dignity, and those that were most
Eminent, assuring them the Crimes were utterly false that had been laid to his
charge; and because he was not able to resist the factious power of his
Enemies, therefore was he resolved to live an Exile at Massilia, a Town
situated upon the Gallick Bay, in the Mediterranean Sea; that and Narbo being
two most Eminent Cities there; still going much by the same name of Marseilles
and Narbonne.

Septima, (Orat. Consul.) quo Catilinam emisi; Octava, quam habui ad populum
postridie, quam Catilina profugit. Cicer. ad Attic. Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
The very next Morning when the news of Catilines nocturnal expedition, and the
sham account of his retirement began to fill the City, Cicero comes into the
public Assembly of the Roman People, and relates to them the whole Affair in
this following Oration.

(...). Strabo. Lib. 2. Page 528.
Cicero's Second Oration against Catiline.
1. WE have now at length, O Quirites, expelled L. Catiline, foaming with rage,
breathing forth Treason, inhumanely plotting his Countrey's ruin, threatening
you, and this whole City with Fire and Sword; or at least we have let him out,
and driven him on by our importunities; he is gone, (what ever you please to
call it) either withdrawn, or escaped, or broken away. This City now no longer
contains within her own Bowels this Monster, this Prodigy, the busy Actor of
perpetual mischief. Certain it is, we have prevailed against him, who is the
only Leader of this intestine War. The treacherous Poniard will not now be so
conversant about our Breast; we may now come to an Election, a Trial, a Senate,
nay, (what was more than formerly we could) we may now enjoy our own Houses,
without continual Terrors. Being driven from the City, he has lost that
advantageous Spot upon which he stood; he is now an open Enemy, and none can
deny but the War against him is just. No doubt but we undid the Man and
obtained a brave Victory, when we drove him out of his lurking Treachery into
apparent Treason. But that he was forced to carry away with him (so contrary to
his wishes) his Dagger unstained with our Blood. That he left us alive behind
him. That we have wrested the Sword out of his Hand, that the Citizens are
saved, and the City standing; you cannot imagine how great his Sorrows are, how
he is broken and subdued by them. Now, O Quirites, he lies, as it were,
prostrate at your Feet; he feels the blow and the fall, casts back his envious
Eyes and weeps over this City for having been rescued out of his devouring
Jaws. But she seems to me refresh't and to rejoice having eased her Stomach of
such a destructive Poison.

2. But if there be any of you (as indeed you ought all to be) concerned, that
I should now glory and triumph in this for which I ought to be severely
censured, as not seizing upon, but promoting the escape of such a Capital
Enemy; Know, O Quirites, that it is not my fault, the times will not bear it.
Catiline ought long ago to have been executed to have been brought to condign
punishment. This, I must confess, the customs of our Ancestors, the exact
Justice of this Empire, the Public Interest have required at my hands: But how
many think you, would have discredited all that I had related? how many by a
stupid easiness would have remained unapprehensive of the Treason? How many
would have favored it? How many corrupted with wicked Principles, would have
even justified it? But for all this could I have thought that the taking him
off, would have sufficiently seemed you from all danger; I had long ago, not
only ventured the envy of it, but readily offered my own Life to the
opportunities of Sacrificing his, But when I saw that notwithstanding there was
such clear proof made before you all, yet if I had punished him (as he deserved)
with Death, I should have been so oppressed with Envy, that I had not been able
to prosecute his Accomplices; I brought it to such a Head that you needed not
openly engage, before he appeared, an open Enemy. This Enemy of ours, O
Quirites, how much he is to be feared now he is abroad, you may apprehend by
this, that nothing, troubles me more than his quitting the City with so small a
Company: Would he had led out all his Forces with him. He carried away
Tongillus, whose very Childhood became infamous by his love. He took also
Publicius and Munatius, whose pitiful Debts in every Tavern did so oppress
them that there was no fear, they could make any stir to the mischief of the
Commonwealth. But then, what considerable Persons has he left behind him?
Indeed deeply engaged in Debt; but withal, both how powerful and how noble they
are, you your selves know.

3. As therefore for that Army of his, which he has collected, consisting of
some old Desperado's, debauched Rusticks and broken Tenants; such, who choose
to follow his Camp, merely to avoid the process of Law; who are ready to run
away not only at the appearance of our Forces, but even at the Praetors Edict;
these are very contemptible in respect of our Gallicane Legions of those that
Q. Metellus has listed in the Picenian and Gallick Country, of those that we
continually Muster at home. But the Gentlemen I see running up and down the
Forum, standing in the Court, sitting in the very Senate, perfumed with Odours,
adorned in Purple; these I could also wish he had carried out for his Soldiers
with him. Who if they continue here, know for certain, are much more to be
dreaded, though absent from the Army, than the Army is, which he has with him.
And this proves how much they are to be feared; they are sensible I know their
Intrigues, yet care not for all that. I know, to whom Apulia is assigned, who
is to have Etruria, who the Picene Country, who the Gallick, who it was that
begged for his part the City-management of the Massacre and Fire. They are
sensible, that all the resolves of the Night before last have been brought to
me; that I yesterday discovered them in the Senate; Catiline himself trembled,
and fled upon it, What do these Men presume upon? I Will assure them they are
much mistaken, if they suppose my former Lenity must be perpetual.

4. That which I have all along labored for, I have now obtained, that all of
you might behold this Plot against the Government made apparent: Unless any of
you can imagine that these who are so like Catiline are not of Catiline's Mind.
And if you do think so, yet know however there can now be no allowance to such
favorable Surmises, the affair it self importunes us to be severe: Yet one
thing will I still grant them; that they may be gone; Oh! let them go; and not
suffer poor Catiline to languish for them. I Will tell them the way, he is gone
the Aurelia Road, if they will but make have, they will reach him before Night. Oh
blessed state, if the sink of this City was but once well drained! Since the
emptying it only of Catiline has given so great ease and refreshment. For what
mischief and villainy can be invented or contrived that he did not design upon
us? What poisoning Artist is there in Italy, what desperate Fencer, what
Hector, what Assassine, what Murderer, what Forgerer, what Cheat, what Bully,
what Whoremaster, what Baud, what Pimp, what Prostitute, what ruined Wretch can
be found who does not presently profess himself of Catiline's Club? What Murder
has there been of late, and he not concerned in it? What villainous rape without
his contrivance? Was there ever such another Artist in debauchery? Sometimes he
was Master of the unnatural Amors, sometimes Mistress; to some he promised the
enjoyment of a Lust, to others the Death of a Father, which was accomplished
not only by his persuasion, but assistance. And now, what a Number of the
vilest Rogues has he got together both from City and Country? There was not
one Bankrupt in Rome, not one necessitous Rascal in any Corner of Italy, but
what he has drawn into the Confederacy of this incredible Treason.

5. But to pursue his various Methods; you mayobserve how he hits each
inclination with a proper difference: If in the Fencing School any one be more
than ordinarily daring, he shall presently boast himself Catiline's Crony; if
the Stage produces any one extremely soft and lecherous, he brags of Catiline's
most agreeable Acquaintance. And this brave Patron of theirs long accustomed to
the exercise of Whoring and Rapine, being inured to Cold and Hunger, to Thirst
and Watching is still cried up by them as hardy and valiant; though in truth
these supports of Valor and advantages for Virtue, are long ago consumed by
his rage and intemperance. Such as he is, had all his Associates attended him;
had all the scandalous crowd of Debauches quitted the Town when he did: Oh
blessed People! Oh happy Government! Oh the unparalled Glory of my
Consulship! For as the World now goes, there is no such thing as a restrained
Lust, a humane and tolerable Intrigue: Nothing now, but Massacre, and Fire, and
Rapine: The have spent their Patrimonies, treated away their Estates; their
Stock has been long consumed, and of late their Credit has been quite cracked,
yet their Lusts are the same they were in their greatest affluence. If after
all they desired nothing but to Drink and Game, to Guttle, and Wench, we might
esteem them wretched, but possibly not intolerable: Whereas now, who can bear
it, that these sloathful Cowards should continually plot against the most
Valiant men? the most Senseless against the most Prudent, the Sots against the
Sober, the Sluggards against the Vigilant? Who sit at a Banquet embracing their
impudent Misses, with heavy Heads and loaded Stomachs, crowned with Garlands,
smeer'd with Ointments, enfeebled with Lechery, and then in the midst of their
Discourse do they belch out the Massacre of good Men, and the firing of the
City. I cannot but assure my self, there is some present judgment hanging over
their Heads; and that those punishments, which have been long due to their
Villainy and Treason, to their Lust and Debauchery, are either now treading upon
their Heels, or not far from them. These, if my Consulship (being not able to
reform) shall root out; it will prolong this Empire, not for a little uncertain
time, but to a steady succession of many Ages. There is no Nation, that we need
dread, no King that dare make War upon the Roman People: All things abroad, Sea
and Land are secured by the Virtue of one General. But there is a War at our
own Doors, Treachery at Home, Danger enclosing us on every side, the Enemy
within us: We are now to engage against Luxury, Rage, Rebellion. This is the
War, O Quirites, in which I now declare my self your General; I willingly load
my self with the enmity of every mischievous Villain. What can be cured, I will
by any means restore: But what must be cut off, I will not suffer to spread to
our public ruin. Wherefore let them be gone, or be quiet: Or, if they will
still stay in the City and retain their former Principles; let them expect to
suffer, what they so much deserve.

6. But some there are, O Quirites, who report that Catiline has been by me
driven into Banishment. If speaking would do it, I would presently send them
after him. For he, certainly, is a very timorous and extremely modest Man, not
able to bear a Consular reprimand; so that so soon as ever he was but bid to go
into Exile, he immediately obeyed and acquiesc'd, Yesterday when I was just
upon being stabbed in my own House, I called a Senate in the Temple of Jupiter
Stator; I informed the Conscript Fathers of the whole Affair. Whither, when
Catiline came, what Sena^or was there, that so much as spoke to him? Who
saluted him? Who looked upon him otherwise than a most mischievous Citizen, or
rather a most dangerous Enemy? Nay, those Noble Persons who were of his
Quality, left that Bench empty and naked, upon which he sat. And now, I am the
cruel Consul that banish Men with a word: I did but ask Catiline, whether he
had a Nocturnal Consult at Lecca's, or No. When he (whose Forehead never failed
him before) was so convinced in Conscience that he at first stood mute: Then I
proceeded to discover; what he had done that Night, where he had been, what he
had resolved upon for the next. Then I gave a plain Description of the whole
Design and Method of the War. When he went to reply, he falter'd and was
plainly baffled: I then asked him, what made him so unresolved in that
Expedition, which he had so long provided for? I told him I knew well enough,
he had sent before his Arms, his Rods and Axes, his Trumpets, his Military
Ensigns, and that Silver Eagle, to which, he had a his House, a Chapel of
Villainy consecrated. Yet I have banished him, who has thus begun a War! Is it
likely that Manlius, the Centurion, who is already encamped in the Fesulane
Country, should proclaim War, against the Romans in his own Name? And so that
Camp has no manner of expectations in Catiline? He (poor Man) is driven into
Exile, withdrawn not to these Forces (as it is said) but to an obscure
retirement at Marseilles.

7.A miserable Province it is, not only to govern, but even to preserve the
Commonwealth. Now, if it had so happened that L. Catiline, circumvented and
defeated by my Councils, Labors, hazards, should in a sudden fright have
changed his resolution, deserted his Party, cast away the Thoughts of War,
quitted his intentions of Treason and Rebellion, betaking himself to Flight and
Exile: It would not have been said, that he was by me disarmed of his
impudence, that he was stunned and terrified by my diligence, that he was
driven from his hopes and designs; but that an uncondemn'd innocent Person was
by the Consul, his power and threats, forced into banishment: And there are
those, who (if he had done so) would have esteemed him not mischievous, but
unfortunate; and me not a most vigilant Consul, but a most cruel Tyrant. Yet
it is worth the while, O Quirites, to bear the tempest of this false and unjust
envy whilst I may shelter you from the danger of this dreadful and bloody War.
Let it be said, he was cast out by me: may it but be true that he is gone into
banishment: But, I am certain, you will not find it so. I Will assure you, I Will
never desire the Immortal God's, that L. Catiline may lead an Army of Rebels,
and you receive Intelligence of his braving it in the Head of them, whereby the
Envy, I have contracted, may be appeased: But within three Days you will know
it too well. And then I fear, it will be more invidiously censured, that I let
him go, than that I cast him out. Such men, as because he is withdrawn, cry
out, he is banished; what would they have said, if he had been executed? Though,
I must say, those that make such a clamor of his retiring to Marseilles, fear
nothing more, than that it should be so: There is none of these commiserating
Creatures, but had much rather he should be gone to Manlius than the
Massilians. And I know him so well, that had he not been at all engaged in the
present designs, his Genius inclines him to die, rather in a Rebellion than an
Exile. However since nothing has happened to him, besides what proceeded from
his own intentions and resolutions (I must except that he went away and left us
alive at Rome) Let us rather wish it true, than complain that he is gone into
banishment.

8. But why do we insist so long upon one Enemy? an Enemy that is now
confessedly so: and whom, because, as I have ever wished, the City Walls do
separate, I no longer fear. But why do we say nothing of those that are left in
Masquerade at Rome, and are amongst us? Whom I (if by any means possible I
could) would endeavor not to be revenged of, but to restore: And why they may
not be restored to the Commonwealth if they would take my advice I cannot
understand: I will tell you, O Quirites, of what sort of men they consist, then
as well as I am able I will afford to each of them the remedy of my advice, and
counsel. One sort is of those who are much in Debt, but of great Estates, and
are so possessed with the love of them, that they will by no means sell any
part of them: These I look upon as the most honorable, for they are indeed
Rich, but their resolutions and humor, are most inexcusable. You are possessed
of Lands, Houses, Goods, Chattels, and every thing else about you, and you
cannot persuade your selves to diminish your possessions, to augment your
Credit. Well, what do you expect? a War? What then? do you think that in a
common ruin your possessions will be so Sacred, as not to be touched? do you
expect Proposals for cancelling old Debts? They are much mistaken that expect
this from Catiline. You shall have new Proposals, by my advice, but such as
must put you upon Selling, nor is there any other way possible, that those who
have Estates should quietly enjoy them. Which if they would have done sooner,
nor have (as is most vain) continued struggling with encumbrances upon their
Farms, we might have enjoyed them, much better and much richer Citizens. But I
think these men are least of all to be dreaded, because they may either be won
over from their intentions, or if they will persist in them, seem more likely
to put up Prayers, than to bear Arms against the Commonwealth.

9. There is another sort of those who are oppressed with Debt and yet desire
to Rule, would have the Government in their hands, think those Honors which
they cannot enjoy in a quiet state, would in the troubles of it fall into their
Laps. To these this seems advisable, which I offer to all the rest, that they
would despair for ever obtaining what they labor for: First, let them know
that I ever watch, am present, and provide for the Commonwealth; then, that
there is a great courage in all good men; a great Concord, a vast multitude,
and mighty Military Forces: Last of all, that the Immortal Gods, are ever ready
to help this invincible People, this most renowned Empire, this most famous
City, against all the violence of Wickedness. But if they had accomplished what
with the greatest madness they desire, can they hope in the Ashes of the City,
and the Blood of the Citizens, (which with impious and cruel Affections they
thirst after that they shall be Consuls, or Dictators, or Kings? Do they not
see, they desire that which, if obtained, must necessarily give the reward to
some Vagabond or Gladiator? The third sort is of those whose Age is almost
spent, yet strong in Experience, of whom is Manlius, to whom Catiline now
succeeds. These men are of those Colonies which Sulla planted at Faesulae,
which I apprehend to have been of the best Citizens, and most Valiant men, but
such who exalted with sudden and unexpected Riches, have lived sumptuously and
extravagantly. They build as if they should be ever happy, and whilst they
delight themselves with their Manors, their Coaches, their great Retinues,
their splendid Feasts, they fall into such Debts, as if ever they would get out
of, Sulla must be raised from the Dead. These have drawn some other Country,
mean, needy Fellows into the same hopes of their old Rapines. Both of which, O
Quirites, I reckon as Robbers, and Plunderers, but I admonish them to leave off
being mad, and fancying Sequestrations, and Dictatorships. For the scars of
those times are so deeply imprinted upon the Citizens, that not only Men, but
even Beasts would be unwilling to undergo them again.

10. The fourth sort is very various, mixed, and turbulent, who have been a
great while sunk, and will never rise, who partly by their sloth, partly by
their imprudence, partly by their expensiveness, stagger in their old Debts.
Who being wearied out, with Suits, Judgments, Prosecutions driven out of the
City, and Country, are retired into that Rendezvous. Whom I do not look so
much upon, to be bold Soldiers as Idle Cheats. If these cannot stand, e'ne let
them fall, but so fall, that neither the City, nor even their next Neigbours,
feel them. But I do not understand this, why if they cannot live honestly, they
must needs desire to perish so basely, or why they should think it a less
trouble to destroy so many with them than to perish alone. The fifth sort is of
Traitors, Assassines, and of all the most villainous whom I do not recall from
Catiline, nor indeed can they ever be parted from him; but let them perish in
the Treason, for they are too many for a Prison to secure. The last sort is not
only of Catiline's number, but his own way and course of Life, his proper
choice, whom he huggs, whom he lays in his Bosom; these you may see well Combed
and Powdered, either with no Beard, or a very neat one, clothed in their wide
long Coats, with Mantles, not Gowns, the industry of whose life, and labourious
watchfulness, is entirely spent in the Revels of the Night. In these Clubs are
conversantall the Gamesters, the Pimps, the Adulterers, the Immodest; these
fine jolly Lads have learned, not only to make love, and receive it, to Sing,
and Dance, but to Stab and Poison; now unless these be driven out, and
destroyed, although Catiline did perish, yet know there would remain a
Catilinarian Seminary in the Commonwealth. But what would those Wretches do?
would they carry their Wenches along with them into the Tents? or can they be
without them these long cold Nights? How will they be able to endure the
Appenines, the Frost and Snow there: unless perhaps they fancy they shall be
better able to endure the Winter, because they have learned to Dance Naked in
their Banquets.

11. A War sure much to be dreaded, when Catiline has with him such a
Praetorian Troop of Drabs. Now Quirites rank the Guards, and Armies, against
these such famous Forces of Catiline: First, to the Gladiator himself baffled
and broken oppose your Consuls and Commanders: Then, against that feeble and
refuse handful of undone Wretches, draw forth the Flower and Strength of all
Italy. Our Colonies, and free Towns shall be set against the rude and country
Garrisons of Catiline. Nor is it necessary that I should compare the rest of
our Forces, Ammunition, Provision, with the Wants and Necessities of that
Rebel. But if all these things were omitted which we are supplied with, and he
wants; set aside the Senate, the Roman Knights and People, the City, the
Treasury, the Customs, all Italy, all the Provinces, and Foreign Nations, if,
I say, all these were omitted, let us but compare the causes together and so
engage; from thence alone we may be assured how miserably they must fall. For
on our side Justice fights, on theirs, Peevishness; on ours Chastity, on theirs
Debauchery; on ours Fidelity, on theirs Fraud; on ours Piety, on theirs
Wickedness; on ours Constancy, on theirs Rashness; on ours Honor, on theirs
Baseness; on ours Continence, on theirs Lust; in a word Equity, Temperance,
Fortitude, Prudence, all the Virtues contend with Injury, Luxury, Sloth, Rage,
and all the Vices: Lastly, Plenty with Wants, good Reason with depraved, a
sound Mind with Madness, a well grounded hope, with a most improbable
Presumption. Now in such an engagement and conflict as this, would not (if the
endeavors of men were wanting) the Immortal Gods themselves force, so many and
so great Vices, to submit to such excellent Virtues.

12. Since things are so, O Quirites, go as I said before, keep Watch and Ward
in your own Houses, I have taken sufficient care, and provided that the City
shall be guarded without your Rising or any Tumult. The Country and Towns
about shall quickly know of Catiline's excursion last Night, and put themselves
into a posture of defense; the Gladiators, (a great part of whom he thought
assured to himself) have not only better resolutions then many Patricians, but
are besides all safe within our power. Q. Metellus whom (foreseeing what came
to pass) I sent before into the Gallicane and Picene Country will either
suppress the Rebel, or else stop all his designs, and proceedings. As to the
management of all other Affairs, the ripening, and transacting of them, we will
refer them to the Senate, which you now know is summoned. But as to those who
have tarried in the City, and were left here by Catiline, that they might plot
against the safety of it, and of all you, though they be Enemies, yet because
they were born Citizens I cannot but again and again admonish them. If my
lenity has seemed to any one too far extended, let him know 'twas upon this
account; that what was hid might have time to break out. But for what is to
come, I am not able to forget that this is my Country, that I am your Consul,
That I must either live with you, or die for you. If there be any that would be
gone they may take their course, no body will stop them at the Gates, there is
no Ambush in the way; but if any one stirs within the City, whom I shall
apprehend not only in the Fact, but in any attempt or design against his
Country, he shall quickly find that there are in this City vigilant Consuls,
Excellent Magistrates, a valiant Senate, Arms, and Prisons, which our Ancestors
designed as punishments for impious villainies.

13.All these things, Quirites, shall be so managed that the greatest Affairs
may be appealed with the least trouble, the greatest dangers with no stir, an
Intestine War; since the Memory of Man most cruel, and potent, by the Conduct
of one Gownman for the General. Which, O Quirites, if possible I would so bring
to pass, that no one how ever mischievous may suffer the punishment of his
wickedness in this City. But if any open violence, any danger imminently
threatening my Country shall, necessarily drive me from this lenity of
Affection; I will then aim at that, which can hardly be expected in so great
and treacherous a War, that not one good Man may perish, and that by the
punishment of a very few, you may all be saved. Which I do not pretend, O
Quirites, to be able to accomplish by my own prudence or humane Counsels, but
by the many and plain intimations of the Immortal Gods: who being my Guides I
am arrived at this hope, this opinion: Who are not now at that distance they
were wont to be when we engaged with a foreign, remote Enemy, but with a more
concerned presence, and assistance, are ready to save their Temples, and the
Houses of this City: whom you now ought, O Quirites, to adore, to pray, and
beseech, that since it has been their pleasure to make this City the most
beautiful, the most flourishing, the most powerful, they would now preserve her
(whose foreign Enemies are subdued by Sea and Land,) from the destructive
villainies of most pernicious Citizens.

Ab his long diversas literat Q. Catulus in senatu recitavit; quas sibi nomine
Catilinae redditas dicebat; earum exemplum infra scriptum est. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap. 34.
Soon after this a Letter was sent from Catiline, to the excellent Q. Luctatius
Catulus very different, from those former by which he had endeavored to
possess the City with a belief that he was only retired to Massilia; not as
Conscious to himself of any ill designs, but only for the sake of the public
quiet, and that no disturbance might arise from engaging with his adversaries.
In this he acquainted the noble Catulus, (of whose goodness he had been
formerly a partaker) with the injuries he had sustained, the public defense of
the Oppressed which he had undertaken, recommending to him the care of his
Family in this time of his distress; upon the receipt whereof, this faithful
Patriot; valuing the Public safety before any particular friendship, and
knowing the duty he owed to his Country was ever to be preferred before all
private Obligations, read the Letter to the Senate, a Copy whereof is here
annexed:

Catilina, Catulo S. Egregia tua fides recognita, mihi-magnis in meis
periculis, fiduciam commendationis meae tribuit, etc.
L. Catiline, to Q. Catulus health. Your Eminent Fidelity which I have had such
Experience of, in my greatest dangers, gives me assurance that I may recommend
my Affairs into your hands. Wherefore I think it less necessary to make any
defense for my proceedings: But to give you the satisfaction of pleading my
Innocence; which upon my Conscience you must submit unto. But thus much I shall
say, that being driven about with injuries and disgraces, deprived of the
Fruits of my Labor and Industry, and of that just Degree of Dignity I had
deserved of the Commonwealth; therefore have I (as my practice has been)
undertaken the public cause of the miserable. Not but that I was able to pay
my own Debts with my own Revenues, especially since the liberality of Aurelia
Orestilla by her own, and her Daughters fortunes, could have given abundant
satisfaction. But because I saw unworthy men promoted to Honor, and my self
oppressed with false suspicions; for this cause have I pursued my hopes (honest
enough as the case stands) of preserving the remainders of my Honor. I was
about to write more, but it is just now told me that there is a force preparing;
I only recommend to you and your fidelity my Orestilla, I beg of you, as you
love your own Children, defend her from injury; Adieu.

(...). Strabo. Lib. 5. Page 229.
Catiline tarrying some few days with C. Flaminius in the Reatine Country,
(which was about Thirty English Miles from Rome) and is now called Sabinia,
from the Sabini, People that anciently inhabited it, whose principal City was
Reate, with little alteration at present named Rieti; Sed ipse, paucos dies
commoratus apud C. Flaminium in agro Reatino, tum vicinitatem ante solicitatam
armis exornat, cum fascibus, atque aliis imperii insignibus in castra ad
Manlium contendit. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 35.
did there Arm the People who were before solicited to his Interest, and then
displaying his Imperial Ensigns marched forward to the Tents of Manlius.

Hec ubi Romae comperta sunt, senatus Catilinam, and Manlium hosts judicant;
caeterae multitudini diem statuit, antequam (...) et sine fraud ab armis
discedere, Praeter rerum capitalium condemnatis. Ibid. Cap. 36.
The News of this was quickly brought to Rome, Catiline and Manlius by Decree of
the Senate adjudged public Enemies, and a Day appointed, by which, if the rest
would lay down their Arms, they should be all pardoned; except those who for
some former Crimes had been condemned to die.

Praeterea, decernit uti consules delectum habeant; Antonius cum exercitu
Catilinam persequi maturet; Cicero urbi prasidio sit. Ibid.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. P. 50.


'Twas decreed also the Consuls should raise an Army as their manner was, by
Electing so many Citizens out of every Company as the occasion required; that
Antonius (whose inclinations to the Conspirarcy were not then known) should
lead them against Catiline, that Cicero should stay at home and guard Rome,
which was the employment that this vigilant Consul did above all desire; for
when the brave Province of Macedon was assigned him, he willingly quitted it to
his Colleague; afterward receiving Gallia in lieu thereof, he still chose to
stay at home and watch over the City, sending Metellus thither, that Catiline
might not get possession of it. At this time also did the Senate lay aside
their Robes of Honor, and put on (as was usual in public dangers and
calamities) a mourning habit.

Ea tempestate mihi imperium populi Romani multo maxume miserabile visum est:
cul cum ad occasum ab ortu solis omnia domita armis parerent, domi otium, atque
divitiae quae prima mortales putant, affluerent, fuere tamen cives qui seque
remque publicam obstinatis animis perditum irent namque duobus senati decretis
ex tanta multitudine neque praemio inducto conjurationem patefecerat neque ex
castris Catilinae quisquam omnium discesserat. Tanta vis morbi, atque uti tabes
plerosque civium animos invaserat. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 36.
And now indeed the State of the Roman Empire appeared very miserable, that when
their Armies abroad had from East to West subdued all those Nations which the
Sun in his daily Circuit discovered to them, when they had Peace and Riches at
home, which Mortals are most apt to dote upon: Then their own Citizens should
with obstinate resolutions proceed to ruin both themselves and the
Commonwealth! For notwithstanding two Decrees of the Senate, yet out of to
great a Number of the Conspirators none could be induced even by hopes of
reward, to make any farther discovery; not one could be persuaded to desert the
Tents of Catiline; such was the power of the Disease, such an inveterate
malignity had seized the generality of Citiz^ns.

But this could not be without some proportionable cause: The Nobles, and the
Commons too had given themselves up to pursue distinct interests, and such as
were most prejudicial to the Common safety. Nam postquam Cneo Pompeio and M.
Crasso Coss. tribunitia potestas restituta est; homines adolescentes summam
potestatem nacti, quibus aetas, animusque ferox erat, coepere, senatum
criminando, plebem exagitare; dein largiendo, atque pollicitando magis
incenderent; ita ipsi clari potentesque fieri. Contra eos summa open nitebatur
pleraque nobilitas, senatus sub specie pro sua magitudine. Namque, uti paucis
verum absolvam, per illa tempora quicunque rempub. agitavere honestis
nominibus, alii, sicuti jura populi defenderent, pars quo senatus auctoritas
maxuma foret, bonum publicum simulantes, pro sua quisque potentia certabat.
Neque illis modestia, neque modus censentionis erat: utrique victoriam
crudeliter exercebant: Ibid. Cap. 38.
For since the last Seven years, that the Tribunitian power (which had been
almost quite taken away by Sylla) was fully restored by the Consuls, Pompey,
and Crassus, some young men, (whose heat and age were over vigorous) obtaining
that uncontrollable Authority, made it their business to traduce the Senate,
and to stir up the People, then by gifts and promises so to inflame them, that
they might thereby become eminent and powerful. On the other side, the Nobility
seemed but to stand their ground, and struggle to maintain their just
greatness. But, to speak a mighty Truth in few Words, Those who had then the
Government in their Hands, did some of them with fair pretenses defend the
Peoples rights, some of them stand up for the Senates Authority, but all of
them counterfeiting the public good, did really contend for the enlargement of
their own particular power, and this without any temper, for when either side
got a Victory, it was pursued to the greatest excess.

Thus, the Empire having contracted so great an indisposition, its Spirits
raised to an immoderate height, then agitated by discontent, envy, ambition,
seemed to be arrived at the critical Moment of its ruin. Sed ubi primum dubiis
rebus novandis spes oblata est, vetus certamen animos eorum arrexit. Quod si
primo praelio Catilina superior aut aequa manu discessisset; profecto magna
clades, atque calamitas rempub. oppressisset; neque illis, qui victoriam adepti
forent, diutius ea uti licuisset, quin defessis and exanguibus, qui plus
possit, imperium atque libertatem extorqueret. Ibid. Cap 31.
The first opportunities of a change awakened the sleeping disease, and began
to set all into an Hectic rage. Had Catiline been Conqueror at the first
engagement, or had he but gone off with equal advantages, vast slaughter, and
calamity had oppressed the Commonwealth: Nor could those that had got the
Victory have long enjoyed it; when they had spent their Blood and fainted, then
some one more powerful would have stepped in and wrested Dominion and Liberty out
of their Hands.

If the sense and experience of Ages could make us wise, how would all that are
imbarqued in one Government, seek its entire undisturbed preservation! It Is
prodigious folly for men in a sinking ship to quarrel who should command, to
scuffle for Goods to furnish their private Cabins; but it is the most extreme
madness to endeavor its loss, that they may enrich themselves by their own
wrecks: Which every one must be guilty of, who enjoys either Goods or life
under the protection of any state, and does not sincerely endeavor its support.

Fuere tamen extra conjurationem complures, qui ad Catilinam intitio profecti
sunt: in his erat Fulvius, Senatoris filius: quem retractum ex itinere parens
necari jussit. Ibid.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. Pa. 52.


Many there were, besides those engaged in Catilines private Conspiracy who upon
his public appearance joined themselves to his Forces: among others, Aulus
Fulvius, a Senators Son; but that truly Roman Father caused him to be brought
back again, and put to death; thereby demonstrating that the affections of a
Patriot might be stronger than those of a Parent: Nor is this any rare Example
among the Roman People, private Persons as well as those in Authority
exercising this severe Jurisdiction over their Children.

Iisdem fere temporibus, in Gallia citeriore, atque ulteriore, item in agro
Piceno, Bruttio, Apulio, motus erat, namque illi, quos ante Catilina dimiserat,
inconsulte, ac veluti per dementiam cuncta simul agere: nocturnis conciliis,
armorum, atque telorum portationibus, festinando, adjutando omnia plus timoris
quam periculi effecerant, ex eo numero complures Q. Metellus Celer Praetor ex
S. C. causa cognita, in vincula conjecerat; item in citeriore Gallia C.
Muraena, qui ei provinciae Legatus praeerat. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 42.
The Insurrections which were breaking out in both the Gallia's, and appeared in
those several parts of Italy, where Catiline had scattered his Emissaries, were
very much suppressed by the Commanders, whom the Senate had sent into the
several Provinces for that purpose: For most of the Rebels acted madly and
rashly, making a great Tumult and Hurry, but with much greater appearance than
danger to the Commonwealth. Q. Metellus Celer in Apulia apprehended many and
committed them to Prison; which was done also by C. Muraena, who was Lieutenant
of the higher Gallia; (...). Strabo, Lib. 5. Page 217.
this is that Country which was particularly called the Cisalpine Gaul,
separated from the further Gallia by the Alps (from whence the distinction had
its denomination) and from the rest of Italy (whereof it is now a part) by
Mount Appennine, which is the great Bank of Etruria, and by the River Aesis at
first, afterward by the River Rubicon, both running into the Adriatic Sea.

Dii faxint, ut meus Collega, vir fortissimus, hoc Catilinae nefarium
latrocinium armatus opprimat: ego togatus, vobis, bonisque omnibus adjutoribus,
hoc, quod conceptum Respubl. periculum parturit, concilio discutiam and
comprimam. Cicer. Orat. pro Muraen. Cap. 29.
At this time whilst Catiline was in Arms, and C. Antonius leading the Consular
Forces against him, an unhappy Controversy fell out, which might have proved
of very ill consequence to the Commonwealth, it being of public concern, and
contested between the most sincere Patriots, whose disagreements must needs be
extremely dangerous, since the safety of all depends upon their unanimity.

Vid. Cicer. Orationem pro Muraena.
Servius Sulpitius late Competitor for the Consulship accuses L. Licinius
Muraena Consul Elect, of Bribery in his canvasing for that high Dignity: Quod
ad Catonem pertinet, summam, illi faelicitatem contigisse, consensus hominum
fatebitur. Quem sibi rerum natura delegit, cum quo metuenda collideret. Seneca,
Lib. de provid. Cap. 3.
M. Porcius Cato the Oracle of Rome, and Elected by Nature as the most eminent
instance of invincible Virtue, becomes also one of his accusers. Si L. Catilina
cum suo consilio nefariorum hominum, quos secum eduxit, hac de re possit
judicare, condemnaret L. Muraenam: si interficere possit, occideret. Cicer.
Orat. pro Mur. Cap. 39.
for though this was much to the advantage of Catiline, who would gladly (had
it been in his power) not only have put by Muraena but cut his Throat; yet
(...). Plutarchi Cato minor. Page 769.
that inflexible Stoic, having sworn to accuse any Person whatsoever who
should give Money to carry the Election, does with great fierceness prosecute
the cause.

The eloquent Hortensius, the powerful Crassus, and the learned Cicero defended
him; Quis mihi in republica potest, aut debet esse conjunctior, quam is, cui
respub. a me una traditur sustinenda, magnis meis laboribus and periculis
sustentata? Cicer. pro Mur. Cap. 2.
the Consul professed it his greatest duty and concern, to put the
Commonwealth, so happily preserved by him, into the Hands of Muraena. Nec
minus vellent, Cato, te quoque aliqua ratione, si possent, tollere: Sed cum
consulari Authoritate, and auxilio spoliatum vim tribunitiam viderint, tum se
facilius inermem, and debilitatum te oppressuros arbitrantur. Ibid. Cap. 38.
Cato Tribune Elect for the ensuing year was bid to consider the storm that
would come upon him, who was raised up by good men to stop the fury of his
pernicious Colleagues: That his Enemies did by all means endeavor to destroy
him, and when his Tribunitian power was bereaved of the Consular assistance,
they would easily suppress him, as he should then be weak and desolate.
Invidiam vero his temporibus habere consulatus ipse nullam potest. Objicitur
enim concionibus Seditiosorum insidiit conjuratorum, telis Catilinae, ad omne
denique periculum, atque ad omnem invidiam Solus opponitur. Ibid. Cap. 39.
That in these times no Man need envy Muraena the Consulship, 'twould expose
him to the slanderous raillery of the Seditious, to the snares of the
Conspirators, to the Darts of Catiline: He must be the Principal Person on whom
all the hatred and danger was like to fall.

This with a great deal more that had been said to the advantage of his
reputation, prevailed upon the Judges, and the Old Election was confirmed.

Now the Conspirators came to lay their last design, in which the entire
Treason might be consummated (...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
the Principal of them left at Rome was, Cornelius Lentulus, whose discontented
and aspiring Genius was mightily raised by the Fortune Tellers of those times:
Singing many Poetic Prophecies, and Oracles which they pretended to have out
of the Sibyllin Records: That three Cornelius's should be Monarchs of Rome,
which had been already accomplished in two, Cinna and Sylla, that now the Fates
were offering to him (the Third Cornelius) the Supreme Power, he ought not to
neglect the acceptance and spoil the opportunity by delay.

Praeterea, ab incenso Capitolio illum esse vigesimum annum, quem saepe ex
prodigiis haruspices respondissent bello civili cruentum fore. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap. 47.
Besides, the Veteri lege sancitum erat, ut priusquam augurandi scientia Romany
innotuisset, haec ad Etruscot deferentur; verba legis sunt: PRODIGIA. ET.
PORTENTA. AD. HETRUSCOS. HARUSPICES. SI. SENATUS. JUSSERIT. DEFERUNTO.
HETRURIAEQUE. PRINCIPES. DISCIPLINAM. DISCUNTO. QUIBUS. DIVIS. DECREVERINT
PROCURANTO. IISDEM. FULGURA. ET. OSTENTA. PIANTA. AUSPICIA. SERVANTO. AUGURI.
PARENTO. Ex hac lege decreto senatus sex optimatum filios Hetruscis in
disciplinam tradi solitos, ut augurandi artem addiscerent, proditum est. Qua
quidem art, Faesulae claruerunt, ubi and domicilium and collegium Augurum
fuit. Peucer. de di vinat.
Hetrurian Prophets, to whom the ancient Laws of Rome committed the Authority
of Divination, and whose Principal College was at Faesulae, often foretold
that this Twentieth Year from the burning of the Capitol Capitolium interjecto
CCCCXV. annorum spacio, L. Scipione, C. Norbano Coss. Flagraverat. curam Vict.
Sulla suscepit, neque tamen dedicavit; hoc solum faelicitati ejus negatum.
Lutalis Catuli nomen, inter tanta Caesarum opera; usque ad Vitellium mansit.
Cor. Tacit. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 72.
which was in the Consulship of Scipio and Norbanus, but again rebuilt by
Sylla, and dedicated in the Name of the Noble Lutatius Catulus should be very
Bloody by a Civil War.

Cicer. Orat. in Cat. 3. Cap. 4.
This was also the Tenth Year since the Vestal Virgins were acquitted from that
Accusation which Catiline and his acquaintance, too much frequenting their
Company, had drawn them into; among which was Fabia, Sister to Terentia, the
Wife of Cicero, who therefore told Catiline in that Oration he made against him
when he was Candidate: You have lived after such a manner, that there is no
place so Holy, but your very access to it, though there be nothing but
Innocence, confers a Crime.

(...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
These Prophetic encouragements, drove Lentulus to such resolutions, that no
small ordinary Villainies would serve his turn, nothing less then murdering the
whole Senate, and as many more Citizens as he was able, nothing less then
burning down the City itself.

Thus superstition, service invented and managed by the Devil is generally made
use of to promote the most horrid Villainies, and to sublimate humane corruption
into the destructive fineness of his own Spiritual wickedness: If at any time
it be accommodated by Politicians to the uses of Government, it may serve a
present turn, but then afterward discovers so much of trick and imposture,
that it cannot be long serviceable to them.

Fabia virgo Vestalis causam incesti dixerat cum ei Catilina objiceretur;
eratque absoluta haec Fabia, quia soror erat Terentiae Ciceronis. Ideo sic
dixit, ita vixisti ut non esset locus tam Sanctus, quo non adventus tuus, etiam
cum culpa nulla subesset, crimen afferret. Ascan. Ped. in Ora. Cicer. in tog.
cand. contra C. Anton. and L. Catil.
Those alone which are truly Divine Oracles can guide our Designs in Virtue and
Happiness, give us sure direction and steady repose in all dangers, teach
infallibly what to revere and what to expect, and on them may we ever rely as a
Foundation unshaken by the succession of all Ages.

(...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
Lentulus resolves to snatch none but Pompey's Children out of the destruction,
whom it was necessary to keep as Pledges of Security against the return of that
great Conqueror; Fines vestri imperii, non terrae, sed coeli regionibus
terminaret. Cicer. in Cat. 3. Cap. 11.
who had now terminated the Bounds of the Roman Empire, not so much by the
Coasts of Earth, as the Regions of Heaven. For it was the Notion of that and
the former Ages, that as the Heavens did encircle this lower World (...).
Strabo. Lib. 1. Page 11.
(acknowledged as a Principle by them to be Sphaerical,) (...). Ibid. Page 2.
so did the great external Ocean encompass the habitable Land, and that again
surrounded the Mediterranean, (or as they called it the internal) Sea.

(...). Plut. Pomp. Page 689.
Pompey therefore having extended his Victorious Conquests to the external
Ocean, thorough all the utmost opposite parts of the Earth, was supposed to
have made them conterminous with the Heavens: He had reached the South-west
shores of the African Ocean: In Spain he had brought the Bounds of the Roman
Empire to the Atlantic Sea (which were the farthest North-west parts that were
known to them, till Caesar afterward visited the Shores of Gaul and Britain:)
Then in the Eastern World in the pursuit of the Albani, he almost touched the
Hircanian or Caspian Sea (which omitting the unknown parts of Tartary and
China, were esteemed the utmost North-east bounds:) And this last expedition
(from whence he was now returning) reached to Arabia, and the Red Sea, the
great inlet of the South-east Indian Ocean.

It was therefore very necessary to provide for his Friendship who had thus
conquered the World, and might very justly be supposed the Master of his own
City when he came back.

At Romae Lentulus cum caeteris, qui principes conjurationis erant, paratis,
uti videbatur, magnis copiis, constituerat, uti, cum Catilina in agrum
Faesulanum cum exercitu venisset, L. Bestia, Tribunus plebis concione habita,
quaereretur de actionibus Ciceronis, bellique gravissimi invidiam, optumo
Consuli imponeret. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 43.
The great appointment which Lentulus and the Conspirators made, was, that when
Catiline had taken the Field with his Army at Faesulae; the City should
presently to correspond with his Motion, be exposed to Fire and Sword.

It was particularly contrived that L. Bestia Tribune of the People should in a
public Assembly complain of Cicero's actions, and transpose the Envy of the
worst War upon the best Consul.

(...), App. Alex. de Bell. Civil. lib. 2.
Appian gives us an account that so soon as intelligence came of Catilines
arrival at Faesulae, Lentulus, and Cethegus were to attend about Cicero's Gate,
who upon the account of their quality being admitted into his Conversation;
should as it were by a prolonged discourse draw him from his Company, and
murder him: That then L. Sextius Tribune of the People should Summon an
Assembly, and accuse Cicero as a Man timorous and turbulent, always alarming
the City when there was not the least cause of fear.

Eo signo, proxuma nocte, caetera multitudo conjurationis suum quisque negotium
exsequeretur. Sed ea divisa hoc modo dicebantur: Statilius and Gabinius uti cum
magna manu duodecim simul opportuna loca urbis incenderent, quo tumultu
facilior aditus ad Consulem, caeterosque quibus insidiae parabantur, fieret.
Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 43.
This Transaction was to be the great signal, that upon the next Night after,
the whole Multitude of the Conspiracy should break out; and every one commit
his assigned Treason. Sallust tells us it was appointed that Statilius and
Gabinius, should with a great Company assisting them, at once set on Fire
Twelve the most opportune places of the City. (...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
Plutarch affirms that the City was distributed into an Hundred parts; to
these, an Hundred Persons were by Lot appointed, each Man particularly
superintendent to his own Ward that all being set on Fire together, the whole
might be one universal conflagration: Others should then attend upon the
Conduits, and cut the Throats of all those who came to fetch Water.

Hoc tempore, cum arderet acerrime, conjuratio: cum Catilina egrederetur ad
exercitum: Lentulus in urbe relinqueretur: Cassius incendiis, Cethegus caedi
praeponeretur: Autronio ut occuparet Etruriam, praescriberetur. Cicer. Orat.
pro Sulla Cap. 19.
Cicero himself gives us this distribution, that Lentulus was left as Principal
in the City, Cassius was to manage the Fire, Cethegus the Massacre: That
Autronius was particularly to Head the Rebellion in Etruria, Cicer. Orat. in
Cat. 3.
Ceperius in Apulia. (...). Plut. Ccer. Page 869.
Lentulus being the grand Orderer of Affairs at Rome, determines the time of
Catilines advance and the Cities destruction to be upon one of the Saturnalia,
a great Festival which lasted for Five days, and Gassendi Roman. Calend.
began upon XVI Call. of January, our Seventeenth of December. Inter haec
parata, atque decreta, Cethegus semper querebatur de ignavia sociorum, illos
dubitando, and dies prolatando magnas opportunitates corrumpere; facto, non
consulto, in tali periculo opus esse: Seque, si pauci adjuvarent, languentibus
aliis, impetum in curiam facturum, Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 43.
Cethegus complained very much of this delay, that his Company thus Spun out
the time and lost their opportunities, that he placing the greatest advantage
in expedition, if any few would help him, was ready presently to set upon the
Senate. (...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
In the mean time his House was made the Magazine of Arms and Fireworks,
particularly of Swords, Tow, and Brimstone.

(...). Ibid.
But whilst these things were transacting, another design was attempted by them,
which over-did the Plot, and happily ruined the whole Affair: They were
desirous not only to strengthen themselves, by drawing in Citizens at home, but
would add (if possible) some foreign Assistance to Catiline: And it happened
that there were then two Ambassadors of the Allobroges, residing at Rome; a
Nation much oppressed by the Roman Government, and which above all hated it.
(...). Strabo. Lib. 4. Page 186.
They were anciently a People who with their Thousands, came down in torrent
expeditions upon the parts of Europe, but at the time of this Conspiracy,
inhabited the Plains and Valleys under the Alps; the most considerable of them
built the City Vienna, formerly a Village, by them made the Metropolis of the
Country: This Gallicane Vienna was situated upon the Banks of Rhodanus which
flowing violently from the Alps into a great Lake, and then running through the
Champaign part of the Allobroges and Segusians mingles its streams with the
Araris at Lugdunum: Which places are now known by the modern Names of Daulpine,
Piedmont, Savoy, and the Lake Lemane.

The Gallick Nation had ever been most fell and fatal to Rome, but the
Conspirators designing her destruction, these were embraced as the most proper
instruments Igitur P. Umbreno cuidam negotium dat; uti legatos Allobrogum
requirat; cosque, si possit, impellat ad societatem belli, existumans public,
privatimque aere alieno oppressos, praeterea quod natura gens Gallica bellicosa
esset; facilius ad tale consilium adduci posse. Umbrenus quod in Gallia
negotiatus erat, plerisque principibus civitatum notus erat, atque eos noverat:
itaque sine mora, ubi primum legatos in foro conspexit, percunctatus pauca de
statu civitatis, and quasi dolens ejus casum, requirere coepit, quem exitum
tantis malis sperarent; postquam illos videt queri de avaritia magistratuum,
accusare senatum, quod in eo auxilii nihil esset; miseriis suis remedium mortem
expectare: At ego (inquit) vobis si modo viri esse vultis, rationem ostendam,
qua tanta mala ista effugiatis. Haec ubi dixit; Allobroges, in spem maxumam
adducti, Umbrenum orare, uti sui misereretur: nihil tam asperum, neque tam
difficile esse, quod non cupidissume facturi essent, dum ea res civitatem aere
alieno liberaret: Ille eos in domum D. Bruti perducit; quod foro propinqua
erat; neque aliena consilii propter Semproniam; nam tum Brutus ab Roma aberat.
Praeterea, Gabbinium accersit, quo major auctoritas sermoni inesset; Eo
praesente conjurationem aperit. nominat socios, praeterea multos cujusque
generis innoxios; quo legatis animus amplior esset: Dein eos, pollicitos operam
suam domu m dimittit. Sall. Bell. Cat.. 40.
for this purpose P. Umbrenus, one who had formerly negotiated in their City,
and was well known to the Principal Persons among them, was employed to draw
them into the Conspiracy; he asked them something of their concerns, pitied
their oppression, and demanded of them what end they could expect of their
sufferings? After he had heard them complain of the Covetousness of their
Magistrates, the negligence of the Senate, and that they could expect nothing
but death as a remedy to their miseries, I know, (says he,) if you would acquit
your selves like men, by what you may yet be delivered.

This raised great hopes in the Allobroges, they beseeched him to have Mercy on
them; that nothing should be so dreadful or difficult, but they would most
readily undertake it, to free their City from the Debts wherewith it was
encumbered.

He led them into the House of D. Brutus, which stood near the Forum, and (
Brutus himself being out of Town) was by the interest of Sempronia, at the
service of the Conspirators. Besides, to add greater Authority to the Proposals
he called in Gabinius and then opens the whole Plot, names all that were really
engaged in it, besides many more of every quality, who knew nothing of it, that
he might enlarge the hopes and resolutions of the Ambassadors; they promised
their aid, and so were at present dismissed.

Sed Allobroges diu in incertum habuere, quidnam concilii caperent: in altera
part erat aes alienum, studium belli, magna merces in spe victoriae: At in
altera majores opes, tuta consilia, pro incerta spe certa praemia. Haec illis
volventibus, tandem vicit fortuna reipublicae; itaque Q. Fabio Sangae cujus
patrocinio civitas plurimum utebatur; rem omnem, uti cognoverant, aperiunt:
Cicero, per Sangam consilio cognito, legatis praecipit, ut studium
conjurationis vehementer simulent, caeteros adeant; been polliceantur, dontque
operam, uti eos quam maxume manifestos habeant. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 41.
But upon farther considerations the Allobrogians became very unresolved what to
do: On one side their oppressing Debts, their love of War, the great rewards of
Victory, much inclined them; on the other, greater alliance, safer Councils,
certain recompense instead of uncertain hopes, offered themselves: amidst these
Thoughts at length the good fortune of the Commonwealth prevailed (...).
Appian. de Bell. Civil. Lib. 2.
They communicate the whole design to Fabius Sanga, the Patron of their City,
(as it was the manner of all the Cities abroad to have their particular
Defensors at Rome.) Sanga goes presently and opens all to Cicero, who directs,
him to command the Ambassadors that they should conceal their discovery,
pretend a vast desire to execute the Plot, visit each Conspirator, promise
their utmost assistance, and above all endeavor to get as much evidence as
possible.

Allobroges ex praecepto Ciceronis per Gabinium caeteros convenient: ab
Lentulo, Cethego, Statilio, item Cassio postulant jus-jurandum, quod signatum
ad cives perferant, aliter haud facile eos ad tantum negotium impelliposse.
Caeteri nihil suspicantes dant. Cassius semet eo brevi venturum pollicetur, ac
paulo ante legatos exurbe proficiscitur. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 44.
To this purpose the Allobrogians by Cicero's command get Gabinius to call all
the Conspirators together, and then demanded of Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius,
and Cassius, a formal Oath to be made by them, which should be signed and
sealed, and so sent to their Citizens; otherwise they could not possibly draw
them in to undertake so great an affair. This was consented to, by all but
Cassius, who suspecting the intrigue, withdrew a little, promising to return
again presently, but from thence went out of Town before the Ambassadors.

Lentulus cum his Titum Vulturtium quendam Crotoniensem mittit; uti Allobroges,
prius quam domum pergerent cum Catilina, data atque accepta fide, societatem
confirmarent. Ibid.
Lentulus thought fit afterward that one from among themselves should be sent
home with the Ambassadors, who might by the way carry Letters to Catiline, and
see them give mutual assurance of their fidelity (...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
the Person pitched upon was Titus of Crotona, to whom were committed such
Letters as were then sent.

His rebus ita actis, constituta nocte, qua proficiscerentur, Cicero, per
legatos cuncta edoctus, L. Valerio Flacco, and C. Pomptino Praetoribus imperat
ut in ponte Milvio per insidias Allobrogum comitatus deprehendant. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 45.
Things having proceeded thus far it was appointed that upon IV. Non. Dec. which
is our Second of December, the Allobrogians should in the Night as privately as
possible begin their Journey; which Cicero being advised of by the Ambassadors
did provide for before hand, by sending Flaccus and Pomptinus two Praetors to
lie in wait for them at the Milvian Bridge: Cicer. Orat. in Cat. 3.
The Company arrived there by that the third Watch of the Night was almost
expired (which with us is near Three a Clock in the Morning) and were presently
beset by two Parties that lay on each side the Bridge, Galli cito cognito
concilio, sine mora praetoribus se tradunt: Vulturtius primo cohortatus
caeteros gladio se a multitu^ine defendit; dein ubi a legatis desertus est,
multa prius de salute sua Pomptinum obtestatus, quod ei notus erat; postremo,
timidus, ac vitae diffidens velut hostibus, sese praetoribus dedit. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 45.
As soon as the Praetors came in, the Gallicanes knowing the design, surrendered
themselves: Titus Vulturtius the Letter-carrier begged of them to stand upon
their defense, he drew his Sword, and for a while defended himself from the
Multitude, but at last being deserted by the Ambassadors, he conjured Pomtinus
to whom he was well known, to preserve him; at last fearful and distrusting his
Life he submitted to the Praetors as Enemies.

Cicer. Orat, in Cat. 3.
An account of this was presently dispatched to the Consul; the Ambassadors and
the Letter-carrier brought to his House at Rome; Cicero immediately sends for
the Conspirators and (...). Plut. Cicer. Page 869.
Summons the Senate by break of day to meet in the Temple of Concord: Taking a
good Omen from the place, Furias antiquus populi superator Hetrusci
Voverat, and voti solverat ille fidem.
Causa, quod a patribus sumptis secesserat omne
Vulgus, and ipsa suas, Roma timebat opes.
Ovid.
it being built by Furius Camillus, upon reconciling a dissension between the
Senate and People. Then Consul Lentulum, quod Praetor erat; ipse manu tenens in
senatum perducit, reliquos cum custodibus in aedem concordiae venire jubet.
Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 46.
leading in the Praetor Lentulus in his own Hand, he read the Letters, Examined
the Evidence, impeached the Conspirators: Quos sciebam memoria; scientia,
consuetudine, and celeritate scribendi, facillime, quae dicerentur, persequi
posse C. Cosconium, qui tunc erat Praetor. M. Messalam, qui tum Praeturam
petebat: P. Nigidium, App. Claudium. Cicer. Orat. pro Sulla, cap. 14.
And having provided three Persons of very good Reputation, and excellency in
writing, C. Cosconius a Praetor, M. Messala a Candidate for the Praetorship,
and App. Claudius who took Notes of all that passed, he did in the afternoon in
a fully Assembly of the People give them a most particular account of the whole
affair in the following Oration.

Cicero's Third Oration against Catiline.
1. Rempublicam, Quirites, vitamque omnium vestrum, etc.
YOu see now, O Quirites, this Commonwealth, your Lives, your Goods, your
Estates, your Wives, your Children, this Seat of the most renowned Empire, this
flourishing and glorious City, this Day by the infinite goodness of the
Immortal Gods toward you, and by my Labors, Counsels, Hazards, rescued from
the Flame, from the Sword, and from the very Jaws of Destruction, preserved and
restored to you. And if those Days in which we are preserved, are no less
memorable, and happy, to us, than those in which we were Born; since the
condition into which we are Born is uncertain, but a present deliverance is
matter of certain joy; since we are Born inapprehensive, but when, preserved
are able to recount the Pleasures of our enjoyments: And if with thankfulness
and glory, we placed Romulus the Founder of this City among the Immortal Gods;
then surely he who saved this same City so built, so augmented, so beautified
deserves to be had in Honor with you and your Posterity. For we have
restrained those Flames which were just kindling, and surrounding the Temples,
the Shrines, the Houses, and Walls of the whole City; we have repelled those
Swords that were drawn upon the Commonwealth, we have put by their points from
your Throats. Which having been discovered, examined, and proved by me in the
Senate, I will now briefly recount to you also, O Quirites, that those of you
who are not yet acquainted therewith, but are in expectation, may apprehend how
great and manifest they are, by what means they were found out and obtained by
us. First, Since Catiline a few Days ago hurried out of the City, and left the
Associates of his Villainy, the fierce Captains of this horrid War at Rome, I
continually watched and provided, O Quirites, that we might be safe amidst so
great and hidden treacheries.

2. For when I cast Catiline out of the City (a word of envy I am not now
afraid of, I rather fear the letting him have gone alive) then, when I sought
to root him out, I was confident either the whole Band of Conspirators would go
along with him, or those that tarried behind must without him be impotent and
ineffective; and when I saw many, whom I knew inflamed with the greatest rage
and wickededness, still left among us at Rome; I so spent all my Days, and
Nights, as I might best pry into both what they did and designed: That since
the incredible greatness of this Treason, must needs diminish the credit of my
Oration, I might so possess my self of the Affair, as not to put you upon
providing for your safety, till with your own Eyes, you beheld the destructive
danger. Therefore, so soon as I found the Allobrogian Ambassadors were
Solicited by P. Lentulus, to stir up a Transalpine War, and a Gallick Sedition;
that they were sent to their own Citizens, and in the same Journey were to
deliver Letters, and instructions to Catiline; that Titus Vulturtius was joined
Agent with them, and to him were the Letters to Catiline committed; I reckoned
I had got the greatest opportunity, to compass that which seemed most
difficult, and which above all I ever begged of the Immortal Gods: that this
Conspiracy might not only be made manifest to me, but to the Senate and you. To
this purpose I yesterday sent for to me L. Flaccus, and C. Pomptinus, valiant
Praetors, and great lovers of the Commonwealth; I told them the whole Affair,
and showed them what I would have done. They, (whose designs were ever
generous, and advantageous for the Public) without any scruple, or delay,
undertook the business, and so soon as it began to be dark, went privately to
the Milvian Bridge; so posting themselves in two Parties about the Neighboring
Villages, that Tiber and the Bridge were between them, Thither also, without
any suspicion, they drew many Valiant men; and several choice young Gentlemen
taken out of the Reatine praefecture, (whose assistance I continually make use
of in preserving the Commonwealth,) I sent thither with their Swords. As the
third Watch of the Night was almost expired, the Allobrogian Ambassadors with
a great retinue, and T. Vulturcius with them, began to enter upon the Bridge;
an on set was made upon them, and Swords drawn on both sides; the two Praetors
only knew the design, the rest acted merely upon their direction.

3. Then Pomptinus, and Flaccus coming in, presently appeased the fight; all
Letters whatsoever were delivered as sealed to the Praetors; and every one of
them that were taken, brought before me about break of Day. Presently I sent
for that Cimbrian Gabinius, the impious contriver of all these Villainies (while
he suspected nothing) to appear before me. Then I called for P. Statilius, and
after him C. Cethegus: but last of all, and much indisposed came Lentulus; I
believe he had sat up very late the Night before, to write Letters more than
ordinary. In the Morning there came to me the greatest and most eminent Persons
of the City, who hearing the news were mightily of the Opinion that I should
open the Letters before I brought them into the Senate; lest they not answering
expectation I should seem to have raised too great an hurry in the City: But I
was positive, not to do any thing in such a public danger, without referring
it to the public Council. For in my Opinion, O Quirites, if those things which
had been discovered to me, had not been found out, yet I think in so great
dangers of the Commonwealth, I could not fear the using of too much diligence.
I presently summoned (as you all know) a full Senate: And in the mean time, by
the advice of the Allobrogians, I sent C. Sulpicius a Praetor, and very trusty,
to search the House of C. Cethegus for Arms, and to bring with him, what he
found there: From whence he has now brought me a very great number of Daggers,
and Swords.

4. I introduced T. Vulturtius without the Gallicanes, and by command of the
Senate, promised him the public Faith: exhorting him without any fear to speak
plainly what he knew. At length, when he had recovered himself out of a pannick
fear, he confessed he was sent by P. Lentulus with Letters, and instructions to
Catiline, to advise him that he would use even all the servile assistance he
could get, and as soon as possible draw toward the City with an Army. And with
this design, that so soon as they had fired every part of it, as it had been
divided and distributed among them; so soon as they had accomplished their
Massacre of the Citizens, he might be at hand to snap those that fled, and then
join himself with these City-Captains. Then were the Gallicane Ambassadors
introduced, who declared, that they had an Oath administered to them, and
Letters from P. Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, addressing to their Country;
that they were directed by L. Cassius to bring their Horse as soon as they
could into Italy, and not to be too slow with their Foot Forces: That Lentulus
did very much assure himself our of the Sybilline Prophecies and Divinations of
the Augurs, he should be the Third Cornelius, who must needs come to the
Government of this City and Empire, the two before him having been Cinna, and
Sylla; that this Year must be fatal to the City and Empire, as being the Tenth
since the Virgins absolution, the Twentieth since the burning of the Capitol:
But this they said was the only dispute between Cethegus, and the rest, they
would have the Massacre, and firing of the City to be upon the Saturnalia;
Cethegus thought that too long a delay.

5. Not to be tedious, O Quirites, we commanded the Letters to be produced, as
they were said to have been delivered to them, by any Person; First, We showed
Cethegus his Seal, he acknowledged it; then we broke it open, and read it
written in his own hand, that he would perform to the Senate, and People of the
Allobroges whatsoever he had undertaken to their Ambassadors; and prayed them
to observe those instructions their Ambassadors now brought them. Then
Cethegus who a little before had made some evasions to those Swords and Daggers
that were taken in his House, saying, That he was ever a lover of good Arms;
upon reading the Letter was so strangely dejected and amazed that restrained by
Conscience he spoke not a word more: Statilius being brought in, acknowledged
both his Hand and Seal: then were his Lettets read of the same import with the
former, which without more ado he confessed. Then I showed Lentulus his Letter,
and asked him whether he would acknowledge his Seal, which he did: I told him
'twas very well known, the Effigies of his Grandfather, an eminent Person one
who most entirely loved his Country and his fellow Citizens; I told him the
very silent appearance thereof, might have been sufficient to recall him from
such a villainous enterprise. The Letters also to the Senate, and People of the
Allobroges were read, and I gave him liberty to speak if he had any thing in
relation to them: At first he denied all, then the whole Evidence being given
and opened, he rose up, and asked the Gallicanes, what he ever had to do with
them, or to what purpose they should ever come to his House: The same he also
demanded of Vulturtius. They answered with brevity, and constancy, who it was
that brought them thither and how often they had been there; and they asked
him, whether he had never spoken to them of the Sybilline Oracle; But then
immediately confoundded with the Treason (such is the power of Conscience!) he
declared, 'twas so. He might have denied the whole, but to the amazement of all
present he made a surprising confession. Thus not only his Wit and Eloquence
for which he was always so eminent, failed him; but such was the conviction of
his discovered and exposed Treason, that his very impudence and equivocation,
wherein he had no equal, were at an utter loss. Vulturtius then presently
demanded that the Letters which were given to him from Lentulus to Catiline,
might be produced and opened: At which Lentulus, was in an extreme disturbance,
yet he acknowledged his Hand and Seal: They had no Name to them, but the words
were these, Who I am you will know by him whom I have sent to you, consider
well in what necessity you are, and remember to be valiant: Consider what the
Estate of your Affairs requires; ask aid of all even the meanest. -- Gabinius
being then brought in began to answer with a great deal of impudence but at
last denied nothing of what the Gallicanes had accused him. And though O
Quirites, the Letters, the Hands, and Seals, lastly every Man's own confession
seemed to me undeniable Arguments, and Evidences of the Treason; yet their
Colors, their Eyes, their Countenances, their silence, gave me much greater
Assurance of their Guilt. So were they amazed, so did they look down, so did
they sometimes steal a look from one another that they seemed, not to have been
discovered by others but by themselves.

6. The Evidences being thus given and opened, I did then, O Quirites, ask the
Senate what was best to be done, for preservation of the Commonwealth. Many
brave and important Proposals were offered by the principal Members, which the
Senate very unanimously followed. And because in our Memory, O Quirites, the
Votes have not been enrolled, I will give you an account what was the sense of
the House. First, Thanks were given me in the largest expressions, for that by
my Virtue, Counsel, and Care, the Commonwealth had been delivered from the
greatest dangers. Then were L. Flaccus, and C. Pomptinus the Praetors, whose
faithful and valiant assistance I made use of most deservedly honored. And
also that excellent Person my Colleague, had thanks imparted to him, for
removing from his own and the public Counsels, all the Abettors of this
Conspiracy. Then it was resolved that P. Lentulus renouncing the Praetorship,
should be committed. That C. Cethegus, L. Statilius, P. Gabinius, who were all
present, should be also committed. The same Decree passed against L. Cassius,
who took upon himself the management of burning the City; against M. Caeparius,
to whom, as it was discovered, Apulia was assigned, that he might raise the
Shepherds of that Country: Against P. Furius, a principal Person of those
Colonies which L. Sulla planted at Faesulae: Against Q. Manlius Chilo, who all
along assisted Furius in soliciting the Allobrogians: Against P. Umbrenus a
Freeman, by whom as it appeared, those Gallicanes were first brought to
Gabinius. And the Senate used such moderation, O Quirites, that out of so great
a Conspiracy, so great an Interest, so great a Multitude of Domestic Enemies,
only by the punishment of Nine most profligate Wretches, it was their Opinion
the Commonwealth might be preserved, the Minds of all the rest that were
disaffected restored to a temper. There was also, O Quirites, a public
Thanksgiving to the Immortal Gods for their especial goodness to us, decreed in
my Name; which no Gown-man ever yet obtained since this City was built; the
Words of the Decree were these: That I had delivered the City from burning, the
Citizens from Massacre, Italy from War. Which Thanksgiving, O Quirites,
compared with others, has this difference; they were appointed for a good
management of the Commonwealth, this alone for its preservation. That which was
first requisite to be done was accordingly transacted; For P. Lentulus convict
by the Evidence, by his own confession, by the judgment of the Senate, did not
only lose the right of a Praetor, but of a Citizen, and laid down his
Magistracy: That (though respect to the Authority, did not restrain the
renowned. C. Marius, from killing C. Glaucias Praetor, of whom nothing was by
Name decreed) we might be delivered even from the Religious awe of that, by now
punishing P. Lentulus as a private Person.

7. Now, Quirites, these impious Leaders of the most horrid and dangerous War
are taken and committed, you may conclude, that all the Forces of Catiline, all
his hopes, all his strength are ruined in the suppression of these. Whom when I
had driven out of the City, I foresaw so far gone, O Quirites, that neither the
drowsiness of P. Lentulus, nor the fat of L. Cassius, nor the furious rashness
of Cethegus, was any more to be dreaded. He alone was to be feared, and that
only so long as he was harbored within the City Walls. Then, he knew every
thing, had access to every Man; then, could, and dared send about, solicit,
suborn: He had advice for every enterprise, nor was his Tongue, or his Hand
wanting to the Execution of his Counsels. Now he has some men chosen, and
appointed for accomplishing his designs; but he was wont never to think any
thing done when he had given Orders for it, there was no thing but what he
himself would undertake, he would set upon it, watch over it, labor in it; he
could bear Cold, and Thirst, and Hunger. And therefore this Man, so eager, so
provided, so bold, so cunning, so watchful in villainy, so active in Treason, if
I had not driven him out of his Domestic lurkings, into his Rendezvous of
Rogues abroad (I tell you truly, O Quirites, what I think) I could not easily
have lifted this vast burden of mischief off your Necks. If he had been here,
he would never have appointed the Saturnalia for you, nor would he have so long
declared the destruction and fatal Day to the Commonwealth; nor would he ever
have committed such an oversight, that his Seal, and his Letters should be
produced as Evidences of his manifest Treason. Which now in his absence are so
managed that there never was any Robbery of a private House so plainly found
out, as this Conspiracy against the Commonwealth is evidently detected and
apprehended. But, if Catiline had continued in the City to this Day, though I
had as much as possible, met and resisted his designs; yet, to speak the least,
we must have engaged with him; nor could we ever whilst he continued an Enemy
in the City have freed the Commonwealth from so great hazards with such Peace,
such Quiet, such Silence.

8. Though I must confess, O Quirites, all these things were so managed by me,
that they seem to have been both laid and performed by the direction and
counsel of the Immortal Gods. This we may very well conclude of, because humane
Counsels can hardly seem to sway so great Transactions; then, at each nick of
time they afforded such present relief and assistance that we have had almost
an ocular demonstration of them. For if I should pass over those blazing Stars
seen in the West, the Heavens burning, the Thunderbolts, the Earthquakes, and
many other such things, which in the time of our Consulship have been so
numerous, that the Immortal Gods seem themselves to have proclaimed what has
now been done. Yet this, O Quirites, which I am now about to say, must by no
means he passed over or left out. You cannot but remember that when Cotta and
Torquatus were Consuls, a great deal of the Capitol was destroyed by Lightning,
the Images of the Immortal Gods beaten down, the Statues of our Ancestors
broken, the Brass upon which our Laws were Engraven, melted: And particularly,
Romulus the Founder of this City was struck; there (as you know,) he lay, a
golden Infant sucking, and gaping after the Teats of the Wolf. At which time
the Augurs flock't together out of all Hetruria, and declared that there were
Massacres and Fires, Eversion of Laws, Civil and Domestic Wars, destruction of
the whole City, and Empire, approaching; unless the Immortal Gods being
appeased should through their Divinity change as it were the very course of
Fate. By their advice a Jubilee was held for Ten Days, nor was any thing omitted
which appertained to mitigate the displeasure of the Gods: 'Twas also by the
same Persons enjoined, that Jupiter should have a greater Image, placed on high
and (contrary to what formerly it was) the Face turned toward the East: And so
they gave us hopes, if that Image (which you behold,) looked toward the rising
of the Sun, the Forum, and the Curia; then would all the Counsels, which were
privately entered upon, against the safety of this City, and Empire, be so
detected that the Senate and whole Roman People might see thoroughly into them.
And thus those Consuls Decreed it to be placed: But so slowly was it carried
on, that neither by the former Consuls, nor by us has it been accomplished
before this Day.

9. Here, O Quirites, who can be so averse from Truth, so mad, so stupid, as to
deny all these things which we see, especially, this City to be managed by the
direction and power of the Immortal Gods? For when it was then interpreted,
that there was a Massacre, a Fire, an overthrow of the Commonwealth
preparing, and all by mischievous Citizens, which yet for the greatness of the
Villainies seemed incredible, you now find that such things were not only
intended but attempted. Did it not fall out just so as to appear to be effected
by the Providence of the best, and greatest Jove; that when yesterday Morning
the Conspirators, and their discoverers were by my order led through the Forum,
at that very time, the Statue should be erected? Which by its situation being
turned toward you and the Senate, the Senate and you have now beheld, all
those things that were contrived against the safety of the Commonwealth,
cleared, and proved. Of how much greater hatred then, and punishment are they
worthy, who have endeavored to throw their impious Fires not only into your
Houses, and Lodgings, but into the Shrines and Temples of the Gods: Which if I
should say I had restrained it would be intolerable presumption. 'Twas he,
'twas Jupiter that withstood them: He saved the Capitol, these Temples, this
City; he preserved you all. From the Immortal Gods, O Quirites, I received my
understanding, my will, by them was I led to these so great discoveries. And
for the solicitation of the Allobrogians, by Lentulus, and the rest of our
domestic Enemies, so great an Affair had never been trusted to Persons so
unknown and foreign, those Letters had certainly never been Committed to them,
unless by the Immortal Gods, they had been infatuated and all Counsel snatched
away from so bold an enterprise. Then that the Gallicane People of a
discontented City, the only remaining People that seem able to make War upon
the Romans, and yet not do it; that these should neglect the hopes of Empire,
and the greatest advantages proferr'd to them even by Patricians, and prefer
your safety before their own profit: Do you think that this was not eminently
the Divine work? Especially when they needed not have used force, but only have
kept silence and overcome us.

10. Wherefore, O Quirites, since Prayers are decreed at every Altar, go, and
celebrate these Days with your Wives and Children; many Honors just and due
have been given to the Immortal Gods, but more just than these were never any:
For, snatched from the most cruel, and miserable destruction, (and snatched you
were, without Slaughter, without Blood, without an Army, without the least
Affray, (in your Gowns have you overcome under the conduct and command of one
Gownman. Now do but call to mind, O Quirites, those Seditions, not only which
you have heard of, but those which you your selves remember, and have seen; L.
Sulla suppressed P. Sulpicius; cast C. Marius Keeper of the City out of it: And
of many other brave men, some he banished, some he put to death. Cn. Octavius
the Consul, by force of Arms drove his own Colleague out of the City. Then was
this place heaped with the Bodies, and flowing with the Blood of the Citizens.
Afterward Cinna with Marius overcame, and then so many Eminent men were slain,
that the Lights of the City seemed extinguished. At length Sylla revenged the
cruelty of this Victory. But there is no need to tell you with what destruction
of Citizens, with how great Calamity to the whole Commonwealth, M. Lepidus
opposed that most worthy and brave Man, Q. Catulus; but his fall gave not such
occasion to the Commonwealth to mourn, as it did to those Persons that were
concerned with him. Such as these, O Quirites, were the sormer Seditions; yet
were they not designed for subversion, but only for alteration of the
Government: They did not desire to have no Commonwealth, but only to be chief
in that which was; they did not wish to burn down the City, but only to be
advanced in it; yet all these Seditions, (none of which aimed at the
destruction of the Commonwealth,) were at last determined, not by a peaceful
Reconciliation but by a Bloody Slaughter of the Citizens. This one, alone,
since the Memory of Man, the greatest and most cruel War, such a War as the
worst Salvages never attempted upon their own People, in which was the Law made
by Lentulus, Catiline, Cassius, Cethegus, that all those who were safe, while
the City was safe, should be accounted among the number of Enemies: I have so
managed Affairs, O Quirites, that you are all preserved in safety, that when
your Enemies intended there should be no more Citizens left than a boundless
Massacre could not devour, so much only of the City as the Flames could not
consume, I have kept both the City and the Citizens, entire, untoucht.

11. For all which eminent Service, O Quirites, I ask of you no reward of
Virtue, no Ensign of Honor, no Monument of Praise, but only the perpepetual
Memory of this Day. I would have all my Triumphs, all Ornaments of Honor, all
Monuments of Glory, all Ensigns of Praise, to be placed and treasured up in
your affections, None of those dumb shows and pictured Honors which the less
worthy can attain, delight me: Our Affairs are cherished in your Memory, O
Quirites, they grow by your Discourses, they shall be strengthened and
perpetuated by the Monuments of History: That Day I mean, which I hope will be
eternally Commemorated, which was created for the preservation of of this City,
and Glory of my Consulship. When at the same time, there were two Citizens in
this Commonwealth, one of which terminated the Bounds of your Empire, not by
the extent of Earth, but the Regions of Heaven; the other saved the House and
Seat of the same Empire.

12. But because the state and condition of those Affairs I have managed, make
my Circumstances very different from those Persons who wage the foreign Wars;
for I must live among those I have conquered and subdued; they either destroy
their Enemies or quit them, when reduced; it lies upon you, O Quirites, to
provide that if their good actions advantage them, mine may not prejudice me. I
have taken care that the impious and cruel designs of these most audacious Men
have done you no hurt, now you must take care that they hurt not me. Though for
my own part, O Quirites, I can not be much hurt by them; there is the greatest
Guard in good men, whom I am now for ever assured of: There is a great
reverence to the Commonwealth, which will always, even when silent, defend me:
There is a great power of Conscience, which, when those that neglect it, would
destroy me, shall make them betray themselves. There is also such a resolved
mind in you, O Quirites, that we shall not only not give place to any Man's
audaciousness, but we shall ever freely provoke all the base and villainous.
What if all the rage of our domestic Enemies was removed from you, and turned
upon me alone? Then must you provide, O Quirites, as considering in what
condition you would hereafter have those to be, who for your sakes have offered
up themselves to envy and all hazards. What more is there that I can add to the
enjoyments of my life especially since as to the Honor and the Praise of
Virtue, I can see nothing higher to which I may ascend? This only would I aim
at, O Quirites, that what I have done in my Consulship I may, when a private
Person, defend and adorn: That if there be any envy to be sustained for
preserving the Commonwealth, it may hurt the envious, and turn to my glory.
Lastly, I will ever so behave my self in the Commonwealth, as always
remembering what I have already performed and that so agreeably, that it may
appear all my performances have been directed by Virtue, not by chance. And
now, O Quirites, because the Night approaches, worship Jupiter, the Keeper of
this City, and of you: Depart to your own Houses, and (although the danger
seems to be over) yet with the same guard and watchfulness defend them, as you
did the Night before. That you may not long be put to this trouble, but that
you may be established in perpetual Peace, shall be my care.

(...). Dio Cassi. Lib. 37. Page 50. and 51.
This Oration took extremely with the People, but chiefly upon this account,
that while Cicero was speaking, the Image of Jupiter was placed in the Capitol,
looking (as the Diviners had directed) toward the rising Sun and the great
Forum; for since the Conspiracy had been foretold by the ruin of the former
Image, and the seizing of the Conspirators fell out just at the erecting this,
the Populace adored the Divinity, and grew much more enraged at those who had
provoked the wrath of Heaven against them.

(...): Pluta. Cicer. Page 870.
That Night were the Vestal Solemnities kept in Cicero's House, to which it was
esteemed the highest profaneness for any but Women to have access; the
principal Person at the celebration was usually the Consuls Wife or Mother:
Cicero therefore with two or three Friends retiring into a Neighbors House,
sat Melancholy, and musing in great doubt what to do. He could not resolve to
be severe and execute punishments proportionable to the crimes, not only from
his own inclinations to lenity, but because he would not seem too much exalted
with Authority, as he must, it he did according to the measures of Justice
proceed against so many noble Persons, who were surrounded with the friendship
of the most potent men in the City. Yet he dreaded the danger of determining
more mildly, for should they suffer any thing less than death, they would not
love him for his Mercy, but break out into greater excesses, their old anger
would be enflamed with new rage. He also would incur the imputations of
softness and fear, whose courage was already by many very much disputed.

Amidst these perplexities in came his Wife Terentia, commanded by the Vestal
Virgins to entreat his prosecution of those Affairs which he had undertaken for
the sake of his Country: Their Goddess having exhibited a miraculous light as
a token of his ensuing safety and glory: for as the Fire lay sleeping upon the
Altar in the Brands-ends and Embers, on a sudden a bright flame rose from them,
(...). Dio. Cass. Lib. 37. Pa. 51.
and extended it self to an extraordinary height.

That all these Religious Observations, and the many public Prodigies then so
much insisted upon, should be supposed nothing but mistake and imposture, too
much reflects upon the judgment and fidelity of our great Authors, either that
they could not discern, or would not give us an account of the Truth; and on
the other side that the Divinity should so evidently appear in such Worship as
was a notorious lie, and dishonor to the Majesty of Heaven, is as hard to
conceive. But then how far God will pass by these failures, where he has not
offered the opportunities of better information, and men do substantially adore
(as Talis igitur men's mundi cum sit, ob eamque causam vel prudentia, vel
providentia appellari recte possit, (Graece enim (...) dicitur) haec potissimum
pro videt and in his maxim est occupata, primum ut mundus quam aptissimus sit
ad permanendum, deinde ut nulla re egeat, maxim autem ut in eo eximia
pulchritudo sit, atque omnis ornatus. Cicer. de Not. Deor. Lib. 2. Cap. 22.

Mihi videtur Epicurus vester de diis immortalibus non magnopere pugnare
tantummodo negare deos esse non audet, nequid invidiae subeat aut criminis. Cum
vero deos nihil agere, nihil curare confirmat, membrisque humanis esse
praeditos, sed eorum membrorum usum nullum habere, ludere videtur. Ibid. Lib.
3. Cap. 1,


Cicero did) a vigilant active overruling providence: How far besides the
common Witness of rain from Heaven and fruitful Seasons, He will interpose with
extraordinary and praeternatural occurences; how far he will appear concerned
for maintaining the Interest of Moral Virtues and all those lawful Governments
he has established in the World, against Traitors and Villains who design most
babarously to subvert them, does not admit of a short determination.

Post eum diem quidam L. Tarquinius ad senatum adductus erat: quem, ad
Catilinam proficiscentem, ex itinere retractum aiebant: is cum se diceret de
conjuratione indicaturum, si fides publica data esset; jussus a Consule, quae
sciret, edicere, eadem fere, quae Vulturtius, de paratis incendiis, de caede
bonorum, de itinere hostium, senatum edocet: Praeterea, se missum a M. Crasso,
qui Catilinae nunciaret, ne eum Lentulus, and Cethegus, aliique ex conjuratione
deprehensi terrerent; Eoque magis properarent ad urbem accedere, quo and
caeterorum animos reficeret, and illi facilius e periculo eriperentur.

Sed, ubi Tarquinius Crassum nominavit, hominem nobilem, maximis divitiis,
summa potentia; alii rem incredibilem rati; pars, tamet si veru^ existumabant,
tamen, quia in tali tempore tanta vis hominis magis leniunda, quam exagitanda
videbatur, plerique Crasso ex negotiis privatis obnoxii, conclamant, indicem
falsum esse; Deque ea re postulant, uti referatur. Itaque, consulente Cicerone,
frequens senatus decernit, Tarquinii indicium falsum videri, eumque in vinculis
retinendum; neque amplius potestatem faciundam, nisi de eo indicaret, cujus
consilio tantam rem esset mentitus.

Erant eo tempore, qui existumarent, indicium illud a P. Autronio machinatum;
quo facilius appellato Crasso, per societatem periculi, reliquos illius
potentia tegeret: Alii Tarquinium a Cicerone immissum aiebant, ne Crassus, more
suo, suscepto malorum patrocimio, remp. conturbaret. Ipsum Crassum ego postea
praedicantem audivi, tantam illam contumeliam sibi a Cicerone impositam. Sall.
Bell. Cat. Cap. 48.


The next day one Lucius Tarquinius going to join with Catiline was apprehended
upon the Road, and brought before the Senate: He then promised to discover the
Conspiracy if they would give him a public assurance of his Pardon; after
which, the Consul bidding him tell what he knew, he related the very same that
Titus Vulturcius had done as to the intended Fire, Massacre, and March of the
Enemy: But then added, that he was sent by M. Crassus with this Message to
Catiline, that he should not be terrified with the seizure of Lentulus, and
Cethegus, and the rest of the Conspiracy, but make more have to come upon the
City, whereby he would raise the Spirits of his Party, and they might be easily
rescued out of danger.

But so soon as ever Tarquinius named Crassus, a Person Noble, vastly rich, and
powerful, some looked upon it as a thing incredible; others, though they
thought it might possibly be true, yet to them, at such a time it seemed
necessary rather to engage, then exasperate the power of so great a Man: Many
that lay under private Obligations to him cried out more impatiently that the
Evidence was false, and demanded that the Question might be put to know the
Sense of the House; accordingly the Consul Cicero proposing it, a resolve
passed in full Senate that Tarquin was suborned, and that he should be
committed till he discovered by whose advice he had framed so great a Lie.

There were then several opinions, some thought it devised by P. Autronius,
that joining Crassus in the danger, the Conspirators might cover themselves
under his power. Others said that it was contrived by Cicero, that Crassus
himself being aspersed might not by taking upon him (as he used to do) the
Patronage of the corrupt party, disturb the settlement of the Commonwealth.
Certain it is he himself did publicly accuse Cicero, as the Author of so great
a calumny (...). Plut. Crassus. Page 551.
and ever was his adversary; but his Son Publius Crassus a great Philosopher,
and lover of Learning, stood always between them, and with great affection so
far sympathiz'd in Cicero's troubles, (which afterward happened) that he and
his Companions, (persuaded by him,) put on mourning for him, and at length
prevailed upon his Father so far as to effect a reconciliation.

(...). Ibid.
Cicero did on the other hand in one of his Orations blot Crassus and Caesar
too with a mark of Infamy in this Affair, but it was not published till after
they were both dead. At this time certainly he produced nothing against Caesar
which might impeach him as guilty of the horrid design: What the Consuls united
fear and prudence might stiffle, is suggested rather than asserted.

Sed iisdem temporibus Q. Catulus, and C. Piso neque gratia, neque precibus,
neque pretio, Ciceronem impellere quivere, uti per Allobroges, aut alium
indicem C Caesar falso nominaretur. Nam uterque cum illo graves inimicitias
exercebant; Piso, oppugnatus in judicio repetundarum, propter cujusdam
Transpadani supplicium injustum: Catulus, ex petitione pontificatus odio
incensus; quod, extrema aetate,, maxumis honoribus usus ab adolescentulo Cesare
victus discesserat; res autem opportuna videbatur; quod is, privatim egregia
liberalitate, public^ maxumis muneribus, grandem pecuniam debebat. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 49.
It Is also said that then Q. Catulus (whose constant Virtue, and universal
esteem, must be acknowledged to render the story suspected) and C. Piso did
never cease importuning Cicero both by entreaties and promises, that he would
either by the Allobrogians, or some other discoverer get C. Caesar falsely
accused. For they both had a great grudge against him, he being Piso's accuser,
in an action of cruel extortion, and Catulus's victorious Antagonist for the
High Priesthood. And indeed Caesar's circumstances would have rendered his
impeachment probably true, he being both by his private generosity and public
munificence fallen under very heavy Debts.

Sed ubi Consulem ad tantum facinus impellere nequeunt; ipsi sigillatim
circumeundo atque ementiendo, quae se ex Vulturtio, Allobrogibus, audisse
dicerent, magnam illi invidiam conflaverant; usque adeo, uti nonnulli equites
R. qui praesidii causa cum telis erant circum aedem Concordiae, seu periculi
magnitudine, seu animi mobilitate impulsi, quo studium; suum in remp. clarius
esset, egredienti ex senatu Caesari gladio minitarentur. Ibid.
But the Consul could by no means be prevailed upon to undertake so vile an
enterprise, and therefore they are said to have gone about and scattered
stories which they pretended to have heard from Vulturcius and the Allobroges,
whereby they raised a very great storm of envy against Caesar, insomuch that
some of the Roman Knights who stood as a Guard about the Temple of Concord
(where the Senate was assembled) either out of a sense of their danger, or an
impulse of affection to show their zeal for the Commonwealth, were like to
have assassinated him, as he came out of the Senate.

(...). Plutar. Caesar. Page 711.
But Cicero himself was so far from assisting the attempt, that being looked
upon for a little countenance he showed the greatest dislike, knowing how much
the People would resent it; or rather he esteemed it an unjust and illegal
Murder. Yet In aftertimes some would needs blame the Consul for not taking
that opportunity of suppressing Caesar, as if he then only chose to endear
himself to the People, by preserving their Favorite. So that then there was
nothing considerable alleged by Cicero against Caesar, and if there was any
thing afterward it must be either from some evidence not extant, or from that
favor he showed the Conspirators in acting so strenuously against their
Capital punishments. Shapeless and boundless are the intrigues of a Plot, which
being always laid in the dark, becomes manageable, according to the various
affections, interests, and designs of men: 'Twas necessary for P. Autronius by
shams and subornations to overload Justice, that he might rescue himself and
his fellow Conspirators from a due prosecution: 'Twas as necessary for Cicero
by a prudential, rather than a severe management of it, to drive on the safety
of the Commonwealth as it was able to go. Crassus may well be supposed for the
corrupt Party, but not for sinking that state wherein he enjoyed the vastest
Treasures: Caesar had no doubt the most ambitious designs, but then they must
be agreeable to himself, noble and glorious; he could not entertain thoughts of
seeing his Country in Blood and Ashes, or of calling in barbarous Foreigners
to destroy his fellow Citizens; his Empire afterward was equally a
demonstration of his Valor and Mercy.

C. Piso (though not Q. Catulus) might also have a turn to serve, and make use
of public Justice for a private revenge; might squeeze accusations into the
shape he would have them, whilst Truth and safety groaning under the
oppression; thus are men of different concerns and sizes, nor will Interest
ever suffer them all to take the same measures; the cruel and indigent draw the
Arrow to the Head, the discontented half way, the generously ambitious only
take aim and opportunity. But amidst all these, how great necessity is there
that the God of Heaven should be ever superintending Empires, and Kingdoms, and
Nations! The four fighting Elements may as well be left to themselves, as the
interests and affections of men. Nothing in Nature wants a more particular
regard of Heaven then the Intrigues of State; none have more need to implore
the Succors of the Al^^ghty than those that bear his Authority, but want his
infinite perfections; which humane nature being not capable of, lies under a
necessity of having continual recourse to the one Omnipotent and Omniscient
Power.

Cicer. Orat. in Cat. 4. Cap. 5.
The same Day that the Evidence of Lucius Tarquinius was voted false, Titus
Vulturtius and the Allobrogian Ambassadors (whose discovery, even those who
were not for the Capital punishment of the Conspirators, acknowledged true)
received the greatest rewards. Which being not particularly mentioned here may
be supposed the greatest of those that had been before offered, Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 30.
being above Fifteen hundred Pound a Man.

Igitur, perlectis literis, cum prius omnes signa suo cognovissent Senatus
decernit, ut, abdicato magistratu, Lentulus, itemque caeteri in liberis
custodiis habeantur. Itaque Lentulus, P. Lentulo, Spintheri, qui tum Aedilis
erat, Cethegus, Q. Cornificio, Statilius, C. Caesari, Gabinius M. Crasso,
Caeparius (nam is paulo ante fuga retractus erat) Cn. Terentio Senatori,
traduntur. Ibid. Cap. 47.
It had been decreed by the Senate the Day before this, upon the reading the
Letters, and producing the Seals which the Conspirators could not but
acknowledge, that Lentulus (being deprived of his Magistracy) and the rest of
them should be committed, not to the confinement of a Prison, but secured by
some particular Magistrate or eminent Person. Accordingly, Lentulus was
delivered to P. Lentulus Spinther, who was then Aedile; C. Cethegus, to Q.
Cornificius; Statilius, to C. Caesar; Gabinius, to M. Crassus; and Ceparius
(having been taken a little while after he made his escape) to Cn. Terentius a
Senator.

(...). Dio. Lib. 37. Page 51.
And this Night many both of the Servants and Freemen, partly out of fear as to
their own concerns, partly out of pity to Lentulus and the rest, got together
with a design to rescue them, fearing the Sentence might at last prove Capital.

Cethegus autem per nuncios familiam, atque liberos suos, lectos, and
exercitatos in audaciam, orabat, uti, grege facto, cum telis ad se irrumperent.
Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 52.
Cethegus sent to all his Retainers, Gladiators and Gentlemen, and whosoever
had any courage left, that they would make a Tumult and break in to him.

(...). Dio. Lib. 37. Page 51.
Cicero, having intelligence of this, secures the Capitol and Forum that Night
with a strong Guard, Nona in concione, quo die Allobroges involgarunt, decima
in senatu nonis December. Cicer. ad Attic. Lib.. Epist. 1.
and next Morning, being the Nones, [our Fifth] of December, Consul, ubi ea
parari cognovit, dispositis praesidiis, uti res atque tempus monebat, convocato
senatu refert, quid de his fieri placeat, qui in custodiam traditi erant. Sall.
Bell. Cat. Cap. 50.
calls together the Senate, and proposes to them what they would please to have
done with those that were in custody.

(...). App. de Bell. Civ. Lib. 2.
The first Person required according to custom to declare his Opinion was, D.
Junius Silanus Consul Elect, for since the Execution of Decrees most nearly
concerned those that were designed to the highest Authority, their resolves
were supposed most advisable and beneficial. (...). Plut. Cicer. Pa. 870.
His Sentence was that they should be clapped into Prison, and there suffer the
utmost punishment: Et Praeterea de L. Cassio, P. Furio. P. Umbreno, Q. Annio,
si deprehensi forent, supplicium sumendum decreverant. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 51.
This also he proposed for L. Cassius, P. Furius, P. Umbrenus, and Q. Amnius,
when they should be apprehended.

(...). App. de Bell. Civil. Lib. 2.
To this many assented till it came to T. Nero, who judged that they should he
kept in Custody till Catiline was overcome, and the Conspiracy more exactly
discovered: This took but faintly till it came to Sed Caesar, ubi ad eum ventum
est, rogatus sententiam a Consule hujuscemodi verba locutus est. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 50.
Caesar, who being asked his Opinion by the Consul, made the following Speech.

Omnis homines, P. C. qui de rebus dubiis consultant, ab odio amicitia, ira,
atque misericordia, vacuos esse decet, etc. Sall. Bell* Cat. Cap. 51.
IT becomes, O Conscript Fathers, all Persons who consult in such difficult
Affairs, to be very free both from hatred, and friendship, both from anger and
pity: The Mind cannot judge impartially where these sway: nor can affection and
public good be easily gratified together. When you act according to the
dictates of the understanding the effects thereof will be agreeable, if
affection possesses you, that tyrannizeth and the Mind becomes useless under
the oppression. I could offer you, O Conscript Fathers, many presidents of
Kingdoms and Nations which have been ruined by the results of Passion, but I
had rather produce the examples of our Ancestors, who by decreeing what became
themselves, more than what their Enemies deserved, reduced them into a well
composed and lasting Obedience; in that Macedonian War which we waged with King
Perses, the great and rich City of Rhodes, (grown so by the favor of the Roman
People) became perfidious and adverse to our Interests; yet when the War was
concluded and a Consultation held what should be done with those Rhodians, our
Ancestors dismissed them unpunished, that none might afterward say the War was
begun rather to enrich our selves then to repel injuries in all the Punick
Wars, the Carthaginians would often in times of Truce and Cessation of Arms,
practice the basest Villainies against us, but we never took the opportunites of
like requitals: We ever more tenderly regarded the demands of Honor than the
exactions of Justice. This is that, O Conscript Fathers, which I would have you
consult in the present Affair of Lentulus and the rest, what will be most
agreeable to your Reputation and Government rather then to your indignation. If
indeed a punishment be requisite which bears a just proportion to their
Treason, we must find out some thing new, but if that exceeds all humane
Invention, then let us be contented to follow the most usual Methods of Law.

Those that spoke before me have excellently commiserated the Commonwealth,
have considered the cruelty of War, have recounted the miseries of the
conquered: The ravishing of Virgins, the haling Children from the Embraces of
their Parents, the Matrons exposed to the Victors fury; Temples, and Houses
demolished; Fire and Sword raging; in a word, every place filled with Blood and
Confusion, with the heaps of the dead and the groans of the dying.

But what I wonder can be the design of such an Oration? Is it to make us more
enraged at the Conspiracy? This is needless, those who have not been moved by
the horrid Nature of it, will never be stirred up by an Oration. No, it is
needless: We want it not; no Mortal Men were ever apt to esteem the injuries
intended them too small, they have often judged them greater than indeed they
were.

Above all, O Conscript Fathers, we should be afraid of an excess of
Indignation; when those who live obscurely, err in undue heats of Passion, but
few take notice of it, their Fortune and their Fame are equals; but we who are
raised to so great an Empire, have all Mankind for the Censurers of our
actions; so that the greatest power has the least liberty to transgress its
just bounds: We cannot honorably allow our selves to be partial to any, to
hate any, no, nor so much as to be angry with any. What in others is only
called Anger, in us will be Pride and Cruelty; I do indeed believe, O Conscript
Fathers, that no torments are too great for their deserts; but People are
always inclined more to remember what was last, and to consider the Cruelties
of punishment than the Merits of the Cause. I am certain what the excellent
Silanus spoke was from a sincere affection to the Commonwealth, that in so
great an Affair he would not interpose either private love or hatred; I am well
acquainted both with his worth and modesty; but what should lead him to such an
Opinion? Cruel I cannot say (for what can be cruel against such offenders?) But
very different from our Polity. It Is idle to suppose, fear should be the cause
of it, since by the diligence of the most renowned Consul, we are abundantly
secured from dangers. As to the Nature of the punishment, Death is not so much
a torment it self as the end of others; it dissoves all the Miseries of
Mortality, and beyond that is neither care nor joy. But why (let Heaven judge)
was it not proposed in the Senate that they should be first beaten with Rods?
Was it not because you know the Porcian Law forbids it? And other Laws command
the Penalty of Banishment, not that of Death, for condemned Citizens. And now,
is it more grievous to be Whipped than to be put to Death? If it be then, why is
not that most heavy and severe punishment inflicted upon Persons guilty (as
these are) of the highest Crimes? But if Whipping be the more gentle and
moderate, how comes the Law to restrain you in that which is the less, if you
are not to be restrained from that which is the utmost severity.

But you will say, who shall ever blame us for such a Decree against the
manifest Traitors of the Commonwealth? Yes, time and chance brings all things
about, and every Nation is subject to their Tyranny. These men will deserve
what they have: But consider well, O Conscript Fathers what you do; the worst
Presidents have good Originals; when the Government comes into the hands of
ignorant or less good men, this new Example will be transferred from these who
have deserved to die, to those who have not.

The Lacaedemonians, upon the Conquest of Athens, appointed Thirty Persons to
manage the Government; at first these began to put to Death without Trial every
one that was notoriously mischievous and hated; the People rejoiced at this
they said it was very well done; after a while, that the Tyranny was grown
strong they were wont with the like Arbitrary Power to kill good and bad, that
all might be kept in awe. Thus the City being slavishly oppressed suffered the
severe rewards of its foolish joy.

In our Memory, when Sylla executed Damasippus and some other vile Persons, who
did not rejoice and applaud it? Ill and Factious men who disturbed the
Government deserved (as 'twas said) to be put to death, but that was only an
entrance; afterward whoever had an House or Farm, or any Goods and Chattels,
which were worth coveting, was brought into the Number of the proscribed till
those that rejoiced at the Death of Damasippus, were forced to follow that fate
which they so unwarily admired: Nor did Sylla ever leave cutting Throats, till
his whole Party was well replenished with the spoil.

This I do not fear from M. Tullius, nor the present times; but in our great
City we may expect variety of Successors, at another time, there may be another
Consul with an Army at his command, who may think that true, which is indeed
false: Now if he has this example, and by Decree of the Senate the Sword be
put into the Consuls hands; who shall put a stop to him or oblige him to
moderation.

Our Ancestors, O Conscript Fathers, never wanted either Council or Courage;
nor has Pride hindered them from imitating the Customs of foreign Nations,
when they were honorable and advantageous; their Arms and Military Exercises
they learned of the Samnites; the Ensigns of Magistracy they took up from the
Hetrusci; Lastly, whatsoever seemed well either among Allies or Enemies they
practiced with the greatest emulation at home: They were always for imitating
rather then envying the good: Then also they followed the Customs of Greece,
corrected their Citizens with Rods, punished the Condemned with Death; but
afterward, when the Commonwealth was come to its full growth, and by the
Multitude of Citizens Factions began to reign, the Innocent to be circumvented
and other such mischiefs; then were the Porcian and other Laws enacted, whereby
banishment was granted to the Condemned.

This under favor, O Conscript Fathers, I look upon as great Reason why we
should not aim at new Counsels; their Virtue and their Wisdom which raised so
great an Empire out of such small beginnings, are much more to be valued than
ours who hardly keep what they left us.

What do I desire then? That they should be dismissed and augment the Forces of
Catiline? No: I I would have all their Estates confiscated, I would have them
kept Prisoners up and down in the strongest Free Towns of Italy; That hereafter
no one intercede either to the Senate, or the People for them; whoever shall,
let the Senate judge him an Enemy to the common safety.

(...). Plut. Cato. Min. Page 770.
This Oration so much swayed the House which was then in some dread of the
People, that Silanus did afterward retract the Sentence he had proposed, or at
least to explain himself, that by the utmost Penalty he did not intend Death
but imprisonment, which was the utmost a Roman might suffer.

M. Cato, princeps familiae Porciae, homo virtuti simillimus, and per omnia
ingenio diis, quam hominibus, propior, qui nunquam recte fecit, ut facere
videretur, sed quia aliter facere non poterat; cuique id solum visum est
rationem habere, quod haberet justitiam; omnibus humanis vitiis immunis, semper
fortunam in sua potestate habuit: Hic, tribunus plebis designatus, adhuc
admodum adolescens, cum alii suaderent, ut per municipia Lentulus, conjuratique
custodirentur, pene inter ultimas interrogatus sententiam, tanta vi animi atque
ingenii invectus est in conjurationem, ut universus senatus in ejus sententiam
transiret. Vel. Pater. Lib. 2.
But then Marcus Cato Head of the Porcian Family a Person who was the very
likeness of Virtue, and had more of the Divine than the Humane Nature in him,
who never did well that he might seem to do so, but because he could not do
otherwise; to whom that always seemed most reasonable that was most just; who
was free from Vice (and therefore had dominion over Fortune:) Being then
Tribune Elect, though a very young Man, and his Opinion asked one of the last,
spoke with such force both of Wit, and reason, that he restored the wavering
Senate by this following Oration.

Long mihi alia men's est P. C. cum res atque pericula nostra considero; and
cum sententias nonnullorum mecum ipso reputo, etc. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 52.
WHen I consider our Affairs and Dangers, O Conscript Fathers, and weigh with
them those Sentences some have proposed, I must declare my self of a far
different Opinion: They seem to have been debating the Punishment of those who
have raised War against their Country, and their Parents, the Houses where
they were Born, the Temples where (if they had any Religion) they were wont to
adore; but after what manner? Does not the thing it self require us to consult,
how we shall be most certainly delivered from these men, rather then what
gentle punishments we inflict upon them?

You may punish other Crimes when they are committed, this unless you take care
to prevent, no Tribunal can signify any thing; the City once taken, nothing is
left to the Conquered.

Let me now (by the Immortal Gods) appeal, not to the generous Lovers of their
Country, but even to those who love their Houses, Gardens, and Pictures better
the Commonwealth; if you desire to enjoy these, and a serene course of
Pleasure, rouse up your selves and lay hold on the sinking Empire: We are not
now about Taxes and Alliances; Life and Liberty lie at Stake.

I have very often, O Conscript Fathers, in this place complained of the Luxury
and Avarice of of our Citizens, and I have many Enemies upon that account; and
if I would never for my own repose, favor the Commission of a Crime, I will
not now pardon the Lusts of those who have almost perpetrated our utter ruin.
You took indeed but little notice of my reprimands, and yet the Commonwealth
stood; the excellency of the establishment supplied the wants of diligence and
virtue: But now the Question is not whether we will live virtuously, or
vitiously, not how great and magnificent the Roman Empire shall be, but
(whatever other thoughts you may) now it is whether we and all ours shall not
fall into the power of the Enemy. Here shall any Man call moderate proceedings
gentleness, and pity? We have long ago lost the right use of words; to lavish
other men's Goods is named Liberality; a frontless impudence in Vice is
assurance; to this pass is the Commonwealth come! Well; since it is so, let men
be esteemed liberal with borrowed Estates; let them be merciful to Thieves and
Rogues; but let them not be profuse with our Blood, and whilst they save a few
Villains destroy every good Man in the City.

C. Caesar has indeed spoken very accurately; something he said of Life and
Death, (as much as I can understand) supposing those things false, which are
related of the Infernal state; that there is a different Journey and different
Habitation, that the wicked are separated from the good, into dark places full
of disorder, nastiness, and horror. Therefore he proposed for them only the
miseries of Life, to have their Estates confiscated, and their Bodies kept in
perpetual Imprisonment: Very well. But he would not have them at Rome, left the
Multitude should be hired to rescue them; as if they could be more safe in the
Towns of Italy, where there is less power to secure them. So that if he be
sensible of danger his Counsel is insufficient, if he be not, there is the
greater necessity that I should fear both for my self and you.

Be assured that whatsoever measures you take concerning Lentulus and the rest,
they will have an influence upon Catilines Army and the whole Conspiracy; if
you be resolute here, their courage will fail, if you flag they will grow bold.

Don't think that our Ancestors did by Arms alone raise this Commonwealth from
so mean an Original to its present greatness: If that had been all, surely we
should now be much more flourishing than ever they were; we have more Allies
and Citizens, greater Forces both of Foot and Horse, than ever they had: But
other things made them great which are lost by us: Their government was
supported by Industry at home, by Justice abroad; their consultations were
generous, free from the influence of Vice and all Affection to it; Instead of
which we have nothing but Luxury and Avarice; the Public is oppressed with
Debt; private men enjoy the greatest abundance; We admire Riches and follow
Sloth; there is now no distinction observed between the good and bad, but
Ambition seizes upon all the rewards of Virtues; nor can it be otherwise when
every Man acts separately for his own Interest; whilst you are domestic
Slaves to your Pleasures, Riches, Relations; every attempt that is made will be
ready to sink such an helpless Commonwealth; but I pass by these things.

What are we now to do? The greatest Citizens have conspired to ruin their
Country; they called in the Gallick Nation, ever most fatal to the Roman Name;
their General with his Army is just coming upon us. And now you are at a stand
what to do with those of them whom you have apprehended within the very Walls!
Now nothing but pity, compassion to some ambitious, rash young Gentlemen that
have taken up Arms! Yes, let them go, armed as they are! What sloth and
softness of mind is this? Surely such Mercy it is as (if they be armed) must at
length end in our misery: But it is acknowledged dangerous; yet you will not
fear it! Nay, though you profess the greatest fears, yet with sloth and
negligence you look upon one another, and expect the Divine assistance to
preserve the Commonwealth (as it has often done) in the most eminent dangers:
But that assistance is not to be expected by faint Wishes and feminine Prayers;
success is always given to sober Councels, to vigilant and active endeavors.
If you give up your selves to security and negligence, you do in vain implore
the Powers of Heaven; they are angry and averse to you.

To speak of our Ancestors; A. Manlius Torquatus in the Gallick War, commanded
his Son to be killed because he sought the Enemy contrary to Order; thus that
Noble Gentleman had Death for a reward of unseasonable, though Victorious
Valor. Yet we are in doubt what shall be done with the most Bloody Traitors?
The other circumstances of their lives (it seems) are more to be considered
then their present Villainy! Spare the Dignity of Lentulus; yes, so we would, if
Lentulus would have spared himself, would have spared either God or Man. Pity
the Youth of Cethegus; Yes! that he may inflame his Country in a new
Rebellion. Yes, and Gabinius, Statilius, Ceparius, who if they ever had the
least love for their Country, would never have entered into those Consults.

And now I protest, O Conscript Fathers, if this present Affair would admit of
an Error, that could ever be retrieved, I would for once contentedly suffer
you that experience might convince you, since no persuasions will prevail; but
repentance here will be too late, we are beset both within and without:
Catiline with his Army is ready to devour us, these are within the Walls,
Enemies in our own Bosom; we cannot consult, we cannot prepare but all is
presently discovered; we must therefore come to a resolution.

Wherefore it is my Opinion that since by the nefarious designs of the most
Villainous Citizens, the Commonwealth is fallen into the greatest dangers,
since by the discoveries of Titus Vulturtius and the Ambassadors, as well as
by their own confessions they are convicted, to have designed the most cruel
murders and barbarous destruction both of their own fellow Citizens and their
Country, let them suffer, (as in the time of our Ancestors) according to the
manifest guilt of their Capital Crimes.

(...). Plut. Cato Min. Page 770.
This is said to be the only Oration of that brave Cato which was preserved and
left extant to the World; and for it we are entirely obliged to the Consul
Cicero, who having beforehand taught some of the best Scribes in Rome; certain
marks containing in little short Characters, the power of many Letters, placed
them for this purpose up and down the Senate House. Nor were there any
Shorthand Writers among them before; the first Footsteps of that Art arising
from the present occasion.

(...). Ibid.
There happened also one little Intrigue amidst this grave Debate, which being
between such eminent Persons, and containing something of Divertisement, may
also be inserted here. Whilst Caesar and Cato were in the heat of this Dispute,
and the Senate very intent upon them, there was a small three cornered Letter
conveyed to Caesar from without Doors; Cato raised a suspicion, and made a
great stir about it, upon which some moved that it should be read; Caesar
standing not far from Cato delivered it into his Hands; he looking it over, and
finding it only to be a Billetdeux from his own Sister Servilia (who had been
formerly debauched by Caesar, and continued her base Amors) threw it down at
his Feet, saying only, Take it Drunkard, and so went on again with his Oration.

(...). Plut. Cicero. Page 871.
To conclude the Debate, the Consul Cicero stood up and discussed both the
Sentences which had been proposed: His Friends were of Opinion that it was very
much the Interest of Cicero to comply with Caesar, that he would undergo a
great deal less envy if the Conspirators were not put to death: But that
faithful Consul above all valuing the safety of the Commonwealth, without
regard to himself proposed his Sentiments in the following Oration.

Cicero's Fourth Oration against Catiline.
Video, P. C. in me omnium vestrum ora atque Oculos esse conversos, etc.
1. I See, O Conscript Fathers, the Eyes and Expectations of all here fixed
upon me; I see you concerned not only for your own and the dangers of the
Commonwealth (if they are put by) but for mine also. Your affection to me is
indeed delightful in my miseries, pleasant in my grief; but I beg of you by the
Immortal Gods, lay it aside; forget my safety, think of your own and your
Childrens. If this place of the Consulship be given me, that I should undergo
all trouble, sorrow, torment; I will bear them resolutely, I will endure them
willingly, whilst by my Labors, Honor and Safety redound to you and the Roman
People, I am that Consul, O Conscript Fathers, to whom neither the Forum, that
place of Universal Justice, nor the Field designed for Consular Business: Nor
the Senate House that Supreme refuge of all Nations: Nor my own House the place
for ordinary retirement; nor my Bed was ever given for rest: No; neither was
this Seat of Honor, this Ivory Chair ever empty of the most pernicious dangers
and snares. Many things have I concealed, many have I born, many have I
yielded: Many of your fears have I healed with my own pain. And now if the
Immortal Gods have thus designed my Consulship to expire, in the deliverance of
you, O Conscript Fathers, and the Roman Empire from a dismal Massacre, your
Wives, your Children, and the Vestal Virgins from the most dreadful violence;
the Temples, the Shrines, this our dearest Country from the consuming Flame;
If I have now snatched all Italy out of War, and ruin, whatever my Fate be, I
joyfully embrace it. For if P. Lentulus could like his Name by the Fates
declared destructive to the Commonwealth; why should not I amidst all, rejoice
in my Consulship by the Fates plainly demonstrated Eminent in its preservation.

2. Wherefore, O Conscript Fathers, consult your own Interest, regard your
Country, preserve your selves, your Wives, your Children, your Estates: Stand
up for the Safety and Glory of the Roman People, let me alone, cease thinking
of me; for I ought to believe that all the Gods who preside over this City,
will reward me for what I have done: Or if it be their Pleasure, with a serene
prepared mind I am ready to die. For Death cannot be dishonorable to the
Virtuous, nor untimely to a Consul, nor miserable to a wise Man. Nor am I yet
so stupid as not to be moved with the grief of my dearest and kindest Brother
here, with the Tears of all those you see surround me; nor can my Mind be so
estranged from home as to forget my fainting Wife, my dejected Daughter, my
little Son, whom the Commonwealth seems to embrace as the Pledge of my
Consulship: Nor am I unconcerned for my Son in Law, who stands there expecting
the event of this Day. I am moved by all these, but so, that they may be all
safe with you though I be destroyed, rather than that they and we both perish
with the Commonwealth. Wherefore, O Conscript Fathers, push on the safety of
the Comwealth, look about you upon those storms which unless you well provide
against, are ready to discharge upon your Heads. It Is not Ti. Gracchus who
wanted to be mad^ ^^^ond time Tribune of the People, it is not C. (...) who
endeavored to stir up the Levellers, it is (...). Saturninus who slew C.
Memmius, that is brought to Trial and to receive the Sentence of your Justice:
But those are apprehended who staid behind at Rome to receive Catiline, to Burn
the City, to Massacre you all. Their Letters, their Hands, their Seals, their
own particular confessions are before us; the Allobrogians were solicited, the
Apprentices raised, Catiline called in; 'Twas designed that in so general a
destruction, none should be left to weep for the Name of this Commonwealth, or
lament the fall of so great an Empire.

3. All this the discoverers have evidenced, the guilty confessed, you your
selves adjudged by several Sentences: First, That you returned me thanks in
particular words, and voted that by my courage and diligence the Conspiracy of
most pernicious Men was brought to light: Then, that you compelled P. Lentulus
to renounce the Praetorship; that you ordered him, and the rest of whom you
passed judgment, to be taken into custody; and chiefly that you Decreed a
Thanksgiving in my Name, an Honor, that was never before conferred upon a
Gown-man. Lastly, You did but Yesterday give most liberal Rewards to Titus
Vulturtius, and the Allobrogian Ambassadors; all which demonstrates that the
Persons who stand committed, are with full satisfaction condemned by you. But I
am resolved, O Conscript Fathers, now to referr the whole to you, both what you
will please to judge of the Crime, and what you will determine as to the
Punishment, I will only premise what is proper for the Consul; I have long ago
observed a great rage fermenting in the Commonwealth, new mischiefs
continually invented and attempted: But I never thought so execr^^^ (...)
Conspiracy could have been undertaken (...)izens. Now whatsoever it be, however
your (...) ^ns and Opinions incline, you must come to a resolution before
Night. How great a Treason has been discovered you all know; if in this you
think but a few concerned, you are greatly mistaken. The mischief is more
widely spread than your apprehension of it can be; It has not only overflowed
Italy, but found a passage over the Alps, and so creeping on with, a silent
stream is diffused through many of the Provinces. Nor can it possibly be
suppressed by connivance or delay: Whatsoever be adjudged must be put into speedy
execution.

4. I find two Sentences proposed, one by D. Silanus, that the Plotters should
be punished with Death; the other by C. Caesar, who (abating Death) offers all
the severity of other punishments: Both of them, as the honor and greatness of
the concern requires, have been managed with the highest exactness. One is of
the Opinion that those who have endeavored to deprive all us, and the whole
Roman People of Life, to destroy the Empire, to blot out the very Roman Name,
ought not to live and breath one Moment longer: And the Records testify, that
this sort of punishment has often been inflicted upon pernicious Citizens. The
other apprehends that Death was never designed by the Immortal Gods for a
punishment; but either as the necessity of Nature, or the relief of Labors and
miseries. And therefore wise men were never unwilling, the Valiant were always
desirous of it. But there are Bonds in Death, and they sempiternal too, for the
particular punishment of every heinous Crime. He would have them secured up and
down in the Free Towns; this seems unjust for you to command, and difficult to
bring to pass if you do enact it. Yet if you please, let it be so decreed. I
will under take it, and hope I shall prove the Man who will think it not
agreeable to his Honor, to refuse any thing that has been determined for the
Public safety. He annexeth a great Penalty upon the Townsmen if any one of
them get away; he would confine them in dreadful Prisons fit for the wickedness
of such pernicious men. He resolves that no one either by the Senate or People
should endeavor to alleviate the punishment of those he condemns: And so
deprives them of hope, which is alone able to comfort men in misery; he
commands besides, that their goods should be confiscated; he leaves Life only
to these wretched men; which if he had also deprived them of, he might (it
seems) with one pain have extinguished those many miseries both of Body and
Mind, he might have at once delivered them from all the punishments of
wickedness! That therefore there might be some restraining Terror upon wicked
men in this life, it has been long acknowledged that in the state of the Dead,
there are punishments appointed for the Impious: For were there none such, it
must be confessed, Death is not of it self terrible.

5. Now, O Conscript Fathers, I see what would be my Interest. If you pursue
the Sentence of C. Caesar, who has ever taken that course in the Commonwealth
which has been most Popular, I may perhaps (he being the Author and Patron)
less fear the Popular rage. If the other, I know not what it may draw upon me.
But let the advantage of the Commonwealth swallow up all the thoughts of my
dangers: We have indeed from C. Caesar a Sentence very worthy of himself, and
his Ancestors, such an one as may be a Pledge of his perpetual Affection to the
Commonwealth. But it is easy to discern between the smoothness of an harangue,
and an intention truly Popular, ^ in reality consulting the Safety of the
People. I see a considerable Person that affects to be accounted an advocate
for the Commons absent himself, that he may not Decree Capital punishments upon
Roman Citizens. The Day before Yesterday he would have them committed, he voted
thanks to me, Yesterday he would have the Discoverers receive the greatest
rewards: Now it cannot be doubted, but he that Decrees the guilty to Prison,
the Prosecutor to be congratulated, the Discoverer to be rewarded, has given
judgment both as to the Fact and Crime. However C. Caesar considers the
Sempronian Law was made for Roman Citizens: But how can he be esteemed a
Citizen who is a Traitor to the Commonwealth? Lastly, The Author of the
Sempronian Law, did by the Peoples appointment make satisfaction to the
Commonwealth, by his own punishment. He is pleased to think P. Lentulus
(guilty of such Bribery and profuseness, nay, of having so fiercely, so cruelly
designed the ruin of the Commonwealth, the Roman People, and the destruction
of this City,) not fit to be esteemed a Friend to the People. He is certainly a
most moderate and favorable Person! And yet he makes no difficulty to condemn
P. Lentulus to perpetual darkness and imprisonment, he Decrees that hereafter
no one should move for the easing of their punishment, that none might affect
to be popular by a mischief to the Roman People; he adds also the Sale of their
Goods, that every torment both of Body and Mind, even want and beggary might
ensue: Wherefore if you enact this, you give me an Author, an Assistant, dear,
and acceptable to the People: If you rather choose Silanus's Sentence you will
easily defend me and your selves from the reproach of cruelty, I shall have it
granted that this was by much the most favorable Sentence.

6. Although, O Conscript Fathers, what cruelty can there be in punishing such
a barbarous Treason? I speak my own judgment: I would so enjoy with you the
preserved Commonwealth, that I being thus earnest in this cause, am not moved
by severity of Mind, (for whose affections can be milder than mine?) but a
certain proper Humanity and Mercy. For I seem to have before mine Eyes this
City, this joy of the whole World, this support of all Nations perishing in one
sudden conflagration: I have before me deplorable unburied heaps of Citizens,
in their buried Country: There I see the rage of Cethegus carousing in your
Blood. When I propose to my self Lentulus tyrannizing, as he confesses the
Fates once put him in hopes, Gabinius in his Purple Robes, and Catiline at the
Head of his Army, then have I a dread upon me, to consider the miserable moans
of Matrons, the amazement of Virgins, and Children, the distress of ravished
Vestals: And because these seem so horrible, so dreadful, therefore does Mercy
compel me to be Zealous, Humanity to be severe, against those that would
perpetrate these things. For I would ask of any one, if the Master of a Family
should inflict the severest punishments upon a Servant that had killed his
Children, murdered his Wife, burnt his House, would such an one seem cruel and
inhumane, or fatherly and compassionate: To me he would seem barbarous and
stupid if he did not endeavor to appease his own pain and torture by the pain
and torture of the Assassine. Thus, if against these men who would have
murdered us, our Wives and Children, would have destroyed every one of our
Houses, and this Mansion House of the Commonwealth, who had contrived to place
the Nation of the Allobroges in the ruins of this City, in the Ashes of this
confumed Empire, if against these men we be zealous we shall be accounted
merciful: But if toward these we will be remiss, the reproach of the highest
cruelty in the destruction of our Country, and Citizens will be imputed to us.
Unless L. Caesar, that most valiant Man, that most faithful lover of the
Commonwealth, should seem to any one more cruel, who but two Days ago, said
that the Husband of his own Sister an excellent Woman, (when he was by and
heard it) ought to be put to death: He said also that his Grandfather had been
slain by command of the Consul, and his Son under Age who was but employed by
him: Now what had these done? Had they entered into any Conspiracy of
destroying the Commonwealth? No, there was only some pensionarying in the
Government, some contention of Parties. And at that time the Grandfather of
this Lentulus a Person of Eminent worth, armed himself, pursued Gracchus, and
was glad to be laden with Wounds that the Commonwealth might not lose any
thing of its Grandeur. But this Lentulus has called in the Galli to subvert
the Foundations of the Commonwealth, raised the rebellious Multitude, sent for
Catiline, given us to be assassinated by Cethegus, the Citizens to be massacred
by Gabinius, the City to be burnt down by Cassius, all Italy to be ransacked
and destroyed by Catiline. And now methinks you are afraid lest in such an
horrid Villainy, so matchless and unspeakable, you should seem to have
determined any thing too severe: Whereas it is much more to be feared, that by
the remisness of Punishment you should seem cruel to your Country, than by the
exactness of Justice too severe upon the worst Enemies. But those things which
I hear, O Conscript Fathers, I cannot dissemble. There are words cast out by
some, and they are come to my Ear as if they feared I had not Guards enough to
execute what you this day Decree.

7. All things are provided for, ordered, settled, O Conscript Fathers, as well
by my utmost care and diligence, as the great affection of the People of Rome
to retain their Supreme Empire, to preserve their lives and fortunes. Men of
every quality, of every Age are flockt together, the Forum's full, all the
Temples, all the Avenues to this place are full. This is that only thing in
which (since this City was built) all have agreed in one and the same
sentiment, except those who knowing they must perish, had rather perish with a
Multitude than by themselves alone. These men indeed I do willingly except and
separate from the rest: For I do not look upon them in the Number of bad
Citizens but of the most implacable Enemies. O Immortal Gods! with what
Numbers, with what Affection, with what Valor, do all the rest conspire to
maintain the public Honor and Safety! Why should I particularly mention the
Roman Knights? These do ever so submit to the Supremacy of your Order and
Counsel, that they may still vye with you in love to the Commonwealth: Whom
after many Years dispute this Day, this Cause, joins to you in perfect
Friendship and Concord: Which Union if fixed in my Consulship and perpetuated
in the Commonwealth, I assure you no domestic mischief will ever assault any
part of it. With the same affection of defending the Commonwealth are all the
Officers of the Treasury, stout men got together, all the Clerks who being upon
business brought to the Office, leave their assignations to attend upon the
public Safety. The whole Multitude of the Freeborn are here, even the
meanest. For who is there to whom these Temples, the Aspect of this City, the
enjoyment of Liberty, the Light they see, and the Air they have ever breathed
in, are not dear, sweet, pleasant?

8. It Is worth the while, O Conscript Fathers, to consider the affections of
our Freemen, who have obtained the Rights of this City, and truly esteem it
their own Country: Which those who were Born here, and of the highest Quality
have not considered as their Country, but as a City of mortal Enemies. But why
do I insist upon this Order of Men, whom Estates, Privileges, and above all,
Liberty, have stirred up to defend the Safety of their Country? There is no
Servant who lives in any tolerable condition of Servitude, that does not
tremble at the Villainy of these Citizens: That does not only desire to maintain
the present State of Government, but as far as he dares, and is able, sets his
Shoulders to the common Safety. And therefore if any be concerned that it is
reported Lentulus has his Pander to run from one Tavern to another, hoping to
hire some indigent, rascally Fellows: It Is true, that has been tried and
attempted; but there are none found so miserable in their condition, so
pernicious in their desires, who had not rather heave the Sedan, carry their
Packs, ply their Fare, and have their quiet course of life preserved to them.
By much the greatest part of those who attend upon Shops and Inns (I may say
all of them) do above any thing desire Peace. All their attendance, their work,
their hire, depends upon the Trade and quiet of the Citizens: Whose gain, if
the Shops be shut, is gone; and where is it if they be burnt? Since things are
thus, O Conscript Fathers, the assistance of the Roman People is not wanting,
now see that you be not wanting to them.

9. You have a Consul preserved from the greatest Dangers, Treacheries, the
very point of Death, not so much for his own Life as for your Safety: All
degrees and ranks of Men conspire to defend the Commonwealth with their
Judgments, Affections, Desires, Valor, and Votes: Our Country surrounded with
the Firebrands and Darts of this impious Conspiracy, stretches forth her
supplicating hands to you; to you she commits her self; to you the lives of all
her Citizens, the Tower and the Capitol; to you the Altars of our tutelary
Angels, the perpetual and sempiternal Fire of Vesta; to you all the Temples of
the Gods, the Shrines, the Walls, and Houses of the City are recommended.
Besides, this Day are you to decide the case for your own lives, the lives of
your Wives and Children, you Goods, your Estates, your dwellings. You have a
Leader mindful of you, forgetful of himself (which does not always happen,) you
have all Men the whole Roman People (which never before was seen in a domestic
cause) agreeing in one and the same resolution. Think with your selves by how
great labors this Empire was founded, with what Valor our Liberty was
obtained, with how great bounty of the Gods these have been increased, our
Estates heaped; all these, one Night had very nigh utterly ruined. That this
may never be done, no nor thought of again by Citizens, you are this Day to
take care. And this I do not speak so much to stir up those who are ready to
run before me, as that my Voice which ought to be principal in the
Commonwealth, may be heard to have performed the Consular Office.

10. But before I return to the Sentence, I must add a little as to my self. By
how great the Band of Conspirators is, which you know to be considerable, such
a multitude of Enemies have I undertaken: Yet I cannot but think them base
weak, low, contemptible. But if ever any Power raised up by their rage and
wickedness should prevail over you and the Commonwealth's Dignity, I shall
never repent, O Conscript Fathers, of my Actions and Counsels. For Death, which
they perhaps threaten me with, is before us all, but to that Glory of Life
which you by your Decrees have honored me with, none else has attained. You
have given to others the congratulation of well managing, to me only of
preserving the Commonwealth. Let Scipio be renow'nd by whose Counsel and
Valor, Hannibal was driven out of Italy, glad to return again into his own
Africa: Or let that other Africanus who subverted Carthage, and Numantia, two
Cities most mischievous to this Empire be advanced with eminent Praise. Let
that L. Paulus, whose Triumphant Chariot the most noble and potent King Perseus
adorned, be esteemed Honorable: Let Marius be in Eternal Glory who twice
delivered Italy from being environed with Enemies and from the danger of
servitude: Before them all place Pompey, whose Valor and success have run
through so many Countries and Regions, that they are Parallel with the Travels
of the Sun. Yet among the Praises of all these, shall place be found for our
Glory; unless perhaps it be judged greater to open a way for entering into
Provinces, then it is to preserve that place into which the Conquerors are to
return Triumphant. Though in one respect foreign Victory is much more
desirable than domestic: When Enemies abroad are subdued they either serve us,
or being received into Friendship acknowledge themselves obliged: But when once
those, who being in the Number of Citizens are possessed with a Rebellious
Frenzy, commence Enemies to their Country, they, if you go to drive them
from the destruction of the Commonwealth, will neither be restrained by force,
nor appeased by kindness. Wherefore I see my self engaged in an eternal War
with mischievous Citizens; which I assure my self by the assistance of you, and
all good men, by the Memory of so great dangers, (which shall have a being, not
only among the People preserved, but in the Hearts and Tongues of all Nations)
will be easily diverted from me and mine. Nor can there any force be found so
great as may either subvert or shake the union of you and the Roman Knights, or
the unanimity of all good men.

11. Wherefore, O Conscript Fathers, instead of that command, that Army, that
Province, which I have quitted; instead of that Triumph, those Ensigns of Glory
which have been cast aside by me that I might effect yours, and the Cities
safety; for those Retinues and provincial Guests, whom I do at no less charge
maintain, then I did at first procure; for all these things, and my most
eminent affections toward you; for this my utmost diligence in preserving the
Commonwealth (the Fruits of which you all now behold) I ask nothing else of
you, but the Memory of this time, and of my whole Consulship, which being
imprinted upon your minds, I esteem my irrefragable defense. But if the
violence of Villains shall deceive and baffle my hopes, I recommend to you my
little Son whose Safety and Honor shall be sufficiently guarded if you will
but remember, he is the Son of him, who preserved all by his own dangers.
Wherefore, O Conscript Fathers, for the Supreme safety of your selves, and the
Roman People, for the sake of your Wives and Children, for your Houses and
Altars, your Images and Temples for this City, this Empire for the liberty and
security of Italy, for the whole Commonwealth, determine, as you began, with
care, and valor. You have a Consul, that is most ready to obey your Decrees,
and whatsoever you resolve, will, whilst he lives, maintain to the utmost of
his Power.

Postquam Cato assedit consulares omnes, itemque Senatus magna pars, sententiam
ejus laudant, virtutem animi ad coelum ferunt: alii alios increpantes timidos
vocant: Cato clarus atque magnus habetur: Senati decretum fit sicut ille
censuerat: Mihi, multa agitanti, constabat paucorum civium egregiam virtutem
cuncta patravisse; eoque factum, uti divitias paupertas, multitudinem paucitas
superaret. Sed postquam luxu atque desidia civitas corrupta est; rursus resp.
magnitudine sua imperatorum, atque Magistratuum vitia sustentabat. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 53.
After all, Cato's Judgment was applauded to the Skies; his eminent Virtue, then
supported the Commonwealth, as the extrordinary merit of some Ancestors had
raised it: for by them it was that the Poverty of Rome conquered the Riches of
her Neighbors, her handfuls overcame their Multitudes: Indeed for some Years
before this Conspiracy, the City had been corrupted with Sloth and Luxury, the
Empire supported the Magistrates, not the Magistrates the Empire; but Cato was
now valued as the reviving Power both of Virtue and Wisdom, so that all who
were of Consular Dignity, and much the greater part of the Senate approved his
Sentence, many of them reproaching one another as basely timorous: (...). Plut.
Cicer. Page 871.
So a Decree passed that the Conspirators should suffer death Caesar then stood
up and opposed the confiscation of their goods entreating that if the milder
part of his Sentence was rejected, the rest of it, which was more severe, might
not be taken. But many insisting upon it, he called in the Tribunes of the
People: They not interceding as was expected Cicero himself undertook so much
in their Favor, that the loss of Goods and Chattels was remitted.

Consul optumum, factu ratus noctem quae instabat, ante capere, nequid eo
spatio novaretur, triumviros, quae supplicium postulabat, parare jubet. Sall.
Bell. Cat. 55.
The Consul Thought it best by a speedy execution to prevent the Night; least
any disturbance should happen, and therefore commanded the Triumviri
Triumviros, scilicet capitales: Qui postquam Curious Dertatus de Samnitibus
triumphavit, tunc primum Romae creati sunt, qui de criminibus pariter
cognoscerent; and in facinorosos, si quid scelere ac perfidia deliquissent
animadverterent. Zan. in loc.
who were in the Nature of Sheriffs to oversee the punishments of Malefactors)
that they should get all ready: He himself went out, attended with great part
of the Senate, and had the Conspirators delivered up to him, and first he
received Lentulus, brought forth out of the Palace whom he lead through the Via
Sacra, and middle of the great Forum to the public Prison, Carcer ad terrorem
increscentis audaciae media urbe, imminens foro aedificatur. Live. Lib. 1. Cap.
33.
which was placed at the head of it as being the very center of the City, and a
more Eminent restraint of audacious Vice. Est in carcere locus, quod Tullianum
appellatur, ubi paululum ascenderis ad laevam, circiter XII. pedes humi
depressus, eum muniunt undeque parietes, atque insuper cumera, lapideis
fornicibus vincta se incultu, tenebris, odore, faedaatque terribilis ejus
facies. In eum locum postquam demissus Lentulus, vindices rerum capitalium
quibus praeceptum erat, laqueo gulam fregere. Ita ille patricius, ex gente
clarissima Corneliorum, qui Consulare imperium Romae habuerat, dignum moribus
factisque suis exitium vitae invenit. De Cethego, Statillo, Gabinio, Cepario,
eodem modo supplicium sumptum est. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 55.
In it there was a Dungeon called Tullianum, near Twelve Foot deep, walled
about and covered with a Stone Arch, but dismally dark, and stinking: Into this
place was Lentulus (...). Plut. Cic. Page 87.
let down, and strangled by the Executioners: Thus that Patrician of the most
renowned Cornelian Family found such a Death, as the manners and the actions of
his Life had merited: Then Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius, Ceparius, were lead
thither by the Praetors, and put to Death after the same manner.

(...). Plut. Cicer. Page 871, and 872.
As the Consul returned he observed many of the Conspiracy stand crowding in the
Forum, not knowing of the Execution, and hoping when Night came they might be
able to rescue their Friends: He therefore a loud (in a Tense which signified
the time past) said, They lived. By the easiness of such an expression, the
Romans were wont to allay the Odium of Capital Punishments. 'Twas Night before
Cicero got to his House, to which he was accompanied, not with a silent orderly
Pomp, but with Crowds and Shouts of all the honest Citizens, calling him
Savior and Father of his Country.

An artificial Day, then enlightened Rome, for Celebrating the Glory of her ever
renowned Consul: The lesser Streets shone with Lights hung out at the Door of
every House, in the greater the Balconies blazed with Torches, and were filled
with Ladies admiring and honoring their blessed Preserver. But the unparalled
Glory of all proceeded from those that followed him: They were the greatest
Persons of the Roman Commonwealth who had been Victorious in their Wars,
renowned by their Triumphs, eminent for preserving the Empire both by Sea and
Land: These went along confessing to one another, that the Roman People owed
the acknowledgment of Power, Riches, Spoils, to many Generals and Commanders,
but their Safety and Preservation to Cicero alone; who had defeated the
greatest danger, and that with the most extraordinary felicity; not as if it
were so much to punish the Villains and suppress their attempts, but that so
deep and inveterate a Conspiracy, should be extinguished with so little Tumult
and Mischief.

(...). App. Alex. de Bell. Civil. Lib. 2.
But three particular Encomiums ought not to be omitted; for since the value of
a Testimony has its Price from the worth of the Persons that give it, these
may be esteemed of the first Rate; I begin with M. Porcius. Cato who followed
and saluted him with that glorious Title of Father of his Country, ecchoed
back again by the Acclamamations of the People: An appellation that thence had
its Original, and was afterward conferred upon Emperors of the highest Merits:
An appellation that was not Hereditary as other Titles of Honor, but then
particularly decreed when a Testimony of the most consummated Virtue made it
due.

Mihi quidem art vir abundans bellicis laudibus Cn. Pompeius multis
audientibus hoc tribuit, ut diceret, frustra. se triumphum tertium deportaturum
fuisse, nisi meo in remp. beneficio, ubi triumpharet esset habiturus. Cicer. de
Offi. Lib. 1 Cap. 22.
Then the renowned Cn. Pompeius, at his return from Syria, did in a public
audience make this acknowledgment to him, That he should in vain have sought
the Honor of a Third Triumph; if Cicero had not preserved that Commonwealth
in which he was to Triumph.

At last we have this Reputation Immortalized by these following Verses of
Juvenal: Quis, Catilina, tuis natalibus, atque Cethegi.
Inveniet quicquam sublimius? arma tamen vos.
Nocturna, and flammas domibus templisque parastis.
Ut Brachatorum, pueri, Senonumque Minores,
Ausi, quod Liceat tunica punire molesta.
Sed vigilat Consul, vexillaque vestra, coercet,
Hic novus Arpinas ignobilis, and modo Romae
Municipalis eques, galeatum ponit ubique
Praesidium attonitis, and in omni gente laborat.
Tantum igitur muros intra toga contulit illi.
Nominis and tituli quantum non Leucade, quantum
Thessaliae campis Octavius abstulit udo
Caedibus assiduis gladio: Sed Roma parentem.
Roma Patrem Patriae, Ciceronem Libera dixit.
Juvenal. Satyr. 8.
Who any thing finds higher than thy Line
Cethegus reaches, Cataline or thine;
Yet you took Arms, and did by Might conspire
To set our Houses, and our gods on Fire:
Like Sons of Gauls or Rogues at Lions Born,
For which you ought pitched Doublets to have worn:
But on your Motion did the Consult wait:
This New Man Tully, this poor Arpinate,
Late made at Rome a Country Gentleman
Set Guards wherever the line of danger ran
Unmaz'd us and took Pains for all the Town;
And therefore even within the Walls the Gown,
A greater Title upon him bestowed
Than any Name Caesar to Actium owed
To Thessaly, or to those weapons kept
Moist with the Blood which they so often wept
For Rome, freed Rome did call her Self his Child,
And Cicero his Countrey's Father styled.


But how vain is the Glory of his Life; how vain are even the Merits that
procure it: The foregoing Solemnity was but upon the Nones, that is our Fifth
of December, yet the Year could not expire before the Consular Power staggered,
and its brightness was darkened in the very last flash.

Atque illis temporibus iisdem, cum jam Capuam metu Sextius liberasset, ego
literis eum Capua accersivi cum illo excercitu quem tum secum habebat. Hoc
adventu P. Sextii, tribunorum pleb. novorum quitum extremis riebus. Consulatus
mei. res eas, quas gesseram vcxare cupiebant, reliquique conjurationis impetus,
and conatus, sunt retadati. Ac, postea quam est intellectum, Catone tribuno
pleb. fortissimo, atque optimo cive, rempub. defendente, per seipsum S. P. Q.
R. sine militum praesidio tueri facile majestatem suam, Sextius cum illo suo
exercitu summa celeritate est Antonium consecutus. Cicer. pro. P. Sextio. Cap.
5.
For such was the turbulency and interest of the New Tribunes in favor of the
opposite Party, not only perplexing Cicero's affairs, but retarding even the
suppression of Catiline, (who was then in Arms) that he was necessitated to
send for P. Sextus, with his forces from Capua, to protect the City, and
support him in the remaining Days of his Consulship.

But it happened well for the Commonwealth, that the most Virtuous and Valiant
Cato was one of those who at that time entered upon the Office of Tribune; who
needed not a Guard of Soldiers to defend the Majesty and Honor of the Roman
People, he was ready and able to support the public Affairs by his personal
Interest, and therefore Sextius was sent away with the Consul Antonius, who was
then marching to join against Catiline.

(...), Plut. Cat. min. Page 768.
And this was the time that Cato thought fit to accept of the Tribuneship: He
had been formerly solicited to it, but would not take upon him such eminent
Power and Authority, without a greater exigence: A strong Medicine is not
requisite till the Disease be so: A great Command he then thought most
desirable, when the posture of public Affairs was most in want of it.

(...). Ibid. Page 769.
This Year therefore his Friends came and importuned him that he would accept of
it, not as a kindness to himself, but to his Country, and all the most
moderate Citizens entreated him that now (though he was formerly pleased to
refuse) he would seek it, to preserve, the public Liberty and Safety by the
hazard of his own.

(...). Plut. Cat. Min. Page 768.
Thus was he persuaded to canvass for the Office, and particularly as Antagonist
to Metellus Nepos, whose Factious attemps he very well understood, and knew
that (though they were both chosen) he should be able to clog and defeat them:
For the Tribunitian Power consisted more in Intercession than in Action, nor
could all of the Tribunes Decree any thing if any one of their Colleagues were
averse, and opposite.

(...). Dio. Cass. Lib. 37. Pa. 52. and 53.
Notwithstanding Cato observed and prevented the more considerable mischiefs,
yet some of the People got Metellus Nepos, upon the Day that Cicero was to lay
down his Office, and intended an Oration relating all the Affairs of his
Consulship, to impose silence upon him, only suffering him to take his Oath of
a Faithful discharge (as the custom was) and so march off. However the Consul
would add one Clause to his Oath, swearing that the City had been preserved by
him.

Quod te audisse credo, pridie Kal. Januar. qua injuria nemo unquam in aliquo
magistratu improbiss^mus civis affectus est, ea me consulem affecit cum remp.
conservassem: at que abeuntem magistratu concionis habenda potestate privavit
Cicer. Epist. ad. Metell. 2.
Of this he complained to his Friend Mettellus Celer, the Tribunes Brother who
was Pro-Consul of Gallia, telling him he could not but hear what disgrace had
been cast upon him at the laying down of his Magistracy, such as the most
villainous Citizens never met with; that when he had been Consul and saved the
Commonwealth, the Liberty of a parting Oration was denied him.

And is it thus? Then, what Principles must generous Spirits move by? Surely
not by a mere thirst of Glory? (which seems to have had the highest ascendant
over Cicero's actions, since he so eagerly received not only such as was given
to him by others, but was so sordidly lavish in his own expressions. For how
soon is that glaring Meteor darkened? We must look higher and pursue the more
Divine Notions both of Cicer. in Cat. 4.
him and Cato in Caesar. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 52.
Cato, who affirmed that there was an Eternal Life, distinct Habitations for
the Virtuous and Vicious, that there shall be Torments enough to punish the one
and Happiness sufficient to reward the others.

(...). Dio. Cass. Lib. 37. Page 52.
The Year from the Building of Rome 691. Before the Birth of Christ. 60. Didius
Junius Silanus, and L. Licinius Muraena, Consuls.
(...). Dio Cast. Lib. 37. Page 53.
AT the very beginning of this Year Catiline him-himself perished, (though
Cassiodare, strangely different from other Authors, and the current of History
it self places it a Twelvemonth farther under the Consulship of M. Pupio and
M. Valerio Coss. Catilina in agro Pistoriensi a C. Antonio bello peremptus est
Cassiodor: in chronico.
Pupius and Valerius.) He had very considerable Forces with him, but lay all
this while in expectation of what Lentulus should accomplish in the City: Still
hoping that Cicero and his Friends might be assassinated, and then he did not
doubt but his success would be easy. Instead of which, at length the News of
their discovery and punishment, the revolt of many, who had took their part,
arrives: So that now C. Antonius marching toward him from Rome, and Mettellus
Celer watching his Motions about Faesule, that he could not tell which way to
stir, he had no hopes left but in the Forces with him, Duas legiones instituit,
--. Sed ex omni copia circiter pars quarta erat militaribus armis instructa,
ceteri uti quemque casus a maverat, sparos, aut lanceas, alii praeacutas sudes
portabunt. -- Catilina permontes iter facere; modo ad urbem, modo in Galliam
versus castra movere; hostibus occasionem pug^andi non dare. Sall. Bell. Cat.
Page 56.
which were Two Legions, being Vid. Sigonium and Vegetium.
(according to the most common account) Twelve thousand, or as Vid. Appian.
Lib. 2. de bell. Civil.
Appian says Twenty thousand men, but not above a quarter of them well armed,
the rest only had such Weapons as they accidentally laid Hands on.

At first he lead his Army up and down the Mountainous passages, sometimes
toward the City, sometimes toward Gallia, avoiding all the opportunities of
an engagement, Sed postquam -- plerique quos ad bellum spes rapinarum, aut
novarum rerum studium illexerat dilabuntur; reliquos Catilina, per montes
asperos magnis itineribus in agrum Pistoriensem abducit, eo consilio, uti
pertramites occulte perfugeret in Galliam Transalpinam. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap.
57.

At Q. Mettellus Celer cum tribus legionibus in agro Piceno praesidebat, ex
difficultate rerum eadem illa existumans, quae supra diximus, Catilinam
agitare. Igitur, ut iter ejus ex perfugis cognovit, castra propere movit, ac
sub ipsis radicibus montium consedit, qua illi descensus erat in Galliam
properanti. Neque tamen Antonius long aberat; utpote qui magno exercitu locis
aequioribus expeditos in fugam sequeretur. Ibid.


but finding that many who followed him only in hopes of Plunder, and for the
love of innovations, began continually to forsake him, he lead them into the
Pistorian Country (which Antonine calls ad Pistores, whose City was placed at
the root of the Appennine between Florence and Luca, still known by the Name of
Pistoia) intending to steal away into Gaul.

But Q. Metellus Celer, presiding with three Legions over the Picene Country,
and supposing by Catilines difficulties, what his attempts would be, marches
thither first; and being well informed by Scouts, of the Enemies motion, posts
himself under those very Mountains by which they were to pass: Nor was Antonius
with his Army far off, following them by the more even and open ways.

(...). Dio Cass. Lib. 37. Page 53.
Catiline was now forced to venture all upon a Battle, and having his choice of
two Enemies, turns toward Antonius. For though the Forces which Mettellus had
with him were much the inferior, and so might have best been ventured upon; yet
Catiline considering that Antonius was once a well willer to, and promoter of
the Conspiracy, resolves to try his Fortune with him, hoping that the Victory
might some way or other be betrayed to him.

(...). Ibid.
But Antonius having escaped the discovery when their designs were great and
hopeful did not now care for coming in to support a broken piece of Villainy,
(such a sort of People ever measuring Friendship and Enmity by the success of
Affairs) and fearing least when they came to a close Engagement, Catiline might
revile him with some of their horrid Secrets, he pretended to be C. Antonius,
pedibus aeger, quod praelio adesse nequibat M. Pretreo legato exercitum
permittit. Sall. Bell. Cat. 59.
sick of the Gout, and committed the Fight to his Lieutenant General M.
Petreius.

Instructos ordines in locum aequum deduci t: dein remotis omnibus equis, quo
militibus exaequato periculo, animus amplior esset. ipse pedes exercitum and
pro loco atque copits instruit. Namuti planities erat inter sinistros montss
and ab dextera rupes aspera, octo cohortes in front constituit: reliqua signa
insubsidiis arctrius collocat. Ab his centuriones omnes selectos evocatos,
praeterea ex gregariis militibus optumum quemque armatum in primam aciem
subducit. C. Manlium in dextra, Faesulanum quendam in sinistra part curare
jubet, ipse cum liberis and colonibus propter Aquilam adsistit; quam bello
Cimbrico C. Marius in exercitu habuisse dicebatur. Ibid.
Catiline drew up his Army in the plain of Pistoria, between the Mountains on
one hand, and a sharp Rock upon the other: He commanded all the Horses to be
quitted, that every ones danger being equal, their courage might be more
generally enlarged; he himself walked before them on foot, disposing them in
such Order as the place would best allow. Eight Cohorts or Companies, usually
consisting of Four hundred and twenty men apiece, he placed in the Fort,
strengthening them with all the most experienced Captains, and chosen Soldiers
he had in his Army: The rest stood closer together, only as it were in reserve
to them, in whom he placed all his Hopes. C. Manlius lead the right Wing, an
old Officer of Faesulae the left, Catiline himself with his most faithful
Servants and Followers surrounded that famous Eagle, which was said to have
been the Standard of C. Marius in the Cimbrian War.

Just before the Trumpet sounded to the Engagement he spoke to them in this
manner:

Compertum ego habeo Milites, verba viris virtutem non addere; Sall. Bell. Cat.
Cap. 58. etc.
I Know very well, Soldiers, that words cannot create Valor, a dissolute Army
never became strong, nor were Cowards ever made resolute by the Oratory of
their General: That courage which Nature and Experience have already given you
possession of, that and no more can be expected in the Exigences of War. If the
Glory we aim at, if the dangers which surround us do not prevail, all other
Exhortations must needs be fruitless: A timorous Mind, ever stops the Ear
against the advice it dreads. I have therefore called you only to give a little
account of our present circumstances and of what I further design. You know how
great a mischief the sloth and negligence of Lentulus has caused both to
himself and us, that waiting so long for aid out of the City, I could not march
into Gallia: And now in what posture our Affairs are, you your selves
understand as well as I. There are two Armies of the Enemy, one is between the
City, the other between Gallia and us; here, if we would never so fain, we can
no longer continue, the want of all Provisions is so pressing. Wherever you
go, your Swords must open the way, I can therefore only exhort you to be
courageous and resolute; when you begin to fight, remember, that you carry not
only Riches, Reputation, and Glory, but even your Liberty and your Country in
your hands. If we Conquer, all things will be secure to us, Provision enough
will be brought in, the free Towns and Colonies will set open their Gates. But
if you the other side fear should make us withdraw, we shall find all things as
destructive: No Place, no Friend will be able to save him whom his own Arms
have not protected: Besides, fellow Soldiers, the case is not the same with
them and us: We fight for the enjoyment of our Country, Our Liberties, and our
Lives: They only to maintain the needless grandeur of a few powerful men. That
you may now the more courageously engage, remember your former resolutions; if
you had pleased, you might have spent your Lives in a sordid Exile, some of you
might have dwelt at Rome, cashiered of your Estates and Depending upon others;
but because this was base, and intolerable to the generous, therefore have you
pursued the present enterprise. Certain it is, no ordinary Valor can bring us
off; and none but the Conqueror does by War arrive at the happy rewards of
Peace. For to expect safety in flight, and that your Bodies should be secured
when you have laid down your Arms, is the greatest madness that ever was. In a
Battle, those who are most afraid, are always in the greatest danger, boldness
is the strongest Rampart. When I recollect who you are, my fellow Soldiers,
and take an estimate of your Actions, I am possessed with the greatest hopes of
Victory. Your Birth, your Youth, your Valor, commands me thus to assure my
self of the utmost success: especially since such necessities drive us on as
are sufficient to make the greatest Cowards become courageous. We need not fear
being enclosed by the Enemy, the straitness of this place sufficiently secures
us from that. But if Fortune should envy the Merits of our Valor, be sure not
to die unrevenged. Which do you think is better? to be taken and butchered like
so many Beasts, or fighting like men to sell our Enemies a dear and mournful
Victory?

Ille cohortes Veteranas. -- in front, post eas caeterum exercitum in
subsidiis locat. Ipse equo circumiens unumquemque nominans, appellat, hortatur,
rogat, uti meminerint, se contra latrones inermes, pro patria, pro-libertate
pro aris atque focis suis certare. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 59.
Petreius placed also (as Catiline had done) all his Veterane Cohorts in the
Front, then the rest of his Army as their reserve; he rid about them, called
each by their Names, exhorted, encouraged, asked them if they did not remember
they were to fight for their Country, their Children, their Houses and Temples
against a Company of undisciplined Rogues.

Homo militaris, quod amplius annos triginta tribunus, aut praefectus, aut
legatus, aut praetor cum magna gloria in exercitu fuerat, plerosque ipsos,
factaque eorum fortia noverat, ea commemorando, militum animos accendebat. Ibid.
He was a very good Soldier, had been either Colonel or Lieutenant for above
Thirty years; he Personally knew most of his Army, and was able by reciting
their former Valiant actions to inflame their Courage anew.

Sed, ubi omnibus rebus exploratis, Petr^ius tuba signum dat, cohortes paulatim
incedere jubet, idem facit hostium exercitus. Postquam eo ventum est, unde a
ferentari is praelium committi posset, maxumo clamore, infestis signis
concurrunt; pila omittunt; gladiis res geritur. Veterani, pristinae virtutis
memores, cominus acriter instare, illi haud timidi resistunt: maxuma vi
certatur. Ibid. Cap. 60.
So soon as all things were ready, Petreius commanded the Trumpet to sound, and
the Cohorts to march a little forwards: The same was done also by the Enemy.
After some light harnessed Soldiers had skirmish'd alittle, they came to a
close Engagement, and laying aside their Darts, they with a great shout and
rage, came to acting all by the Sword: The Veteranes mindful of their former
Vaour, resolutely thrust forwards; their Enemies no less courageously stood
their ground, that there was for a great while a most fierce contest. Interea
Catilina cum expeditis in prima acie versari; laborantibus succurrere; integros
pro sauciis accersere: omnia providere; multum ipse pugnare, saepe hostem
ferire; strenui militis and boni imperatoris officia simul exsequebatur.
Petreius ubi videt Catilinam contra, ac ratus erat, magna vi contendere:
cohortem praetoriam in medios hostis inducit; eosque perturbatos, atque alios
alibi resistentes, interficit. deinde utrinque ex lateribus caeteros
aggreditur. Sall. Bell. Cat. Cap. 60.
Catiline labored chiefly to maintain that select Company he had placed in the
Front of the Battle, he relieved them who began to faint, he called for fresh
men in the place of those who were wounded: He had his Eye every where, he
fought the Enemy hand to hand, he at once performed the duty of a stout
Soldier and good Commander. When Petreius saw Catiline fight thus with a
Valor so much above expectation, he led the Pretorian Cohort, Talis fuit apud
Macedonas Cohors regia. Lips. in loc.
which was in nature of a Lifeguard to the General) into the midst of the
Enemy, beating down those that were disordered, and killing all that made any
resistance, having thus routed the Body, he falls upon the Wings; Manlius and
Faesulanus in primis pugnantes cadunt. Postquam fasas copias seque cum paucis
relictum videt Catilina, memor generis, atque pristinae dignitatis suae, in
confertissimos hosts incurrit, ibique pugnans confoditur. Ibid.
Manlius and the other Commander of Faesulae, were slain among the foremost
after which, Catiline seeing his Forces scattered and himself left with a very
few about him, mindful of his Noble Sergestusque, domus tenet a quo Sergia
nomen,
Centauro invehitur magna.
Virgil. 5. Aeneid.
Sergian Family and his former Honors, rush't in among the thickest Enemies,
and there died fighting.

Sed confecto praelio, tum vero cerneres quanta audacia, quantaque animi vis
fuisset in exercitu Catilinae. Nam fere, quem quisque vivus pugnando locum
ceperat, eum, amissa anima, corpore tegebat, Pauci autem, quos medios Cohors
Praetoria disjecerat, paulo diversius, sed omnes tamen adversis vulneribus
conciderant.

Catilina vero long a suis inter hostium cadavera repertus est, paululum etiam
spirans, ferociamque animi quam habuerat vivus, in vultu retinens. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 61.


The great courage and resolution of his Army appeared even after the Battle was
over, for that same place each Soldier had taken possession of to fight upon,
he lay in, when dead: Except some few whom the Pretorian Cohort had overborn;
but all of them had such wounds as testified they fell facing their Enemies.

Catiline was found far from any of his own men amidst the heaps of the slain,
fetching almost his last breath, but in his dying looks still retaining the
fury of his life. Catilina long a suis inter hostium cadavera repertus est,
pulcherrima morte, si pro patria sic concidisset. L. Flo. Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
Had he performed all this in seeking to save his Country, his Death had been
glorious enough; Catilina non segnius nota obiit, quam sceleris conandi
concilia inierat; quippe fortissime dimicans, quem spiritum supplicio debuerat,
supplicio reddidit. Vell. Patercu. Lib. 2.
but now 'twas only the closing Scene of Villainy: That Soul which had been long
due to avenging Justice was but surrendered to it.

Postremo ex omni copia, neque in proelio neque in fuga quisquam civis ingenuus
captus est. Ita cuncti suae hostiumque vitae juxta pepercerant. Neque tamen
exercitus populi R. laetam, aut incruentam victoriam adeptus erat. Nam
strenuissimus quisque, aut occiderat in proelio, aut graviter vulneratus
discesserat. Multi autem qui se e castris visundi, aut spoliandi gratia
processerant, volventes hostilia cadavera, amicum alii, pars hospitem, aut
cognatum reperiebant. Fuere item qui inimicos suos cognoscerent. Ita vary per
omnem exercitum laetitia, maror, luctus, atque gaudia agitabantur. Sall. Bell.
Cat. Cap. 61.
Of all the Multitude there was not one Freeborn Citizen taken alive, either
flying or fighting, they sold their lives at the dearest rate, sparing,
themselves no more than their Enemies. The Conquering Army had no great comfort
neither in their Victory, the most Valiant of them, being either slain or
wounded, and when they came to turn over the Bodies of the dead, one found a
Friend, another his relation, some also saw their particular Enemies, which
afforded a confused medly of joy and grief, the best event that can be supposed
in a Civil War.

(...). Cass. Lib. 37. Page 52.
After the Battle was over, Antonius sent the Head of Catiline to Rome, that the
People being assured of his Death might acquiesce from their fears; for this
Service he was styled Imperator, public Sacrifices were also decreed, and that
the dreaded dangers being now over, they should change their Mourning Attire
for the Garments of Joy.

Consulatui Ciceronis non mediocre adjecit decus natus eo anno D. Augustus,
omnibus omnium gentium viris magnitudine sua inducturus caliginem. Vell. Pater.
Lib. 2.
In the height of this destructive Treason, in the Consulship of Cicero was Born
the most Illustrious, Octavius afterward Augustus Caesar; Lepidi atque Antonii
arma in Augustum cessere, qui cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa, nomine
principis imperium accessit. Tacit. Annal. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
who gave a lasting Peace to the World, when it had been long tired out with
War and Discord: Under whose peaceful Empire was Born the Prince of Peace
himself, the Redeemer and Savior of men; who has done more to make us happy,
than any can do to make us miserable: And has that blessedness to give, which
the World can no way equal nor destroy. If we therefore amidst the greatest
dangers and difficulties continue in the ways of Virtue, we may reasonably
expect to be both safe and successful: Virtue is stronger in its own Nature
than Vice, more generally taking, most commonly prevalent: But however, if Vice
should be come rampant, and Rebellion, Oppression and Cruelty, be let loose in
the World, still may Virtuous Persons enjoy a serene pleasure in their own
Breasts; and (expecting with a little patience, till the Volumes of Divine
goodness, unroll themselves) shall certainly either here receive a joyful
return and establishment of Peace, or else be received into the greater
Blessedness of Eternal, undisturbed Glory.

FINIS.

