PITHANALOGIA. OR, A Persuasive TO CONFORMITY By way of a LETTER to the
Dissenting Brethren.

Si Propheta es praenuntia aliquid, si Apostolus praedica public.

Tertul. de carne Christi. p. 390. (...).

Justin Martyr ad Gracos, p. 33. Non de adversario victoriam, sed contra
mendacium quaerimus veritatem.

Jerome adversus Pelagianos, p. 273. By a Country Minister.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, near
Cliffords Inn. 1670.

CHAPTERS.
I. A Paraenesis. II. The Height of the Bishops, no reason to keep from
Conformity. III. Animadversions upon some passages in a Book entitled Solomon's
prescription for removing the Pestilence. IV. Subordination of Presbyters to
Bishops; and the honorary Title of Lords given to the Bishops, no just
impediments to Conformity. V. An Answer to that popular Clamor, Godly meetings
are disturbed, and Papists favored. VI. Reordination no sufficient ground for
Nonconformity. VII. A Transition, or Introduction to the main Reasons, which
are pretended to obstruct conformity. VIII. Assent and consent not unlawful to
be given to the Common Prayers and Rites of the Church of England. IX.
Concerning the Salvation of Infants dying after Baptism. X. How Infants are
Regenerated in Baptism. XI. Concerning Godfathers, and Godmothers. XII. No
good Christian need be offended at the Cross in Baptism. XIII. It is no
enormity to have Ceremonies about Gods Worship. XIV. Good Subjects may lawfully
declare, or swear, that it is not lawful to take up Arms against the King. XV.
The Solemn League and Covenant is not obligatory. XVI. A Coronis; or seasonable
conclusion.
A Persuasive TO CONFORMITY, By way of a LETTER to the dissenting BRETHREN.
CHAP. I. A Paraenesis.
MY Brethren! Do not startle, or fly back because I call you so: Like those
seditious, and turbulent Donatists, who retus'd to give this sweet Title of
Relation to any, but only to those Traditores (as Optatus calls them) who were
their own Partisans in iniquity, and the misshapen Members of the African
fraternity, as well as themselves. I am sure, we have all one common Father, if
we are yet thoroughly reconciled to that Prayer, wherein we call him so. And if
we have not the same Mother too, it is not only our guilt, but our shame: For
whilst we divide the seamless Coat of Christ; and every party will have an
Ephod, and a Teraphim, a Church of his own modelling; we maintain the worst
sort of Poligamy in the World, in making Christ to have as many Spouses as ever
Solomon had Concubines.

And whilst we go about to disown that Mother, or which is worse, scratch her
by the face, and call her Whore; on whose knees we have been dandled, nourished
by her breasts, and carried in her womb; we do but debase our selves into a
viperous and spurious Generation.

Methinks I see the Church of England wringing her hands; and hear her
complaining against such disobedient Children, or rather Apostatizing Julians;

Hear O Heavens, Isa. 1.2
and give ear O Earth, I have nourished and brought up Children, Lam. 1.2.
and they have rebelled against me. My Friends have dealt treacherously with
me, they are become mine enemies.

But now I have made you sport enough, in calling the Church our Mother; And
your Proselytes dance after the same pipe: They are never more merry, then when
they speak of the Sons and daughters of the Church by way of derision: as if
this were a fond, and ridiculous Soloecism. Into what profuse, and intemperate
laughter, have many of you, and them, broke forth in my hearing? as if your
sides would have burst asunder, at the very mention of the Sons and Daughters
of the Church. But stay Sirs! Suppress your swelling spleenes, and lets be
serious. What you esteem our reproach, that we account our own glory. And if it
be vile in your eyes, to be obedient, regular, peaceable, and walking by
innocent Canons, we are resolved to be more vile yet. It was Theodosius's joy,
that he was a Member of the Church; and it is ours, not only that we are so,
but that we are not erralical, and extravagant in our Motions; every member
observing its own office, and station; as all the Servants did, in Solomon's
Family.

Tell me true! is it such an absurdity to be styled the Sons and Daughters of
the Church? did you never read of the Sons and daughters of Zion? Lam. 4.2.
Of the Daughters of Jerusalem? Gant. 3.11.
That Jerusalem which is above, Luke 23.28.
is the Mother of us all. Gal. 4.26,
Which is interpreted by your selves of the true Christian militant Church.
Heb. 12.22.


Well then: Maugre all animosities; we are, we will be brother Germans; except
you will renounce both God, and his Church. And if we be Brethren, let that
name be Coagulum pacis, to cement us and soder us together. Let that word hush
and charm all our differences; as Caesar by calling the mu^ineers of his Army,
Commilitones! Fellow Soldiers! reduced them to their proper Colors; allaying,
Genesis 13.8.
and melting their rage. And Abraham composed that growing discord betwixt
himself and Lot, by saying unto Lot, Let there be no strife I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my Herd-men, and thy Herd-men, for we are
Brethren. If you shall refuse to lay hold on this right hand of fellowship,
which is tendered unto you, by one that woo's you in the name of a Brother, Genesis
42.21.
you will say one day with Joseph's Brethren, Verily we are guilty concerning
our Brother, in that we would not hear him, when he besought us in the anguish
of his Soul. What a shame is it that Christian Brethren, should be like the
offspring of Cadmus; Or those Romish Twins, that sucked the breast of a Wolf;
so that one must needs turn the other into a Sacrifice, when a common fire is
like to devour us both. Alas! must we like those unhappy Brethren be divided
in our very flames? It was not so with Saul, and Jonathan: For they were
lovely, 1 Samuel 1.23
and pleasant in their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided. Where
is now the glory of the English Clergy? We were once, Stupor mundi, the
amazement of the World round about, for Learning, Religion, Love, and
Integrity. What cursed spirit is that which is now come amongst us? Nay what
devilish vapors are belched out of the infernal pit, to darken, and eclipse
our glory? Have we not enemies abroad to grapple withal? But we must spend the
remainder of our expiring valor, one upon another? What are we posting on, and
declining to our western bed? Hastening our own fatal periods? And digging our
own graves?

But what is the matter? Have we so soon forgot our late deliverance out of
Babylon? Are we no sooner free from the voice of the oppiessour? are our
fetters no sooner off, but we are lifting up our heels one against another. Is
it so long since, we took down our Harps from the ^willows? since we were in a
dream, and could scarce believe our own eyes, when the Lord turned again the
captivity of our Zion? Are we already weary of our own liberty? And are we
going backward? as if with the male-contented Israelites, our delight were to
be in Egypt; As if like madmen, we fared best in the dark. Are our Garlands of
Bays already withered? or turned into mournful Cypress? Our shouting, into
howling? our Bon-fires, to firing of Beacons, and Funeral Piles? The clapping,
to the wringing of Hands? Is it not far better to be disciplined, and awed with
the rods of a tender Father, then to bleed under the Scorpions of tyrannical
Taskmasters? Is it not better for us to live under the Empire of a legitimate,
and natural Prince, then to lie continually gasping, and dying under the lashes
of tyrannical usurpers? And lick up the spittle of some cursed Dyonisius? Is it
not better to be governed by the pastoral staff, of pious and learned Bishops;
then to lie under the iron rod of arbitrary Commissioners, ambitious and
imperious Tryers? Men that were bounded within no enclosure of Laws, but what
their own bias'd wills, invidious prejudices, and cankered passions, suggested
unto them: every one doing that which seemed good in their own blood-shotten
eyes. Are we so soon weary of Manna, Nectar, and Ambrosia? Sure I am, we want
nothing to complete our happiness, but to know it, and to be thankful for it. I
I can scarce forbear to say; Blessed are our eyes, which see the things that we
see: And Blessed are our ears, that hear the things which we hear. How would
those faithful souls have rejoiced, for their own, for the Churches, and for
their posterities sake, to have seen one of these days! I mean those that were
hurried out of this life, in the late dismal confusions, before they saw any
gleams of that Sun which now shines in our Horizon: Nay, we our selves, who
have passed that gulf, and are now arrived to the Haven of Rest, would have
parted with whatever had been most dear unto us; or run those hazzards which
had been most desperate; that so we might have purchased these mercies, which
God has been pleased to bestow upon us, immediately from his own hand, at a
cheaper rate: We could have been contented (some of us, I dare boldly say) to
have sung our Nunc dimittis with old Simeon, could we but from some Mount Nebo
have discovered the borders of this Land of Canaan: And shall we now depreciate
and undervalue it? Shall we repine, and mutter, whilst our mouths are full of
Butter and Honey? When the deluge of waters is abated, and runs within its own
channel, would we fain have it return and overwhelm the earth again? would we
again converse with roaring Cannons? and dance after Drums, and Trumpets? What
do we mean to look such several ways? To cast suchtorvous aspects one upon
another? As if like Basilisks, we would discharge and let fly, even venomous
Arrows from our eyes. Why do we speak the language of Ashdod? As if we were the
Builders of Babel, rather then the Bezaleels of the New Jerusalem. The Flocks
must needs be divided, the people distracted, when the Shepherds lead them to
contrary pastures; and Paul and Barnabas part, and cannot agree which way to
go. The Ark of the Church must needs totter, when the Pilots are at variance,
and sail by several Cards: Some fetching their directions from the Stars; and
others going by the deceitful Compass of their own imaginations; the slippery
Globes of their doting brains. Strange watchmen! to betray the Gates of the
City: Unnatural Pastors! to weary the tender Lambs; instead of carrying them in
their bosom, and snatching them out of the Lions mouth -- Quis custodiet
ipsos?. Custodes? -- 1 Kings 3.26.
That was the worst of Harlots, that said, Let it be neither thine nor mine,
but divide it. Pompey had more pity and kindness for the City of Rome. Ah!
Potius bello patio vis in isto, te Caesar putet esse suam, Luc.
Rather then harrass it with civil Wars, he was willing to quit his own claim,
and surrender all his interest, unto the dispose of Caesar alone. I am sorry to
see Machivels doctrine put in practice amongst you -- Divide, and Reign: First
mud the waters, and then angle for those fish, which will best suit with your
palates. Raise a great dust, and then mount your victorious Chariots or like
Juno, escape in a Cloud. Your farewell Sermons have been to me a stone; nay, a
whole Rock of offense. How passionately do you there cry up the preciousness of
Souls? How do you there proclaim your tenderuess, and yerning bowels, even
bleeding and melting for the salvation of your people; and yet at the very next
instant, desert them, and expose them in Arks of bulrushes, to sink or swim on
the surges of troublesome waters. As if you could kiss, and starve; embrace,
and strangle in the same breath. And if you had left your charges only to your
successors, to have born the heat and burden of the day; it had been the more
tolerable: and task enough I Will warrant you, to pollish a a knotty Generation,
and to have gathered a scattered Israel. But how does this air wring with the
eccho's of lamentable complaints? Our bellows are burnt in the fire: Our lungs
are consumed. We have fisht all night, and caught nothing: We would have healed
the wounds of the Church; Hehe. 4.7.8.
but others keep them from closing. Our webs are revell'd. Tobiah and Sanballat
demolish in private, what we build in public. Just, as most Countries have
their traditions, that Churches have been pulled down in the night, as much as
they have been raised in the daytime: The envious man has done this. Why do
many hang back? Others are cold, in joining with the devotions of the Church,
in praying for mercies, for the averting and removing of judgments. They go to
the public assemblies like the Cows of Bethshemech: They go and low, and look
back to their calves: whereas we should come together from Dan to Beersheba, as
one man; in flocks like Doves; in droves, like sheep. Alas! like wild beasts;
or berries on the Trees, after the gathering of the Summer vintage; here one
and there another drops into the Congregation; is this for Gods glory? The
Ministers, or peoples comfort? And have they not your example for a pattern?
Your assertions for a rule? As if in this you would imitate Lucifer; by drawing
multitudes after you. Is not this the way to bring in Atheism at last a flood?
Shall such religious, holy, popular, and learned men (say the people) forbear
the assembly and prayers of the Church: and what would you have us to do? O
take heed, you do not entitle your selves to their sins; nor destroy your
Brethren with your singular conceits; for whom Christ dyed. Just so it was in
Germany when the reformation dawned there, by Luthers and Melanctons means;
there sprang up a Generation, Camerarius in vito. Melanctonis. p. 45.46.
who cried down all Church-orders, and by the suggestions of the Devil did
hinder its progress. And Saint Paul, makes the same complaint, that when he had
a great door and effectual opened, he had many adversaries. 1 Cor. 16.9.
The Angel is now moving our waters: It is but stepping in, and we may be
healed of all our maladies; why should yon with your niceties, and scruples;
affright your brethren from washing in this Jordan? You stand so much upon your
modalities, in every administration; that it is all one with you to see Zion lie
waste, as not to be reared up according to the Idea's of your phansies. It is
all one with you, not to pray, not to receive the Sacrament, as not to perform
these according to your prescription: If this be not, what is it to Lord it
over men's faith, and over the heritage of the Lord? What else is it, in our
Sayiours sense, to call men Fathers upon Earth? Although you do as little agree
among your selves in particulars, as you do with us in the main. If Religion
should be put into your dress, its fashion would be changed as often, as that
of the greatest Gallants, or as the color of the Chamaelion. Every Parish
would be in a mode by it self. Some of you are utterly against all forms: Some
not: yet most of you are against ours. But if any party of you should compose
another: the rest would be as unsatisfied with it (as we have seen) as with
this. Retire therefore into the withdrawing room of your own hearts: Turn over
the leaves of your Consciences: Dismantle all your selfish thoughts; divest
your selves of all by-respects: Deal nakedly, and clearly with your own Souls:
Then tell me true; nay, tell the people true; whether God may not truly be
worshipped with our prayers, and we made happy with the concession and granting
of them: Whether the Sacraments are not administered in all their essential
parts; and set off in a very lively and quickening manner: Whether the way of
Salvation, is not solidly and completely set forth in our Congregations. I know
not what answer you return to these interrogatories. But had I such a window
into your breasts, as the Grand Signior is said to have into the Divano; I
doubt not, but I might see your secret impulses breathing out that acclamation
of Balaam, Numb. 24.^^
How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob! and thy Tabernacles O Israel! However your
thoughts run; although you go on to call us ceremonial formalists, men
destitute of zeal, the power of Godliness, because we cannot swim down your
stream: Acts 24.14.
Yet we will by Gods grace, continue in Saint Paul's resolution, After the way
which you call herosie, so will we worship the Lord God of our Fathers. May not
we expostulate with you, in allusion to Saint Paul? Are not we
Gospel Ministers? Do not we preach the Catholic, Apostolical Faith? Have we
any communion with Haeretical, Popish Tridentine Tenants? Do not we watch over
our Flocks, and our Selves? Do you think that we mind not the way to Heaven, as
well as you? Why then do you run from us, as Polycarpe did from Cerinthus? why
do you either pull off the peoples Chariot Wheels? or else clogg and scotch
them, that they might not run with us in the same Christian race? As if our
prayers were Charms, and Conjurations; and we our selves Monks, and Friars: Do
not (according to the old method) like flies, dwell upon some particular
ulcers. As because, some are two negligent in their places, and charges; too
loose in their lives; too ignorant in their functions ^s^^ therefore you will
traduce and defame the whole Order aggravating their failings, as if the whole
body were overrun with the same. Leprosy; passing by those parts which are
sound and free from this contagious gangreen. It were no difficulty to
recriminate in this kind, and to repay you with the same dirt: If it were any
pleasure to scramble in such a puddle. All the cattle of your own herd are not
pure from all blemishes. But I had rather wrap my self in the mantle of silence
then expatiate in this field. It was an excellent act of Constantine to throw
into the fire, all those Libels, and Articles of the dissenting Bishops; that
they might not stand upon Record, for the eternal infamy of them both. You well
know, when Christ chose our twelve, one of them was a devil. And if some
amongst us are too defective, the fault must in part lie at your own doors, who
have occasioned a sad necessity of supplying your rooms, by some that are none
of the best. As a General forsaken by his Veterani, or experienced Soldiers,
revolting from him, is constrained for the present to list such as he can
gather together. Can there be any more pleasing music in the ears of enemies;
when it shall be published in Gath, and declared in the streets of Ashkelon;
then that we are crumbling and moultering into pieces of our own accords? That
the Sentinels have left their watch-Towers; The Pretorian Bands have left their
stations? Mount the scaling Ladders who will; those will neither give warning
of, nor these prevent their approaching invasions. A cheap victory sure, and an
easy prey we are like to prove, when men in office are resolved not to oppose,
come Romans, come Gauls, come Devils: These tame Guardians will not lift up a
standard against them: These tutelar Angels, will not come down their Jacobs
Ladders, to succor their helpless Brethren, ready to be hurried into
captivity: Let wolves come, they will not move their tongues: Let Amaleck
prevail, they will nor so much as lift up a hand to wards Heaven. Aristides was
not so malevolent against his fellow Citizens, although they had banished him
by their barbarous Ostracism, yet he left his heart with them: and occasionally
too, he ftood them in great stead against their Adversaries. In the late times,
when the Interdict came forth, That none should have the benefit of the Clergy,
but those that would not read: rather then not exercise their ministry, and (as
you do) wrap their Talents in a Napkin; to the intent they might stand in the
gapp, to stop that torrent of delusions, about to break in upon the English
Church; with the a dvise of good Casuists (though with much regret) many did
submit for a time, to that sad condition, that they might be capable of doing
the more good; so much did it pity them, either to leave their Sheep to wander
up and down without Shepherds, or, to hearken to the voice of strangers. Nay,
should the King. Lords, and Commons, have made a Law (which God avert!) that
your darling discipline should be established in England: Although they cannot
be convinced from Scripture, or Antiquity, that it is the best; or from
experience, that it is most suitable to the constitution, and happiness of this
Nation: yet rather then discompose the public peace, and betray the Churches
welfare, I dare aver, you should have many of them, that are now at the Stern,
tugging at their Oars, and laying their shoulders to the work of the ministry
together with you. So far would they have been from suffering their Swords to
rust in their Scabbard, and their Breasts to dry up, that they might not afford
nourishment, to them that cry after knowledge, and desire the sincere milk of
the Word. But now the waters (blessed be God) are sunk within their banks, and
our eyes behold our old Landmarks: Yet except the ancient Hedges and
Foundations may be pulled up; except the Mountains may be levelled, and the
Cedars rooted out of their places; except the Land may be new measured with
your Line, and mounded according to your Platform, you will not enter into the
Vineyard; but in a sullen fit quit all; and so are woe rse then the
Sea Monsters, For they draw forth their breasts, and give suck to their young
ones. Lam. 4.3.
This is not to deal with us, as we should have dealt with you: Besides, who I
pray, you, or we, have showed the greatest love for Souls? We that passed
through the fire and water with them, in the worst? Or you that leave them in a
calm, in the best of times? I read of Nazianzen, Chrysostom, and others, that
entered the ministerial calling with fear and trembling, and much reluctance:
These were drawn out of their Cells, and haled with violence into the Sacred
Mount: Yet having once set their hands to the Plow, no discouragement or
persecutions could ever constrain them to look back; But they passed through the
flames, through good and evil report; they persevered Praying and Preaching, as
if they were ambitious of dying in the Pulpit. Soar as high as you will in your
Seraphick pretenses: Cry as loud as you please, the Temple of the Lord! Nullum
seculum ferarius Religionum, sterilius pietptis. Lipsius
Religion! Religion! Yet who will believe, but that your eyes are fixed upon
some carrion or other. Lets look back into the Annals of our own time, and turn
over some few Leaves of that Tragical Hystory; whereof you were not the
smallest part. Where shall we find the fattest gobbets, and Benjamins Mess, but
upon your Tables? Who were those that strutted, and fluttered in their
feathers, who were fain to go naked themselves? And as for that usurped power,
which some of you had grasped into your hands, how magisterially and
tyrannically was it employed? How lofty were some of your eyes and your eyelids
lifted up? Neither do I wonder it should be so: For those that are such ill
proficients in the lesson of obedience, can never be good Governors
themselves: Such as scorn to sit at the feet of careful, and experienced
Gamalils, when they get the reins of power into their own hands, will hurl all
things into confusion. Sirs, study the point of self-denial better; and strive
to know of what manner of spirit you are of. I wish from my heart, that we
might see such evidences of Christian meekness, and loyal submission, that we
might say of a truth, The Ethiopian has changed his skin, and the Leopard his
spots. Far be it from me, to insult over any, that is inhumane and barbarous;
and to repay evil for evil, that is Antichristian. But I desire (in the Apostles
sense) to heap coals of fire upon your heads; to melt you into more kindness
toward your selves, and others: Saint Paul has made my apology to my hand. I
write not these things to shame you, 1 Cor. 4.14.
but as my beloved Brethren, to warn you. Genesis 19.7.
And as for the future; let me beseech you in the words of Lot, I pr^y you
Brethren, do no more so wickedly. That so all stones of scandal, which have
made up a partition wall between us, being demolished, and removed, we may like
living stones grow up together, and concenter upon the Basis of Piety, Virtue,
Obedience, Loyalty, and a joint desire of doing good in our Generation; which
are the best ingredients of that sovereign Balsome, whereby our luxated and
shattered members may be settled and knit together: which may make up such a
bond of peace, that will neither be fretted by the teeth of time, nor be
dissolved by men or Devils: As it is said of Melancthon and Camerarius (two
Luminaries in the Commonwealth of Learning) that there was such a similitude
of Studies, Manners, Wills, confirmed with daily familiarity and converse
between them; that they arrived to the very perfection, and quintessence of
friendship. If it were so with us, how would this beautify, and embellish our
conversations? Allure some, to silence; dazel or confound others? If we could
once sail together with all our faces toward Zion, as if we aimed to put in
at the same Port of Heaven; this would sweeten our own lives in the passage,
and make us terrible as an Army with Banners, when we shall meet with our
enemies in the Gate. How good and joyful a thing is it, for Brethren to dwell
together in unity

Methinks I hear you giving your Assent and Consent to the truth of this
conclusion -- 'Twere well, if there might be such an harmony between us: Yet
this is the mischief, we cannot agree upon the premises, which may infer it;
nor find the right way leading thereunto. All men naturally desire felicity (
Balaam himself would dye the death of the righteous) yet what virtues, or
means, are most necessarily conducing thereunto, here there are no small odds,
in the manners and tempers of men. Would you hearken to me, I should advise you
to obey those that have the rule over you, even for C^nscience sake; and to
submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. These were Canonical
Scriptures some years since, when they were vehemently pressed by some of your
selves, to support the power of those men (who right or wrong) had ravished it
into their hands: Your doctrine now is quite contrary, directly tending to the
keeping of our wounds raw, and fresh. Pull down (say you) that Government in
the Church, (you would say as much concerning that in the State ^oo, if you
durst) which is rooted in the Adamant of Scripture, and the history of the
Church, ever since it was Christian. You account the way to a lasting
agreement, to lie in removing those apples of contention, those prohibentia,
which hinder union, and amity. And what are they? disarm the Bishops of their
Crosiers; Take their Mitres from their heads; Dismount their Canons; Give us
their Lands; and burn your Common Prayer Books. But speak more plain English
yet: Is not this your sense? If you desire our assistance, and copartnership in
the work of the ministry, You must take us to be your guides, for we cannot
endure any Superiors: Take the imposition of our hands, as the current stamp
of your callings: use no prayers, but what you shall be directed from our
Conclave: Read not the ancient Fathers of the Greek and Latin Church, for they
will poison, and possess you with an high conceit of Episcopacy: But study
Smectymnuus thoroughly: Learn the method of Preaching from Doctor Goodwin; Submit
your selves to the Scrutiny and Trial of Doctor Manton, and Master Nigh, whether
you be truly gracious: Satisfy them of the time and manner of your conversion,
and upon these terms weel ascend our Pulpits again, and condescend to assume
you into our fellowship. I wish this were but an Histrionical Harangue,
personating some Inhabitants in Vtopia, or the new Atlantis, and that there
were no such innovators, or strange Minotaurs to be found among the natives of
old England: But sure we find the print of their footsteps in former times: We
have been so torn with their sharp teeth, which lay concealed (like those of
vipers) in fine, soft flesh, that we are scarce well recovered to this day: We
start in our sleep, as if we were still haunted with their Ghosts. The noise of
their furious Chariots, and the eccho's of their thundering lashes, are still
in our ears: And though they are now charmed and limited, look downward, and
speak pitifully, as if thoroughly mortified, yet we tremble at their very
shadows, lest their stark joints should recover their former activity. If this
seems too severe, and satirical, for an (...), where mutual kindness, and a
peaceable accommodation is the white in the Butt, even the main design of this
attempt: I will assure you, so far as I am conscious of my own heart, there is
no gaul within, no bitterness to your persons: The doors of my heart are wide
open, and my arms expanded to receive you: Only I desire, (...), to inflame,
and stir up those gifts and graces, which are in you, and also modifie and
regulate them, that you may lay them forth for the promoting, not the retarding
of our Masters service; the warming and cherishing, not burning, and wasting
such as you converse withal. And if I touch upon any of your ulcers by the
way, it is not to reproach you, but to heal them. I would have these lines,
like precious balm, not to break your heads, but to revive, and wake you out of
a slumber. What though the Chyrurgion be blamed at first, for being cruel, in
searching to the bottom of a wound; yet he aims at nothing, but the healing and
recovering his querulous patient. The good Samaritan in the Gospel, did not
only pour in Oil into the gashes of the wounded man, to supple them, but Wine
too, which is of a searching nature, to make them smart. And such dealing in
the close, I hope will rather merit your gratitude, then your frowns. He that
rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, Prove. 8.23.
then he that flatterereth with his tongue. Could I but dis-intangle, and
expedite you out of those Meanders and Labyrinths, wherein you have lost your
selves: Could I but satisfy your doubts, or rather scruples, wherewith you
perplex your selves, and the Church: I should glory more in such an achievment,
then Caesar did in all his Trophies. However, though I fail, Aliud officium,
aliud finis: Aliud cure, aliud uratio.
it is something to enterprise such an Heroical act, though his chair is in
Heaven, that can accomplish it. Who knows but that little David may do more
execution with his sling, then better champious with their complete Artillery?
Why may not a child lead those Leopards, and Lions, which have escaped from the
greatest Giants? having more confidence therefore in the propitious influence
of Gods Spirit, and the goodness of the cause, then in my own strength, I shall
endeavor to rebate the edge of those discouragements which you object to your
self; and lay those Goblins where with you are affrighted: And then, by an
hearty Paraenesis accompanied with the best motives I can find, interwoven
throughout, which is primum in intention. I shall excite you to gird on your
Sword upon your thigh (I mean that of the Spirit) and to ride on prosperously,
in the peaceable works of the ministry. If I meet with the fate of Reconcilers
(...) who are beaten on both sides, I shall acquiesce in this; that neither the
Gale of preferment, nor the desire of Ambition, did ever^ carry on, or leaven
this undertaking. Therefore only having on the breast plate of righteousness,
(...). Laort. in vita Antisthenes, p. 367.
and winged with the integrity of Conscience, I shall venture through the
throngs of calumnies and detractions which shall haunt me in my way; and say
with Antisthenes to railing Plato, This is to resemble Kings; to do well, yet
to suffer reproach for ones labor.

CHAP. II. The height of the Bishops, no reason to keep you from Conformity.
YOu say the Bishops are lofty, and enemies to godliness. Romans 3.8.
Take heed Sirs, least whilst ye speak against Swearing, ye be guilty of
Blasphemy. And whilst ye abhor Idols, Romans 2.22.
ye commit Sacrilege, in speaking evil of dignities, and plundering the Ark of
its most precious Jewels, by staining the Honor, and sullying the names of
those that support it. Methinks you should tremble at that expostulation of the
Lord with Aaron and Miriam; Numb. 12.8.
were ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses? Deuteronomy. 33.5
Now Moses, was not only King in Jesurun, Naz. orat. 6.
but a Priest too as well as Aaron, Psalm. 95.6. (...) Nay, (...).
Philo Judaeus in the life of Moses, calls him a King, a Lawgiver, and an
High Priest. I hope you will allow Fathers some pre-eminence above their
Children: Such as rule and are commissionated with Jurisdiction, beyond those
that must imperata capessere, obey their just commands, Ad Aphes. p. 28.
or as Ignatius expresses it, (...), conform themselves to the judgment and
discretion of the Bishops. Should these Fathers expose their Persons and Power
unto contempt, by rendering either of them (by too much familiarity) cheap and
common; this would rather betray and prostitute, then grace and illustrate
their calling; this would also make us too pragmatical and saucy, instead of
paying that just tribute of duty, and reverence, which is their hereditary
right, and inseparable prerogative. You will not call it pride, but a necessary
majestick-state in the Major and Aldermen of the City, if they do not play at
Football with the Apprentices in the streets. Nor will you say a Schoolmaster
is ambitious, but discreet, if he keep a distance with his Scholars, and
forbear to play with their Cherry-stones. And must those that are in the high
places of the Church, be branded with pride, if they do not presently degrade
themselves, and abandon all badges of superiority, wherewith they are invested
by God, and the King? And distinguished from those that are minorum gentium, or
have their Province in the Valleys? As a General on whose life the welfare of
an Army depends, must not be prodigal of his own safety. In the life of
Pelopidos.
He in Plutarch, said he was ashamed, that he should come into so much danger,
as that a dart should fall near him: This was not cowardice, but a courageous
prudence. Lysander did but disgrace himself, and prejudice the Graecians, by
running his head against the walls of Aliarte: Plutarch. p. 523.
So the impairing of the Bishops power and lessening their honor, is nothing
else, but our loss: If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? and
if a numerous Army should consist altogether of Commanders, or have none at
all, what a confused rout would it prove to be? Like a multitude of ciphers,
(...). Philo Juda. de opifi^to mundi.
without any Numerical letter before them. Just so the Church would be but a
rude mass, if there were no overseers to put it into some comely shape, and
awful posture: A paralytick body, if without nerves, to convey the spirits, and
keep the parts together. I read of no creatures in the whole volumn of nature,
but they are headed with some imperial Leaders, under whose conduct they are
marshaled, and repay them with an obsequious admiration, and a devout kind of
trembling; Prove. 30.27.
except the Locusts; And these indeed, Solomon says have no King. I presume,
you have read, who those were, that did much resemble them. What have
Christians to do (said they with an impudent mouth) with Kings? et quid
Episcopis cum palatio? Why do Bishops live in ceiled houses, and build their
nests on high? If any of you are ignorant who these were, I Will inform you: They
were the furious and factious disciples of Donatus. And if you have (perhaps)
some kinder resentments, for these more innocent Heretics, Can you choose but
quake, to see your own faces in the mirror of those -- that durst expostulate
with Moses and Aaron, just as ye do. Numb. 16.3.
Wherefore do ye lift up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Take
heed, lest whilst you disdain to draw in the same yoke with us, you be guilty
of a worse Syncretism, Natura tanto magis superba, quanto magis dominio
peccoti, mortique subjecta fulgent. p. 174.
in being conformable to Core, and his company; is not this to act the part of
cursed Cham over again? Are not these malignant looks upon your Governors, the
relics of Adams aspiring Ambition? a spice of that lawless Law in your
members, and a tang of that scornfulness, which fell from heaven with the
lapsed Angels.

Of all men, you have the least cause to draw up this black bill of indictment
against the Bishops; if you would call to mind, with what condescension they
have treated with you, in order to the satisfaction of your scruples; in what a
fatherly and pathetical manner, they have entreated you to continue in your
places; until they have not only wept in secret, but even in public view;
their tears have started out of their eyes: And do you thus requite them, O
ungrateful men, and unwise! It Is reported of Sylla, that whilst he was
venturing his life, in several Battles for the good of his Country, Plutarchin
the life of Sylla.
at that very time his Wife was driven out of Rome, his Houses overthrown, and
his Friends slain. Just so when these Worthies lay under an unlucky Ostracism,
they were contriving our good, and disputing for our Religion. And when God, in
a miraculous manner, raised up these dead bones; they were so far from
vindictive passions, that so long as there were any hopes of prevailing, they
ceased not to beseech and woe you, to partake in the harvest of their
indefatigable labors, in a peaceable submission to the Ordinances of God: As
if they had forgot, who they were that voted their proscription; and (with the
Emperor) could remember all things, saving injuries. And are these so lofty as
you represent them? Rub your own eyes, perhaps the fault may be rather in the
Organ, then in the Object. It Is possible, your apprehensions of them, may arise
from some predominant humor in your selves. As Diogenes trampled on Plato's
bed; sed fastu majori: And the old Romans denominated Tarquinius proud, quia
Regios ejus fastus, alia superbia ferebant; because they were so proud
themselves, Aust. de Civit. Dei. Lib. 3^ C^p. 15.
that they could not endure any Kingly state in their Monarch. To hear you to
cry out of other men's pride, is all one; as to hear the Gracchi, complaining of
sedition, or to hear Catalin calling Cethegus, Traitor. I pray tell me, why
there are so many Heteroclites or Anamola in the Church; and who are they,
walking without the compass of any rule; who they are, who have raised and
fomented so many schims and divisions amongst us. And I will tell you from the
mouth of Saint Paul in the general, from whence they arise; that is, from the
flesh. Whereas there is among you envying, strife, divisions, 1 Co, 3.3. p.
530.531.
are ye not carnal? Hooker goes a step further, and tells you in particular,
that they arise from pride: Naming pride (says he) we name the Mother that
brought them forth, and the nurse that feeds them. It is not enough (as he
goes on) to make show of a demure humility: for a foul scar may be covered with
a fair cloth: And such as are as proud as Lucifer, may be in outward appearance
lowly.

Give me leave to give an instance of my own experience; and that is a very
convincing Mistress. I was once tempted to go to the Tryars; then whom, neyer
was Juncto of men more high, scornful, overlooking, and brow-beating their poor
clients: As if we had scarce been made out of the same metal with themselves:
As if they had been the only Seraphick, Numb. 13.33.
and Angelical Doctors; but we, a company of lumpish, and phlegmatic pedants,
poor Grasshoppers, scarce worthy to come into their presence. And if we did so;
which was not easy without long attendance; what distances did we keep? How
were we fain to observe their eminencies? And look, what informers, and
confederates, they had in the Country; these were also blown up with the same
elation of spirit; so that it is easy to guess what humble, and meek spirited
men we should have met withal, had Gods anger still continued us under your
yoke. It was but time for such conceited Rabbis, and strutting Mountebanks to
disappear, who by soaring too high, had put out their own eyes; and to leave
their usurped charges, to more sober, and better poysed Raphaels. And though
some of them are naturally alive; yet because I hope mine eyes shall never see
them again in that capacity, I shall write out the same Epitaph for them, as
the Hystorian set upon Nero, -- Sua immanitas, Tacitus Hist. 1
sua superbia, Cervicibus publicis depulere.

And since I would fain thaw your congealed hearts and melt them into a better
opinion of these reverend Fathers, which now sit at the stern, Consider I
beseech you (though it is common with you to reproach them with Popery) that we
are indebted unto them (next unto God, and the King) for the free exercise of
that reformed Religion which we profess: For as their Predecessors have been
the best Champions, and the most impregnable Bulworks against the Romish
emissaries; so they themselves (to show they are no degenerate off spring) have
of late stood in the gap against the incursions of the same assailants. Give me
leave to refresh your memories with matter of fact; for I fear they are too
slippery to retain, what does so evidently, so justly redound to their immortal
honor; and when I have done, for shame, tell the people no more that they are
antichristian, when you have a purpose to dress them up in such barbarous
skins, that they may with the more case, fall a sacrifice to their fury.

When in a session of this very Parliament, it was urged with no small
vehemence, backed with the intercessions and interests of great personages --
that the Roman Catholic Religion, might be freely tolerated in these
Dominions, (and if the Serpent had thus wound in his head, it is easy to
divine what would follow) when some began to warp, others to stagger, and some
Barnabas's had like to have been carried away with this torrent; as if they
thought it but reasonable, that such as had been men of fidelity and courage
heretofore, should now receive this donative, and reap this harvest of a
Toleration. Then stood up these Phinchas's, and partly by their obsecrations to
his sacred Majesty, partly by their convincing and nervous arguments in
public, they dashed this coccatrice, when it was ready to peep out of the
shell. Thus did these Heroes obviate and frustrate this black but plausible
design. Ringantur! Rumpantur! let their enemies swell with their own poison,
until like Judas they burst asunder: Let Shimei and Rabsheketh rail, These
Angels of the Churches will not turn aside out of the way of truth but will
still go on asserting the ancient, and Catholic doctrines against those that
oppose them. Anokins.
These Stars are fixed in their Orbs (not erratical or falling) keeping their
direct and even motions, Bark who will at their constant regularity: and in so
doing, may they ever be kept in Gods right hand, may their bow abide in
strength, Gell. 49.23, 24
and the hands of their Arms be made strong, by the hands of the mighty God of
Jacob: Though the Archers have sorely grieved them, Numb. 22.18. (...)
shot at them, and hated them: Though Balak would give them his house full of
Silver and Gold, may they never go beyond the word of the Lord their God, to do
less or more. Let their resolution, be that of stout Melancton, to the Prince
of Hassia's Ambassador, offering Prolix promises, Camerariu^ in vita Melanct.
p. 110.
if he would espouse his masters controversies, saying, No earthly things,
should ever alter his purpose, in what he was already satisfied.

CHAP. III. Animadversions upon some passages in a Book Entitled Solomon's
prescription for removing the Pestilence.
I Have read a Treatise of yours, called Solomon's prescription for removing the
Pestilence. I call it yours, because the Author professes himself one of your
number; and he seems to express the sense of your aggregate body. Like a
Physician of value, he searches into the causes procuring the Plague; and to
that end, he musters up a black catalogue of -- Swearing, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Pride, which I will freely grant, and with a sad heart, confess,
are too rife in our days: Yet I abhor that imputation of unfaithfulness, which
he charges upon us in that Book, who continue in the exercise of our callings,
as if we did not open our mouths against some of those sins, in our Sermons;
and so by our traitorous and silent connivanc^ they are encouraged and gather
strength. It is time the Land should vomit us forth; if we were such Pandours
and Brokers for sin, if we sow such pillows under sinners elbows, or dawb^
writh such untempered mortar. Sirs, leave this ^^ick of strenuous calumnies; to
the intent, some spots of dirt may at least stick upon your Brethren. I say the
truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness; we desire
(many of us) to spend, and to be spent, in telling Israel of her sins, and
Judah of her transgressions. Neither does this Author show himself an
Interpreter, one of a thousand, declaring the whole counsel of God: For he
deals very partially, concerning the integral and adaequate causes of the
Pestilence: There were other sins which should have been enumerated in this
case, had they not been in the other end of the wallet; as Perjury in violating
the Oaths of God, Allegiance, Supremacy, and that of Canonical Obedience; Numb.
16.47.
Bloodshed, Censorious condemning and traducing one another, Schism and
Rebellion; which have a most direct influence and causality upon the Plague:
Are these sins of the growth of some foreign Countries? Had you consulted
Scripture Oracles, these plump Amalekites, these Agag-sins should have been
brought forth, and fallen a Sacrifice, in order to the appeasing the wrath of
God, and removing the Pestilence: For my own part, I never look we should be
free from this, or some other Plague, until without palliating, shifting,
reserving, and mincing our darling sins, we can all take shame and confusion to
our selves. If we still think to hide these deformed brats, these stinging
Scorpions in our own bosoms, Pluarch.
(as that Lacedemonian did the Eox he had stolen, for fear of discovering) they
will never leave gnawing at our very bowels. It is but a pernicious and
desperate modesty, to cover those vipers which at last will suck our very heart
blood. But to go on with our Author: He tells us at long-running (which is the
scope of the whole Book) what is the principal cause of the Plague; and that
is, his and your silence; or, your not Preaching the Gospel: The more shame for
you then, that you will not open your mouths in Prayer and Preaching, to
deliver us from such a judgment: You are worse then Craesas his Son; for though
he was born dumb, yet seeing one about to kill his Father, he burst the strings
of his tongue, and cried out, will ye kill my Father? yet you can see your
Brethren fall by thousands, and never go about to break your obstinate silence;
nor throw away those with his, (as Sampson did when the Philistines were upon
him) wherewith ye have bound up your own tongues.

Well! give me leave to tell you what Christ: said to his drowsy Disciples,
Fast, Pray, Preach hereafter, lest ye your selves be swallowed up by this, or
some other Plague.

I but say you, the fault is not in us, but in the Government; and that we may
not be in suspense, what is your meaning, this Author charges all upon the
Bishops. page 62. -- this is plain dealing. But why upon the Bishops? Must they
be our Scapegoat, to carry all our sins on their backs? or must they be our
(...), a lustration, or expiation, for those curses which are due unto us all?
Can they make and impose Laws? Were the Liturgy, Canons, and other decrees
established by their Authority alone? Do not we own the King Supreme upon
earth? Have not the Laws the superscription and stamp of his Royal Assent? Are
they not the product (not as your Covenant) of a part, but the whole
Parliament, King, Lords and Commons? And yet by a wilful kind of Sophistry you
are still casting all the Odium (as you intend it) upon the Bishops; who are
but the Trustees, Heb 3.2.
to see the execution of those Laws. Therefore as Moses was faithful to him
that appointed him, in all things concerning the Lord's House; so these Aarons
must be men of fidelity, in discharging that trust, which is reposed in them,
by the supreme Authority of this Kingdom, concerning the affairs of the
Church, according to the pattern which they have received in the Mount; I mean,
from the Legislative power of the Land. Indeed should they coin Articles of
Faith (like that Romish Dictator) and impose them upon the Church, then there
were just cause of complaint. But whilst (like Ahasuerus) they only inquire,
what they may do according to law, to those that break the Commands of the
King; take heed, lest whilst you level your darts at them, you hit the Throne.
But why do you impute the Plague unto the Bishops? Esth 1.55.
Does this savor of a Christian spirit? I had thought, that in general
calamities, every man should have laid his hands upon his own heart, and
suspect himself to be that Achan that troubles the Camp, that Jonah which
occaons the storm; and say with the Apostles (though innocent) Master, is it I?
And not like Solomon's Harlot, wipe our mouths, or with guilty Ahab, lay the
fault of troubling Israel, on good Elijah. Will you still be the worser sort of
Conformists, resembling the murmuring Israelites if any thing went amiss with
them? If they wanted water, or meat for their lusts, then Moses was in all the
fault, in bringing them from the fleshpots of Egypt. Will you needs
conformyour selves to those idolaters, that Jer 44.18.
looked upon them that reclaimed them from offering incense to the Queen of
Heaven, to be the cause of the Sword, and Famine? or those Heathens, that sent
the Christians to the Lions, if Nilus did not swell high enough, to make their
fields fruitful, or if their Legions miscarried in the Field. So unhappy are
our Fathers, if their teeth must be set on edge, as often as the people eat sour
Grapes. This will make their backs crack, (though made of steel) if every man's
burden must be laid on their shoulders; they are objects of pity, rather then
envy, if our faults must be whipped on them, and they must be piacular oblations
for us. Good Sirs! learn more candor, morality, justice, and charity
hereafter, and see that ye speak every man the truth to his neighbor. Some of
you have so blackened these reverend Fathers, and put them into such a strange
and monstrous dress, by calling them the Members of the great Whore, of the
Beast of Babylon, Idolaters, Haters of God, and Godliness, the verymystery of
iniquity, and those principalities, and powers, which Christ came to cast down,
or as this Scribe does more then insinuate, page 53. Esteeming Ceremonies above
Souls. That I dare boldly aver, that some of the seduced Herd, who are ignorant
of their Integrity, ear of the Churches, bounty, public spirits, Piety, and
Loyalty, do scarce believe them to be men, or if so, yet, that they are some
terrible Cannibals, that came out of some strange Land. I was (not long since)
desired to Preach to a Congregation, that had been instructed by one of your
selves. A Gentleman told a Countryman there after Sermon, that his Son was an
hopeful youth, and might in time be a Bishop: The man startled presently with
fear, or indignation, I know not whether, saying, God-forbid that ever my Child
should be a Bishop. Sure this man thought his Child should be transformed into
some strange shape have been converted into an Egyptian Mammaluke, or paid as a
tribute-Child to the Grand Signi^r, and so have been brought up in the
Mahumetan Religion, and made a Janizary to that Emperor. Thus the spies, to
the intent they might disgrace the Land of Canaan, said, The Land did eat up
the Inhabitants thereof. Numb. 13.33.
And in our remembrance, even at the beginning of these late times, some
malicious Poers told the World, that the Royalists eat up Children, and trained
their Horses under ground, etc. Can such weapons prosper, as are sharpened at
the Forges of the Philistines? Can such Champions hope for success, that go
dewn into Egypt for help? Cutting and lancing with lies, as with sharp Razors:
Is there no way to undermine the sacred order of Bishops, but by digging as low
as Hell; in slandering the footsteps, and traducing the Persons and Government
of those servants of the Lord, of whom this treacherous World is not worthy.
Gal. 5.20.
If this be your zeal, it never came down from Heaven, Calvin Epis^ 3.
but it is a mere work of the flesh; it is such a zeal (quo nunquam arsit
Elias) which never inflamed the hearts of Gods faithful servants. There were
just such zealots indeed in Jerusalem a little before its Conquest by the
Romans: And I wish you may not show your selves to be their offspring, and so
become as ominous to us, in ringing the knell of our Native Country.

CHAP. IV. Subordination of Presbyters to Bishops: and the Honorary Title of
Lords given to the Bishops, are no just impediments to Conformity.
YOu are not a little troubled, that you must truckle under Bishops: Nor will
you own any such distinction betwixt you and them. Whence this arises (as to
the sublimity of your spirits) I have touched upon before. I desire still to be
serviceable unto you, by removing and dispelling such clouds, which interpose
their gross bodies betwixt you and us. It is not my business to dispute this
Polemical Article at large, which my betters have done so fully, that there is
nothing to be gleaned after them: What can he do that comes after the King?
Their Arguments stand like a firm Mountain against the popping squibs of all
Arrius's Disciples. Only let me reason with you in a word or too, according to
my own observation, and reading. Was not Aaron above the Priests, Levites,
Nethenims? Were there not Archiflamines amongst the Romans, by the very light
of nature? Were not the Disciples (think ye) inferior to the Apostles? Were
not the Ministers in Ephesus and Creet, subordinate to Timothy and Titus? What
think you of the superintendants in the Lutheran Churches, of the leading
Presbyters in Geneva, and here at home? Did they go so equally, hand in hand
with their Brethren, without advanceing one step before them? (...) Philo
Judae. p. 6.
Neither do the Bishops challenge any pre-eminence above you or us in Preaching
the Gospel, or administration of the Sacraments; but only as to Acts of
Jurisdiction and Ordination: And what order would be in the Church without
these? As for the Hystory of the Church; that there was such a distinction (if
my Books be Authentic) even in the purest times, I am abundantly confirmed.
And it has been the subject of my admiration; that those amongst you, who have
more then ordinary familiarity with antiquity, should yet boggle at this
concession. If you would permit me to be your remembrancer I would lay before
you these few Testimonies. Ignatius ad Magnes. p. 55. Tertul. de Baptismo. p.
280. Cle. Alexand. Stroma. 6. p. 667. Cyrillus p. 209. Austin de Civit. dei,
lib. 22. cap. 8. Jerome ad Evagrium and Heliodorum, vindicated from the
exceptions of Blondel and Salmasius, by that (...) Dr Hammond.


Calvin, Beza, with other modern writers of great credit, who are commonly
looked upon as adversaries to Episcopacy; yet speak most softly and favorably
of the English Bishops.

But could you submit to the Bishops as your Superiors, yet you will by no
means admit of their Titles of Lords: This is (say some of you' taking Gods
name in vain, in perverting the genuine sense of Scripture) to Lord it over the
Lords Heritage: This is expressly contrary to Gods command, telling his Apostles
that it should not be so amongst them. Yet methinks, if we can agree in the
main, concerning a gradation, sub and supra, in the Church, we should not
differ about a word: Especially since the Authority, and divine right of
Scripture, is not herein pretended, but only the indulgence of Princes. He that
makes others Knights and Earls, has the same power sure, to make these Lords.
But see your own unhappiness again, whilst you fling at the Mitre, you hit the
Crown, and pierce the purple Robe: As much as in you lies, you abridg the Kings
prerogative, in conferring Titles of Honor upon whom he pleases, unless your
suffrages be first procured. The fountain of Honor must be dried up, rather
then empty it self into any Rivulets, but where you shall direct them. How came
that very same spirit of contradiction into you, which was in those
malcontents of Scotland? If the King there, either went an Hunting, or kept a
Feastival day, without their approbation, presently the Pulpits must ring with
Anathema's against him. If those that are eminent in the studies of the Laws,
or men of heroical and valiant atchievments in war, be dignified with the
chaplet of Honor; they will permit them to wear those Crowns, which they have
purchased by their own merits: But if those that excel in the study of divine
learning, by their Princes favor, be accordingly advanced, what squint eyes
are cast upon them? then you grudg with Judas, at this expense of princely
bounty, and are as far from congratulating their preferment, as you are from
equalling their endowments. Rex Anius Rex idem hominum, phabiq, Sacerdos.
The very Heathens thought their Priests capable of being Kings; so that both
offices met in the same person. And Solomon accounted it no disparagement, that
he was Ecclesiastes, The Preacher in Jerusalem. How many great Princes are
there in the World at this day, who are Bishops by their callings? Yet you are
more violent against the innocent Rochets of reformed Bishops, then at the Caps
of Romish Cardinals, though of a sanguine complexion: Were they all
Pres^er-John's, they would not be so much exposed to your anger.

French History in the life of Charlemaign
When a Stracen King came to the Court of France, w^^n an intent to turn
Christian; he was so much scandalized at the poor and ragged condition of the
Kings Chaplains, that he went away as very an Heathen as he came. The best
Christian Emperors thought it a most compendious way, to make Religion to
flourish; by gracing and crediting Bishops. Constantine set them at his own
Table; and wherever he went, Eusebius. p. 127.
they were his companions. Theodosius and Valentinian showed the same respect
to those that were most eminent in the Church. Cracanthorp's defense of
Constantine, p. 44. etc.
No man more welcome tothem, then the Bishop of Millane. Nay, to gain the more
respect among the people, many controversies 'twixt men and men, were devolved
to their decision: Theodor l. 4. p. 5.
And it was lawful, even to appeal from the Emperor to the Bishop: May not
this be the reason, Z^zam l. 1. c. 9.
that the Scriptures adorn them with such transcendent Names, Aust. Epist. 147.
Ambassadors of Christ, Stewards of the mysteries of God, Rulers of Gods
Family, Stars, Angels, Gods? yet we are so infatuated with ignorance, or
distorted with malice, that we can neither see the advantages which accrews to
the Church by their advancement, nor perceive how this tends to our own benefit
and renown. Is it not for our good that they sit in Parliament? That they are
vigilant and provident there, as our Representatives, both to prevent what may
be prejudicial to us, and also to interpose and move in our behalf: Is it not
for our honor, that they are thus exalted, who were taken out of our selves?
May not this shield off some of that contempt, which the people are apt to cast
upon us? and if we be injured, and oppressed, is it not for a consolation, that
we have such heads of our Tribes, such Fathers of our Family, into whose bosom
we may empty our complaints, who will be as ready to relieve as to hear us. And
if our grievances are above the sphere of their own activity, yet they can
appeal to higher authorities; when such little ones as we are, can scarce be
admitted.

For all this you cannot digest their Titles of Lords; Mat. 20.25, 26.
This favors (say you) too much of a temporary Kingdom upon earth, which our
Savior does upon all occasions renounce; Luke 22.25.
This is to bear rule like the Princes of the Gentiles. Thus you run away with
this Text like Lapwings with shells upon your heads, as if 'twere not possible
to overtake you. And you think your selves so deeply intrench't in the
authority of this Scripture, as if it were impossible to beat you out of this
fortress: yet lets spend some second thoughts upon it; and search it with a
narrower eye: It Is true, our Savior prohibits all affectation of honor among
his Apostles, he would not have them strive after greatness; but to be
serviceable to the meanest, that they may win all sorts of persons, by their
humility. Dominatio interdicitur, judicitur ministratio. They must not hunt
after dominion, but like the Angels they must be ministering Spirits. Yet that
there should be no prerogative and pre-eminence one above another, this is not
forbidden at all in that place. Indeed Christ would not have his Apostles to
have any violent, or compulsive jurisdiction over their Brethren in exercising
the power of the Sword: He would have them to leave that to temporal Princes.
Therefore it is said, it shall not be so among you, that is, as it, is with
civil Magistrates, Princes of the Gentiles, punishing offenders with corporal
stripes. And accordingly our Bishops, meddle not with criminal matters; but as
I am informed, they go forth of the Parliament house, when sentence of death is
pronounced against Malefactors.

You might as well conclude that no men should be called Masters, Fathers,
Lords, because the Scripture says -- Be not called Masters. -- Call no man
Farher upon Earth. -- There is but one Lord Jesus Christ. But this word Lord,
is taken in a latitude of interpretation; It carries with it, respect and
superiority. Rebecca did so respect and reverence Abraham's servant, that she
says, drink my Lord. Sarah called Abraham Lord. 1 King. 18
Elias a Prophet is so called -- my Lord Elias -- so is Elizeus too. 2 King. 2.
There is honor, nay double honor due to those that wait at the Altar;
therefore (methinks) we may signify that honor in our expressions: Ambrosius
de dig. Sacer. c 3.
If we must honor them with our hearts, why not with our lips? since Nihil
sublimius Episcopis. No calling is more sublime then that of the Bishops.
Bishop Bilson, of the perpetual Government of the Church. p. 63.
I conclude this return with the very words of that excellent Bishop of
Winchester: God is my witness, I smooth no man's pride, I seek no man's favor; I
read as sincerely as my simple learning will suffer me; I see no reason why it
should trouble any godly mind, to hear a Bishop called by that name, with which
Saint Peter wills every woman to honor her Husband.

CHAP. V. An Answer to that popular clamor -- Godly meetings are disturbed,
and Papists favored.
IT is no small rub in your way, to hinder your advance toward us and does not
a little open your mouths against your Governors, that you cannot be quiet in
your private meetings, but you are ferreted and disturbed by the secular power;
so that Papists, and drunkards, are not so narrowly observed in their
extravagancies, as you are in the true worship of God.

Ad populum Phaleras! This Topic does you much service; whereby you persuade
the credulous multitude that you suffer a great deal of wrong; this is
oppression and persecution in grain. What must godly, sober, conscionable
Ministers be more severely dealt withal, then those that sing Dirges, and say
Mass? Then those that flock to those seminaries of misdemeanors, Alehouses and
Taverns? Far be it from me, from being patron or advocate for either of these,
better my tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth. Yet comparatively, and
(...) compose your countenances, until I come to a full period) I mean, in
point of obedience to Government, and so in respect of public peace, and
tranquillity, I wish it may not be truly said, that these very persons against
whom you so bitterly declaim, and sharpen all your invectives, overwhelming
them with showrs of stones from your slings, as if none were sinners but they,
were not less dangerous to the welfare of the Kingdom, then those reputed Godly
men, who with a sullen kind of sobriety (like him in the Hystorian) go about to
destroy the common wealth? Sober men did I call them? Then who are those
pernicious drunkards, of whom the Prophet speaks; who are drunk, but not with
wine: Drunk with malice and revenge, and drenched in such furious passions,
that like Etna they belch forth nothing but flames. There are some unclean
spirits that walk in dry places, Matthew. 12.43. Now if spiritual sins are worser
then carnal, as partaking more of the will and the whole soul, certainly this
drunkenness which throws firebrarnds into the roof of Government, and longs to
wallow in the ashes of a Kingdom, is worse then his that rowles in his own
vomit: This degrades us below bruit beasts; and that equals us to the very
devils: This has more scandal before men but that has more guilt in the sight
of God. Such as these may in time be brought to repentance, but those are
commonly hardened in their impiety: that as Christ told the Priests and Elders,
that Publicans and Harlots should go into the Kingdom of Heaven before them; so
it is easier to teach these profane wretches, their duty to (...) their Prince,
and convince them of their exorbitant carriage, then it is to turn those about,
whose webs are finer spun, and their fardels wrapped up in Eliah's Mantle. I hope
you will not call this pleading for Baal, and arguing for debauchery, no more
then Saint James pleaded for Devils, when he says they believe and tremble; or
our Savior, for Heathenism, when he prefers the condition of Tire and S^don,
before that of Chorazin, and Bethsaida. A Serpent is a Serpent still: though in
some respect, that is, in looking to his head, he is the emblem of wisdom.

But as the Moralities of Pagans, and honest dealings of Turks, do but
aggravate the vices, and cheatings of Christians, and will rise up in judgment
against them: So that loyalty which is in profane persons, does the more
condemn that disobedience, which is in men professing Religion. Are not you
ashamed to violate the commands of Authority, when Swearers, and Drunkards are
zealous for them; and herein it is, to wit, in what is good, that they deserve
both favor and encouragement. I pray study Metaphysiks better, and do not
confound and jumble together the notions of those things which ought to be
distinguished, abstracted, and severed one from another. These men are
c^untenanc'd, it is true, as obedient subjects; but not as Drunkards: For so the
Laws of the Land are severe against them, if they were well executed. It Is an
arrand fallacy to conclude absolutely, and comprehensively, when the premises
are only to be understood of things in some particular respects and
considerations: Although I wish from my heart, there were no need of such
logical acceptations; but that such as were loyal heretofore, and do still keep
their integrity, did not blast their own virtue, and give their enemies
occasion, by the looseness of their lives, to traduce the goodness of their
cause.

Now as to your darling, private meetings, whereby you contront the public
established worship of God, and would make men believe, that God is served only
in your corners: That (as Eliah once spoke unadvisedly, and with too much
ostentation) you are left alone -- that you are as a garden of Cucumbers --
that our Temples are profaned with superstition.

Sirs, be not angry, if the supreme Magistrate have a jealous eye upon your
Assemblies; as having paid dear already for the like method, and procecdings.
Is there no cause for him to fear? lest you should hatch such Harpy's as may in
time devour him. And what necessity I pray of this schism? I can call it no
better, if he defined it a right, that said, it was a causeless and culpable
separation. Are not the gates of Jerusalem open? Why do you flock then (like
the Disciples of Jeroboam) to Dan, and Bethel? Hos. 5.1.
Are there any snares upon Mizpheth? or Nets spread upon Tabor? Are the ways
of Zion unoccupied? Are there any Lions in the way to cause you to go through
by-ways? Are there any Cerinthus's, or Marrions, that you run out of our
Assemblies as Saint John did out of the Bath? Is this to follow the direction
of Christ, to preach from the house top? or is this to imitate his example, who
spoke openly to the World, and taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple
whither the Jews resorted; Joh. 18.20.
and in secret he said nothing. Were there a Nero, or Dioclesian at the helm,
who should threaten to mingle our blood with our Sacrifices, if you had your
Antelucana, and should flock into canes of the earth, to worship God in Christ
I would commend your zeal, and run along with you. But now the blessed days of
Queen Elizabeth (as you were wont to call them heretofore) are revolved, and
come back again: we have liberty and encouragement, under our Josiah, to be as
religious, as we will, or can, what ingratitude is it to complain of such
halcian days? See Dr. Minton on Jude; and Calvin was of the same judgmen. I
here ought to be no separation, from those Ghurehes wherein are taught all
things nece^^ary for Salvation.
to run like Foxes into holes? when we should like Doves, flock to the windows
of the Tabernacle. You confess we keep to the same Foundation; why should we
not then meet under the same roof? The first Christians met together with one
consent in one place; whether it was to pray, hear, or break bread. Division of
places will not long be without division of minds. And where can we upon better
grounds expect the presence of God, then in places dedicated, and consecrated
to his name. There he has promised that he will dwell in the midst of the
Children of Israel for ever. Saint Basil upon those words -- I will pay my vows
in the midst of Jerusalem; breaks out into -- (...). -- that is, observe this;
ye that leave the Church, Acts 4.24.86.46.
and turn aside to common houses! Bishop Androws Ser p 599 (...) Ezekiel. 43.7.
As if they had been guilty of a great crime, in setting up Altars in any other
place, save at Jerusalem where men ought to worship. This proved from the
Devils Apishness: For if the Lord have his Table -- the Table of Lord, we shall
read also of the Table of Devils. If Bees have their Hives: habent it vespae
(says Tertullian) wasps and Hornets, will have their holes too.

I know you will say, p. ^2^.
we do but pray to our God, and discourse of his Word. Well! you know who was
poisoned with Wine in the Sacrament. And I wish there were no venom distilled in
private prayers, and dilating upon Scriptures, by uncouth reflections upon legal
establishments. Tell us of obeying the commandments of God, as long as you
please, yet I dare not believe you; so long as you break the Laws of the
Church: for unless we observe both we obey neither, Lib. 3. p. 107.
says unparalled Hooker. It is to me a distinction without a difference, to
separate and divide the laws of men, from the laws of God: if such laws of men
are not Repugnant to the laws of God.

In the next place you are much troubled, that Papists are not so much troubled
as your selves; and indeed, I am much troubled that you give more occasion.
It Is true they refuse to take the oaths of Allegiance, (I speak of some of
them) and Supremacy, and you refuse to keep them. Some of their principles are
pernicious to our Government; and you know whose practices have been so. Though
you look several ways; yet we find our fields wasted, and can scarcely tell
who are the greatest trespassers: They would have blown up the
Parliament House: And I am loath to say, who were the occasion of doing worse;
See Mr^ Prins parrallel 'twixt these two:
because what they did was in the dark, but this before the face of the Sun. I
know with Pilate, you will wash your own hands; Well, tell me what you think of
this narrative; A kennel of Hounds hunted an Hare all the former part of the
day, and toward night a Shepherds curr steps in, and murders the Hare; who
were accessory to the poor Hares death? If you abhor the fact, do not build the
Tombs, or keep the garments of them that did it. Take heed of nibling and
knawing at the root of another gourd, and undermining another Cedar:
Murmuring will lay the Axe to the root of this Tree: In so doing you shall
justify Sodom, I mean Rome it self. I acknowledge (with my betters) that
Jesuited Papists, standing to their own principles, cannot be good Subjects to
reformed Princes; yet we know that the secular Priests renounce their Doctrine
herein, as most destructive. The Popes themselves have also contradicted each
other in this point (where is then their infallibility?) Boniface the eight
ordained that all men should acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope, upon pain of
damnation; Stilling fl. p. 448.
yet Innocent the third, affirmed that the King of France has no Superior
upon earth. It was a reproach cast upon the late Royal Army, that it was
Popish; I call it a reproach because the denomination was taken from the lesser
part, and from a very small inconsiderable number of that body: Yet suppose it
had consisted, most of them upon mature deliberation; this will redonnd to
their honor, and our shame, were there Doctrines as ancient, Catholic, and
Orthodox, as many of their personal actings in that War were courageous and
loyal; I think there would be no need of keeping such a vast distance from
them. (...) cap. 15. (...)
I am sorry (said that blessed Martyr) that Papists should have a greater sense
of their Allegiance than many Protestant Professors; who seem to have learned
and practiced the worst principles of the worst Papists; or as (that Oracle of
Reason, and standard of Religion) goes on saying: It was indeed a foul and
indelable shame, for such as would be accounted Protestants, to enforce me a
declared Protestant, their Lord and King, to a necessary use of Papists, or any
others, who did but their duty to help me to defend my self.

But perhaps, I may so long endeavor to deliver you from this scruple, that I
may contract to my self the imputation of Popery: And whilst I am so
charitable, as to prevent the dust from falling into your eyes, I may stand on
the windy side on you, until I hazard the putting our my own; for you are too
free of that livery to every one that stands in your way. Though you may as
truly say, we worship an Asses head, as that we espouse any Popish Tenants; my
Answer to those that examine me in this point is this: Am I not a Minister of
the Church of England? And is not this enough to evade, or blow away such a
calumny? Is it less than a contradiction to call those Bishops and Ministers of
the Church Popish, who have subscribed unto, and do allow of the Articles,
Liturgy, and Canons of this Church? Wise men will as soon believe you, if you
should affirm; that those who approve all things in the Alcoran, are
Christians, or that England reaches as far as Italy, What considerable point
almost betwixt them and us, is not in some of these declared against? So that
this web which you weave with so much earnestness, will only catch dotterels
and fools; such as have either shak'd hands with their reason, or else are
enthralled and captivated under the tyranny of their partiality, and locked
down to the Galleys of their own passions. If this be not enough to disabuse
your credulity, and to vindicate my self from any compliance with the Court of
Rome; I profess moreover, that with the Beraeans, I have searched the
Scriptures: Neither am I an utter stranger to the Fathers and Historians of the
primitive times; yet I can neither find either their opinions, or your
singularities, wherein they or you differ from the Church of England, in any of
those Canonical, and Authentic Records. Why should you grudge at the Papists
peace and protection, so long as they are peaceable: and either actively obey
the Laws of the Land, or else are ready passively to submit to the penalties
charged upon them for their neglect, if you find them thus disposed? As great
an aversion, and antipathy as ye have against them, it is worth your labor,
herein to make them your own exemplars. Sure you are not so bloody in your
Tenants, as to maintain that all who differ from us in Religion, merely upon
the account of Religion, must presently incur capital punishments. Saint
Bernard upon those words of Solomon -- Take the Foxes -- observes, Ser. inf
(...) Gant. 2.1^.
that he commands them not to be rooted up and killed, but only to be taken,
that is, by convicing them of their errors. -- Cu^ convincitur falsitas, capta
est vulpes quae demolitur vineam. You cannot be so ignorant of the usages, in
other States, and Kingdoms (except where the inquisition prevails) how those
that dissent from the Religion, which is publicly authorized, are not only
permitted but secured, so long as they do not affront the Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Laws of those dominions. And it would be but an unseasonable
president, and excitement of cruelty toward our Brethren abroad, if we should
begin in the same cup at home. I wish with Saint Paul that all men were as my
self; yet since there must be Heresies, and our judgments are as different as
our faces: since breeding and education do so much sway, and influence men's
Religion; I have a latitude of charity, for those that dissent from me; if they
be not seducing impostors, or turbulent incendiaries.

CHAP. VI. Reordination is no sufficient ground for Non conformity.
ANother Sconce, or Bulwark of yours, wherein ye have intrench't your selves,
and stand out against us inviting you (out of the sense of the greatness of the
Harvest) to bear a part with us in the heat and burden of the day, in the work
of the Ministry, saying unto you, as the men of Gibeon said to Joshua: slack
not your hands, Josh. 10.6.
but come up to us quickly, and help us: Some of you have answered no, for we
must be ordained by Bishops; otherwise by the Law, we have no commission; and
as for our parts, we are resolved not to undervalue that ordination, which we
have received already from our Brother Presbyters. The Bishops hands are not
more Authentic than theirs. Besides should we admit of another ordination;
what is this, but to confess our former void; and then what shall become of
those children, which we have Baptized and other minsterial acts which we have
performed by virtue of that ordination; this is objected but by some of you and
those juniors, who came up in the time of the second Temple, and did not behold
the glory of the first: And herein, your condition is the more to be pitied,
as being deceived and betrayed into such a labyrinth as this, by those that had
seen more years, and so should have been more fatherly: I wish the complaint of
Cyprian may not hold in this case -- Parents Parricidae -- Fathers are
murderers, poison their children, and give them sour Grapes to set their teeth
on edge. I cannot but apply to them the case of the young Prophet, that man of
God, who was led out of his way by an old Prophet, so that he brake the
commandment of the Lord and at last was slain by a Lion: 1 King. 13.24.


Sirs, look about you: Will you stand in the Market place all the day idle, out
of a complement to some ring leaders of a party, who thought to have retrenched
the footsteps of ancient discipline, and pulled up the Landmarks of Catholic
order in the Church; that all persons acting in the ministry might derive from
them and commence from the Epoche of their jurisdiction. Just as Jeroboam made
new Priests, after he had made an innovation in the political Government. The
old Wells must be stopped up, and new found Cisterns must be set abroach. If one
should ask these recusants whether they had not at first an inward call from
God, I Will warrant you, they would make it as evident to Master Nigh (if he were
again in his chair) both as to the time, and manner of such a call, as ever it
is apparent that young Samuel, the Prophets, and Apostles, were called by a
signal voice from Heaven: Yet this call from God must be suspended, or utterly
neglected, if it be not warranted, and confirmed by such men as they fancy
and approve; as if they were the servants of men, and came on their errand,
rather than the Embassidours of Christ, and Nuncio'^ of Heaven. What is
Ordination, but an impouring such men to the work of the Ministry, as by their
quallifications make it appear, they are set apart, and appointed by God to the
same office: As Kings when Inaugurated, and persons when Married, are declared
unto the World, that they are to be looked upon, in such a royal capacity, and
Matrimonial relation. Therefore it is no contradiction in Saint Paul -- that he
was not an Apostle of men nor by men, Gal. 1.1.
but by Jesus Christ. Acts. 13.
Yet we read, that he was ordered, instituted, and set apart by men to the work
of the ministry: because his inward call was derived immediately from God, but
the manifestation, and declaration of this, was from men. Now, since the
loosing the golden reins of Government, in head strong times, some that were
but mere Presbyters themselves, by a too precipitate boldness, took upon
themselves a power of making and propagating others like themselves, where they
meet with officious Clients, such as were willing to be made current by their
stamp; it has pleased our Legitimate Governors, after a Jubilee of an happy
restoration, to prevent schism, and confusion among Ministers, that they may
not claim from several Originals, and so maintain diverse interests, and like
Jacob and Esau struggle in the womb of the Church, and endanger the rending of
her bowels; as those lay-Corinthians did; whereas some cried up Paul some
Apollos. It has pleased the wisdom of the foresaid Authority to command --
that all professing to take upon them the work of the ministry, should pass
under the hands of the Reverend Bishops, according to the custom of this, and
the primitive Catholic Church; that all might pronounce the same Shibboleth.
Who would think that any should be so refractory, as to not comply with this
peaceable and laudable design. Epist ad Evagrium.
Saint Jerome did much advance the office of Presbyters; yet when he comes to
the business of Ordination, he leaves that solely to the Bishop. 1 Timothy 4.14.
And so I understand Saint Paul, though he mentions the laying on of the hands
of the Presbyters, as concurring with him in that work; yet to show; that he
was the principal, and they but assitants, he expounds his meaning afterward 2 Timothy 1.8. by the laying on of his own hands; (...) in that place noting the
chief causation; as (...) in the other signifies only a concurrance^: Thus he
appropriates this work also to Titus Bishop of Crete -- to Ordain Elders in
every City. Titus 1.5.
I will not dispute what may be done in case of necessity, when Bishops cannot
be had. I am not an absolute stranger to the judgment of Learned men, when
things are brought to this exigent; nor am I ignorant, that Edesius and
Frumentius Preaching to the Indians, are commended, though they had no
Ordination at all. But I adore the goodness of God, that did not suffer us to
be plunged into that gulf, in the worst of times; he left us a seed of that
apostolical Race; some whereof Ordained many hundreds, maugre all the
thunderbolts of their malicious adversaries! And I look upon them as shielded
by a supernatural power, in doing of this their duty; when men wereso
wrathfully displeased at them. Therefore to such as say they could be ordained
by none but Presbiters in those times; and so plead necessity; I must answer,
it was not absolute. but contracted. And whether such voluntary, and forward
revolting from the established rule and method of Ordination climing up into
the Lords sheepfold some other way; I say, whether this irregular sending
forth of Ministers, has not been a great occasion that so many sheep have been
peeled and scratched with the briars and brambles of wasting erros, I leave to
the sad thoughts of others: Sure I am, this has been the subject of my pensive
meditations, when I saw so much hemlock, and such daring, luxuriant tares
growing in the furrows of the Church; God usually leaves those men to
themselves, blasts their enterprises, and lets Satan loose upon them that
leaves his good old paths, to walk in ways of their own invention. Cheminitius
judged Origin to have fallen into so many errors, because he Preached without
ordination: Cyprian notes the same of Donatus, qui a seipso ordinatus: Uport
Gol. 23.
And Bishop Durant says -- It Is no wonder that those men preach what is false,
who never had any legitimate power at all. Jer. 23.32.
But I am most confirmed by that of the Prophet, Behold I am against them that
Prophecy false dreams, and cause my people to err by their lies; yet I sent
them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people at
all, says the Lord. It troubled Bilueh to the day of his death, that he madea
Collation in a place where there was no Minister, before he himself was in
Orders; So tender was that good man, of violating, that Order which was in the
Church:

Now wh^^^^^ you put on y^^r Tr^^^^al Buskins, and cry out if you should be
reordain'd, this were all one, with renouncing your former ordination, and
proclaiming all your ministerial Acts performed, by virtue thereof void. I
profess, I neither see any coherence, nor any sound inference at all in this
logic; neither is there any such declaration in the Act of Parliament; but
rather a great deal of tenderness and compassion for men in your condition; a
meeting only to set us all in a right posture, that we might all be as an Army
with Banners, marching all one way, that is, with our faces toward Zinn, under
the conduct of the same Commanders.

Had those in Authority reduced you into the state of laymen, concluded your
ordination void, and then applied this salvo to what you acted heretofore --
Fieri non debuit, factum valet; you might (perhaps) have complained the more,
yet they would not have wanted presidents and examples of councels to that
purpose: But they touch you with a soft hand, only injoyning you to take
Episcopal ordination, as it were ad corroberandum titulum; to make your former
ordination Canonical, Legal, and Authentic: This is evident from that proviso
in the act it self -- That it shall not extend to those Ministers of the
foreign reformed Churches allowed, or to be allowed by the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors. Therefore it follows in my logic; that the compilers of
this act, did not account ordination by Presbyters to be absolutely void. In
his unBishoping T^noth^ and Titus.
However Master Prin is pleased to condemn Bishop Hall for reordaining Master
Bury, ordained before beyond the Seas; which is matter of fact, either without
the compass of my remembrance, or short of my observation: Yet to show our
charity to the reformed Churches, the letter of the Law is now express to the
contrary: Does not this proceed from a spirit of condescension and moderation?
Yet in your anger you will say-all things are screwed up to the utmost
extremity, without the least abatements whatever. But though the Law thus bares
with foreigners, and is civil to strangers, must you that are of the same
Family claim the same privilege, and plead exemption from the discipline of
your Mother? For shame unlace your selves, come in, and renew your commission.
Those Officers that fought under the Earl of Essex, received a new commission
under the Lord Fairfax. Were not many Kings in the old Testament anointed, I
Chron. 29.22.
and inaugurated again and again? As Solomon and David. 1 Samuel 16.2.
Were not the Apostles sent forth by Christ? Yet they were separated, and had
hands imposed on them, 2 Samuel 2.4.
by men; and that not only once, but Paul had hands laid on him, first by
Ananias, Act. 9. and then by the Prophets, Bishop Bilson P. 93.
Acts 13. and Barhabas had hands imposed on him, before he stood in competition
with Matthias; and a good Casuist gives the reason -- Ordination is an external
Rite, Baldwin. P. 1040.
and no Sacrament, therefore it may be itarated, or repeated. Were not many in
these late times married by a Minister, and afterward by a Justice of peace?
Yet what a dust, and a bustle do you make? You pretend that you are willing to
exercise the office of your mnistiry; yet you are so stiff, that you will not
come in to have your patents sealed. What though many of you, scarce ever dipped
your feet in font Caballino; I mean, were never graduated in the University by
way of preparation, to receive Orders in the Church; yet I am assured, ye would
have found the Fathers of the Church so indulgent to you, that notwithstanding
this defect, they would have flown upon your necks, and rejoiced over you as
their fellow laborers in the Lords vineyard. The door is not yet shut: Why do
you stand deliberating and demurring, whether you should perform your duty, by
entering in? Though it is the eleventh hour of the day, yet you may earn your
penny, if you will lay your shoulders to the work, and with sincere and double
diligence redeem the time you have lost. But if you still resolve to go on
whispering in the dark, and to continue in your claudestine vaults, do not
study what answer you may give unto me; but what return you will make to your
master and mine at the great day of accounts; how you will evade that woe which
Saint Paul pronounced against himself, had he not preached the Gospel; which
very words did so far prevail with an eminent person of your persuasion, that
as Saint Austin was converted from libertism by those words, -- not in
chambering and wantonness, etc. So was he reclaimed from Nonconformity by -- Woe
is me if I preach not the Gospel. Mr Sprint.
Go ye and do likewise, lay the same Text close to your hearts, not as a charm,
but a cataplasma; and if there be any life left, it will setch you again; if
this physic will not work upon your Tempers, what think you of this expedient?
Were Saint Austin, Saint Ambrose, Calvin, Perkins: Nay, were Christ and his
Twelve Apostles here upon the Earth, and met together in our English World;
would they (think ye) lurk in holes, and seal up their mouths? I dare say, they
would rather break forth into exultation, and wonder saying. How beautiful are
thy Tents, and thy Gates O England.

CHAP. VII. A Transition, or Introduction to the main Reasons which are
pretended to obstruct Conformity.
WE have hitherto been but in the Suburbs, and grappled only with your
outworks: The main Forts and Cittadels in which you incamp your selves against
our batteries, are yet untouc'd and unshaken. All that has been yet said, is
but pickeering some velitations with your forlorn hope (like the Turkish Asapi)
which were to abate their enemies first furious onset, and blunt their Swords
to make way for the Janissaries: The main battle is yet behind. Just as
Sophisters make a flourish with some inconsiderable, and prelusory Sillogism,
before they pinch, and wound with their keener Arguments.

Methinks I see your very Triarij divided into three Battalia's, marching up
yonder Hill (like Hannibals Troops climing up the Alp's) and in a Gigantick
rage, defying all the hosts of little David that shall stand in your way, and
oppose your thundering Legions: Confident of victory, and prodigal of death.
Your defensive Armor is not like that Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16. But it is the
Covenant upon your breasts, whilst you are clad with this, you think your
selves invulnerable, and charmed into a profound security. Who can pierce this
Coat of Male? Your offensive Weapons, are Swords and Javlings, furbush'd with
Lawfulness of War against the King, and overturning the Government of the
Church and State. In the Rear are Volleys of Canonshot against the Book of
Common Prayer. This must be dragged along, like a Royal Captive, to adorn your
Chariots and set off your Trophies. These are your Cerberus-Heads; these are
your frightful Mormo's; in these threefold cords twisted together lies your
strength, as Sampsons did in his hair. What? We give our Assent and Consent to
the Common Prayer, diselaim all War against the King, Renounce the Covenant?
we will never do it. And indeed, I tremble at this part of my persuasive, since I
am come to uncase the head; and must be tampering with your right eyes, lest
both my Rhetoric and my skill should be defective, in accomplishing my
peaceable design, and crowning my desires after unanimity. Methinks I am
essaying to carry a vast Mountain upon my back, and to reconcile antipathies:
For though I had Logic enough to deal with your understandings, and Engines to
batter, or undermine this Capitol; yet you have so many reserves in those
secret Corners and Caverns of your wills; that I much doubt the force of my
Oratory to inchant you out of them. Yet as I have run with your footmen, so I
shall now endeavor to keep what pace I can with your Horsemen; and like
Horatius, I will fiest separate these Ter gemini, and then (Auspice Christ^)
plead with them apart.

CHAP. VIII. Assent and Consent not unlawful to be given to the Common Prayers
and Rites of the Church of England.
I Have never been more transported with wondoer, than when some of your
classis, and those none of the lowest, have maintained most dogmatically, in
conference with my self. -- That neither the Greek nor Latin Churches, had any
forms of Prayer. This made me almost to turn a Skeptical Academick, and to
doubt of all things of which I took my felf to have some knowledge, I was even
tempted to dis-beleive my own senses; as if all things were but spectra
phantasmes, and empty apparitions which I beheld As if Geographers and
Travelours had imposed upon me, when they told me of such a place as
Constantinople: For I thought I had as good evid^ne for these forms of Prayer,
which my eyes have looked upon, and have been handed down to our age, by the
uncontroleable Tradition, and unanimous consent of former generations, as I
could have of any objective verity below divine Revelations. That cause must
needs stand upon a tottering Basis, that is ushered in with so strange an
Hypothesis; Mat. 26.44.
which amounts to no less than an incredible Paradxe.

As for the lawfulness of a form, it is an indisputable indisputable warrant
unto me; that we have not only our Saviors practice, who went the third time
and prayed the same words, but his command too -- When ye pray say -- And if
you will have measure pressed down; see the practice of Hezekiah, who after he
had composed an Ode of thansgiving for his recovery from sickness, (...) Iia.
30.
(and thanksgiving you know is a part of prayer) he vowed to sing the same to
the tuned instrument all the days of his life. And the very same song which
Moses began Exodus 15.1. Miriam repeated over again verse. 21. Nay, those Saints
which had got the victory over the beast (as if forms were to be used in
Heaven) sang the same song of Moses. Rev. 15.3.
You your selves do not account it any stinting, much less quenching of the
Spirit, though you sing a pleasant Psalm that is drawn up into meter to your
hands, yet notwithstanding you will say, you sing with the Spirit. 1 Cor. 14.26.
And the Apostle taxes it for an absurd indecorum in the Church of Corinth,
that when they came together every one had a Psalm. And is it not as uncouth,
for every one in public to have a several prayer? A several prayer did I say?
Nay, were men let loose to their own liberty, they would be little better than
wild Asses Colts, snuffing up the wind toward diverse climes: One would pray
contrary to another, as they are sowr'd with opposite principles and aim at
diametrical interests. The devotions of Covenanteers and Independants, have
been a sad instance, praying as if they would enervate, ravel and unpray one
another prayers. Certainly, this is not to take Heaven by violence; or as
Tertuliian -- Coire in ^oetum; (...)
and deum quis^ manu facta, precationibus ambire orantes; to beset the
Almighty, and as Jacob did, not let him go until he hear us and bless us.
Thetis in Homer caught Jupiter by the knees, and by this importunity obtained
her request. Christ has lest a special promise that their prayers shall be
granted in Heaven; Mat. 13 19.
who in their askings can agree upon Earth. When we are divided in our
supplications (as the Builders of Babel were in their languages) we abate, and
weaken their force; even as water looses its strength, when it is divided into a
multipliciplity of Trenches.

Hezekiah and his Princes, foresaw this dangerous, and exorbitant humor in the
Levites; if once they got the reins upon their own necks; therefore they
prescribe them the very words wherewith they should sing praises unto the Lord.
2 Chronicles. 29.30.
The primitive Christians were so uniform in their prayers, that when they said
Amen, they made a noise like a clap of thunder, or like the roaring of the Sea.

Judicious Hook^ was so verily persuaded, that no Church thoroughly settled did
ever use their voluntary dictates. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians
does rarely and earnestly enjoin (...), let there be one common prayer in all
the Church. Constantine did not only command a set form of prayer in the
Church, but also in his Camp. And Calvin speaking of a form of prayer, in his
Epistle to the Protector of England, is at his valde probo: He always used the
same prayer himself before his Lectures, which is Printedbefore his commentary
upon Ezekiel el: It he ever spoke any thing obliquely of ours, it was before it
was polished and corrected, in the latter end of the reign of King Edward the
sixth. And that such prayers were, and are still used in the reformed Churches
abroad at this day; he is but a novice in story, that is iguoran^ of it.

As for these objections. It shall be given to you in that hour what ye shall
say. -- And praying in the Spirit -- they do nothing invalidate the Authority
offorms; for, the first is only concerning times of Trial and Persecution, when
Christians were to be brought before Kings and Rulers for the sake of Christ:
And there is a mere fallacy in the last; as if praying by a form and praying in
the Spirit, were such (...), that they cannot stand together; whereas their own
sudden prayers are forms, in respect of others that join with them; yet I hope
they will not deny but these do also pray in the spirit. Nay, a form has many
advantages to promote spiritual prayer, for those that pray without
premeditation; their inventions, memories, judgments, and tongues are all busy
in framing matter, and forming expressions suitable thereunto, which must needs
be as so many sucklers, and distractions, to abate the vigor of their
intentions, for what they pray.

Where men have a desire to instill their singular opinions into the minds of
others; it is no wonder they would be lax and free in their prayers: Hence it
has been forbidden by counsels, to use any prayers but what have been approved
by Synods, lest poison should be conveyed by prayers, as it was (by (...)
Priests, in the Sacrament: Neither is it strange, that (...) stomachs, which
refuse solid and wholesome meat, and long after kickshaws; if they reject the
ordinary prayers of the Church, and seek for other of their own inventions: for
you know men are fond of their own productions. I dare say, if any are not
nourished and heated with our prayers; if their hearts be not like those of the
Disciples going to Emaus; they bring with them some prejudicate impediment,
some nauseating distemper, and coldness in their own breasts. The fault is not
in the liturgy, but in their own want of zeal, in not joining their hearts in
good earnest to those prayers, or as it is expressed better to my hands -- Men
lay all the blame upon the Liturgy, to excuse the deadness of their own hearts:
Like her in Seneca that said the room was dark, when she her self was blind, I
confess, where men have fluent, eloquent tongues, and have expressions at will
(which are the common not distinguishing gifts of Gods Spirit) if they are
minded to sacrifice to the dragge of their own applause, in the ostentation of
their parts, and desire to erect their own Monuments among the people; they
have a large field to expatiate in: yet all this I aver, may be done without
any dram of saving grace. The distinction between (...) and (...), grace and
gifts deserves your further inquiry upon this subject.

I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that upon emergencies, I have indulged my
self the liberty of my own measures, and I found a vehement heat in my self for
the time, my affections even over running their banks: and if I did casually
hit upon any pertinent, winning and melting words, I was ready to flatter, and
hugg the felicity of my own rhetoric: By which it clearly appears to me, that
there is a Serpent lurking under those leaves, or specious pretenses, for
extempory prayer, especially when we do velificare, or make a flourish in
public, by turning the Pulpit (to use Mr. Baxters words) into the hypocrites
Theater: We are then more apt to seek our own glory, than the glory of him that
sent us: for in private commonly there is not so much heat attending our
extemporary prayers (I appeal to your own experience in this particular) which
is no small evidence, that vainglory is at one end of them: For there is an
exorbitant zeal, which is a work of the flesh. May there not be a fire in
straw, which may flame and expire at the same time? Gal. 5.20.
Cito ignis stipulae conquiescit, and exundans flamma, deficientibus
nutrimentis emoritur, Though the affections may be more enlarged, Jerome ac^
suriam p. 83.
and dilated in sudden ebullitions raptures and passions; as some women swell
to an unusual bigness, because they keep not themselves under the restraint of
laceing; and the waters that covered the earth at the first creation, were
shallower than when they were reduced into the bounded channels of the Seas.
The blood and spirits called forth into the outward parts of the body, leave a
lesser proportion about the heart, to guard it from a delinquium, and such
feavorish distempers often prove mortal. Yet may not those devotions which are
performed by the standard of prescribed forms (though they make not such a
blaze) like coals of Juniper, preserve that he^^^ longer which they have
conceived? May not these deliberate and rational services be more deep though
they make not so much noise? May not I pray with judgment, understanding and
intenseness of soul when I read, as well as when I say a prayer without book?
when I open my eyes, as well as when I shut them? I pray read the true meaning
of those words -- The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
truth, as expounded by that good man Mr. Hildersham. On John 4.


Let Us not dispute so long about the mode of prayer until we forget either
what it is, or that we owe any such tribute unto God. As I have heard a
wrangling Sophister so earnest in snatching at collateral and incident
disputes, until he has forgot the question in debate: And I have seen some
ill nurtured dogs, so violent in questing after every little Bird, that they
have left the game behind them. Let us offer up to God (...), Clo. Alew. p. 717.
the incense of a righteous soul, let us (...), converse with God and keep
close unto him, in the pantings and motions of our souls; Basil. p. 772
and then if this may be done by a form, lets be wise unto sobriety, in hushing
of unchristian quarrels; and by joining together (...) with one consent, in the
same work of such regular prayers.

Now because some of you will condescend to a form, as lawful and expedient;
yet you have no kindness for ours. Just as I knew a Gentleman, who had variety
of drinks, and those the best in their kind, approved off by his neighbors
round about; yet he was always out of conceit with his own liquors, and sent
his man far and near, even to obscure places, to buy, or borrow what might
better please his own palate. The application is as easy as the story is
realibut were it fabulous, the moral would prove very pertinent. We admire
things at a distance, and those that are far fetched do best please such
persons, whose imaginations are stronger than their reason. Were the Officers
of Geneva, or Amsterdam translated into England, I Will warrant you, many nice
stomachs (for a time) would make no bones of them; nay how would they be
embraced and cried up? not because they are better than ours, but in that they
would be novelties amongst us. Although our usages, and methods in Gods service
have been commended, and the harshest particulars practiced, by the most
eminent reformers in the world, ours have stood without any contradiction that
I have met withal, except it be such as the Moon meets with, whose luster may
be barked at by whiffling currs but it is far enough elevated above the reach
of their teeth.

That stratagem-that our Liturgy was taken out of the Mass Book, did execution
in its season, whilst it was managed by the brawny Arms of those en^ssa^es of
Apolyon, who were resolved to be strenuous in their calumni^s, it is yet
uncertain whether ^^s charge did proceed most from impotent ^^^lice, of
desp^rate impudence: This imposture is now so ^^^parent, that the mear^^t
capacities begin to ^^e thorrow it; and discover the legerdem^^ thereof. If to
pray to God in our Mother ^^ngue and not in latin. (...) to pray to him only in
the, name of Jesus Christ, without any addresses to the Virgin Mary, or any
other Saint, or Angel. If to acknowledge but two Sacraments, if to receive the
Lords Supper in both kinds, with a declaration against transubstantiation,
elevation, and adoration. If neither to respect the Popes Supremacy, purgatory,
justification by works, or prayers for the dead. If those prayers which were
composed by martyred Protestants, against which the Pope sends forth his
roaring Bull, as if they were levelled directly against his Throne; and will
sooner dispense with his followers, for hearing our Sermons, than joining with
our prayers: I say (that I may put a period to this sentence, which might
easily be drawn forth into a whole paragraph) if these things savor of the
Mass Book, Praeflat culpam agnoscere guam deprecari.
I must confess before the Sun, that I am a Papist: that our Liturgy and
Articles, were framed out of the Romish mint. But since there is nothing of
this denomination once insinuated in our prayers: Since the whole compages of
our service is purged and fan'nd from all the rubbish, and chaffs of Popish
trash: since we have recovered those vessels which Nehuchadnezzar had carried
out of Jerusalem; Ezra. 7.8.
may not we bring them again into the house of the Lord? May not we fetch the
Ark out of the territories of the Philistines and carry it unto Shilo? may not
Lot be redeemed from the Kings of the Nations, after he had been taken
prisoner? And may not the Creed, Lords prayer, ten commandments some excellent
prayers and laudable usages, which were usurped upon by the tripple Crown, be
restored to the service of the Church as a captiye Woman might be married to an
Israelite, after her head had been shaven, her nails paired, Deuteronomy 21.12, 13.
and the raiment of her captivity taken from her: Especially seeing the beams
and rafters of our Liturgy, were in the Church long before there was any such
thing as Popery in the World.

This Lion being hunted out of your way, this Bugbear being divested of all
its terrible vizzards: Bishop Taylar.
Lets see what in the next place affrights you. And herein I could have said
more to the purpose, if I could have prevailed with any of you, to have given
me your particular exceptions, to which you would have stood: For I perceive
there is almost as much variety in your exceptions as there is in your faces:
One pishes at and slites, what another cries out against with a stentorian
voice, as an intolerable abomination. But this I could never obtain, either by
my self, or by the mediation of proxies, whom I employed to the same purpose:
As if it were as difficult a matter to procure a catalogue of your objections
against the Liturgy, as it is to get a list of the Churches traditions.

I cannot suppose that men of your pitch can be offended with those words in
the confession -- There is no health in us -- with the Letany, as if it were a
role of curses -- with kneeling at that short prayer at the end of the
commandments -- Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep thy
Law! Alas! Conscientis minus scrupulosa noscitur ex vitis.
these are poor vulgar cavils, your scruples run higher, concerning assent and
consent: And here you are very critical, learned and curious in finding out
gins to entangle and perplex your own consciences, as if you had found out a
spititual Microscope, to discern what is invisible to our duller eyes. Not only
your wills (say you) must Consent to the use of it as good, but your
understanding is engaged in the truth of the Liturgy. And indeed I had thought
these two acts had been so twisted together in rational men, that ordinarily,
one does suppose and infer the other. When I consent with my will to use the
prayers of the Church, this arises from the conviction of my reason, that I
may and ought to do so. And the act of my will would be brutish and irregular
(like that of Medea, who was hurried only with the Ocstrum of her wilful
passions) if it were not steered by the dictate of my understanding; this is to
do it in judgment; therefore you-do but put a fallacy upon your selves -- a
been conjunctis etc. And whereas you say (some of you) that you could read our
prayers, if you might be abated your Assent n="*" The Church in her best ages
has secured her vitals, with an hedge of subscription. In Austins time, such
as were admitted to the ministry, were to renounce the errors of the Manichees,
Arrians, Novatians, and Pelagians; to declare whether they allowed of first and
second marriages, the eating of flesh -- repentance after lapses. Whether
original concupiscence were a sin, or whether such as were out of the Church
might inherit eternal life; in the Synod of Nice not only the Bishops, but
Constantine himself subscribed to the decrees of that Synod with his own
hands. So in Luthers time, when the Church was pestered with Anabaptists;
Servetus, Canipanus, Stuckfoldius, and other Furies; it defended it self by
prescribing bounds to those that were in the ministry, which they should not
pass. See Melancton, Tomo tertio Declarationum selectavum. Cap de calumnijs
Osiandri p. 699, 700. And why should not the Church of England (after these and
other laudable examples) fortify and preserve the Capitol of her peace,
against turbulent invaders, and pernicious incendiaries, by limiting men's
exorbitant excursions, in joining their consent to her wholesome discipline,
saying hitherto shall ye go and no further.
and Consent; it is all one to me, as if if you should say, you would use them
in hypocrisy. But if after all this strife, what if these words Assent and
Consent are but exegitical, where (...) the same thing is expressed in several
terms, as it is very usual in Scripture: and import no more than that you shall
constantly, and unseignedly use this form in public, excluding all others: Not
as if our Assent to these definitions, were in the same manner internal as that
is, which we give unto decrees, as infallible, but such as we give to those,
which are not contrary to the fundamentals of faith out of submission for peace
sake; Stilling fl. desenee of the Archbishop. 82. l 509.
as one well expresses it, whose reading and judgment out-strips his years.

Whereas some of you have told me you would conform, were you not enjoined to
do do what is absolutely sinful. These are but swelling words of vanity: For I
must tell you again, prove what you say, and you shall have more companions. If
any thing in the Common Prayer were contrary to any part of Gods word, we have
authority from our subscription to disclaim it. It is not lawful for the Church
to ordain any thing that is contrary to the word of God, or besides the same.
They are the very words of our twentieth Article of Religion; so far is she
from imposing any thing that is sinful; so unlike is our Church to the Church
of Rome; if Cardinal Peroon hit her meaning right, when he told King James
pressing him, that the cup in the Sacrament, was according to Christ's
institution -- That it is lawful for the Church to dispense with Christ's
institutions; or if this single Cardinal be no competent Interpreter of that
Churches sense, yet the counsel of Constance cannot be denied, affirming --
that although Christ has appointed the Sacrament to be received under both
kinds; yet (Hoc non obstante) we decree that the lay people shall only receive
under the species of bread. I only add this, that by the illustration of
contraries ungrateful men might be brought to see their own happiness, who
breath in the air of the English Church I bless God for his mercy, and conclude
with those words of remarkable D. Downham Though envy cannot say but our Church
holds all substantial points of Divinity, and uses the ordinary means of
salvation, as other Churches testify; yet so wanton in Religion are men
through spiritual pride, that they care not for the sound food of their souls,
unless they may have their own sauce.

10. Besides your giving Assent and Consent, you stumble again very unluckily,
at the very threshold of the Liturgy. The very Calendar you say is
intolerable: For therein is enjoined the observation of festival days, by the
institution of man. I will not dispute with you about the change of the Sabbath
day, from the seventh to the first day of the week. I had rather grant that to
be by Apostolical and divine Authority than raise any dust about it. Yet this
hinders not but that it is in the power of the Church to set apart other days,
especially I am confirmed herein, because I find days of thanksgiving, and
fasting set apart in the Scriptures, by commission from men; and I have seen the
like practiced by your selves, I find the feast of Pu rim so lemnly observed in
the Old, Joh. 10.22.
and the feast of the dedication owned by Christ himself in the New Testament.
Those Agapae, or Love feasts the Apostle speaks of, were taxed by him, not
simply as feasts, but as abused by the Corinthians. It Is easy to mention the
Homilies and Orations, which the Ancients made upon the Nativity of Christ and
other festivals: That is a false plea against Saints days, as if they were
equalliz'd to the Lords own day: For look what difference there is between the
Lady and her Maid, Christ and his servants, the same we acknowledge twixt the
Sabbath, and other festivals. We Honor the Saints; and if we should not, I
find by experience, we should give the Papists just offense; yet we do not
adore them: We desire to imitate those virtues and graces that were in the
Saints: We rejoice at their conquest over the World, their triumph in Heaven;
because they keep an holy day in rejoicing at our welfare; especially when we
are converted from our sins. Above all we desire to glorify God himself; who
sanctified them on earth, enabled them to do and suffer gloriously, and has
now enrolled them in them in the Calender and dipticks in Heaven; He is
wonderful in all his Saints. We make no shrines for them, or go a pilgrimage to
visit their remains: We fall not down to their representing pictures, only we
retain their hystorical memorial, that we may show our selves their genuine
posterity; as the Romans by beholding the Images of their Noble Ancestors,
were inflamed to an imitation of their Heroical Acts. It Is true, the Apostle
told the Col^ssians, he was afraid of them, in that they observed days but I
take in the whole verse, and there follows Mouths and Yeares' which makes it
plain those days were Jewish feasts, not only preceding, but prefiguring
Christ who was to come; and who doubts but that such festivals were abolished
in Gospel Times. There is yet another Bank cast up against Holidays -- They
contradict the fourth Commandment, which says, Six days shall thou labor.
Therefore none of those days are to be set apart for recreation, or festivity.
This was pressed upon me by a plain person under my own charge; yet it is easy to
divine out of whose quiver this shaft was derived, or on whose Anvil it was
hammered. Grotius unties this knot: For the Imperative Mood (says he) in this
place, or (which is all one among the Hebrews) the Future Tense, Sensum tantum
sinendi habet, does only signify permission -- Thou shall, that is, thou
may work six days. I may add those words are to be understood
Hypothetically, that is, thou shall labor six days, if the Church do not
otherwise determine of any of those days, for prayer, praises, or fasting: As
many universal propositions in Scripture, are to be understood in a particular
and limited sense; so many things absolutely spoken, are to be interpreted by
way of supposition, as is evident in Jonahs famous Sermon, concerning the
destruction of Nineveth, such texts as seem p^remtory, and to tie us up to what
is enjoined in them, must be understood in such a latitude, that they do not
contradict other Scritures. As -- Take no care what you shall eat, ^^at 6.26.
that is, in comparison of the next World. And those words -- Take no staves,
that is, Mat. 10.1
to strike or fight withal; otherwise they are contrary to Mark 6.8. Take
nothing save a staff, that is, to walk withal as Travellours.

20. Another offense you take at the Calender is, some lessons are taken out of
the Apocripha. It Is true what Jerome says -- Librum Apocriphum Ecclesia non
recepit: Those Books are not looked upon as any part of Canonical Scripture:
Their Authority is not to be depended upon, as to prove any Article of Faith,
or to be a rule of that doctrine which is necessary to salvation. Yet who is
ignorant; except those who never read those ancient Books, that therein are
many excellent Lectures of morality, much conducing to the regulation of men's
manners; though I will not commit Scripture with Scripture; nor compare the
Apocrypha with any part of the Old and New Testament, yet I refer it to your
own consideration, whether many Chapters in the Apocrypha may not seem to
convey more of edification to the generality of people, than many abstruse
geneological Chapters in the Old Testament. I am sure our Savior had an eye to
this end, when in his quotations out of the Old Testament, he has more regard
to the reading of the Septuagint, than of the Original Hebrew; Because that was
more common and better understood by his Auditors: And whether it was for this
reason that the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews Chap. 13.25. quotes that
place out of Apocrypha 2 Maccab. 7.7. It deserves your second thoughts.

If you except against these Books, as of humane authority only, and therefore
not to be read in the Congregation; I demand of you, whether the Scriptures as
divided into Chapters, and read in our translations, as also the Psalms sung in
our meter and contents of Chapters are not so: neither is it any strange thing
to read in the Church occasionally, even Books of humane composure, as well as
Clements Epistles in the primitive times. But if all this will not reconcile
your minds to our Calendar, prescribing some Chapters out of the Apocrypha,
what follows methinks should more than satisfy any rational men, who are not
pertinaciously resolved to lie under their own doubts and fears. Rather than
lose your communion, and the execution of your Ministry upon this account, the
Church is so indulgent, as in this matter, almost to leave you to your own
liberty, I mean so far, as to exchange one Chapter for another, the Apocrypha
for Canonical Sripture, as appears by the Preface to the second part of the
Book of Homilies, O that there were such an heart in you! as to be sutably
disposed (Ruendo in occursum) by meeting so tender a Mother in complying with
her innocent constitutions!

30. Some of you (for it is rare to find many of you in the same mind) have not
much to say against the body of the Liturgy, were it left to your free will, to
use, or not to use it, if Ministers that are heavy and unexperienced might have
the assistance of these crutches; but those that have more elevated parts and
are men of activity, might be left to their own Legs. If such as have but
barren inventions and stamm^ring expressions might help themselves out with
such a form, it would not be amiss: But to confine such as have pregnant heads
and voluble tongues, within such bounds, that they must always move in the
same circle: This is little less than preventing their own growth and
proficiency, by being staked down always to their alphabet, and having their
wings pinioned; by this means the Talents of able men will be rapp'd up in a
Napkin; the Church deprived of their gifts, and the Spirit quenched within
them. What? must Saul's head and shoulders be cut off, that he may be equal to
his brethren?

When I read, or hear such harrangs as these, I am prone to suspect, that these
Seraphick Doctors (notwithstanding all their sublime Notions and refined
pretenses) are not well acquainted with the very essentials of prayer, or at
least, have not those apprehensions of God (who is the only object of prayer)
as they ought to have. Alas! Do we think to charm his ears, (...) upon pride
at an^^^^ but specially in prayer. Holder; sh^m on Ps 51. p. 310.
with a multiplicity of pompous words? or, think we that our prayers are the
more acceptable to him, because they are presented to him every day in a new
dress. -- Q^^s pulmo animae praelargus Anhelat; because they are acco^ted in
some odd tone, and set off by some unusual looks. God delights not in variety
of phrases, nor rejects our desires, glossing. n Eccl^^. 5 (...) T^r. (...) in
Mat. 26.20 and (...) in ^^x^d. 2^
though tendered in the same words, In oraeione quantum verbis accedit, tantum
spieitui decedit, says the Casuist. The more intent we are upon words in
prayer, the weaker is our spirit in praying: Though we pray in an old form, yet
if we put forth new vigor of soul, B^l^m. p 21,
our prayers shall be fresh every day; and not for that reason) be the less
prevalent since that God with whom we have to do, looks more after our Hearts
and Reins, and those secret groans, which cannot be uttered (this is prayer
indeed, (...) effectually wrought in us, by Gods own spirit) than after the
froth of our lips, or cadency of our words. -- In sacro quid facit anrum. It
was an Heathenish conceit that the smoke of their Incense burnt upon their
Altars, and the savor of their Sacrifices did delight the Nostrils of their
Gods. Let us come before him with humility, repentance, and steady zeal, -- Et
far litemus: It matters not though our words be few and plain, though our
prayers be short and repeated every day in the same numerical syllables, though
our ears are so carnal, that they long and itch as much after change of
sentences, as a wanton stomach does after variety of meats; yet far be this
from us, when we have to do with God. Our words may be the same, yet our
prayers may be new: As he that read over Virgil several times, and always
observed a new fancy in that Poet. But what necessity of any new strain of
words? If God would grant me those petitions which are offered up to him in the
Common Prayers, I should account my self sufficiently happy: Although we are
not so restrained, but upon occasions, even in public we may use our gifts, if
there we be grave, modest, discreet and humble. And here we have a Royal
approbation of one that was the best Interpreter of the Law. (...)


If men would study to undermine the very walls of Zion, and throw Granado's
into the Holy of Holies, they could not find out a more compendious way than by
bringing into the Church such a Trojan Horse, as this intolerable tolleration
in permitting every one to do what is good in his own eyes; if some Ministers
should pray by Book, and others without, if some should observe the Rubric,
and others go by the Cards of their own distorted fancies; What Censuring? What
condemning each other must inevitably follow hereupon? Look what the one did,
must needs be a reproach and a defiance unto the other. He that reads will pass
sentence upon him that reads not. As those Christians that were converted from
Gentilisme and did eat all sorts of meats indifferently, did judge and despise
those judaizing converts, who were more scupulous, in abstaining from several
sorts of meats: What casting of dirt ( I had almost said darts) into one
another faces would there be betwixt the Ministers of this and the next
Parish? Ardet adbuc Ombros, et Tentyrs summus utrinq, jude suror populo, quad
numina vicinorum die marg: locusquum jolos credat habondas ^sse d(...) ipso
(...)
Methinks I here one say of the other -- he is a legal, flat, hide-bound,
phlegmatic Parish Priest: And the other replying (before the words are quite
out of his mouth) that he who is so forward to brand his neighbor is a proud,
daring, pragmatical babbler, evaporating crude, indigested and lame petitions,
which he would be ashamed to offer unto his Prince. What will the people do in
this case? Scinditur in incertum, etc. they are at best but (...) like Proteus
turning into several shapes; they are as unstable as water; and therefore are
compared in the Revelation, to floods and great waters which roar this way, and
the other way, as they meet with impressions of several winds: They will hardly
be kpt within their own channels: They will adhere to the one, and despise the
other; and like that rout Acts 19. Some will cry one thing some another; some
will say such a Minister is a good man, no says his neighbor, for he
deceives the people. The Sabbath day will be spent in counter-traversing the
ways from one Church to another. Here goes a troop of Malcontents from their
own Jerusalem unto Hiericho; These have nice squeamish stomachs, that care not
for solid meat, but cry out upon their daily Manna; therefore they are looking
out for novelties and change of diet which may suit better with their curious
stomachs: Perhaps by the same way they meet as many that are weary of their
running-banquets, and kickshaw dishes; these are looking our for sincere milk:
They desire to worship God, not at the discretion of a single Minister, but in
such a way as has been approved of by Synods, Convocations, Parliaments, by
the best Divines ancient and modern, at home and abroad, so that after the way
which others (even those they met a little before) call Superstition, Heresy,
Idolatry, so worship they the Lord-God of their Fathers. Now what confusion is
here like to be? especially since no discords swell higher, than those that are
maintained by dissenters in Religion; and where Conscience (whether rightly
informed, or deluded) is called in to abet the quarrel. In such cases there are
bella plusquam civilia, inveterate, and irreconcilable jarrs, here a company
of Guelphs, and yonder as many Gibelines. Several Congregrations will be but as
York and Lancaster, one to the other. Consider now my Brethren; whether this
motion of yours is like to come from the God of peace and order, from that
spirit which says as much as possibly ye can, live peaceably with all men: As
if the Apostle would have us to strain our selves, and not to stand upon gnats
and petty provocations; that so we may preserve the bonds of peace. Does this
spirit prompt you to promote such courses which are like to crumble the Church
and state into Atoms: And to break our staves into shivers; both that of
beauty and this of bonds -- Hoe ithacus velit, this is that which the common
enemy watches for; such designs, though they setch a compass about, yet in the
conclusion will jump in and concenter with theirs.

Now you are so unkind to the Church and your own native Country, yet can you
blame the supreme Magistrate, whom God has appointed to be our nursing Father;
and has entrusted him with two swords, and with both the Tables of his Law; if
he seeing his Subjects rushing precipitantly, perniciously, as well as
pertinaciously, upon the point of their own ruin does interprose his Authority
and restrain theem, by setting them bounds which they shall not pass.

But I have heard some pleading very vehemently (who would not seem
inconsiderable persons. That in point of policy, those that are in authority
should allow liberty in indifferent things: For this say they would content the
people and tend to their own preservation. Thus we are ready to prescribe to
our Superiors, and are more apt to teach them, than to learn our own duty. We
can tell others what they should do in policy; but we are defective, in that
obedience, which we our selves ought to perform in Conscience; our sovereign
has learned better divinity from his Royal Father, whose memory is blessed and
sweet. (...) P, 298.302.
He has taught him, not to abet any factions in any public discriminations of
Religions, contrary to his own judgment, or to gratify a faction with the
perturbation of the Laws, in which is wrapped up the public interest, and the
good of the community. It seems by the carriage of these men, the King may
yield to them if he please, but they will not submit to him, though it be in
things (in their own apprehension) indifferent. And herein they declare their
non-submission to God himself, who has commanded obedience unto Kings (at
least) in things of this nature: Such persons would have the King confirm the
Atheists objection; Bishop Bromhals Answer to Dr Lamelateir^ p. 128.
to wit that religion is nothing else but an act of policy, though such who are
best versed in Christian policy, have thought -- That a needless alteration
does but diminish the venerable esteem of Religion and lessen the credit of
ancient truths: Luther
Break the ice in one place, ic will crack in more. Semel violata Ecelesiae
concordia, non est finis, neque modus dessention is.

30. Yet you are not satisfied what will become of yourparts if a form be
enjoined? what? must they be suppressed? must swift dromedaries be keptin, and
march at the rate of Snails? Well, it is granted that parts are very necessary
for the Ministers of the Gospel, when they are rightly employed, and not like
fire in the thatch: Learning in such heads, as know not how to weild it does
but make men the more dangerous Heretics, and cursed incendiaries. Let it be
supposed too, that you are the only men of parts, the Cedars in our Lebanon:
That we are Grasshoppers, shrubs, and Ignoramuses in comparison of you; yet will
you disdain to take us along with you? Good-natured children, though some of
them be of riper years, will take their younger Brothers and Sisters by their
hands, and and not run away from them. No doubt but among Jacobs cattle, some
were vigorous, and activer than others, yet he draws them all softly, and top'd
the foremost of them that they might make up one drove. So Marius marched
quadrato agmine, in Rank and File: and though some of his Soldiers might be
more nimble of foot than the rest, yet he was not so raw a General, as not to
discipline his Army, by keeping them together.

40. But if there must be a form of prayer, why is it not continued into our
prayer, as in the reformed Churches abroad? Why is it parcell'd into so many
scraps, and written in such a Lypsian style.

I see you are resolved to dispute, and condemn every thing, wherein your own
hands have not been employed. Had you been so happy as to have been amongst
those Church. Heroes who compiled the Liturgy, you might have directed them to
have drawn it up in a far better manner; but consider who they were that said
it. If we had been in the days of our Forefathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets; you know who said it. Mat.
23.30.
O that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man who has any suit or
cause might come unto me. 2 Samuel 15.4.
Think of that voice which Luther heard, when he was troubled about some
passages of Gods Providence, and thought with himself, that they might have
been ordered better. Martine! Martine! tu valde sapis, sed ego non sum Deus
sequax. Martin Luther! Thou art very wise but God is not at thy beck. This
correction did so so humble Luther, and made him so tractable to Gods will,
that when Melancton was troubled at the affairs of the Church -- He wrote to
him not to trouble himself with the Government of the world. Brithwald Bishop
of Winchester, was troubled in like manner at the expiring of the blood Royal,
and he received a like answer -- Regnum Angliae, Goodwin of the lives of the
Bishops.
Regnum Dei -- The Kingdom of England is Gods in a special manner, and he will
take care that it shall not want a King. Such as have been too pragmatical,
beyond the tether of their proper places and callings, deserve a check from
God; and are as it were, so many Anomala's from men.

Were I so fond of my own judgment, as to lay it in the other end of the
balance, against the determinations of the Church; so as to conclude with my
self, that I could have mended the form of our prayers in any particular (as
that blasphemous wretch said, had he stood at Gods elbow, when he made the
World he could have told him how to have made it better) I should suspect such
a daring thought, as the spawn and injection of the old Serpent: For though I
will not captivate my understanding to any man's Ipse dixit; or suffer my self
to be led away by an implicit Faith, much less embrace the Religion of such as
are uppermost, though it be Turcissime it self; which is as monstrous a
doctrine, as the Title of the Book which holds it forth: Yet in matters of
discipline, order, Government, manner of Worship, where nothing is obtruded
contrary to the word of God, I desire to submit to the wills, and to acquiesce
in the commands of my Governors. And though I were so Eagle-cy'd, as to
discern defects in our Church offices (for it pretends not to be absolute, as
appears by the Preface before the Communion) so they were consistent with
piety; I would not go about to make a rupture in the Church, and stand aloof
off from her communion, unless I might be gratified, in having that amended,
which perhaps some ill humors, or perturbations in my own eyes, represent unto
me to be amiss. For as the Eastern Proverb tells us -- though many things which
I want are dear, yet patience is cheap. So though what I would have, may seem
to me of great consequence; yet the peace and welfare of the Church are far
greater. Those words are very severe wherever they fall: It may, their
impression may be the deeper, when you know the Author -- Schismatics have
light heels, and lighter heads, Mr Merle on Christ's passion p. 207.
that run first out of their wits, and then out of the Church; because it runs
not on the giddy wheels of their vertiginous sanfies. Such as are busybodies,
in putting their hooks into other men's Corn, and meddling in other men's
Provinces, especially in prescribing to their Rulers, they are but Idle
persous. Saint Paul will salve the contradiction: He calls the same persons
busiebodies, and Idle too, 1 Timothy 5.13.

But is it such an unpardonable fault in our prayers that many of them are
short? What think you of ejaculations, are not they prayers? and commonly the
most fervent: There is most of a spiritual Impetus exerted in them: (as those
that have but a short race to run, their strength serves them to run the
faster) And is it not belonging to their very nature to be short? What think
you of all the prayers mentioned in Scripture? were not Moses, Hezekiah, David,
Daniel, nay Christ himself as able as any of us, to lengthen out their prayers?
yet where have they left us any pattern upon Record? of prolix protracted, and
volumnious prayers? except you will say the Book of the Psalms are so. But then
why do you sit at the reading of them? Is that a seemly posture for prayer, and
praises? we read that Paul and Silas prayed at midnight; Saint Paul preached
until midnight Acts 20.7. but I find none praying so long together. That prayer
of our Saviors Jo. 1.7. is the longest I can think on at present. Yet though I
read no long prayers in Scripture, I read of them but with a sharp spit, on
black brand before them in three of the Evangelists: Woe unto you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you devour Widows houses, and for pretense make
long prayers: Or as some read it -- Simulantes orationem longam: Not praying
long, but fainting and counterfeting the doing so. That under the pretense of a
long grace they might eat the greater dinner, in swallowing Widows houses at a
bitt: Widows houses did I say? I wish that some under this pretense, had not
thought to have taken the houses of God into possession; had not the gobbets
been too hard of digestion; had not the great Paterfamilias and Landlord of
these houses, granted David's imprecation against such sacrilegious cormorants
-- O my God! make them like unto a wheel! that is; making them so giddy, that
they let go their hold.

If we came with a good stomach, I mean with such a Christian appetite, and
disposition of soul, as we ought to do, when we join together in prayer; the
shortness would not offend us, but rather prevent that tediousness, which is
too incident to our flesh and blood, in our devotions, and a means to make them
new, fresh, and vigorous, at every period. As after Moses had been praying in
the Mount, Exol. 12.7.
his hands began to be heavy; had not Aaron and Hur held them up. It is not so
easy (as some account it) to wind up the soul to an heavenly pitch, and to
keep it at that bent for any duration of time: Sure I am, the best of Gods
people have complained of coolings, slacknings, and distractions in this case;
and after their prayers, could even have cast stones at themselves, and beat
upon their own breasts, when they have reflected upon their languishing
devotions. Therefore the shortness of our prayers, and the peoples responses
are so many helps to our infirmities; as so much Cork or as so many bladders to
keep us from sinking into the Gulf, or dead sea of a lither, and dull kind of
oscitancy. Then we have time time pause, and take breath with Sampson to check
our selves, or with the Cocks to clap our wings, that so with the greater
alacrity and activity of spirit we may fall on again.

Bishop Gauden thought it most heavenly music (when he preached at the Temple)
to hear the unanimous Answers of that honorable Assembly, every one bearing a
part in the public prayers; this is (...) (in the Apostles language (to
inflame one the other with fire from heaven. When prayers are continued into an
extraordinary length, it falls out many times, as when Saint Paul was long a
preaching, some like Eutychus will fall into a deep sleep until they be taken
up for dead. Act. 2.9.


As for our being just the same with other Churches abroad in every punctilio;
it can neither be expected by them. nor performed by us. We allow them their
Christian liberty, without censuring them for that. Wherein they differ from us
in circumstantials; and those that have been even pillars amongst them, have
been a^ their Dabimusque vicissim. They have not not only commended, but have
wished for the same discipline and manner of worship among themselves, were it
consistent with the condition of their affairs.

Were I in some foreign Church said the learned Bishop of Worcester (I heard
it from his own mouth) where it were the custom to kneel at the Creed, Dr.
Prideaux.
I would conform to that Church; and shall not we condescend to the practices
of our own Church, which are both lawful, and warranted by the best authority
of the Nation? That our prayers are lawful appears by some of your own
concessions: For you say, you should not be against them, were they joined in
one: whereas Magis and Minus vary not the species of any thing; so neither does
the length, or shortness of it. A short line is a line as well as a long ones
only the length of things many times, does but dwindle them into weakness, as
plate, the more it is beaten out the thinner it is, and rarifaction in nature
swells the same matter into a greater bulk, but withal impairs its strength.
There is more worth in a Diamond, than in a whole Mountain of rubbish-stone.
The less the eye is, the sharper the fight: And in the little compacted heart
of a Lion there is most of boldness, and courage. Nature is maxima in minimis,
it shows most of its skill in things of smallest quantity, or (as Saint Austin)
Deus non parvus in parvis, Gods wisdom and power are not small in the smallest
things. -- Major in exiguo Regnabiteor pore virtus --


The Greek proverb also is often too true -- (...). And may not the Publicans
short prayer, Lord bemerciful to me a sinner! be more massy, and effectual,
than the bablings of the long winded Pharisees.

This objection is more unreasonable yet: for as it is said of the Scriptures,
There are depths for the Elephant to swim, and fords for the Lambs to wade:
Some things so mysterious that they may puzzle the most subtle and angelical
Doctors; some things so plain; that a novice may run and read them: Milk for
babes, and stronger meat for men of riper years. So in our Liturgy. There are
some prayers more concise in consideration of our infirmities, which are apt to
tire in running a longer race of devotions; and there are others more large, as
that for the Catholic Church, etc. to exercise their more Eagle-like wings;
who are able to soar higher, or fetch a wider compass without resting, or
pausing by the way.

I read indeed of Nazianzene and Basil, that they fasted so long, until they
became so many skeletons. And Saint Bernard did pray so much night and day,
donec genua sustinere Corpus non possent, until he was not able to go, until
his knees as Eus^bius says of Saint James) were like those of Elephants. Here
was Nimietas Sancti fervoris, Est discretio non tam virtus quam quaedam Auriga
and mod^rat i^ virtutum. Bernard Ser. 49. in Cant.
an immoderate zeal overflowing all banks, without any judicious timeing of
what is sacred. God would not have us to Sacrifice our selves in the Letter,
but in the Allegory, by offering him a reasonable service: As we must not eat
until we nauseate our meat, but give off with an appetite; so our God expects
not that we should pray until we surfeit with an Honeycomb, and make the
exercise of Religion a very drudgery, like rowing in a Gally; He knows better
whereof we are made. There were a company of praying Heretics in former ages,
who abused those words of the Apostle, pray always. Religion was never
intended to oppress the spirits of men; but to refresh and ravish them -- Vt
samelici ad delicias conveniamus; that we may still be longing to appear before
the presence of God. Fervor discretionemerigat, and discretio fervorem Regat.
Our zeal must excite our Judgment, Bernard Ser. 23. in Cant.
and our Judgment must moderate our zeal.

50 I find that the Commissioners chosen out of your selves, to treat about the
Common Prayers, at the Sav^y, have proposed an alteration of several passages:
And I find that your requests are gratified in several particulars; such as
were backed with any show of reason: As in the offices of Marriage, Churching
of Women, Burial, and in the declaration of the ground of kneeling at the
Sacrament, and in other instances. Now who would have thought but good-natured
men should have come some few steps toward an happy accommodation? Yet you
stand like so many marble pillars, without moving one foot; as if you were
resolved (after all these concessions) not to abate the least punctilio. Let
the Church sink or swim; if you may not have your wills. As David said of his
dead child, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. So we may say --
we may come to you, but you will not move toward us. Which calls to mind the
like disposition in some of your persuasion, who came to Queen Elizabeth and
petitioned to be dispensed withal concerning the Cross. See Dr. Jo. Burg^^.
The Queen readily granted their request upon condition they would yield
obedience to other things: But at last they told her plainly, they would not
leave so much as a hoof behind. How came the same spirit into you from them? or
how came the spirit in those members which once sat at Westminster. First, they
must have Straffords blood, and one would have thought that Sacrifice should
have atoned and asswag'd all growing fears; but afterward they must have a
Triennial Parliament. Yet all this was nothing, they must have the Militia too.
Thus it was with them, and it is with you, one concession (as it is in
victories) is but Gradus futurae, a step to another. you see what slender hopes
of condescension you afford as on your parts.

60. It is not my purpose to write a rationale upon the body of the Liturgy, or
to anatomise it in its several parts. That Is performed already by more dextrous
hands. As Christ told the Glutton, desiring that one might be sent to his
Brethren, to forewarn them that they came not into that place of torment: They
had Moses and the Prophets. If they would not hearken to them; neither would
they believe, though one should rise from the dead. So you have Hooker,
Hammond, etc. If these can get no audience, what shall he do that comes after
the King? If an Apostle should rise out of his Grave, or an Angel drop from
Heaven, and assure you that you may lawfully use the Common Prayers; I much
question whether some of you would believe them.

Yet your objections against our prayers are so light, thin, and scanty, that I
cannot find any rational man, to insist upon them, as so momentous, or
Tanta-Mount, as to justify their noncompliance with them here, or dare trust
their power, to shield them from the Articles and cross interrogatories of a
greater Bishop, at another day of visitation: Therefore most of you are like
Squerrils skipping from one thing to another as if you were afraid to stand
your ground, or trust to any of your Forts: Like sick men, tumbling now on this
side, now on that. Would you pitch upon any particulars in our prayers, and say
-- Hie figo baculum -- Hie murus Aheneus -- pointing at those things in them,
which are absolutely sinful, and which will wound Conscience, regulated by the
word of God: Then you must either be answered, or else we must desist from our
practice: for we cannot do so great wickedness and sin against God. But where is
the Champion, that entered these lists? If there has been any who has not
received sufficient answers, I must profess my own ignorance.

Porphyry and Julian found many things in the Scriptures to cavil at, and open
their mouths wide against. But who thinks the worse of those Luminaries, the
Prophets and Apostles, because such dogs barked at them? And if the Divine
Oracles have been exposed to such Panthers; what wonder is it that what is of
humane composure, though never so exactly framed, be carp'd at by Aristarchus
his offspring.

I remember some years since a form of prayer of your own modelling peeped out
into the World, and it was damned by many of your selves, before it had wiped
off the sweat of the press, whereas ours has stood out against the tempests
and shakings of virulent tongues, for many years. (I had almost said ages) And
were men but so ingenious to promote a peaceable order in the Church, as they
are watchful to find knots in bulrushes, and to torture their brains to find
scruples in what is most plain; they might without any startling, or
affrightments, apply themselves to a conscionable use of the same Strange! that
men should be so jea lous, that a Serpent should lurk under every leaf. As if
our Governors and Fathers were so unnatural as to give us scorpions instead of
eggs: lay trains to blow us up: Rats bane to poison us, and gins to ensnare us.
Had we but a due latitude of Candor, and charity toward others, or understood
our own happiness That we may take things in the Lyturgy, in the best sense me
can: Dr. Sparks p. 58.
As King James declared at the conference at Hampton Court: and is still to be
supposed, that the same liberty is virtually allowed by our Gracious Sovereign:
Sure these billows, and waves would cease roaring.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Salvation of Infants dying after Baptism.
THe position concerning Children Baptized -- That if they dye before actual
sin committed they shall be undoubtedly saved, does much offend you though it is
no part of the Lyturgy, enjoined to beread at any time. But some of you say
it is such a doctrine as is purposely set down, to bring in Pelagianism,
Arminianism, Popery and I know not what.

Thus you are still afraid of shadows, and by your active fancies frame such
chymera's of danger, which have no footing in nature. That this assertion is no
new invention, or addition of our times, Dr. Ward will inform you: In his
determinations p. 50.
who affirms that it was anciently set down in the Rubric before confirmation:
And he does as soundly prove in the same place -- that Infants Baptized are
without doubt justified, Romans 8 30
and if justified, then they shall be also glorified: for the Apostle will by
no means sever these two, and I hope you will not say; this grave and eminent
Divine was either Pelagian, Arminian or Papist. I hope you have the like
charity for Bishop Davenant; De Justitis Habituali Cap. 7. p. 233.
yet he will tell you that the guilt of Original sin is presently taken away in
Baptism: though the contagion of it remains and dies by parcels. And if the
guilt, or damning power of sin be taken away, sure such Infants as dye before
they have contracted any new guilt, shall not be damned; and will it not
necessarily follow then that they shall be saved? Except you will maintain a
third place, A limbus Infantum, betwixt both. This Doctrine was part of Luthers
Creed. I believe says he, that Infants Baptized, s^ in prima aetate extincti
sint, Class so cundd p. 1^3.
salvatos esse. And long before him, Saint Jerome tells us; Vetus Adam in
lavacro totus moritus, novus cum Christo suscitatur in Baptismate. Apollogia
adversus Rufinum. p. 212.
Perit choicus nascitur super Coelestis. Shall such as are Baptized be buried,
and rise again with Christ; and shall they not ascend into Heaven after him,
Col. 2.12.

But pray tell me; was there not a reason, that this part of Catholic
Doctrine, should be revived? was not Baptism too much vilified in your days?
not only in the bold administration of it, by those who were never lawfully
ordained and appointed thereunto: But also by a cursed indifferency, whereby
many persons began to be careless of Water Baptism, as they called it, as if at
best it did but serve as the marking an Horse for a Common: as if it were an
empty sign without a seal: Was it not time then to vindicate the power and
efficacy of this blessed Sacrament from such encroachments? and to rub off this
moss which was growing over it? As Saint Paul magnified his office most, and
gloried in his education, sufferings, visions, when impostors and false
Brethren went about to debase him. The Primitive Christians put the cross into
their Banners, and made a show of it openly, when the Heathens did most of all
reproach it. As if by a kind of an Antiperistasis ' other men's scorn did but
add to their honorable esteem of it. This I take to be the reason, why the
Ancients are so voluminous against Heathen-Worship, and such Heretics as
depraved the Doctrine of the Trinity, and say so little concerning our
differences with the Papists, or among our selves; because that kind of
Idolatry did most infest and assault the Church, and these controversies were
not yet brought forth by Satan's Mid wifery in those days.

Object. But if Infants dying after Baptism are saved, then those that dye
before Baptism are damned.

Sol. Here is a desperate sequel: There Is no thing in our Articles of
Religion, Canons, or Lyturgy to make it good; no such dur^ patres Infantum in
our Church. What though Baptism be the ordinary means of salvation? Yet who
ever affirmed that God is a Physical Agent, or tied him up to the use of means?
Such secrets we leave to the Lord who acts most freely, and graciously. We are
so far from passing sentence on poor Infants dying without Baptism, that we
are ready to say with Calvin: If none can be saved but such as are Baptized,
Necesse erit Retrahi latronem de Regno Dei: The Theif must be thrown out of
Paradise. Epist. 244.


CHAP. X. How Infants are Regenerated in Baptism.
HAd those two or three lines concerning the salvation of Infants been left
out, yet you would have been as angry, so long as the word Regenerate is
retained in this service; allthough the words immediately following -- And
grafted into the body of Christ's Church, -- and again -- Incorporated into the
boly Church, -- may seem to such as are peaceable, and willing to take things
in the most candid sense, to import no more, but that by Baptism a door is
opened into the Church, and we thereby enrolled into the Album, or blessed
Register, of Gods people: accounted in the number of the (...) such as are
discipled for the Kingdom of Heaven, and so distinguished from other Nations of
the World or if you would but have the patience to take a distinction along
with you, it might prove a Salvo to this doubt.

Actual regeneration is when we come to years of understanding: Dr. John
Burges on Baptismal regeneration.
But it is no absurdity to say -- that such as are Baptized, are regenerated
with Potential, Habitual, Passive, or Initial Regeneration, which takes away
the guilt of Original sin: These are Regenerate act u primo, in that the seed
of regenerating grace is sown and planted in their hearts; but not in Actu
secundo, until they be in a condition of bringing forth the fruit thereof. As
Infants have a rational soul, but exercise not any rational acts, until some
years have passed over their heads. Hence it is that Baptism is called the
washing of Regeneration, and is also compared to Noah's Ark, because it saves us
from the deluge of Gods wrath, Tit. 35. 1 Pet. 3.21.
by wafting and transplanting us into the Harbor of Christ's death, or as the
Apostle speaks, Baptizing us into one body. This is the meaning of that
Prophecy from the mouth of John the Baptist, 1 Cor. 12.13.
He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Not as if the whole
efficacy of Baptism did show it self, when it is administered, but some then,
Mat. 3.11.
some afterward: In this sense I understand Basil the great -- The whole life
of man is the time of Baptism, that is, (...). P. 187.
to show forth its energetical virtue in. The Ancients are full in asserting
the power of Baptism; they call such as are Babtiz'd (...) such as were
illummated from above. (...) the very Infants are influenced with the grace of
Baptism. And Cyril of Jerusalem advertised such as came to be Baptized, Justin
Martyr p. 424. p. 16.
that they did not come (...), to naked water, but together with the water,
(...). And Saint Jerome calls it Secundam Nativitatem, Epist ad Gerontia^ p. 91.
our second birth. Therefore Constantine thought himself so happy when
Baptized, that when others wished him a longer life, Eusebius p. 168.
he thought himself then to have attained true life, and so was willing then to
sing his Nune dimittis, Epist 23.
before he had committed any after sins. I shall here conclude with the words
of Saint Austin -- As for those that are not contentious, this answer is
sufficient; but to those that are peaceable and ingenious this is more than
enough.

CHAP. XI. Concerning Godfathers and Godmothers.
THat scruple about Godfathers and Godmothers, I am even ashamed to mention.
For though there is not the same necessity now as when Heathenism was more
rife; Isa. 8.2.
yet how can a Covenant be well entered into without some Sponsors? Luk 1.59
How might this Church-ordinance (not to speak of those texts of Scripture
which may seem to countenance it) contribute toward the virtuous education of
Children, especially where Parents are either dead or negligent, were the first
institution hereof rightly observed; and did these stipulators, or side
jussors, conscionably perform their duties and promises. But we are still apt
to accuse and traduce the usages of the Church, when the fault is in our
selves. We are most of us for Infant Baptism, yet we grudge that these tender
babes should be brought upon other men's feet (and as Saint Austin goes on) that
they should make confession by other men's mouths; though when they come to age,
the obligation lies wholly upon themselves. This exception is the more
unreasonable, when we consider the reasons brought to enforce it. As

10. They must renounce the devil and all his works, this troubles them. But
can any Christian doubt or demur about this? May not I say what Eliah said --
How long halt ye between two opinions. 1 Kings 1.21.
If the Lord be God follow him; but if Baal (I may add if the Devil.) follow
him For my own part (what Saint Basil says was customary at Baptism) I do
(...) spit at and defy the devil and all his works. But I find there are three
things you much boggle at the renounceing. First the Devil. Secondly, War
against the King. Thirdly, the Covenant.

20. You are afraid to attribute too much to your own strength, by promising
what you are not able to perform. Whereas both the Catechism and Lyturgy have
professedly provided against this fear: for the Catecumen says, -- He will do
as his Godfathers promised -- by the help of God -- And after those solemn
promises (to show that our ability is from above) the Minister prays -- Grant
that he may have power and strength, to have victory, and to triumph against
the Devil, the World and the flesh. Why do you not direct this plea against
Saint Peter, commanding us -- to resist the devil, as well as against our
practice?

CHAP. XII. No good Christian need be offended at the Cross in Baptism.
THe terrible Ghosts which haunts our Fonts, and affrights you from our
Baptismal form, is the Cross; yet if you would but consult the thirtieth Canon
(whither you are referred) this spectrum would loose its vizard: For there it is
declared to be no part of Baptism at all. therefore in our private Baptism it is
not enjoined. -- Strain no more at gnats, and we shall agree. What though the
Cross is abused by the Papists? Make it good if you can that therefore we may
not use it; for so we should not look up to the Sun and Moon, nor warm our
selves by the fire, because some of the Heathens have adored them. That
influence of the Brazen Serpent being destroyed by Hezekiah, carries
Bellerophons letters along with it, I mean its own consutation: Mark this was
done by the King, by Hezekiah. You well know there is great difference betwixt
the Papists using the Cross and ours: they before, we after Baptism they, as an
Operative rite to expel the devil; we only as that which signifies and puts us
in mind of Christ crucified, and that we are not ashamed of a crucified
Savior; and this not Sacramentally (for we own but two) but Morally. You think
it no superstition to tie a string about a child's finger to put him in mind of
his errand: I am sure I have many profitable and wholesome thoughts suggested to
me from the picture of death which hangs in my study before my eyes. We are not
so spiritual as to stand in no need of visible Hieroglyphics. Some Christians
in the Indies were so much convine'd of the usefulness of the Cross, that they
caused it to be burnt with an hot iron in the foreheads of their children. That
as the Jews had their Philacteries upon their Garments, so these carried about
the badge of their profession upon their faces.

It were easy to mind you what opinion Constantine had of the Cross, and how
good Theodosius forbade this sign to be engraven on the Earth, Polydore.
Virgil. p. 450.
or Marble -- Ne hominum pedibus tereretur, lest men should trample upon it.

I cannot but commend that Italian Friar, who preaching concerning the Cross,
held it up and kissed it; yet afterward, to show he did not idolize it, he
brake it to pieces.

You cry out indeed upon significant ceremonies, as if presently they were
Sacraments: as if a Sign were both the genus and differentia, constituting the
essence and definition of a Sacrament: By the same Logic I have heard a punie
Sophister proving a Man to be an Ass, because he is animal. But to me a
Ceremony would be of no use at all, if it were not significant and according to
the Apostles rule, in its kind, tending to edification. Sure none are so gross,
as to think we maintain any Jewish rites, signs of Christ to come in the flesh,
which were all consummated, and abolished at the birth and death of Christ.
This is such a charge as that was against the primitive Christians -- that they
worshipped an Asses head, and eat their own children.

As for the Cross which is called Transient, wherewith men cross themselves
upon occasions, I find Mr. Perkins acknowledging it, Perkins prob.
in the purest times of the Church. And Saint Jerome gives advise and
direction, to a young woman, that she might the beter avoid the temptations of
the unclean spirit, and live a chaste Virgin life ut Crebro signaculo crucis
frontem muniret, Ad demotriadem. p. 67, p. 46.
and the Christian Poet Prudentius treads in the very same steps. Fac cum
vocante somno castum petis cubile
Frontem, locumque Cordis, Crucis figura
Signs: Crux pellis omne crimen.


And whether Christians are not still propense upon emergent dangers, and
affrightments, to renew the same practice; if others were silent, I could give
an experimental testimony: And if as Mr Baxter tells us -- the very naming the
words Jesus Christ, has droven away Witches and Devils; why should it be
thought incredible, that this sign which puts us in mind of Christ crucified,
and may occasion our prayers to him, may not do the like? I know you will blow
away all this with that common blast of Enchantment and Popery. But methinks
since it is most plain, the Cross was used in the Church, when there was no such
thing as Popery heard of in the World, it should be cleared from that
aspersion: for proof hereof, we have the evidence of Tertullian de Resurrec.
Carnis. Origin, Homil. 8. Cyprian Epist. 70.72, 73. Jerome de Hillarione p. 241.
245.

CHAP. XIII: It is no enormity to have Ceremonies about Gods worship.
AS for the other Rites and Ceremonies retained in our Church, which are as few
as in any Church in the Christian world: were you at the stern dictating to us
the Idea's of your own heads, I nothing doubt but we should have more
circumstances in Gods worship than now we have; but perhaps, Cultus divinus non
potest osse sine ceremoniss, licet Ceremoniae non sint pars cultus. Bald. 1138.
neither so apposite, nor ancient, as these we have already. I pray, wherein
are these contrary to Gods word, or declared to be any part of Gods worship?
Bishop Gauden in his preface to Bishop Browwigs Sermons.
or taught for doctrines: They are neither the meat nor sauce of Religion, but
only as the garnish of the dish, to use the words of a reverend Bishop. Sires
agatur non modo frivole sed eliam iniqua, qua nob^ detrimentum adfertur, tamen
sipater out Magistratus preseripserit id faciendum est. Camer de Eccl. p. 370.
Epist. 120.
They are indifferent (you yield) in their own natures; we say so too: Neither
does the injoyning of them alter their intrinsecal condition, but only as to
their outward use we are not so free to use or not to use them, as we were
before; As those things mentioned Acts 15. were some of them lawful in
themselves to be used or forborne; yet after the Synod had determined the
controversies about those indifferent things, then they are called necessary
verse. 28. of that Chapter.

That good man Bishop Hooper did for a time scruple the Surplice; but after
that Bucer, Peter Martyr and Calvin in an Epistle of his had discovered his
weakness unto him, he was not so tenacious of his own conceit, but he yielded
to preach in his Episcopal habit before the King. Book of Martyrs. p. 1367.


If you shall still say, these things are indifferent as to their use,
Conscentia obligatur p^aeceptis Ecclesiae (ij^quae spectant ad ordinem and ad
vitanda scandala) indire Ele quanquam little materia non est in varbo Dei, tamen
finis and ordo, est. Camers de Ecl. p. 371.
after they are commanded; it is all one as if you should say, it is indifferent
whether we obey the King; nay whether we obey God, who commands obedience to
the King.

Since God has left us such a latitude to our Superious of setting things in
order in the Church, and determining what is decent, so long as they entrench
not upon divine Authority, and so by consequence wound not the Consciences of
men; wherein shall we manifest our obedience unto them? (As King James was wont
to say) if not in things of this inferior nature: Especially where they are so
suitable, that good men would not refuse them, were they left to their own
choice; as to kneel at prayer or at the Sacrament, which is delivered by the
Minister praying: To stand at the Creed, and Gospel, to show that we will stand
for the maintenance of them both: To stand at Praises, Himns, Songs of
Thanksgiving (which are branches of prayer) and at that lesser Creed, Glory be
to the Father, and to the Son, etc. Must not God be served with our bodies as
well as our souls? Can those that serve him in spirit choose to express the
zeal of their hearts in the reverential postures of their bodies? As out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; so where there is the heavenly fire of
true devotions in the pantings and regular motions of the Soul, there it will
sparkle out at the eyes, break out at the knees, elevate the hands, and put the
whole body into such a frame, that it will keep time with those secret wheels
and floatings of the soul. Inward and outward worship are but the integral
parts making up the same worship; one without the other is but lame, Jam. 2 26
imperfect, defective. The body without the spirit is dead; and spirit without
the body is but a meagre ghost. Bodily service without the actings of the soul
is but hypocrisy; and these without the other, are oftentimes a spiritual
delusion. Though God calls for the heart, will he have nothing else? Though we
must worship him in Spirit, must not he be worshipped too in truth? because some
superstitious persons lay the greatest stress of Gods service upon bodily
adorations, must we place none at ^t all therein, lest we should be accounted
superstitious? Will a wise man forsake his mear, because a fool calls it by
some ugly nickname? When I see men rude, careless, slovenly, inflexible like
statues, in Gods service, am I uncharitable in judging their offerings to come
from a cold Altar, and to be no better than dead sacrifices. Learned men tell
us -- that (...) which signifies Gods worship comes from (...) a dog, because
as a dog, crouches to his Master, so must we humble our selves in our
devu^addresses unto God. I find Abraham falling on his face and worshipping God
before the Law: And I find the Meathen- Romans, by the very light of nature,
Livie. l. 3.
sweeping their Temples with the hair of their heads, in their applications to
their Gods. And shall not we give God that respect which we would give to some
noble personage, or carthly Prince? Go and offer it to thy Prince, was once an
Ironical check; and may not God still use the same far casm? expostulating with
as much bitterness: would you carry your selves so unmannerly, if you were
either to petition for, or receive a favor from the hands of a King. Mr.
Torshal on Mal. 1.7.


There is less danger in superstition, overvaluing Gods worship, than in
profaneness: I must refer you to my Authors in the Margin, Baldwin. p. 174.
else I shall bear the blame. The exercise of true piety lies in external
worship, and this is called Religion (...).

Hence it is that Salvian so sadly complains -- Minori Reverentia introimus
templum -- we show less respect in Gods house, than we would in a Judges Hall.
Or we go with as little reverence (says the Martyred Archbishop) into the
Temple, as a Tinker and his dog into an Alchouse.

Were our Church cumbred, and even oppressed with so pompous, liveless and
numerous train of Ceremonies, as that of the Church of Rome, which might either
distract, or divert our devotions: Were it with us, as Saint Jerome says it
was per totas Orientis Eccle^^^ throughout all the Eastern Churches (...) they
read the Gospel, Adversus Vigildation. p 121 (...)
Candles were lighted (...) the Sun shined most brightly to testify the
^^^ness of their joy; then you had more colorable pretenses for your
complaints.

But since ours are so few; and so sitted to persons and things; I wish you
would rather submit, and comply with us, than carp and dispute. Show us less of
your morose criticisms, and scrupulosities; but more of your kindly obedience.
You say it is better to obey God than men; I say so too, where the commands of
men interfere with the commands of God: But in this case I must assent (until
you can convince me of the contrary) that those men cannot obey God, that
herein do not obey men, that is, such as are set over them in the Lord.

There is one particular, which does not a little trouble you, either to behold
in others, or make use of your selves, and that is the Surplice, though it be
the very badge of innocence and purity it self, even the figure of that
angellical clothing wherewith we expect to be apparrelled in glory; or if you
will, it may put us in mind of our winding-sheets: Hence it was, that the Queen
of France after the death of her Husband, went clad in white; yet (for all
this) it cannot escape your censorious rod: Polydore Virgil P. 547.
you do allow (as it appears by your practice) a distinction of Ministers from
other men in ordinary habit; therefore you condescend to wear blacks, except
some of you (who in these days of Apostasy) for what reason you know best) who
have transformed your selves into an habit as varigated and speckled as Jacobs
Sheep: The lightness of your dress resembling your fancies, as if you affected
to be great divines in Querpo. So that it is as hard to find you out by your
Apparel, as it is to discern the Romish Priests and Jesuits. And good reason,
for otherwise the deluded people would scarcely believe your cry of
persecution. Yet though many of you are for a distinction of ordinary garments,
you will not allow the same in Sacris. Although (what was said of the Cross
before) this ornament was used in the Church, before any Bishop in the world
challenged an universal head-ship and jurisdiction over the rest. Neither is
the Popish Albe, according to the form of our Surplice, or any way like it; yet
if you have a mind to turn the stomachs of ignorant well-meaning men against
it, then you cloth it with the Livery of Popery, and off it goes with such
silly proselytes for Popish trumpery: Even as Painters and Limners by a sudden
dash of their pencils, can make any figure under their hands ugly and deformed.
Hooker l. 5. p. 242.
Although so far as Papists follow reason and truth, we fear not to follow them.

In older times, when poor Christians were clothed with the skins of beasts,
and were fain to make use of their dons for Temples and places of their solemn
meetings: The Minister officiating had his Superpelliceum, to cover his course
leathern atire, and to grace his ministry in the sight of the people: And I
wish the same reason did not still continue in many places, where the Ministers
revenues are so short, that they will not extend to any other than scandalous
apparel. Now this white garment does not only prevent this offense, but raises
the peoples esteem, even as a Judge or Major of a City are more aweful when
they put on their Robes. However this be now ridiculous in their eyes, whose
spleen is stronger than their brains; and their scorn harder than their
arguments; yet heretofore it was the garb of Noble men, and the Egyptian
Priests looked upon it as most pure, quoniam linum ex terra oritur; but as for
garments made of wool, they looked upon them as profane, quia ab animato
decerpuntur, p. 120, 121.
as Polidore Virgil gives the reason.

I know you will fly to your old refuges.

10. Produce (say you) some Scriptures for this and other Ceremonies; then we
shall observe them. And for an answer, p. 354.
I must refer you to Master Hooker who tells us that all things necessary for
salvation are set down in Scripture; But not all things which concern
Ecclesiastical Policy, and circumstances in Religon. Where had the Gilleadites
any command to erect an Altar? Josh. 22.
or the women of Israel to lament the memory of Jephte's daughter? Judges 11.
yet where the Scripture commands that all things should be done without
scandal decently and to edification; there is a general command for what rites,
we are enjoined to observe: for though the Church as it is the body and spouse
of Christ, wants no external policy: The express word of God is a sufficient
rule: Yet as the Church is a society of men, and a body politic, so it stands
in need of Ecclesiastical constitutions, as much as the State does of civil:
Concerning the 3.
And those bind us to obedience as well as these; bot harising from the same
authority, Innocent Cerem. p. 189.
says Bishop Morton.

20. Another (...) or sanctuary of yours is, that this and other Ceremonies are
offensive to good men: 1. Cor. 8.12.
And the Apostle says, when ye sin against the Brethren, and wound their weak
Consciences, ye sin against God.

If such as are offended at Ceremonies be indeed what they pretend to be, that
is, truly good men, they understand their duty better to God and the King. And
then they cannot be ignorant that the public peace of the Church is more to be
regarded, than the scandal of private Brethren. If my wearing the Surplice, or
using any other Ceremonies, offend any weak persons in my Congregation, I will
endeavor to inform them better: But I dare not be guilty of sacrilege, that I
may give alms; Do evil that good may come on it: I dare not disobey my Mother,
to please my Brethren; or spit in my Fathers face by my disobedience to the
King, to gratify the peoples ignorance, or humor their distempered zeal.

As for those texts of Saint Paul, forbidding us to offend the weak Brethren by
eating of flesh, etc. These relate to those times, when such things as these
were not determined by authority, but men were left to their own liberty: and
in such a case, I would neither use Surplice, or Cross; if thereby I should
offend my weak Brethren. But had Saint Paul lived in our days, when we are
limited and staked down by royal commands; no doubt but he would have practiced
himself those lessons of obedience which he has left in his Epistles for us to
take forth. Although in the Interregnum (as it were) betwixt the Jewish Rites,
Acts 16.3.
and the establishments of the Gospel, he yielded to circumcise Timothy that he
might not offend the Jews. Yet when the Gospel was confirmed, Gal. 5.2.
then he declared that such as were Circumcised, Gal. 2.3.
Christ should profit them nothing: Therefore he would by no means have Titus
circumcised. He well knew that the confronting of establishments, is not only
to throw down the battlements, but even to undermine the very foundations of
the Church. Et utinam probe expenderent, says Calvin: I wish that such persons
as stand for an unlimited liberty, and cast off the yoke of subjection, would
seriously lay to heart, Epist. ad Questiones circa disciplinam Ecclesiae p. 461.
how by his means they contrive the ruin and desolation of the Church.

30. You say 'twas otherwise in the Law, there every pin, every circumstance in
Gods worship was prescribed; but there is this difference in the Law, we were
little children under the pedagogy of it, now we are adulti, A Camer. p. 369.
and enjoy the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free.

CHAP. XIV. Good Subjects may lawfully declare, or swear that it is not lawful
to take up Arms against the King.
THE next Mountain in your way, which you have not faith enough to remove, is,
that you cannot declare it to be unlawful upon any pretense to take up Arms
against the King. And this suggests one true reason, why some of you are so
inveterately bent against the Lyturgy. -- Take it in the words of our Martyred
Sovereign -- One of the greatest faults some men found with the
Common Prayer Book I believe was this, p. 285.
that it taught them to pray so often for me, to which petitions they had not
loyalty enough to say Amen. This is such a Shibboleth that some of your lisping
tongues are not able to pronounce: And this discovers that the main spring, or
primum mobile of your hearts, hurries you another way. And herein we are the
more confirmed, since many of you have chosen to flitt your habitations, and
expose your wives and children to the mercy of the Parishes wherein they dwell;
rather than take that oath of fidelity (which in effect is no more than the
oath of Allegiance in other terms) which the wisdom of the Parliament thought
fit, in these times of danger, to impose upon you that they might make a trial
how your pulse beats, or how you stand affected to the Kings welfare, and the
Kingdoms peace: Whether you are likely to follow the right line of David, or
revolt into the tents of Jereboam: And I wish that former manners had not
occasioned this Law.

Who is ignorant that one Sinon within the walls is more dangerous than a whole
Armado without? one Doeg or Achitophel at home, than Armies of professed
enemies abroad? therefore it is a Proverb in some Countries -- God deliver us
from our friends; that is such as do salute, and stab us under the fifth rib at
the same time. And may not Kings in such a case, use lawful means and take
security even by the Ordale of an oath? to distinguish chaff from wheat: bran
from flower: who are Israelites indeed; such as will obey Gods Vicegerent for
Consciscience sake; and such as are Subjects in an abusive signification (per
Antiphrasin) because they will be no longer subject, than his command does
comply with their own wills. If he cross them, let him look to himself. To your
Tents O Israel! we have no part in David.

Now although such persons as these are (who can never be good Christians,
because ill Subjects) will make as little Conscience of oaths, as they do of
their allegiance; yet the best of Kings have bound their Subjects unto them, by
this kind of ligature. 1 Chronicles. 11.3.
When David came to the Crown, the Elders of Israel came to him to Haebron, and
made a Covenant with him there. And when Solomon succeeded his Father, 1 Chronicles.
29.24.
all the Princes and mighty men submitted themselves unto Solomon the King; or
as it is in the Hebrew -- they gave their hand under Solomon; which was the
custom, Genesis 24.9.
or manner of swearing among the Hebrews; Ephesians. 8.2.
as is apparent by Eliazar putting his hand under Abraham's thigh, and swearing
to him: The Annotators therefore do with good reason understand Solomon
speaking of this oath of fidelity, Icounsel thee to keep the Kings commandment,
and that in regard of the oath of God. Hence it is that some of the more sober
dissenters amongst you, being convinced of this truth, and foreseeing the
scandal they should gain, had they refused, have submitted to the present oath;
unto whom I could make this address -- Go on my brethren mastering and subduing
all the remaining difficulties, until ye arrive both at the Penand the Pulpit.
I hope that you having passed this Iron-gate, you will make no stop until we all
meet in Navi Ecclesiae, in the body of the Temple; that we may not be Almost,
but Altogether such Subjects, Christians, Ministers, as may most advance our
Masters service. Rumpantur ilia! let their bowels (like Judas's) gush forth,
who rather like Devils gnash with their teeth, than with Angels rejoice at the
return and reception of such brotherly coadjutors -- That Is a poor surmise,
that we are afraid lest your glory should eclipse our names: No your glory
shall be ours. As Saint Paul rejoiced at the flourishing of the Romans, Romans
1.8.
that it was spoken of through the world; so the luster of your parts,
industry, piety, and integrity, shall be so far from offending my weak eyes,
that I shall exult with joy, that my Master is so well provided with servants;
that I am the meanest of those that wait at his Altar; and of the lowest form
in the school of the Prophets.

But I must break off this delightsome theme, and come to that more unpleasing
task, of reasoning with those who refuse to give this assurance of their
loyalty to their Prince. Sirs, where is the Thorn that pricks you? Are you
troubled that your distinctions are cut off? that your old Avenews and
Postern-Gates are in this Declaration and oath now shut up? Are there not
Evasions, or starting-holes left open? Are you to be so cloistered up, that you
can make no excursions? It Is no wonder if men sweat, that are so strait laced;
if the waters roar that are penned up with such dams.

Lets look back and see what pretenses there were for an unnatural war. p.
141.
I may usher in this discourse as Jerome did his concerning the Arrians,
Claudite aures, qui audituri estis, ne tantae impietatis vocibus polluamini.

10. Some thought it a sufficient ground of war, to remove evil Counselors,
that is, all faithful Hushai's, from the King. All loyal souls that trembled at
listing up their hands against the Lords anointed, were cursed with bell, book
and candle -- Curse ye Meroz, etc.

20. Others told us, they might fight against the King, if it were for the
cause of Religion to purge the Church from idolatry, and superstition. Master
Baxter seems to go this way in his Book of rest; as if Nero and Claudius had
been Saints, and there had been no idolatry or superstition in theird ayes;
when Saint Paul and Sain Peter did so vehemently press obedience to these
Emperors. As if subjects had as great a latitude as the Pope himself, in ordine
ad spiritualia. I not this the same which Job inveighs against to contend for
God.

30. Others were so modest, p. 258. The Devil of Rebellion does commonly turn
him self to an Angel of reformation. (...) p. 297.
as to say, they fought not against the King, but such bloody, ruffianly
Cavaleers as were commissionated by him. As if the same God who commanded
obedience to the King, had not also commanded submission to those that are sent
by him.

40. Others told us quite contrary (for like those false witnesses which, came
in against Christ, they did not agree among themselves) it is true they fought
against the Kings person; Job 13.8.
but it was by his own commission; that is, By virtue of his own Authority then
residing in some Members of Parliament. Good God! what pretenses were invented?
what Jesuitical tricks and distinctions were now set on foot? to palliate and
gloss over, a most rotten and devilish design: Yet all too little, too cover
that cloven foot, which appeared to men of piety, peace, and heavenly wisdom at
the very first: But afterward this cloud of the bigness of a man's hand, waxed
bigger and bigger, until it darkened our English heavens, and dissolved into a
shower of Royal blood. O hear and fear, and do no moae so wickedly. Let former
experience dis^ipline you into an abhorrency of war against the King, and
restrain you from all those methods and Premises, which may infer the like
catastrophe.

Who can blame the King? if desiring to live long, and to see good days
(former transactions considered) to make a decree, that it shall be declared to
be unlawful to take up arms against himself, or those that are commissionated
by him, upon any pretenses whatsoever. And since the lines of our peace and
happiness, as to Church and State, do meet and concenter in him as our Common
Father; is it unreasonable for Subjects to swear they will not endeavor the
alteration of Government in the Church and State? Who would think that any
Natives of a Land, professing themselves the followers of Christ (who in the
days of his humiliation, was obedient to Caesar, that he wrought a miracle to
give him his due) and expecting protection from a lawful Prince, should once
demur whether they should make this declaration, or take this Oath? Qui
deliberant desciverunt, such as doubt of this, have even shak'd off the yoke of
subjection. Mistake me not I am no virulent Tertullus, to draw up an indictment
against you: I accuse you not. But as Christ told the Jews there was one that
accused them even Moses: so there is one that accuses you by upbraiding you;
bestowing on you some Caeca verbera, and putting you sometimes into a cold
sweat; I mean your own Conscience. I must tell you too before we part, that if
upon this account you court your own sufferings, I would have you to consider,
whether ye suffer as Christians for righteousness sake, And for well doing or
whether you are buffeted for your faults. Shall I commend you for this? I
commend you not. If you expect a coronet, or garland due to confessors; if I
might plat the wreaths, they should be of Nettels, and Hemlock. I should as
soon set the crown of martyrdom upon the head of Thomas a Becket, or Sir Thomas
More, as adorn their foreheads who refused to put in caution for their fidelity
and due subjection to their Prince. If such persons would be accounted
loyalists, let them be so: But then let me have leave to derive their pedigree,
or assign the reason of their denomination; and that is, because they are of
their Father Ignatius Loyala. It is a wonder to me, that we should be adeo
Histricasi (to use Saint Jeroms words) so prickley, sharp and full of
invectives against the Jesuits, for maintaining the lawfulness of murdering
protestant Princes, and yet the same men should refuse to declare and swear --
That it is unlawful to take up Arms against the King upon any pretense
whatsoever.

I wish these recusants would consider what difference there is, betwixt taking
up Arms against the King (if the success fall on their side) and un Kinging (I
had almost said un manning) of him I confess I have set my eyes as steady as I
could, and I have strengthened them too with the spectacles of several
Histories, and I can discern but very little -- Not as if all that engaged in
the last War had this design; far be it from me to be so uncharitable: For as
some followed Absalom against David, in the simplicity of their hearts; 2. Sam
15.11.
so many through the prematurity of age and judgment, persuasions of relations,
and the enchantments of fair pretenses, did purchase their own repentance: p.
303.
and they that are sensible of their former errors will no doubt, be most
faithful and loyal afterward, said the Father of our present Solomon.

I cannot but admire at Master Baxter who acquainting us with his activity in
the late War, tells us at last that it is not his intent to determine which
party was in the right: Book of Rest. p. 258.
As if he had been fluctuating all that while twixt wind and water, or at least
did not then remember the Apostles (...) Let every one be fully satisfied in
his own mind; Romans 145
sure he was not ignorant of that maxim: Suppose the case had been so doubtful
as he makes it, yet in doubtful cases -- praesumitur pro Rege, and lege -- and
which is all one -- subdit tenentur in favorem legis judicrre. Be Bishop
Bramhals vindication of the Church of England p. 112.
Better obey than disobey doubtingly, because as my Author quotes it out of
Saint Austin -- Reum facit principem iniquitas imperandi, Innocentem subditum
ordo serviendi.

Had I been near this Gentlemen when he was in this libration of suspense, I
would have put the fifth commandment, together with two or three choice texts
out of Saint Paul and Saint Peter's Epistles into the other scale; and then
questionless he would have been the better able to determine which party was in
the right.

And since I have named Master Baxter: if I durst, I would (Cum tanti viri
venia) be his (...) (as Saint Jerome speaks in an Epistle of his) and further
his active industry in a double performance.

10. To rev^ew his political doctrines; especially those that are gathered
together by an eminent hand: And if after a second scanning, or weighing them
in the balance of the Sanctuary, he finds them too light -- That he would deal
with them as I presume he has done with several of his Theological Aphorisms;
even abandon and dis inherit them. What a glorious work would this be?
conducing to the benefit and edification of the Church; un-deceiving and
disintangling many poor captivated souls, more than many other swelling
Volumes. In so doing he would not only resemble the great Bishop of Hippo, but
the great Doctor of the Jews. This would not only be to profess and print, but
to live that evangelical doctrine of self-denial: This disowning our own
infallibility, will with Achan give glory unto God; Josh 7.19
by taking shame unto our selves, A^s^in. Re racta.
Qui primas habere non potuit sapientiae, secundas habeat parts modestiae.

20. Since in his five disputations, he allows of a Lyturgy, and of those
things which are most disputable in ours; Nay for peace sake (he says) we must
obey inconvenient circumstantials in Gods worship. p. 4^7.
And in his safe way, he acknowledges that the Governors of the Church have a
decessive power in things undetermined in Scripture: and where he has resided
(I have informed) it has been his constant practice to frequent our
Church Service even at the beginning of it. P. 193.
Is it any breach of manners, or disparagement of a man's reason to desire this
person, to reconcile his principles upon Record, and his practice at present,
to his refusal of an active submission to the Laws and Orders of the Church and
state: that he might act that part of the ministry himself, which he seems to
approve in others, or if he resolve to be Miles emeritus before his time, in
quitting his ministerial station: Why does he not give the World some solid
succinct, and (if it were possible) Apodictical account of his so doing, such
as he will o^n for argumentative, directly grounded upon Scripture rightly
understood, or upon right regulated reason: which may be able to bear up such a
fabric, or superstructure of such a desertion; not like that loose paralytick
discourse given to the Kings Commissioners at the Savoy, written rather
Rhetorically ad captandum populum -- to insinuate into vulgar capacities, than
logically to evince the Hypothesis contended for: strip it of its multifarious
fallacies, ungrounded surmises, and erroneous suppositions; and it will not
only be a massy body of flesh, without either bones, or nerves to support and
join it together; but Sine succo and sanguine, a very skeleton; I had almost
said some ghastly ghost.

Is it not equitable, that men should render an account of their judgment and
practice, as well as of their faith? that a protestant Minister should give
reasons for his abjuring his public ministry, or self-suspension; as well as
Campian did of his Apostasy. If any strange at this pressing upon Master
Baxter in particular, I must without any Ambages, return this clear answer:
Because in these parts where providence has cast the lot of my residence;
there are many unsatisfied brethren, who grew up either under his shadow, or
were so influenced and biased by him; that either they hold off from the
public service of the Congregation; or else are very cold, and halting in
joining with it. What an effectual expedient might it prove? how might it tend
to uniting us in Gods service? that so we might worship him with one heart, one
voice, one shoulder; If such an (...), A leader of the people, would come but
off his recluse, Et sibilaret illos, would labor with them by example,
personal advice, proxies or emissaries of letters, that they would lay their
shoulders to the common yoke of devotion; draw evenly, soberly and unanimously
in the worship of God. Cursed be that credit, which does but with the more ease
draw men (like decoye's) into perdition. p. 469
No sort of men (says Polydore Virgil) is more Pestilential and pernicious
than preachers; Si adgratiam conciones ad populum habeant: Quippe ubi Semel
Sanctitatis nomen sint adepti, tum maxim nocent, quia ijs maxim Creditur. May
my reputation be blasted! sullied! obscured! rather than by any such spurious
light, I should allure men into bogs, gulphs, labyrinths: leading them from the
waters of comfort: The excellency of Carmel and Sharon: The fragrant valley of
Achor, into parched Heathes and howling Wildernesses; until they are not only
scratched, tattered; and peeled, but even torn and rent with the briars and
thorns of wild opinions, and wasting errors.

When once men leap out of the cape of the Church; and run from under her
wings; they are presently exposed to ravenous Vultures and Harpyes, impressed
by the Prince of the air: and like him, that went from Jerusalem to Jericho,
they fall among theives. They sink into the bottom of the sea like a stone:
Their heads will be wrapped about with weeds of delusion; that leave Nineveth
to go to Tarshish. Had men kept close to the Church of England, they needed not
have stumbled at swearing -- That it is not lawful to take up arms against the
King.

I must tell the whole Chorus of my dissenting brethren; that this very fly is
enough to spoil the whole box of their pretended ointments. Who can choose but
nauseare that way of discipline, which startles at renouncing war against the
King? Were there no other reason this were enough to incline me to that
resolute soliloquy Enternot thou my soul into your secrets: This is such an
infatuation as discovers more of your nakedness, than I am willing to take
notice of: lest I should (like flies) stick upon a sore place; and write a
Satyr instead of a persuasive. If we love not our brother whom we have seen;
how shall we love God, whom we have not seen? And if we obey not the King, who
is a visible God, how shall we obey God who is an invisible King? this
distemper is the more dangerous, in that it is even incorporated into the very
complexion of your great Diana not only at home but abroad. It is accompanied
with an affectation, of levelling the old standards, and erecting new ones: In
sober-sadness; it has been accompanied with prodigions unkindness toward
Princes. As ungrateful neighbors will scarce clear themselves in this
particular. In France I find the King of Navarre, to be so^^ far offended with
Bezs's heat at Poisy, and with others that ran riot, Davila 1.20.
abusing their liberty, that he left them and made a league with the Duke of
Guise. I am loath to go so far as Geneva, and turn over the History of
transactions there. I shall rather return to our Brethren of Scotland. After
Bothwel that cursed regicide had murdered the King; Sporswood.
he was not only favored by such like Ministers, in Scotland; but also
ressetted (to use my Authors words) by their confederates here in England, when
King James discoursed with Mr Robert Bruce, about calling Huntley to Court; he
told him he should either lose Huntley, or himself; take his choice: Other of
his brother Ministers being convented before the King for their traitorous
words, they refused to appear, saying -- that the Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets alone, for what is spoken in the Pulpit for the
advancement of Christ Could any men more resemble Dathan and Abiram? If the
King went an hunting, or kept a feast; when they thought it fitting to fast,
the Pulpit must convey their ill resentment to the people; and when some
advised the King to let them alone, for so they would soon render themselves
odious: True said he, so I would had I a mind to ruin the Church. Thus that
most reverend and impartial Spotswood. But from the beginning it was not so.
Tertul. p. 43.
The primitive Christians looked upon their Emperors, as subject only to the
power of God, a quo sunt secundi, p. 91. Ibid.
post quem primi; ante omnes and super omnes deus. And again, Christianus
nullius est Hostis, nedum imperatoris. Go and search the prisons (says the
same Author) whet her any traitorous Chistians are there: and this I take to be
the main reason why Cristianity did increase so fast in those days; because
Christians were so obedient and peaceable that they were permitted to reside in
any Kingdom.

Valentinian told his Army -- penes vos fuit mili^es committere mihi habenas
imperij, Theodit H^st Ec^l. l. 4.
cum nondum essem imperator; sed in possessione imperij cum sim, non vestrum,
sed meum fuerit gerere reipcuram. And Grotius tells us, De Jure Belli. p. 57.
That the Kings of Egypt though they violated their promises to their Subjects;
yet Accusari vivi non poterant, sed mortuis abjudicabatur solemnis sepultura.
Saint Austin gives the reason -- Qui regnum Auguste, ipsi Neroni commissit: De
Civit. dei lib. 5.
Qui Constantino Christiano, Juliano Apostatae Regnandi dedit potestatem.
Optatus observes, p. 63.
that it is said The Lord repented him that he had anointed Saul to be King.
God (says he) could have taken from him that Oylwhich he had bestowed upon
him, sed cum voluit docere, non debere contingi oleum etiam in peccatore, ipse
qui dederat, poenitentiam egit. I know no sin against the second Table set
forth in more bloody colors, than this of disobedience -- it is compounded of
Homicide, Parricide, Christicide, and Deicide. And it is compared to the sin of
witchcraft, where the party indents and covenants with the deyil himself. Who
more fit to teach men the black Art of this sin, than he that practiced it
himself, in aspiring to be as God, as if he would have dethroned the Almighty?
We may see something of his practicing upon Adam; how he tempted him to take
the same course, he had done before him. And indeed every sin he sollicites men
unto, has a vein of rebellion running in it, David well knew, that there was
much of guilt in this sin, when he said, How can I lift up my hands against the
Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Therefore he commanded the Amalekite who had
an hand in Saul's death, to be slain before his eyes. Sheba blowing a Trumpet
against David is styled the son of Belial. Jerome gives the reason, Speed. p.
630.
because he was sine jugo without any yoke of obedience. Those Assasini, which
were sent against Princes at the command of their superiors, were an odious
sect among the Sarazens. What made Jeroboam so infamous in Scripture? so that
he is said so often, to have made Israel to sin: 1 Kings 11. 26.
But because he lift up his hands against the Kings, as well asset up Calves at
Dan and Bethel. What more hateful or hurtful creature than the Locust? yet they
only are observed to have no King. An irreverend or wry word against the King,
is in Scripture called blasphemy. Thoushalt not blaspheme the Gods. Prove. 30 27.
And Naboth was accused in that he did blaspheme God and the King, God will not
suffer such words to go undiscovered -- Curse not the King, no not in thy
thoughts: for a bird of the Air shall carry the voice: Therefore God himself
expostulates so sharply, Numb. 12. S.
with Aaron and Miriam, even for whispering against Moses -- Were ye not afraid
to speak against my servant Moses? Nay, they must not be told of their faults
like other men, lest their Authority should be weakened, and their Majesty
sullied. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked, Job 34.18.
and to Princes ye are ungodly? It may be good advise, and better prudence
sometimes -- not to Prophecy at Bethel -- where it is the Kings Chapel, and
the Kings Court.

In the New Testament, that theif who was crucified with Christ, Votum pro
pace. p. 124.
is thought by Grotius to be such an one, as had taken up arms against the
King, and therefore he was condemned to that shamful and painful death; however
this be disputable: 2 Timothy 3.4
yet sure I am, that such as are Traitors, Heady, etc are left for the last
and worst of times. That plain text Romans 13. Those that resist shall receive
damnation, -- has been so tortured and dislocated, in the late times by some
patrons of disobedience; that I have wondered, and wonder I shall, until (...)
I shall go down into the slimy valley where all things are forgotten, Job. 38.2.
how it was possible to darken such clear counsel by words without knowlegde:
how men should raise such a mist at noonday, making darkness their Pavilion
round about them, with dark waters, and thick clouds of the Skies. As if with
the fish Sepia, ready to be taken, they could at their pleasure vomit forth
such an inky humor, that they may escape through their own shades, and glide
away thorough that water which they themselves have mudded. As the Valentinians
of old, wrapped up the poison of their heresy in their Aeones, and other
intricate and obscure terms: that they might first amuse, and then captivate
their followers. How was the name of God taken in vain in our remembrance, by
the abusing of Scripture to prove the lawfulness of Arms? Because Jonathan was
rescued from the hands of Saul, and Elisha shut the doors against the Kings
Messengers; 1 Samuel 14.
thence it was inferred that Kings might be resisted, 2 Chr. 6.33.
and Armies raised against them. Whereas the rescuing of Jonathan was nothing
else, but by a loving violence and importunity, whereby the execution of a
passionate and unlawful command was prevented, as if a servant should snatch
away a child from an enraged father, when he is about to whip him, upon a false
suggestion. And Elisha did but ward off the blow of a sudden and rash assault.
Now to argue from hence a lawfulness of fighting against Kings, or disobeying
their deliberate and just commands, would be but harsh logic, especially if
reduced into practice in their own families. If servants shrinking from their
masters blows, might also draw their swords, or maintain bellum servile against
them. Other inconveniences of like nature have been too rife. Some Sacrilegious
persons in some cases have de facto affronted Princes; therefore it has been
concluded de jure, that it is lawful. And some usurpers have been brought to
condign punishment, therefore the same course is to be taken with lawful and
legitimate Kings. because Lybnah is said to have revolted frm the King of
Judah, because he had forsaken the Lord, therefore if Kings fall off from God,
2 Chronicles. ^1.20.
their Subjects may fall off from them: Although the genuine sense is this; God
punished the King of Judah with the revolt of his people, yet that revolt in
the people was a sin.

Whether the Prince be good or bad it matters not as to our duty of obedience.
It Is true when Kings are good, our obedience is the more cheerful and willing:
Eccles. 10.17.
Blessed art thou O Land! when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength and not for drunkenness. Yet where Princes are
oppressors, and ungodly, our obedience may be the more heavy and clogged with
discouragements, but such obedience in things lawful is the more acceptable to
God: As the subjection of servants, even to froward Masters commends them more,
than though they were good and gentle. Pet. 2.18.


Many of the first Emperors were Heathens, and after they were converted to
Christianity, they were Arrian Heretics, yet they were faithfully obeyed by
Orthodox Christians.

Had God set no better guard about Kings, than to have lest them to the
censures and judgment of the people, whether they ought to be obeyed or not,
who would not rather spurn than court a Crown? well might the Vine and Figtree
in Jothams parable refuse that office. They would be but ridiculous Gods, who
are at the mercy of their votaries. God never put the Image of his own power
upon them, to be razed out at the pleasure of the people. Therefore it is
observed that God has signally plagued those wrongs, which have been done to
his vicegerents Funestus fuit ille Armus -- that was an unlucky time
accompanied with a deluge of miseries, when the power of Kings was taken away
in Rome and Consuls set up. And in our own Annals we read that after R. 2.
Austin do Civit. dei l. 3. c. 16.
was deposed their followed a War wherein an hundred thousand English Men were
slain, Such progedies portend black and cloudy events -- Certe violata potestas
-- Invenit ista does, numerous sacrifices must fall, to expiate the blood of
one King, who being alive, was worth ten thousand of us.

We must pray for Kings, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives: Our
happiness is wrapped up in theirs. A King is (...) the very foundation of the
people, carrying all his Subjects upon his back. The Persians after the death
of their Prince, forbear some few days to enthrone another, that the confusion
and anarchy, which was too evident in that interval, might make them love their
King the better all his reign.

We have no cause to disquiet Kings, by envying their Grandeur, especially if
we consider their great care and sleepless nights for our good. Cyrus thought
the life of an Herdsman better than of a King; and that it was easier to govern
brute-Beasts than men. And Tiberius in Sueton, told his friends they little
knew Quanta bellua esset imperium, what a terrible Behemoth an Empire was --
Aeneae fidus Achates, Achates ^^om (...) grief.
let us not requite our King, (who was a King of as many joys, as he was of
prayers and sorrows) with such unkindness, as not to renounce the lawfulness of
taking up Arms against him, and altering the Government of Church and State,
established by and under him: So we shall but renew his former labors, and rub
upon that wound which was so lately healed: Lib. 10. P^ 16.
This is to turn our Hosanna's into Crucifiges. For my part what Lactantius
said of Constantine, the same shall I say of our Sovereigns restoration --
Ille dies felicissimus or by illuxit, quo illum Deus summus ad beati imperij
culmen evexit. -- That was the happiest day which ever shone upon our Olbion,
Salva Roma, Salva. patrio Sal vus est Germanicus.
when this Sun brake forth out of those Clouds wherein it was mantled. I pray
my Brethren bear a part with me in this following Author. Salva Anglia, salva
patria, Salvus est Carolus.

I cannot choose but recount with sadness of of heart the subjects of some
conferences I have had with persons of no ordinary quality, who were engaged in
the late War. When I told them I have no other Divinity warranted from
Scripture, but prayers and tears: And that Whatever the King commands me, which
is not contrary to the great Charter of the Word of God, I am bound in
Conscience to obey. If be command any thing repugnant to Gods revealed will, I
must obey him still; though not actively in doing what he commands; yet
passively in submitting to those penalties which he shall inflict upon me; they
told me they had been acquainted with other doctrine: And who were the
preachers you may easily guess. I do even tremble to consider that any should
profane the pulpit, poison the air, or which is worse, the hearts of men with
such seditious and devilish doctrine. Such Sermons go down smoothly. This is to
swim with the tide of men's corrupted hearts; it is no wonder that Watt Tylar and
Jack Straw gathered together such an incredible rout against R. 2. since they
had John Ball an excommunicate Priest to be their Chaplain, who threw the
fi^^rands of rebellion amongst the people, who are prepared like tinder, or
Gunpowder to catch at such wildfire. Just so, those two Doctors Sha and
Pincher, quickly raised and excited R. 3. against H. 5.

Men's ears are too open to receive any Tragical complaints, concerning their
Governors. Sheba's Trumpet is pleasant music to that great beast, the common
people. They hearken with both ears to detractions, and calumnies against their
Governors, That they are tyrannical: Bishops are Antichristian; Popery is
coming on apace: The Gospel is adulterated: Justice is obstructed: Profaneness
is countenane'd: What Hurricanes will these beasts raise? men are sick of
things present, and long for change, there fore they have a forward says and
affection (...) what conduces unto variety. It is easter to (...) turn and
destroy more in a day, than can be built in an age. Such tares are so
connatural to the ordinary soil, that they will start up in a moment;
therefore upon this account Mahumetanism and Popery grew so fast, because they
were commensurate to men's carnal hearts: it is grace alone which must check and
choke these luxuriant weeds, and season men with better principles. For as
natural men are prone to approve of Plato's Commonwealth, or the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, which God hates in suffering their lusts to run riot, in a
promiscuous and exorbitant manner, without any enclosure, or distinction of
persons. So, such as are sensual who never had the wind of Gods spirit
winnowing them from their chaff; in unsettling them from their Lees, and
securing them from the common Mass: These discern not the Image of God upon the
King: They smell none of Gods Oil upon him: but look upon him as an ordinary
person; and so they conceive not themselves under an obligation of Conscience
to pay that reverence and obedience which is due unto him. These are apt to
mistake Manassey for Ephraim, Eli for the Lord, Eliab for David. What is this,
but to open a flood gate to let in all manner of confusion? I am not afraid to
say that those that are good men will have War with this Amalek, from
generation to generation.

But that which yet increases the earthquake in my Bowels, and makes my knees
justle one against another, is that men pretending to be refined; and more than
ordinary spiritual and religious, should break their allegiance and teach men
so: That after such a shipwreck (as we have seen) they should still refuse the
plank of repentance whereby they might sail safe to shore; and are so far from
retracting this pernicious error, by declaring and swearing, that it is not
lawful to take up Arms against the King; that so they might make some
satisfaction for their former mis^^ria^e: Stop the sluices of future rebellions,
(...) deluded followers; who are (...) even sworn to follow the dictates of
(...) Masters, and count it part of their service to God; to do what disservice
they can to the King: Methinks such incendiaries, when they see any of their
followers going to execution for their traitorous exploits, they should see
themselves executed in them; and say to the executioners.- in nos convertite
ferrum: Methinks they should also fear, lest this guilt should follow them
after this life into another World; For it is no new opinion, that punishment
will increase as men grow worse and worse, through our examples and doctrines,
which we have left behind. I say the paroxism of my sorrow is the more
heightened, when I see men even justifying their former actings (as Jonah did
his anger) Challenging all men to charge them with doing the least personal
injury to any; V^nd^^^^^ on of F^at Lu^^ p^^^
and professing to give satisfaction to any that can justly claim it; they are
the words of Doctor Owen. As if it were possible to carry on a War; to act
under our revolutions, with the greatest zeal and vigor, and to keep many,
many persons from the enjoyment of their rights, were not to be guilty of
personal injuries. And if he should give satisfaction to all that might justly
claim it; let his estate be what it will, I dare with a better grounded
confidence aver -- Non est solvendo. But if this be no answer to the Doctors
challenge, I could whisper in his ear, some notes of a thansgiving Sermon,
preached in Christ-Church in London, upon the overthrow of the Leyellers at
Burford, which must needs abate his confidence. The circumstance of time and
place may probably quicken and refresh his memory. -- Nos utinam vani --


I have no ill will to the person of the man; but rather have cause to own some
civilities from him; much less have I a purpose to insult over Bajazet in his
cage; or any others that are descended to the bottom of the wheel. I well
remember what Lewis King of France is reported to have said, when he was
counseled to demolish the Duke of Bedfords Tomb -- What Honor will it be to
spoil his Monument, who being alive would have disquieted the proudest of us
all. Speed in H. 6.


My scope is (according to the purport and tenor of this discourse) to invite
my Brethren, and O that I could thoroughly persuade them, not only to an (...), a
confession of their errors in general; but to an (...), A confession of this
particular, in taking up Arms -- that they have been out of the way themselves,
and have also misled others. Such a Palinodia would be more acceptable to God
and good men than all evasions, wiping of mouths, or writing Tostatus his
Volumes, in a way of justification of their actings. Though by this course
Sirs, you may seem to consult your own shame, yet it would preserve your names
better than Brass and Marble. This would be a means to atone God: to make the
King sleep securely in the lap of his people: to prevent jealousies: to take
off the former scandal from our Church, and to ease your own souls; if you are
sensible of that crude matter, which lies upon the stomachs of your
Consciences: For Torah which signifies confession, comes from a root which
signifies to cast forth; because it eases an aching heart, as vomit does an
oppressed stomach. Quid hoc mali est? this is a strange kind of sin, quod
naturalia mali non habet; timorem, pudorem, Tertu^. Apologe^. p. 18.
tergiver sationem, poenitentiam, deplorationem. Quid hoe mali est cujus Reus
gaudet? Cujus Accusatio votum est, and paena felicitas. If you slight mine take
the Prophets counsel -- Take unto you words, and turn unto the Lord: Say unto
him, take away all our iniquity, and receive us graciously-Ashur shall not save
us, Hof. 13.2.3.
we will not ride upon Horses; neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, ye are our Gods. What the Lord himself spoke to Job's friends give me
leave to speak unto you. Job 42.8^.
Take unto you now seven Bullocks and seven Rams, and go to my servant Job (the
King) and offer up for your selves a burnt offering and my servant Job (the
King) shall pray for you, for him will I accept; least I deal with you after
your folly, in that ye have not spoken the thing that is right. If you shall
return me the same answer as Rich Chremylus did, when he heard the
commendations of poverty (...), Arisl^^ (...)
say what you will, we will none of your advise: (...) Antoninus in vita sua 1.6.
I am resolved to be avenged of you: For I will never be like you. If I do
amiss, I will acknowledge it; and though I may err, yet I will not be an
Heretic: though, could I prevail with you in this suit, the comfort would be
the Churches, and therein mine: the glory Gods; but the greatest advantage
would be your own; for repentance (as well as love) will cover a multitude of
sins. I have read of an African Theif, condemned to dye by Mauritius,
Eutichiu^^ Tomo socundo p. 199.
before he was executed, he prayed that God would pardon his sins, as he did
Peter's, Hezekiahs, the Thief on the Cross; his eyes ran down with tears, and
his handkercheif was thoroughly drenched with the same: When he was dead, the
fiends came to challenge him for their own; they weighed down the scale with a
black catalogue of his sins, which they had ready prepared. At last there
appeared two Angels in white, and they put the handkercheif wetted with briny
tears into the other end of the balance, and weighed down the fardel of all
his sinful pranks: I shall not accommodate this History; but I shall attend
your next motion. Methinks I hear you say, I have gone upon a false
supposition; and grapled with my own shadow, or a ghost of my own raising: for
you have ^as great a share in David, as any of us. Neither will you yield your
selves to come behind the beft of Subjects in the duty of Loyalty. Well, make
this good, and we are all agreed, all other differences will fall in; if we
could once meet together in this cardinal Point: Lay aside your evasions,
limitations, demurs, reservations and distinctions, concerning the rights and
prerogatives of Kings, then come in with a full and kindly obedience to our
Abimelech, the Father of our Country: And what remains to keep us asunder? Who
would boggle at the Lyturgy, or Rites appendant? Who would think much to
declare, or swear, that it is not lawful to take up Arms against the King? Who
would ever have taken the Covenant at first? or who would now look upon
themselves as obliged by it, to endeavor the alteration of Church Government?
Were men thoroughly principled in obedience to the King. And since I have named
the Covenant; I have roused up such a Lion out of his Thicket, that I must set
apart the next Chapter to charm him down again into his Den

CHAP. XV. The Solemn League and Covenant is not obligatory.
Well may the Covenant be compared to a Lion; for it looks fierce and
terrible, scattering abroad the very Arrows of death. And no wonder it is so
deadly, and of so ghastly a visage: For it rose lately from the dead, and
started out of its own ashes. This is the very Achilles, or Goliath, which is
thought to be invincible, your Palladium, take this, and take all. It is such a
stone, as threatens to fall back and grind to powder those that go about to
remove it. What renounce the Covenant? We can read Common Prayer (I have heard
some say) but to be Covenant-breakers and to violate the oath of God this we
cannot do: Nobis non licet esse tam profanis. Now I have followed you to the
very Capitol, and what remains is like the uncasing of the head.

Though we fight you not in the field (I have heard others say) yet we will pray
you down, yet how can ye pray in Faith? upon what promise will ye ground such
prayers? But will you stop there? can you choose but second your prayers with
your strenuous endeavors? will you (with the Ostrich) leave these eggs in the
dust? and never look after these Arrows? It Is well that you have washed out
your former spots: for I observed heretofore that when the lightning of your
prayers went before, the thunder, and clattering of your Armor followed after:
You used the Sword of Gideon, as well as the Sword of the Lord; when like
Moses, you went up into the mountain to pray, you had your Armies of Jehues
fighting in the valleys. But why do you call the Covenant the Oath of God? I
read of that expression but once in Scripture Eccles. 8. 2. and there no doubt
it signifies the oath of Allegiance to the King. With what Engines can you
wire-draw this text to the Covenant? What has the Covenant to do with
Allegiance? How these agree together, we shall see afterward; yet you may as
well see Allegiance in the Covenant, as discover the National Covenant in that
of Baptism. A leading person of your way, told me once in discourse. -- That to
renounce the Covenant, and to renounce Baptism is all one; this is just like
another assertion of his: When I told him that the Covenant was imposed upon
Subjects, by Subjects: No said he, -- Parliament men (Sedente curi^) are not
Subjects -- a weak fabric sure! that must be pillar'd and buttress'd up with
such props as these are. I forbear further to ravel into this bottom, because
that good man is now fallen asleep

Whilst you call the Covenant the Oath of God, you break the third Commandment
in taking Gods name in vain, by abusing of Scripture.

I confess there is much of Religion in keeping our Vows and Promises. Ps. 15.4.
He shall dwell in Gods Holy Hill, Temerator voti coecusationem juslam suae
praevaric asionis non invenict quem nemo compulit ut voveret Fulgent. 619.
that swears and changes not, (...), one that makes Conscience of his Oath is
all one as (...), an holy or religious man. No sin is followed at heels with
more signal Judgments than this of perjury; as might be evidenced by Arrius
(who was as 'twere the Antitype of Judas) whose bowels for this very cause
gushed out. Vladislaus King of Hungary broke a solemn league with Amurath the
sixth, who spreading those Articles in the Air, to which the King of Hungary
had sworn, and making his appeal to the God of the Christians, Turkish Hist. P.
322
suddenly the Hungarians were overthrown. Sad instances there are in our own
stories; Dr. Beard of Gods Judgments.
of Harrold breaking his Oath with the Norman, and of Stephen, with Mande the
Empress. Pythagoras taught his Scholars (in order to make them good men)
(...), to reverence and observe their Oaths: This is like to God himself, who
is called in Scripture A God keeping Covenant; valuing every title of his word
at an higher rate than he does Heaven and Earth. Yet when Oaths are so sacred,
that it is a piacular offense to break them; they must have the Prophets
conditions, that is, they must be sworn in judgment, righteousness and truth.

First, men must make inquiry and then vow: And a promissory Oath, Jer. 4.2^
which binds the taker must be taken upon these proviso's.

First, The matter of it must be lawful.

Secondly, It (...) ^^trench upon the Authority of our ^^periou^. How far short
the Covenant came of theso conditions, it will appear afterward.

Before I lanch into the depth of this Subject, I shall as it were stand upon
the bank-side, and preface it with a narrative or two.

First, of a plain Country man, who observed it unto me -- That when the Scots
marched through these parts with the Covenant in their Hats: those that had
with so much solemnity taken it before, were so far from lifting up an hand,
that they did not so much as move their tongues in behalf of it: As if this
stratagem of state having done its execution upon Episcopacy, were to be laid
aside and become Nebushtan; or as Bishop Gauden expresses it; this Flag of
faction were then to be called in; that part which concerned the King was
Apocryphal: But after a longer distance of time, when things are happily settled
under our gracious Sovereign: As the Jews cried up the Temple of the Lord, so
these do the Covenant. All the application I shall make is -- that some
legerdemain is so gross and palpable, that it is discernable by clouted shoes.
The other is of a person as highly elevated for parts and piety, as any that
has moved in the sphere of the Church these many ages. The most reverend
Bishop Usher: Who in a Sermon at Saint Mary Oxon, before those loyal and
faithful Parliament men, that left Westminster, and came thither in the late
war in obedience to the Kings commands: speaking of the Covenant; whether it
had any binding power, he used these words -- My soul upon it; that Covenant
binds no more such as have taken it; than Sampsons withes, which he brake
asunder, and cast from him at his pleasure. If the deliberate judgment of any
man will weigh any thing in the scale of Conscience, I should think the
resolution of this Apostolical casuist, should statuminate, and settle any soul
that fluctuates about the Covenant. Had either a superstitious ignorance, or a
cowardly compliance ever betrayed me into this snare, upon the hearing of this
Angel I would have gone forth and wept bitterly, that ever I had adulterated my
soul, by swallowing such a poisoned gobbet. It would have been gravel in my
belly, until I had vomited it up by repentance: I should have accounted my
self free from any obligation from thence for the time to come.

When I consider how this unshapen Monster was ushered into the World, by the
Mid-wifery of an unnatural war: what a strages, or desolation has been wrought
by this flying Role! How it has devoured Royal, Noble, Common flesh: and laid
the Lords Vineyard waste; I cannot choose but say, A bloody Covenant have thou
been unto us. Therefore such as wish well to the King, Church, Nation, others
and themselves, will never go about to unty those graveclothes, wherewith
Authority has bound up this Malefactor, or open a door to let out this
Minotaure, to sport himself again in our gore. For although it is prefac'd with
these plausible enchanting words -- After the commendable practices of these
Kingdoms, and the example of Gods people in other Nations.

Yet upon diligent search, by the best Historians, there is none can be found to
run parallel with it, but only that Catholic cursed league, contrived by the
Guises, in the kingdom of France. It differs from all other Covenants, and
has a special signature of its own. They began, but this ended in blood. Heb.
9.18.
The first Covenant was not dedicated without blood; and the second was laid in
the blood of the Paschal Lamb. In the Jewish Covenants there was a Beast slain
and divided; then the Covenanteers passed between those parts, to show that
they deserved to be slain and cut into pieces if they violated their Covenant.
When Catalin conspired the ruin of Cicero, together with the Roman
Commonwealth (and now I think I have found another parallel) he first killed a
little boy; and then his confederates mutually bound themselves together by an
oath, taken over the bowels of that child. But this Covenant was wrapped up in
fair professions at first, but afterward it floated in blood, and ended in
bitterness.

Nabis an arrand tyrant of Lacedaemon, had a wife called Apega, Dion Cassius l.
37.
who fleeced the women as he did the men; he loved her so dearly, that he made
her picture with costly garments; and when he could not get money by fair means,
Sr Walter Rawley p. 618.
he told them he would bring them to his wife, perhaps she might persuade them:
So the Image opened its Arms, as to embrace, but the arms and bosom of it was
so full of Iron nails, that they tormented those poor men to death. (who
refused to lay down their moneys) Just such an Idol was this Covenant: It was
habited in the dress of a religious Matron -- Mulier formosa superne -- doted
upon as the great Diana of the Ephesians; I mean such as plotted the overthrow
of Church and State: and when other engines could not draw on that design fast
enough; this Amazonian Virago expands her arms, and courts us with her killing
rhetoric: But those arms were so full of nails, that had not the providence of
God rescued us out of her embraces, she would have exhausted our very heart
blood, and killed us with a seeming kindness: This was like that sagacious
Hyaena, which was to hunt out a prey for the hungry Lions.

But perhaps this discourse is too general, to alienate and divorce your
arnorous thoughts, from this painted Helena. Many of you have so espoused her
to your selves, that you count it all one to forsake the Covenant, as to break
wedlock: Therefore I shall come closer yet and try whether it is possible to
persuade you, that there is not that obliging power in the Covenant as you
imagine. I shall put the trial upon this plain Sillogism.

No unlawful Oath is obligatory: The Solemn League and Covenant was an unlawful
Oath: Therefore the Solemn League and Covenant is not obligatory. Major prop.
No unlawful Oath can lay an obligation upon him that takes it.
The Prophet sharply reproves those idolatrous votaries, which said, they would
surely perform their vows, Jer. 44.25.
which they had vowed, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven. Whoever swears
an assertory Oath, calls God to witness that what he swears is true; and by
laying his hand upon the book before a Magistrate, does imprecate upon himself
the judgments of God in that book and renounces any share in those promises
that are involved therein, if he swears falsely. And in a promissory Oath, he
must swear in righteousness and truth; otherwise his oath will be a bond of
iniquity: He will swear to sin and so by consequence, sin in swearing, for he
calls the God of righteousness to record upon his soul, that he will deal
unrighteously. De jure belli l. 20, c. 13.
Jurata promissio: (says Grotius) When a man swears to do any thing unlawful
in it self, by the Law of God, or man; such an oath is null, and without force.
Scelus est fides, our fidelity in the performance of such a promise would be a
double iniquity. Saint Austin wonders that any should nickname this obstinacy
in what is evil, with that excellent title of fidelity. Si executio ejus quod
est promissum, sit contra legem, Lessius de jura. l. 2. p. 618.619.
vel publicam utilitatem, etc. If we fulfill a promise which is contrary to the
Law, or public welfare, Juramentum promissioni adjectum non obligat: That oath
which confirms such a promise binds not at all: And the Casuist gives a good
reason; because Obligat Conscientia, non per se, sed ratione legis, quae aliud
praecipit vel prohibet; Baldwin.
Conscience binds not of it self, but by virtue of some affirmative, or
negative Law. Therefore it is an infallible rule to me -- In malis promissis,
when we promise any thing that is wicked, such a promise is not to be
performed: But that the best way to make amends for such a promise is to break
the Cockatrise in the shell; that is, to revoke it suddenly, before it takes
effect, the sooner the better. Sam. 25.
David blessed God that he did not fulfill his rash vow against Nabal. And had
those in the Acts who vowed they would neither eat nor drink until they had
slain Paul been as bad as their words, they had highly aggravated their
offense: As Herod did, who standing so nicely upon his Oath, must have John the
Baptist murdered out of tenderness of Conscience: Whereas it is more then
probable that this Tragical Scene was complotted aforehand by Herodias and
himself: as the downfall of Bishops (to say no more) was by the Covenanteers,
and then all must be mantled under the Religion of an oath, and crusted over
with the integrity of keeping Covenant. Religion is the highest excellency of
man, whilst it is sincere and undefiled, but when it is made a Cloak or stalking
Horse only for blacker designs; it is no better than a white-Devil: It is all
one as to look toward Heaven and to row toward Hell; to be (...), men that
seem only to look after virtue, yet are in truth (...), the very Champions of
wickedness. Cle. Alox. p. 41.
Alas, such paint will quickly wear off; and then a hagg face will appear the
more ugly. As she in the Epigramatist, after drinking of wine perfumed her
breath, lest it should be found out; yet when she belched she did but stink the
worse.

Ne gravis hesterno fragres Fescenia vino,
pastillos Cosmi luxuriosa voras.
Ista linunt dentes jentacula; sed mihi obstat,
extremo ructus cum venit e Barathro.
Casuists tell us, of some things which ought not to be done; yet facta valent,
there is no reversing of them, when once they are done: And I am much inclined,
this rule holds in marriage: Though it is not lawful for a Christian to marry a
Heathen wife, yet once married he may not put her away, at his plea sure; but
this holds not in unlawful promissory vows, since the accomplishment of them
does but accumulate the guilt. I can see but a passage or two in Scripture,
which may seem to invalidate this truth.

First, That Covenant with the Gibeonites seems to be utterly unlawful: For God
had commanded that they and all the Cananites, Josh. 5.19.
should be destroyed, yet contrary hereunto, Joshua made and faithfully
observed a Covenant with the Gibeonites: And afterward Saul by breaking this
Covenant in slaying those Gibeonites brought a famine upon the whole Land, 2 Samuel 21.2
and consulted shame and confusion to his whole Family. This instance is urged
by some, to press the observation of the Solemn League and Covenant; but upon a
stricter view, we shall discern a vast disparity betwixt these two cases.

10. The Covenant with the Gibeonites was made by Joshua himself, as also by
the Princes of the Congregation. Here was, as it were a complete Act of
Parliament to warrant the same. But in our case Joshua did utterly prohibit,
and disclaim any such Covenant.

20. Though there was an error in the Israelites in making such a sudden
compact with the Gibeonites without asking counsel of God; being circumvented
by the fraud of their old garments, moldy bread, etc. Yet this Covenant was
not unlawful in it self For though God had commanded that no peace should be
made with the Cananites; yet it was but conditional, if they should stand upon
their guards; not yield up their Lands; or not forsake their idolatry. But
since these poor Gibeonites did submit their persons, estates and services to
be disposed of by Joshua, for the use of the Sanctuary; forsaking their old
idolatry: He might make a Covenant with them and they seem tacitly to be
commended for what they did. Josh. 11.19.20.
There was not a City that made peace with the Children of Israel, save the
Hivites, the Inhabitants of Gibeon; for it was of the Lord to harden the hearts
of the rest, that they came against Israel in Battle. Therefore notwithstrnding
that command, Josh. 4.6.
Rahab and all her Fathers Family had their lives given them before. 1 Kings
9.20.
Afterward Solomon permitted the Hittites, Hivites, Perizites and Jebusites to
live quietly under his Reign, as Grotius observes. See Suarez do juramento. p.
366.
Though 'twas forbidden to take a wife of another Nation, yet if she forsook
her idolatry and embraced the faith she might be taken to wife.

This is but according to the law of Arms, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11.
set down by God himself -- that approaching any City, they should proclaim
peace unto it, and if the people therein shall make an answer of peace, and
open there Gates then they were to be made tributaries, but not to be
destroyed. Thus the Lord had promised Moses, that he would give into his hands
Sehon the Amorite the King of Heshbon and his Land: He commands him to arise
and take possession of it; yet Moses well knowing how to interpret Gods
commands in the most merciful sense; first sends Messengers of peace to Sehon,
offering to him if he would p^^mit him to pass quietly through his Country,
(...). 24.26, (...).
he would not turn to the right hand, or the lest to molest him: (...) in Josh.
(...).
Therefore these Gibeonites humbly yielding themselves up to the hands of
Joshua, he might lawfully make a Covenant with them: But from hence to argue
the lawfulness of the Scottish-English-Covenant; and that it ought not to be
broken, is all one, as to conclude that Herod might not lawfully have broken
his Oath concerning the beheading of John the Baptist, Jer. 39.
because it was not lawful for the Rechabites to break the vow which they had
made to Jonadab their Father.

20. Another instance of keeping unlawful vows, is that of Jephta sacrificing
his daughter, Judge. 11^.
which was not lawful for him to do, Deuteronomy. 12.31.

This is grounded upon a saudy foundation: For supposing this vow of Jephta to
be unlawful; Temerarium fuit, and prestari non debuit; it was a rash vow,
Bal^mi^ p. 290.
and therefore ought not to have been performed, says the Casuist: He was no
more to be imitated herein, than David was in the matter of Vriah.

Numslorus, Orotiu, Perkins. Coses of Consei, p. 53.
But I find very learned men of another judgment. That Jephta did not kill his
Daughter; but only devoted her to a private, or single life; which was only a
metaphorical sacrifice. Therefore the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament
the daughter of Jephta, Judge. 11.40. or as the word lament is noted to signify
Judges 15.11. to confer with her; or to comfort her whereof she had not been
capable, had she been slain. Hence it is that we read of her bewailing of her
Virginity, in that she was not like to leave any issue behind her, which was a
reproach in Israel: But we read not that she lost her life. Therefore Jephtas
vow is understood by Vatablus and Drusius, to be conditional; that is, if that
which first met him out of the door of his house, were fit to be sacrificed:
For had a dog met him; it was not to be sacrificed according to the Law: They
read the words also disjunctively -- whatsoever comes out of the doors of my
house, shall either be consecrated to the Lord, or else it shall be sacrificed
to him; Si molari possit; if it be capable of falling a sacrifice unto the
Lord. What is this now to the Scottish League and Covenant, either as to the
entering into it at first, or being obliged by it? and this will better appear
by the illegality of it, which is the Minor prop. But the Solemn League the
Scottish-English-Covenant, was and is an unlawful Oath.


I am loath to call it the National Covenant: I hope that is but an abusive
speech which reflects too much disgrace upon the whole Nation: Omnes omnitan
Charitantes p^ta Com^^ur (...).
for suppose this denomination be taken from the greater; I am well assured it
is not from the better part of the Nation -- pudet baec approbria -- and as it
was not Catholic in respect of persons; so much less in the contents of it.

There have been so many invincible reasons given against this Covenant, by my
dear Mother the University of Oxon, and also by many of my Fathers and
Brethren; that I am almost rapt up into an ecstasy of wonder, that any should
appear in such a profligated and baffled cause; unless they had dexterity
enough, to ward off those blows, which will inevitably fall upon them. He that
goes about to dispute against this Covenant, has so many advantages at hand,
that he may be puzzled ex copia, what to say first, but cannot be destitute of
arguments to plead against it. It Is not my business to play the disputant, but
to beseech you to climb over this Rock, into the Pulpit. Yet that I may prevail
the better with your wills, I shall spend a word or two upon your
understandings; by showing the unlawfulness of this Covenant in matter and
form, in respect of the efficient and final cause: Though there is no need of
all these terms; for if the matter be not justifiable, neither can the end: We
must not do evil that good may come on it. And if the efficient cause be not
right and legitimate in a promissory oath, it is defective in that which is
(...), the very formality of such oath, which is the Authority imposing it: Now
that this was the case of the Covenant, he that runs may read it, if he can but
read the capital letters of the Kings Proclamation, prohibiting all his
subjects to enter into such a combination. If those that took it were Subjects
to our Prince, as was acknowledged in the preface to the Covenant it self, yet
how they did discharge that relation, or how they did show their subjection in
this particular, it is as casie to determine, as I am loath to express. Here is
too large a field to expatiate m^^t would argue too much resemblance to that
poor insect, the impotent and angry fly, to insist long on this gauled place.
I wish my Brethren were as much ashamed of their own precipitancy herein; as I
am to urge them with it, and to charge upon them those consequences which might
follow naturally upon the commission of such a miscarriage; sure then they
would be persuaded to cast forth this Hagar and dis-inherit this Ishmael.

I pray read over the thirtieth Chapter of Numbers, and you may find, that
persons who are not sui juris, as Wives and Children, who were under the power
of Hus bands and Fathers (and why not subjects who are under the power of
Princes) might not make vows and Covenants unless they were ritified by their
Superiors. How can Subjects pl^ad an exemption from this Law? We read of
putting down idolatrous Priests, destroying the Groves, Nigh places, Altars,
the brazen Serpent; yet these things were done by the Kings command; never as I
remember in a way of contradiction, 2. Kings 23.5.
or defiance to their Authority, as appears in the reigns of Josiah and
Hezekiah: When any thing was amiss in the Church in the primitive times, 2 Chronicles 30.
the Christians petitioned the Emperors to reform it; they did not (invitis
regibus) attempt that work, therefore the Kings in Scripture are every where
blamed, and not the people in that the High places were not taken away. The
forwardness of the people herein is but an unwarrantable and preposterous zeal:
Though the thing it self be good, that is to reform abuses in the Church, as it
is good in it self to offer sacrifice, yet not in people that are under
subjection; as it was not in Soul to offer Sacrifice without a calling. Sam 3,
1^.
It is the Kings peculiar office to be (...) (as Aristostle) the chief disposer
in matters of Religion: He is the Common Bishop of the Church, as Constantine
is styled by Eusebius. Private persons must defend religion, Non occidendo,
Lactan Institu. 5.(...). c. 20.
sed Moriendo, not by killing others but dying themselves. It is altogether
unlawful (says Bishop Davenant) for the people, Renuente Magistratu, Ecclesiae
Reformationem Moli^i, Determ. 12.
to go about to reform the Church, without the consent of the supreme
Magistrate. This is a right so properly belonging to the King, that Darius,
Cy^us, the King of Nineve were invested with it, Jure gentium, though they were
Heathen Princes, Dr Ward. p. 105. (...).
says another professor of divinity out of the same chair.

I read indeed that the people entered into Covenant Ezra. 10.3. but it was to
put away their strange wives, which was according to Law in the same verse.
What is this to our pupose? except you could produce unquestionable evidence of
Scripture proof -- That the Government of the Church by Bishops (which you have
Covenanted against) is as unlawful as the having of strange wives.

A little reading in Casuists and Schoolmen, will easily confirm this truth --
that such oaths and Covenants, which are made against the consent of our
Superiors, are not obligatory. Si Res jurata sit illicita, superiore vetante,
obligatio tollitur -- Irritationem quoque Lessius de Justitia and Jure
429.430.431.551.
tollitur, quando materia juramenti promissorij subest alterius potestati. Haec
igitur conditio ex natura rei, vel juris dispositione includitur promissioni,
vel juramento promissioni opposito -- nisi superior, cui materia subest,
contradicat.

Quicquid in nostra potestate non sit, Ibid. p. 542
sub votum non cadit, nec quod malum est.

Nemo potest se firmiter obligare per promissionem, ad id quod est in potestate
alterius, Aquinas 22.. Q. 88. Art. 80.
sed solum ad id quod est omnino in sua potestate. Quicunque autem est
subjectus alicui, quantum ad id in quod est subjectus, non est suae potestatis
facere quod vult; sed dependet ex potestate alterius, and ideo non potest se
per votum firmiter obligare in his, in quibus ^a^teri subjicitur, sine consensu
sui superioris.

Ad vnumquemque Ibid. Q. 88. Art. 90.
pertinet irritare juramentum quod a sibi subditis factum est, circa ea quae
ejus potestati subduntur.

Gregory de Valentia affirms the same -- In multis casibus constat juramentum
promissorium non obligare, Disp. 6. Q. 7 de Juramento.
scilicet de Re illicita: Nam ex eo quod juramentum praestatur homini,
superiores, aut domini Reipromissae, possunt irritare juramentum. Non tenetur
quis per media inutilia vel minus grata deo, procurare divinum honorem ad
implendo juramentum. p. 5^5.
Our own Master Perkins does but translate the sense of the Schoolmen into
English -- An oath says he, binds not if it be made concerning things which
are not in our power; as to swear to give away another man's goods: And was not
this our case? did not you swear to take away the Rights of the Bishops? nay,
the Rights of the King, whose prerogative and jurisdiction it is to reform the
Church! and that after many of you had subscribed to the rights of the
Episcopal government, both when ye took degrees in the University, and orders
from the Bishops, and had also taken the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Can a subsequent oath, or Covenant so far bind us, as to make void the former?
Juramentum factum contra prius votum; Suarez l. 2. d J^ra p. 62.
juramentum aut promissum (modo sit in re licita) non obligat. Doctor
Cracanthorpe was no ordinary divine in his time, yet he confirms this truth --
The Emperor (says he) swears at his Coronation to keep safe the Honors and
Rights of his Kingdom; Defense of Constantine c. l. p. 170.
afterward he alienates them: and takes an oath that he will not revoke them.
But since this latter oath was contrary to his imperial Oath at his Coronation,
it binds not, being unlawful, and so cannot be vinculum iniquitatis: But
notwithstanding such an oath, he may revoke his grant.

Suppose a married man, or woman, after marriage should vow continency; this is
more than was in his, or her power; therefore such a promise is not to be
fulfilled: Hoc enim quisa; recta, and firma devotione solus promittit, Ful^ewi
p. 620. and 623.
quod sui tantum juris esse cognoverit: Temerariese vovisse cognoscat, and
debitum conjugi casta sinceritate Redhibet. Does not this rule hold as true
betwixt Subjects, who are bound by oaths unto their Princes, as betwixt an
Huband and the Wife of his Covenant? Therefore why should not you return unto
your first love? I mean in making good these former promises and engagements
which you have made unto the Crown and unto those that are commissionated by
the supreme authority Do you think that adventitious and contradictory vows of
a later date (for the making of which you never had any sufficient authority to
warrant you) will supplant and evacuate your former oaths? There was a lawful
power prohibiting you to enter into such a combination at first; and there has
been since in declaring the Nullity of such a Covenant. (...) 22. (...).
Will you still look upon your selves (like that Ram which the Angel showed to
Abraham) as caught in a thicket by the horns? whereas your setters are rather
imaginary than real. And herein you resemble some melancholy men, who have
separated themselves from common society, fancying themselves to be Lepers:
Others have been afraid to speak lest they should low like beasts, and to ease
nature, by letting go their water, lest they should drown the whole Town
wherein they dwelt; Burtans D^^l incholies.
which conceit was cured by this stratag^m -- one cried fire! fire! Hereupon
the melancholy person lets go his water that he might extinguish the fire, an^
was healed. Do not you hear the like outcry in our dwellings, by reason of our
growing and wasting divisions at home and abroad? Sirs, let go the Covenant out
of your clutches, and all will be well; and join your endeavors with us, in
helping to put out this common conflagration: rectify vour erroneous conceits:
clear up your blood-shotten eyes: look upon the Covenant through the true optic
glass of loyalty and religion; and I dare say you will not account your selves
bound by it, to endeavor the alteration of government in the Church. Antoninus
in vita sua. l. 410.
(...) If you were once freed from the perturbations of your own heads, the
terrible bug-beares in your way would disappear and vanish. If this physic
will not work, I shall give you the Casuists conclusion, as another pill to
chew upon. -- Caput Melancholicum est diaboli balneum. Boldmin. p. 577.


Were there any obligation in the Covenant, we who never bound our souls with
it (maugre all the anathema's and terors of those that imposed it) have more
cause then your selves, to complain of the severity of the Parliament in
injoyning us to declare, that not only there is no obligation on our selves,
but also making us your compurgatours: we must declare -- That no other person
is obliged by that oath called the Solemn League and Covenant. But instead of
complaining and murmuring, we gratefully acknowledge the wisdom of our
Governors, and their tenderness toward you: for fearing lest you should
hinder our happy settlement upon the Kings return, hanging off from a
compliance with our peace, upon pretense of the Covenant: They called in those
that were free, to relieve those that thought themselves bound: those that
stood upon firm ground, to lend an hand to those that floated upon the waters;
that so by the interposition of our judgment, and charitable assistance, your
supposed Gives and Fetters might (like untimely figs) fall from you, and you
might look upon your selves, as free from any tie arising from the Covenant,
that so we might all concenter, upon a legally established foundation of peace
and tranquillity. O when will it once be that we shall see the long expected
fruit of this labor of love! When will ye know the things that belong to your
own, ours, the Churches and the Kingdoms happiness? If the ship sink, we shall
lie together in the bottom of the Sea, that could not agree upon the deck:
Lets therefore commit our selves to our experienced Pilots, so we may arrive to
the Haven where we would be.

Secondly, The Covenant is unlawful in respect of the matter -- As for those
things in it which concern a personal reformation of life and manners, in
walking more closely with, and religiously before God: in avoiding profaneness
and scandal, that so we might walk worthy of Gods mercies and deeline his
judgments, I have not a thought in my heart, much less a word in my tongue
against the material part of it. I wish we were all such Covenanteers, and that
our Covenants in this respect were written in Marble and Adamant: like Gods
Covenant of Grace everlasting, or that which he has made with Day and Night:
Jer. 33.25.
As Job made a Covenant with his eyes so 'twere well if we could make a
Covenant with our hearts and ways. Had this been all that had been aimed at,
good men would not have been so scandalized at the Covenant: My hand would have
trembled, and my pen would have fallen from betwixt my fingers, ere I had
written any word to have impleaded it. May Holiness to the Lord be written, not
only on our Horse Bridles, the Phylacteries of our Garments, but upon the door
posts of our hearts, and the frontispeice of all our actions; yet were this the
design of the Covenant, as good as it is; yet I utterly abhor the manner of its
birth, or introduction into the world, which was altogether tumultuary and
irregular. The reformed Religion professed among us, which is the very ornament
of our Church and Nation, and the joy of our souls would loose much of its
glorious luster and verdure with me, hadit been ushered in with Axes and
Hammers, clashing of Armor and roaring of Canons: Had it been established by
rebellion, and not by the decrees, and laws of reforming Princes, who called
our Fathers out of Babylon, and led them out of spiritual Egypt. Kings (blessed
be God, who put such a thing as this into their hearts) were the nursing
Fathers of our Reformation: But alas, amendment of life was least of all
intended in the Covenant. The limitation, or impairing of the Regal, and the
total abolition of the Episcopal power, were the very white in the But. This
was the letter and all the pretenses of reformation, but as so much wanton
embellishment flourishing round about it. This was the pill to be swallowed,
all the rest but as sugar to wrap it up, which presently dissolved and left
nothing behind, but the naked pill which was as so much ferment in the stomach,
and occasioned a strange Timpany in the body politic: This was the practice of
Nestorius; he inveighed bitterly against all other Heresies (who would have
thought but he had been orthodox? Vincent lirinem c. 16, and 23.
) to make way for his own: And he made the greater havoc of Christ's flock;
because those that were torn a pieces by this wolf, still deemed him to be a
sheep. Just so this Covenant hangs out the white flag of Religion, seems to
promote nothing but piety and purity; to batter down nothing but profaneness,
(...) Cle. Alex. stro. 3. p. 440.
and in the mean while it levels all its force against those Mountains which
stand about our Jerusalem. Those Adversaries do the most mischief, which make
the most show of friendship and kindness.

10. The matter of an oath ought to be plain and obvious to our understanding;
without obscurity and intricacy. I must know what I swear, otherwise I take
Gods name in vain in swearing without judgment. Now in this oath there are many
words of ambiguous signification: As Common enemies, best reformed Churches
(without telling which they are) Malignants, Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of Scotland, privileges of Parliament, which in those days were like
the Popes Traditions, Arbitrary and Inexhaustible.

20. There are plain contradictions in this oath: For those that have taken
the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and have therein sworn to defend the
King and his Rights Absolutely; yet here they must mince the matter and vow to
defend the King himself with a limitation -- In the defense of Religion: So
that if he do not what they would have him do in matters of Religion, they have
an evasion at hand: by virtue of their Covenant they may defeat him; if not
dethrone him. So he must be a precarious, not a glorious King, reigning at the
placitum of his Subjects: nay, in their former oaths they swore to defend all
the Kings Rights, whereof his jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical is not
accounted the least, yet here they vow to reform Religion themselves and as it
were snatch that Jewel out of their Sovereigns Crown. And as by this Covenant
they violate their former oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, so they would
have the King too, like themselves, in violating his oath at his Coronation,
when he swears to maintain Bishops and their Rights.

In this very Covenant they swear to maintain the liberties of Subjects; yet as
if Bishops were not Subjects, they swear to root them up root and branch.

30. There are gross absurdities in the Covenant. The Parliament is placed
beforethe King. The Church of Scotland before the Church of England. There is
swearing to maintain the privileges of Parliament absolutely, but the King and
his Rights with a limitation: As if a Parliament were infallible, not so the
King; whereas to speak properly, the Parliament is no Parliament at all without
the King; no more than the trunk of a man's body is a complete body without his
head.

40. The fourth Article of the Covenant is even unnatural, binding Children to
betray their Parents to death, by bringing them to public trials, If they are,
or have been Malignants.

50. What desperate Hypocrisy and prevarication is there in the third Article?
the world must bear witness with the Covenanteers Consciences of their loyalty;
that they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish the Kings just power and
greatness. Just like Herod, that told the wise men -- they should bring him
word, where Christ was, and he would come and worship him: In plain English
that is, he would come and murder him: praetendit cultum, intendit cultrum; or
as Absalom makes a flourish, that he would pay his vows in Haebron, but the
truth was; he had a purpose to raise war against the King his Father. 2. Sam.
15.7.8.
So the same men that robbed the King of his legislative power, of the Militia,
and turned their swords against his very bosom, would have the world bear
witness to their loyalty -- that they have no thought or intention to diminish
the Kings just power and greatness. They would fain have the World as guilty in
violating the Ninth, as they themselves have been in breaking the fifth
Commandment.

60. But suppose the other Articles of the Covenant were free from all
exceptions, and might pass for current, without any allowance; yet all the
united skill of the Covenanteers in England and Scotland (were the very
quintessence of all their parts strained into the pericranium of one
Covenanting Achilles) can never justify the matter of the second Article,
concerning the exstirpation of prelacy: for had the houses of Parliament been
full and complete when they passed this ordinance. Yet what Authority had they
to pull up and retrench the very fundamentals of Government, which was so
firmly rivited by the Laws of the Land, confirmed by Magna Charta, and so many
Acts of Parliament. Can a subordinate or lesser power supersede, or make void
the decrees of that power which is greater, Isa: 66.8.
even the supreme power of the Nation? Who has heard such a thing? Who has
seen such things? It has even pitied me to hear what fig-leav'd salvo's some
have found for their Consciences in this case. As I told you of one, that said
Parliament men were no Subjects; so others have told me -- that they did not
Covenant against Episcopacy, but against the Hierarchy: What an irrational
subtersuge is this? What is the Hierarchy but an holy Government; and must this
be rooted up? read the very next words of the Covenant and you will see what is
understood by praelacy: that is, the Government by Archbishops and Bishops.
Yet the very same men that told me, they did not Covenant against Episcopacy,
have refused to take the late Oath, why? because they will not swear -- Not to
endeavor to alter the Government of the Church: Have not these men Renbens
curse upon them? in being as Instable as water; Jam. 1.8.
or are not they of the number of those (...), Double minded men who are
unstable in all their ways. What will not men say, that have espoused a
desperate cause.

Others say they have Covenanted against Bishops, it is true: But only in their
places and callings. Yet which of you can challenge it as a proper duty of your
places and callings -- Mutare quadrata rotundis, to turn the Government of
Church and state topsey turvey: I join these together because I want spectacles
to discern what difference there is betwixt usurping upon the Kings power and
subverting the Government of the Church in spite of his Authority. Woe be to the
Kings Majesty, if you should lift up your hands again and fall a swearing. What
security has the King, but your vows may reach him as well as the Bishops; for
if you account your selves in your places and callings when ye kick off the
Mitre, it is but going a step farther and it may be your Tether may stretch so
far that you may hazard the shaking of the Crown: If this beto act within
the proper sphere of your callings and places: Then Phaeton was in his proper
place, when he was tampering with his Fathers Chariot. And the waters were in
their proper place when they overflowed the earth. Should I carry my self thus
in my place and calling, Act. 1.25. (...)
, I should much fear, lest I should be going to Judas his proper place; not as
the text is sensed by the learned Doctor Hammond, but according to the fullest
current of Interpreters.

Some say, they took the Covenant freely, and voluntarily, and how can they
recall and recant such an act?

I am sorry to answer what the matter in hand compels me, viz. The more free
and voluntary this Act was, the more sinful it was, and calls the louder for
repentance.

Others say, how can the people believe what we preach, if we should break the
Covenant? This quere borders upon the true reason (in my apprehension) why you
will not declare against the Covenant, lest your credits and reputations should
be impeached: As some of the more ingenuous Papists will acknowledge some
things to be amiss in the Church of Rome, Mal. 3.9.
yet should they be amended -- the Heretics (say they) would take advantage to
open their mouths against the Popes infallibility; or, which is more pertinent
to my present discourse, as it was with Herod, after he had sworn rashly
concering John the Baptist; yet for his oaths sake, and them that sat with him
at meat, Mark that! (lest they perhaps should report him not to be Master of
his word) right or wrong he commands the head of John the Baptist to be given
to the daughter of Herodias.

CHAP. XVI A Coronis, or seasonable Conclusion.
Bear with me a little my Brethren, in suffering a word of exhortation, from
the meanest of those that wait at the Altar.

Tractemus fabriliafabri! let us preach the word in season and out of season:
Divinity is our Sparta, the Province which we must study to adorn. As for
politics Government, affairs of State, these are out of our Diocese and beyond
our last. Lets study to be quiet, to fear God and honor the King, and all
those that are commissionated by him in Church and State. Let us beat down sin
strenuously, reform our selves, Families, Parishes faithfully, pray for the
reformation of what is amiss in the whole Nation constantly In two words lets
(...) preach well and live well, Bishop Andrews his motto.
so we shall not be at leisure to spend our selves in notional and whiffling
disputes -- Then shall our light break forth as the morning, and our health
shall spring forth speedily. But if instead of performing our ministerial
duties conscionably, and humbly; we shall be so pragmatical Eccontrical and
magisterial, Isa. 58.8.
as to m^del with things above us: by lying in lurking places, watching and
laying ambuscadoes for the downfall of those for whom we ought to pray. If we
think thus to run away with the pillars of the Ecclesiastical fabric upon our
shoulders, we shall like Sampson) be buried in the rubbish, and then what other
Epitaph shall we deserve? but -- Here lies the posterity of Dathan, which
perished in the gainsaying of Core, or what is said of Stigandus.

Inquinat infer number spiritus, ossa solum. It looks like a studied piece of
malice; if we should dry up our breasts, Goodwinus de praesulibus in annum 105.
when poor souls lie starving and gasping for want of spiritual food. If we
shall either throw away our Aaronical Bells, or which is all one, pull out
their clappers, rather then we will awake and rouse up those that snort upon
the very brink of hell. Is there any so angry with his own Nation, as
Hypocrates was with the Persians, who refused to give them physic, Eutychius
part prim^
and to heal their maladies when they sent for him.

But my brethren, I hope better things of you, and things accompanying peace
and salvation: May these things happen to the enemies of our Church and Nation!
But let Religion and loyalty be within our walls, Heb. 6.9.
peace and plenty within our palaces Therefore what Jotham said to the men of
Sechem in Mount Gerizim -- Hearken unto me, Judge 9.7.
that God may hearken unto you. Gold is the best of Metals, and it is also most
ductile. If you are men of generous dispositions, and of a golden nature, you
will be pliable to his advise that aims at nothing but yours, and the Churches
happiness. Ser in Ganc^^^.
I hope you are none of those, of whom Saint Bernard speaks -- Nec suasionibus
flectuntur, quia subversi, which words may be rendered by that sad sentance
given out against those refractory Son of Eli -- they hearkened not to the voice
of their Father, Sam 2.25.
because the Lord would stay them. p. 12.
Nor would I have you to be like that heretical Raven (as Prosper calls it)
that went out of the Ark and was so immersed with the carrion that floated upon
the water, ut ad Arc am Eeclesiae redire noluit. Many of you have now ease and
rest more than enough -- take heed that you do not say

-- Deus nobis haec otia fecit. Be not like Dear in purlew-Woods, which endure
not afterward to be cooped up and confind within their own pale, Jeromod
Demetriadem. p. 7^.
until some Nimrod or other make a prey of them. Morbidae oves suum relinquunt
gregem, and luporum faucibus devorantur. When Sheep faint and lagg behind their
fellows, the next news is, they are seized on by the Wolf.

Be not like those Crows in Arabia, which if they be empty and want what they
would have to fill their Craws, they make a stridulous, raucous and horrid
noise. What though every pin in the Sanctuary does not stand point-size as you
would have it? must all Europe echo with your bellowings? Or must the whole
structure presently be demolished; will you presently run out of the Garden
enclosed never to return, though it be full of fragrant Flowers, living
Fountains, and has in it the tree of Life? because perhaps some particular
herb or other is wanting for which you have some special kindness, or grows
there, with which your nostrils are not delighted? Must an unwarrantable
Covenant hinder our cementing and sodering together? Will you stand so stiffly
upon that rash word which is gone out of your lips? that rather than you will
reverse it we must all go down together into the Chambers of death. Is ambition
so immortal, that as Jerome notes, inter lacrymas, luclusque non cessat: rather
than men will seem to be indeed what they are, obnoxious to error and a
peccant fallibility, they will go down into the lowest vault in the valley of
Bochim, and chaunt forth the highest note to the tune of Hadadrimon.

You are not such strangers in our Israel as to be ignorant how the waters
swell, the winds blow, the waves beat against the Ark of the Church, and the
ship of the whole Kingdom, so that we may say, Master! Master! we perish: nay,
to leave Allegories, and to speak the naked truth: you have heard the Alarm of
War, you well know what confederacies and combinations there are abroad against
our tranquillity: Geball, Ammon, This was waitten the cun^ of the D^^ch W^r.
Amaleck are all bent upon our ruin. I wish you would also take notice, whence
our foaming adversaries took the first rise of their encouragement; and then
tell me (as Elish^ said to Gehazi) is this a time to receive Sheep and Ox^^? 2
Kings. 5^.20.
Is this a time for us to cavil one with another, when the flame is coming
toward us all, and climbing up into our windows; or as Absalom to Hushai, is
this thy kindness to thy Friend? Is this your love to your Native Country? That
you had rather -- Barbarus has segetes: that the Satyrs should dance here; and
forraigners inhabit our dwellings, than you will come short of your own wills;
unfold your stubborn arms, to receive them that are ready to rush into them,
rather than you will pay that tribute which is due to God and the King. What,
must we dispute of trifles when Hannibal is at the Gates: Are we so besotted?
Non tam Accersere, quam urgere, not so much to hasten, but Court our ruin?

And though I will not at this juncture of time turn upon you the mouth of your
own text -- Curse ye Meroz, Judges (...) 23
Curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof because they came not to the help of
the Lord against the mighty; yet give me leave to expostulate with you in a
portion of the same Scripture. verse 17. Why did Gilead abide beyond Jordan?
Why did Dan remain in Ships? Why did Asher continue on the Sea shore and abide
in his breaches? Plutarelf in Aristides
you come far short of Aristides and Themistocles: for though they had been
enemies one to another ever since they went to school together; yet against a
common enemy they desired to be reconciled one to another. Pilate and Herod (as
bad as they were) were made friends when in danger of a third person, the King
of the Jews. Do you think (like the Sea Pie) to rise by going against the Wind?
or which is worse, to rise by the fall of your Brethren? to sprout up out of
the ashes of the Church and Nation, must the public suffer? and do you think
to flourish in your private capacities? you know the apologue. The members
conspired against the belly, and were starved themselves. It Is impossible but
private interests must sink when the publik falls (...) Diou. Cossius p. 83.
When the Commonwealth thrives this is the way to prevent consumptions in
particular Members. Have we not had experiences enough of the miseres of War,
and the cursed fruits of resisting our superiors? to make one Church and
Nation wise, for at least one Century of years.

Who would judge by your proceedings, but that the supreme Magistrate were a
bound less Tyrant: who yet rules his people according to law; and is so
merciful as to pardon all former failour, though many and great. Who would
think but the Church were a severe stepmother? which has dandled you on her
knees and feeds her children with the sincere milk of the word, when they see
how inveterate you are against them both. I have read of one Azdashir, who
besieged Alsawade in the City Masce: E^tichius part secund^. p. 37^.
The Kings own daughter beholding from the wall the Assailants Army, and being
much enamored with the beauty of Azdashir: she writes in a paper, fastens it
to an Arrow and shootes it into the enemies Camp: Wherein she signifies to
Azdashir that she would betray the City to him, if he would marry her: He
accepts the condition, and when he was master of the City, instead of marrying
her, Azdashir asked her with what meat her Father fed her? She answered, with
the best of the Milk, the Honeycomb and Marrow; Azdashir replied since thou
have so requited him, How shall I put any confidence in thee? May not the like
questions be put to you? How have have you been dealt withal under the
Government of Kings? Like the Peasant in France, or the spunges in Turkey, have
you felt the shaving of Selymus his beard? or been subject to Dioclesians nod?
Whose Ox, or whose Ass was taken from him? And with what meat did your mother
the Church feed you? Was it not the very kidneys of Wheat, Butter and Honey?
And will you so requite her? As with Gallio, to stand as if you were careless,
when the is laboring for life? Is it nothing O all ye that pass by? nay, it
were to be wished, there were not some untoward, Zac. 1 15.
unhappy children which did not help forward her affliction. So the
perfideousness of the Donatists and Manichees in Hippo; were the cause that it
was made a prey to the Vandals. But who will put any confidence in such
undutiful and unkind Sons, who have lift up their heels against so tender a
Father, so indulgent a Mother? I beseech you Sirs! Remember the womb wherein ye
were born, and the paps that gave you suck. Rev. 2.5.
Remember from whence ye are fallen and repent, that our breaches may be once
more made up, and we may see England a quiet habitation. Let us by our mutual
love to each other, and by our joint labors in the Church, so endeavor to
please the Lord, That he may make our very enemies, to be at peace with us, Let
us discover Satan's siratagem (for the hand of this Joab is in all our quarrels)
in busying men of parts and sobriety in by-matters, that he may divert them
from following the unum necessarium. In keeping them disputing and scrambling
about Ceremonies, mint and Cummin, that they may neglect the greater things of
the Law, obedience to God and the King, and the edifying the church, in love.
He dreads those battering Rams of his kingdom, sound-preaching, and regular
praying, therefore (what possible he can) he obstructs these.

When Pyrrhus proposed to himself to win Rome, Sicily, and Carthage; Cyneas
asked him, what he would do at last? Pyrrhus said, be merry, Cyneas replied, so
you may be already, if you would be contented with what you have.

I know you will say, could we settle that discipline we desire; and moddle the
Church according to our platform, then we might be religious indeed. I must
(like another Cyneas) tell you, if you would be contented with that liberty
which is allowed you already. You may be as religious as you will, or can, who
hinders you? It is observed of Pigeons, that they are most fearful when they
fare best: Let us not be like Doves in this, jealous and querulous, when we are
by the Waters of comfort, in the midst of Manna.

Why should we then suspect Popery, and superstition? Charity thinks no evil. A
strong suspicion, where there is no evident cause to back it, does either
proceed from, or argue guilt. Therefore (all surmises being laid aside) let
every one of you endeavor to answer the sounding of my bowels toward you with
the same echo: I mean the same readiness and singleness of heart, as
Jehosophat did the King of Israel -- I am as thou art, 1 Kings 22.4.
my people as thy people, my Horses as thy Horses. But alas I perceive, that
all this while I have been beating the Air, or laboring in vain, in
persuading you to march in our ranks: for (I perceive) you are resolved to stop
your ears against my counsel. It Is part of your vow (that is) your Covenant --
Never to suffer your selves by what persuasion soever, to be withdrawn from
that union. Thus a Serpent never becomes a Dragon, until it has devoured a
Serpent. However, Whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear --
Liberavi animam meam; I have discharged the office of a Brother, in warning you
of your duty.

If in your cooler blood, and more serious thoughts, you see no cause to
retract that resolution, I must refer the issue of this persuasive, to him that
can persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Sem, who can overpower the wills of
men and stop Saul in his carreer to Damascus; who can make those that are most
wilful, even by one glance of his eye, as the Charriots of Aminadab -- A
willing people in the day of his power. Suadere hominis, persuadere Dei. Paul
may plant but God gives the increase: Therefore I must appeal to his throne by
prayer. And God forbid that I should cease praying for you. Pray therefore I
will in those words of that excellent Bishop of Winton. Bishop Bilson. p. 414.


The Lord make you mindful to keep the bond of peace, which he has left you,
and mindful to show that lowliness of heart which he has taught you; that you
wax not so wise in your own conceits, as to despise all others besides your
selves, and so resolute in your private persuasions, that you enforce your
devices upon the Church of God, under the name of the Holy and Heavenly
preeepts. Even so O Lord, for Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

Qui errare me existimant, etiam atque etiam quae sunt dicta considerent,
nefortassis ipsi errent. Augustinus in coronide libri de bona perseverantia.

Si quid in hoc opere dixerim, quoa placeat, non est indigentiae meae, sed
divinae sufficientiae; Siquid vero forsan dixerim, ut nec sufficere possit, nec
placere; non est sufficientiae divinae sed indigentiae meae. Fulgentius ad
Probam. p. 669.

Fidem nolle asserere, poene id est quod; negare plerumque mi'es ignavus, Regia
Castra, somnolento Corpore depressus, oppugnantibus tradit, dum competentibus
excubijs non defendit. Fulgent. p. 393 395.

In ijs rehus, de quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina, mos populi Dei,
vel In stituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt, de quibus si disputare
voluerimus, and ex aliorum consue tudinealios improbare, orietur interminata
luctatio, quae tempestate Contentionis, serenitatem charitatis obnubilet.
Augustini Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. vid. etiam Epist. 118. ad Januarium.

In those things which are indifferent, we are more bound to follow the command
of the Magistrate, than our own Conscience. Weems on the fifth Commandment.

It is not so much the tenderness of Conscience and weakness of brains, as the
Iron sinews in men's necks, which makes them so clamorous and scrupolous. Causes
of the decay of Christian Religion. Page 331.

No wise man mislikes reading of prayers, Mr. Hildersham on Ps. 51. p. 810.

In not maintaining the Laws Rulers ruin themselves Dr. Manton on Jude v. 8.
and in the same Commentary he says -- there are but two lawful causes of
separation from the Church. First, Persecution. Secondly, A general corruption
of Doctrine.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. Line 26. For as Read our. P. 16. l. 12. blot out to. P. 19. r. one.
P. 18. l, 20. r (...) l. 27. r. (...). P. 20. r. (...) P. 21 r. (...) P. 36. r.
Aecius P. 41. r. indicitur. P. 46. r. Mo^cion. P. 57. r. Davenant. P. 58. l.
10. r. aiming. P. 69. r. deliquium. P. 73. marg. r. nimis. P. 87. l. 12. r.
drives P. 90. l. 25. r. John 17 l. 33. r. feigning. P. 107. l. 14. r instance.
P. 115. r. assert. P. 122. l. 16. r. p^w. P. 127. 1. 13. r. indicare. P. 130.
l. 4. add out. l. 25. r. lapp. P. 132. r. (...) P. 138, l. 26, r, Anthem,

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Thomas Basset, at the
George near Cliffords Inn in Fleet Street.
Folio's.
COsmography in four Books, containing the Hystory of the World, etc. by P.
Heylyn price 20 s.

The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary and Persia; begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. And also the
Travels of Mandelslo from Persia into the East Indies; begun in 1638. and
finished 1640. the whole illustrated with Mapps. Written Originally by Adam
Olearius, Englished by I. D. price^ 8 s.

An Historical account of the Romish State, Court, Interests, Policies, etc.
and the mighty influences of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other
Christian States, not hitherto extant. Written originally by Mons. de St.
Amor. Dr. of Sorbonne. Englished by G. Havers: price 14 s.

The History of Barbados, St Christophers, Mevis, St. Vincents, Antege,
Martineco Montserrat and the rest of the Caribby Islands: illustrated with
diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable rarities therein
described. Englished by J. Davies, price 10 s.

Bentivolio and Urania in 6. Books, by Nath. Ingelo D. D. the 2d edition, price
12 s.

The complete body of the Art Military, being plain and perfect, directions for
the right ordering and framing of an Army both of Horse and Foot: together with
all the manner of fortifications, and the Art of Gunnery by Rich. Elton.
Lieutenant Colonel. price 8 s.

The History of the late wars in Denmark, comprising all the transactions, both
Civil and Military during the differences betwixt the two Northern Crowns, by
R. Manly price 6 s.

Ecclesiae Restaurata, or the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England, containing the beginning; progress and successes of it, from King
Henry the 8th. until Queen Elizabeth, the second edition by Petet Heylyn, price
10 s.

Aerius Redivivus, or the History of the Presbyterians, containing the
Beginnings, Progress and Successes of that active Sect, etc. by Peter Heylyn.
price 10 s.

The History of England extending to the Conquest of so much of Britain as was
subjected by the Romans. Written in the year 1666. price 3 s. 6 d.

The use of the Pen and Pencil, or the Art of Painting. By W. Sanderson
Esquire. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Serjant Rolls Abridgment of the Common Law, published by the Lord chief Barron
Hales, price 40 s.

Sir George Crooks Reports in three Volumes, price 45 s.

Lord Cokes Commentary on Magna Charta, pleas of the Crown and jurisdiction of
Courts. price 27 s.

Animadversions on, and amendmenrs of the fourth part of the Lord Cokes
Institutes of the Laws of England by W. Pryn price 12 s.

Sir Edmond Andersons Reports in two parts. price 14 s.

Reports taken by Sir Tho. Hetley in the 3d. 4th 5th 6th and 7th years of King
Charles the first, as they were argued at the Common Pleas Bar. price 5 s.

Quarto's.
The English Princess, or the death of Richard the third: a Tragedy, written in
the year 1666. price 1 s.

The Slighted Maid, a Comedy price 1 s.

The Roman Generals, or the distressed Lady. price 1 s.

The Marriage night, written by the Lord Faulkland price 1 s.

An exact Book of Entries by R. Moyl, Esquire and late Prothenatory of the Kings
Bench. price 3 s. 6 d.

A Treatise of Forest Laws by J. Manwood price 6 s.

Placita Lativae, Redivivae, a new Book of Entries by R. A. price 6 s.

Octavo's and Twelves.
The Art how to know men, written by de la Chamber, Englished by J. Davies.
price 3 s. Claudius Elianus his various Histories, Englished by T. Stauley.
price 2 s. 6 d.

Scarrus Novels, Englished with additions by J. Davies. price 3 s.

The Worthy Communicant by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and
Conne^. price 4 s.

Hyppocrates Aphorisms reviewed, and rendered into English price 1 s.

Modern Policies price 1 s.

Lux Lillio, or observations on two parts of Grammar, Orthography and Etymology
by T. Scriven, price 1 s.

An Abridgment of the three Volumes of Sir George Crooks Reports by W. Hughes
price 6 s.

They young Clerks Tutor being a Collection of the best presidents of
Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of sale, Warrants
of Attorney, etc. price 2 s. 6 d.

Landlords Law, a Collection of several Cases in the Law concerning Leases and
the Covenants, Conditions, Grants, Proviso's, Exceptions, Surrenders, etc. of
the same, as also touching Distresses, Replevius, Rescous and wast, and an
exact abridgment of the Doctor and Student. price 1 s.

The Complete Justice price 2 s.

Cary's Reports in Chancery price 1 s. 6 d.


