God's Eternal Preparations FOR HIS DYING SAINTS.

Discovered in a Sermon at PAUL'S, May the 7th 1648

By Thomas Hill, D. D. Master of Trinitie-Colledg in CAMBRIDG.

Isai. 9. 6. Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his Name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Father of Eternities, the Prince of
peace. Isai. 45. 17. Israel shall be saved with an everlasting Salvation.
Incomparabiliter clara est civitas aeterna, ubi victoria, ubi veritas, ubi
dignitas, ubi sanctitas, ubi vita, ubi eternitas. August. de Vita aeterna.
Repent quidem alta seculi corruunt, pulcra transeunt* nam cum stare in his
floribus suis mundus cernitur, repentina fortuna turbatur; aut festina and
omnia deturbante morte concluditur; vana ergo sunt gaudia seculi quae quasi
manentia blandiuntur, sed amatores suos cito transeundo decipiunt. Greg. in 1
Reg. cap. 11. LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard for Nathanael Brooks at the
sign of the Angel in Corn-hil. 1648.

VIA ^ VNA ^ COR ^ VNVM ^

HONORATISSIMO D. D. JOANNI WARNER PRAETORI, and Spectatissimis Senatoribus,
una cum gravissimis Communis Concilii membris, celeberrimae Civitatis
Londinensis Gubernatoribus, Auditoribusque mei candidissimis, Thomas Hill S.
Theolog. D. concionem hanc, habitam in Templo B. Pauli, Maii 7o Anno Dom. 1648
Tenue admodum, sinceri tamen amoris in Christo pignus erga animas vestras
devote D. D. D.

AA


To the Worshipful his worthy Friend Richard Foxton Esquire, one of his
Majesty's Justice of Peace for the Town of Cambridg, and others my ingenuous
and candid Hearers therein.
SIR!
IOW you much respect as an ancient Imanuel-Colledg man, where (by the good
hand of God upon me) I had both my first Universitie being, and wel-beeing;
and like-wise, as an old Disciple, a great friend to the most reverend and
learned Mr Perkins; yea, and as an Instrument of advancing Justice in the
Commonwealth, of encouraging Religion in the Church, and Learning in the
Universitie (according to your sphere) as also my attentive and candid hearer
for some years formerly in Cambridg: And I know not how better (for the present)
to make any reciprocal return, then by tendering this Sermon (such as it is) to
your acceptance; and hopeing that by you it may with the more advantage be
transmitted to others in Cambridg, who are prepared to receive the love of the
truth, 2 These. 2. 1^.
though delivered by me; as also for your Soul-improvement, by raising your
thoughts in your declining years to mind Eternity.

It was the greatest part of it preached by me at Trinitie-Church in Cambridg,
Febr. 13. 1647. and I can truly say, it was both framed at first upon a sick
bed, (when such thoughts are very seasonable) and preached when I was under sad
symptoms of wel-nigh six months Quartane Ague. So desirous was I to promote the
intended Combination for morning Sermons there, which depended upon me for the
beginning of it, that with apparent hazard to my own health, (being not only
weakened by my desease, but having, upon an occasion of a Communion, preached
three times within a few days before in Trinitie-Colledg Chapel) I adventured
upon the work out of an honest intention, though I had neither consent of
Friends or Physicians. Admit I were not able to carry on or finish my
discourse, as I desired, should I not rather have been pitied then bespattered,
then grossly disparaged by son, and the present prevailing of my disease most
shamefully mis-interpreted by others, as if this were a Judgment of God upon
me, for defending the Universitie against the Town; wherein they show as
little Christianity as Wisdom.

As for them, I earnestly desire they would seriously consider what our Savior
says, Mat. 12. 36.
Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of Judgment. Note.
And if of every idle word, then undoubtedly of every uncharitable, censorious,
lying, and blasphemous word. And likewise often remember that of the Prophet
Zachary, Zach. 1. 15.
I am very sore displeased with the Heathen that are at ease: for I was but a
little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. When God whippe's
his children, it is most unbecoming brethren to add to their stripes. He is no
ingenuous servant that triumph's over his fellow (unless he be guilty of some
offense) when he is brought low before his Master.

And as for me, I am not ashamed to be made comformable to my head Jesus
Christ, who was accounted Beelzebub, the prince of devils; Mat. 12. 24.
and to be reproached as one that was mad, which was the portion of the most
wise and holy Apostle Paul. Neither shall I deny that this was an humbling
Providence, that such an indisposition should surprise me then, Act. 26. 24.
(though it might well be so after a longer and stronger intention of spirits
in prayer then my condition would bear) to let splenatick fumes more
prevailingly surprise me in preaching at that time, then in any other
employment since my ague began; wherein I desire to sanctify God's Name, by
abasing my self, and exalting Him without whom we can do nothing. I wish all
may make a right interpretation of his actions which are infinitely wise, and
consider that Ministers, being public persons, as they have consolations that
they may comfort others, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
so have they many times afflictions for the edification and salvation of
others: 2 Timothy 2. 10.
Paul is an instance of both. And they must make account they may possibly
inherit the same Apostle's portion; one while possibly to be adored, and
almost sacrificed unto, Act. 14, 11, 12, 13. and yet soon after to be stoned,
verse. 19.

I were very stupid, did I not observe the various aspect of diverse in
Cambridg-Town toward me in some bypast years, wherein I have, and I hope
still shall unchangeably endeavor to approve my self a true friend to their
best good (in defiance to all unkindeness) and a faithful servant to their
souls. Psalm. 24. 6.
Yet, by the good hand of God upon me, there have been withal a generation of
Seekers which have cleaved unto, and with some fruitful acceptance, attended
upon my Ministry. I would not value personal respects, in comparison of that
acceptance which has reference unto the glory of Christ in Gospel-success.

I remember, not without thankfulness to my good God, with what welcome
entertainment many entertained my weak and plain preaching here in former
years, An. Them. 1628. 1629.
when I was your preacher at Andrew's. I hope I shall never forget how much of
God's goodness I found amongst you both in his assistance and your acceptance
in the great plague; 1630.
( he can make by his presence a Wilderness prove a Paradise) neither must I
pass by with what readiness of mind you attended upon my occasional ministry
in 1643, when Providence cast me for some time amongst you, the sons of
violence having forced me from the place I then had in North-Hampton-shire.
Tychmersh.


But whence is this Eclipse? whence this black cloud? (God and some men's
conscience know) which I doubt not but it will soon vanish, as Athanasius said
of Arrius. Nubecula cit^ transitura.
Shall I trust God for my soul, and not for my reputation, for a crown, and not
for a crust?

It was indeed my portion to be involved in those unhappy differences between
the Universitie and Town of Cambridg, about their Privileges, when I had the
honor to serve them as Vice Chancellor. Is that a sufficient ground of such an
unkind alteration, that they calumniate and traduce the Innocent thereupon?
Alas! poor Universitie, how have thou offended the Town of Cambridg which
live's so much upon thee? (as by woeful complaints appears when a great plague
scatter's the scholars) that as of old it was in Tertullian's time, a crime to
be a Christian: so it is now little less (amongst some for want of Christian
charity) to be an engaged Universitie-man, and to stand for that, though he
be obliged thereunto by the Rules of Ingenuitie and Conscience.

I do heartily wish, where our privileges are not subservient to the public
good, they were regulated and bounded by those who have power as our competent
Judges; but neither Universitie nor Town must be Judges in their own case. We
cannot give them away, they must not take them away, till the Parliament (to
whom we have appealed) do determine the controversy. In the mean while, till
they can have leisure to mind it, why should it be offensive for us to act
soberly, according to that which the Universitie has been so long invested
with, by the donation of Princes, confirmation of Parliaments, or by a
voluntary composition betwixt both Corporations.

Certainly, this is no sufficient ground for such passionate unchristian
invectives, whereby they fret themselves to do evil, Psalm. 37. 8.
gratify him who is the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10.
and the father of lies. Were it my portion only to be thus injured, John 8.
44.
I should suspect my self; but my reverend Brethren, who deserve much better
then I can, fare as ill from some, when one of them lately was forced by a
violet fit of an ague, being preaching at the Universitie-Church, to break off
not long after he began; it would make one tremble to hear what language was
spoken thereupon aaginst him, for the holy hand of God upon him, which might
have befallen an Apostle; and against others of us engaged as Masters of
Colleges with him.

O that I knew what language to speak, to win them to terms of amity with the
Universitie: Surely the Devil get's much advantage by these differences; they
are most unhappy Instruments who ever do inflame them, whether Universitie or
Townsmen. Is God's Word the worse because delivered by men they now dislike?
Is not this sad, that men, whose ministry they have valued, that they can
scarce bring off your spirits to hear them preach. This is the devil's plot, in
fomenting those prejudices to hinder the good of their souls, and the spreading
of the Gospel. Herein mistake me not, I do not complain for want of Auditors.
Yet it grieve's me to see some of more eminent abilities, whose gifts were
formerly highly valued, now to be slighted, because engaged in
Universitie-employment, as Masters of Colleges.

Yet, what ever some think of me, and how unkindely soever they have dealt with
me, I will apply my self to you (whose Christian candor, and
Gospel-ingenuitie, I have had some years experience of) not without respect to
their good, who wish me none. I doubt not but you will bear my wonted
plainness I can give you no more real testimony of my cordial love unto you,
then by suggesting some few things, which, by God's blessing, may advance the
good of your souls.

duty toward God, Directions.
who is our Alpha, and Omega; our first cause, and last end: as all the good
we receive is derived from him, Rev. 1. 8.
so all the good we receive must be resolved unto him. Prove. 3. 5, 6.
Trust in the Lord with all your hearts, and lean not to your understanding: In
all your ways acknowledge him, and he will direct your paths.

worshipping him purely, according to his will. I doubt Cambridg has been too
patient (I mean the Saints there) of sinful mixtures, not mindeing sufficiently
the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
If you would have much of the presence of Christ, love purity, he walks in
the midst of the golden candlesticks; Revel. 2. 2.
expect much of the presence of his Spirit, where there are pure golden
Ordinances.

Let the Ministry of the Gospel be more precious unto you, love of the
truth, and attend upon preaching without respect of persons. Do not ye blush
to remember, that when the truly Noble Earl of Manchester had picked a choice
combination of most able Ministers out of the Country, that they should ride a
dozen or twenty miles to preach a Sermon to you, and sometimes so few hearers
that they were discouraged to preach? What ever you say or think of Scholars,
did not they help to fill up Assemblies, there would be thin Auditories at
week days Lectures. Remember (I pray) our Savior's words, He that hears
you, Luke 10, 16.
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me.

Maintain Christian Communion, whereby you may experiences and prayers. O the
amiable beauty of the spirits of primitive saints, who did so sweetly close,
Act. 2*4^*
as, They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and prayers.

I can remember, when, in the most corrupt and dangerous times, some of you
would adventure even your all, (so destructive was then the high Commission
Court) to enjoy a praying-day together; what has now deaded your spirits, that
now these things are so much neglected?

Is there not as much need as ever? Does not the Churches exigents bespeak your
wrestling importunities at the throne of grace.

Chide your selves, and one another out of this dullness, or disjointing, and
labor to remove the obstructions what ever they are. Often remember their
practice, when one Apostle was in prison (we have many in persecution) instant
prayer was made for him by the Church, Act. 12. 5.
they prayed earnestly, and sped succesfully.

Christian communion, act soberly, and with a godly prudence. There are that
admit young Scholars into fellowship with them in private duties, or rather
into public: I dislike it not, that any Saints join to provoke one another to
love and good works. Romans 12. 3.
But do not encourage them to do any thing beyond the proportion of their
gifts, and without a call from God. Far be it from me to snib the movings of
God's Spirit in the weakest and meanest of his Saints. I desire to live no
longer then I cherish the least good in any, if indeed it be good duly
circumstantiated.

I know the direction Peter give's, 1 Pet. 4. 9, 11.
Use hospitality one to another without grudging. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God, (which is a place they alledg for that purpose.) But,

1. It may be this grace here mentioned, is chiefly the grace of Bounty.

2. If it be meant of spiritual gifts and graces, and their exercise in
prophesying, I grant, in Ecclesia constituenda, in a Church to be constituted,
occasionally, especially when upon trial by competent Judges of their
abilities for the ministry, (with learned Dr Ames) something may be don that
way, Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap 25. de Voc. ad Minister.
sine singulari vocatione, without a singular call. But that the admiration of
some few ignorant (though honest) women, who judge much by quick expressions;
(which are often beyond the experience and judgment of the speaker himself,
being borrowed rather from others) or that one young scholar applauding of
another, should be the call of Christ, I am not yet satisfied; but shall
welcome any light that shall clear up any truth of Christ, though never so much
against my present opinion. I do not lay the strength of a Minister's call upon
a Prelate's blessing of him; nor upon a concurrence of all external
circumstances and formalitie; Note*
(though I heartily love and desire order in the Churches) neither must any
judge of their call by their assistance. Many dear Saints call that a spiritual
desertion of God in prayer, which is rather some darkness by the clouding of
Melancholy. Other Novices account that assistance from God in preaching
oftentimes, which is rather heat of fancy, some warmth by applause, mixed
indeed with some stirring affections.

whetstones to sharpen one another to raise some monument of your thanksgiving
and thanksdoing, for God's distinguishing goodness to Cambridg. When other
parts of the Kingdom were steeped in blood, you were dry; when destroying
Angels swept away many in other places, you were but scratched. O never let it
be forgotten how God snatched Cambridge out of the fire, in staying the plague
these two last years; should not you now provoke your Magistrates more to mind
the sanctifying the Lord's day, to restrain by their power those profane
pollutions which cry for another more sweeping plague? Because they may not do
all, but the Universitie must share in power, therefore will they do nothing?
This, I doubt will be no satisfying answer, when the Lord shall say to a
Magistrate, Give an account of thy stewardship. Luke 16. 2.


I could likewise wish there were a greater harmony of Judgments amongst you;
however let not difference of opinions breed difference of affections. Love the
meanest Saints more for that of God you see in them, then you neglect them for
what they differ from you that is not sinful. Convers meekly together,
(distance increases difference) you may possibly satisfy one another. As long
as we nourish prejudices, and take it for granted, there is no possibility of
reconciliation, the devil blow's the coal more, and exasperate's the flame,
till (it may be) men bite and devour one another names and reputations; at
least, do not suddenly excommunicate all you account carnal; Gal. 5. 1^.
for Reprobates, though you cannot embrace them with a love of Complacencie,
yet must you with a love of Pity; there is not only Brotherly kindness, 2
Pet. 1. 7.
but Charity: so will you commend Religion to them who judge more of it by what
they see, then by what they hear.

Finally, as for my self, when they speak evil of me, Photii Epist. 10.
I will satisfy my self with that of the ancient Writer, If the things thou
producest be true, thou have not hurt but advantaged me, whilst thou by
reproving faults, may procure reformation: if they be falls, thou do more
advantage me; for thou make me more watchful to abstain, not only from
such actions, but even from such thoughts; only, the more vigilant others are
over me, pray the more for me, Isid. Hispal.
because of my observers. I must say with the Father, I thank as well God for
the cruelty of my Adversaries, as the love of Friends. It has been my portion
to suffer much by tongues amongst you, since my being Vice Chancellor, and to
receive more unkind and unjust censures from some of Cambridg, then ever in all
my life before; (my comfort is they are but few, and men whose interest was
crossed, and therefore Self will be angry, and revenge often, though never so
injuriously) yet nothing shall it discourage me from serving your and their
souls. Let them mis-interpret the hand of God upon me in my sickness, and the
effects thereof; yet when ever God please's to restore my bodily health, by
preaching to promote the health of their souls: I will beg by prayer the best
good from God for them, who cannot speak a good word of me before men. I had
enemies enough because I appeared for Reformation, which I would not decline
(if I know my heart) out of love to my God, though I had not been (as I am)
under the bond of a solemn Covenant obliging me thereunto. When the
competition comes between God's will and man's, Peter has taught how to
resolve, Act. 4. 19. yea, that heroical Heathen Socrates, (...) Vide Plat.
Apol. Socrat.
(which may make us blush) being accused, said, If upon such conditions (they
being dishonorable) you Athenians will absolve me, I embrance you, I love you
well, yet I will rather obey God then you.

None need (especially not such as I think fear God) express more passion,
because I would not, contrary to my oath betray (which it may be they expected
from me, having been their preacher, with more acceptance formerly then it is
fit for me to mention) privileges with which I was betrusted as
Vice Chancellor, lifting up my hand to the most high, that I would maintain the
statutes (which include's them) so far as they were agreeable to the Statutes
and Ordinances of the Kingdom which are or shall be extant. If the Parliament
had altered them, or when they shall please to bound them any way, the matter
of my oath being taken away, I am at liberty. In the mean while, why may not
the Vice Chancellor act for the Universitie, as well as Mr Major for the Town
of Cambridg, in pursuance of his Oath? The Mighty God of Peace, dry up the
spring of these most unhappy and unseasonable differences, when there are so
many dissensions abroad; which shall be my prayer and endeavor till the Lord
please to accomplish it.

If I must still suffer under the uncharitableness of any, I shall desire to
kiss the rod of my Heavenly Father, Mic. 6. 9.
who has appointed it in this place where he has been good unto me; and
earnestly labor, that overcoming my self, Rom, 12. 20, ^^
I may overcom evil with good, and not suffer my self to be overcom of evil,
that in so doing, I may heap coals of fire upon their head, not to destroy them
by burning, Igniculi Charitatis.
but coals of charity to melt them, and so mould them into an unfeigned love
of all the Brethren who love the Lord Jesus Christ sincerely.

If this prevail not, I will make use of Paul' s sovereign cordial, Rejoicing
in the Testimony of my conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God I have had my conversation
in the world, and more abundantly to youwards.

Trin. Col. Camb. June the 7th 1648. Yours in the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
Thomas Hill.

God's eternal Preparations for his dying Saints.
2 CORINTHIANS. 5. 1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens.
TOo many men in the world are like unwise Merchants that have two ships at
sea; Preface.
one little old rotten one, full of things of an inferior value; another, a
goodly ship, and full fraught, and richly laden; yet possibly, out of some
particular and fond respect, he may more mind that rotten bark, then that
stately ship, which call's for more serious thoughts, and more fervent prayers.
Our immortal souls are goodly ships, indeed, sparks of Divinity, our bodies
are poor brittle houses of clay, (for the best of the sons of men dwell in no
better.) Now, to have the strength of our thoughts, the vigor of our
affections, the greatest stream of our endeavors, to run out to mind our
bodies, it is a preposterous care; yet most men in the world are sick of this
distemper; and therefore I shall desire you to set before you a better copy,
that does bespeak, yea, challenge, yea, command your imitation of it: Paul, he
well knew the worth of his immortal soul, and therefore laye's out his most
serious thoughts about it, and the eternal welfare thereof. The words contain
Paul's account of the sweet support that he had under bitter troubles.

Be pleased to cast your eye upon the 4th Chapter, there you shall find him
tossed upon a most troublesome sea of affliction; yet he count's them all but
light in the 17th verse: a strange Paradox at least to the carnal heart and
ears.

We know, not not only in the singular, but in the plural number, not only
for himself, but wrapp's in the Saints with him, We.

conjecturally, that is Popish language, a dull, groundless hope of salvation
only; but we know, where is an evidence and a certainty.

What did he know? why those lessons well worth the learning for all those
that will be good Scholars in the school of Christ, and would be able to hold
out, if their Master be provoked to whip them. We know that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: that if, (...), etsi, although
(says Grotius upon the place) Although our earthly house of this tabernacle
were dissolved. Here you have a description of the brittleness of our body; 1.
The bodies mortality.
a poor Venice-glass, goodly, beautiful, useful, but easily broken: every word
(almost) has an emphatical intimation; it is but an House: Houses, you know,
will be out of repair, houses will fall in time; it is but an earthly house,
and therefore may be resolved into its first principle; it is our earthly
house of this Tabernacle; the Tabernacle was a moveable house. When the
children of Israel were to travel through the wilderness, they had Tents, they
had Tabernacles, moveable houses, fastened with a few cords and pins, easily
removed. If our earthy house of this tabernacle were dissolved, soul and body
though knit together, though the soul be the darling, as the Psalmist speak's,
Psalm. 35. 17. yet that knot must be untied, when they have been married forty,
fifty, threescore years together; it needs no cutting asunder of the knot, it
will break of it self, the lamp will burn out: all this shewe's the mortality
of our body, but then that which he does intend, is principally and more
explicitly to show you that we have indeed an eternal provision made for us
in heaven.

Lay two things that have an opposition together, Contraria juxta se posita
clarius elucescunt.
one will illustrate another, and make it appear more clearly, as Logicians
speak: so says Paul, We know that we have a building with God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens. When he had before spoken of an house
that was made of man; Carpenters build houses: but there is something reserved
for the Saints, which is God's own making, and that in a more immediate way;
man indeed is made (...), but here it is (...), he being the more special
immediate maker of this piece of work-manship, God's own preparing, none can do
it but God himself, and he does not use any instrument therein.

We have a building of God. Heb. 1. ult.
Great honor, that whilst poor Saints live here upon earth, Angels shall be
their servants, and all creatures to attend them; and God himself in heaven
has been preparing a house for them, even from eternity what house? a house
not made with hands. So in Hebr. 11. 10. A City whose builder and founder is
God; we look for such an one.

Eternal in the heavens: that was earthly, that was a Tabernacle, that was
subject to dissolution; that was earthly, this is heavenly; that was but a
Tabernacle, a very temporary house, this is eternal.

And here was Paul's certainty, this he was sure of, which is a great matter,
a glorious privilege. But there is one word which link's all together, and that
must not be forgotten, and that is the first in the Text, For; What did
support Paul? What was his cordial in those great extremities, that he did not
sink when wave upon wave came flowing in upon him? says he, For we know: 2
Cor. 4. 18.
he had beheld those things that were eternal, We look not upon those things
that are temporal, but those that are eternal: and here he, looked upon them
with an eye of certainty, For we know; and from these premises deduce's this
sweet Conclusion.

O that you and I had such faith to do the same, if God should cast us into as
great a sea of troubles, as ever Paul was plunged into, that we might say,
These are nothing! why so? For we know, that though the very sentence of death
should not only be passed, but executed upon us, by these troubles, by the
furious malice of unreasonable men, Is vere felix qui miser esse nequit.
yet they cannot make us miserables as he is truly happy indeed that cannot
be made miserable: he is a rich Citizen indeed, that cannot be undon by the
Devil and all his Agents; we know God has prepared a house for us, where he
will entertain us with everlasting happiness. Out of the words (had I time) I
might handle these three Propositions.

First, Doct. 1.
That God has been pleased to make eternal provision for all his Saints in
heaven.

Secondly, Doct. 2.
That it is possible for his Saints to have a certainty of this, that God has
built such a house for them in heaven, where he mean's to entertain them
eternally.

Thirdly, Doct. 3.
The certain evidence of this to their own hearts, would be a most sweet and
sovereign cordial under the bitterest troubles that can befall them.

Let us begin with the first, and that I shall only handle at this time; but
before I make any further entrance upon it, give me leave only to premise
this one thing:

The best of Saints dwell here in poor tabernacles: the best of Saints, all
Adam's sons have no better a portion, then to dwell in poor earthly
Tabernacles. Some men are very great, so great, that they are called Gods, Psalm.
82. yet even they must die like men. It is appointed for all men once to die,
Hebr. 9. 27. And in the same Dialect does the Psalmist speak in another place,
Psalm. 39. 5.
Verily man in his best estate is altogether vanity; not only man when he
lie's sick under a great long Ague, or a Fever, or the Stone, or the Gout; not
only under infirmities of old age, which is a kind of sickness, but verily
man in his best, take him in flore; take any young man, when he has strength,
and vigor, and marrow, and all heat, all advantages nature can afford him, yet
in his best he is altogether vanity. Old men must die, and young men may die:
I believe you have many instances of both; it may be it has cost some of you
many bitter and brinish tears: we are all poor Tenants at will; it is true,
we are Tenants for life, but yet that life is but for a moment; and so indeed
our lease is but from moment to moment. O that we were so wise as to consider
it, and therefore to carry our selves like Pilgrims and strangers here, and
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against our immortal souls, as the
Apostl^ Peter beseeches his beloved, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Do not reckon your selves at
home, make account you are but in a journey, you are But (...), in an Inn; it
is to no purpose to go build there, to go plant there a garden, to go furnish
your chamber, you are but for a nights lodging; the very Stoics (Epictetus,
and others) could speak that language: O that we could be the more active,
while our candles are burning, because we know not how soon they may be
extinguished; God let us not always the candle burn out, Note.
sometimes it is put out: O that we could be active as our Savior Christ was,
I will do my Father's work while it is day, while it is light, the night comes
when no man work's, Joh. 9. 4. O that we would so consider, that we dwell in
these brittle houses of clay, Ephesians. 5. 16.
that we would redeem time, redeem precious opportunities; Eternity depends
upon every moment; A quolibet momento pendet aeternitas.
there are many that sell away their time to the first temptation in the
morning: many young Gentlemen, Citizens, and others, for whom their fathers
have had many wearisom journeys and thoughts, night and day, to get good
estates; now they think themselves Gentlemen, the first thing they do in a
morning, after they have spruced, and powdered, Note.
and combed, and tricked up themselves, then they sell themselves and their
talent of time to the next temptation, at the next tavern, at the next
gaming-house: the Lord put it into the hearts of the honorable Governors of
this City, to look to those snares, those pit-falls, that have undon many
thousand young men; and where many of your estates, after you have gotten them
with a great deal of care and industry, are thrown away with the shaking of
the elbow (as they say); they sell away their time, so far are they from
redeeming time: little do they mind eternity, and and consider, that at the
best they also dwell in houses of clay, and that in their best estate they are
altogether vanity; this I premise.

There are three things will conduce (if God please to help me in the midst
of many weaknesses) to open this point, That he has made eternal provision to
entertain all his Saints in heaven.

1. I Will give you the (...) of it, by way of demonstration, that it is so.

2. The (...), or grounds of it, how it come's to pass that it should be so.

3. What the Nature of this Eternity is.

I. (...), That God has made eternal Provision for his Saints, appears by 4.
demonstrations* 1. Demonst. God has given his Saints immortal souls capable of
eternal happiness.
For the first, there are these hints which I hope will help to clear it: If
the Lord did not intend eternal provision for his Saints in heaven, why has
he given them immortal souls, capable of etertie? God and Nature (says the
Philosopher) never do any thing in vain: let us say, God, and his wisdom and
grace never does any thing in vain. There are many desperate disputes (never
did we expect to hear such in England, especially in these times of
Reformation) against the immortality of the soul, in defiance to that clear
light of God's Word even here. There is a house eternal in the heavens, for
what? for a mortal body? for a mortal soul? what need's an eternal house for a
mortal soul? Note.
Paul desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ: it seems Paul, who was
guided by the Spirit of God, Philip. 1. 21. he thought he had an immortal
soul, else why did he desire to die, that he might be with Christ? he had
better have stayed here; he did enjoy much of Christ here; why would Christ
himself have given such an answer to the Thief, Luke 23. 42, 43. Lord, remember
me when thou come into thy Kingdom; why, says he, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise: It is a poor evasion they have, that Christ should say to
him, (...),
Verily, I say unto thee to day, there they would have the comma, thou shall
be with me in Paradise; then the answer is not full to the Thief's question;
for then they overthrow the Scriptures, and make it nothing, and withal,
manifestly pervert the original, as the Spirit of God speak's it unto us; but
this is the first thing, God has given you immortal souls, and therefore
reserv's it for you.

2ly. 2. Demonst. God has appointed a day of the Resurrection. Act. 17. 30.
The Lord has proclaimed, that he has appointed a day (though it be
concealed) that there shall be a resurrection of all his Saints, their souls
and bodies shall be reunited. It is most desperate doctrine the Socinians
have up and down in their books, they have a delentur, they tell you your souls
shall be blotted out. Who would have thought we should ever have so far
complied with Socinians and Arminians, as many people do? I hope it is
ignorantly; but, to speak the very Socinians language, they reckon the soul
shall be blotted out, no eternity afterward: but why soul and body
reunited? Surely, for some further end; has not Jesus Christ said, Joh. 6. 39,
44. he has it twice, I came down to do my Father's will, and the will of my
Father is this, that all that he has given me shall com to me, and I will
loose none of them: so again, ver. 44. and I will loose none of them; not the
least member, not the least finger, not a joint in the mystical body of Christ
shall be lost; for this is certain, Note.
(and it is a most sweet truth) As by the death of Christ the hypostatical
Union was not dissolved, not the humane Nature separated from the Divinity; so
by the death of a Saint, the mystical Union is not dissolved; neither body or
soul are dis-jointed or separated from Christ, the very dust of a Saint is
still in Christ's keeping, and (though in a most mysterious way, yet) both soul
and body are united to him; though many of your friends may be lost in the
sea, and eaten by fishes, though many of them shot to pieces with bullets, and
torn with Cannon, etc. yet still the mystical Union is undissolved; and though
it is true Jesus Christ will send for wicked men at the day of Judgment, as a
Judge send's for a Prisoner, the Sheriff, or who ever the officer be, when he
intend's to execute him, commanding that such a Prisoner be brought to the
place of Execution; Colos. 3. 3, 4.
yet he raise's his Saints, not as a Judge, but as an head: he raise's them by
virtue of Union with himself, as a father send's for his Son home from the
University, that he may more refresh him, and satisfy him, and cloth him,
etc. it may be he think's he has had short Commons there, that now he may
com and be entertained with the fatling, Luke 15.
even as the Father did entertain his Prodigal son, and much more then we are
capable here upon earth; but then

3ly. 3. Domonstrat; God has appointed a day to give them possession of
Eternity. Mat. 25. 23, 34.
There is a day of Judgment, when they shall have possession of this eternity;
Com ye blessed of my Father enter into the Kingdom. heretofore the Kingdom of
Christ has been in them, entered into them, but now they must enter into the
Kingdom; heretofore some joy entered into them, but now they must enter into
their Master's joy, be possessed of joy, of a Kingdom; and then fourthly, and

Lastly, 4. Demonstrat. Christ has prepared Mansions.
Jesus Christ himself has prepared Mansions: Joh. 14. 2. Mansions are not
tabernacles, but durable houses: I go to my Father to prepare a place for you,
and thither you shall com, and there are many mansions; if it were not so I
would have told you; (a most ingenuous melting speech) room enough in heaven
for all the Saints; though God has never so many children, yet every one shall
be his heir; and though Jesus Christ have never so many subjects, yet every
one shall be a King; why? because he himself is their reward, he himself is
their Crown, he himself (as Austine says) is their Inheritance; every one an
house, every one a Mansion in heaven? yes, God himself is their habitation, who
is eternal.

Now the Grounds, II. (...), The Grounds of the Doctrine. 1. God has decreed
it.
why it come's to pass:

1. God and the Father has resolved it from eternity; it is resolved from
eternity that it should be so; their names are written in the book of life;
thou John, and thou Elisabeth, and thou Mary, and thou Zachary, you are book'd
down; there is the particularitie, there is the certainty; your names are
written in heaven, rejoice in it, Luke 10. 20.

2. 2. Christ has purchased it.
Jesus Christ he likewise has taken care to do his part, he has purchased
this place for you; it is a purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. As he did
purchase it, so he possessed it, he kept it; he reserveth heaven for you, as
well as preserves you for heaven; the Crown is reserved for you in heaven, 1
Pet. 1, 4.

3. 3. The holy Ghost applie's it.
The Spirit, which is an eternal Spirit, Heb. 914.
in concurrence with God the Father, and God the Son, he has been preparing,
and polishing, 2 Cor. 5. 5. (...), rem rudem expoliens, Camer.
and fashioning his Saints, that they may be meet for heaven, Col. 1. 12. and
so you see a joint concurrence, that all their operations may be of equal
extent; not as the Arminians would say, and their followers, that make the
death of Christ larger then either the Decrees of God, or the Application of
the Spirit; here the three glorious Persons in the Trinity jointly concur that
all the Decrees may be made good, that all the promises may be accomplished,
and that all your prayers may be answered: and so in this eternal house
reserved for you, you shall then see all these three effected.

Now for the nature of eternity* III Nature of this Eternity.
and there I shall only hint that which is the description of the learned
Boethius, Eternity is such an unbounded possession of life, as is perfect and
altogether.

1. There is a Possession: Eternitas est interminabilis vitae possessio,
perfecta and tota simul Boethius.
a possession, that is, a tenure, both firm and quiet. In heaven you are not
subject to any uncertainties, to any intercisions, to any interruptions, you
shall never be turned out of that house; it is above Thievs or Robbers, Mat.
6. 20.

2. It is a possession of life, nothing is properly eternal, but that that is
living; Eternity being a duration according to immanent acts, (as the
Schoolmen speak) and those immanent acts do presuppose life; Job 2. 4.
now life for life, or life upon life, skin upon skin, so some render that place
in Job, (indeed the Anatomist's will tell you* you have many skins, three or
four at least) life upon life, one after another. You Will venture all to save
your life which you most esteem.

Life is most precious: it is an high pitch of love, when you com to venture it
for God, it being most dear to you; and therefore the fitter to set forth
Eternity: it is a possession of life.

3. Interminabilis, without bounds, no end of this happiness: without beginning,
and without end, but this shall have no end, as much as creatures, as much as
Angels are capable off; it is an unbounded, an infinite possession (as it were)
of life; and that

4. Perfect; whereas now the best of Creatures, Angels, have a part post, for
time to com.

5. Altogether; you are fully, entirely, and wholely possessed of it, and all
at once; you have whole heaven, the first moment you com to heaven: Time is
Nunc fluens, but Eternity is Nunc stans; a standing moment, that has a
co-existencie to time past, time present, time to com; that is the nature of
it; and that house you shall have in heaven, shall have this eternity added to
it, to the happiness of having the fruition of God himself.

By way of Instruction; Application. Use 1.
Let poor carnal men that wallow in lust, and take so much pains to gratify
the Devil, in making provision for their flesh, Rom 13 (...)
consider how dear they pay for them, and what they lose: Alas poor souls! you
pamper your body, you paint your house, you adorn it, but all this while you
take a great deal of pains to very little purpose, for you lose Eternity.
Cyprian bring's in in the Devil triumphing over poor carnal people at the last
day of Judgment: Here are the souls that I never died for; and, (in a way of
upbraiding Jesus Christ) here are the souls that thou laid'st down thy life
for, and under-went'st so much trouble and contradiction of sinners for, and
now they are mine and not thine: Note.
O what a sad triumph to you, though the Devil will rejoice in it! As all the
Saints in heaven, and Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, at the
return of a Prodigal, Luke 15. so when any one is recovered into the snares of
the Devil, all the Devils in hell keep holy day (as it were), triumph in it,
when they can get a man, such a man especially that has lived not in a Sodom
and Gomorrah, but in Capernaum, in a London, lifted up to heaven by the means
of the Gospel, and lived in godly Family, brought up under a godly Parent, it
may be in a Universitie under a good Tutor; and if he can get such an one,
how will the Devil triumph? But, poor soul! little do thou imagine what a
looser thou art, no less then the eternal happiness of an immortal soul; and to
make it more dreadful to thee, that so thou may (if the Lord please)
endeavor to rescue thy self out of those snares in which thou have been
entangled all this while: do but think a little what hell is, and what things
are eternal in hell.

1. There is an Eternity of that, What things are eternal in hell.
which Divines call pana damni everlastingly destroyed, from the power and
presence of God everlastingly Depart, depart ye ursed. 2 These. 1. 9. Mat. 25.
41.
How do many good women grieve and mourn when their Husbands are to go to sea,
or go a far journey, or in the public service in a Military way, though they
think (it may be) it is but for some Months, or for a year, and have very
probable hopes, if not certain, that by the blessing of God they shall return
in ordinary course; but what will you be, when soul and body shall com to
part, not only themselves by death, but thou partest with thy Savior eternally,
though thou may own him as an husband, and challenge him as thine and com
and speak good words in a complemental way to him, Luke 13. 26, 27.
as they in the Gospel. Luke 13. 26. 27. We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, we have been baptized; we have been thus often at thy Table, we
have been kind to our Minister, and we have don these and these things for
the public: O but Christ will not own you, you have not endeavored to find a
spiritual building in your souls, and therefore you cannot expect an eternal
building in heaven, that is a certain Argument: but this will be your doom,
Depart, everlastingly to turn the back upon Jesus Christ, and to be out of all
hopes, all the least possibility of mercy, and to be sent packing into hell,
and there chained up: O then when that thou come with that unprofitable
servant, to be cast into utter darkness, where is nothing but weeping,
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, then thou will weep over thy self, bemoan thy
remedile's condition, and gnash thy teeth with envy, when thou (like Dives)
shall see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; thy self being possibly an Alderman,
Common Council man, Knight, (I speak not to any particularly, but promiscuously
to all); or, it may be, a servant of Christ, whom thou have scoffed, 1 Cor. 6.
2.
shall be in Abraham's bosom, having judged thee to lie in hell eternally;
he^e is poena damni; the loss of eternity it self: and is not this much? but
yet here is more.

2. Here is the punishment of sense. Besides the loss of God, (a Saint eternal
torments, to fry in hell, to be everlastingly destroyed, to be everlastingly
lashed, Note. Si addas eternitatem alicui malo, erit infinite inalum. Less. de
perfect. Divin.
to have stripes, and it may be many stripes everlastingly, this is to be
truly miserable. They that are ignorant shall have some stripes, and one lash in
hell will be lamentable, because it will be eternal: but to be eternally
lashed, and that with many stripes, O what a loss is here: I cannot but pity
you who scoff us poor souls for your sakes, and be charitable even to those
that are without, and desire heartily your deliverance from this misery.

3. But here is an Eternity likewise, as of fire without thee to eternal
flaming conscience within, a worm that never die's, a fire that will never be
extinct. What was that that made Caligula, as great a man as he was, an
Emperor, run under a bed, when it thundered; there was a terrified conscience
within: and you hear much talk of Furies that the Heathens had that haunted
them; it was hell in their consciences, and this will gnaw thee to Eternity; O
how will thou check and chide thy self, and be upon a perpetual rack within,
(I doubt some of us know what it means already, by horrors and terrors of
conscience) to think I outlived so many Ministers, I persecuted so many
Saints, I trifled away so many Gospel-seasons, I neglected the day of my
visitation; conscience tell's thee this was thy fault, God will be justified
in thy confusion, Note.
and though thou have an eternal loss, yet thou have right from God, and it is
charged upon thy self, that it is thy will not, that did undo thee; Why will
you die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 18. 31. But you will say next by way of Question,

How can it be just with God, Quest.
if we dwell in houses of clay, in brittle houses, and fining but temporally,
to punish us eternally?

Take Gregorie's Answer, Reason 1.
(if my memory fail me not) We sin in our Eternity, Deus punit nos in
aeterno suo, quia nos peccamus in aeterno nostro.
and therefore God will punish men in his Eternifie; yea, let me add this
further.

We would sin eternally if God did leave us to our selves; there is not a
wicked man in this congregation, but has that within him that would betray him
to sin against God eternally, 2
if God should leave him;

Yea, when thou come to hell, if thou should lie there Millions of years, 3
thou can never satisfy God; and therefore thou having offended an infinite
God, must undergo an infinity of torments. It would be some comfort to a
wicked man, if after he were there Millions of Millions of years, there some
hopes of recoverie out of it. Origin had an opinion, that all wicked men should
be saved at such a time, some think the Devils at last; but the Scripture is
contrary, therefore satisfy your selves with this, there will be no
interruption, Mat. 16. 24. Psalm. 49. 7.
nor redemption; what shall a man give for the change of his soul? If a man win
the whole world, and loose his own soul, what will it profit him? what shall a
man give for the change thereof? If you could conceive that one of the numerous
stars in heaven should fall at the end of a 1000, Drexellius his Book of
Eternity.
1000. years, when all the stars are fallen that you should be released, there
would be some comfort. Divines use these comparisons: If at the end of 10.
millions of millions of years you should but fetch one sand out of the
Seashore, or a Bird pick out but one drop of water out of the Sea, when all
this were spent, all this were exhausted, if then there would be but a little
abatement of torments, there would be some refreshment; but (brethren) such
shall be locked up in hellish chains, there is no abatement, no remitting. O
consider what you do, and what losers you are, and how dearly, how exceeding
dearly you pay for some transitory, momentanie pleasures here below: there is
the first Use.

An Use of Expostulation: Use 2. Of Expostulation.
Is it thus that God has made eternal provision for his Saints in heaven? then
(brethren) I beseech you give me leave a little to expostulate the case with
you: How come's it to pass that you do not more mind Eternity? Do you believe
this Doctrine to be true, That God has provided such an eternal house in
heaven? why do you not then more contemplate it? The contemplation of that
glorious house that God has reserved for you in heaven for all his Saints,
would have an admirable influence upon us; if any thing in the world should
melt us, that would de it. Do not bound your thoughts, and circumscribe them,
in the consideration of that which has no bounds: mind that much here upon
earth, upon which you must live for ever in heaven; and, to encourage you,
there will be these advantages:

1. 1. Advantage, by contemplating your eternal mansions in heaven.
If you look backwards so the eternity of God's election: Good nature, (I mean
new nature, for that only is good nature) there is no good nature, but so far
as there is (at least) some common work of the Spirit of God; so far as men get
ground of self-love by some work of the Spirit, so much good nature they have,
and no more) If there be the least spark of it, as there is in all the Saints
of God, it will fill them with ingenuitie, and it will engage them to serve God
in their eternity; that is to be constant, to be faithful even to the death;
not to be a back-slider, nor revolter, nor like the false spies that brought
up an ill report of the land of Canaan; then

2. 2. Consideration. Your eternal mansions will have a sweet influence upon
your Spirits.
When you look forward, it would have a most happy influence upon you, nothing
would make you such active and such passive Christians, as to consider
Eternity, and that Jesus Christ has purchased Eternity for you. Paul would
be content to be a Fool, to be any thing, to be nothing; why? he did judge
it most reasonable, 2 Corinthians. 5. 14, 15. that if Christ did die for him, that
he might live, then it was that he might live to Jesus Christ* why? Because
you shall live with him hereafter. There is nothing in the world will keep you
more above troubles, 1. It will keep us above troubles.
brethren, when shakeing and sinking times shall com, then such considerations;
who are the generation of people now in the world, that are most unshaken in
England, in any of the Protestant Churches, where there are streams of blood,
where there are such confusions and distractions, as we have had sad
experience of; why they whose eternal condition is safe, 2. Above trifles.
being in a good hand; I have an immortal soul, which God has taken possession
of, and that shall be everlastingly happy; and as it will keep you above
troubles, (...) Damasc 1. 2. de Orthod. Fide. cap. 13.
so indeed it will keep you above trifles, above vanities; what is the reason
that the vanities of this world do so much carry men away? because they do not
know, or mind Eternity. It is an admirable expression that Damas^en has, he
says, that those that will live according to God, they must exercise
pleasures, whether necessary, or natural, only in transitu, as they pass by:
it were a rare thing now to have such a disposition of soul: you enjoy
pleasures and comforts in the world, and many of you swim in them, and you have
the world at will, but you should only take it in transitu, as you are going
home to your Father's house just as a Scholar coming from the University, is
going to his Father's house, but he is content to bait in an Inn. Nothing in
the world will sublimate your souls more, then to mind Eternity; the Lord
make you more apprehensive of it.

Again, 3. Compose differences.
would you have all the sad differences, that are now amongst many people of
God, in London and in England, (for these indeed are the sad provoking ones)
would you have them swallowed up, then let your thoughts be more possessed of
Eternity: here is so many heats of Disputes, and so many contestatious, a
great deal of Religion is turned into arguing and disputing, (the Lord grant
we do not loose much of the life and vigor of practical Christianity by these
fiery Disputes) which should be buried, being most unbecoming Brethren. O how
many bitter provocations, how much opposition, how much censuring, yea, how
much persecuting of one another do these differences cost? I dare say, the want
of the consideration of Eternity, is a great occasion; and if your souls were
more full of that, if you thought you should live in heaven together, you would
shake hearts and hands more lovingly here upon earth. Plutarch. Dion.
It is a notable story of Ovidius Pollio, that invited Augustus to supper, and
while his man was preparing for, and setting forth. Supper, he broke a glass,
and the man of the house, (the great Emperor Augustus being to com) he was so
troubled at it, that he condemned his Servant to be cast into the Sea, that
he might be devored of Fishes: when the Emperor heard of this, he took all
the glasses, and broke them in pieces, and said, Better never a glass in the
world, then one man should be lost for them. We had heretofore many Disputes
about Ceremonies, and we have as many now about mere externals, I dare say,
that are no ways essential to Christianity. A man may be of this opinion,
and that opinion, I speak of external forms; I would have every fundamental
truth precious, and what has an influence, and what concern's our Religion and
the substance of it: but for some externals, and for some circumstances that we
have so much heat about, about this form, and that form and circumstance,
better a great many such glasses as some of them are, (to say no more) were laid
aside, if not broken all to pieces, at least put up in a cup-board a while,
(give the common adversary so much present advantage) then it should cost so
much blood, as it possibly may do, so much heat amongst Saints, amongst
brethren, (I am very confident of both sides are many such dear Saints of God,
that will spend Eternity together) and if heaven were capable of any sorrow,
this would be a great part of it, that they did so much quarrel upon earth
together: O consider it, consider it! the Lord fill your thoughts and mine too
more and more with Eternity, that so your hearts may cling and cleave more
together, that you betrary not all to the common Enemy.

Brethren, I must say as Chrysostom, (God know's, if my heart deceive me not,
I desire to speak it with deep respect to this honorable renowned City, and
with sense of the Condition of all the Saints of God in England, and Scotland
too) to his hearers, he would never leave preaching against swearing, till
they left swearing; and as often as you are pleased to employ me to serve your
souls in this way, I shall never leave pressing Peace and Love, till there be
more love amongst Saints, and amongst Brethren, that while you dwell in these
houses of clay together, you may not fall out, because you shall all one day
dwell in the same eternal house together. Will you give me leave to tell you a
plain story, out of Livie, Live. lib. 2.
concerning Menenius Agrippa, There was a great difference, betwixt the
Inferiors and Superiors, several Opinions, and they complained that those men
of place got away all from them, and therefore they would have them
circumscribed, and confined, and kept short; he come's like a witty subtle
Orator to them, and use's this Parable; says he, The stomach in the body,
that swallow's all, what shall we have don with the Stomach? A great deal of
meat it eat's, the Head must contrive, and the Mouth take in, and the Hands
reach it to the Mouth: O (say they) the Stomach must be kept short; the
Stomach was kept short a while, but then the Hands were enfeebled, Note.
and the Head starved, and the Mouth closed up, and all the Body is in a
confusion, when the Stomach was not fed. I intend not any particular, as to
your City, I beseech you* mistake me not; I Will suggest the Application, and
leave you further to enlarge it; I Will say it seriously, that the People of God
are like the stomach to the body, they help to maintain the whole; and I say
it most confidently, there is never a wicked man in this Congregation, nor in
any other part of the Christian world, but be may bless God for the Presence
of Saints amongst them; for it is the children that God take's care for: when
the house is built, the scaffold shall com down, and go to the fire; it may be,
when the corn is ripe, and carried in, the hedge is designed to be burned: God
care's not for wicked men, but in reference to the corn, no more then a
Carpenter care's for his Scaffold, but in reference to his house. Make much of
the people of God, cry them not down, because they are of this opinion, and
that opinion, differing in some lesser matters, if they be Saints; Job 22. 30.
the innocent shall deliver the land: Sodom could not be undon, Genesis 19. 16.
as long as Lot was there; and I am confident there is not a Saint in London,
nor in England, though he may be perhaps uneven in his practice, (the Lord
reduce him) he may have some unsound opinions, (the Lord recover him) and I
wish we might all set to do it, with a Spirit of Meekness, and Wisdom, and
Evidence of God's truth; but yet I say, the meanest of God's Saints, as he
has preparations for in heaven, so is he a pawn and pledge of mercy here upon
earth: therefore they that persecute them, drive away God's blessing from
themselves. And let me say this to the Saints, (I would I could speak as in the
name, and be in the power of God, in such language as may stick with you);
Little do you consider that the third Party make's account to raise themselves
in your ruins. For the Quarrel (we must speak out, the Quarrel) is not
INDEPENDENCIE, nor PRESBYTERY; Quarrel at bottom is the power of Godliness;
and I am verily persuaded, as I am speaking in this honorable Assembly at this
time, if the difference between them were compounded, (as I doubt not but in
God's good time it may be) you will have another Controversy rise (unless you
can reconcile the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent) for that is
but their stalking-horse, and their pretense, because they see there is a
difference between those you call Presbyterians and Independents, Note.
which they endeavor to improve to carry on their own designs: just like men
that see two schoolboys fighting, set them on, and cry, Well don, good boys,
etc! Here they cry out against this Presbyterian, and that Presbyterian, and
com into another shop, and there they will cry out on the other side, to
exasperate their spirits, that so at last when you have gotten bloody noses,
and can fight no longer, then they may get the better of you both: this is
their project.

I beseech you, suffer not your selves in any Convention, or public meeting
whatsoever, to be seduced by a fine cunning speech that will talk of
Presbytery and the Covenant, etc. things very good, but then there com's in a
clause in the conclusion of his speech, that drive's on his own design, and you
shall in the mean time, if his Rhetoric overcom you, do his and the Malignants
work; and God forbid, the City of London should do it. Give me leave to be
earnest, wherein the good of so many thousand souls, the Kingdom, both Kingdoms,
yea, the cause of the Protestant Churches abroad is so much concerned; (I speak
it, as if I were to die and answer it immediately after Sermon) shake your
hands and hearts, and though there be some difference in opinion, it is a
thousand times less evil then to suffer men that are Enemies to Christ, and
his Kingdom, Covenant, and Presbytery, and Scripture-reformation in their
hearts, to prevail; O let there be such thoughts of Eternity, where you shall
dwell together, let that possess your souls so that you may sweetly and
seasonably close, and not betray your selves to a third party: For your
encouragment consider what is Eternal in Heaven: Why brethren, there is an
eternal freedom from all evil; and an eternal enjoyment of all good which will
make you infinitely happy.

By way of thankfulness; Use III.
bless God therefore, bless him all ye poor Saints, that have any hopes, any
spiritual building, any foundation of that, (...).
any thing of Jesus Christ in your souls, bless the Lord for it; adore, admire
free grace, and say eternity will be little enough for your thoughts, 1 (...).
how to advance that God, that has prepared an Eternity of blessedness for
you; First, you are a people of acquisition,: You are purchased: 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Christ Jesus was at great cost and charges to recover you, 2 2 Cor. 5. 5.
you have a purchased Possession; Ephesians 1^ 1^. You have a purchased Spirit,
3 Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Non prodest resurrectio nisi Christus in te resurgat.
that fit's and prepare's you for it; O let God have the glory of it; and now I
beseech you, let this be your great care that you do live according to your
hopes; that is one thing, I shall bespeak (I Will have don presently) live
according to your hopes; If you hope to live eternally in heaven, do not
prostitute those rich hopes, do not be praevaricatores spei, as the Father
elegantly speak's; O do not delude, do not prevaricate those eternal hopes of
yours: Let Christ be the scope of your life, follow him in the way, Sit scopus
vitae Ch^istus quem s^quaris in via ut assequaris in patria.
that you may attain him at your journeys end; let this be your care; Saints
should burn here like a Lamp, which is fed with Aromatical Oil, when it is
extinguished, it will leave a very sweet smell: O thus should Saints live;
you will say,

Q. How should we do this? how?

A. Directions.
A few directions: First,

Take heed of carnal company; 1 Beware of carnal company.
fly and shun them; there are no Drunkards in Heaven; I mean such as live and
dye drunkards impenitently, no such persons in Heaven, that live impenitently
in their sins; Away from me all such, God has heard the voice of my weepings:
Psalm. 6. 8.
What shall I do to convers with such men here, that I must be everlastingly
separated from at the day of judgment! what shall I live with such men, that I
shall judge at the last day! I Will rather judge my self for any carnal compliance,
or conversation with them. 2 Be careful in the use of earthly delight.
Secondly, Let this be your care, Use creatures only as your servants, not as
your friends, if God have provided an Eternity, do not all things here, as if
you were at home; but do things here, as it were in your way to the Kingdom; as
the Painter said, who being ask't why he was so exact in his Painting, why
(said he) these pieces are for Eternity. I pray for Eternity, and I desire to
act in my place, as a Governor of a City, Alderman, Parliament Man, whatsoever
condition I live in, as a Minister, I do it for Eternity, and so labor to keep
your hearts above all comforts: It is a great mistake, uti fruendis, and frui
utendis.
Austin has it, that men do use things they should enjoy, and enjoy things
they should only use: Jam. 4. 4.
We make use of God only and seek not to enjoy him, but we enjoy those
things, we should but only use; that is, Creatures, we make them our
Friends, that we should make only our servants.

Thirdly, 3. Have your conversation in Heaven. Phil. 3. 20.
Have your conversation in Heaven, O speak heavenly language, walk by a
heavenly rule, begin heavenly employment, let every Sabbath day be to you an
Epitome of Heaven: when ever you com to an Ordinance think, now I am in a
corner of the Kingdom of Heaven: and carry your selves so to sing praises to
God, and admire and adore his mercies, and to power out Hallelujahs to him, as
if you were in Heaven. And then in the fourth and last place: Be much in
communion with God; for what is Heaven, 4. Be much in communion with God.
but the full pitch of Communion with God, be glad of address to God, com not
to prayer, as to a task, but as to a sweet privilege, com not to it only to
enjoy such blessings from God in prayer, but also to enjoy thy God in prayer,
and to have a sweet communion and fellowship with thy Savior there, and that
there may be some illapses of his spirit into thy spirit, and some irradiations
of the Sun of righteousness, some beams to fall upon thy soul, this is heaven.
And therefore I beseech you in the last place, (and so I shall dispatch, I Will
not meddle with the other two points, Use IV.
but by way of Motive) If it be so, Take a friendly caution, beware as you
love eternal happiness of an immortal soul, do not let things lie at six and
sevens, (as they say) at mere uncertainties any longer, but give diligence as
to make your calling and election, so likewise to make your eternal mansions
reserved for you in Heaven, as sure to you, give diligence: 2 Peter 1. 10. Now
I should have added the two next points, one is to show you,

That it is possible to attain such a certainty, D. e.
and the other is to show you,

That it is a sovereign Cordial, D. 3.
in the greatest troubles; but I Will wrap them up, I see the time is gone; only
two Motives:

First, Motive 1.
Though to attain such a certainty be difficult, yet it is possible; there is
not only a Faith of adherence, by which you rest upon Christ for salvation,
Faith of Adherence.
but a Faith of evidence, by which you know Christ to be your Savior; Evidence.
that all Saints have, and this later they may have; the one is required to the
Esse of a Christian, to the being, but this to the wel-beeing of a Christian;
therefore some of Gods Saints want it, and the best of Gods Saints have it not
at all times, but sometimes to prepare them for a cross, sometimes to cheer them
under a cross, as Paul and Silas, when they were in the prison, Acts 16. 25.
sometimes to reward and crown them after a cross, after great troubles: Let me
add this further:

There is that Divines call certainty of the thing, Certitudo Objecti.
and of the Person, the certainty of the thing, it depend's upon Gods decree,
upon the mighty and invincible power of the spirit of God, upon the efficacy
of the death and intercession of Jesus Christ; Subjecti.
of the thing it shall be made good; the Saints shall com to Heaven; but then
certainty of the Person, that is more or less, as God is pleased to dispens
himself; Sometimes the Saints pay a little fine, have a little legal
humiliation, then they pay a great deal of rent, it may be more trouble about
their Sanctification afterward: Note.
sometimes they pay a great Fine, when they are converted, lie long under a
spirit of bondage, then after six or seven or more years, the spirit of
adoption take's possession of them, (it may be) they never meet with a cloudy
day many years afterward, here is Certitudo subjecti, as God please's to
dispens himself, and this may be the Portion of many Saints, not only as an
extraordinary privilege to Abraham and Paul, (as the Papists would make us
believe) but as a privilege common to the Saints; that is, they are all capable
of it, and they may attain it, if God pleas, according to the ordinary rules of
his word* We know says Paul, Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? etc. He says not only of himself, but of others; but how com you
to this certainty? there is a threefold seal thereof.

There are are the promises of God, Three seals to assure the Saints certainty
of heaven. 1. The blood of Christ sealing the Gospel-promises. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
which are yea, and Amen in Christ, and they are sealed in his blood; though
thy name be not written there, yet it is included, and Faith will spy and
pick it out; As when you have the Commandment, (the Papists use this as a
great Argument;) Is no man sure that he is in the promise, because John or
Zachary is not in the promise? so you may as well say no man is obliged in the
Commandment, because his name is not there; now as you must apply the
Commandments, so the promises, and Faith will fetch out thy name that is
wrapped up in the general: And secondly, 2. Seal of the Sacraments which are
seals of the Covenant.


As there is the blood of Jesus Christ, to seal the promises, in whom they are
all Yea and Amen, 2 Corinthians 1. So there is the seal of the Sacraments, a
public standing visible seal, whereby things are made more credible to us,
though they are as true in themselves as things can be; yet by a present
visible representation, to help your sens, you shall have the material
Elements, as it is Austins comparison; When a man is upon the ground, that be
may be raised toward Heaven, he must make use of his hands, leaning upon the
earth: So that we may be lifted up to Heaven, Jesus Christ has appointed
these things sensible to help our Faith; and then thirdly,

There is the Privy Seal of the holy Spirit, which by a secree work does
reallize and particularize the two former; 3. Third seal, the holy Spirit.
Grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption:
Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Cor. 2. 12.
So that it is possible, God enabling them fiducially to apply such promises to
themselves, and to see the work of grace clearly in their hearts; and that the
certainty of their salvation shall be sealed to them; 1 John 5. 7. There are
three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost,
and these three are one; All the the three glorious Persons concur as to work
so to confirm our Salvation. The Testimony, the Record is, v. 11. That God
has given to us eternal life, and this life it in his Son. v. 8. There are
three that bear witness on earth, the spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and
these three agree in one, which seems to be the Spirits Testimony in the
work of Vocation, the Testimony of Water in Sanctification, and of Blood in
Justification, rather then the Sacraments, 2 Motive. Difficulty, Possibility,
Excellency, three whetstones of diligence.
etc.

It is a most sweet and excellent thing, if you could attain this: Brethren, it
is the very next door to Heaven, to be sure of Heaven: the very next thing to
the being in Heaven, is to have a certainty of Heaven; you are in the Suburbs,
you are in the Porch, you have entered Paradise, that glorious Palace, when you
com once to this assurance; O sweet! it is a very Heaven here upon earth; Peace
of conscience that passe's understanding, and joy in the holy Ghost, which is
unspeakable and glorious, these are the words the Scripture here use's of it,
as of the first fruits of Heaven: Phil. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Now what is this? why it is indeed the believing and the eying of those things
that are eternal, and a certain knowledge, as Paul speak's there in that place,
2 Corinthians 4. 17. For our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; Paul a man of
great crosses, yet you see in the midst of all had the greatest comforts, a
light affliction; he had told you a sad story before of his troubles, v. 8, 9,
10.
that would (it may be) fink your hearts and mine, yet here light afflictions,
which were but for a moment, they were great and long, yet he call's them
light and momentanie; what is the reason? why, they work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory; works out, as the spirit of God
carrie's you through, not by way of merit; a far more exceeding weight of
glory, as the Spirit of God prepare's them for Heaven, so Heaven is prepared
for them; and you shall find, it is prepared in this method, by affliction; as
in the 1 Peter 5. 10. The God of grace that has called you to his eternal
glory, make you perfect after you have suffered a while; this Hyperbolical
weight of glory, which Paul tried in his afflictions did uphold him.

It is not moral Philosophers apprehensions, that could support them; there was
Aristides, and Socrates, and others, that might be called the Puritans among
the Heathens, who went very far and suffered much, Socrates to death; yet
doubtless if they had nothing but mere morality, it would not have comforted
them.

As moral Philosophy will not carry a man through when he com's to suffer, so it
is not Jesuitical fancies which some Papists have that can yield solid comfort;
It is a thing worth knowing, I would every one knew it; Mr. Burroughes Gracious
spirit, c. 3.
it is indeed in Hospinian, and you will find it in the excellent Book of that
man of God, that now is triumphing in Heaven, he will tell you how the Jesuits
use to raise a man to kill a King, some of them the new Romanists com to venture
themselves very far, and will expose themselves to suffer much, to that which they
think Martyrdom, as the old Roman Heathens, and others did, who threw themselves
sometimes into the greatest troubles, even to death it self; (Popularitie and
Vainglory, and self-respect, and such considerations may do much:) How do they
raise a man to kill a King? First, they bring him to such a place, and there
they show him a consecrated Knife, and so many consecrated beads hanging upon
it, and then they deliver it into his hand, O here is the sword of Gideon,
Jephtah, etc. and pray to God to bless him, and prosper him, then they carry
him to an Altar, there they show him the picture of Jacobus Clemens that killed
Henry the third to animate him, and then they fain (as they can act a part most
diabolically) and seem to envy him, O to what a height of happiness art thou
advanced, that can kill a King. (It is a dangerous Religion, whose principles
lead to that, to eat their Maker, and kill their King;) yet this you see they
do, and this will heighten a poor man for a while, and some of them are so
desperate and proud, and vainglorious, they will do it, but this will not last,
this will not be a sufficient Cordial, the sovereign Cordial of all, is to
behold Eternity, to see him that is invisible, as Moses did, and to see the
things that were Eternal, as Paul here did. Heb. 11. 27.
One asked the great Duke of Saxony, How came you to be upheld in so many
troubles, you have met withal? Says he, I felt the Divine consolations of
the Martyrs: If God should let wicked men prevail, and the disaffected party
of both Kingdoms (who now it is clear are joined, and Ireland I doubt in too) I
am afraid they have all one design, if God should suffer them so far, and leave
the Saints of God so far to themselves, to give advantage to them, to suffer
wicked men to prevail, yet God will carry on his cause. The Revelation will prove
true, they cannot undo us, they can but send us to Heaven: I could tell you a
sad story (which I had from the fountain) of a Gentleman, that had don very
good service to his Country in the Parliament, who was one of the Eleven, came
to take his leave of one of the greatest Subjects in the Kingdom, by his place,
said to him this, when he came for a Pass to go over Sea, He thanked him for
his kindness, saying, Had the plot prevailed on the other side, you had not
been so kindly dealt withal; Therefore let us labor to acquaint our selves with
the true, yet the divine Consolations of the Martyrs, at least some taste of
them, then let the Devil, and all the Malignants in Hell, and on earth do their
worst, yet they cannot everlastingly undo us; God may suffer them to bring us
into a suffering condition, but when we suffer with Christ, we shall reign
with Christ, and be crowned with Christ, there is a Mansion in Heaven reserved
for us after we shall have judged those that live and dye Enemies to us, and to
Jesus Christ. Now the Lord in his rich mercy, give you to find such a sure
foundation of this spiritual building, even Jesus Christ, laid up in your
hearts, that you may have a certain Evidence of this eternal building: Amen.

FINIS.
A Postscript to the READER.
Candid Reader,
IF in any of these six plain Sermons, there be any defects or redundancies,
be pleased to consider they were transcribed by him who took them in
Characters, in some things possibly he might mistake, in other things be
mistaken, the Printers not knowing his hand; And probably diverse Errata pass
uncorrected, both in the Sermons and Epistles, I being sick or at a distance
(for the most part) from the Press. Excuse what is amiss, accept and improve
what is good: The Lord who has abundance of spirit, bless that unto thy
spiritual and everlasting good, through Christ Jesus:

Thine in and for Him, T. H.


