Licensed

May 26. 1677. To. L'strange.

Decameron Physiologicum: OR, TEN DIALOGUES OF NATURAL Philosophy.

By THOMAS HOBBES of Malmsbury.

To which is added The Proportion of a straight Line to half the Arc of a
Quadrant. By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1678.

The Contents.
Dial. 1. OF the Original of Natural Philosophy. Page 1. 2. Of the Principles
and Method of Natural Philosophy. p. 14. 3. Of Vacuum. p. 23. 4. Of the Systeme
of the World. p. 31. 5. Of the Motions of Water and Air. p. 46. 6. Of the
Causes and, Effects of Heat and Cold. p. 58. 7. Of Hard and Soft, and of the
Atoms that fly in the Air. p. 72. 8. Of Gravity and Gravitation. p. 84. 9. Of
the Loadstone, and its Poles; and whether they show the Longitude of Places on
the Earth. p. 104. 10. Of Transparence, Refraction, and of the Power of the
Earth to produce living Creatures. p. 121. The Proportion of a straight Line to
half the Arc of a Quadrant; by the same Author. p. 133.
CAP. I. Of the Original of Natural Philosophy.
A. I Have heard exceeding highly commended a kind of thing which I do not
well understand, though it be much talked of, by such as have not otherwise much
to do, by the name of Philosophy. And the same again by others as much despised
and derided. So that I cannot tell whether it be good or ill, nor what to make
of it, though I see many other men that thrive by it.


B. I doubt not, but what so many do so highly praise must be very admirable,
and what is derided and scorned by many, foolish and ridiculous. The honor and
scorn falls finally not upon Philosophy, but upon the Professors. Philosophy
is The knowledge of Natural Causes. And there is no Knowledge but of Truth. And
to know the true Causes of things, was never in contempt, but in admiration.
Scorn can never fasten upon Truth. But the difference is all in the Writers and
Teachers. Whereof some have neither studied, nor care for it, otherwise than as
a Trade to maintain themselves or gain Preferment; and some for Fashion, and to
make themselves fit for ingenious Company: and their study has not been
meditation, but acquiescence in the Authority of those Authors whom they have
heard commended. And some (but few) there be, that have studied it for
Curiosity, and the delight which commonly men have in the acquisition of
Science, and in the mastery of difficult and subtle Doctrines. Of this last
sort I count Aristotle, and a few others of the Ancients, and some few Moderns:
and to these it is that properly belong the Praises which are given to
Philosophy.


A. If I have a mind to study (for example Natural Philosophy) must I then
needs read Aristotle, or some of those that now are in request?


B. There Is no necessity of it. But if in your own meditation you light upon a
difficulty, I think it is no loss of time, to enquire what other men say of it,
but to rely only upon Reason. For though there be some few Effects of Nature
(especially concerning the Heavens) whereof the Philosophers of old time have
assigned very rational Causes, such as any man may acquiesce in, as of Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon by long observation, and by the Calculation of their
visible Motions; yet what is that to the numberless and quotidian Phenomenon of
Nature? Who is there amongst them or their Successors, that has satisfied you
with the Causes of Gravity, Heat, Cold, Light, Sense, Color, Noise, Rain,
Snow, Frost, Winds, Tides of the Sea, and a thousand other things which a few
men's lives are too short to go through, and which you and other curious Spirits
admire (as quotidian as they are) and fain would know the Causes of them, but
shall not find them in the Books of Naturalists; and when you ask what are the
Causes of any of them, of a Philosopher now, he will put you off with mere
words; which words, examined to the bottom, signify not a jot more than I
cannot tell, or Because it is: Such as are Intrinsecal quality, Occult quality,
Sympathy, Antipathy, Antiperistasis, and the like. Which pass well enough with
those that care not much for such wisdom, though wise enough in their own ways;
but will not pass with you that ask not simply what is the Cause, but in what
manner it comes about that such Effects are produced.


A. That Is Cozening. What need had they of that? When began they thus to play
the Charletants?


B. Need had they none. But know you not that men from their very birth, and
naturally, scramble for every thing they covet, and would have all the world,
if they could, to fear and obey them? If by fortune or industry one light upon
a Secret in Nature, and thereby obtain the credit of an extraordinary Knowing
man, should he not make use of it to his own benefit? There is scarce one of a
thousand but would live upon the charges of the people as far as he dares. What
poor Geometrician is there, but takes pride to be thought a Conjurer? what
Mountebank would not make a living out of a false opinion that he were a great
Physician? And when many of them are once engaged in the maintenance of an
Error, they will join together for the saving of their Authority to decry the
Truth.


A. I pray, tell me, if you can, how and where the study of Philosophy first
began.


B. If we may give Credit to old Histories, the first that studied any of the
Natural Sciences were the Astronomers of Aethiopia. My Author is Diodorus
Siculus, accounted a very faithful Writer, who begins his History as high as is
possible, and tells us that in Aethiopia were the first Astronomers; and that
for their Predictions of Eclipses, and other Conjunctions and Aspects of the
Planets, they obtained of their King not only Towns and Fields to a third part
of the whole Land, but were also in such veneration with the People, that they
were thought to have discourse with their Gods, which were the Stars; and made
their Kings thereby to stand in awe of them, that they durst not either eat or
drink but what and when they prescribed; no nor live, if they said the Gods
commanded them to die. And thus they continued in subjection to their false
Prophets, till by one of their Kings, called Ergamenes, (about the time of the
Ptolemies) they were put to the Sword. But long before the time of Ergamenes,
the Race of these Astrologers (for they had no Disciples but their own
Children) was so numerous, that abundance of them (whether sent for or no I
cannot tell) transplanted themselves into Egypt, and there also had their
Cities and Lands allowed them, and were in request not only for Astronomy and
Astrology, but also for Geometry. And Egypt was then as it were an University
to all the world, and thither went the curious Greeks, as Pythagoras, Plato,
Thales, and others, to fetch Philosophy into Greece. But long before that time,
abundance of them went into Assyria, and had their Towns and Lands assigned
them also there; and were by the Hebrews called Chaldies.


A. Why so?


B. I cannot tell; but I find in Martinius Lexicon they were called Chasdim,
and Chesdim, and (as he says) from one Chesed the son of Nachor; but I find
no such man as Chesed amongst the issue of Noah in the Scripture. Nor do I
find that there was any certain Country called Chaldaea; though a Town where
any of them inhabited were called A Town of the Chaldies. Martinius says
further, that the same word Chasdim did signify also Demons.


A. By this reckoning I should conjecture they were called Chusdim, as being a
Race of Ethiopians. For the Land of Chus is Aethiopia; and so the name
degenerated first into Chuldim, and then into Chaldim; so that they were such
another kind of people as we call Gypsies; saving that they were admired and
feared for their Knavery, and the Gypsies counted Rogues.


B. Nay pray, except Claudius Ptolomaeus, Author of that great Work of
Astronomy, the Almegest.


A. I grant he was excellent both in Astronomy and Geometry, and to be
commended for his Almegest; but then for his Judiciar Astrology annexed to it,
he is again a Gypsy. But the Greeks that traveled (you say) into Egypt, what
Philosophy did they carry home?


B. The Mathematiques and Astronomy. But for that sublunary Physiques, which is
commonly called Natural Philosophy, I have not read of any Nation that studied
it earlier than the Greeks, from whom it proceeded to the Romans. Yet both
Greeks and Romans were more addicted to Moral than to Natural Philosophy; in
which kind we have their Writings, but loosly and incoherently, written upon
no other Principles than their own Passions and Presumptions, without any
respect to the Laws of Commonwealth, which are the ground and measure of all
true Morality. So that their Books tend rather to teach men to censure than to
obey the Laws. Which has been a great hinderance to the Peace of the Western
world ever since. But they that seriously applied themselves to Natural
Philosophy were but few, as Plato and Aristotle, whose Works we have; and
Epicurus, whose Doctrine we have in Lucretius. The Writings of Philolaus and
many other curious Students being by fire or negligence now lost: though the
Doctrine of Philolaus concerning the Motion of the Earth have been revived by
Copernicus, and explained and confirmed by Galileo now of late.


A. But methinks the Natural Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, and the rest,
should have been cultivated and made to flourish by their Disciples.


B. Whom do you mean, the Successors of Plato, Epicurus, Aristotle, and the
other first Philosophers? It may be some of them may have been learned and
worthy men. But not long after, and down to the time of our Savior and his
Apostles, they were for the most part a sort of needy, ignorant, impudent
cheating fellows, who by the profession of the Doctrine of those first
Philosophers, got their living. For at that time, the name of Philosophy was so
much in fashion and honor amongst great persons, that every rich man had a
Philosopher of one Sect or another to be a Schoolmaster to his Children. And
these were they that faining Christianity, with their disputing and readiness
of talking got themselves into Christian Commons, and brought so many Heresies
into the Primitive Church, every one retaining still a tang of what they had
been used to teach.


A. But those Heresies were all condemned in the first Council of Nice.


B. Yes. But the Arrian Heresy for a long time flourished no less than the
Roman, and was upheld by diverse Emperors, and never fully extinguished as long
as there were Vandals in Christendom. Besides, there arose daily other Sects,
opposing their Philosophy to the Doctrine of the Councils concerning the
Divinity of our Savior; as, how many Persons he was, how many Natures he had.
And thus it continued till the time of Charlemain, when he and Pope Leo the
third divided the Power of the Empire into Temporal and Spiritual.


A. A very unequal division.


B. Why? Which of them think you had the greater share?


A. No doubt, the Emperor: For he only had the Sword.


B. When the Swords are in the hands of men, whether had you rather command the
Men or the Swords?


A. I understand you. For he that has the hands of the Men, has also the use
both of their Swords and strength.


B. The Empire thus divided into Spiritual and Temporal, the freedom of
Philosophy was to the power Spiritual very dangerous. And for that cause it
behoved the Pope to get Schools set up not only for Divinity, but also for
other Sciences, especially for Natural Philosophy. Which when by the power of
the Emperor he had effected, out of the mixture of Aristotle's Metaphysics
with the Scripture, there arose a new Science called School Divinity; which has
been the principal Learning of these Western parts from the time of Charlemain
till of very late.


A. But I find not in any of the Writings of the Schoolmen in what manner,
from the causes they assign, the Effect is naturally and necessarily produced.


B. You must not wonder at that. For you enquire not so much, when you see a
change of any thing, what may be said to be the cause of it, as how the same is
generated; which generation is the entire progress of Nature from the efficient
cause to the Effect produced. Which is always a hard Question, and for the most
part impossible for a man to answer to. For the alterations of the things we
perceive by our five Senses are made by the motion of Bodies (for the most
part) either for distance, smalness, or transparence, invisible.


A. But what need had they then to assign any cause at all, seeing they could
not show the Effect was to follow from it?


B. The Schools (as I said) were erected by the Pope and Emperor, but directed
by the Pope only, to answer and confute the Heresies of the Philosophers.
Would you have them then betray their Profession and Authority, that is to say,
their Livelihood, by confessing their ignorance? Or rather uphold the same, by
putting for causes, strange and unintelligible words; which might serve well
enough not only to satisfy the people whom they relied on, but also to
trouble the Philosophers themselves to find a fault in.


A. Seeing you say that Alteration is wrought by the Motion of Bodies, pray
tell me first what I am to understand by the word Body.


B. It is a hard Question, though most men think they can easily answer it, as
that it is whatsoever they can see, feel, or take notice of by their Senses.
But if you will know indeed what is body, we must enquire first what there is
that is not Body. You have seen (I suppose) the Effects of Glasses, how they
multiply and magnify the Object of our sight; as when a Glass of a certain
Figure will make a Counter or a Shilling seem twenty, though you be well
assured there is but one. And if you set a mark upon it, you will find the
mark upon them all. The Counter is certainly one of those things we call
Bodies: Are not the others so too?


A. No, without doubt. For looking through a Glass cannot make them really more
than they are.


B. What then be they but fancies, so many fancies of one and the same thing in
several places?


A. It Is manifest they are so many Idols, mere Nothings.


B. When you have looked upon a Star or Candle with both your eyes, but one of
them a little turned awry with your finger, has not there appeared two Stars,
or two Candles? And though you call it a deception of the sight, you cannot
deny but there were two Images of the Object.


A. It Is true, and observed by all men. And the same I say of our faces seen in
Lookingglasses, and of all Dreams, and of all Apparitions of dead men's Ghosts;
and wonder, since it is so manifest, I never thought upon it before, for it is a
very happy encounter, and such as being by every body well understood, would
utterly destroy both Idolatry and Superstition, and defeat abundance of Knaves
that cheat and trouble the world with their devices.


B. But you must not hence conclude that whosoever tells his Dream, or
sometimes takes his direction from it, is therefore an Idolater, or
Superstitious, or a Cheater. For God does often admonish men by Dreams of what
they ought to do; yet men must be wary in this case that they trust not Dreams
with the conduct of their lives further than by the Laws of their Country is
allowed: For you know what God says, Deuteronomy. 13. If a Prophet or a Dreamer of
Dreams give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign come to pass, yet if he did
thee serve other Gods, let him be put to death. Here by serving other Gods
(since they had chosen God for their King) we are to understand revolting from
their King, or disobeying of his Laws. Otherwise I see no Idolatry nor
Superstition in following a Dream, as many of the Patriarchs (in the Old
Testament) and of the Saints (in the New Testament) did.


A. Yes: Their own Dreams. But when another man shall dream, or say that he has
dreamed, and require me to follow that, he must pardon me if I ask him by what
Authority, especially if he look I should pay him for it.


B. But if commanded by the Laws you live under, you ought to follow it. But
when there proceed from one Sound diverse Echoes, what are those Echoes? And
when with fingers crossed you touch a small Bullet, and think it two; and when
the same Herb or Flower smells well to one and ill to another, and the same at
several times, well and ill to your self, and the like of Tastes, what are
those Echoes, Feelings, Odours, and Tastes?


A. It Is manifest they are all but Fancies. But certainly when the Sun seems to
my eye no bigger than a Dish, there is behind it somewhere somewhat else (I
suppose a real Sun) which creates those fancies, by working (one way or other)
upon my eyes, and other Organs of my Senses, to cause that diversity of Fancy.


B. You say right; and that is it I mean by the word Body, which briefly I
define to be any thing that has a Being in it self, without the help of Sense.


A. Aristotle (I think) means by Body, Substance, or Subjectum, wherein
Color, Sound, and other Fancies are (as he says) inherent. For the word
Essence has no affinity with Substance. And Seneca says, he understands it not.
And no wonder: for Essence is no part of the Language of mankind, but a word
devised by Philosophers out of the Copulation of two names, as if a man having
two Hounds could make a third (if 'twere need) of ther^ Couples.


B. It Is just fo. For having said in themselves (for example) A Tree is a
Plant, and conceiving well enough what is the signification of those Names,
knew not what to make of the word Is that couples those Names; nor daring to
call it a Body, they called it by a new name, (derived from the word est)
Essentia, and Substantia, deceived by the Idiome of their own Language. For in
many other Tongues, and namely in the Hebrew, there is no such Copulative. They
thought the Names of things sufficiently connected, when they are placed in
their natural consequence; and were therefore never troubled with Essences, nor
other Fallacy from the Copulative Est.


CAP. II. Of the Principles and Method of Natural Philosophy.
A. THis History of the old Philosophers has not put me out of love, but out of
hope of Philosophy from any of their Writings. I would therefore try if I could
attain any knowledge therein by my own meditation: But I know neither where to
begin, nor which way to proceed.


B. Your desire (you say) is to know the Causes of the Effects or Phenomenon of
Nature; and you confess they are Fancies, and (consequently) that they are in
your self; so that the Causes you seek for only are without you, and now you
would know how those external Bodies work upon you to produce those Phenomenon.
The beginning therefore of your enquiry ought to be at What it is you call a
Cause, I mean an Efficient Cause: For the Philosophers make four kinds of
Causes, whereof the Efficient is one. Another they call the Formal Cause, or
simply the form or essence of the thing caused; as when they say, Four equal
Angles and four equal Sides are the Cause of a Square Figure, or that Heaviness
is the Cause that makes heavy Bodies to descend. But that is not the Cause you
seek for, nor any thing but this: It descends because it descends. The third is
the Material Cause, as when they say, The Walls and Roof, etc. of a house, are
the cause of a House. The fourth is the Final Cause, and has place only in
Moral Philosophy.


A. We will think of Final Causes upon some other occasion; of Formal and
Material not at all: I seek only the Efficient, and how it acts from the
beginning to the production of the Effect.


B. I say then, that in the first place you are to enquire diligently into the
nature of Motion. For the variations of Fancies, or (which is the same thing)
of the Phenomenon of Nature, have all of them one Universal Efficient Cause,
namely the variety of Motion. For if all things in the world were absolutely at
rest, there could be no variety of Fancy, but living Creatures would be without
sense of all Objects, which is little less than to be dead.


A. What if a Child new taken from the Womb should with open eyes be exposed
to the Azure-Sky, do not you think it would have some sense of the Light, but
that all would seem unto him Darkness?


B. Truly, if he had no memory of any thing formerly seen, or by any other
sense perceived (which is my supposition) I think he would be in the dark. For
Darkness is Darkness, whether it be black or blue, to him that cannot
distinguish.


A. Howsoever that be, it is evident enough that whatsoever works is moved:
for Action is Motion.


B. Having well considered the nature of Motion, you must thence take your
Principles for the foundation and beginning of your Enquiry.


A. As how?


B. Explain as fully and as briefly as you can what you constantly mean by
Motion; which will save your self as well as others from being seduced by
Aequivocation.


A. Then I say, Motion is nothing but change of place: For all the Effect of a
Body upon the Organs of our Senses is nothing but Fancy. Therefore we can fancy
nothing from seeing it moved, but change of place.


B. It Is right. But you must then tell me also what you understand by Place:
For all men are not yet agreed on that.


A. Well then; seeing we fancy a Body, we cannot but fancy it somewhere. And
therefore I think Place is the fancy of Here or There.


B. That is not enough. Here and There are not understood by any but your self,
except you point toward it. But pointing is no part of a Definition. Besides,
though it help him to find the Place, it will never bring him to it.


A. But seeing Sense is Fancy, when we fancy a Body, we fancy also the Figure
of it, and the space it fills up. And then I may define Place to be The precise
space within which the Body is contained. For Space is also part of the Image
we have of the Object seen.


B. And how define you Time?


A. As Place is to a Body, so (I think) is Time to the Motion of it; and
consequently I take Time to be our fancy or Image of the Motion. But is there
any necessity of so much niceness?


B. Yes. The want of it is the greatest, if not the only cause, of all the
discord amongst Philosophers, as may easily be perceived by their abusing and
confounding the names of things that differ in their nature; as you shall see
when there is occasion to recite some of the Tenets of diverse Philosophers.


A. I will avoid Aequivocation as much as I can. And for the nature of Motion,
I suppose I understand it by the Definition. What is next to be done?


B. You are to draw from these Definitions, and from whatsoever Truth else you
know by the light of Nature, such general Consequences as may serve for
Axioms, or Principles of your Ratiocination.


A. That is hard to do.


B. I will draw them my self, as many as for our present discourse of Natural
Causes we shall have need of; so that your part will be no more than to take
heed I do not deceive you.


A. I will look to that.


B. My first Axiom then shall be this: Two Bodies, at the same Time, cannot be
in one Place.


A. That Is true: For we number Bodies as we fancy them distinct, and
distinguish them by their Places. You may therefore add, Nor one Body at the
same time in two Places. And Philosophers mean the same, when they say, There
is no penetration of Bodies.


B. But they understand not their own words: For penetration signifies it not.

My second Axiom is, That nothing can begin, change, or put an end to its own
Motion. For supposing it begin just now, or being now in Motion, change its Way
or Stop; I require the Cause why now rather than before or after, having all
that is necessary to such Motion, Change, or Rest, alike at all times.


A. I do not doubt but the Argument is good in Bodies inanimate; but perhaps in
Voluntary Agents it does not hold.


B. How it holds in Voluntary Agents we will then consider when our Method has
brought us to the Powers and Passions of the mind.

A third Axiom shall be this: Whatsoever Body being at Rest is afterward
moved, has for its Immediate Movent some other Body which is in Motion and
touches it. For, since nothing can move it self, the Movent must be external.
And because Motion is change of place, the Movent must put it from its place,
which it cannot do till it touch it.


A. That is manifest, and that it must more than touch it, it must also follow
it. And if more parts of the Body are moved than are by the Movent touched, the
Movent is not Immediate. And by this reason, a continued Body though never so
great, if the first Superficies be pressed never so little back, the Motion will
proceed through it.


B. Do you think that to be impossible? I will prove it from your own words:
For you say that the Movent does then touch the Body which it moves. Therefore
it puts it back; But that which is put back, puts back the next behind, and
that again the next; and so onward to any distance, the body being continued.
The same is also manifest by experience, seeing one that walks with a Staff can
distinguish (though blind) between Stone and Glass; which were impossible, if
the parts of his Staff between the ground and his hand made no resistance. So
also he that in the silence of the night lays his Ear to the ground, shall hear
the treading of men's feet further than if he stood upright.


A. This is certainly true of a Staff or other hard Body, because it keeps the
Motion in a straight Line from diffusion. But in such a Fluid Body as the Air,
which being put back must fill an Orb, and the further it is put back, the
greater Orb, the Motion will decrease, and in time, by the resistance of Air to
Air, come to an end.


B. That any Body in the world is absolutely at Rest, I think not true: But I
grant, that in a space filled every where with Body, though never so Fluid, if
you give Motion to any part thereof, that Motion will by resistance of the
parts moved, grow less and less, and at last cease; but if you suppose the
space utterly void, and nothing in it, then whatsoever is once moved shall go
on eternally: Or else that which you have granted is not true, viz. That
nothing can put an end to its own Motion.


A. But what mean you by resistance?


B. Resistance is the Motion of a Body in a way wholly or partly contrary to
the way of its Movent, and thereby repelling or retarding it. As when a man
runs swiftly, he shall feel the Motion of the Air in his face. But when two
hard Bodies meet, much more may you see how they abate each others Motion, and
rebound from one another. For in a space already full, the Movent cannot, in an
instant, be communicated through the whole depth of the Body that is to be
moved.


A. What other Definitions have I need of?


B. In all Motion, as in all Quantity, you must take the beginning of your
reckoning from the least supposed Motion. And this I call the first Endeavor
of the Movent; which Endeavor, how weak soever, is also Motion. For if it have
no Effect at all, neither will it do any thing though doubled, trebled, or by
what number soever multiplied: For Nothing, though multiplied, is still
Nothing. Other Axioms and Definitions we will take in, as we need them, by the
way.


A. Is this all the preparation I am to make?


B. No, you are to consider also the several kinds and properties of Motion,
viz. when a Body being moved by one or more Movents at once, in what way it is
carried, straight, circular, or otherwise crooked; and what degree of
swiftness; as also the action of the Movent, whether Trusion, Vection,
Percussion, Reflection, or Refraction; and further you must furnish your self
with as many experiments (which they call Phenomenon) as you can. And
supposing some Motion for the Cause of your Phenomenon, try if by evident
Consequence, without contradiction to any other manifest truth or experiment,
you can derive the Cause you seek for from your Supposition. If you can, it is
all that is expected (as to that one Question) from Philosophy. For there is no
Effect in Nature which the Author of Nature cannot bring to pass by more ways
than one.


A. What I want of Experiments you may supply out of your own store, or such
Natural History as you know to be true; though I can be well content with the
knowledge of the Causes of those things which every Body sees commonly
produced. Let us therefore now enquire the Cause of some Effect particular.


B. We will begin with that which is the most universal, the Universe, and
enquire in the first place, if any place be absolutely empty, that is to say in
the language of Philosophers, whether there be any Vacuum in Nature.


CAP. III. Of Vacuum.
A. It Is hard to suppose, and harder to believe that the Infinite and
Omnipotent Creator of all things should make a work so vast as is the world we
see, and leave a few little spaces with nothing at all in them; which put
altogether in respect of the whole Creature, would be insensible.


B. Why say you that? Do you think any Argument can be drawn from it to prove
there is Vacuum?


A. Why not? For in so great an Agitation of Natural Bodies, may not some small
parts of them be cast out, and leave the places empty from whence they were
thrown?


B. Because he that created them is not a Fancy, but the most real substance
that is; who being Infinite, there can be no place empty where he is, nor full
where he is not.


A. It Is hard to answer this Argument, because I do not remember that there is
any Argument for the maintenance of Vacuum in the writings of Divines:
Therefore I will quit that Argument, and come to another. If you take a Glass
Vial with a narrow neck, and having sucked it, dip it presently at the neck into
a basin of water, you shall manifestly see the water rise into the Vial. Is not
this a certain sign that you had sucked out some of the Air, and consequently
that some part of the Vial was left empty?


B. No: For when I am about to suck, and have Air in my mouth, contracting my
Cheeks I drive the same against the Air in the Glass, and thereby against every
part of the sides of the hard Glass. And this gives to the Air within an
Endeavor outward, by which (if it be presently dipped into the water) it will
penetrate and enter into it. For Air if it be pressed will enter into any Fluid,
much more into water. Therefore there shall rise into the Vial so much water as
there was Air forced into the Basin.


A. This I confess is possible, and not improbable.


B. If sucking would make Vacuum, what would become of those women that are
Nurses? Should they not be in a very few days exhausted, were it not that
either the Air which is in the Child's mouth penetrateth the Milk as it
descends, and passes through it, or the Breast is contracted?


A. From what Experiment can you evidently infer that there is no Vacuum?


B. From many, and such as to almost all men are known and familiar. If two
hard Bodies, flat and smooth, be joined together in a common Superficies
parallel to the Horizontal Plain, you cannot without great force pull them
asunder, if you apply your force perpendicularly to the common Superficies: But
if you place that common Superficies erect to the Horizon, they will fall
asunder with their own weight. From whence I argue thus: Since their
Contiguity, in what posture soever, is the same, and that they cannot be pulled
asunder by a perpendicular force without letting in the ambient Air in an
instant, which is impossible; or almost in an instant, which is difficult: and
on the other side, when the common Superficies is erect, the weight of the same
hard Bodies are able to break the Contiguity, and let in the Air successively,
it is manifest that the difficulty of Separation proceeds from this, that
neither Air nor any other Body can be moved to any (how small soever) distance
in an instant; but may easily be moved (the hardness at the sides once
mastered) successively. So that the Cause of this difficulty of Separation is
this, that they cannot be parted except the Air or other matter can enter and
fill the space made by their diremption. And if they were infinitely hard, not
at all. And hence also you may understand the Cause why any hard Body, when it
is suddenly broken, is heard to crack; which is the swift Motion of the Air to
fill the space between.

Another Experiment, and commonly known, is of a Barrel of Liquor, whose
Tap-hole is very little, and the Bung so stopped as to admit no Air; for then the
Liquor will not run: but if the Tap-hole be large it will, because the Air
pressed by a heavier Body will pierce through it into the Barrel. The like
reason holds of a Gardeners Watering-pot, when the holes in the bottom are not
too great. A third Experiment is this: Turn a thin Brass kettle the bottom
upwards, and lay it flat upon the Water. It will sink till the water rise
within to a certain height, but no higher: Yet let the bottom be perforated,
and the Kettle will be full and sink, and the Air rise again through the water
without. But if a Bell were so laid on, it would be filled and sink, though it
were not perforated, because the weight is greater than the weight of the same
bulk of water.


A. By these Experiments, without any more, I am convinced, that there is not
actually in Nature any Vacuum; but I am not sure but that there may be made
some little place empty, and this from two Experiments, one whereof is
Torricellius his Experiment, which is this: Take a Cylinder of Glass, hollow
throughout, but close at the end, in form of a Sack.


B. How long?


A. As long as you will, so it be more than 29 inches.


B. And how broad?


A. As broad as you will, so it be broad enough to pour into it Quicksilver.
And fill it with Quicksilver, and stop up the Entrance with your finger, so as
to unstop it again at your pleasure. Then set down a Basin, or (if you will) a
Sea of Quicksilver, and inverting the Cylinder full as it is, dip the end into
the Quicksilver, and remove your finger, that the Cylinder may empt it self. Do
you conceive me? For there is so many passing by, that I cannot paint it.


B. Yes, I conceive you well enough. What follows?


A. The Quicksilver will descend in the Cylinder, not till it be level with
that in the Basin according to the nature of heavy Fluids, but stay and stand
above it at the height of 29 inches or very near it, the bottom being now
uppermost that no Air can get in.


B. What do you infer from this?


A. That all the Cavitie above 29 inches is filled with Vacuum.


B. It Is very strange that I, from this same Experiment, should infer (and I
think evidently) that it is filled with Air. I pray, tell me, when you had
inverted the Cylinder, full as it was, and stopped with your finger, dipped into
the Basin, if you had then removed your finger, whether you think the
Quicksilver would not all have fallen out?


A. No sure. The Air would have been pressed upward through the Quicksilver it
self: For a man with his hand can easily thrust a Bladder of Air to the bottom
of a Basin of Quicksilver.


B. It is therefore manifest that Quicksilver can press the Air through the
same Quicksilver.


A. It Is manifest; and also it self rise into the Air.


B. What cause then can there be, why it should stand still at 29 inches above
the level of the Basin, rather than any place else?


A. It Is not hard to assign the cause of that. For so much Quicksilver as was
above the 29 inches, will raise the first level of that in the basin, as much
as if you had poured it on; and thereby bring it to an Aequilibrium. So that I
see plainly now, that there is no necessity of Vacuum from this Experiment. For
I considered only that naturally Quicksilver cannot ascend in Air, nor Air
descend in Quicksilver, though by force it may.


B. Nor do I think that Torricellius or any other Vacuist thought of it more
than you. But what is the second Experiment?


A. There is a Sphere of Glass, which they call a Recipient, of the Capacity of
three or four Gallons. And there is inserted into it the end of a hollow
Cylinder of Brass above a foot long; so that the whole is one Vessel, and the
bore of the Cylinder three inches Diameter. Into which is thrust by force a
solid Cylinder of Wood, covered with leather so just, as it may in every point
exactly touch the Concave Superficies of the Brass. There is also to let out
the Air which the wooden Cylinder as it enters (called the Sucker) drives
before it, a Flap to keep out the External Air while they are pulling the
Sucker. Besides, at the top of the Recipient there is a hole to put into it any
thing for Experiment. The Sucker being now forced up into the Cylinder, what do
you think must follow?


B. I think it will require as much strength to pull it back, as it did to
force it in.


A. That is not it I ask, but what would happen to the Recipient.


B. I think so much Air as would fill the place the Sucker leaves, would
descend into it out of the Recipient; and also that just so much from the
External Air would enter into the Recipient, between the Brass and the Wood, at
first very swiftly, but, as the place increased, more leasurely.


A. Why may not so much Air rather descend into the place forsaken, and leave
as much Vacuum as that comes to, in the Recipient? For otherwise no Air will be
pumpt out; nor can that wooden Pestle be called a Sucker.


B. That Is it I say. There is no Air either pumpt or sucked out.


A. How can the Air pass between the Leather and the Brass, or between the
Leather and the Wood being so exactly contiguous, or through the Leather it
self?


B. I conceive no such exact contiguity, nor such fastness of the Leather: For
I never yet had any that in a storm would keep out either Air or Water.


A. But how then could there be made in the Recipient such strange alteration
both on animate and inanimate Bodies?


B. I will tell you how: The Air descends out of the Recipient, because the Air
which the Sucker removes from behind it self as it is pulling out, has no
place to retire into without. And therefore is driven into the Engine between
the wood of the Sucker and the brass of the Cylinder, and causes as much Air to
come into the place forsaken by the retiring Sucker; which causes by often
repetition of the force, a violent circulation of the Air within the Recipient,
which is able quickly to kill any thing that lives by respiration, and make all
the alterations that have appeared in the Engine.


CAP. IV. Of the Systeme of the World.
B. YOu are come in good time; let us Fig. 1.
therefore sit down. There is Ink, Paper, Ruler, and Compass. Draw a little
Circle to represent the Body of the Sun.


A. It Is done. The Center is A, the Circumference is L M.


B. Upon the same Center A, draw a larger Circle to stand for the Ecliptic:
For you know the Sun is always in the Plain of the Ecliptic.


A. There it is. The Diameters of it at right Angles are B Z.


B. Draw the Diameter of the Equator.


A. How?


B. Through the Center A (for the Earth is also always in the Plain of the
Equator or of some of its Parallels) so as to be distant from B 23 degrees. and a
half.


A. Let it be H I: And let C G be equal to B H; and so G will be one of the
Poles of the Ecliptic, suppose the North Pole; and then H will be East, and I
West. And C A produced to the Circumference in E, makes E the South-Pole.


B. Take C K equal to C G, and the Chord G K will be the Diameter of the
Arctick-Circle, and parallel to H I, the Diameter of the Equator. Lastly, upon
the point B, draw a little Circle wherein I suppose to be the Globe of the
Earth.


A. It Is drawn, and marked with l m. And B D and K G joined will be parallel;
and as H and I are East and West, and so are B and D, and G and K.


B. True; but producing Z B to the Circumference l m in b, the Line B b will be
in the Diameter of the Ecliptic of the Earth, and B m in the Diameter of the
Equator of the Earth. In like manner, if you produce K G cutting the Circle,
whose Center is G, in d and e, and make an Angle n G d equal to b B m, the Line
n G will be in the Ecliptic of the Earth, because G d is in the Equator of
the Earth. So that in the Annual Motion of the Earth through the Ecliptic,
every straight Line drawn in the Earth, is perpetually kept parallel to the
place from whence it is removed.


A. It Is true; and it is the Doctrine of Copernicus. But I cannot yet conceive
by what one Motion this Circle can be described otherwise than we are taught by
Euclid. And then I am sure that all the Diameters shall cross one another in
the Center, which in this Figure is A.


B. I do not say that the Diameters of a Sphere or Circle can be parallel; but
that if a Circle of a lesser Sphere be moved upon the Circumference of a great
Circle of a greater Sphere, that the straight Lines that are in the lesser
Sphere may be kept parallel perpetually to the places they proceed from.


A. How? And by what Motion?


B. Take into your hand any straight Line, (as in this Figure) the Line L A M,
which we suppose to be the diameter of the Suns Body; and moving it parallelly,
with the ends in the Circumference, so as that the end M may withal describe a
small Circle, as M a. It is manifest that all the other points of the same Line
L M will by the same Motion, at the same time, describe equal Circles to it.
Likewise if you take in your hand any two Diameters fastened together, the same
Parallel-motion of the line L M, shall cause all the points of the other
Diameter to make equal Circles to the same M a.


A. It Is evident; as also that every point of the Suns body shall do the like.
And not only so, but also if one end describe any other Figure, all the other
points of the Body shall describe like and equal Figures to it.


B. You see by this, that this Parallel-motion is compounded of two Motions,
one Circular upon the Superficies of a Sphere, the other a straight Motion from
the Center to every point of the same Superficies, and beyond it.


A. I see it.


B. It follows hence, that the Sun by this Motion must every way repel the Air;
and since there is no empty place for retiring, the Air must turn about in a
Circular stream; but slower or swifter according as it is more or less remote
from the Sun, and that according to the nature of Fluids, the Particles of the
Air must continually change place with one another; and also that the stream of
the Air shall be the contrary way to that of the Motion, for else the Air
cannot be repelled.


A. All this is certain.


B. Well. Then if you suppose the Globe of the Earth to be in this stream which
is made by the Motion of the Suns Body from East to West, the stream of Air
wherein is the Earths Annual Motion will be from West to East.


A. It Is certain.


B. Well. Then if you suppose the Globe of the Earth, whose Circle is moved
Annually, to be l m, the stream of the Air without the Ecliptic falling upon
the Superficies of the Earth l m without the Ecliptic, being slower, and the
stream that falls within swifter, the Earth shall be turned upon its own
Center proportionally to the greatness of the Circles; and consequently their
Diameters shall be parallel; as also are other straight Lines correspondent.


A. I deny not but the streams are as you say; and confess that the proportion
of the swiftness without, is to the swiftness within, as the Suns Ecliptic to
the Ecliptic of the Earth; that is to say, as the Angle HAB to the Angle m B
b. And I like your Argument the better, because it is drawn from Copernicus his
foundation. I mean the compounded Motion of Straight and Circular.


B. I think I shall not offer you many demonstrations of Physical conclusions
that are not derived from the Motions supposed or proved by Copernicus. For
those Conclusions in Natural Philosophy I most suspect of falsehood, which
require most variety of Suppositions for their demonstrations.


A. The next thing I would know, is how great or little you suppose that Circle
a M.


B. I suppose it less than you can make it: For there appears in the Sun no
such Motion sensible. It Is the first Endeavor of the Suns Motion. But for all
that, as small as the Circle is, the Motion may be as swift, and of as great
strength as it is possible to be named. It Is but a kind of trembling that
necessarily happens in those Bodies, which with great resistance press upon
one another.


A. I understand now from what Cause proceeds the Annual Motion: Is the Sun
the Cause also of the Diurnal Motion?


B. Not the immediate Cause. For the Diurnal Motion of the Earth is upon its
own Center, and therefore the Suns Motion cannot describe it. But it proceeds
as a necessary consequence from the Annual Motion. For which I have both
experience and demonstration. The Experiment is this: Into a large Hemisphere
of Wood, spherically Concave, put in a Globe of Lead, and with your hands hold
it fast by the brim, moving your hands circularly, but in a very small compass,
you shall see the Globe circulate about the Concave Vessel, just in the same
manner as the Earth does every year in the Air; and you shall see withal, that
as it goes, it turns perpetually upon its own Center, and very swiftly.


A. I have seen it: And it is used in some great Kitchins to grind Mustard.


B. Is it so? Therefore take a Hemisphere of Gold (if you have it) the greater
the better, and a Bullet of Gold, (and without Mustard) you shall see the same
Effect.


A. I doubt it not. But the of it Cause is evident. For any Spherical Body
being in Motion upon the sides of a Concave and hard Sphere, is all the way
turned upon its own Center by the resistance of the hard Wood or Metal. But the
Earth is a Bullet without weight, and meets only with Air, without any
harder body in the way to resist it.


B. Do you think the Air makes no resistance, especially to so swift a Motion
as is the Annual Motion of the Earth? If it do make any resistance, you cannot
doubt but that it shall turn the Earth circularly, and in a contrary way to its
Annual Motion; that is to say, from East to West, because the Annual Motion is
from West to East.


A. I confess it. But what deduce you from these Motions of the Sun?


B. I deduce (first) that the Air must of necessity be moved both circularly
about the Body of the Sun according to the Ecliptic, and also every way
directly from it. For the Motion of the Suns Body is compounded of this
Circular Motion upon the Sphere L M, and of the straight motion of its
Semi-diameters from the Center A to the Superficies of the Suns Body, which is
LM. And therefore the Air must needs be repelled every way, and also
continually change place to fill up the places forsaken by other parts of the
Air, which else would be empty, there being no Vacuum to retire unto. So that
there would be a perpetual stream of Air, and in a contrary way to the Motion
of the Suns Body, such as is the Motion of Water by the sides of a Ship under
sail.


A. But this Motion of the Earth from West to East, is only Circular, such as
is described by a Compass about a Center; and cannot therefore repel the Air as
the Sun does. And the Disciples of Copernicus will have it to be the Cause of
the Moons monthly motion about the Earth.


B. And I think Copernicus himself would have said the same, if his purpose had
been to have shown the Natural Causes of the Motions of the Stars. But that was
no part of his design; which was only from his own observations, and those of
former Astronomers, to compute the times of their Motions; partly to foretell
the Conjunctions, Oppositions, and other Aspects of the Planets; and partly to
regulate the times of the Churches Festivals. But his followers, Kepler and
Galileo, make the Earths Motion to be the Efficient Cause of the Monthly motion
of the Moon about the Earth; which without the like Motion to that of the Sun
in LM, is impossible. Let us therefore for the present take it in as a
necessary Hypothesis; which from some Experiment that I shall produce in our
following discourses, may prove to be a certain truth.


A. But seeing A is the Center both of the Suns Body and of the Annual Motion
of the Earth, How can it be (as all Astronomers say it is) that the Orb of the
Annual Motion of the Earth should be Excentrique to the Suns Body? For you know
that from the Vernal Aequinox to the Autumnal, there be 187 days; but from the
Autumnal Aequinox to the Vernal, there be but 178 days. What Natural Cause can
you assign for this Excentricity?


B. Kepler ascribes it to a Magnetique virtue, viz. that one part of the Earths
Superficies has a greater kindness for the Sun than the other part.


A. I am not satisfied with that. It is Magical rather than Natural, and
unworthy of Kepler. Tell me your own opinion of it.


B. I think that the Magnetical virtue he speaks of, consists in this: that
the Southern Hemisphere of the Earth is for the greatest part Sea, and that the
greatest part of the Northern Hemisphere is dry Land. But how it is possible
that from thence should proceed the Excentricity (the Sun being nearest to the
Earth, when he is in the Winter-Solstice) I shall show you when we come to
speak of the Motions of Air and Water.


A. That Is time enough: For I intend it for our next meeting. In the mean time
I pray you tell me what you think to be the Cause why the Equinoctial (and
consequently the Solstitial) points are not always in one and the same point of
the Ecliptique of the Fixed Stars. I know they are not, because the Sun does not
rise and set in points diametrally opposite: For if it did, there would be no
difference of the Seasons of the year.


B. The cause of that can be no other, than that the Earth (which is l m) has
the like Motion to that which I suppose the Sun to have in L M, compounded of
straight and circular from West to East in a day, as the Annual Motion has in
a year; so that (not reckoning the Excentricity) it will be moved through the
Ecliptiques one Revolution (as Copernicus proves) about one degree. Suppose
then the whole Earth moved from H to I, (which is half the year) circularly,
but falling from I to i in the same time about 30 minutes, and as much in the
other Hemisphere from H to k; then draw the line i k, which will be equal and
parallel to H I, and be the Diameter of the Equator for the next year. But it
shall not cut the Diameter of the Ecliptic B Z in A, which was the Equinoctial
of the former year, but in o 36 seconds from the first degree of Aries. Suppose
the same done in the Hemisphere under the Plain of the paper, and so you have
the double of 36 seconds, that is 72 seconds, or very near, for the progress of
the Vernal Equinox in a year. The cause why I suppose the Arch I i to be half a
degree in the Ecliptique of the Earth, is, that Copernicus and other
Astronomers, and Experience, agree in this, that the Aequinoctial points
proceed according to the order of the Signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. from
West to East every 100 year one degree or very near.


A. In what time do they make the whole Revolution through the Ecliptique of
the Sky?


B. That you may reckon. For we know by Experience that it has proceeded about
one degree, that is 60 minutes constantly a long time in a hundred years. But
as 100 years to one degree, so is 36000 years to 360 degrees. Also as 100 years
to one degree, so is one year to the hundred part of one degree or 60 minutes;
which is 60/100, or 36 seconds for the progress of one year; which must be
somewhat more than a degree according to Copernicus, who, lib. 3. cap. 2.
says, That for 400 years before Ptolomie it was one degree almost constantly.
Which is well enough as to the Natural Cause of the Precession of the
Aequinoctial points, which is the often-said compounded Motion, though not an
exact Astronomical Calculation.


A. And it is a great sign that his Supposition is true. But what is the Cause
that the Obliquity of the Ecliptique, that is, the distance between the
Aequinoctial and the Solstice, is not always the same?


B. The necessity of the Obliquity of the Ecliptique is but a consequence to
the Precession of the Aequinoctial points. And therefore if from C the
North Pole you make a little Circle C u equal to 15 minutes of a degree upon
the Earth, and another u s equal to the same, which will appear like this
Figure 8, that is (as Copernicus calls it) a Circle twined, the Pole C will be
moved half the time of the Aequinoctial points, in the arc C u, and as much in
the alternate arc u s descending to s. But in the arc s u, and its alternate
rising to C. The cause of the twining is the Earths Annual Motion the same way
in the Ecliptique, and makes the four quarters of it; and makes also their
revolution twice as slow as that of the Aequinoctial points. And therefore the
Motion of it is the same compounded Motion which Copernicus takes for his
Supposition, and is the cause of the Precession of the Aequinoctial points, and
consequently of the variation of the Obliquity, adding to it or taking from it
somewhere more, somewhere less; so as that one with another the addition is not
much more, nor the substraction much less than 30 minutes. But as for the
Natural Efficient cause of this compounded Motion, either in the Sun, or the
Earth, or any other Natural Body, it can be none but the immediate hand of the
Creator.


A. By this it seems that the Poles of the Earth are always the same, but make
this 8 in the Sphere of the fixed Stars near that which is called Cynosura.


B. No: It Is described on the Earth, but the Annual Motion describes a Circle
in the Sphere of the fixed Stars. Though I think it improper to say a Sphere of
the fixed Stars, when it is so unlikely that all the fixed Stars should be in the
Superficies of one and the same Globe.


A. I do not believe they are.


B. Nor I, since they may seem less one than another, as well by their
different distances, as by their different magnitudes. Nor is it likely that
the Sun (which is a fixed Star) is the Efficient Cause of the Motion of those
remoter Planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; seeing the whole Sphere, whose
Diameter is the distance between the Sun and the Earth, is but a point in
respect of the distance between the Sun and any other fixed Star. Which I say
only to excite those that value the knowledge of the Cause of Comets, to look
for it in the Dominion of some other Sun than that which moves the Earth. For
why may not there be some other fixed Star, nearer to some Planet than is the
Sun, and cause such a light in it as we call a Comet?


A. As how?


B. You have seen how in high and thin Clouds above the Earth, the Sunbeams
piercing them have appeared like a Beard; and why might not such a Beard have
appeared to you like a Comet, if you had looked upon it from as high as some of
the fixed Stars?


A. But because it is a thing impossible for me to know, I will proceed in my
own way of enquiry. And seeing you ascribe this compounded Motion to the Sun
and Earth, I would grant you that the Earth (whose Annual Motion is from West
to East) shall give the Moon her Monthly-motion from East to West. But then I
ask you whether the Moon have also that compounded Motion of the Earth, and
with it a Motion upon its own Center, as has the Earth? For seeing the Moon
has no other Planet to carry about her, she needs it not.


B. I see reason enough, and some necessity, that the Moon should have both
those Motions. For you cannot think that the Creator of the Stars, when he gave
them their Circular Motion, did first take a Center, and then describe a Circle
with a Chain or Compass, as men do? No; he moved all the parts of a Star
together and equally in the Creation: And that is the reason I give you. The
necessity of it, comes from this Phenomenon, that the Moon does turn one and
the same face toward the Earth: Which cannot be by being moved about the Earth
parallelly, unless also it turn about its own Center. Besides, we know by
experience, that the Motion of the Moon does add not a little to the Motion of
the Sea: Which were impossible if it did not add to the Stream of the Air, and
by consequence to that of the Water.


A. If you could get a piece of the true and intimate Substance of the Earth,
of the bigness of a Musquet-bullet, do you believe that the Bullet would have
the like compounded Motion to that which you attribute to the Sun, Earth, and
Moon?


B. Yes truly; but with less strength, according to its magnitude; saving that
by its Gravity falling to the Earth, the activity of it would be unperceived.


A. I will trouble you no more with the Nature of Celestial appearances. But I
pray you tell me by what art a man may find what part of a Circle the Diameter
of the Suns Body does subtend in the Ecliptique Circle.


B. Kepler says it subtends 30 minutes, which is half a degree. His way to
find it is by letting in the Sunbeams into a close room through a small hole,
and receiving the image of it upon a plain perpendicularly. For by this means
he has a Triangle, whose sides and angles he can know by measure; and the
vertical Angle he seeks for, and the substance of the arc of the Suns Body.


A. But I think it impossible to distinguish where the part illuminate touches
the part not illuminate.


B. Another way is this: Upon the Aequinoctial-day, with a Watch that shows the
minutes standing by you, observe when the lower brim of the Suns setting first
comes to the Horizon, and set the Index to some minute of the Watch; and
observe again the upper brim when it comes to the Horizon: then count the
minutes, and you have what you look for. Other way I know none.


CAP. V. Of the Motions of Water and Air.
A. I Have considered, as you bad me, this compounded Motion with great
admiration. First, it is that which makes the difference between Continuum and
Contiguum, which till now I never could distinguish. For Bodies that are but
Contiguous, with any little force are parted; but by this compounded Motion
(because every point of the body makes an equal Line in equal time, and every
Line crosses all the rest) one part cannot be separated from another, without
disturbing the Motion of all the other parts at once. And is not that the
Cause, think you, that some Bodies when they are pressed or bent, as soon as the
force is removed, return again of themselves to their former figure?


B. Yes sure; saving that it is not of themselves that they return, (for we
were agreed that nothing can move it self) but it is the Motion of the parts
which are not pressed, that delivers those that are. And this restitution the
Learned now call the Spring of a Body. The Greeks called it Antitypia.


A. When I considered this Motion in the Sun and the Earth and Planets, I
fancied them as so many Bodies of the Army of the Almighty in an immense field
of Air, marching swiftly, and commanded (under God) by his glorious Officer the
Sun, or rather forced so to keep their order in every part of every of those
Bodies, as never to go out from the distance in which he had set them.


B. But the parts of the Air and other Fluids keep not their places so.


A. No. You told me that this Motion is not natural in the Air, but received
from the Sun.


B. True. But since we seek the Natural Causes of Sublunary Effects, where
shall we begin?


A. I would fain know what makes the Sea to ebb and flow at certain Periods,
and what causes such variety in the Tides.


B. Remember that the Earth turns every day upon its own Axis from West to
East; and all the while it so turns, every point thereof by its compounded
Motion makes other Circlings, but not on the same Center, which is (you know) a
rising in one part of the day, and a falling in the other part. What think you
must happen to the Sea, which rests on it, and is a Fluid Body?


A. I think it must make the Sea rise and fall. And the same happens also to
the Air, from the Motion of the Sun.


B. Remember also, in what manner the Sea is situated in respect of the Dry
Land.


A. Is not there a great Sea that reaches from the Straight of Magellan
Eastward to the Indies, and thence to the same Straight again? And is not there
a great Sea called the Atlantic Sea that runs Northward to us? and does not
the great South Sea run also up into the Northern Seas? But I think the Indian
and the South Sea of themselves to be greater than all the rest of the Surface
of the Globe.


B. How lies the water in those two Seas?


A. East and West, and rises and falls a little, as it is forced to do by this
compounded Motion, which is a kind of succussion of the Earth, and fills both
the Atlantic and Northern Seas.


B. All this would not make a visible difference between High and Low water,
because this Motion being so regular, the unevenness would not be great enough
to be seen. For though in a Basin the water would be thrown into the Air, yet
the Earth cannot throw the Sea into the Air.


A. Yes. The Basin, if gently moved, will make the water so move, that you
shall hardly see it rise.


B. It may be so. But you should never see it rise as it does, if it were not
checked. For at the Straight of Magellan, the great South Sea is checked by the
shore of the Continent of Peru and Chily, and forced to rise to a great height,
and made to run up into the Northern Seas on that side by the coast of China;
and at the return is checked again and forced through the Atlantic into the
British and German Seas. And this is done every day. For we have supposed that
the Earths Motion in the Ecliptique caused by the Sun is Annual; and that its
Motion in the Aequinoctial, is Diurnal. It follows therefore from this
compounded Motion of the Earth, the Sea must Ebb and Flow twice in the space of
Twenty four hours, or thereabout.


A. Has the Moon nothing to do in this business?


B. Yes. For she has also the like Motion. And is, though less swift, yet much
nearer to the Earth. And therefore when the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction or
Opposition, the Earth, as from two Agents at once, must needs have a greater
Succussion. And if it chance at the same time the Moon also be in the
Ecliptique, it will be yet greater, because the Moon then works on the Earth
less obliquely.


A. But when the Full or New Moon happen to be then when the Earth is in the
Aequinoctial points, the Tides are greater than ordinary. Why is that?


B. Because then the force by which they move the Sea, is at that time, to the
force by which they move the same at other times, as the Aequinoctial Circle to
one of its Parallels, which is a lesser Circle.


A. It Is evident. And it is pleasant to see the Concord of so many and various
motions, when they proceed from one and the same Hypothesis. But what say you
to the stupendous Tides which happen on the Coasts of Lincolnshire on the
East, and in the River of Severn on the West?


B. The cause of that, is their proper Situation. For the Current of the Ocean
through the Atlantic Sea, and the Current of the South Sea through the
Northern Seas meeting together, raise the water in the Irish and British Seas a
great deal higher than ordinary. Therefore the mouth of the Severn being
directly opposite to the Current from the Atlantic Sea, and those Sands on the
Coast of Lincolnshire directly opposite to the Current of the German Sea, those
Tides must needs fall furiously into them, by this Succussion of the water.


A. Does, when the Tide runs up into a River, the water all rise together, and
fall together when it goes out?

No: One part rises and another falls at the same time; because the Motion
of the Earth rising and falling, is that which makes the Tide.


A. Have you any Experiment that shows it?


B. Yes. You know that in the Thames, it is high water at Greenwich before it
is high water at London Bridge. The water therefore falls at Greenwich whilst
it rises all the way to London. But except the top of the water went up, and
the lower part downward, it were impossible.


A. It Is certain. It is strange that this one Motion should salve so many
apparences, and so easily. But I will produce one Experiment of water, not in
the Sea, but in a Glass. If you can show me that the cause of it is this
compounded Motion, I shall go near to think it the Cause of all other Effects
of Nature hitherto disputed of. The Experiment is common, and described by the
Lord Chancellor Bacon, in the third page of his Natural History. Take (says
he) a Glass of water, and draw your finger round about the lip of the Glass,
pressing it somewhat hard; after you have done so a few times, it will make the
water frisk up into a fine Dew. After I had read this, I tried the same with
all diligence my self, and found true not only the frisking of the water to
above an inch high, but also the whole Superficies to circulate, and withal to
make a pleasant sound. The Cause of the frisking he attributes to a tumult of
the inward parts of the Substance of the Glass striving to free it self from
the pressure.


B. I have tried and found both the Sound and Motion; and do not doubt but the
pressure of the parts of the Glass was part of the Cause. But the Motion of my
finger about the Glass was always parallel; and when it chanced to be
otherwise, both Sound and Motion ceased.


A. I found the same. And being satisfied, I proceed to other questions. How is
the water (being a heavy Body) made to ascend in small particles into the Air,
and be there for a time sustained in form of a Cloud, and then fall down again
in Rain?


B. I have shown already, that this compounded Motion of the Sun, in one part
of its Circumlation, drives the Air one way, and in the other part, the
contrary way; and that it cannot draw it back again, no more than he that sets
a stone a flying can pull it back. The Air therefore, which is contiguous to
the water, being thus distracted, must either leave a Vacuum, or else some part
of the water must rise and fill the spaces continually forsaken by the Air.
But, that there is no Vacuum, you have granted. Therefore the water rises into
the Air, and makes the Clouds; and seeing they are very small and invisible
parts of the water, are (though naturally heavy) easily carried up and down
with the Wind, till, meeting with some Mountain or other Clouds, they be pressed
together into greater drops, and fall by their weight. So also it is forced up
in moist ground, and with it many small Atoms of the Earth, which are either
twisted with the rising water into Plants, or are carried up and down in the
Air incertainly. But the greatest Quantity of Water is forced up from the great
South and Indian Seas, that lie under the Tropique of Capricorn. And this
Climate is that which makes the Suns Perigaeum to be always on the
Winter-Solstice. And that is the part of the Terrestrial Globe which Keplerus
says is kind to the Sun; whereas the other part of the Globe (which is almost
all dry land) has an Antipathy to the Sun. And so you see where this Magnetical
virtue of the Earth lies. For the Globe of the Earth having no Natural Appetite
to any place, may be drawn by this Motion of the Sun a little nearer to it,
together with the water which it raises.


A. Can you guess what may be the Cause of Wind?


B. I think it manifest that the unconstant Winds proceed from the uncertain
Motion of the Clouds ascending and descending, or meeting with one another. For
the Winds after they are generated in any place by the descent of a Cloud, they
drive other Clouds this way and that way before them, the Air seeking to free
it self from being pent up in a straight. For when a Cloud descends, it makes
no wind sensible directly under it self. But the Air between it and the Earth
is pressed and forced to move violently outward. For it is a certain Experiment
of Mariners, that if the Sea go high when they are becalmed, they say they
shall have more Wind than they would; and take in their Sails all but what is
necessary for steering. They know (it seems) that the Sea is moved by the
descent of Clouds at some distance off: Which presses the water, and makes it
come to them in great Waves. For a Horizontal Wind does but curl the Water.


A. From whence come the Rivers?


B. From the Rain, or from the falling of Snow on the higher ground. But when
it descends under ground, the place where it again arises is called the
Spring.


A. How then can there be a Spring upon the top of a Hill?


B. There is no Spring upon the very top of a Hill, unless some Natural Pipe
bring it thither from a higher Hill.


A. Julius Scaliger says, there is a River, and in it a Lake, upon the top of
Mount Cenis in Savoy; and will therefore have the Springs to be engendered in
the Caverns of the Earth by Condensation of the Air.


B. I wonder he should say that. I have passed over that Hill twice since the
time I read that in Scaliger, and found that River as I passed, and went by the
side of it in plain ground almost two miles. Where I saw the water from two
great Hills, one on one side, the other on the other, in a thousand small
Rillets of melting Snow fall down into it. Which has made me never to use any
Experiment the which I have not my self seen. As for the conversion of Air into
Water by Condensation, and of Water into Air by Rarefaction (though it be the
doctrine of the Peripatetiques) it is a thing incogitable, and the words are
insignificant. For by Densum is signified only frequencie and closeness of
parts; and by Rarum the contrary. As when we say a Town is thick with houses,
or a Wood with trees, we mean not that one house or tree is thicker than
another, but that the spaces between are not so great. But (since there is no
Vacuum) the spaces between the parts of Air are no larger than between the
parts of Water, or of any thing else.


A. What think you of those things which Mariners that have sailed through the
Atlantic Sea called Spouts, which pour down water enough at once to drown a
great Ship?


B. It Is a thing I have not seen. And therefore can say nothing to it; though I
doubt not but when two very large and heavy Clouds shall be driven together by
two great and contrary winds, the thing is possible.


A. I think your reason good. And now will propound to you another Experiment.
I have seen an exceeding small Tube of Glass with both ends open set upright in
a Vessel of Water, and that the Superficies of the Water within the Tube was
higher a good deal than of that in the Vessel; but I see no reason for it.


B. Was not part of the Glass under Water? Must not then the Water in the
Vessel rise? Must not the Air that lay upon it rise with it? Whither should
this rising Air go, since there is no place empty to receive it? It is
therefore no wonder if the Water, pressed by the Substance of the Glass which
is dipped into it, do rather rise into a very small Pipe, than come about a
longer way into the open Air.


A. It Is very probable. I observed also that the top of the enclosed Water was
a concave Superficies; which I never saw in other Fluids.


B. The Water has some degree of tenacity, though not so great but that it
will yield a little to the Motion of the Air; as is manifest in the Bubbles of
water, where the concavity is always toward the Air. And this I think the
cause why the Air and Water meeting in the Tube make the Superficies toward
the Air concave, which it cannot do to a Fluid of greater tenacity.


A. If you put into a Basin of Water a long rag of Cloth, first drenched in
water, and let the longer part of it hang out, it is known by Experience, that
the Water will drop out as long as there is any part of the other end under
Water.


B. The cause of it is, that water (as I told you) has a degree of tenacity.
And therefore being continued in the rag till it be lower without than within,
the weight will make it continue dropping, though not only because it is
heavy (for if the rag lay higher without than within, and were made heavier by
the breadth, it would not descend) but it is because all heavy Bodies Naturally
descend with proportion of swiftness duplicate to that of the time; whereof I
shall say more when we talk of Gravity.


A. You see how despicable Experiments I trouble you with. But I hope you will
pardon me.


B. As for mean and common Experiments, I think them a great deal better
Witnesses of Nature, than those that are forced by fire, and known but to very
few.


CAP. VI. Of the Causes and Effects of Heat and Cold.
A. It Is a fine day, and pleasant walking through the Fields, but that the Sun
is a little too hot.


B. How know you that the Sun is hot?


A. I feel it.


B. That is to say, you know that your self, but not that the Sun is hot. But
when you find your self hot, what Body do you feel?


A. None.


B. How then can you infer your heat from the Sense of Feeling? Your walking
may have made you hot: Is Motion therefore hot? No. You are to consider the
Concomitants of your heat; as, that you are more faint, or more ruddy, or that
you sweat, or feel some Endeavor of Moisture or Spirits tending outward; and
when you have found the Causes of those Accidents, you have found the Causes of
Heat, which in a living Creature, and specially in a Man, is many times the
Motion of the parts within him, such as happen in sickness, anger, and other
passions of the mind; which are not in the Sun nor in Fire.


A. That which I desire now to know, is what Motions and of what Bodies without
me are the Efficient Causes of my Heat.


B. I showed you yesterday in discoursing of Rain, how by this compounded
Motion of the Suns Body, the Air was every way at once thrust off West and
East; so that where it was contiguous, the small parts of the water were forced
to rise, for the avoiding of Vacuum. Think then that your hand were in the
place of water so exposed to the Sun. Must not the Sun work upon it as it did
upon the Water? Though it break not the skin, yet it will give to the inner
Fluids and looser parts of your hand, an Endeavor to get forth, which will
extend the skin, and in some climates fetch up the blood, and in time make the
skin black. The Fire also will do the same to them that often sit with their
naked skins too near it. Nay, one may sit so near (without touching it) as it
shall blister or break the skin, and fetch up both spirits and blood mixed into
a putrid oily matter sooner, than in a Furnace Oil can be extracted out of a
Plant.


A. But if the Water be above the Fire in a Kettle, what then will it do? Shall
the particles of water go toward the Fire, as it did toward the Sun?


B. No. For it cannot. But the Motion of the parts of the Kettle which are
caused by the Fire, shall dissipate the Water into Vapor till it be all cast
out.


A. What is that you call Fire? Is it a hard or Fluid Body?


B. It is not any other Body but that of the shining coal; which coal, though
extinguished with Water, is still the same Body. So also in a very hot Furnace,
the hollow spaces between the shining coals, though they burn that you put into
them, are no other Body than Air moved.


A. Is it not Flame?


B. No. For flame is nothing but a multitude of Sparks, and Sparks are but the
Atoms of the Fuel dissipated by the incredible swift Motion of the Movent,
which makes every Spark to seem a hundred times greater than it is, as appears
by this; That when a man swings in the Air a small stick fired at one end
(though the Motion cannot be very swift) yet the Fire will appear to the eye to
be a long, straight, or crooked Line. Therefore a great many sparks together
flying upward, must needs appear unto the sight as one continued Flame. Nor are
the sparks stricken out of a Flint any thing else but small particles of the
stone, which by their swift Motion are made to shine. But that Fire is not a
substance of it self, is evident enough by this, that the Sunbeams passing
through a Globe of Water will burn as other fire does. Which beams, if they
were indeed Fire, would be quenched in the passage.


A. This is so evident, that I wonder so wise men as Aristotle and his
followers, for so long a time could hold it for an Element, and one of the
primary parts of the Universe. But the Natural heat of a man or other living
Creature, whence proceeds it? Is there any thing within their Bodies that
has this compounded Motion?


B. At the breaking up of a Deer I have seen it plainly in his Bowels as long
as they were warm. And it is called the Peristaltique Motion, and in the Heart
of a Beast newly taken out of his Body; and this Motion is called Systole and
Diastole. But they are both of them this compounded Motion, whereof the former
causes the food to Wind up and down through the guts, and the later makes the
Circulation of the Blood.


A. What kind of Motion is the Cause of Cold? Methinks it should be contrary to
that which causes Heat.


B. So it is in some respect. For seeing the Motion that begets Heat, tends
to the separation of the parts of the Body whereon it acts, it stands with
reason, that the Motion which makes Cold, should be such as sets them closer
together. But contrary Motions are (to speak properly) when upon two ends of a
Line two Bodies move toward each other, the Effect whereof is to make them
meet. But each of them (as to this Question) is the same.


A. Do you think (as many Philosophers have held and now hold) that Cold is
nothing but a privation of Heat?


B. No. Have you never heard the Fable of the Satyr that dwelling with a
Husbandman, and seeing him blow his fingers to warm them, and his Pottage to
cool it, was so scandalized, that he ran from him, saying he would no longer
dwell with one that could blow both Hot and Cold with one breath? Yet the Cause
is evident enough. For the Air which had gotten a Calefactive power from his
vital parts, was from his mouth and throat gently diffused on his fingers, and
retained still that power. But to cool his Pottage he streightened the passage
at his lips, which extinguished the Calefactive Motion.


A. Do you think Wind the general Cause of Cold? If that were true, in the
greatest Winds we should have the greatest Frosts.


B. I mean not any of those uncertain Winds which, I said, were made by the
Clouds, but such as a Body moved in the Air makes to and against it self. For
it is all one Motion of the Air, whether it be carried against the Body, or the
Body against it. Such a Wind as is constant (if no other be stirring) from East
to West made by the Earth turning daily upon its own Center. Which is so swift,
as (except it be kept off by some hill) to kill a man, as by Experience has
been found by those who have passed over great Mountains, and specially over
the Andies which are opposed to the East. And such is the Wind which the Earth
makes in the Air by her Annual Motion, which is so swift, as that (by the
Calculation of Astronomers) to go Sixty miles in a minute of an hour. And
therefore this must be the Motion which makes it so cold about the Poles of the
Ecliptique.


A. Does not the Earth make the Wind as great in one part of the Ecliptique as
in another?


B. Yes. But when the Sun is in Cancer, it tempers the Cold, and still less and
less, but least of all in the Winter-Solstice, where his beams are most oblique
to the Superficies of the Earth.


A. I thought the greatest Cold had been about the Poles of the Equator.


B. And so did I once. But the reason commonly given for it is so improbable,
that I do not think so now. For the Cause they render of it, is only, that the
Motion of the Earth is swiftest in the Aequinoctial, and slowest about the
Poles; and consequently (since Motion is the Cause of Heat, and Cold is but (as
'twas thought) a want of the same) they inferred that the greatest Cold must be
about the Poles of the Aequinoctial. Wherein they miscounted. For not every
Motion causes Heat, but this agitation only, which we call compounded Motion;
though some have alleged Experience for that opinion; as that a Bullet out of
a Gun will with its own swiftness melt. Which I never shall believe.


A. It Is a common thing with many Philosophers to maintain their Fancies with
any rash report, and sometimes with a Lie. But how is it possible that so soft
a Substance as water should be turned into so hard a Substance as Ice?


B. When the Air shaves the Globe of the Earth with such swiftness, as that of
Sixty miles in a minute of an hour, it cannot (where it meets with still water)
but beat it up into small and undistinguishable bubbles, and involve it self in
them as in so many bladders or skins of Water. And Ice is nothing else but the
smallest imaginable parts of Air and Water mixed; which is made hard by this
compounded Motion, that keeps the parts so close together, as not to be
separated in one place without disordering the Motion of them all. For when a
Body will not easily yield to the impression of an external Movent in one place
without yielding in all, we call it Hard; And when it does, we say it is Soft.


A. Why is not Ice as well made in a moved as in a still water? Are there not
great Seas of Ice in the Northern parts of the Earth?


B. Yes, and perhaps also in the Southern parts. But I cannot imagine how Ice
can be made in such agitation as is always in the open Sea made by the Tides
and by the Winds. But how it may be made at the Shore, it is not hard to
imagine. For in a River or Current, though swift, the water that adhereth to
the banks is quiet, and easily by the Motion of the Air driven into small
insensible bubbles; and so may the water that adhereth to those bubbles, and so
forwards till it come into a stream that breaks it, and then it is no wonder
though the fragments be driven into the open Sea, and freeze together into
greater lumps. But when in the open Sea, or at the Shore, the Tide or a great
Wave shall arise, this young and tender Ice will presently be washed away. And
therefore I think it evident, that as in the Thames the Ice is first made at
the banks where the Tide is weak or none, and broken by the stream comes down
to London, and part goes to the Sea floating till it dissolve, and part (being
too great to pass the Bridge) stops there and sustains that which follows,
till the River be quite frozen over: So also the Ice in the Northern Seas
begins first at the banks of the Continent and Islands which are situated in
that Climate, and then broken off, are carried up and down, and one against
another, till they become great Bodies.


A. But what if there be Islands, and narrow Inlets of the Sea, or Rivers also
about the Pole of the Aequinoctial?


B. If there be, it is very likely the Sea may also there be covered all over
with Ice. But for the truth of this, we must stay for some further discovery.


A. When the Ice is once made and hard, what dissolves it?


B. The Principal Cause of it, is the weight of the water it self; but not
without some abatement in the Stream of the Air that hardened it; as when the
Sunbeams are less oblique to the Earth, or some contrary Wind resists the
stream of the Air. For when the impediment is removed, then the nature of the
water only works, and (being a heavy Body) downward.


A. I forgot to ask you, Why two pieces of Wood rubbed swiftly one against
another, will at length set on fire.


B. Not only at length, but quickly, if the Wood be dry. And the Cause is
evident, viz. the compounded Motion which dissipates the external small parts
of the Wood. And then the inner parts must of necessity (to preserve the
Plenitude of the Universe) come after; first the most Fluid, and then those
also of greater consistence, which are first erected, and (the Motion
continued) made to fly swiftly out; whereby the Air driven to the Eye of the
beholder, makes that fancy which is called Light.


A. Yes. I remember you told me before, that upon any strong pressure of the
Eye, the resistance from within would appear a Light. But to return to the
enquiry of Heat and Cold, there be two things that beyond all other put me into
admiration. One is the swiftness of kindling in Gunpowder. The other is the
freezing of Water in a Vessel (though not far from the fire) set about with
other water with Ice and Snow in it. When Paper or Flax is flaming, the flame
creeps gently on; and if a house full of Paper were to be burnt with putting a
Candle to it, it will be long in burning; whereas a spark of fire would set on
flame a mountain of Gunpowder in almost an instant.


B. Know you not Gunpowder is made of the powder of Charcole, Brimstone, and
Saltpeter? Whereof the first will kindle with a spark, the second flame as soon
as touched with fire; and the third blows it, as being composed of many Orbs of
Salt filled with Air, and as it dissolveth in the flame, furiously blowing
increases it. And as for making Ice by the fire side. It is manifest that
whilst the Snow is dissolving in the external vessel, the Air must in the like
manner break forth, and shave the Superficies of the inner vessel, and work
through the water till it be frozen.


A. I could easily assent to this, if I could conceive how the Air that shaves
(as you say) the outside of the Vessel, could work through it. I conceive well
enough a pail of water with Ice or Snow dissolving in it, and how it causes
Wind. But how that Wind should communicate it self through the vessel of wood
or metal, so as to make it shave the Superficies of the water which is within
it, I do not so well understand.


B. I do not say the inner Superficies of the vessel shaves the water within
it. But it is manifest that the Wind made in the Pail of water by the melting
Snow or Ice presses the sides of the Vessel that stands in it; and that the
pressure works clean through, how hard soever the Vessel be; and that again
works on the water within, by restitution of its parts, and so hardens the
water by degrees.


A. I understand you now. The Ice in the Pail by its dissolution transfers its
Hardness to the water within.


B. You are merry. But supposing, as I do, that the Ice in the Pail is more
than the water in the Vessel, you will find no absurdity in the Argument.
Besides, the Experiment, you know, is common.


A. I confess it is probable. The Greeks have the word (...) (whence the Latins
have their word Frigus) to signify the curling of water by the Wind; and use
the same also for Horror, which is the passion of one that comes suddenly
into a cold Air, or is put into a sudden affright, whereby he shrinks, and his
hair stands upright. Which manifestly shows that the Motion which causes Cold,
is that which pressing the Superficies of a Body, sets the parts of it closer
together. But to proceed in my Quaeries. Monsieur Des Carts, who (you know)
has written somewhere, that the noise we hear in Thunder, proceeds from
breaking of the Ice in the Clouds; What think you of it? Can a Cloud be turned
into Ice?


B. Why not? A Cloud is but Water in the Air.


A. But how? For he has not told us that.


B. You know that it is only in Summer, and in hot weather, that it Thunders;
or if in Winter, it is taken for a Prodigy. You know also, that of Clouds,
some are higher, some lower, and many in number, as you cannot but have
oftentimes observed, with spaces between them. Therefore, as in all Currents of
water, the Water is there swiftest where it is straightened with Islands, so
must the Current of Air made by the Annual Motion be swiftest there, where it
is checked with many Clouds through which it must (as it were) be strained, and
leave behind it many small particles of earth, always in it, and in hot
weather more than ordinary.


A. This I understand, and that it may cause Ice. But when the Ice is made, how
is it broken? And why falls it not down in shivers?


B. The particles are enclosed in small Caverns of the Ice; and their Natural
Motion being the same which we have ascribed to the Globe of the Earth,
requires a sufficient space to move in. But when it is imprisoned in a less
room that that, then a great part of the Ice breaks: And this is the
Thunderclap. The Murmur following is from the settling of the Air. The
Lightening is the fancy made by the recoiling of the Air against the Eye. The
fall is in Rain, not in Shivers; because the prisons which they break are
extreme narrow, and the shivers being small, are dissolved by the Heat. But in
less Heat they would fall in Drops of Hail, that is to say, half frozen by the
shaving of the Air as they fall, and be in a very little time (much less than
Snow or Ice) dissolved.


A. Will not that Lightning burn?


B. No. But it has often killed men with Cold. But this extraordinary
swiftness of Lightning consists not in the Expansion of the Air, but in a
straight and direct stream from where it breaks forth; which is in many places
successively, according to the Motion of the Cloud.


A. Experience tells us that. I have now done with my Problems concerning the
great Bodies of the world, the Stars, and Element of Air in which they are
moved, and am therein satisfied, and the rather, because you have answered me
by the Supposition of one only Motion, and commonly known, and the same with
that of Copernicus, whose Opinion is received by all the Learned; and because
you have not used any of these empty terms, Sympathy, Antipathy,
Antiperistasis, etc. for a natural Cause, as the old Philosophers have done to
save their credit. For though they were many of them wise men, as Plato,
Aristotle, Seneca, and others, and have written excellently of Morals and
Politiques, yet there is very little Natural Philosophy to be gathered out of
their Writings.


B. Their Ethiques and Politiques are pleasant reading, but I find not any
argument in their discourses of Justice or Virtue drawn from the supreme
Authority, on whose Laws all Justice, Virtue, and good Politiques depend.


A. Concerning this Cover, or (as some have called it) the Scurf or Scab of the
Terrestrial Star, I will begin with you to morrow. For it is a large Subject,
containing Animals, Vegetables, Metals, Stones, and many other kinds of Bodies,
the knowledge whereof is desired by most men, and of the greatest and most
general profit.


B. And this is it, in which I shall give you the least satisfaction; so great
is the variety of Motion, and so concealed from humane senses.


CAP. VII. Of Hard and Soft, and of the Atoms that fly in the Air.
A. COncerning this Cover of the Earth, made up of an infinite number of parts
of different natures, I had much ado to find any tolerable method of enquiry.
But I resolved at last to begin with the Questions concerning Hard and Soft,
and what kind of Motion it is that makes them so. I know that in any pulsion
of Air, the parts of it go innumerable and inexplicable ways; but I ask only if
every point of it be moved.


B. No. If you mean a Mathematical point, you know it is impossible. For
nothing is movable but Body. But I suppose it divisible (as all other Bodies)
into parts divisible. For no Substance can be divided into Nothings.


A. Why may not that Substance within our Bodies, which are called Animal
spirits, be another kind of Body, and more subtle than the common Air?


B. I know not why, no more than you or any man else knows why it is not very
Air, though purer perhaps than the common Air, as being strained through the
blood into the Brain and Nerves. But howsoever that be, there is no doubt, but
the least parts of the common Air, (respectively to the whole) will easilier
pierce (with equal Motion) the Body that resists them, than the least parts
of water. For it is by Motion only that any mutation is made in any thing; and
all things standing as they did, will appear as they did. And that which
changes Soft into Hard, must be such as makes the parts not easily to be moved
without being moved all together; which cannot be done but by some Motion
compounded. And we call Hard, that whereof no part can be put out of order
without disordering all the rest; which is not easily done.


A. How Water and Air beaten into extreme small Bubbles is hardened into Ice,
you have told me already, and I understand it. But how a soft Homogeneous Body,
as Air, or Water, should be so hardened, I cannot imagine.


B. There is no hard Body that has not also some degree of Gravity; and
consequently, being loose, there must be some Efficient Cause, that is, some
Motion, when it is severed from the Earth, to bring the same to it again. And
seeing this compounded Motion gives to the Air and Water an Endeavor from the
Earth, the Motion which must hinder it, must be in a way contrary to the
compounded Motion of the Earth. For whatsoever, having been asunder, comes
together again, must come contrary ways, as those that follow one another go
the same way, though both move upon the same Line.


A. What Experiment have you seen to this purpose?


B. I have seen a drop of glass like that of the second Figure, newly taken out
of the furnace, and hanging at the end of an Iron rod, and yet Fluid, and let
fall into the water and hardened. The Club-end of it A A coming first to the
water, the tail B C following it. It Is proved before, that the motion that
makes it is a compounded Motion, and gives an Endeavor outward to every part
of it; and that the Motion which makes Cold, is such as shaving the Body in
every point of contact, and turning it, gives them all an Endeavor inward.
Such is this Motion made by the sinking of the hot and fluid glass into the
water. It Is therefore manifest that the Motion which hardneth a Soft Body, must
in every point of contact be in the contrary way to that which makes a hard
body Soft. And further, that slender tail B C shall be made much more hard than
common Glass. For toward the upper end, in C, you cannot easily break it, as
small as it is. And when you have broken it, the whole Body will fall into
dust, as it must do, seeing the bending is so difficult. For all the parts are
bent with such force, that upon the breaking at D, by their sudden restitution
to their liberty, they will break together. And the cause why the tail B C,
being so slender, becomes so hard, is, that all the Endeavor in the great part
A B, is propagated to the small part B C, in the same manner as the force of
the Sunbeams is derived almost to a point by a Burning-glass. But the Cause
why, when it is broken in D, it breaks also in so many other places, is, that
the Endeavor in all the other parts (which is called the Spring) unbends it;
from whence a Motion is caused the contrary way, and that Motion continued
bends it more the other way and breaks it, as a Bow over-bent is broken into
shivers by a sudden breaking of the string.


A. I conceive now how a Body which having been Hard and softened again, may be
rehardned; but how a Fluid and mere Homogeneous Body, as Air or Water, may be
so, I see not yet. For the hardening of water is making a hard Body of two
Fluids, whereof one (which is the water) has some tenacity; and so a man may
make a Bladder hard with blowing into it.


B. As for mere Air, which has no Natural Motion of it self, but is moved
only by other Bodies of a greater consistence, I think it impossible to be
hardened. For the parts of it so easily change places, that they can never be
fixed by any Motion. No more I think can Water, which though somewhat less
Fluid, is with an insensible force very easily broken.


A. It is the opinion of many learned men, that Ice (in long time) will be
turned into Crystal; and they allege Experience for it. For they say that
Crystal is found hanging on high Rocks in the Alps like Isicles on the Eaves
of a house, and why may not that have formerly been Ice, and in many years have
lost the power of being reduced?


B. If that were so, it would still be Ice, though also Crystal: Which cannot
be, because Crystal is heavier than Water, and therefore much heavier than Ice.


A. Is there then no transubstantiation of Bodies but by mixture?


B. Mixture is no transubstantiation.


A. Have you never seen a Stone that seemed to have been formerly Wood, and
some like Shells, and some like Serpents, and others like other things?


B. Yes. I have seen such things, and particularly I saw at Rome in a
Stone-cutters workhouse a Billet of Wood, as I thought it, partly covered with
bark, and partly with the grain bare, as long as a man's Arm, and as thick as
the Calf of a man's Leg; which handling I found extreme heavy, and saw a small
part of it which was polished, and had a very fine Gloss, and thought it a
substance between Stone and Metal, but nearest to Stone. I have seen also a
kind of Slate painted naturally with Forest-work. And I have seen in the hands
of a Chemist of my acquaintance at Paris, a broken Glass, part of a Retort, in
which had been the Rozin of Turpentine, wherein though there were left no
Rozin, yet there appeared in the piece of Glass many Trees; and Plants in the
ground about them, such as grow in Woods; and better designed than they could
be done by any Painter; and continued so for a long time. These be great
wonders of Nature, but I will not undertake to show their causes. But yet this
is most certain, that nothing can make a hard Body of a Soft, but by some
Motion of its parts. For the parts of the Hardest Body in the world can be no
closer together than to touch; and so close are the parts of Air and Water, and
consequently they should be equally Hard, if their smallest parts had not
different Natural Motions. Therefore if you ask me the Causes of these Effects,
I answer, They are different Motions. But if you expect from me how and by what
Motions, I shall fail you. For there is no kind of Substance in the World now,
that was not at the first Creation, when the Creator gave to all things what
Natural and special Motion he thought good. And as he made some Bodies wondrous
great, so he made others wondrous little. For all his works are wondrous. Man
can but guess, nor guess further, than he has knowledge of the variety of
Motion. I am therefore of opinion, that whatsoever perfectly Homogeneous is
Hard, consists of the smallest parts (or, as some call them, Atoms) that
were made Hard in the beginning, and consequently by an Eternal Cause; and that
the hardness of the whole Body is caused only by the contact of the parts by
pressure.


A. What Motion is it that makes a hard Body to melt?


B. The same compounded Motion that heats, namely, that of Fire, if it be
strong enough. For all Motion compounded is an Endeavor to dissipate (as I
have said before) the parts of the Body to be moved by it. If therefore
hardness consist only in the pressing Contact of the least parts, this Motion
will make the same parts slide off from one another, and the whole to take such
a figure as the weight of the parts shall dispose them to, as in Lead, Iron,
Gold, and other things melted with Heat. But if the small parts have such
figures as they cannot exactly touch, but must leave spaces between them filled
with Air or other Fluids, then this Motion of the fire, will dissipate those
parts some one way, some another, the Hard part still hard; as in the burning
of Wood or Stone into Ashes or Lime. For this Motion is that which makes
Fermentation, scattering dissimilar parts, and congregating similar.


A. Why do some hard Bodies resist breaking more one way than another?


B. The Bodies that do so, are for the most part Wood, and receive that quality
from their generation. For the heat of the Sun in the Springtime draws up
the moisture at the Root, and together with it the small parts of the Earth,
and twisteth it into a small twig by its Motion upwards to some length, but to
very little other dimensions, and so leaves it to dry till the Spring
following; and then does the same to that, and to every small part round about
it; so that upward the strength is doubled, and the next year trebled, etc. And
these are called the grain of the Wood, and but touch one another, like sticks
with little or no binding, and therefore can hardly be broken across the grain,
but easily all-along it. Also some other hard Bodies have this quality of being
more fragile one way than another, as we see in quarrels of a Glass-window,
that are aptest many times to break in some crooked Line. The cause of this may
be, that when the glass, hot from the Furnace, is poured out upon a Plain, any
small stones in or under it will break the stream of it into diverse lines, and
not only weaken it, but also cause it falsely to represent the Object you look
on through it.


A. What is the Cause why a Bow of Wood or Steel, or other very hard Body,
being bent, but not broken, will recover its former degree of straightness?


B. I have told you already, how the smallest parts of a hard Body have every
one (by the generation of hardness) a Circular, or other compounded Motion;
such Motion is that of the smallest parts of the Bow. Which Circles in the
bending you press into narrower figures, as a Circle into an Ellipsis, and an
Ellipsis into a narrower but longer Ellipsis with violence; which turns their
Natural Motion against the outward parts of the Bow so bent, and is an
Endeavor to stretch the Bow into its former posture. Therefore if the
impediment be removed, the Bow must needs recover its former Figure.


A. It Is manifest; and the cause can be no other but that, except the Bow have
Sense.


B. And though the Bow had Sense, and Appetite to boot, the Cause will be still
the same.


A. Do you think Air and Water to be pure and Homogeneous Bodies?


B. Yes, and many Bodies both Hard and Heavy to be so too, and many liquors
also besides water.


A. Why then do men say they find one Air healthy, another infectious?


B. Not because the nature of the Air varies, but because there are in the Air
drawn, or rather, beaten up by the Sun, many little Bodies, whereof some have
such Motion as is healthful, others such as is hurtful to the life of man. For
the Sun (as you see in the generation of Plants) can fetch up Earth as well as
Water; and from the driest ground any kind of Body that lies loose, so it be
small enough, rather than admit any Emptiness. By some of these small Bodies it
is that we live; which being taken in with our breath, pass into our blood, and
cause it (by their compounded Motion) to circulate through the Veins and
Arteries; which the blood of it self (being a heavy Body) without it cannot
do. What kind of substance these Atoms are, I cannot tell. Some suppose them
to be Nitre. As for those infectious creatures in the Air, whereof so many die
of the Plague, I have heard that Monsieur Des Carts, a very ingenious man, was
of opinion, that they were little Flies. But what grounds he had for it, I know
not, though there be many Experiments that invite me to believe it. For first,
we know that the Air is never universally infected over a whole Country, but
only in or near to some populous Town. And therefore the cause must also be
partly ascribed to the multitude thronged together, and constrained to carry
their Excrements into the fields round about and near to their habitation.
Which in time fermenting breed Worms, which commonly in a month or little more,
naturally become Flies; and though engendered at one Town, may fly to another.
Secondly, in the beginning of a Plague, those that dwell in the Suburbs, that
is to say, nearest to this corruption, are the poorest of the people, that are
nourished for the most part with the Roots and Herbs which grow in that
corrupted dirt; so that the same filth makes both the blood of poor people, and
the substance of the Fly. And it is said by Aristotle, that every thing is
nourished by the matter whereof it is generated. Thirdly, when a Town is
infected, the Gentlemen, and those that live on wholsomest food, scarce one of
Five hundred die of the Plague. It seems therefore, whatsoever creatures they
be that invade us from the Air, they can discern their proper nourishment, and
do not enter into the mouth and nostrils with the breath of every man alike, as
they would do if they were inanimate. Fourthly, a man may carry the infection
with him a great way into the Country in his Clothes, and infect a Village.
Shall another man there draw the Infection from the Clothes only by his
breath? Or from the Hangings of a Chamber wherein a man has died? It is
impossible. Therefore whatsoever killing thing is in the Clothes or Hangings,
it must rise and go into his mouth or nostrils before it can do him hurt. It
must therefore be a Fly, whereof great numbers get into the blood, and there
feeding and breeding Worms, obstruct the Circulation of the blood, and kill the
man.


A. I would we knew the palate of those little Animals; we might perhaps find
some medicine to fright them from mingling with our breath. But what is that
which kills men that lie asleep too near a Charcole-fire? Is it another kind of
Fly? Or is Charcole venomous?


B. It is neither Fly nor venim, but the Effect of a flameless glowing fire,
which dissipates those Atoms that maintain the circulation of the blood; so
that for want of it, by degrees they faint, and being asleep cannot remove, but
in short time, there sleeping die, as is evident by this, that being brought
into the open Air (without other help) they recover.


A. It Is very likely. The next thing I would be informed of, is the nature of
Gravity. But for that, if you please, we will take another day.


CAP. VIII. Of Gravity and Gravitation.
B. WHat Books are those?


A. Two Books written by two learned men concerning Gravity. I brought them
with me, because they furnish me with some material Questions about that
Doctrine; though of the nature of Gravity, I find no more in either of them
than this, That Gravity is an Intrinsecal Quality by which a Body so qualified
descends perpendicularly toward the Superficies of the Earth.


B. Did neither of them consider that descending is local Motion, that they
might have called it an intrinsecal Motion rather than an intrinsecal quality?


A. Yes. But not how Motion should be intrinsecal to the special individual
Body moved. For how should they, when you are the first that ever sought the
differences of Qualities in local Motion, except your authority in Philosophy
were greater with them than it is? For it is hard for a man to conceive (except
he see it) how there should be Motion within a Body, otherwise than as it is in
living creatures.


B. But it may be they never sought, or despaired of finding what natural
Motion could make any inanimate thing tend one way rather than another.


A. So it seems. But the first of them enquires no further than, Why so much
water (being a heavy Body) as lies perpendicularly on a Fishes back in the
bottom of the Sea, should not kill it. The other (whereof the Author is Dr.
Wallis) treats universally of Gravity.


B. Well. But what are the Questions which from these Books you intend to ask
me?


A. The Author of the first Book tells me, that Water and other Fluids are
Bodies continued, and act (as to Gravity) as a piece of Ice would do of the
same Figure and quantity. Is that true?


B. That the Universe (supposing there is no place empty) is one entire Body,
and also, as he says it is, a continual Body, is very true. And yet the parts
thereof may be contiguous, without any other cohesion but Touch. And it is also
true, that a Vessel of Water will descend in a medium less heavy (but Fluid)
as Ice would do.


A. But he means that water in a Tub would have the same Effect upon a Fish in
the bottom of the Tub, as so much Ice would have.


B. That also would be true, if the water were frozen to the sides of it.
Otherwise the Ice (if there be enough) will crush the Fish to death. But how
applies he this, to prove that the water cannot hurt a Fish in the Sea by its
weight?


A. It plainly appears that Water does not Gravitate on any part of it self
beneath it.


B. It appears by Experience, but not by this Argument, though instead of Water
the Tub were filled with Quicksilver.


A. I thought so. But how it comes to pass that the Fish remains uncrush'd, I
cannot tell.


B. The Endeavor of the Quicksilver downward, is stopped by the resistance of
the hard bottom. But all Resistance is a contrary Endeavor; that is, an
Endeavor upwards, which gives the like Endeavor to the Quicksilver, which is
also heavy, and thereby the Endeavor of the Quicksilver is diverted to the
sides round-about; where stopped again by the resistance of the sides, it
receives an Endeavor upwards, which carries the Fish to the top, lying all the
way upon a soft bed of Quicksilver. This is the true manner how the Fish is
saved harmless. But your Author, I believe, either wanted age, or had too much
business, to study the doctrine of Motion; and never considered that Resistance
is not an impediment only, or privation, but a contrary Motion; and that when
a man claps two pieces of Wax together, their contrary Endeavor will turn both
the pieces into one Cake of Wax.


A. I know not the Author; but it seems he has deeplier considered this
Question than other men. For in the Introduction to his Book, he says, That
men have pre-engaged themselves to maintain certain Principles of their own
invention, and are therefore unwilling to receive any thing that may render
their labor fruitless: and That they have not strictly enough considered the
several interventions that abate, impede, advance, or direct the Gravitation of
Bodies.


B. This is true enough; and he himself is one of those men, in that he
considered not, that Resistance is one of those interventions, which abate,
impede, and direct Gravitation. But what are his Suppositions for the Question
he handles?


A. His first is, That as in a Pyramide of Brick, wherein the Bricks are so
joined, that the uppermost lies every where over the joint or Cement of the two
next below it, you may break down a part, and leave a Cavity, and yet the
Bricks above will stand firm and sustain one another by their cross posture: So
also it is in Wheat, Hail-shot, Sand, or Water; and so they arch themselves,
and thereby the Fish is every way secured by an arch of water over it.


B. That the cause why Fishes are not crushed nor hurt in the bottom of the Sea
by the weight of the water, is the waters arching it self, is very manifest.
For if the uppermost Orb of the water should descend by its Gravity, it would
tend toward the Center of the Earth, and place it self all the way in a less
and lesser Orb; which is impossible. For the places of the same Body are always
equal. But that Wheat, Sand, Hail-shot, or loose Stones should make a firm
arch, is not credible.


A. The Author therefore (it seems) quits it: And takes a second Hypothesis
for the true Cause, though the former (he says) be not useless, but
contributes its part to it.


B. I see, though he depart from his Hypothesis, he looks back upon it with
some kindness. What is his second Hypothesis?


A. It is, That Air and Water have an Endeavor to Motion upward, downward,
directly, obliquely, and every way. For Air (he says) will come down his
chimney, and in at his door, and up his stairs.


B. Yes, and mine too; and so would Water if I dwelt under water, rather than
admit of Vacuum. But what of that?


A. Why then it would follow, that those several tendencies or Endeavors would
so abate, impede, and correct one another, as none of them should Gravitate.
Which being granted, the Fish can take no harm. Wherein I find one difficulty.
Which is this: The Water having an Endeavor to Motion every way at once,
methinks it should go no way, but lie at rest; which, he says, was the opinion
of Stevinus, and rejects it, saying, it would crush the Fish into pieces.


B. I think the Water in this case would neither rest nor crush. For the
Endeavor being (as he says) intrinsecal, and every way, must needs drive the
water perpetually outward, that is to say (as to this Question) upwards; and
seeing the same Endeavor in one individual Body cannot be more ways at once
than one, it will carry it on perpetually without limit, beyond the fixed
Stars; and so we shall never more have rain.


A. As ridiculous as it is, it necessarily follows.


B. What are Dr. Wallis his Suppositions?


A. He goes upon Experiments. And first he alleges this, That Water left to
it self without disturbance, does naturally settle it self into a Horizontal
Plain.


B. He does not then (as your Author and all other men) take Gravity for that
Quality whereby a Body tends to the Center of the Earth.


A. Yes, he defines Gravity to be a Natural propension toward the Center of
the Earth.


B. Then he contradicts himself. For if all heavy Bodies tend naturally to
one Center, they shall never settle in a Plain, but in a Spherical Superficies.
But against this, That such an Horizontal Plain is found in water by
Experience, I say it is impossible. For the Experiment cannot be made in a
Basin, but in half a mile at Sea, Experience visibly shows the contrary.
According to this, he should think also that a pair of Scales should hang
parallel.


A. He thinks that too.


B. Let us then leave this Experiment. What says he further concerning Gravity?


A. He takes for granted (not as an Experiment, but an Axiom) that Nature
works not by election, but ad ultimum virium, with all the power it can.


B. I think he means (for it is a very obscure passage) that every inanimate
Body by nature works all it can without election; which may be true. But it is
certain that men (and beasts) work often by election, and often without
election; as when he goes by election, and falls without it. In this sense I
grant him, that Nature does all it can. But what infers he from it?


A. That naturally every Body has every way (if the ways oppose not one
another) an Endeavor to Motion. And consequently, that if a Vessel have two
holes, one at the side, another at the bottom, the water will run out at both.


B. Does he think the Body of water that runs out at the side, and that which
runs out at the bottom is but one and the same Body of water?


A. No sure. He cannot think but that they are two several parts of the whole
Water in the Vessel.


B. What wonder is it then, if two parts of water run two ways at once, or a
thousand parts a thousand ways? Does it follow thence that one Body can go more
than one way at once? Why is he still meddling with things of such difficulty?
He will find at last that he has not a Genius either for Natural Philosophy or
for Geometry. What other Suppositions has he?


A. My first Author had affirmed, that a lighter Body does not Gravitate on a
heavier; against this Dr. Wallis thus argues: Let there Fig. 3.
be a Siphon A B C D filled with Quicksilver to the level A D. If then you pour
Oil upon A as high as to E, he asks if the Oil in A E (as being heavy) shall
not press down the Quicksilver a little at A, and make it rise a little at D,
suppose to F. And answers himself, that certainly it will. So that it is
neither an Experiment nor an Hypothesis, but only his opinion.


B. Whatsoever it be, it is not true; though the Doctor may be pardoned,
because the contrary was never proved.


A. Can you prove the contrary?


B. Yes. For the Endeavor of the Quicksilver both from A and D downward, is
stronger than that of the Oil downward. If therefore the Endeavor of the
Quicksilver were not resisted by the bottom B C, it would fall so, by reason of
the acceleration of heavy Bodies in their descending, as to leave the Oil, so
that it should not only not press, but also not touch the Quicksilver. It is
true in a pair of Scales equally charged with Quicksilver, that the addition of
a little Oil to either Scale, will make it praeponderate. And that was it
deceived him.


A. It Is evident. The last Experiment he cites is the weighing of Air in a pair
of Scales, where it is found manifestly that it has some little weight. For if
you weigh a Bladder, and put the weight into one Scale, and then blow the
Bladder full of Air, and put it into the other Scale, the full Bladder will
outweigh the empty. Must not then the Air Gravitate?


B. It does not follow. I have seen the Experiment just as you describe it, but
it can never be thence demonstrated that Air has any weight. For as much Air as
is pressed downward by the weight of the blown Bladder, so much will rise from
below, and lay it self Spherically at the altitude of the Center of gravity of
the Bladder so blown. So that all the Air within the Bladder above that Center,
is carried thither imprisoned, and by violence: And the force that carries it
up, is equal to that which presses it down. There must therefore be allowed
some little counterpoise in the other Scale to balance it. Therefore the
Experiment proves nothing to his purpose. And whereas they say there be small
heavy Bodies in the Air, which make it Gravitate, do they think the force
which brought them thither cannot hold them there?


A. I leave this Question of the Fish, as clearly resolved, because the water
tending every way to one point (which is the Center of the Earth) must of
necessity arch it self. And now tell me your own opinion concerning the Cause
of Gravity, and why all Bodies descend or ascend not all alike. For there can
be no more Matter in one place than another if the places be equal.


B. I have already showed you in general, that the difference of Motion in the
parts of several Bodies makes the difference of their Natures. And all the
difference of Motions consists either in swiftness, or in the way, or in the
duration. But to tell you in Special, why Gold is heaviest, and then
Quicksilver, and then (perhaps) Lead, is more than I hope to know, or mean to
enquire: for I doubt not but that the Species of heavy, hard, Opaque, and
Diaphanous, were all made so at their creation, and at the same time separated
from different Species. So that I cannot guess at any particular Motions that
should constitute their natures, further than I am guided by the Experiments
made by fire or mixture.


A. You hope not then to make Gold by Art?


B. No, unless I could make one and the same thing heavier than it was. God
has from the beginning made all the Kinds of Hard, and Heavy, and Diaphanous
Bodies that are, and of such Figure and magnitude as he thought fit; but how
small soever, they may by accretion become greater in the Mine, or perhaps by
generation, though we know not how. But that Gold, by the art of man should be
made of not Gold, I cannot understand; nor can they that pretend to show how.
For the heaviest of all Bodies, by what mixture soever of other Bodies, will be
made lighter; and not to be received for Gold.


A. Why, when the Cause of Gravity consists in Motion, should you despair of
finding it?


B. It is certain, that when any two Bodies meet, as the Earth and any heavy
Body will, the Motion that brings them to or toward one another, must be upon
two contrary ways; and so also it is when two Bodies press each other in order
to make them Hard. So that one contrariety of Motion might cause both Hard and
Heavy. But it does not. For the hardest Bodies are not always the heaviest.
Therefore I find no access that way to compare the Causes of different
Endeavors of heavy Bodies to descend.


A. But show me at least how any heavy Body that is once above in the Air, can
descend to the Earth, when there is no visible movent to thrust or pull it down.


B. It Is already granted, that the Earth has this compounded Motion supposed
by Copernicus, and that thereby it casts the Contiguous Air from it self
every way round-about. Which Air so cast off, must continually by its nature,
range it self in a Spherical Orb. Suppose a Stone (for instance) were taken up
from the ground, and held up in the Air by a man's hand, what shall come into
the place it filled when it lay upon the Earth?


A. So much Air as is equal to the Stone in magnitude, must descend and place
it self in an Orb upon the Earth. But then I see that to avoid Vacuum, another
Orb of Air of the same magnitude must descend, and place it self in that, and
so perpetually to the man's hand; and then so much Air as would fill the place
must descend in the same manner, and bring the Stone down with it. For the
Stone having no Endeavor upward, the least Motion of the Air (the hand being
removed) will thrust it downward.


B. It Is just so. And further, the Motion of the Stone downward shall
continually be accelerated according to the odd numbers from Unity; as you
know has been demonstrated by Galileo. But we are nothing the nearer by this,
to the knowledge of why one Body should have a greater Endeavor downward than
another. You see the Cause of Gravity is this compounded Motion with exclusion
of Vacuum.


A. It may be it is the Figure that makes the difference. For though Figure be
not Motion, yet it may facilitate Motion, as you see commonly the breadth of a
heavy Body retardeth the sinking of it. And the cause of it is, That it makes
the Air have further to go laterally, before it can rise from under it. For
suppose a Body of Quicksilver falling in the Air from a certain height, must it
not (going as it does toward the Center of the Earth) as it draws nearer and
nearer to the Earth, become more and more slender, in the form of a Solid
Sector? And if it have far to go, divide it self into drops? This Figure of a
Solid Sector is like a Needle with the point downward, and therefore I should
think that facilitating the Motion of it does the same that would be done by
increasing the Endeavor.


B. Do not you see that this way of facilitating is the same in Water, and in
all other Fluid heavy Bodies. Besides, your Argument ought to be applicable to
the weighing of Bodies in a pair of Scales (which it is not, for there they
have no such Figure) it should also hold in the comparison of Gravity in Hard
and Fluid Bodies.


A. I had not sufficiently considered it. But supposing now (as you do) that
both heavy and hard Bodies, in their smallest parts, were made so in the
Creation; yet, because Quicksilver is harder than Water, a drop of Water shall
in descending be pressed into a more slender Sector than a drop of Quicksilver,
and consequently the Earth shall more easily cast off any quantity of Water
than the same quantity of Quicksilver.


B. This one would think were true; as also that of simple Fluid Bodies, those
whose smallest parts, naturally, without the force of Fire do strongliest
cohere, are generally the heaviest. But why then should Quicksilver be heavier
than Stone or Steel? Fluidity and hardness are but degrees between greater
Fluidity and greater hardness. Therefore to the knowledge of what it is that
causes the difference, in different Bodies, of their Endeavor downward, there
are required (if it can be known at all) a great many more Experiments than
have been yet made. It is not difficult to find why Water is heavier than Ice,
or other Body mixed of Air and Water. But to believe that all Bodies are
heavier or lighter according to the quantity of Air within them, is very hard.


A. I see by this, that the Creator of the World, as by his Power he ordered
it, so by his Wisdom he provided it should be never disordered. Therefore
leaving this Question, I desire to know whether if a heavy Body were as high as
a fixed Star, it would return to the Earth.


B. It Is hard to try. But if there be this compounded Motion in the great
Bodies so high, such as is in the Earth, it is very likely that some heavy
Bodies will be carried to them. But we shall never know it till we be at the
like height.


A. What think you is the reason why a drop of Water (though heavy) will stand
upon a Horizontal Plain of dry or unctuous Wood, and not spread it self upon
it? For let A B (in the 6th Figure) be the dry Plain, D the drop of Water, and
D C perpendicular to A B. The drop D (though higher) will not descend and
spread it self upon it.


B. The reason I think is manifest. For those Bodies which are made by beating
of Water and Air together, show plainly that the parts of Water have a great
degree of Cohesion. For the skin of the Bubble is Water, and yet it can keep
the Air (though moved) from getting out. Therefore the whole drop of Water at
D, has a good deal of Cohesion of parts. And seeing A B is an Horizontal
Plain, the way from the contact in D either to A or B is upwards, and
consequently there is no endeavor in D either of those ways, but what proceeds
from so much weight of Water as is able to break that Cohesion, which so small
a drop is too weak to do. But the Cohesion being once broken, as with your
Finger, the Water will follow.


A. Seeing the descent of a heavy Body increases according to the odd numbers
1, 3, 5, 7, etc. and the aggregates of those numbers, viz. of 1 and 3; and 1
and 3 and 5; and of 1 and 3 and 5 and 7, etc. are square numbers, namely 4. 9.
16, the whole swiftness of the descent will be, I think, to the aggregate of so
many swiftnesses equal to the first Endeavor, as square numbers are to their
sides, 1, 2, 3, 4. Is it so?


B. Yes, you know it has been demonstrated by Galileo.


A. Then if (for instance) you put into a pair of Scales equal quantities of
Quicksilver and Water, seeing they are both accelerated in the same proportion,
why should not the weight of Quicksilver to the weight of Water be in duplicate
proportions to their first Endeavors?


B. Because they are in a pair Scales. For there the Motion of neither of them
is accelerated. And therefore it will be, as the first Endeavor of the
Quicksilver to the first endeavor of the Water, so the whole weight to the
whole weight. By which you may see, that the Cause which takes away the
Gravitation of Liquid Bodies from Fish or other lighter Bodies within them, can
never be derived from the weight.


A. I have one Question more to ask concerning Gravity. If Gravity be (as some
define it) an intrinsecal quality, whereby a Body descends toward the Center
of the Earth, how is it possible that a piece of Iron that has this
intrinsecal quality, should rise from the Earth, to go to a Loadstone? Has it
also an intrinsecal quality to go from the Earth? It cannot be. The Cause
therefore must be extrinsecal. And because when they are come together in the
Air, if you leave them to their own nature, they will fall down together, they
must also have some like extrinsecal Cause. And so this magnetique virtue will
be such another virtue as makes all other heavy Bodies to descend (in this our
World) to the Earth. If therefore you can from this your Hypothesis of
compounded Motion, by which you have so probably salved the Problem of Gravity,
salve also this of the Loadstone, I shall acknowledge both your Hypothesis to
be true, and your Conclusion to be well deduced.


B. I think it not impossible. But I will proceed no further in it now, than
(for the facilitating of the demonstrations) to tell you the several
proprieties of the Magnet, whereof I am to show the causes. As first, That
Iron, and no other Body, at some little distance (though heavy) will rise to
it. Secondly, That if it be laid upon a still Water in a floating Vessel, and
left to it self, it will turn it self till it lie in a Meridian, that is to
say, with one and the same Line still North and South. Thirdly, If you take a
long slender piece of Iron, and apply the Loadstone to it, and (according to
the position of the Poles of the Loadstone) draw it over to the end of the
Iron, the Iron will have the same Poles with the Magnet, so it be drawn with
some pressure; but the Poles will lie in a contrary Position; and also this
long Iron will draw other Iron to it as the Magnet does. Fourthly, This long
Iron, if it be so small as that poised upon a Pin, the weight of it have no
visible Effect, the Navigators use it for the Needle of their Compass, because
it points North and South; saving that in most places by particular accidents
it is diverted; which diversion is called the variation of the Horizontal
Needle. Fifthly, The same Needle placed in a Plain perpendicular to the
Horizon, has another Motion called the Inclination. Which that you may the
better conceive, draw a fourth Fig. 4.
Figure; wherein let there be a Circle to represent the Terrella, that is to
say, a Spherical Magnet.


A. Let this be it, whose Center is A, the North Pole B, the South Pole C.


B. Join B C, and cross it at right Angles with the Diameter D E.


A. It Is done.


B. Upon the point D set the Needle parallel to B C, with the cross for the
South Pole, and the Barb for the North; and describe a Square about the Circle
B D C E, and divide the arch D B into four equal parts in a, b, c.


A. It Is done.


B. Then place the middle of the Needle on the points a, b, c, so that they may
freely turn; and set the Barb which is at D toward the North, and that which is
at C toward the South. You see plainly by this, that the Angles of Inclination
through the Arch D C taken all together, are double to a Right Angle. For when
the South point of the Needle, looking North, as at D, comes to look South, as
at C, it must make half a Circle.


A. That is true. And if you draw the Sine of the Arch D a (which is d a) and
the Sine of the Arch B a (which is a c) and the Sine of the Arch D b (which is
b f) and the Sine of the Arch B c (which is c g) the Needle will lie upon b f
with the North-point downwards, so that the Needle will be parallel to A D.
Then from a draw the line a h, making the Angle e a h equal to the Angle D A a.
And then the Needle at a shall lie in the line a h with the South point toward
h. Finally, draw the line c h, which (with c g) will also make a quarter of a
right Angle; and therefore if the Needle be placed on the point c it will lie
in c h with the South point toward h. And thus you see by what degrees the
Needle inclines or dips under the Horizon more and more from D till it come to
the North Pole at B; where it will lie parallel to the Needle in D; but with
their Barbs looking contrary ways. And this is certain by experience, and by
none contradicted.


B. You see then why the degrees of the Inclinatory Needle in coming from D to
B are double to the degrees of a Quadrant. It is found also by experience, that
Iron both of the Mine and of the Furnace put into a Vessel so as to float, will
lay it self (if some accident in the Earth hinder it not) exactly North and
South. And now I am, from this compounded Motion supposed by Copernicus, to
derive the causes why a Loadstone draws Iron; why it makes Iron to do the same;
why naturally it places it self in a parallel to the Axis of the Earth; why by
passing it over the Needle it changes its Poles; and what is the cause that it
inclines. But it is your part to remember what I told you of Motion at our
second meeting; and what I told you of this compounded Motion supposed by
Copernicus, at our fourth meeting.


CAP. IX. Of the Loadstone, and its Poles; and whether they show the Longitude
of places on the Earth.
A. I Come now to hear what Natural Causes you can assign of the virtues of the
Magnet; and first, why it draws Iron to it, and only Iron.


B. You know I have no other cause to assign but some local Motion, and that I
never approved of any argument drawn from Sympathy, Influence, Substantial
Forms, or Incorporeal Effluvia. For I am not, nor am accounted by my
Antagonists for a Witch. But to answer this Question, I should describe the
Globe of the Earth greater than it is at B in the first Figure, but that the
Terrella in the fourth Figure will serve our turn. For it is but calling B and C
the Poles of the Earth, and D E the Diameter of the Aequinoctial Circle, and
making D the East, and E the West. And then you must remember that the Annual
Motion of the Earth is from West to East, and compounded of a straight and
circular Motion, so as that every point of it shall describe a small Circle
from West to East, as is done by the whole Globe. And let the Circles about a b
c be three of those small Circles.


A. Before you go any further, I pray you show me how I must distinguish East
and West in every part of this Figure. For wheresoever I am on Earth (suppose
at London) and see the Sun rise (suppose in Cancer) is not a straight line from
my Eye to the Sun terminated in the East?


B. It Is not due East, but partly East, partly South. For the Earth (being but
a point compared to the Sun) all the parallels to D E the Equator, such as are
e a, f b, e g, if they be produced, will fall upon the Body of the Sun. And
therefore A b is North-East; A a East North-East; And A c North North-East.


A. Proceed now to the Cause of Attraction.


B. Suppose now that the Internal parts of the Loadstone had the same Motion
with that of the Internal parts of the Sun which make the Annual Motion of the
Earth from West to East, but in a contrary way, for otherwise the Loadstone and
the Iron can never be made to meet. Then set the Loadstone at a little distance
from the Earth, marked with z; and the Iron marked with x upon the superficies
of the Earth. Now that which makes x rise to z, can be nothing else but Air;
for nothing touches it but Air. And that which makes the Air to rise, can be
nothing but those small circles made by the parts of the Earth (such as are at
a b c,) for nothing else touches the Air. Seeing then the Motion of each point
of the Loadstone is from East to West in Circles, and the motion of each point
of the Iron from West to East; it follows, that the Air between the Loadstone
and the Iron shall be cast off both East and West; and consequently the place
left empty, if the Iron did not rise up and fill it. Thus you see the Cause
that makes the Loadstone and the Iron to meet.


A. Hitherto I assent. But why they should meet when some Heterogeneous Body
lies in the Air between them, I cannot imagine. And yet I have seen a Knife,
though within the Sheath, attract one end of the Needle of a Mariners Compass;
and have heard it will do the same though a Stone-wall were between.


B. Such Iron were indeed a very and vigorous Loadstone. But the Cause of it is
the same that causes Fire or hot Water (which have the same compounded Motion)
to work through a Vessel of Brass. For though the Motion be altered by
restraint within the Heterogeneous Body, yet being continued quite through it
restores it self.


A. What is the Cause why the Iron rubbed over by a Loadstone will receive the
virtue which the Loadstone has of drawing Iron to it?


B. Since the Motion that brings two Bodies to meet must have contrary ways,
and that the Motions of the Internal parts of the Magnet and of the Iron are
contrary; the rubbing of them together does not give the Iron the first
Edeavour to rise, but multiplies it. For the Iron untouched will rise to a
Loadstone; but if touched, it becomes a Loadstone to other Iron. For when they
touch a piece of Iron they pass the Loadstone over it only one way, viz. from
Pole to Pole; not back again, for that would undo what before had been done;
also they press it in passing, to the very end of the Iron, and somewhat hard.
So that by this pressing Motion all the small Circles about the points a b c,
are turned the contrary way. And the halves of those small Circles made on the
Arch D B will be taken away, and the Poles changed, so as that the North-Poles
shall point South, and the South Poles North, as in the Figure.


A. But how comes it to pass, that when a Loadstone has drawn a piece of Iron,
you may add to it another, as if they begat one another? Is there the like
Motion in the generation of Animals?


B. I have told you that Iron of it self will rise to the Loadstone. Much more
then will it adhere to it when it is armed with Iron, and both it and the Iron
have a plain Superficies. For then not only the points of Contact will be many
(which make the coherence stronger) but also the Iron wherewith it is armed is
now another Loadstone, differing a little (which you perhaps think) as Male and
Female. But whether this compounded Motion and confrication causes the
generation of Animals, how should I know, that never had so much leisure as to
make any observation which might conduce to that?


A. My next Question is, seeing you say the Loadstone, or a Needle touched with
it, naturally respects the Poles of the Earth, but that the variation of it
proceeds from some accidents in the Superficies of the Earth; what are those
accidents?


B. Suppose there be a Hill upon the Earth (for example) at r; then the stream
of the Air which was between z and x Westward, coming to the Hill, shall go up
the Hills side, and so down to the other side, according to the crooked Line
which I have marked about the Hill by points; and this infallibly will turn the
North-point of the Needle, being on the East side, more toward the East, and
that on the other side more toward the West, than if there had been no Hill.
And where upon the Earth are there not Eminencies and depressions, except in
some wide Sea, and a great way from Land?


A. But if that be true, the Variation in the same place should be always the
same. For the Hills are not removed.


B. The Variation of the Needle at the same place is still the same: but the
Variation of the Variation is partly from the Motion of the Pole it self, which
by the Astronomers is called Motus trepidationis; and partly from that, that
the Variation cannot be truly observed: for the Horizontal Needle and the
Inclinatory Needle incline alike, but cannot incline in due quantity. For
whether set upon a Pin or an Axis, their Inclination is hindered in the
Horizontal Needle by the Pin it self. If upon an Axis, if the Axis be just, it
cannot move; if slack, the weight will hinder it. But chiefly because the North
Pole of the Earth draws away from it the North Pole of the Needle. For two like
Poles cannot come together. And this is the cause why the Variation in one
place is East, and another West.


A. This is indeed the most probable reason why the Variation varies, that ever
I heard given. And I should presently acknowledge that this parallel Motion of
the Axis of the Earth in the Ecliptic, supposed by Copernicus, is the true
Annual Motion of the Earth, but that there is lately come forth a Book called
Longitude found, which makes the Magnetical Poles distant from the Poles of the
Earth eight Degrees and a half.


B. I have the Book. It Is far from being demonstrated, as you shall find if you
have the patience to see it examined. For wheresoever his demonstration is
true, the conclusion (if rightly inferred) will be this, that the Poles of the
Loadstone and the Poles of the Earth are the same. And where on the contrary
his demonstrations are fallacies, it is because sometimes he fancieth the Lines
he has drawn, not where they are; sometimes because he mistakes his station;
and sometimes because he goes on some false Principle of Natural Philosophy;
and sometimes also because he knows not sufficiently the Doctrine of
Spherical Triangles.


A. I think that is the Book there which lies at your Elbow. Pray you read.


B. I find first (Page 4.) that the ground of his Argument are the two
observations made by Mr. Buroughs; one at Vaygates, in 1676, where the
Variation from the Pole of the Earth he found to be 11 degrees. 15 min. East; the
other at Lime-house near London, in 1580, where the Variation from the Pole of
the Earth was 8 degrees. 38 min. West. By which he says, he might find out the
Magnetical Pole.


A. Where is Vaygate?


B. In 70 Degrees of North Latitude, the difference of Longitude between London
and it being 58 Degrees.


A. The Longitude of places being yet to seek, how came he to know this
difference of 58 Degrees, except the Poles of the Magnet and the Earth be the
same?


B. I believe he trusted to the Globe for that. For the distance between the
places is not above 2000 Miles the nearest way. But we will pass by that, and
come to his Demonstration, and to his Diagram, wherein L is London, P the
North Pole of the Earth, V Vaygates. So that L P is 38 degrees. 28 min. P V 20 degrees.
the Angle L P V 58 degrees. for the difference between the Longitudes of Vaygates
and London. This is the Construction. But before I come to the demonstration, I
have an Inference to draw from these observations, which is this. Because in
the same year the Variation at London was 11 degrees. 15 min. East, and at Vaygates
8 degrees. 38 min. West; If you substract 11 degrees. 15 min. from the Arc L P; and 8
degrees. 38 min. from the Arc L V, the Variation on both sides will be taken away;
so that P V being the Meridian of Vaygates, and L P the Meridian of London,
they shall both of them meet in P the Pole of the Earth. And if the Pole of the
Magnet be nearer to the Zenith of London than is the Pole of the Earth, it
shall be just as much nearer to the Zenith of Vaygates in the Meridian of
Vaygates which is P V; as is manifest by the Diurnal Motion of the Earth.


A. All this I conceive without difficulty. Proceed to the Demonstration.


B. Mark well now. His words are these, (Page 5.) From P L V substract 11 degrees.
15 min. and there remains the Angle V L M. Consider now which is the Angle P L
V, and which is the remaining Angle V L M, and tell what you understand by it.


A. He has marked the Angle P L V with two numbers, 11 degrees. 15 min. and 21 degrees.
50 min. which together make 33 degrees. 5 min. And the Angle 11 degrees. 15 min. being
subtracted from P L V, there will remain 21 degrees. 50 min. for the Angle V L M.
I know not what to say to it. For I thought the Arc P V, which is 20 degrees. had
been the Arc of the Spherical Angle P L V; and that the Arc L V had been 58
degrees. because he says the Angle L P V is so; and that the Arc L M had been 46
degrees. because the Angle L P M is so; and lastly, that the Angle P L M had been 8
degrees. 30 min. because the Arc P M is so.


B. And what you thought had been true, if a Spherical Angle were a very Angle.
For all Men that have written of Spherical Triangles take for the ground of
their calculation (as Regiomontanus, Copernicus, and Clavius,) that the Arch of
a Spherical Angle is the side opposite to the Angle. You should have considered
also that he makes the Angle V P M 12 degrees. but sets down no Arc to answer it.
But that you may find I am in the right, look into the Definitions which
Clavius has put down before his Treatise of Spherical Triangles, and amongst
them is this; The Arc of a Spherical Triangle is a part of a great Circle
intercepted between the two sides drawn from the Pole of the said great Circle.


A. The Book is nothing worth; for it is impossible to substract an Arc of a
Circle out of a Spherical Angle. And I see besides that he takes the
Superficies that lies between the sides L P and L M for an Arch, which is the
quantity of an Angle; and is a Line, and cannot be taken out of a Superficies.
I wonder how any Man that pretends to Mathematics could be so much mistaken.


B. It Is no great wonder. For Clavius himself striving to maintain that a right
Angle is greater than the Angle made by the Diameter and the Circumference,
fell into the same error. A corner (in Vulgar Speech,) and an Angle (in the
Language of Geometry) are not the same thing. But it is easy even for a
learned Man sometimes to take them for the same, as this Author now has done;
and proceeding he says, Substract 8 degrees. 38 min. from the Angle P V L, and
there remains the Angle L V M.


A. That again is false, because impossible. What was it that deceived him now?


B. The same misunderstanding of the nature of a Spherical Angle. Which appears
further in this, that when he knew the Arc V P was part of a great Circle, he
thought V M (which he makes 8 degrees. 30 min.) were also parts of a great Circle;
which is manifestly false. For two great Circles (because they pass through the
Center) do cut each other into halves. But P V is not half a Circle. He sure
thought himself at Vaygates, and that P M V was equal to P V, although in the
same Hemisphere.


A. But how proves he that the Arc PM is 8 degrees. 30 min?


B. Thus. We have in two Triangles, P L M and P V M, two sides and one Angle
included, to find P M the distance of the Magnetical Pole from the Pole of the
Earth 8 degrees. 30 min.


A. Is that all? It Is very short for a Demonstration of two so difficult
Problems, as the quantity of 8 degrees. 30 min. and of the place of the Magnetical
Pole. But he has proved nothing till he has showed how he found it. And though
P M be 8 degrees. 30 min. it follows not that M is the Magnetical Pole.


B. Nor is it true. For if P M be 8 degrees. 30 min. and V M 8 degrees. 38 min. the
whole Arc P M V will be 17 degrees. 8 min. which should be 20 degrees. Besides, whereas
the Variations were East and West, the substracting of them should be also East
and West, but they are North and South.


A. I am satisfied that the Magnetical Poles and the Poles of the Earth are the
same. But thus much I confess, that if they were not the same, the Longitude
were found. For the difference of the Latitudes of the Earths Equator and of
the Magnetical Equator is the difference of the Longitude. But proceed.


B. The Earth being a solid Body, and the Magnetic Sphere that encompasseth
the Earth being a substance that has not solidity to keep pace with the Earth,
loses in its Motion. And that may be the Cause of the Motion of the Magnetic
Poles from East to West.


A. This is very fine, and unexpected. The Magnetic Sphere (which I took for a
Globe made of a Magnet) has not solidity to keep pace with the Earth, though it
be one of the hardest Stones that are. It encompasseth the Earth; yet I thought
nothing had encompassed the Earth but Air in which I breath and move. By this
also the whole Earth must be a Loadstone. For two Bodies cannot be in one
place. So that he is yet no further than Dr. Gilbert whom he sleights. And if
the Sphere be a Magnet, then the Earth and Loadstone have the same Poles. See
the force of Truth! which though it could not draw to it his reason, has drawn
his words to it.


B. But perhaps he meant that the Magnetic virtue encompasseth the Earth, and
not the Magnetic Body.


A. But that helps him not. For if the Body of the Magnet be not there, the
virtue then is the virtue of the Earth; and so again the Poles of the Earth are
Magnetic Poles.


B. You see how unsafe it is to boast of Doctrines as of Gods gifts, till we
are sure that they are true. For God gives and denies as he pleases, not as
our selves wish; as now to him he has given Confidence enough, but has denied
him (at least hitherto) the finding of the Longitudes. In the next place (Page
8.) he seems much pleased that his Doctrine agrees with an opinion of Keplerus,
That from the Creation to the year of our Lord it is to the year 1657 now 5650
years; and with that which he says some Divines have held in times past, That
as this World was created in six days, so it should continue six thousand
years. By which account the World will be at an end 350 years hence; though the
Scripture tell us it shall come as a Thief in the night. O what advantage 340
years hence will they have that know this, over them that know it not, by
taking up Money at Interest, or selling Lands at 20 years purchase!


A. But he says he will not meddle with that.


B. Yes, when he had meddled with it too much already.


A. But you have not told me wherein consists this Agreement between him and
Keplerus.


B. I forgot it. It Is in the Motion of the Magnetic Poles. For precedently
(Page 7.) he had said that their Period or Revolution was 600 years; their
yearly Motion 36 min. and (Page 8.) that their Motion is by sixes. Six tenths
of a degree in one year; six degrees in ten year; sixty degrees in a hundred
year; and six times sixty degrees in 600 year.


A. But what Natural Cause does he assign of this revolution of 600 years?


B. None at all. For the Magnet lying upon the Earth, can have no Motion at all
but what the Earth and the Air give it. And because it is always at 8 degrees. 30
min. distance from the Pole of the Earth, the Earth can give it no other Motion
than what it gives to its own Poles by the precession of the Aequinoctial
points. Nor can the Air give it any Motion but by its Stream; which must needs
vary when the Stream varieth. But what a vast difference does he make between
the period of the Motion of the Aequinoctial points, which are about or near
36000 years according to Copernicus (Lib. 3. Cap. 6.) which makes the Annual
precession to be 36 seconds, and the period of the Magnetical Poles Motion,
which is but 600 years.


A. Go on.


B. He comes now (Page 15.) to the Inclinatory Needle upon a Spherical
Loadstone. Where he shows, by Diagram, that the Needle and the Instrument
together moved toward the Magnetical Pole, make the sum of the Inclinations
equal to two Quadrants, setting the North-point of the Needle Southward. Which
I confess is true. But (in the same Page) he ascribes the same Motion to the
Earth in these words: As the Horizontal Needle has a double Motion about the
Round Loadstone or Terrulla, so also the Inclinatory Needle has a double
Motion about the Earth. What is this, but a confession that the Poles of the
Magnet and of the Earth are the same?


A. It Is plain enough.


B. Besides, seeing he places the Magnetical Pole at M in the Meridian of
Vaygates, the Needle being touched shall Incline to the Pole of the Earth which
is P, as well there as at London, and make the North Pole of the Earth point
South.


A. It Is certain, because he puts both the Magnetical Pole and the Pole of the
Earth in the same Meridian of the Earth. Nor see I any Cause why, the Needle
being the same, it should not be as subject to Variation, and to Variation of
Variation, and to all Accidents of the Earth there, as in any other part.


B. He puts (Page 16.) a Question, At what distance from the Earth are the
Magnetic Poles? and answers to it, They are very near the Earth, because the
nearer the Earth, the greater the strength. What think you of this?


A. I think they are in the Superficies of the Magnet, as the Pole of the Earth
is in the Superficies of the Earth. And consequently, that then the Earth must
be a part of the Magnet, and their Poles the same. For the Body of the Magnet
and the Body of the Earth, if they be two, cannot be in one place.


B. His next words are, Some things are to be considered concerning those
Variations of the Horizontal Needle which are not according to the situation
of the place from the Magnetic Poles, but are contrary; as all the West Indies
according to the Poles should be Easterly, and they are Westerly. Which is by
some Accidental Cause in the Earth; and their Motion, as I formerly said, is a
forced Motion, and not Natural.


A. He has clearly overthrown his main Doctrine. For to say the Motion of the
Needle is forced and unnatural, is a most pityful shift, and manifestly false,
no Motion being more constant or less accidental, notwithstanding the
Variation, to which the Inclinatory Needle is no less subject than the
Horizontal Needle.


B. That which deceived him, was, that he thought them two sorts of Needles,
forgetting what he had said of Normans Invention of the Inclinatory Needle by
the inclining of the Horizontal Needle, Page 11. For I will show you that what
he says is Easterly and should be Westerly, should be Easterly as it is.
Consider the fourth Figure, in which B is the North Pole, and B c 11 degrees. 15
min. Easterly, which was the Variation at London in 1576 Easterly. Suppose A c
to be the Needle, shall it not incline, as well here as at D a, and the
Variation B c be Easterly? Again, D a is 11 degrees. 15 min. and the Needle in D
parallel to A B, and at a inclining also 11 degrees. 15 min. Westerly. And is not
the Variation there D a Westerly, with the North-point of the Needle in the
Line a h?


A. But the West Indies are not in this Hemisphere B C D E. The Variation
therefore will proceed in an Arc of the opposite Hemisphere, which is Westerly.


B. I believe he might think so, forgetting that he and his Compass were on the
Superficies of the Earth, and fancying them in the Center at A.


A. It Is like enough. If we had a straight Line exactly equal to the Arc of a
Quadrant, I think it would very much facilitate the Doctrine of Spherical
Triangles.


B. When you have done with your Questions of Natural Philosophy, I will give
you a clear Demonstration of the equality of a straight Line to the Arc of a
Quadrant, which, if it satisfy you, you may carry with you, and try thereby if
you can find the Angle of a Spherical Triangle given.


A. It is time now to give over. And at our next meeting I desire your opinion
concerning the Causes of Diaphaniety, and Refraction. This Copernicus has done
much more than he thought of. For he has not only restored to us Astronomy, but
also made the way open to Physiology.


CAP. X. Of Transparence, Refraction; and of the Power of the Earth to produce
living Creatures.
A. THinking upon what you said yesterday, it looked like a generation of living
Creatures. I saw the love between the Loadstone and the Iron in their mutual
attraction, their engendring in their close and contrary Motion; and their
issue in the Iron, which being touched has the same attractive virtue. Now
seeing they have the same internal motion of parts with that of the Earth, why
should not their substance be the same, or very near a kin?


B. The most of them (if not all) that have written of this Subject, when they
call the Loadstone a Terrella, seem to think as you do. But I, except I could
find proof for it, will not affirm it. For the Earth attracteth all kind of
Bodies but Air, and the Loadstone none but Iron. The Earth is a Star, and it
were too bold to pronounce any sentence of its substance, especially of the
Planets, that are so lapt up in their several Coats, as that they cannot work
on our Eyes, or any Organ of our other Senses.


A. I come therefore now to the business of the day. Seeing all Generation,
Augmentation, and Alteration is local Motion, how can a Body not Transparent be
made Transparent?


B. I think it can never be done by the Art of Man. For as I said of Hard and
Heavy Bodies in the Creation, so I think of Diaphanous, that the very same
Individual Body which was not Transparent then, shall never be made Transparent
by Humane Art.


A. Do not you see that every day Men make Glass, and other Diaphanous Bodies
not much inferior in beauty to the fairest Gems?


B. It is one thing to make one Transparent of many by mixture, and another to
make Transparent of not Transparent. Any very hard Stone, if it be beaten into
small Sands, such as is used for Hour-Glasses, every one of those Sands, if you
look upon it with a Microscope, you will find to be Transparent; and the harder
and whiter the Sone is, so much the more Transparent, as I have seen in the
Stone of which are made Milstones, which Stone is here called Greet. And I
doubt not but the Sands of white Marble must be more Transparent. But there are
no Sands so Transparent that they have not a scurf upon them as hard, perhaps,
as the Stone it self; which they whose profession it is to make Glass, have the
Art to scour and wash away. And therefore I think it no great wonder to bring
those Sands into one Lump, though I know not how they do it.


A. I know they do it with Lie made with a Salt extracted from the Ashes of an
Herb, of which Salt they make a strong Lie, and mingle it with the Sand, and
then bake it.


B. Like enough. But still it is a Compound of two Transparent Bodies, whereof
one is the Natural Stone, the other is the Mortar. This therefore does not
prove, that one and the same Body, of not Transparent can be made Transparent.


A. Since they can make one Transparent Body of many, why do they not of a
great many small sparks of natural Diamant compound one great one? It would
bear the charges of all the Materials, and beside, enrich them.


B. It Is probable it would. But it may be they know no Salt that howsoever
prepared, which (with how great a Fire soever) can make them melt. And, it may
be the true Crystal of the Mountain, which is found in great pieces in the
Alps, is but a compound of many small ones, and made by the Earths Annual
Motion. For it is a very swift Motion. Suppose now that within a very small
Cavern of those Rocks whose smallest Atoms are Crystal, and the Cavity filled
with Air; and consider what a tumult would be made by the swift reciprocation
of that Air; whether it would not in time separate those Atoms from the Rock,
and jumbling them together make them rub off their scruf from one another, and
by little and little to touch one another in polished plains, and consequently
stick together, till in length of time they become one lump of clean Crystal.


A. I believe that the least parts of created substances lay mingled together
at first, till it pleased God to separate all dissimilar natures, and
congregate the similar, to which this Annual Motion is proper. But they say
that Crystal is found in the open Air hanging like Icicles upon the Rocks.
Which (if true) defeats this supposition of a narrow Cavern. And therefore I
must have some further experience of it before I make it my opinion. But
howsoever, it still holds true that Diaphanous Bodies of all sorts, in their
least parts, were made by God in the beginning of the World. But it may be
true, notwithstanding those Icicles. For the force of the Air that could break
off those Diaphanous Atoms in a Cavern, can do the same in the open Air. And I
know that a less force of Air can break some Bodies into small pieces, not much
less hard than Chystal, by corrupting them.


B. That which you now have said is somewhat. But I deny not the possibility,
but only doubt of the Operation. You may therefore pass to some other Question.


A. Well, I will ask you then a Question about Refraction. I know already that
for the Cause of Refraction (when the Light falls through a thinner Medium
upon a thicker) you assign the resistance of the thicker Body; but you do not
mean there by Rarum and Densum, two Bodies whereof in equal spaces one has more
substance in it than the other.


B. No. For equal spaces contain equal Bodies. But I mean by Densum any Body
which more resists the Motion of the Air, and by Rarum that which resists
less.


A. But you have not declared in what that resistance consists.


B. I suppose it proceeds from the Hardness.


A. But from thence it will follow, that all Transparent Bodies that equally
refract are equally Hard. Which I think is not true, because the Refraction of
Glass is not greater (at least in comparison of their Hardnesses) than that of
Water.


B. I confess it. Therefore I think we must take in Gravity to a Share in the
production of this Refraction. For I never considered Refraction but in Glass;
because my business then was only to find the Causes of the Phenomenon of
Telescopes and Microscopes. Let therefore A B (in Fig. 7.) be a hard, and
consequently, a heavy Body. And from above (as from the Sun) let C A be the
line of Incidence, and produced to D. And draw A E perpendicular to A B. It is
manifest that the Hardness in A B shall turn the stream of the Light inwards
toward A E, suppose in the line A e. It is also evident that the Endeavor in
B, which is (being heavy) downward, shall turn the stream again inward, toward
A E as in A b. Thus it is in Refraction from the Sun downwards. In like manner,
if the light come from below, as from a Candle in the point D, the line of
Incidence will be D A, and produced will pass to C. And the resistance of the
Hardness in A will turn the stream A C inward, suppose into B l, and make C l
equal to D e. For passing into a thinner Medium, it will depart from the
perpendicular in an Angle equal to the Angle D A e, by which it came nearer to
it in A e. So also the resistance of the Gravity in the point A shall turn the
stream of the Light into the line A i, and make the Angle l A i equal to the
Angle e A b. And thus you see in what manner, though not in what proportion
Hardness and Gravity conjoyn their resistance in the Causing of Refraction.


A. But you proved yesterday, that a heavy Body does not Gravitate upon a Body
equally heavy. Now this A B has upper parts, and lower parts; and if the upper
parts do not Gravitate upon the lower parts, how can there be any Endeavor at
all downward to contribute to the Refraction?


B. I told you yesterday, that when a heavy Body was set upon another Body
heavier or harder than it self, the Endeavor of it downward was diverted
another way, but not that it was extinguished. But in this case, where it lies
upon Air, the first endeavor of the lowest part works downward. For neither
Motion nor Body can be utterly extinguished by a less than an Omnipotent power.
All Bodies as long as they are Bodies, are in Motion one way or other, though
the farther it be communicated, so much the less.


A. But since you hold that Motion is propagated through all Bodies, how hard
or heavy soever they be, I see no Cause but that all Bodies should be
Transparent.


B. There are diverse Causes that take away Transparency. First, if the Body be
not perfectly Homogeneous, that is to say, if the smallest parts of it be not
all precisely of the same nature, or do not so touch one another as to leave no
Vacuum within it; or though they touch, if they be not as hard in the contact
as in any other line. For then the Refractions will be so changed both in their
direction, and in their strength, as that no Light shall come through it to the
Eye; as in Wood and ordinary Stone and Metal. Secondly, The Gravity and
hardness may be so great, as to make the Angle refracted so great, as the
second Refraction shall not direct the beam of light to the Eye; as if the
Angle of Refraction were D A E, the Refracted line would be perpendicular to A
B, and never come to the line A D, in which is the Eye.


A. To know how much of the Refraction is due to the Hardness, and how much to
the Gravity, I believe it is impossible, though the Quantity of the whole be
easily measured in a Diaphanous Body given. And both you and Mr. Warner have
demonstrated, that as the Sine of the Angle Refracted in one Inclination is to
the Sine of the Angle Refracted in another Inclination, so is the Sine of one
Inclination to the Sine of the Angle of the other Inclination. Which
Demonstrations are both published by Mersennus in the end of the first Volume
of his Cogitata Physico-Mathematica. But since there be many Bodies, through
which though there pass Light enough, yet no Object appears through them to the
Eye, what is the reason of that?


B. You mean Paper. For Paper-Windows will enlighten a Room, and yet not show
the Image of an Object without the Room. But it is because there are in Paper
abundance of pores, through which the Air passing moves the Air within; by the
Reflections whereof any thing within may be seen. And in the same Paper there
are again as many parts not Transparent, through which the Air cannot pass, but
must be reflected first to all parts of the Object, and from them again to the
Paper; and at the Paper either reflected again or transmitted, according as it
falls upon Pores or not Pores; so that the Light from the Object can never come
together at the Eye.


A. There belongs yet to this Subject the Causes of the diversity of Colors.
But I am so well satisfied with that which you have written of it in the 24th
Chapter of your Book de Corpore, that I need not trouble you further in it. And
now I have but one Question more to ask you, which I thought upon last night. I
have read in an ancient Historian that Living Creatures after a great deluge
were produced by the Earth, which being then very soft, there were bred in it
(it may be by the rapid Motion of the Sun) many Blisters, which in time
breaking, brought forth (like so many Eggs) all manner of living Creatures
great and small, which since it is grown hard it cannot do. What think you of
it?


B. It is true that the Earth produced the first living Creatures of all sorts
but Man. For God said, (Genesis 1. verse. 24.) Let the Earth produce every living
Creature, Cattle, and creeping thing, etc. But then again (ver. 25.) it is said
that God made the Beast of the Earth, etc. So that it is evident that God gave
unto the Earth that virtue. Which virtue must needs consist in Motion, because
all Generation is Motion. But Man, though the same day, was made afterward.


A. Why has not the Earth the same virtue now? Is not the Sun the same it was?
Or is there no Earth now soft enough?


B. Yes. And it may be the Earth may yet produce some very small Living
Creatures: And perhaps Male and Female. For the smallest Creatures which we
take notice of, do engender, though they do not all by conjunction; therefore
if the Earth produce living Creatures at this day, God did not absolutely rest
from all his Works on the seventh day, but (as it is Cap. 2. ver. 2.) he rested
from all the work he had made. And therefore it is no harm to think that God
works still, and when and where and what he pleases. Beside, it is very hard
to believe, that to produce Male and Female, and all that belongs thereto, as
also the several and curious Organs of Sense and Memory, could be the work of
any thing that had not understanding. From whence, I think we may conclude,
that whatsoever was made after the Creation, was a new Creature made by God no
therwise than the first Creatures were, excepting only Man.


A. They are then in an Error that think there are no more different kinds of
Animals in the World now, than there were in the Ark of Noah.


B. Yes doubtless. For they have no Text of Scripture from which it can be
proved.


A. The Questions of Nature which I could yet propound are innumerable. And
since I cannot go through them, I must give over somewhere, and why not here?
For I have troubled you enough, though I hope you will forgive me.


B. So God forgive us both as we do one another. But forget not to take with
you the Demonstration of a straight Line equal to an Arc of a Circle.


FINIS.

