THE HISTORY OF Tarquin and Lucretia.

Licensed December. 26. 1668.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, for C. Wilkinson, at the Black Boy over against
St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1669.

FOR LUCINDA.
Dear Madam,
THis Poem of Tarquin and Lucretia challenges your Patronage and Protection:
for I Will assure you, had it not been for your strict Injunctions, it had never
seen the light. But since the subject was of so virtuous a Lady as Lucretia,
and so ingenuous a Person laid her commands on me to Publish it; I was resolved
to give way whatever were the hazard of it, and let Lucretia come to kiss your
hands in that innocent Garb she used to wear, and that modest Behave that used
always to accompany her Port air and actions. But I must beg pardon for all
the faults, for being on another more serious subject, I could not review it as
I would; neither do I but by accident make Verse my study, yet for
divertisements from my unhappy troubles which you know attend me, I sometimes
use to make it my recreation. I designed this Poem as I was walking one Morn
among the little Trees of my Wilderness, and writ most if it down the same day,
and so as it is, send it you. What errors there are, pray tell me, and I will
amend it in the next Edition, and that is fair. In the mean time you must needs
be my Championess to defend me against the censure and malice of the Age, and
then I doubt not but this Poem will find favor among all the Courtly and
Generous world, as Lucretia her self must needs oblige the concern of your
self, and compassion of all the chaste and well disposed. A virtuous disposition
is commendable in all, but most in those whose great beauty renders them liable
to many temptations, but yet scorn to be allured by the gilded folly and gaudy
nonsense of the times, but their affections are wrought upon by brave temper,
honor, and worthiness. How far does our Lucretia differ from the lewdness of
the world, whose aerie Nimphs esteem wantonness, well managed, the best part of
their Portion; when doubtless, sweetness and modesty, added to native Beauty,
are infinitely the best accomplishments in a woman, understanding how to value
a noble friendship beyond vicious extravagances. Poor Lucretia deserves the
concern of all for her Misfortune, and vindication of all for her Affection and
Loyalty: which must not be judged as wholly impeached, though sullyed by this
Rape; but yet much redeemed by her Trouble, Anguish, and Death. For such
Accidents may inevitably fall out some times, though women stand on never so
strict a Guard; though they are genuinly of never so virtuous a temper, yet
their tender natures are liable to be frighted into several inconveniences
they were unwary off. Poor Lucretia's floods of Tears had expiated her Crime,
if that could be called a Crime, which could not be helped, but by killing her
self first, which though she had better have done before than after, So that by
this disaster, the Ladies of our times may learn to be fore-witted. A Wife that
is constant, and abominates disloyalty, as did Lucretia, deserves the Love of
her Husband, Defense of Nations, and Wars of Kingdoms for her; but those that
shall voluntarily unvail their Modesty, and profane their sacred Vows at the
Altar, and join in Confederacy against Loyalty. no punishment is too bad for
them; but such low and mean spirits, deserve the scorn of all mankind: Though
their vice is clothed with never so much Grandeur, yet they appear too base and
unworthy for the Heroic world to own or regard them: Their whole Lives being
infamous, and their Actions black and foolish: Their Beauty it self afterward
proves but the Trumpet to make known their disgrace; so much the more I would
have all Ladies esteem their Honor, and put a value on Chastity in a Cottage,
before the glorious Addresses of Crowns and Empires with Dishonesty: For the
Lines of their Faces are by it so altered, that afterward all their Garb,
Paint, and Impudence, can never set them right again in the view of the world:
And their Deport makes thousands of others sober and harmlesly free women fare
the worse for them. But whither do I run? Dear Madam, I hope you will pardon this
Digression. For the honored value I have for your Sex, makes me (being on a
subject tending this way) give a word or two of caution to the wilder sort. For
Love ought either not at all to be pretended, or if it be, to be maintained
with the greatest Piety and Constancy in the world. I understand no Pleasure on
Earth, but Philosophy and Love; one for the serious part of Life, the other for
the merry. For all the Grandeurs we have, tend to this of Love at the last.
What signifies all the Riches, fine Houses, fine Coaches, Garb, Splendour, and
Equipage, but to endeer and entertain the Persons they Love. And as Love is
that which causes most pleasure and satisfaction, so women are the proper and
natural Centure of it. What dull Sports are all the Exercises of Hawks, Hounds,
Horses, and Drinking, to this of adoring your Sex. Society is the Life of Life,
and Women the Life of all Society. And lovely women that are virtuous, the very
Angels of this world. Wherefore I would have them do nothing that may render
them otherwise than the Stars and Luster of the Creation, but wearing Souls
stamped with the Glory of the Ancient Heroes, may like little Deities soar above
the ordinary Rank of Mortals: When others chaining their Lives to dark and
crocked ways, live clouded and scandalously, and at last, sneak out of the
world pitifully; while the truly Virtuous and Gallant persons, are happy in
themselves, good to others, merit the Laurels of the wise, and ride triumphant
on the Acclamations of the whole world. And after they have by the odours of
their virtues perfumed the Age they live in, Immortal Story remembers them to
Posterity by Deeds truly Heroic and Honorable. But no more of this now, lest
I make my Epistle swell into a Volumne, though all I have said, Madam, is but
to Come to you at last, who show your good Inclinations, by having such a
Concern for this excellent Lady. And as the bravest temper is to be pleasant in
all Conditions whatever, yet not insensible of the nature of any Condition. To
be one can reach at Crowns, or dwell in an Hermitage. So you, Madam. understand
all the Modes and Meanders of women, and remain at last generous; having the
gift also to be lively and well pleased at all times; and can be compleisant
when you ought to be so, and at other times reserved. You can be merry, when
you may do it with Convenience, or otherwise, be as well contented to be
contriving your Household affairs. I know also you hate penuriousness as one of
the Devils on Earth, esteeming it mere madness to live sordidly to dye rich. I
dare say this is much your humor, and so I Will leave you at the present in the
midst of all your happiness and pleasant design.

Your Friend and Servant PHILANDER.

THE HISTORY OF Tarquin and Lucretia.
QUeen of all Cities in the World was Rome,
The Nations far and near did thither come
To see their Glory, and themselves to please
There being all things Land could yield or Seas;
Here was the Pomp, the Splendour, Living-high,
The Grandees of the world and Bravery.
Never was seen so great, so rich a Court,
Gallants and Beauties here in Troops resort;
Chariots and Gilded Rooms held them by days,
The nights were spent in Balls, Treats, Masks, and Plays.
To give delight nothing was wanting here,
Their Houses brave and nobly furnished were.
Set off with Painting, Marbles, and the Glories
Of Pictures, Statues, and the Ancient Stories
Adorned with Walks, with Gardens, Bathing Courts
What e're with Pleasures suited, or with Sports:
Their Vestures were most rich, no want of Treasures,
They melted and dissolved in sostest pleafures.
Great Romulus first walled and built this Place,
Stole Subine Wives and peopled it apace:
So that in stead of wild Woods, Fields and Downs,
He founds a City, and established Crowns;
And from that time to this they still have kept
The Earth in Awe, and there securely slept.
Brave Collatine a Roman Senator
From the proud City lived not very far,
He lead a pleasant and contented life,
Enjoyed the world, and had a handsome Wife,
Who was so good and virtuous too withal,
That they the chaste Lucretia did her call.
No man was happier in his Choice than he,
Or any woman better pleased than she;
They lived and loved most dearly, at that rate,
As all did envy, or else wish their fate:
The Gods did bless them, and their Joys promove,
To show what sweet delights there dwelt in Love.
Who e're but viewed and saw their Loves combine,
Plainly beheld the Almighties great Design
When first he Adam made and gave him Eve,
As one should both his soul and sense relieve,
And he be to her both a Guard and Guide,
And greater friend than all the world beside.
Lucretia now was Young and in her Prime
The Beauty and the wonder of her time;
Thick Aurean pleasant hair bedecked her head,
None was more fair, or lovelier white and red;
A round of Glory like the radiant Sun
Behem'd her still, as a new Morn begun.
A kind of pleasant Clouds enclasp'd her myen
Transparent, and beyond what e're was seen,
Her sprightly Air so waved about her face,
As if it might be caught in every place;
Her seatures were transcendent, such her charms,
None veiw'd her shape but wished her in his arms.
The Great men had her all in Admiration,
Yet never came near her but by Contemplation;
For she so careful of her honor was,
Lest by her means a stain should come to pass;
That she did surely all the ways prevent
Might be her crime or husbands discontent.
But the fierce Tarquin who was Prince of Rome
Came to her when her Husband was from home,
Pretending business from her noble Lord,
Or else with him she had not spoke a word,
For she employed was in her house and sphere,
Surveighing of her business every where.
None had more order in her Family,
All did obey the dictates of her eye;
Tarquin the wonder of her ways admired,
The more he saw, the more he still desired,
But in discourse at last he told her plain,
His Errand was her kindest love to gain.
What should so fair a Lady live so long
From Court. There store of all Admirers throng;
In the Country all is dull, while here are Plays,
And all divertisements your soul can raise;
Gallants to court you, love you, and commend you,
Whilst all the Glories in the world attend you.
Madam in short I burn in love with you;
And naught before could e're my heart subdue.
What Rome can give or all the Earth beside
Shall be your Lot if I am not denied;
Pardon my seeming error, so great Love
Changes from vice, and does a virtue prove.
O Sir, quoth she, and trembling as she stood,
Pouring forth of her Crystal tears a flood;
I am already to another wed,
And will be truly loyal to his Beb;
Women are lost and nothing signify
If once they let their same and honor die.
We must not trust our selves with men alone,
They who will trust can trusted be by none;
For if we play, and love to courted be,
We shall resign to Importunity;
There Is none can promise what may happen to
One that will freely let all persons woe.
Who love to be admired but in Jest,
Are sure to lose their name if not the rest;
I scorn the dirty follies of this age,
Who after various mixtures lust and rage,
Who marriage make but as a stalking horse,
That they may sure and slyly act things worse.
As for the crowds in Cities do appear
I value not, I Am best contented here;
I seek not others honor, praise, or love,
My Glory's constant to my Lord to prove;
The foolish Gallants with their glittering Train
Appear to me ridiculous and vain.
I wonder what you did see in my face
Should make you think I Would yield to this disgrace;
A light deport should never with women stay,
Their very looks should fright ill thoughts away:
He comes too near who comes to be denied,
Virtue should keep us pure, at least our Pride.
Dear Madam what do you mean to think that I
Would injure you, or make your honor fly;
I Will love you, and will do you all the good,
And for your sake will spend my life and blood;
But now by all that is sacred here I vow,
I would not hurt or else dishonor you.
Grant me your love, and I will ever be
Your perfect Slave and constant Votarie:
What is true honor you do much mistake,
Honor does never us unhappy make;
Well managed Love's allowed, for secrecy
Makes it true friendship, not dishonesty.
Love is a kind and natural appetite,
None can resist it, or with nature fight,
No more than thirst, the Doctors preachments can
Alter its course no more than alter man;
Or yet can any love whom that they will,
But where it comes they must its law fulfill.
The Gods themselves this Passion all appro^e,
And veil their Dieties to own their Love;
This made the Thunderer lay by his Crown,
And often to Beauties on the Earth come down;
Love breeds such softness by its warming gleams,
Melting the hardest Rocks to running streams.
What law can your commanding Beauty bind,
Such glorious Creatures must not be confined;
The common Rules are for the common sort,
You are above the world and all report;
Such lovely souls as you are made to be
Surely for more than ones felicity.
Marriage is but a humor politic,
Collatine got you by some cheat or trick;
I wonder in my soul he dared aspire
To warm his Genius at your heavenly fire;
You are designed for better things than these,
All Kings and Thrones you may command with ease.
Be gone you Messenger of Ribaldry,
How dare you thus to tempt my honesty;
You make as if I were beyond good fame,
And honor that is so great were but a name;
But you shall know though honor were asleep,
Reason and Piety my Soul shall keep.
Were it no crime, which yet it is the worst,
A Whore of all things in the world's accursed,
So mean to satisfy base men's disease,
And then to be thrust off when e're they please,
And hist at by the world, and thrown about
As vilest Caitiffs by the Revel Rout.
Speak not of naturalness, I know all vice
Have in you men a very natural rise;
And if this Passion could not be declined,
All things in common would be soon resigned;
These are but fallacies, Reason's our Guide,
Nature from Honesty does never divide.
What do you tell me that I am exempt
From Laws, That is a poor thing me to tempt,
I have a soul, and in that Honor find
Which Queens themselves as well as others bind,
And Love must not be common, or too free,
But always circumscribed with Loyalty.
Greatness or Riches tempt me not at all,
There Is few enjoy that which we happy call:
They Are foolish Girls that fancy gaudy Flies,
The soul and person only take the wise;
Where each are pleased with each beyond all chance,
They spurn at Crowns as but a poor advance.
What Is Wealth, or Power, or Splendor more to me
Then I enjoy my self: Felicity
Is much mistaken by us Women when
We think we are happy in the greatest men;
They please themselves: When others please us do,
And they are only happy that live so.
Who can have more than I who have a friend,
That naught but death to Love can put an end;
What I defire I have, and I desire
Nothing but what true friendship does require:
Love is the Star that leads us, nothing eases
Each others mind but what each other pleases.
The Bounds are set which you and I must keep,
And plain to all whose souls are not asleep:
Let single Persons please themseves in friends,
Married must not have such unworthy ends;
They are not then their own, but each the others,
They must live chaste and all ill Passion smother.
Why do you tell me of my Beauty so,
They only hansome are that hansome do;
An ounce of Vertu's worth a load of Beauty,
Who hav't are bound to heaven in greater duty,
'Twas given to make us happy, not more lewd,
And turn such blessings to Ingratitude.
You Atheist would you marriage too profane,
And make me break the sacred oath I have taken:
This is worst yet to palliate the crime,
To make fools of the Gods from first of time;
Know that in keeping firm this holy Pact,
The Gods the being of the world enact.
What e're design before had either part,
Hymen once past nothing must change the heart;
All wounds are salved and bound up in Love,
Nothing should ever this great League remove;
For all excuses then they come too late,
Both sides must bow and buckle to their fate.
I like not that you should ill words bestow
On Collatine, or think him to lay low
In my esteem, for that is the common cheat,
It is not outside or the name of great
My soul can charm, the Genius I admire,
How e're none but my Lord I will defire.
Kings are but little things in my esteem,
Naught does to me so great as virtue seem;
Our Passions and our crimes subdue we must,
I Will not mix Poisons, but will still be just,
Or harbor ill, for Collatine is he
Has all my heart, and shall my constancy.
Madam one word, once understand but Love
These seeming Rocks will quickly from you move;
Love is a Pleasure you never understood,
There is a sprightly Air in flesh and blood,
Which once well ken'd all other things are folly,
This makes the hearts and souls of those so jolly.
Converse with Nature that will quickly tell
How many Pleasures in this Passion dwell;
Trees, Birds and Beasts, and Fishes in the Seas
Till they have chose their Loves are never at ease;
There is a Loving Fury feizeth all
In Sea, Air, Earth and Heaven, both great and small.
The lively winged people of the Sky
Sing their amors with chanting melody;
The Stars of heaven at one another dart,
Which only is a kind and loving Art.
Why should we fear at all then to be kind
When all things that have life are so inclined.
What Is all the Glory men or times possess,
But whom they love to pleasure and Caress,
Riches, Garb, Splendour, tend to heighten Love,
And servants are as it does turn and move;
Love is the great wheel, here moves Gods and men,
And when we come to heaven we love again.
Wherefore what is there ere can nobler be
Than this which is so good, so great, so free:
Kept up it is at so sweet so kind a rate
It wings us clear above the frowns of Fate.
Then all things else as follyes I despise,
And wait the sentence of your scornful eyes.
You make me first an Atheist, then instill
Sweet melting love, so have me at your will;
But be assured for all you are a Prince,
Yet all your slights and art will never convince;
Tarquin you miss your aim, 'twill never do,
Yet love I understand as well as you.
Virtue and Love together I adore
Beyond the Indies or the richest Ore:
Religion, Duty, Love, then strive to show
Each its affection, each for to outdoe;
For there is the pleasure when the Love is free
From guilt: But yours is naught but Treachery.
Where harbors Virtue, Love and Innocence,
Pleasures as high as heaven there comence.
These are those pious fervours well begun
From which streams of content apace do run.
Nothings so dear as harmony of Hearts,
There Is what is in Kingdoms, Empires, Crowns, or Arts.
Whose humourous fancy's lead them to be great,
Some foreign matters still with dangers threat,
And trouble too or Treason does attend,
But all things rest and sweeten in a friend:
Friendship is that all things and creatures woe
Makes Life more pleasant than all else can do.
Yet these true solid joys there is none can tell
But those that do in Love's fair Kingdom dwell;
And this breeds the true pleasure when we know,
It Is honest, lawful, and we may do so,
Then without fear we may resign to Love:
What was a crime a duty now does prove.
We may live merry if our Bounds we keep,
Wine we may drink, but must not go too deep.
Then Tarquin understand and be at rest,
I Have all things in the world that please me best;
I Am pleased in my condition and nmy state,
And I Will as constant be as holy Fate.
But did I him not like, naught else I Would love,
Our fancies should not wander, roll, or move;
We must not straggle or raise needless dust,
For who does so loves to create a Lust;
I love not to be called a light-heel'd Dame,
And thought to be regardless of my fame.
What a poor spirit it is to be undrest,
And at the will of man to play the Beast,
And ever after must remain their slave,
If any comfort in their lives will have,
And for a moments folly must endure
A whole Life's shame, and always be impure.
These are the words which she to Tarquin spoke,
Which did him not appease but more provoke;
For the more chaste and virtuous was she,
The greater mind to rifle her had he:
But when she saw she could not him subdue,
She turned about and to her chamber flew.
But as the swift foot Greyhound breaks the Air,
And runs with speed when that he sees the Hare;
So followed Tarquin, and broke in before
That she had time to shut the Chamber door;
He quickly showed how ill he had been bred,
For presently he laid her on the Bed.
And there contemplated the lovely make
Of all her dainty Limbs, His eyes did take
The greatest pleasure that the Earth could give
To any mortal in this world and live:
She had such Beauty dwelt in every part,
Beyond description of the Pen or Art.
He was in heat before, but now in flame,
Longing for to enjoy this curious frame;
His heart and blood and soul was now confounded,
Torrents of Love on all sides him surrounded
Oh Gods quoth he why do you mortals tempt,
Yet by your Laws from pleasures them exempt?
He was resolved now to ransack all
That men do chastity or beauty call,
And bless himself upon this sweet composure,
Thinking he never should have the like enclosure;
Wherefore he speeded to make use of time
This Lady being in her chiefest Prime.
And without fear unto those parts made way,
Which as affecting make her fly or stay:
But then she vowed that if he left her breath,
Before she would yield she would surely be his death;
And there Conjured him not to touch her more,
Yet like a Supliant did him there implore.
With that he fell down on his bended knees,
Begging to grant him those felicity's;
Told her his Passion and his mighty flame,
An hundred Alters should burn to her name;
And all the honor in the world should be
A Sacrifice unto her memory.
But she a thousand thousand tears let fall,
And said this day should be her funeral
Before this wrong that she would undetgoe,
And humbly prayed this thing he would not do:
Pity said she use not this cruelty,
This is the worst of inhumanity.
But nothing would his humor now withstand,
He laid her body at his sole command,
And rufled all her Garments very rudely,
That he might view her loveliness more lewdly;
Nothing would keep him back, for he was bent
To ravish her if she would not consent.
And then he told her plain that since she could
Not grant him his desires he force her would,
And after kill her and her Negro too,
And lay him by her side and all should know
That he enjoyed you, and that I was there,
And killed you both as in the act you were.
This dreadful Story in her mind she mused,
She Is loath to yield, yet loath to be abused;
But what with fear at last his wrath and thunder,
He forced her purest chastity asunder;
And between Will ye Nill ye did enjoy
His hot desires, and after went his way.
But she did rave like one that was stark mad,
Nothing could ease her heart it was so sad:
O Fool said she was I to suffer this,
Better that I had died than done amiss;
For then I Would left the world pure innocent,
Now I must kill my self for discontent.
I lost my honor honor to enjoy,
My body now polluted I Will destroy;
Yet why should I? consent I did not give,
Which makes the sin, however I Will not live:
Unhappy women's beauty, and their fears
That draw them in such plunges and such snares.
I Will never live a minute longer sure,
Since nothing now my honor can secure;
I hate to see the light or else mankind,
No comfort in my life at all I find:
My guilt so startles me, the world will say
Lucretia like the rest loves private play.
O fatal day, oh horrid accident,
That robs me thus of honor and content:
Tell me ye Higher-powers what course to take
That I may yet my life but happy make:
What fond word did I say, o^ there is no Power
Can ever, ever what I lost restore.
Then take me death, my Shroud my Tomb prepare,
My burdened soul shall straight possess the Air;
I Will sacrifice my self for to appease
The angry Gods, and give my spirits ease:
With that she set a dagger to her breast,
And sent her soul unto eternal rest.
Her Women gave such shreeks to see her fall
Quickly resounded in the high-roof'd Hall,
Piercing the ears of all within the place,
Which made then flock and thunder up apace;
Where, oh Misfortune, they their Lady found
Near to deaths borders by her own hands wound.
Just as this Hurry was in agitation
Comes Collatine with many men of fashion,
Who dreamed some ill had happened to his Wife,
Which made him post away as for his life;
For no man ever loved a woman better,
And she was never unto him a debtor.
He came up to the house, and in at door,
But none did fee, yet heard them cry and rear;
At last one bolder than the rest came down
That told the news, at which his breath was gone;
But he recovering himself at last,
Up stairs he went to see what there had past,
And found the story true to his great grief,
And could not see a way to get relief:
He wrung his hands, invoked, made horrid wishes,
Then gave her fainting limbs ten thousand kisses;
He called Lucretia loud just by her side,
She answered, I am thine alone, then died.
And so now past all hope she did depart,
Which last adieu was like to break his heart;
No Doctors means or art was left unsought,
But all experiments did come to naught;
Her countenance changed at last and she grew cold
As he her body in his arms did hold.
Friends then persuaded him to come away,
And would not let him in her chamber stay.
Poor Collatine did rave and tore his hair,
And with his dismal mones did pierce the Air:
At last some little comfort eased his breath,
Vowing revenge for his Lucretia's death.
Quoth he she was constant to me all her life,
None was more loving or a better Wife;
And at the last from me she would not stray,
Though Tarquin fain would had her quite away;
But she vowed to him she would die before
That ere she would go from out her husbands door.
Who hearts deceitful have, vain, light, or lewd
I Would let them drive amongst the multitude,
I would not be their Jayler, for this know
Where freedom will not oblige nothing will do:
Whose Mistress cleaves to him he is bound to adore,
But he is mad strives for another Whore;
Like unto Marcus Cassiado^e the great,
Who had a Wife both light was and a cheat,
Who robbed her Husband, and concealed lay
While she with Damasus had private play;
Yet Marcus fought his Rival, but was killed,
Whose Wife had then her end when is blood was spilled.
So pious Marcus weltred on the ground
Whilst his base Wife did dress the others wound:
O cruel wretch was it not enough to do
To leave him, but thus persecute him too:
What horrid treacheries was founded here,
Hell gave her counsel, and her course did steer.
What stony heart can now from tears refrain,
To think that mortals should such crimes retain:
The barbarous Nations round about us here,
Never so savage or so rude appear;
Honor, Love, Laws, Religion, Gratiude
Are lost and buried in a heart so lewd.
But dear Lucretia thou did love me so,
Greater affection none could ever show;
Had thou inconstant been or false to me,
I Would never be concerned or fight for thee,
I Would let thee pine and sink in thy own shame;
But now I Am bound to vindicate thy name.
O all ye Gods in the celestial state
If Justice is not with you out of date,
As it is on Earth your powers I do invoke
To help me at this plunge, your holy book
I yield to, and your hard'st decrees obey,
Your Alters still shall flame, I Will all dues pay.
If this be suffered who can live at rest,
None will be found to keep an honest breast,
Marriage esteemed was always, for if that
Be once profaned farewell the sacred knot
Of all society, then farewell Laws,
Ruin attends upon so bad a cause.
Nature it self in Love commands Propriety,
Else no good offsprings would be or society,
No care of Child or how to manage Land,
But every one would grasp what comes to hand;
All Children would be Bastards, Men Deceivers,
No Government, Religion, or Believers.
All hold propriety a thing most dear,
But nothing ever like a Wife so near;
With that he paused: but could not grief assuage,
But plots the founding of a tragic age;
Strange Sceans are laid, confusions quickly flow,
Brutus the Rebel closes with him too,
And helped the broyl: quoth he, we are void of fear,
All this whole Province for you will appear;
Collatia is already up in Arms,
And vow to keep you from all future harms.
I Will lead the forces and maintain the day,
Command me as your slave I will obey.
Now naught but quarrels gave their hearts contentment
These humors in their breasts had such resentment.
Arms at all points, nothing will them debar,
They Would Peace so long, that they are mad for War;
Both sides make ready, now the battle comes,
Which gives to many unexpected Tombs.
How thick the Hills were spread with lookers on,
While some for victory to the Templerun;
What shreiks are heard sometimes, then Trumpet sounds
Whet up their courage and their foesconfounds:
Here bodies mangled are, what direful slaughters,
What cries of mournful Widows, Wives and Daughters.
To tell of all the furies, heats, enragements,
Raunges of Battle, and the fierce Engagements:
Who lead the Wings of Horse up, who the Foot,
Which side gave ground, and which the best stood to it
Requires a Volume: and besides black night
Now summons both the Armies to retreat.
So here I Will leave and do as the Romances,
Lead up your thoughts with many pretty fancies.
Then leave you in a Cloud, and never close,
For then your mind would have too much repose;
But then it is best: when thoughts still farther bend,
For there the pleasure never has an End.
FINIS.

