THE HISTORY OF NATURALIZATION, With some Remarques upon the Effects thereof,
in respect to the Religion, Trade and Safety of His Majesty's Dominions.
Printed according to Order.

THE first Notices of Naturalizing Alien Merchants under the name of
Endenization, are handed to us by the Statute of the 1mo. of Henry the 7th.
cap. 2d. in these words:

Whereas in time past diverse Grants have been made by King Edward, as well by
his Letters Patents, as by Acts of Parliament to diverse Merchant Strangers born
out of this Realm to be Denizons, whereby they have and enjoy such Freedoms and
Liberties as do Denizons born within the said Realm, as well in abatement of
their Custom which they should bear, as if they were no Denizons, as in buying
and selling of their Merchandise to their great avail and lucre, and oft-times
suffer other Strangers, not Denizons, deceitfully to ship and carry great and
notable substance of Merchandise in their names, by the which the said Goods be
f^^e of Custom: In likewise as if they were the Goods of a Denizon, where of
right they ought to pay C^st^m as the Goods of Strangers, by the which they be
greatly advanced in Riches and Honor, and after they be so enriched, for the
most part they convey themselves with their said Goods into their own Countries
wherein they be naturally born, to the great impoverishing of this Realm, and
to the great hurt and defraud of the King's Highness in payment of his Customs.
Wherefore it is Enacted, Established and Ordained by the Advice of the said
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That any person made or hereafter to be made
Denizon, shall pay for his Merchandise like Custom and Subsidy as he ought or
should pay before that be were made Denizon, any Letters Patents or other
Ordinances by Parliament or otherwise notwithstanding.

And to the same purpose is the Statute of 11th. Henry 7th. cap. 14th.

And to the like purpose is the Statute of 22th. Henry the 8th. cap. 8th.

During the Reigns of Edward the 6th. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, nothing
is recorded touching Naturalization. But when King James happily added the
Diadem of Scotland to this of England, so cautious were our Ancestors, that
they would never admit the there Natives of Scotland, though His Majesty's
Subjects, to the privilege that Aliens naturalized do now enjoy. And by the
Statute the 7th. Jacobi, cap. 2d. It is provided by Parliament in these words:
For as much as the Naturalizing of Strangers, and restoring to blood, persons
attainted have been ever reputed matters of mere Gra^ ^^nd Favor, which are
not fit to be bestowed upon any others than such as are of the Religion now
Established in this Realm, Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent
Majestie^ the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, That (...) Person or persons of what quality, condition
or place so ever, being of the Age of Eighteen years or above, shall be
Naturalized or Restored in blood, unless the said person or persons have
received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper within one month before any Bill
exhibited for that purpose; and also shall take the Oath of Supremacy, and the
Oath of Allegiance, in the Parliament House, before his or her Bill be twice
read. And for the better effecting of the Premises, Be it further Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal for the time being, if the Bill begin in the Upper House, and
the Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament for the time being, if the Bill
begin there* shall have Authority at all times during the Session of Parliament
to mini^ter such Oath and Oaths, and to such person and persons as by the true
intent of this Stature is to be ministered.

In the Reign of King Charles the First, of blessed memory, the English Merchant
had a Trade to profit, so that many of them arrived to great Estates, some to
100000 l value, several to fifty thousand pounds Estate: And in all the Reign
of King James and King Char^es the First, not above Ten Aliens Merchants were
naturalized, and those such as by long abode in England had merited the
kindness of the Nation, and then it was rare to hear of an English Merchant
that failed, so that the Clothiers then grew rich by the good payments the
English Merchants made them, and the Clothing of this Kingdom was in great
request abroad: And the Gentry then began to put their Sons Apprentices unto
Merchants, and it was thought a very good Provision for Gentlemen's youngest
Sons.

O fortunati si sua bona norint.

But this growing happiness of the English Merchants was soon Ecclipsed by the
late Oliverian Usurpers, who being fond of the Hollanders Coalition with us,
and that failing them, those Usurpers did more greedily imbibe the opinion and
practice of Naturalization, hoping thereby to weaken the Hollanders by drawing
over numbers of Dutchmen, and so gave this singular privilege to all that
asked it, not forbidding the Jews, but encouraging their admission and abode
with us, and laid aside the said Statutes for difference in Customs, and that
also of the 7^h. Jacobi. And thus the industrious English Merchant, who cannot
live so poorly as a Jew, or other Aliens that lives only in a Chamber, was
much discouraged, nor was this free admission of Foreign Merchants any weakening
to the Dutch, or other Foreign States; for there came no number of Artificers
with Families, but the greatest part that come to be Naturalized, were such as
rather lived like Spies, than Inhabitants amongst us: And though some hundreds
of Aliens Merchants were then and since Naturalized, yet they are no accession
of Strength or Interest to this Kingdom, nor any advance of our Lands; but on
the contrary are a great cause of distraction in Religion, dangerous to the
Government, and ruinous to the English Trade and Merchant.

1. That this Naturalization has been a great cause of our distraction in
Religion is evident in (...) Effect, and the worthy Author of the compassionate
Enquiry amongst the Causes of the neglect (...) contempt of our Religion brings
in Judaism, and this pretense of the enlargement of Trade, as (...) of the
Causes, it being, says that Author most remarkably true of the English, that
their good (...) prompts them to look and think favorably of such things as
they see in request with others, (...) ^^om thence they proceed to affect the
Novelty, or at least become unstable in their own Religion. And when the said
Usurpers thought it convenient to make England an Amsterdam of all Religions,
the admission of Foreiners was a most effectual means to introduce that great
diversity of Opinions amongst us, which has ever since abated men's zeal for,
and reverence of our Established Religion; and its worthy Observation, that not
only the Jews, but those of all other Nations who have obtained this
privilege, do no way incorporate with the English, but continue a distinct
body in all Ecclesiastical Affairs, not only in their own persons, but also in
their children to after generations.

2. This introducing of Merchants Aliens is dangerous to the Government, for
Aliens will not have their Affections changed, nor their Alliances
exstinguished by Naturalization, for it is engraven in every man's heart with
indelible Characters, ever to love his Native Soil and Country best, witness
the late Wars we had with Holland and France, what advices, what amusing
Stories at the Coffee-houses, weakening the hands of His Majesty's Subjects, by
misreporting all our Naval Actions, and it has ever been found, that a Babel
in Languages begets confusion in Kingdoms, and tends to beget fear and
diffidence amongst the Natural born Subjects.

3. This favor to Aliens is ruinous to the English Trade and English Merchant,
for before this Naturalization, the English Merchants had many Foreign
Commissions very advantageous to them, which these Ali^^^ ^ow ^njoy; and the
English had Factories settled in all Countries, and by these Factories
influenced (...) ^^erned the Trade of the world, these Factors were honorable
to our Nation, encourage^ (...) Manufactories, and a great Addition to the
Capital Stock of the Kingdom by the great E^^h (...) generally gained abroad
and brought home amongst us. By these Factories the English (...) ^^quainted
with the Secrets and Mysteries of other Kingdoms, and the Youth of our Nation
(...) ^^^chandize, had many great opportunities beyond that of other Gentlemen
Travelers, (...) in the works of God and man, of Nature and of Art to enlarge
their minds as well as (...), to be inured to hardship and danger, and
instructed in subtilty, and all the Arts of li^^^^ (...) ^elf-security. But
since this particular Naturalization of Merchant Aliens, our our Factories in
France, the Netherlands, Holland, and the best part in Portugal, are ruined,
and the French F^andrians, Dutch and Portugals have so far gained this point of
us since this Naturalization, as that they have set up Factories here in
England, and the Italians have attempted the like also to the great spoil of
our English Trade and Merchants.

This Encouragement to Aliens is but a transplanting the Trade from Natives to
Aliens, for Aliens naturalized, beside the cheapness of living here as Lodgers,
have four or five per Cent. advantage in Trade above the Natives, by the
Interest of money wherewith they Trade, and by having the Commission of all
their Kindred and Friends abroad, so that the ancient distinction of one fourth
part in Customs upon Aliens naturalized more then English, does but put the
English upon equal terms in Trade with these Aliens.

The English Merchants have both inclinations and stock sufficient to drive the
Trade of this Kingd^m, and the increase of Aliens Merchants is but the decrease
and ruin of Natives; for before this frequ^nt Naturalization there was no
complaint of the want of People amongst us, and although these Aliens
naturalized, and all other Aliens by the Statue 25. of his Majesty's Reign, are
to pay no other Cu^^omes for any of the Native Commodities of this Realm
Exported, than are paid by His Maj^^^ies Natural-born Subject, yet its found by
Experience that they Export very little of our English (...), but generally
make their returns by paying money in Exchange beyond Sea for the Toys and
Baubles they bring us, and they no way increase the Consumption of our
Provision; by their Families, for those that come to be naturalized, are not
any considerable number of ^^ti^^ers with their Families but are Merchants, and
are one of a Tribe, two of a Town, and five o^ six of a Province fitted
instruments to carry on the designs of their Employers, and the greatest part
of them are not intended to inhabit with us, but like Summer Birds when they
have filled their Po^^ets, or if trouble or War arise, they will not forget
their Fathers Land, and in such case hereafter, as formerly, may be instruments
of great inconvenience to His Majesty and His Natural-Born Subjects.

The advantages to the Nation by this particular Naturalization have been
loudly proclaimed, as being the only way to increase His Majesty's Subjects,
advance Trade, and to raise the price of Lands, but as hitherto it has had no
such effect. So it will never produce any such or other advantage to this
Kingdom, unless it could be presumed that the liberal ofter of this privilege
had virtue and power in it to bring in such Persons for Number and Quality as
the Kingdom may seem to stand in need of; but as has been said, few or none of
those come to accept these privileges, but such only come as have designs
upon the Kingdom for their own advantage; and their practices have been and
will be ac^ording to their Principles and Interests, for of the great number of
Merchants that have been admitted, not twelve of them have purchased Lands in
England, nor fifteen of them intermarried with English amongst us; few of them
live otherwise than as Lodgers, and diverse Aliens having got Credit amongst us
have broke much indebted unto the English, who are constantly loosers by them,
but their own Countrymen are better treated, it being the Principle of many of
these Aliens to preserve the Capital Stock of their own Countries: for they use
to set up one, and make him great in Credit, and then he breaks indebted to the
English, but salves his own Countrymen, and then they set up another as has
been instanced in several of these Alien Merchants one after another.

Thus ends the first part of the History of Naturalization, whereby it
appears that we have been abused by these Aliens for those who should come and
be beneficial to us, are not with us, and those that have and do come are
prejudicial to us, It remains therefore that all true Englishmen join in their
supplications, that Provision may be made to encourage Gentlemen's Sons in
Merchandise, and that according to the President of the aforesaid Statutes this
mischief be speedily retrieved, not by forbiding Aliens from a peaceable Abode
and Trade amongst us, but by maintaining the ancient and equal difference
between them and Natives, by making all Aliens born liable to Aliens Customs
for their Toys and Baubles and other Merchandise which they shall import, or
that at least those who are either Papists or Infidels, those who have got this
privilege by indirect means and all those Aliens Merchants who have no Family
amongst us, but live in Chambers as Lodgers, may loose their privilege of
Naturalization. And that it may be Provided for by a Law, That no Aliens
Merchant be hereafter admitted to the Privilege of Naturalization, until they
have lived as Dezizons by His Majesty's Letters, Patents, a certain number of
years amongst us, or until they have intermarried with English, or Purchased
Lands upon their Denization, or otherwise merited is Majesty's Favor and
Bounty by some signal Service.

If it be Objected, That there is an Experiment which may be more safely
trusted to than Argument, in that the Hollanders by the universal admission of
all Foreigners unto equal Privilege with Natives have arrived to a great
Trade, and thereby to Riches and Strength beyond other Nations.

The Answer is, The Hollanders are only strong in Shipping, which are Manned by
the Natives of the Country. But how easily were they vanquished at Land, when
the French for asking, got so much of their Country; and the Reason is plain,
for all Foreigners are but as Sojourners, and had rather change there
Governors then venture either their Persons or Estates when troubles come.

The Hollanders are necessitated to give a free tolleration of all Religions,
without which Foreigners will not join themselves in numbers to that or any
other Nation.

The Hollanders have no Lands to live upon, nor other ways then that of Trade
to advance their Industrious and ingenious Youth, and so all their Estates
descend from Fathers to Sons in Trade and Merchandise, and so need not fear the
loosing, of their Trade of Merchandises by the Accession of Foreigners.

But in England we have Lands to live upon, and have several other ways for
advancing Ingenious and Industrious Persons, besides that good way of
Merchandiz^ng, and if through frequent Naturalization of Alien Merchants the
Trade of Mer^^^^dizing in England become a poor picquering Trade (as it will
quickly be if For^^^^ers be equal in Privileges with (...)) ^^en all o^^
Contry, and men of Estates (...) ingenuity, will leave Merchandising unto
Foreigners; and betake themselves (...) more profitable Employments of the
Court, the Ca^^p, Divinity, the Law (...) Physic: And so in a short time we
^^all loose the Trade of Merchandising, which is the Mistress of the World, by
the mistaken methods we pursue in the C^urtship of her.


