THE ART OF Rhetoric, WITH A DISCOURSE OF The Laws of England.

By Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury.

Dent Vmbrae tenuem Divi and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos and in urna perpetuum ver.
LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
1681.

TO THE READER.
Although these pieces may appear fully to express their own real intrinsic value,
as bearing the Image and Inscription of that great Man Mr. Hobbes; yet since
common usage has rendered a Preface to a Book as necessary as a Porch to a
Church, and that in all things some Ceremonies cannot be avoided, Mode and
Custom in this point is dutifully to be obeyed.

That they are genuine, credible testimony might be produced; did not the
peculiar fineness of thought and expression, and a constant undaunted
resolution of maintaining his own Opinions sufficiently ascertain their Author.
Besides which, they are now Published from his own true Copies, an advantage
which some of his works have wanted.

The first of them, being an abridgement containing the most useful part of
Aristotle's Rhetoric, was written some thirty years since. Mr. Hobbes in his
Book of Humane Nature had already described Man, with an exactness almost equal
to the original draught of Nature; and in his Elements of Law, laid down the
constitution of Government, and shown by what Armed Reason it is maintained.
And having demonstrated in the State of Nature, the Primitive Art of Fighting
to be the only medium whereby Men procured their ends; did in this design to
show what Power in Societies has succeeded to reign in its stead. I mean the
Art of speaking, which by use of Common places of Probability, and knowledge in
the manners and passions of Mankind, throu the working of Belief is able to
bring about whatsoever Interest.

How necessary this Art is to that of Politic, is clearly evident from that
mighty force, whereby the Eloquence of the Ancient Orators captivated the minds
of the People. Mr. Hobbes chose to recommend by his Translation the Rhetoric of
Aristotle, as being the most accomplished work on that Subject, which the World
has yet seen, having been admired in all Ages, and in particular highly
approved by the Father of the Roman Eloquence, a very competent Judge. To this
he thought fit to add some small matter relating to that part which concern's
Tropes and Figures; as also a short discovery of some little tricks of false
and deceitful Reasoning.

The other piece is a Discourse concerning the Laws of England, and has been
finished many years. Herein he has endeavored to accommodate the general
notions of his Politic to the particular constitution of the English Monarchy.
A design of no small difficulty, wherein to have succeeded, deserves much
Honor; to have perchance miscarryed, deserves easy Pardon. It has had the
good fortune to be much esteemed by the greatest Men of the Profession of the
Law, and therefore may be presumed to contain somewhat excellent. However it is
not to be expected, that al Men should submit to his Opinions, yet it is hoped
none will be offended at the present Publishing these Papers, since they will
not find here any new fantastic Notions, but only such things as have been
already asserted with strength of Argument by himself, and other Persons of
eminent Learning. To the Public at least this Benefit may accrue, that some
able Pen may undertake the controversy, being moved with the desire of that
reputation, which will necessarily attend Victory over so considerable an
Adversary.

THE WHOLE ART OF RHETORIC.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
That Rhetoric is an Art consisting not only in moving the passions of the
Judge; but chiefly in Proofs. And that this Art is Profitable.

WE see that all men naturally are able in some sort to accuse and excuse: Some
by chance; but some by method. This method may be discovered: and to discover
Method is all one with teaching an Art. If this Art consisted in Criminations
only, and the skill to stir up the Judges to Anger, Envy, Fear, Pity, or other
affections; a Rhetorician in well ordered Commonwealths and States, where it is
forbidden to digress from the cause in hearing, could have nothing at all to
say. For all these perversions of the Judge are beside the question. And that
which the pleader is to show, and the Judge to give sentence on, is this only:
It Is so: or not so. The rest has been decided already by the Lawmakers; who
judging of universals, and future things, could not be corrupted. Besides, it is
an absurd thing, for a man to make crooked the Ruler he means to use.

It consists therefore chiefly in Proofs; which are Inferences: and all
Inferences being Syllogismes, a Logician, if he would observe the difference
between a plain Syllogism, and an Enthymeme, (which is a Rhetorical
Syllogism,) would make the best Rhetorician. For all Syllogismes and
Inferences belong properly to Logic; whether they infer truth or probability:
and because without this Art it would often come to pass, that evil men by the
advantage of natural abilities, would carry an evil cause against a good; it
brings with it at least this profit, that making the pleaders even in skill, it
leaves the odds only in the merit of the cause. Besides, ordinarily those that
are Judges, are neither patient, nor capable of long Scientifical proofs, drawn
from the principles through many Syllogisms; and therefore had need to be
instructed by the Rhetorical, and shorter way. Lastly, it were ridiculous, to
be ashamed of being vanquished in exercises of the body, and not to be ashamed
of being inferior in the virtue of well expressing the mind.

CHAP. II.
The Definition of Rhetoric.

Rhetoric, is that Faculty, by which we understand what will serve our turn,
concerning any Subject to win belief in the hearer.

Of those things that beget belief; some require not the help of Art; as
Witnesses, Evidences, and the like, which we invent not, but make use of; and
some require Art, and are invented by us.

The belief that proceeds from our Invention, comes partly from the behavior
of the speaker; partly from the passions of the hearer: but especially from the
proofs of what we allege.

Proofs are, in Rhetoric, either Examples, or Enthymemes, as in Logic,
Inductions, or Syllogisms. For an Example is a short Induction, and an
Enthymeme a short Syllogism; out of which are left as superfluous, that which
is supposed to be necessarily understood by the hearer; to avoid prolixity, and
not to consume the time of public business needlessly.

CHAP. III.
Of the several kinds of Orations: and of the Principles of Rhetoric.

IN all Orations, the Hearer does either hear only; or judge also.

If he hear only, that is one kind of Oration, and is called Demonstrative.

If he judge, he must judge either of that which is to come; or of that which is
past.

If of that which is to come, there is another kind of Oration, and is called
Deliberative.

If of that which is past; then it is a third kind of Oration, called Judicial.

So there are three kinds of Orations; Demonstrative, Judicial, Deliberative.

To which belong their proper times. To the Demonstrative, the Present; To the
Judicial, the Past; and to the Deliberative, the time to come.

And their proper Offices. To the Deliberative, Exhortation and Dehortation. To
the Judicial, Accusation and Defense. And to the Demonstrative, Praising and
Dispraising.

And their proper ends. To the Deliberative, to Prove a thing Profitable, or
Unprofitable. To the Judicial, Just, or Unjust. To the Demonstrative,
Honorable, or Dishonorable.

The Principles of Rhetoric out of which Enthymemes are to be drawn; are the
common opinions that men have concerning Profitable, and Unprofitable; Just,
and Unjust; Honorable, and Dishonorable; which are the points in the several
kinds of Orations questionable. For as in Logic, where certain and infallible
knowledge is the scope of our proof, the Principles must be all infallible
truths: so in Rhetoric the Principles must be common opinions, such as the
Judge is already possessed with: because the end of Rhetoric is victory; which
consists in having gotten belief.

And because nothing is Profitable, Unprofitable, Just, Unjust, Honorable or
Dishonorable, but what has been done, or is to be done; and nothing is to be
done, that is not possible: and because there be degrees of Profitable,
Unprofitable, Just, Unjust, Honorable, and Dishonorable; an Orator must be
ready in other Principles; namely, of what is done and not done; possible and
not possible, to come and not to come, and what is Greater, and what is Lesser,
both in general, and particularly applied to the thing in question; as what is
more and less, generally; and what is more profitable, and less profitable,
etc. particularly.

CHAP. IV.
Of the subject of Deliberatives; and the abilities that are required of him
that will deliberate of business of State.

IN Deliberatives there are to be considered the subject, wherein; and the ends
whereto the Orator exhorts, or from which he dehorteth.

The Subject is always something in our own power, the knowledge whereof belongs
not to Rhetoric, but for the most part to the Politics; and may be referred
in a manner to these five heads.

1. Of levying of money. To which point he that will speak as he ought to do,
ought to know before hand the revenue of the State, how much it is, and wherein
it consists: and also how great are the necessary charges and expenses of the
same. This knowledge is gotten partly by a man's own experience, partly by
Relations, and accounts in writing.

2. Of Peace and War. Concerning which the Counselor or Deliberator, ought to
know the strength of the Commonwealth; how much it both now is, and hereafter
may be; and wherein that power Consists. Which knowledge is gotten, partly by
experience, and Relations at home; and partly by the sight of Wars, and of
their events abroad.

3. Of the safeguard of the Country. Wherein he only is able to give counsel,
that knows the forms, and number, and places of the Garrisons.

4. Of Provision. Wherein to speak well, it is necessary for a man to know what
is sufficient to maintain the State; what Commodities they have at home
growing; what they must fetch in through need; and what they may carry out
through abundance.

5. Of making Laws. To which is necessary so much Political, or Civil
Philosophy, as to know what are the several kinds of Governments; and by what
means, either from without or from within, each of those kinds is, preserved,
or destroyed. And this knowledge is gotten, partly by observing the several
Governments in times past, by History; and partly by observing the Government
of the times present in several Nations, by Travel.

So that to him that will speak in a Council of State, there is necessary
this; History, Sight of Wars, Travel, Knowledge of the Revenue, Expenses,
Forces, Havens, Garrisons, Wares, and Provisions in the State he lives in; and
what is needful for that State, either to export, or import.

CHAP. V.
Of the ends which the Orator in Deliberatives, propounds, whereby to exhort,
or dehort.

AN Orator in exhorting always propounds Felicity, or some part of Felicity
to be attained by the actions he exhorts unto: and in Dehortation the
contrary.

By Felicity, is meant commonly, Prosperity with virtue, or a continual content
of the life with surety. And the parts of it are such things as we call good,
in body, mind, or fortune; such as these that follow.

1. Nobility, which to a State or Nation is, to have been ancient inhabitants;
and to have had most anciently, and in most number, famous Generals in the
Wars, or men famous for such things as fall under emulation. And to a private
man, to have been descended lawfully of a Family, which has yielded most
anciently, and in most number, men known to the World for virtue, riches, or
any thing in general estimation.

2. Many and good Children. Which is also public and private. Public, when
there is much youth in the State endued with virtue, (namely, of the body,
stature, beauty, strength, and dexterity: Of the mind, valor, and temperance)
Private, when a man has many such Children, both Male and Female. The virtues
commonly respected in women, are of the body, Beauty, and Stature; Of the mind,
Temperance, and Houswifery, without sordidness.

3. Riches. Which is, Money, Cattle, Lands, Household Stuff; with the power to
dispose of them.

4. Glory. Which is, the reputation of Virtue, or of the possession of such
things as all, or most men, or wise men desire.

5. Honor. Which is the glory of benefiting, or being able to benefit others.
To benefit others, is to contribute somewhat, not easily had, to another man's
safety, or riches, The parts of Honor are, Sacrifices, Monuments, Rewards,
Dedication of places, Precedence, Sepulchers, Statues, public Pensions,
Adorations, Presents.

6. Health. Which is the being free from Diseases, with strength to use the
body.

7. Beauty. Which is to different Ages different. To Youth, strength of body,
and sweetness of aspect. To full men, strength of body fit for the Wars, and
Countenance sweet, with a mixture of Terror. To old men, strength enough for
necessary labors, with a Countenance not displeasing.

8. Strength. Which is the ability to move any thing at pleasure of the Mover.
To move, is to pull, to put off, to lift, to thrust down, to press together.

9. Stature. Which is then just, when a man in height, breadth, and thickness
of body does so exceed the most, as nevertheless it be no hinderance to the
quickness of his motion.

10. Good old Age. Which is, that which comes late, and with the least trouble.

11. Many and good Friends. Which is, to have many that will do for his sake
that which they think will be for his good.

12. Prosperity. Which is, to have all, or the most, or the greatest of those
goods which we attribute to Fortune.

13. Virtue. Which is then to be defined, when we speak of Praise.

These are the grounds from whence we exhort.

Dehortation is from the contraries of these.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Colors or common opinions concerning Good and Evil.

IN Deliberatives, the Principles, or Elements from whence we draw our Proofs,
are common Opinions concerning Good and Evil. And these Principles are either
Absolute, or Comparative. And those that are Absolute, are either Disputable,
or Indisputable.

The Indisputable Principles are such as these;

Good, is that which we love for it self.

And that, for which we love somewhat else.

And that which all things desire.

And that to every man which his reason dictates.

And that, which when we have, we are well, or satisfied.

And that which satisfies.

And the Cause or Effect of any of these.

And that which preserves any of these.

And that which keeps off, or destroys the contrary of any of these.

Also to take the Good, and reject the Evil, is Good.

And to take the greater Good, rather than the less; and the lesser Evil,
rather than the greater.

Further, all Virtues are Good.

And Pleasure.

And all things Beautiful.

And Justice, Valor, Temperance, Magnanimity, Magnificence; and other like
habits.

And Health, Beauty, Strength, etc.

And Riches.

And Friends.

And Honor, and Glory.

And Ability to say or do: also Towardliness, Will, and the like.

And Whatsoever Art, or Science.

And Life.

And whatsoever is Just.

The Disputable Principles are such as follow.

That is, Good, whose contrary is Evil.

And whose contrary is Good for our Enemies.

And whose contrary our Enemies are glad of.

And of which there cannot be too much.

And upon which much labor and cost has been bestowed.

And that which many desire.

And that which is praised.

And that which even our Enemies and evil men praise.

And what good we prefer.

And what we do advise.

And that which is possible, is Good (to undertake.)

And that which is Easy.

And that which depends on our own Will.

And that which is proper for us to do.

And what no man else can do.

And whatsoever is Extraordinary.

And what is suitable.

And that which wants a little of being at an end.

And what we hope to master.

And what we are fit for.

And what evil men do not.

And what we love to do.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Colors, or common Opinions concerning Good and Evil, comparatively.

THE Colors of Good comparatively depend partly upon the following Definitions
of Comparatives.

1. More, is so much, and somewhat besides.

2. Less, is that, which and somewhat else is so much.

3. Greater and more in number are said only Comparatively to Less, and Fewer
in number.

4. Great and Little, Many and Few, are taken Comparatively to the Most of the
same kind. So that Great and Many, is that which exceeds; Little and Few, is
that which is exceeded by the Most of the same kind.

Partly from the precedent Definitions of Good absolutely.

Common Opinions concerning Good. Comparatively then are these.

Greater Good is Many, than fewer, or one of those many.

And Greater is the kind, in which the greatest is greater than the greatest of
another kind. And greater is that Good than another good, whose kind is greater
than another's kind.

And Greater is that from which another Good follows; then the Good which
follows.

And of two which exceed a third, Greater is that which exceeds it most.

And that which causes the greater Good.

And that which proceeds from a greater Good.

And Greater is that which is chosen for it self, than that which is chosen
from somewhat else.

And the end greater than that which is not the end.

And that which less needs other things, than that which more.

And that which is independent, than that which is dependent of another.

And the Beginning, than not the Beginning.

[Seeing the Beginning is a greater Good, or Evil, than that which is not the
Beginning; and the End, than that which is not the End; One may argue from this
Color both ways: as Leodamas against Chabrias, would have the Actor more to
blame than the Advisor; and against Callistratus, the Advisor more than the
Actor.]

And the Cause, than not the Cause.

And that which has a greater Beginning or Cause.

And the Beginning, or Cause of a greater Good or Evil.

And that which is scarce, greater than that which is Plentiful; because harder
to get.

And that which is Plentiful, than that which is scarce; because oftener in Use.

And that which is easy, than that which is Hard.

And that whose Contrary is greater.

And that whose Want is greater.

And Virtue than not Virtue, a greater Good. Vice, than not Vice, a greater
Evil.

And greater Good, or Evil is that, the effects whereof are more Honorable or
more Shameful.

And the effects of greater Virtues, or Vices.

And the Excess whereof is more tolerable, a greater Good.

And those things which may with more honor be desired.

And the desire of better things.

And those things whereof the Knowledge is better.

And the Knowledge of better things.

And that which wise men prefer.

And that which is in better men.

And that which better men choose.

And that which is more, than that which is less delightful.

And that which is more, than that which is less Honorable.

And that which we would have for our selves and Friends, a greater Good; and
the contrary a greater Evil.

And that which is Lasting, than that which is not Lasting.

And that which is Firm, than that which is not Firm.

And what many desire, than what few.

And what the Adversary, or Judge confesses to be greater, is greater.

And Common than not Common.

And not Common than Common.

And what is more Laudable.

And that which is more Honored, a greater Good.

And that which is more Punished, a greater Evil.

And both Good and Evil divided than undivided, appear greater.

And Compounded than Simple, appear greater.

And that which is done with Opportunity, Age, Place, Time, Means
disadvantagious, greater than otherwise.

And that which is natural, than that which is attained unto.

And the same part of that which is great, than of that which is less.

And that which is nearest to the end designed.

And that which is Good or Evil to ones self, than that which is simply so.

And Possible, than not possible.

And that which comes toward the end of our Life.

And that which we do really, than that which we do for show.

And that which we would be, rather than what we would seem to be.

And that which is good for more purposes, is the greater Good.

And that which serves us in great necessity.

And that which is joined with less trouble.

And that which is joined with more delight.

And of the two, that which added to a third, makes the whole the greater.

And that which having, we are more sensible of.

And in every thing, that which we most esteem.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the several kinds of Governments.

BEcause Hortation and Dehortation concern the Commonwealth, and are drawn
from the Elements of Good and Evil; as we have spoken of them already in the
Abstract, so we must speak of them also in the Concrete; that is, of what is
Good or Evil to each sort of Commonwealth in special.

The Government of a Commonwealth, is either Democracy, or Aristocracy, or
Oligarchy, or Monarchy.

Democracy is that, wherein all men with equal right, are preferred to the
highest Magistracy by Lot.

Aristocracy is that, wherein the highest Magistrate is chosen out of those,
that had the best education, according to what the Laws prescribe for best.

Oligarchy is that, where the highest Magistrate is chosen for wealth.

Monarchy is that, wherein one man has the Government of all; which
Government, if he limit it by Law, is called Kingdom; if by his own will,
Tyranny.

The end of Democracy, or the Peoples Government, is Liberty.

The end of Oligarchy, is the Riches of those that Govern.

The end of Aristocracy, is good Laws, and good ordering of the City.

The end of Monarchy, or Kings, is the safety of the People, and conservation
of his own Authority.

Good therefore, in each sort of Government is that which conduces to these
their ends.

And because belief is not gotten only by proofs, but also from manners; the
manners of each sort of Commonwealth ought to be well understood by him that
undertaketh to persuade, or diswade in matter of State. Their manners may be
known by their designs; and their designs by their ends; and their ends by what
we see them take pleasure in. But of this more accurately in the Politics.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Colors of Honorable and Dishonorable.

IN a Demonstrative Oration, the subject whereof is Praise, or Dispraise; the
proofs are to be drawn from the Elements of Honorable and Dishonorable.

In this place we anticipate the second way of getting belief; which is from
the manners of the Speaker. For Praise, whether it come in as the principal
business, or upon the by, depends still upon the same Principles. Which are
these.

Honorable, is that, which we love for it self, and is withal laudable.

And that Good, which pleases us only because it is Good.

And Virtue.

Virtue is the faculty of getting and preserving that which is Good; and the
faculty of doing many, and great things well.

The kinds of it are these;

1. Justice; which is a Virtue whereby every man obtains what by Law is his.

2. Fortitude; which is a Virtue by which a man carries himself Honorably, and
according to the Laws, in time of danger.

3. Temperance; which is a Virtue whereby a man Governs himself in matter of
pleasure according to the Law.

4. Liberality; which is a Virtue, by which we benefit others in matter of
money.

5. Magnanimity; which is a Virtue, by which a man is apt to do great benefits.

6. Magnificence; which is a Virtue, by which a man is apt to be at great cost.

7. Prudence; which is an Intellectual Virtue, by which a man is able to
deliberate well concerning any Good leading to Felicity.

And Honorable, are the Causes and effects of things Honorable.

And the Works of Virtue.

And the signs of Virtue.

And those actions, the reward whereof is Honor.

And the reward whereof is rather Honor, than Money.

And that which we do not for our own sakes.

And what we do for our Countries good, neglecting our own.

And those things are Honorable, which good of themselves, are not so to the
Owner.

And those things which happen to the dead, rather than to the living.

And what we do for other men, especially for Benefactors.

And bestowing of Benefits.

And the contrary of those things we are ashamed of.

And those things which men strive for earnestly, but without fear of Adversary.

And of the more Honorable, and better men, the Virtues are more Honorable.

And more Honorable are the virtues that tend to other men's benefit, than
those which tend to ones own.

And Honorable are those things which are Just.

And Revenge is Honorable.

And Victory.

And Honor.

And Monuments.

And those things which happen not ot the living.

And things that excel.

And what none can do but we.

And Possessions we reap no profit by.

And those things which are had in honor particularly in several places.

And the signs of praise.

And to have nothing of the servile, mercenary, or Mechanic.

And that which seems Honorable; Namely such as follow.

Vices confining upon Virtue.

And the extremes of Virtues.

And what the Auditors think Honorable.

And that which is in estimation.

And that which is done according to custom.

Besides, in a Demonstrative Oration, the Orator must show, that he whom he
praises, did what he praises unconstrainedly, and willingly.

And he does so, who does the same often.

Praise, is speech, declaring the magnitude of a Virtue, Action, or Work.

But to praise the Work from the Virtue of the Worker, is a circular proof.

To Magnify, and to Praise, differ in themselves, as Felicity and Virtue. For
Praise declares a man's Virtue; and Magnifying declares his Felicity.

Praise is a kind of inverted Precept. For to say, Do it because it is good, is
a Precept. But to say, He is good because he did it, is Praise.

An Orator in Praising must also use the forms of Amplification; such as these:

He was the first that did it.

The only man that did it.

The special man that did it.

He did it with disadvantage of time.

He did it with little help.

He was the cause, that the Law ordained Rewards and Honors for such Actions.

Further, he that will praise a Man, must compare him with others; and his
actions with the actions of others; especially with such as are renowned.

And Amplification is more proper to a Demonstrative Oration, than to any
other. For here the Actions are confessed; and the Orators part is only this,
to contribute unto them Magnitude and Luster.

CHAP. X.
Of Accusation and Defense, with the Definition of Injury.

IN a Judicial Oration, which consists in Accusation and Defense, the thing to
be proved is, that Injury has been done: and the heads from whence the proofs
are to be drawn, are these three:

1. The causes that move to Injury.

2. The Persons apt to do Injury.

3. The Persons obnoxious, or apt to suffer Injury.

An Injury is a voluntary offending of another man contrary to the Law.

Voluntary is that which a man does with knowledge, and without compulsion.

The causes of Voluntary Actions are Intemperance, and a Vicious disposition
concerning things Desirable. As the Covetous man does against the Law, out of
an intemperate desire of Money.

All Actions proceed either from the doers disposition, or not.

Those that proceed not from the Doers disposition are such as he does by
Chance, by Compulsion, or by Natural necessity.

Those that proceed from the Doers disposition, are such as he does by Custom,
or upon Premeditation, or in Anger, or out of Intemperance.

By Chance are said to be done those things whereof neither the Cause, nor the
Scope is evident; and which are done neither orderly, nor always, nor most
commonly after the same manner.

By Nature are said to be done those things, the Causes whereof are in the
Doer; and are done orderly, and always, or for the most part after the same
manner.

By Compulsion are done those things, which are against the Appetite, and
Ordination of the Doer.

By Custom those Actions are said to be done, the Cause whereof is this, that
the Door has done them often.

Upon Premeditation are said to be done those things which are done for profit,
as the End, or the way to the End.

In Anger are said to be done those things which are done with a purpose of
Revenge.

Out of Intemperance are said to be done those things which are delightful.

In sum, every Voluntary Action tends either to Profit or Pleasure.

The Colors of Profitable are already set down.

The Colors of that which is Pleasing follow next.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Colors, or Common Opinions concerning Pleasure.

PLeasure is a sudden and sensible motion of the Soul, toward that which is
Natural.

Grief is the Contrary.

Pleasant therefore is that, which is the cause of such motion.

And to return to ones own Nature.

And Customs.

And those things that are not violent.

Unpleasant are those things, which proceed from Necessity, as Cares, Study,
Contentions. The contrary whereof, Ease, Remission from Labor and Care: also
Play, Rest, Sleep, are Pleasant.

Pleasant also is that, to which we have an appetite.

Also the appetites themselves, if they be sensual; as Thirst, Hunger, and Lust.

Also those things to which we have an appetite upon persuasion and Reason.

And those things we remember, whether they pleased, or displeased, than when
they were present.

And the things we hope for.

And Anger.

And to be in Love.

And Revenge.

And Victory. Therefore

Also contentious Games; as Tables, Chess, Dice, Tennis, etc.

And Hunting.

And Suits in Law.

And Honor and Reputation amongst men in Honor and Reputation.

And to Love.

And to be Beloved and Respected.

And to be admired.

And to be Flattered.

And a Flatterer: (for he seems both to love and admire.)

And the same thing often.

And Change, or Variety.

And what we return to afresh.

And to Learn.

And to admire.

And to do Good.

And to receive Good.

And to help up again one that is fallen.

And to finish that which is unperfect.

And Imitation.

And therefore the Art of Painting.

And the Art of Carving Images.

And the Art of Poetry.

And Pictures and Statues.

And other Men's Dangers, so they be near.

And to have escaped hardly.

And things of a kind please one another.

And every one himself.

And ones own pleases him.

And to bear Sway.

And to be thought Wise.

And to dwell upon that which he is good at.

And ridiculous actions, Sayings and Persons.

CHAP. XII.
Presumptions of Injury drawn from the persons that do it: or Common Opinions
concerning the aptitude of Persons to do Injury.

OF the Causes which move to Injury, namely, Profit and Pleasure, has been
already spoken, Chap. 6. 7. 11.

It follows next to speak of the Persons, that are apt to do Injury.

The Doers of Injury are.

Such as think they can do it.

And such as think to be undiscovered when they have done it.

And such as think, though they be discovered, they shall not be called in
question for it.

And such as think, though they be called in question for it, that their Mulct
will be less than their Gain, which either themselves or their Friends receive
by the Injury.

Able to do Injury are.

Such as are Eloquent.

And such as are practiced in business.

And such as have skill in Process.

And such as have many Friends.

And Rich Men.

And such as have Rich Friends; or Rich Servants; or Rich Partners.

Vndiscover'd when they have done it, are Such are not apt to commit the crimes
whereof they are accused: as Feeble Men, Slaughter: Poor, and not Beautiful
Men, Adultery.

And such as one would think could not choose but be discovered.

And such as do Injuries, whereof there has been no Example.

And such as have none, or many enemies.

And such as can easily conceal what they do.

And such as have some body to transfer the fault upon.

They that do Injury openly, are Such, whose friends have been Injured.

And such as have the Judges for friends.

And such as can escape their Trial at Law.

And such as can put off their Trial.

And such as can corrupt the Judges.

And such as can avoid the payment of their Fine.

And such as can defer the payment.

And such as cannot pay at all.

And such as by the Injury get manifestly, much, and presently; when the Fine
is uncertain, little, and to come.

And such as get by the Injury, money; by the penalty, shame only.

And such on the Contrary, as get honor by the Injury, and suffer the mulct of
money only, or banishment, or the like.

And such as have often escaped, or been undiscovered.

And such as have often attempted in vain.

And such as consider present pleasure, more than pain to come; and so
intemperate men are apt to do Injury.

And such as consider pleasure to come, more than present pain; and so
temperate men are apt to do Injury.

And such as may seem to have done it by Fortune, Nature, Necessity, or Custom;
and by Error, rather than by Injustice.

And such as have means to get pardon.

And such as want Necessaries, as poor men: or Unnecessaries, as rich men.

And such as are of very good, or very bad Reputation.

CHAP. XIII.
Presumptions of Injury drawn from the Persons that suffer, and from the matter
of the Injury.

OF those that do Injury, and why they do it, it has been already spoken.

Now of the persons that suffer, and of the Matter wherein they suffer, the
common Opinions are these:

Persons obnoxious to Injury are,

Such as have the things that we want, either as necessary, or as delightful.

And such as are far from us.

And such as are at hand.

And such as are unwary, and Credulous.

And such as are Lazy.

And such as are Modest.

And such as have swallowed many Injuries.

And such as we have Injured often before.

And such as never before.

And such as are in our danger.

And such as are ill beloved generally.

And such as are envyed.

And our Friends.

And our Enemies.

And such as, wanting friends, have no great ability either in speech or Action.

And such as shall be losers by going to Law: as Strangers, and Workmen.

And such as have done the Injuries they suffer.

And such as have committed a crime, or would have done, or are about to do.

And such as, by doing them an Injury, we shall gratify our friends or
superiors.

And such, whose friendship we have newly left, and accuse.

And such as another would do the Injury to, if we should not.

And such as by Injuring, we get greater means of doing good.

The Matters wherein men are obnoxious to Injury are,

Those things wherein all, or most men use to deal unjustly.

And those things which are easily hid, and put off into other hands, or
altered.

And those things which a man is ashamed to have suffered.

And those things wherein prosecution of Injury, may be thought a love of
contention.

CHAP. XIV.
Of those things which are necessary to be known for the Definition of Just and
Unjust.

WHen the fact is evident, the next Inquiry is, whether it be Just, or Unjust.

For the Definition of Just and Unjust, we must know what Law is; that is, what
the Law of Nature, what the Law of Nations; what the Law Civil, what written
Law, and what unwritten Law is: and what Persons, that is, what a public
Person, or the City is; and what a private Person, or Citizen is.

Unjust in the opinion of all men, is that which is contrary to the Law of
Nature.

Unjust in the opinion of all men of those Nations which traffic and come
together, is that which is contrary to the Law common to those Nations.

Unjust only in one Commonwealth, is that which is contrary to the Law Civil,
or Law of that Commonwealth.

He that is accused to have done any thing against the Public, or a private
Person, is accused to do it either ignorantly, or unwillingly, or in anger, or
upon premeditation.

And because the Defendant does many times confess the fact, but deny the
unjustice; as that he took, but did not steal; and did, but not adultery; it is
necessary to know the Definitions of Theft, Adultery, and all other crimes.

What facts are contrary to the written Laws, may be known by the Laws
themselves.

Besides written Laws, whatsoever is Just, proceeds from Equity, or Goodness.

From Goodness proceeds that which we are praised, or honored for.

From Equity proceed those actions, which though the written Law command not,
yet being interpreted reasonably, and supplied, seems to require at our hands.

Actions of Equity are such as these.

Not too rigorously to punish Errors, Mischances, or Injuries.

To pardon the faults that adhere to Mankind.

And not to consider the Law so much, as the Lawmakers mind; and not the Words
so much, as the meaning of the Law.

And not to regard so much the Fact, as the intention of the Doer; nor part of
the Fact, but the Whole; nor what the Doer is, but what he has been always, or
for the most part.

And to remember better the Good received, than the Ill.

And to endure injuries patiently.

And to submit rather to the sentence of a Judge, than of the Sword.

And to the sentence of an Arbitrator, rather than of a Judge.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Colors or Common Opinions concerning Injuries, comparatively.

COmmon Opinions concerning Injuries comparatively, are such as these:

Greater is the Injury which proceed from greater Iniquity.

And from which proceeds greater damage.

And of which there is no revenge.

And for which there is no remedy.

And by occasion of which, he that has received the Injury, has done some
mischief to himself.

He does the greater Injury, that does it first, or alone, or with few:

And he that does it often.

Greater Injury is that, against which Laws and Penalties were first made.

And that which is more brutal, or more approaching to the actions of beasts.

And that which is done upon more premeditation.

And by which more Laws are broken.

And which is done in the place of Execution.

And which is of greatest shame to him that receives the Injury.

And which is committed against well deservers.

And which is committed against the unwritten Law; because good men should
observe the Law for Justice, and not for fear of punishment.

And which is committed against the written Law; because he that will do Injury
neglecting the penalty set down in the written Law, is much more likely to
transgress the unwritten Law, where there is no penalty at all.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Proofs Inartificial.

OF Artificial Proofs we have already spoken.

Inartificial Proofs, which we invent not, but make use of, are of five sorts.

1. Laws. And those are Civil, or written Law: the Law or Custom of Nations:
and the universal Law of Nature.

2. Witness. And those are such as concern Matter; and such as concern Manners.
Also, they be ancient, or present.

3. Evidences, or Writings.

4. Question, or Torture.

5. Oaths. And those be either given, or taken, or both, or neither.

For Laws, we use them thus.

When the written Law makes against us, we appeal to the Law of Nature,
alleging, That to be greatest Justice, which is greatest Equity.

That the Law of Nature is immutable; the written Law mutable.

That the written Law is but seeming Justice; the Law of Nature very Justice.
And Justice is among those things which are, and not which seem to be.

That the Judge ought to discern between true and adulterate Justice.

That they are better men that obey unwritten, than written Laws.

That the Law against us does contradict some other Law. And when the Law has a
double interpretation, that is, the true one, which makes for us.

And that the cause of the Law being abolished, the Law is no more of Validity.

But when the written Law makes for us, and Equity for the Adversary, we must
allege,

That a man may use Equity, not as a liberty to judge against the Law; but only
as a security against being forsworn, when he knows not the Law.

That men seek not Equity because it is good simply, but because good for them.

That it is the same thing not to make, and not to use the Law.

That as in other Arts, and namely in Physic, Fallacies are pernicious; so in
a Commonwealth it is pernicious to use pretexts against the Law.

And that in Commonwealths well instituted, to seem wiser than the Laws, is
prohibited.

For Witnesses, we must use them thus:

When we have them not, we must stand for Presumptions, and say,

That in Equity sentence ought to be given according to the most probability.

That Presumptions are the testimony of the things themselves, and cannot be
bribed.

That they cannot lie.

When we have witnesses, against him that has them not, we must say,

That Presumptions, if they be false, cannot be punished.

That if Presumptions were enough, witnesses were superfluous.

For Writings, when they favor us; we must say,

That Writings are private and particular Laws; and he that takes away the use
of Evidences, abolisheth the Law.

That since Contracts and Negotiations pass by Writings, he that bars their
use, dissolves humane Society.

Against them, if they favor the Adversary, we may say,

That since Laws do not bind, that are fraudulently made to pass, much less
Writings.

And that the Judge being to dispense Justice, ought rather to consider what is
just, than what is in the Writing.

That Writings may be gotten by fraud or force; but Justice by neither.

That the Writing is repugnant to some Law, Civil, or Natural; or to Justice;
or to Honesty.

That it is repugnant to some other writing before, or after.

That it crosses some commodity of the Judge (which must not be said directly,
but employed cunningly.)

For the Torture, if the giving of it make for us, we must say,

That it is the only testimony that is certain.

But if it make for the Adversary, we may say.

That men enforced by Torture, speak as well that which is false, as that which
is true.

That they who can endure, conceal the truth; and they who cannot, say that
which is false to be delivered from pain.

For Oaths; he that will not put his

Adversary to his Oath, may allege,

That he makes no scruple to be forsworn.

That by swearing, he will carry the cause; which not swearing, he must lose.

That he had rather trust his cause in the hand of the Judge, than of the
Adversary.

He that refuses to take the Oath, may say,

That the matter is not worth so much.

That if he had been an evil man, he had sworn, and carried his cause.

That to try it by swearing for a Religious man against an irreligious, is as
hard a match, as to set a weak man against a strong in Combat.

He that is willing to take the Oath, may pretend.

That he had rather trust himself, than his Adversary; and that it is equal
dealing for an irreligious man to give, and for a Religious man to take the
Oath.

That it is his duty to take the Oath, since he has required to have sworn
Judges.

He that Offers the Oath may pretend,

That he does piously commit his cause to the Gods.

That he makes his Adversary himself Judge.

That 'twere absurd for him not to swear, that has required the Judges to be
sworn.

And of these are to be compounded the Forms we are to use, when we would give,
and not take the Oath; or take, and not give; or both give and take; or neither
give nor take.

But if one have sworn contrary to a former Oath, he may pretend;

That he was forced.

That he was deceived, and that neither of these is Perjury, since Perjury is
voluntary.

But if the Adversary do so, he may say; That he that stands not to what he
has sworn, subverteth humane society.

And (turning to the Judge) What reason have we to require, that you should be
sworn, that judge our cause; when we will not stand to that we swear our selves.

And so much for Proofs inartificial.

BOOK. II.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction.

OF Belief proceeding from our Invention, that part which consists in proof,
is already spoken of.

The other two parts follow; whereof one arises from the manners of the
Speaker; the other from the passions of the Hearer.

The Principles, Colors, or Common Opinions upon which a man's belief is
gronnded concerning the manners of him that speaks, are to be had partly out of
that which has been said before concerning Virtue, Book. 1. Chap. 9. partly
out of those things which shall be said by and by, concerning the Passions. For
a man is believed either for his Prudence, or for his Probity, which are
Virtues; or for good will: of which among the Passions.

The Principles concerning belief, arising from the passion of the Hearer, are
to be gathered from that which shall now be said of the several Passions in
order.

In every one of which three things are to be considered. 1. First, how men are
affected. 2. Secondly, Toward whom. 3. Thirdly, For what.

CHAP. II.
Of Anger.

ANger is desire of Revenge, joined with grief for that he, or some of his, is,
or seems to be neglected.

The object of Anger is always some particular, or individual thing.

In Anger there is also pleasure proceeding from the imagination of revenge to
come.

To Neglect, is to esteem little or nothing: and of three kinds.

1. Contempt. 2. Crossing. 3. Contumely.
Contempt, is when a man thinks another of little worth in comparison to
himself.

Crossing is the hinderance of another man's will without design to profit
himself.

Contumely, is the disgracing of another for his own pastime.

The common Opinions concerning Anger are therefore such as follow.

They are easily Angry that think they are neglected.

That think they excel others; as the Rich with the Poor; the Noble with the
Obscure, etc.

And such as think they deserve well.

And such as grieve to be hindered, opposed, or not assisted. And therefore
sick men, poor men, Lovers, and generally all that desire, and attain not, are
Angry with those that standing by, are not moved with their wants.

And such as having expected good, find evil.

Those that men are Angry with, are, Such as mock, deride, or jest at them.

And such as show any kind of Contumely, toward them.

And such as despise those things which we spend most labor and study upon:
and the more, by how much we seem the less advanced therein.

And our friends, rather than those that are not our friends.

And such as have honored us, if they continue not.

And such as requite not our courtesy.

And such as follow contrary courses, i^ they be our inferiors.

And our friends, if they have said, or done us evil, or not good.

And such as give not ear to our entreaty.

And such as are joyful, or calm in our distress.

And such as troubling us, are not themselves troubled.

And such as willingly hear or see our disgraces.

And such as neglect us in the presence of our Competitors; of those we admire
of those we would have admire us; of those we reverence, and of those that
reverence us.

And such as should help us, and neglect it.

And such as are in jest, when we are in earnest.

And such as forget us, or our Names.

An Orator therefore must so frame his Judge or Auditor by his Oration; as to
make him apt to Anger: and then make his Adversary appear such as men use to be
Angry withal.

CHAP. III.
Of Reconciling, or Pacifying Anger.

REconciliation is the Appeasing of Anger.

Those to whom men are easily reconciled, are,

Such as have not offended out of Neglect.

And such as have done it against their will.

And such as wish done the contrary of what they have done.

And such as have done as much to themselves.

And such as confess and repent.

And such as are humbled.

And such as do seriously the same things, that they do seriously.

And such as have done them more good heretofore, than now hurt.

And such as sue to them for any thing.

And such as are not insolent, nor mockers, nor slighters of others in their
own disposition.

And generally such as are of a contrary disposition to those, whom men are
usually angry withal.

And such as they fear or reverence.

And such as reverence them.

And such as have offended their Anger. Reconcilable are,

Such as are contrarily affected to those whom we have said before to be easily
angry.

And such as play, laugh, make merry, prosper, live in plenty; and in sum, all
that have no cause of grief.

And such as have given their anger time. Men lay down their Anger for these
causes.

Because they have gotten the Victory.

Because the Offender has suffered more than they meant to inflict.

Because they have been revenged of another.

Because they think they suffer justly.

And because they think the revenge will not be felt, or not known that the
revenge was theirs, and for such an injury.

And because the Offender is dead.

Whosoever therefore would assuage the anger of his Auditor, must make himself
appear such, as men use to be reconciled unto: and beget in his Auditor such
opinions, as make him reconcilable.

CHAP. IV.
Of Love and Friends.

TO Love, is to will well to another, and that for others, not for our own sake.

A Friend is he that loves, and he that is beloved.

Friends one to another, are they that naturally love one another.

A Friend therefore is he,

That rejoices at another Good.

And that grieves at his hurt.

And that wishes the same with us to a third, whether good, or hurt.

And that is Enemy or Friend to the same man.

We love them,

That have done good to us, or ours; especially if much, readily, or in season.

That are our Friends Friends.

That are our Enemies Enemies.

That are Liberal.

That are Valiant.

That are Just.

And that we would have love us.

And good Companions.

And such as can abide Jests.

And such as break Jests.

And such as praise us, especially for somewhat that we doubt of in our selves.

And such as are neat.

And such as upbraid us not with our vices, or with their own benefits.

And such as quickly forget injuries.

And such as least observe our Errors.

And such as are not of ill Tongue.

And those that are ignorant of our Vices.

And such as cross us not when we are busy, or angry.

And such as are officious toward us.

And those that are like us.

And such as follow the same course or trade of life, where they impeach not
one another.

And such as labor for the same thing, when both may be satisfied.

And such as are not ashamed to tell us freely their faults, so it be not in
contempt of us, and the faults such, as the World, rather than their own
Consciences Condemns.

And such as are ashamed to tell us of their very faults.

And such as we would have honor us, and not envy, but imitate us.

And such as we would do good to, except with greater hurt to our selves.

And such as continue their Friendship to the dead.

And such as speak their mind.

And such as are not terrible.

And such as we may rely on.

The several kinds of friendship, are Society, Familiarity, Consanguinity,
Affinity, etc.

The things that beget love, are,

The bestowing of Benefits. Gratis. Unasked. Privately.


CHAP. V.
Of Enmity and Hatred.

THE Colors, or Common Opinions concerning Hatred are to be taken from the
contrary of those, which concern Love and Friendship.

Hatred differs from Anger in this,

That Anger regards only what is done to ones self; but Hatred not.

And in this, that Anger regards particulars only; the other universals also.

And in this, that Anger is curable, Hatred not.

And in this, that Anger seeks the vexation, Hatred the damage of ones
Adversary.

That with Anger there is always joined Grief; with Hatred not always.

That Anger may at length be satiated, but Hatred never.

Hence it appears how the Judge or Auditor may be made Friend or Enemy to us;
and how our Adversary may be made appear Friend or Enemy to the Judge; and how
we may answer to our Adversary, that would make us appear Enemies to him.

CHAP. VI.
Of Fear.

FEar is a trouble, or vexation of the mind, arising from the apprehension of
an evil at hand, which may hurt or destroy.

Danger is the nearness of the evil feared.

The things to be Feared, are, Such as have power to hurt.

And the signs of will to do us hurt, as Anger and Hatred of powerful men.

And Injustice joined with power.

And Valor provoked, joined with power.

And the fear of powerful men.

The men that are to be feared, are, Such as know our faults.

And such as can do us Injury.

And such as think they are injured by us.

And such as have done us Injury.

And our Competitors in such things as cannot satisfy both.

And such as are feared by more powerful men than we are.

And such as have destroyed greater men than we are.

And such as use to invade their inferiors.

And men not passionate, but dissemblers, and crafty, are more to be feared
than those that are hasty and free.

The things especially to be feared, are,

Such, wherein if we err, the error cannot be repaired; at least, not according
to ours, but our Adversaries pleasure.

And such as admit either none, or not easy help.

And such as being done, or about to be done to others, make us pity them.

They that fear not, are,

Such as expect not evil; or not now; or not this; or not from these.

And therefore men fear little in prosperity.

And men fear little that think they have suffered already.

An Orator therefore that wouldput Fear into the Auditor, must let him see that
he is obnoxious; and that greater than he do suffer, and have suffered from
those, and at those times they least thought.

CHAP. VII.
Of Assurance.

ASsurance is hope, arising from an imagination that the help is near, or the
evil afar off.

The things therefore that beget Assurance are,

The remoteness of those things that are to be feared, and the nearness of
their contraries.

And the facility of great, or many helps or remedies.

And neither to have done; nor received Injury.

And to have no Competitors or not great ones, or if great ones, at least
friends; such as we have obliged, or are obliged to.

And that the danger is extended to more, or greater than us.

Assured, or Confident, are, They that have often escaped danger.

And they to whom most things have succeeded well.

And they that see their Equals, or inferiors not afraid.

And they that have wherewith to make themselves feared, as wealth, strength,
etc.

And such as have done others no wrong.

And such as think themselves in good terms with God Almighty.

And such as think they will speed well, that are gone before.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Shame.

SHame is a perturbation of the Mind arising from the apprehension of Evil,
past, present, or to come, to the prejudice of a man's own, or his friends
reputation.

The things therefore which men are ashamed of are those Actions which proceed
from Vice, as,

To throw away ones Arms; to run away, signs of Cowardliness.

To deny that which is committed to ones trust, a sign of Injustice.

To have lain with whom, where, and when we ought not, signs of Intemperance.

To make gain of small and base things; not to help with money whom and how
much we ought; to receive help from meaner men; to ask money at use from such
as one thinks will borrow of him; to borrow of him that expects payment of
somewhat before lent; and to redemand what one has lent, of him that one thinks
will borrow more; and so to praise, as one may be thought to ask; signs of
Wretchedness.

To praise one to his face; to praise his virtues too much, and color his
vices; Signs of Flattery.

To be unable to endure such labors as men endure that are elder, tenderer,
greater in quality, and of less strength than he, signs of Effeminacy.

To be beholden often to another; and to upbraid those that are beholding to
him, signs of Pusillanimity.

To speak and promise much of ones self more than his due, signs of Arrogance.

To want those things which ones Equals, all, or most of them have attained to,
is also a thing to be ashamed of.

And to suffer things ignominious, as to serve about another person; or to be
employed in his base actions.

In Actions of Intemperance, whether willingly, or unwillingly committed; there
is shame in Actions of Force, only when they are done unwillingly.

The men before whom we are ashamed, are such as we respect; namely,

Those that admire us.

And those whom we desire should admire us.

And those whom we admire.

Those that contend with us for Honor.

Those whose opinion we contemn not.

And therefore men are most ashamed in the presence.

Of old and well bred men.

Of those we are always to live with.

Of those that are not guilty of the same fault.

Of those that do not easily pardon.

And of those that are apt to reveal our faults; such as are men injured,
Backbiters, Scoffers, Comic Poets.

And of those before whom we have had always good success.

And of those who never asked any thing of us before.

And of such as desire our Friendship.

And of our familiars, that know none of our Crimes.

And of such as will reveal our faults to any of those that are named before.

But in the presence of such whose judgment most men despise, men are not
ashamed.

Therefore we are ashamed also in the presence

Of those whom we reverence.

And of those who are concerned in our own, or Ancestors, or Kinsfolks actions
or misfortunes, if they be shameful.

And of their Rivals.

And of those that are to live with them that know their disgrace.

The Common Opinions concerning Impudence are taken from the contrary of these.

CHAP. IX.
Of Grace, or Favor.

GRace is that Virtue, by which a man is said to do a good turn, or do service
to a man in need; not for his own but for his cause to whom he does it.

Great Grace is when the need is great; or when they are hard, or difficult
things that are conferred, or when the time is seasonable, or when he that
conferr's the favor is the only, or first man that did it.

Need, is a desire joined with grief for the absence of the thing desired.

Grace therefore it is not, if it be not done to one that needs.

Whosoever therefore would prove that he has done a Grace, or Favor, must show
that he needs it to whom it was done.

Grace it is not,

Which is done by Chance.

Nor which is done by Necessity.

Nor which has been requited.

Nor that which is done to ones Enemy.

Nor that which is a trifle.

Nor that which is naught, if the Giver know the fault.

And in this manner a man may go over the Praedicaments, and examine a benefit,
whether it be a Grace for being This, or for being so Much, or for being Such,
or for being Now, etc.

CHAP. X.
Of Pity, or Compassion.

PIty is a perturbation of the mind, arising from the apprehension of hurt o^
trouble to another that does not deserve it, and which he thinks may happen to
himself, or his.

And because it appertains to Pity, it think that he, or his may fall into the
misery he pities in others, it follows that they be most compassionate,

Who have passed through Misery.

And old Men.

And weak Men.

And timorous Men.

And learned Men.

And such as have Parents, Wife, and Children.

And such as think there be honest Men. And that they are Iess Compassionate.

Who are in great despair.

Who are in great prosperity.

And they that are Angry; for they consider not.

And they that are very confident; for they also consider not.

And they that are in the Act of contumely; for neither do these consider.

And they that are astonished with fear. And they that think no Man honest.

The things to be pitied are, Such as grieve, and withal hurt. Such as destroy.

And Calamities of fortune, if they be great: as none or few friends,
deformity, weakness, lameness, etc.

And evil that arrives where good is expected.

And after extreme Evil, a little Good.

And through a Man's life to have no good offer it self; or being offered, not
to have been able to enjoy it.

Men to be pitied are,

Such as are known to us, unless they be so near to us, as their hurt be our
own.

And such as be of our own years.

Such as are like us in manners.

Such as are of the same, or like stock.

And our Equals in dignity.

Those that have lately suffered, or are shortly to suffer injury: and those
that have the marks of injury past.

And those that have the words or actions of them that be in present misery.

CHAP. XI.
Of Indignation.

OPposite in a manner to Pity in good Men, is Indignation, which is grief for
the prosperity of a Man unworthy.

With Indignation there is always joined a joy for the prosperity of a Man
worthy, as Pity is always with contentment in the adversity of them that
deserve it.

In wicked Men the opposite of pity is, Envy; as also the companion thereof,
delight in the harm of others, which the Greeks in one word have called (...).
But of these in the next Chapter.

Men conceive Indignation against others, not for their virtues, as Justice,
etc.

For these make Men worthy; and in Indignation we think Men unworthy.

But for those goods which men endued with virtue, and noble Men, and handsome
Men are worthy of.

And for newly gotten power and riches, rather than for ancient, and especially
if by these he has gotten other goods, as by Riches, Command. The reason why we
conceive greater Indignation against new than ancient Riches, is, that the
former seem to possess that which is none of theirs. But the ancient seem to
have but their own. For with common people, to have been so long, is to be so
by Right.

And for the bestowing of goods incongruously: as when the arms of the most
valiant Achilles were bestowed on the most eloquent Ulysses.

And for the comparison of the Inferior in the same thing, as when one Valiant
is compared with a more Valiant; or whether absolutely Superior, as when a
good Scholar is compared with a good Man.

Apt to Indignation are,

They that think themselves worthy of the greatest goods, and do possess them.

And they that are good.

And they that are ambitious.

And such as think themselves deserve better what another possesses, than he
that has it.

Least apt to Indignation are,

Such as are of a poor, servile, and not ambitious Nature.

Who they are, that Rejoice, or Grieve not at the Adversity of him that suffers
worthily, and in what occasions, may be gathered from the contrary of what has
been already said.

Whosoever therefore would turn away the compassion of the Judge, he must make
him apt to Indignation; and show that his Adversary is unworthy of the Good,
and worthy of the Evil which happens to him.

CHAP. XII.
of Envy.

ENvy is grief, for the prosperity of such as our selves, arising not from any
hurt that we, but from the good that they receive.

Such as our selves, I call those that are equal to us in blood, in age, in
abilities, in glory, or in means.

They are apt to Envy,

That are within a little of the highest.

And those that are extraordinarily honored for some quality that is singular
in them, especially Wisdom or good Fortune.

And such as would be thought wise.

And such as catch at glory in every action.

And Men of poor spirits: for every thing appears great to them.

The things which Men Envy in others are,

Such as bring Glory.

And goods of Fortune.

And such things as we desire for our selves.

And things in the possession whereof we exceed others, or they us a little.

Obnoxious to Envy are,

Men of our own time, of our own Country, of our own Age, and Competitors of
our Glory.

And therefore,

Those whom we strive with for Honor.

And those that covet the same things that we do.

And those that get quickly, what we hardly obtain, or not at all.

And those that attain unto, or do the things that turn to our reproach, not
being done by us.

And those that possess what we have possessed heretofore. So old and decayed
Men Envy the young and lusty.

And those that have bestowed little, are subject to be Envyed by such as have
bestowed much upon the same thing.

From the contraries of these may be derived the Principles concerning Joy for
other Men's hurt.

He therefore that would not have his Enemy prevail, when he craves pity, or
other favor; must dispose the Judge to Envy; and make his Adversary appear
such, as are above described, to be subject to the Envy of others.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Emulation.

EMulation is grief arising from that our Equals possess such goods as are had
in honor, and whereof we are capable, but have them not; not because they have
them, but because not we also.

No Man therefore Emulates another in things whereof himself is not capable.

Apt to Emulate are,

Such as esteem themselves worthy of more than they have.

And Young and Magnanimous Men.

And such as already possess the goods for which Men are honored: for they
measure their worth by their having.

And those that are esteemed worthy by others.

And those whose Ancestors, Kindred, Familiars, Nation, City, have been eminent
for some good, do Emulate others for that good.

Objects of Emulation are, for things; Virtues.

And things whereby we may profit others.

And things whereby we may please others.

For Persons,

They that possess such things.

And such as many desire to be friends or acquainted with, or like unto.

And they whose praises fly abroad,

The contrary of Emulation is Contempt.

And they that Emulate such as have the goods aforementioned, Contemn such as
have them not: and thence it is, that Men who live happily enough, unless they
have the goods which Men honor, are nevertheless Contemned.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Manners of Youth.

OF Passions we have already spoken. We are next to speak of Manners. Manners
are distinguished by Passions; Habits, Ages, and Fortunes.

What kind of Manners proceed from Passions, and from Virtues and Vices (which
are Habits,) has been already showed.

There remains to be spoken of the Manners, that are peculiar to several Ages
and Fortunes.

The Ages are Youth, Middle-Age, Old Age.

And first of Youth.

Young Men are,

Violent in their desires.

Prompt to execute their desires.

Incontinent.

Inconstant, easily forsaking what they desired before.

Longing mightily, and soon satisfied.

Apt to anger, and in their anger Violent: and ready to execute their anger
with their hands.

Lovers of Honor, and of Victory more than Money, as having not been yet in
Want.

Well natured, as having not been acquainted with much malice.

Full of hope, both because they have not yet been often frustrated, and
because they have by natural heat that disposition that other Ages have by
Wine; Youth being a kind of natural drunkenness. Besides, Hope is of the time
to come, whereof Youth has much, but of the time past little.

Credulous, because not yet often deceived.

Easily deceived, because full of Hope.

Valiant, because apt to Anger and full of Hope; whereof this begets
confidence, the other keeps off Fear.

Bashful, because they estimate the Honor of Actions by the precepts of the
Law.

Magnanimous, because not yet dejected by the misfortunes of humane life.

And lovers of Honor more than of Profit, because they live more by Custom
than by Reason; and by Reason we acquire Profit, but Virtue by Custom.

Lovers of their Friends and Companions.

Apt to err in the excese, rather than the defect, contrary to that precept of
Chilon, Ne quid nimis; for they overdo every thing: they Love too much, and
Hate too much, because thinking themselves wise, they are obstinate in the
opinion they have once delivered.

Doers of Injury rather for Contumely than for damage.

Merciful, because measuring others by their own Innocence, they think them
better than they be, and therefore less to merit what they suffer; which is a
cause of Pity.

And Lovers of Mirth, and by consequence such as love to jest at others.

Jesting is witty Contumely.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Manners of Old Men.

THe Manners of Old Men are in a manner the contraries of those of Youth. They
determine nothing: they do every thing less vehemently than is fit: they never
say they know; but to every thing they say, perhaps and peradventure; which
comes to pass from that having lived long, they have often mistaken and been
deceived.

They are peevish because they interpret every thing to the worst.

And suspicious through Incredulity, and Incredulous by reason of their
Experience.

They Love and Hate, as if they meant to continue in neither.

Are of poor spirits, as having been humbled by the chances of life.

And Covetous, as knowing how easy it is to lose, and hard to get.

And Timorous, as having been cooled by years.

And greedy of life: for good things seem greater by the want of them.

And Lovers of themselves out of Pusilla^imity.

And seek Profit more than Honor, because they love themselves; and Profit is
among the goods that are not simply good, but good for ones self.

And without bashfulness, because they despise seeming.

And hope little; knowing by Experience that many times good Counsel has been
followed with ill event, and because also they be timorous.

And live by Memory rather than Hope; for Memory is of the time past, whereof
Old Men have good store.

And are full of Talk, because they delight in their Memory.

And Vehement in their anger; but not stout enough to execute it.

They have weak, or no desires; and thence seem Temperate.

They are slaves to Gain.

And live more by reason than Custom; because reason leads to Profit, as Custom
to that which is Honorable.

And do Injury to indammage, and not in Contumely.

And are merciful by Compassion, or imagination of the same Evils in themselves
which is a kind of Infirmity, and not Humanity, as in Young Men, proceeding
from a good opinion of those that suffer Evil.

And full of complaint, as thinking themselves not far from Evil, because of
their Infirmity.

Seeing then every Man loves such Men, and their discourses, which are most
agreeable to their own Manners; it is not hard to collect, how the Orator, and
his Oration may be made acceptable to the Hearer, whether Young or Old.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Manners of Middle-aged men.

THe Manners of Middle-aged men, are between those of Youth, and Old Men, and
therefore,

They neither dare, nor fear too much: but both as is fit.

They neither believe all; nor reject all; but judge.

They seek not only what is Honorable, nor only what is Profitable; but both.

They are neither Covetous, nor Prodigal; but in the mean.

They are neither easily angry; nor yet stupid: but between both.

They are Valiant, and withal Temperate.

And in general, whatsoever is divided in Youth, and Old Men: is compounded in
Middle-age.

And whereof the Excess, or Defect is in Youth or Old Men; the Mediocrity is in
those of Middle-age.

Middle-age for the Body, I call the time from thirty to five and thirty years:
for the Mind, the nine and fortieth, or thereabouts.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Manners of the Nobility.

OF Manners that proceed from the several Ages we have already spoken.

We are next to speak of those that rise from several Fortunes.

The Manners of the Nobility are,

To be Ambitious.

To undervalue their Ancestors Equals. For the goods of Fortune seem the more
precious for their Antiquity.

Nobility is the Virtue of a Stock.

And Generosity, is not to degenerate from the virtue of his Stock.

For as in Plants; so in the Races of Men, there is a certain progress; and
they grow better and better to a certain point; and change, viz. Subtle Wits
into Madness; and staid wits into stupidity and Blockishness.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Manners of the Rich.

RIch Men are Contumelious, and Proud. This they have from their Riches. For
seeing every thing may be had for Money, having Money, they think they have all
that is good.

And Effeminate; because they have wherewithal to subminister to their Lust.

And Boasters of their Wealth: and speak in high terms foolishly. For Men
willingly talk of what they love and admire; and think others affect the same
that they do: and the truth is, all sorts of Men submit to the Rich.

And think themselves worthy to command, having that by which Men attain
Command.

And in general, they have the Manners of Fortunate Fools.

They do Injury, with intention not to hurt, but to disgrace; and partly also
through Incontinence.

There is a difference between New and Ancient Riches: for they that are newly
come to Wealth have the same faults in a greater degree: for New Riches are a
kind of rudeness and apprentiship of Riches.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Manners of Men in Power, and of such as prosper.

THe Manners of Men in Power, are the same, or better than those of the Rich.

They have a greater sense of Honor than the Rich; and their Manners are more
Manly.

They are more Industrious than the Rich: for Power is sustained by Industry.

They are Grave, but without Austereness: for being in place conspicuous, they
carry themselves the more modestly; and have a kind of gentle and comely
Gravity, which the Greeks call (...).

When they do Injuries, they do great ones.

The Manners of Men that prosper, are compounded of the Manners of the
Nobility, the Rich, and those that are in Power, for to some of these all
Prosperity appertains.

Prosperity in Children, and goods of the Body, make Men desire to exceed
others in the goods of Fortune.

Men that Prosper have this ill, to be more proud, and inconsiderate than
others.

And this good; that they worship God, trusting in him, for that they find
themselves to receive more good than proceeds from their Industry.

The Manners of Poor Men, Obscure Men, Men without Power, and Men in Adversity,
may be collected from the Contrary of what has been said.

CHAP. XX.
Common Places or Principles concerning what May be Done, what Has been Done,
and what Shall be Done; or of Fact Possible, Past and Future. Also of Great and
Little.

WE have hitherto set down such Principles as are peculiar to several kinds of
Orations.

Now we are to speak of such Places as are Common to them all; as these,
Possible, Done, or Past, Future, Great, Small.

Possible is that,

The Gontrary whereof is Possible.

And the like whereof is Possible.

And then which some harder thing is Possible.

And the beginning whereof is Possible.

And the end whereof is Possible.

And the usual consequent whereof is Possible.

And whatsoever we desire.

And the beginning whereof is in the power of those whom we can either compel
or persuade.

And part whereof is Possible.

And part of the whole that is possible.

And the General if a Particular.

And a Particular if the General.

And of Relatives, if one, the other.

And that which without Art and Industry is Possible, is much more so with Art
and Industry.

And that which is Possible to Worse, Weaker, and Unskilfuller Men, is much
more so to Better, Stronger, and more Skilful.

The Principles concerning Impossible are the Contraries of these.

That Has been done,

Then which a harder thing has been Done.

And the Consequent whereof has been done.

And that which being Possible, he had a will to, and nothing hindered.

And that which was Possible, to him in his Anger.

And that which he longed to do.

And that which was before upon the point of doing.

And whose antecedent has been Done; or that, for which it uses to be Done.

And if that, for whose cause we do this, than this.

The Principles concerning Not done are the Contraries of these.

That Shall be done.

Which some Man can, and means to do.

And which some Man can, and desires to do.

And which is in the way, and upon the point to be done.

And the antecedents whereof are past.

And the Motive whereof is past.

Of Great and Small, More and Less, see Chap. 7. Book. 1.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Example, Similitude, and Fables.

OF the Principles both general and special from whence Proofs are to be drawn,
has been already spoken.

Now follow the Proofs themselves which are Examples or Enthymemes.

An Example is either an Example properly so called (as some Action past:) or a
Similitude (which also is, called a Parable:) or a Fable (which contains some
Action feigned.)

An Example properly so called, is this; Darius came not into Greece, till he
had first subdued Egypt. Xerxes also conquered Egypt first; then afterward
crossed the Hellespont. We ought therefore to hinder the King of Persia from
conquering Egypt.

A Similitude, or Parable, is such as follows: They who choose their
Magistrates by Lot, are like them that choose for their Champions those on whom
the Lot shall fall, rather than those who have the greatest strength; and for
their Pilot, not him that has skill; but him whose name is drawn out of the
Vrne.

A Fable is in this manner. The Horse desiring to drive out the Stag from his
common (...)

Such as are not manifest; are either Conclusions of Enthymemes; as

He that is wise will not suffer his Children, etc.

Or else are Enthymematical; that is; have in themselves the force of an
Enthymeme; as

Mortal Men ought not to carry Immortal Anger.

A Sentence not Manifest, ought to be either Inferred, or Confirmed.

Inferred thus.

It Is not good to be effeminately minded, nor to be envyed by ones fellow
Citizens. A wise Man therefore will not have his Children overlearned.

Confirmed thus.

A wise Man will not have his Children overlearned, seeing too much Learning
both softens a Man's mind, and procures him envy among his fellow Citizens.

If a reason be added to a manifest Sentence let it be short.

Sentences become not every Man; but only old Men, and such as be well versed
in business. For to hear a young Man speak Sentencee, is ridiculous; and to
hear an ignorant Man speak Sentences, is absurd.

Sentences generally received, when they are for our purpose, ought not to be
neglected, because they pass for truths. And yet they may be denied, when any
laudable custom, or humor may thereby be made appear in the Denyer.

The commodities of Sentences, are two.

One proceeding from the Vanity of the Hearer, who takes for true universally
affirmed, that which he has found for true only in some particular; and
therefore a Man ought to consider in every thing what opinion the Hearer holds.

Another is, that Sentences do discover the manners and disposition of the
speaker; so that if they be esteemed good Sentences, he shall be esteemed a
good Man; and if evil, an evil Man.

Thus much of Sentences, what they be; of how many sorts; how to be used; whom
they become; and what is their profit.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Invention of Enthymemes.

SEeing an Enthymeme differs from a Logical Syllogism, in that it neither
concludes out of every thing, nor out of remote Principles; the Places of it,
from whence a Man may argue ought to be certain, and determinate.

And because whosoever makes a Syllogism Rhetorical, or other, should know
all, or the most part of that which is in question; as, whosoever is to advise
the Athenians in the question, whether they are to make War or no, must know
what their Revenues be; what, and what kind of power they have: and he that
will praise them, must know their acts at Salamis, Marathon, etc. It will be
necessary for a good speaker to have in readiness the choicest particulars of
whatsoever he foresees he may speak of.

He that is to speak ex tempore, must comprehend in his speech as much as he
can of what is most proper in the matter in hand.

Proper, I call those things which are least common to others; as, he that will
praise Achilles, is not to declare such things as are common both to him, and
Diomedes; as that he was a Prince, and Warred against the Trojans; but such
things as are proper only to Achilles; as that he killed Hector and Cygnus;
went to the War young, and Voluntary.

Let this therefore be one general Place, from that which is proper.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the Places of Enthymemes Ostensive.

FOrasmuch as Enthymemes either infer truly, or seem only so to do; and they
which do infer indeed, be either Ostensive; or such as bring a Man to some
impossibility; we will first set down the Places of Enthymemes Ostensive.

And Ostensive Enthymeme is, wherein a Man concludes the question from somewhat
granted.

That Enthymeme which brings a Man to an impossibility, is an Enthymeme wherein
from that which the Adversary maintains, we conclude that which is manifestly
impossible.

All Places have been already set down in a manner in the precedent
Propositions of Good, Evil, Just, Unjust, Honorable and Dishonorable: namely,
they have been set down as applied to particular Subjects, or in Concrete.

Here they are to be set down in another manner; namely in the Abstract or
Universal.

The first Place then let be from Contraries, which in the Concrete or
Particulars is exemplified thus. If Intemperance be hurtful, Temperance is
profitable: and if Intemperance be not hurtful; neither is Temperance
profitable.

Another Place may be from Cognomination or affinity of words: as in this
Particular. If what is Just be Good; then what is Justly is well: but Justly to
die is not well: therefore not all that is Just is Good.

A third from Relatives; as, This Man has Justly Done, therefore the other has
Justly suffered. But this Place sometimes deceives for a Man may suffer justly,
yet not from him.

A fourth from Comparison, three ways.

From the Great to the Less; as, He has stricken his Father; and therefore this
Man.

From the Less to the Greater: as, The Gods know not all things; much less Man.

From Equality: as, If Captains be not always the worse esteemed for losing a
Victory; why should Sophisters?

Another from the Time: as Philip to the Thebans: If I had required to pass
through your Country with my Army, before I had ^ayded you against the
Phocaeans, there is no doubt but you would have promised it me. It is absurd
therefore to deny it me now, after I have trusted you:

A Sixth from what the adversary says of himself: as, Iphicrates asked
Aristophon, whether he would take a Bribe to betray the Army: and he answering
no; What (says he) is it likely that Iphicrates would betray the Army; and
Aristophon not?

This Place would be ridiculous, where the Defendant were not in much more
estimation than the accuser.

A seventh from the Definition; as that of Socrates; A Spirit is either God, or
the Creature of God: and therefore he denies not that there is a God, that
confesses there are Spirits.

An eighth from the distinction of an ambiguous word.

A Ninth from Division: as, If all Men do what they do for one of three causes,
whereof two are impossible; and the Accuser charge not the Defendant with the
third; it follows that he has not done it.

A Tenth from Induction: as, At Athens, at Thebes, at Sparta, etc. And
therefore every where.

An Eleventh from Authority, or precedent sentence; as that of Sappho, that
Death is evil, for that the Gods have judged it so, in exempting themselves
from mortality.

A Twelfth from the Consequence: as, It Is not good to be envied; Therefore
neither to be Learned. It Is good to be wise, therefore also to be instructed.

A Thirteenth from two contrary Consequences; as, It Is not good to be an
Orator, because if he speak the truth, he shall displease Men: If he speak
falsely, he shall displease God.

Here is to be noted, that sometimes this argument may be retorted: as thus, If
you speak truth, you shall please God; if you speak untruth you shall please
Men; therefore by all means be an Orator.

A Fourteenth from the quality that Men have to praise one thing, and approve
another* as, We ought not to War against the Athenians upon no precedent
injury; for all Men discommend injustice. Again, We ought to War against the
Athenians; for otherwise our Liberty is at their mercy, that is, is no Liberty:
but the preservation of Liberty is a thing that all Men will approve.

A Fifteenth from Proportion: as, seeing we naturalize strangers for their
virtues, why should we not Banish this stranger for his vices?

A Sixteenth from the similitude of Consequents: as, He that denies the
immortality of the Gods, is no worse than he that has Written the generation of
the Gods. For the same Consequence follows of both, that sometimes there are
none.

A Seventeenth from that, that Men change their mind: as, If when we were in
Banishment, we fought to recover our Country, why should we not fight now to
retain it?

An Eighteenth from a fained end: as, that Diomedes chose Ulysses to go with
him, not as more Valiant than another; but as one that would partake less of
the Glory.

A Nineteenth from the Cause; as if he would infer he did it from this, that he
had cause to do it.

A Twentieth from that which is Incredible, but True: as, that Laws may need a
Law to mend them; as well as Fish Bred in the salt Water, may need salting.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Places of Enthymemes that lead to I^possibility.

LEt the first Place be from inspection (...) Times, Actions, or Words, either
of the Adversary, or of the Speaker, or Both. O^ the Adversary; as, He says, he
loves the People, and yet he was in the conspiracy of the Thirty. Of the
Speaker; as, He says, I am contentious, and yet I never began Suit. Of Both; as
He never conferred any thing to the benefit of the Commonwealth, whereas I have
ransomed diverse Citizens with mine own Money.

A Second from showing the cause of that which seemed amiss, and serves for Men
of good reputation that are accused; as, The Mother that was accused of Incest
for being seen Embracing her Son, was absolved as soon as she made appear, that
she embraced him upon his arrival from far, by way of Salutation.

A Third, from rendering of the cause; as, Leodamas. to whom it was objected,
that he had, under the Thirty Tyrants, defaced the Inscription (which the
People had set up in a Pillar) of his Ignominy; answered, He had not done it;
because it would have been more to his commodity to let it stand; thereby to
indear himself to the Tyrants, by the Testimony of the Peoples hatred.

A Fourth from better Counsel; as, He might have done better for himself;
therefore he did not this. But this Place deceives, when the better Counsel
comes to mind after the Fact.

A Fifth, from the Incompatibility of the things to be done; as, They that did
deliberate whether they should both Mourn and Sacrifice at the Funeral of
Leucothea, were told, that if they thought her a Goddess, they ought not to
Mourn; and if they thought her a Mortal, they ought not to Sacrifice.

A Sixth (which is proper to Judicial Orations) from an Inference of Error;
as, If he did it not, he was not wise, therefore he did it.

Enthymemes that lead to Impossibility, please more than Ostensive: for they
compare, and put contraries together, whereby they are the better set off, and
more conspicuous to the Auditor.

Of all Enthymemes, they be best, which we assent to as soon as hear. For such
consent pleases us; and makes us favorable to the speaker.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the Places of seeming Enthymemes.

OF seeming Enthymemes, one Place may be from the Form of speaking; as when a
Man has repeated diverse Sentences, he brings in his Conclusion, as if it
followed necessarily, though it do not.

A Second from an ambiguous word.

A Third from that which is true divided, to that which is false joined; as
that of Orestes, It was justice that I should Revenge my Fathers death, and it
was justice my Mother should die for killing my Father, therefore I justly
killed my Mother. Or from that which is true joined, to that which is false
divided; as, one cup of Wine, and one cup of Wine, are hurtful; therefore one
cup of Wine is hurtful.

A Fourth from Amplification of the Crime. For neither is the Defendant likely
to have committed the Crime he amplifies; nor does the Accuser seem, when he is
Passionate, to want ground for his Accusation.

A Fifth from signs; as, when a Man concludes the doing of the Fact from the
manner of his life.

A Sixth from that which comes by chance, as if from this, that the Tyranny of
Hipparthus came to be overthrown from the love of Aristogeiton to Harmodius, a
Man should conclude, that in a free Commonwealth loving of Boys were
profitable.

A Seventh from the Consequence, as Banishment is to be desired, because a
Banished Man has choice of places to dwell in.

An Eighth from making that the cause which is not; as, In Demosthenes his
Government, the War began; therefore Demosthenes Governed well. With the
Peloponnesian War began the Plague, therefore Pericles that persuaded that War,
did ill.

A Ninth from the Omission of some circumstance, as, Helen did what was Lawful,
when she ran away with Paris, because she had her Fathers consent to choose her
own Husband; which was true only during the time that she had not chosen.

A Tenth, from that which is probable in some case, to that mhich is probable
simply; as, It Is probable, he foresaw, that if he did it, he should be
suspected; therefore it is probable he did it not.

From this Place one may infer both ways that he did it not. For if he be not
likely to do it, it may be thought he did it not: again, if he were likely to
do it, it may be thought he did it not, for this, that he knew he should be
suspected.

Upon this Place was grounded the Art which was so much detested in Protagor^^,
of making the better cause seem the worse* and the worse the better.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the ways to answer the Arguments of the Adversary.

AN Argument is answered by an opposite Syllogism, or by an Objection.

The Places of opposite Syllogismes are the same with the Places of
Syllogismes, or Enthymemes: for a Rhetorical Syllogism is an Enthymeme.

The Places of Objections are four.

First, from the same, as, To the Adversary that proves Love to be good by an
Enthymeme, may be objected, that no want is good, and yet Love is want; or
particularly thus; The Love of Myrrha to her Father was not good.

The Second from Contraries: as, if the Adversary say, A good Man does good to
his friends, an Objection might be made, that then an evil Man will do also
evil to his friends.

The Third From Similitude: as thus, if the Adversary say, all Men that are
injured, do hate those that have injured them, it may be Objected, that then,
all Men that had received Benefits should love their Benefactors, that is to
say, be grateful.

The Fourth from the authority of famous Men; as when a Man shall say, that
drunken Men ought to be pardoned those Acts they do in their drunkenness,
because they know not what they do; the Objection may be, that Pittacus was of
another mind, that appointed for such Acts a double punishment; one for the
Act, another for the Drunkenness.

And forasmuch as all Enthymemes are drawn from Probability, or Example, or
from a Sign Fallible, or from a Sign infallible: an Enthymeme from Probability
may be confuted Really, by showing that for the most part it falls out
otherwise; but Apparently, or Sophistically, by showing only that it does not
fall out so always; whereupon the Judge thinks the Probability not sufficient
to ground his Sentence upon.

[The Reason whereof is this, That the Judge, while he hears the Fact proved
Probable, conceives it as true. For the Understanding has no Object but Truth.
And therefore by and by, when he shall hear an Instance to the contrary; and
thereby find that he had no necessity to think it true, presently changes his
opinion, and thinks it false, and consequently not so much as Probable. For he
cannot at one time think the same thing both Probable and False: and he that
says a thing is Probable, the meaning is, he thinks it True, but finds not
arguments enough to prove it.]

An Enthymeme from a fallible sign, is answered, by showing the sign to be
fallible.

An Enthymeme from an Example, is answered, as an Enthymeme from Probability;
Really, by showing more Examples to the contrary; Apparently, if he bring
Examples enough to make it seem not necessary.

If the Adversary have more Examples than we, we must make appear, that they
are not applycable to the Case.

An Enthymeme from an infallible Sign, if the Proposition be true, is
unanswerable.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Amplification and Extenuation are not Common Places. Enthymemes by which
Arguments are answered, are the same with those by which the matter in question
is proved, or disproved. Objections are not Enthymemes.

THe first, that Amplification and Extenuation are not Common Places, appears
by this, that Amplification, and Extenuation do prove a fact to be great, or
little; and are therefore Enthymemes, to be drawn from Common Places, and
therefore are not the Places themselves.

The Second, that Enthymemes, by which Arguments are answered, are of the same
kind with those by which the matter in question is proved, is manifest by this,
that these infer the opposite of what was proved by the other.

The Third, that an Objection is no Enthymeme, is apparent by this, that an
Objection is no more but an Opinion, Example, or other Instance, produced to
make appear, that the Adversaries Argument does not conclude.

Thus much of Examples, Sentences, Enthymemes, and generally of all things that
belong to Argumentation; from what Places they may be drawn, or answered.

There remains Elocution, and Disposition to be spoken of in the next Book.

BOOK. III.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original of Elocution and Pronuntiation.

THree things being necessary to an Oration, namely Proof, Elocution and
Disposition; we have done with the first, and shall speak of the other two in
that which follows.

As for Action, or Pronunciation, so much as is necessary for an Orator, may be
fetched out of the Book of the Art of Poetry, in which we have treated of the
Action of the Stage.

For Tragedians were the first that invented such Action, and that but of late;
and it consists in governing well the Magnitude, Tone, and Measure of the
Voice; a thing less subject to Art, than is either Proof, or Elocution.

And yet there have been Rules delivered concerning it, as far forth as serve
for Poetry.

But Oratorical Action has not been hitherto reduced to Art.

And Orators in the beginning, when they saw that the Poets in barren and
feigned Arguments, nevertheless attained great Reputation; supposing it had
proceeded from the choice, or connection of words, fell into a Style, by
imitation of them, approaching to Verse, and made choice of words.

But when the Poets changed their Style, and laid by all words that were not in
common use, the Orators did the same, and lighted at last upon words, and a
Government of the Voice and Measures proper to themselves.

Seeing therefore Pronuntiation, or Action are in some degree necessary also
for an Orator, the Precepts thereof are to be fetched from the Art of Poetry.

[In the mean time this may be one general Rule. If the Words, Tone, Greatness
of the Voice, Gesture of the Body and Countenance, seem to proceed all from one
Passion, then it is well pronounced. Otherwise not.

For when there appear more passions than one at once, the mind of the Speaker
appears unnatural and distracted. Otherwise, as the mind of the Speaker, so the
mind of the Hearer always.]

CHAP. II.
Of the choice of Words and Epithets.

THe Virtues of a Word are two; the first, that it be perspicuous; the second,
that it be decent; that is, neither above, nor below the thing signified; or,
neither too humble, nor too fine.

Perspicuous are all Words that be Proper.

Fine Words are those, that are borrowed, or Translated from other
significations; of which in the Art of Poetry.

The reason why borrowed Words please, is this. Men are affected with Words, as
they are with Men, admiring in both that which is Foreign and New.

To make a Poem graceful, many things help; but few an Oration.

For to a Poet it sufficieth with what Words he can to set out his Poem: but an
Orator must not only do that: but also seem not to do it: for else he will be
thought to speak unnaturally, and not as he thinks; and thereby be the less
believed; whereas belief is the scope of his Oration.

The Words that an Orator ought to use are of three sorts. Proper; Such as are
Received; and Metaphors.

Words taken from Foreign Languages, Words compounded, and Words new coined
are seldom to be used.

Synonimaes belong to Poets, and Equivocal words to Sophisters.

An Orator, if he use Proper words, and Received, and good Metaphors, shall
both make his Oration beautiful, and not seem to intend it; and shall speak
perspicuously. For in a Metaphor alone there is perspicuity, Novity, and
Sweetness.

Concerning Metaphors the Rules are these.

1. He that will make the best of a thing, let him draw his Metaphor from
somewhat that is better. As for Example, let him call a Crime, an Error. On the
other side, when he would make the worst of it, let him draw his Metaphor from
somewhat worse, as, calling Error, Crime.

2. A Metaphor ought not to be so far fetched, as that the Similitude may not
easily appear.

3. A Metaphor ought to be drawn from the noblest things, as the Poets do that
choose rather to say, Rosy-finger'd; then Red fingered Aurora.

In like manner the Rule of Epithets is,

That he that will adorn, should use those of the better sort; and he that will
disgrace should use those of the worse: as Simonides being to Write an Ode in
honor of the Victory gotten in a Course by certain Mules, being not well paid,
called them by their name [(...)] that signifies their propinquity to Asses:
but having received a greater reward, Styles them the Sons of swift footed
Coursers.

CHAP. III.
Of the things that make an Oration Flat.

THe things that make an Oration flat, or insipide, are four.

1. Words Compounded; [and yet a Man may Compound a word, when the Composition
is necessary, for want of a simple word; and easy, and seldom used.]

2. Foreign Words. As for Example, such as are newly derived from the Latin;
which though they were proper among them whose tongue it is, are Foreign in
another Language: and yet these may be used, so it be moderately.

3. Long, impertinent, and often Epithets,

4. Metaphors, indecent, and obscure. Obscure they are, when they are far
fetched. Indecent when they are ridiculous, as in Comedies; or too grave, as in
Tragedies.

CHAP. IV.
Of a Similitude.

A Similitude differs from a Metaphor only by such Particles of Comparison as
these, As; Even as; So; Even so, etc.

A Similitude therefore is a Metaphor dilated; and a Metaphor is a Similitude
Contracted into one Word.

A Similitude does well in an Oration, so it be not too frequent; for it is
Poetical.

An Example of a Similitude, is this of Pericles; that said in his Oration,
that the Baeotians were like to so many Oaks in a Wood, that did nothing but
beat one another.

CHAP. V.
Of the Purity of Language.

FOur things are necessary to make Language Pure.

1. The right rendering of those Particles which some antecedent particle does
require: As to a Not only, a Not also; and then they are rendered right, when
they are not suspended too long.

2. The use of proper Words, rather than Circumlocutions, unless there be
motive to make one do it of purpose.

3. That there be nothing of double construction, unless there be cause to do
it of purpose. As the Prophets (of the Heathen) who speak in general terms, to
the end they may the better maintain the truth of their Prophesies; which is
easier maintained in generals, than in particulars. For it is easier to divine,
whether a number be even or odd, than how many; and that a thing will be, than
what it will be.

4. Concordance of Gender, Number, and Person; as not to say Him for Her; Man
for Men; Has for Have.

In Sum; a Man's Language ought to be easy for another to read, pronounce, and
point.

Besides, to diverse Antecedents, let diverse Relatives, or one Common to them
all, be correspondent: as, He saw the Color; He heard the Sound; or he
perceived both Color and Sound: but by no means, He heard or saw both.

Lastly, that which is to be interposed by Parenthesis, let it be done quickly:
as, I purposed, having spoken to him (to this, and to this purpose) afterward
to be gone. For to put it off thus; I resolved, after I had spoken to him, to
be gone; but the subject of my speech was to this and this Purpose, is vi^^ous.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Amplitude and Tenuity of Language.

A Man shall add Amplitude, or Dignity to his Language, but by such means as
these.

1. By changing the Name with the Definition, as occasion shall serve. As, when
the Name shall be indecent, by using the Definition; or Contrary.

2. By Metaphors.

3. By using the plural Number for the singular.

4. By privative Epithets.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Convenience or Decency of Elocution.

ELocutions are made Decent,

1. By speaking Feelingly; that is, with such Passion as is fit for the matter
he is in; as Angerly in matter of Injury.

2. By speaking as becomes the Person of the Speaker; as for a Gentleman to
speak Eruditely.

3. By speaking proportionably to the matter; as of great affairs to speak in a
high; and of mean, in a low Style.

4. By abstaining from Compounded, and from Outlandish Words; unless a Man
speak Passionately, and have already moved, and, as it were, inebriated his
Hearers. Or Ironically.

It confers also to persuasion very much, to use these ordinary Forms of
speaking, All Men know; It Is confessed by all; No Man will deny, and the like.
For the Hearer consents, surprised with the fear to be esteemed the only
Ignorant Man.

It Is good also, having used a word that signifies more than the matter
requires, to abstain from the Pronunciation and Countenance that to such a word
belongs; that the Disproportion between it and the matter may the less appear.
And when a Man has said too much, it will show well to correct himself: For he
will get belief by seeming to consider what he says.

[But in this a Man must have a care not to be too precise in showing of this
Consideration. For the oftentation of Carefulness is an argument oftentimes of
lying; as may be observed in such as tell particularities not easily observed,
when they would be thought to speak more precise truth than is required.]

CHAP. VIII.
Of two sorts of Styles.

THere be two sorts of Styles.

The one continued or to be comprehended at once; the other divided, or
distinguished by Periods.

The first sort was in use with ancient Writers; but is now out of date.

An Example of this Style is in the History of Herodotus; wherein there is no
Period till the end of the whole History.

In the other kind of Style, that is distinguished by Periods, a Period is such
a Part as is perfect in it self; and has such length, as may easily be
comprehended by the understanding.

This later kind is pleasant; the former unpleasant, because this appears
finite, the other infinite: in this the Hearer has always somewhat set out, and
terminated to him; in the other he fore-sees no end, and has nothing finished
to him: this may easily be committed to memory, because of the measure and
cadence (which is the cause that Verses be easily remembered;) the other not.

Every Sentence ought to end with the period, and nothing to be interposed.

Period is either simple, or divided into Parts.

Simple is that which is Indivisible; as, I wonder you fear not their ends,
whose actions you imitate.

A Period divided, is that which not only has perfection and length convenient:
for respiration, but also Parts. As, I wonder you are not afraid of their ends,
seeing you imitate their actions: where in these words, I wonder you are not
afraid of their ends, is one Colon, or Part; and in these, Seeing you Imitate
their Actions, another: and both together make the Period.

The parts, or members, and periods of speech ought neither to be too long, nor
too short.

Too long are they, which are produced beyond the expectation of the Hearer.

Too short, are they that end before he expects it.

Those that be too long, leave the Hearer behind, like him that walking, goes
beyond the usual end of the Walk, and thereby out-goes him that walks with him.

They that be too short, make the Hearer stumble; for when he looks far before
him, the end stops him before he be aware.

A period that is divided into Parts, is either divided only; or has also an
Opposition of the parts one to another.

Divided only is such as this; This the Senate knows; the Consul sees; and yet
the Man lives.

A Period with Opposition of Parts, called also Antithesis, and the parts
Antitheta, is when contrary parts are put together; or also joined by a third.

Contrary parts are put together, as here, The one has obtained Glory, the
other Riches; both by my benefit.

Antitheta are therefore acceptable; because not only the parts appear the
better for the opposition; but also for that they carry with them a certain
appearance of that kind of Enthymeme, which leads to Impossibility.

Parts, or Members of a Period, are said to be equal, when they have
altogether, or almost equal Number of Syllables.

Parts, or Members of a period, are said to be like, when they begin, or end
alike: and the more Similitudes, and the greater equality there is of
Syllables, the more graceful is the Period.

CHAP. IX.
Of those things that grace an Oration, and make it delightful.

FOrasmuch as there is nothign more delightful to a Man, than to find that he
apprehends and learns easily; it necessarily follows, that those Words are most
grateful to the Ear, that make a Man seem to see before his Eyes the things
signified.

And therefore Foreign Words are unpleasant, because Obscure; and Plain Words,
because too Manifest, making us learn nothing new: but Metaphors please; for
they beget in us by the Genus, or by some common thing to that with another, a
kind of Science: as when an Old Man is called Stubble; a Man suddenly learns
that he grows up, flourishes, and withers like Grass, being put in mind of it
by the qualities common to Stubble, and to Old Men.

That which a Metaphor does, a Similitude does the same; but with less grace,
because with more prolixity.

Such Enthymemes are the most graceful, which neither are presently very
Manifest, nor yet very hard to be understood; but are comprehended, while they
are uttering, or presently after, though not understood before.

The things that make a speech graceful, are these; Antitheta, Metaphors, and
Animation.

Of Anitheta, and Antithesis has been spoken in the precedent Chapter.

Of Metaphors the most graceful is that which is drawn from Proportion.

[ Aristotle (in the 12 Chapter of his Poetry) defines a Metaphor to be the
translation of a name from one signification to another; whereof he makes four
kinds, 1. From the General to the Particular, 2. From the Particular to the
General. 3. From one Particular to another. 4. From Proportion.]

A Metaphor from Proportion is such as this, A State without Youth, is a Year
without a Spring.

Animation is that expression which makes us seem to see the thing before our
eyes; as he that said, The Athenians powered out their City into Sicily,
meaning, they sent thither the greatest Army they could make; and this is the
greatest grace of an Oration.

If therefore in the same Sentence there concur both Metaphor, and this
Animation, and also Antithesis, it cannot choose but be very graceful.

That an Oration is graced by Metaphor, Animation and Antithesis, has been
said: but how it is graced, is to be said in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
In what Manner an Oration is graced by the things aforesaid.

It Is graced by Animation, when the actions of living Creatures are attributed
to things without life; as when the Sword is said to devour.

Such Metaphors as these come into a Man's mind by the observation of things
that have similitude and proportion one to another. And the more unlike, and
unproportionable the things be otherwise, the more grace has the Metaphor.

A Metaphor without Animation, adds grace then, when the Hearer finds he learns
somewhat by such use of the word.

Also Paradoxes are graceful, so Men inwardly do believe them: for they have in
them somewhat like to those jests that are grounded upon the similitude of
words, which have usually one sense, and in the present another; and somewhat
like to those jests which are grounded upon the deceiving of a Man's expectation.

And Paragrams; that is, allusions of words are graceful, if they be well
placed; and in Periods not too long; and with Antithesis: for by these means
the Ambiguity is taken away.

And the more of these; namely, Metaphor, Animation, Antithesis, Equality of
Members a Period has, the more graceful it is.

Similitudes grace an Oration, when they contain also a Metaphor.

And Proverbs are graceful, because they are Metaphors, or Translations of
words from one species to another.

And Hyperboles, because they also are Metaphors: but they are youthful, and
bewray vehemence; and are used with most grace by them that be angry; and for
that cause are not comely in Old Men.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Difference between the Style to be used in Writing, and the Style to be
used in Pleading.

THe Style that should be Read ought to be more exact and accurate.

But the Style of a Pleader ought to be suited to Action and Pronuntiation.

Orations of them that Plead, pass away with the Hearing.

But those that are Written, Men carry about them, and are considered at
Leisure; and consequently must endure to be sifted and examined.

Written Orations appear flat in Pleading.

And Orations made for the Bar, when the Action is away, appear in Reading
insipide.

In Written Orations Repetition is justly condemned.

But in Pleadings, by the help of Action, and by some change in the Pleader,
Repetition becomes Amplification.

In Written Orations Disjunctives do ill; as, I came, I found him, I asked him:
for they seem superfluous, and but one thing, because they are not
distinguished by Action.

But in Pleadings it is Amplification; because that which is but one thing, is
made to seem many.

Of Pleadings, that which is Judicial ought to be more accurate, than that
which is before the people.

And an Oration to the people ought to be more accommodate to Action, than a
Judicial.

And of Judicial Orations, that ought to be more accurate, which is uttered to
few Judges; and that ought to be more accommodate to Action, which is uttered
to Many. As in a Picture, the farther he stands off that beholds it, the less
need there is that the Colors be fine: so in Orations, the farther the Hearer
stands off, the less need there is for his Oration to be Elegant.

Therefore Demonstrative Orations are most proper for Writing, the end whereof
is to be Read.

CHAP. XII.
Of the parts of an Oration, and their Order.

THe necessary Parts of an Oration are but two; Propositions, and Proof; which
are as it were the Problem, and Demonstration.

The Proposition is the explication, or opening of the Matter to be proved.

And Proof is the Demonstration of the Matter propounded.

To these necessary parts, are sometimes added two other, tho Proeme and the
Epilogue, neither of which are any proof.

So that in some, there be four parts of an Oration; the Proeme, the
Proposition, or (as others call it) the Narration, the Proofs (which contain
Confirmation, Confutation, Amplification, and Diminution;) and the Epilogue.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Proem.

THe Proem is the Beginning of an Oration, and, as it were, the preparing of
the way before one enter into it.

In some kinds of Orations it resembles the Prelude of Musicians, who first
play what they list, and afterward the Tune they intended.

In other kinds it resembles the Prologue of a Play, that contains the Argument.

Proems of the first sort, are most proper for Demonstrative Orations; in which
a Man is free to foretell, or not, what points he will insist upon; and for
the most part it is better not: because when a Man has not obliged himself to a
certain matter, Digression will seem Variety: but if he have engaged himself,
Variety will be accounted Digression.

In Demonstratives the matter of the Proem consists in the Praise or
Dispraise of some Law or Custom, or in Exhortation, or Dehortation; or in
something that serves to incline the Hearer to the purpose.

Proems of the second kind are most proper for Judicial Orations. For as the
Prologue in a Dramatick, and the Exordium in an Epique Poem, sets first in
few words the Argument of the Poem: so in a Judicial Oration the Orator ought
to exhibit a Model of his Oration, that the mind of the Hearer may not be
suspended, and for want of foresight, err or wander.

Whatsoever else belongs to a Proem, is drawn from one of these four; From the
Speaker, From the Adversary, From the Hearer, or from the Matter.

From the Speaker and Adversary are drawn into Proems such Criminations and
Purgations as belong not to the cause.

To the Defendant it is necessary in the Proem to answer to the accusations of
his Adversary; that those being cleared, he may have a more favorable entrance
to the rest of his Oration.

But to the Plaintiff it is better to cast his Criminations all into the
Epilogue, that the Judge may the more easily remember them.

From the Hearer and from the Matter are drawn into the Proem such things as
serve to make the Hearer favorable, or angry; attentive, or nor attentive, as
need shall require.

And Hearers use to be attentive to persons that are reputed good; to things
that are of great Consequence, or that concern thomselves, or that are strange,
or that delight.

But to make the Hearer attentive, is not the part of the proeme only, but of
any other part of the Oration, and rather of any other part, than of the
proeme. For the Hearer is every where more remiss than in the beginning. And
therefore wheresoever there is need, the Orator must make appear both the
probity of his own person, and that the matter in hand is of great Consequence;
or that it concerns the Hearer; or that it is new; or that it is delightful.

He that will have the Hearer attentive to him, but not to the Cause, must on
the other side make it seem that the matter is a trifle, without relation to
the Hearer, common, and tedious.

That the Hearer may be favorable to the Speaker, one of two things is
required; that he love him, or that he pity them.

In Demonstrative Orations, he that praises shall have the Hearer favorable if
he think himself, or his own manners, or course of life, or any thing he loves,
comprehended in the same praise.

On the contrary, he that dispraises, shall be heard favorably, if the Hearer
find his Enemies, or their courses, or any thing he hates, involved in the same
dispraise.

The Proeme of a Deliberative Oration is taken from the same things, from which
are taken the Proemes of Judicial Orations. For the matter of a Deliberative
Oration needs not that natural proeme, by which is shown what we are to speak
of; for that is already known: the proeme in these, being made only for the
Speakers, or Adversaries sake; or to make the Matter appear great, or little,
as one would have it, and is therefore to be taken from the persons of the
Plaintiff or Defendant; or from the Hearer, or from the Matter, as in Orations
Judicial.

CHAP. XIV.
Places of Crimination, and Purgation.

1. ONe is from the removal of ill Opinion in the Hearer, imprinted in him by
the Adversary, or otherwise.

2. Another from this, That the thing done is not hurtful, or not to him, or
not so much, or not unjust, or not great, or not dishonorable.

3. A Third from the Recompense, as, I did him harm, but withal I did him
honor.

4. A Fourth from the Excuse; as, It was Error, Mischance, or Constraint.

5. A Fifth from the Intention; as, One thing was done, another meant.

6. A Sixth from the Comprehension of the Accuser; as, What I have done, the
Accuser has done the same; or his Father, Kinsman, or Friend.

7. From the Comprehension of those that are in Reputation; as, What I did,
such, and such have done the same, who nevertheless are good Men.

8. From Comparison with such as have been falsely accused, or wrongfully
suspected, and nevertheless found upright.

9. From Recrimination; as, The Accuser is a man of ill life, and therefore not
to be believed.

10. From that the Judgment belongs to another Place, or Time; as, I have
already answered, or am to answer elsewhere to this Matter.

11. From Crimination of the Crimination; as, It serves only to ^e^vert
Indgment.

12. A Twelfth, which is common both to Crimination and Purgation, and is taken
from some sign; as Teucer is not to be believed, because his Mother was Priam's
Sister. On the other side, Teucer is to be believed, because his Father was
Priam's Enemy.

13. A Thirteenth, proper to Crimination only, from praise and dispraise mixed;
as, To praise small things, and blame great ones; or to praise in many words,
and blame with effectual ones; or to praise many things that are good, and then
add one evil, but a great one.

14. A Fourteenth, coming both to Crimination and Purgation, is taken from the
interpretation of the fact: for he that purges himself interprets the fact
always in the best sense; and he that Criminates, always in the worst; as when
Ulysses said, Diomedes chose him for his Companion, as the most able of the
Grecians, to aid him in his exploit: but his Adversary said, He chose him for
his cowardice, as the most unlikely to share with him in the Honor.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Narration.

THe Narration is not always continued and of one Piece; but sometimes, as in
Demonstratives, interrupted, and dispersed through the whole Oration.

For there being in a Narration something that falls not under Art; as namely,
the Actions themselves, which the Orator inventeth not; he must therefore bring
in the Narration of them where he best may. As for Example, if being to praise
a Man, you would make a Narration of all his Acts immediately from the
beginning, and without interruption, you will find it necessary afterward to
repeat the same Acts again, while from some of them you praise his Valor, and
from others his Wisdom; whereby your Oration shall have less variety, and shall
less please.

It Is not necessary always that the Narration be short. The true measure of it
must be taken from the matter that is to be laid open.

In the Narration, as often as may be, it is good to insert somewhat commendable
in ones self, and blameable in ones Adversary: As, I advised him, but he would
take no Counsel.

In Narrations, a Man is to leave out whatsoever breeds compassion, indignation
in the Hearer besides the purpose; as Ulysses in Homer, relating his Travels to
Alcinous, to move compassion in him, is so long in it, that it consists of
diverse Books: but when he comes home, tells the same to his Wife in thirty
Verses, leaving out what might make her sad.

The Narration ought also to be in such words as argue the Manners; that is,
some virtuous or vicious habit in him of whom we speak, although it be not
expressed; As, setting his Arms a kenbold, he answered, etc. by which is
insinuated the Pride of him that so answered.

In an Oration a Man does better to show his affection than his Judgment: this
is, It Is better to say, I like this; than to say, This is better. For by the
one you would seem wise, by the other good. But favor follows Goodness;
whereas Wisdom procures Envy.

But if this Affection seem incredible, then either a reason must be rendered,
as did Antigone. For when she had said, She loved her Brother better than her
Husband, or Children; she added, for Husband and Children I may have more; but
another Brother I cannot, my Parents being both dead. Or else a Man must use
this form of speaking; I know this affection of mine seems strange to you; but
nevertheless it is such. For it is not easily believed, that any Man has a mind
to do any thing that is not for his own good.

Besides in a Narration, not only the Actions themselves; but the Passions, and
signs that accompany them, are to be discovered.

And in his Narration a Man should make himself and his Adversary be considered
for such, and such, as soon, and as covertly as he can.

A Narration may have need sometimes not to be in the beginning.

In Deliberative Orations; that is, where soever the question is of things to
come; a Narration, which is always of things past, has no place: and yet things
past may be recounted, that Men may Deliberate better of the future: But that
is not as Narration, but Proof; for it is Example.

There may also be Narration in Deliberatives in that part where Crimination
and Praise come in: But that part is not Deliberative, but Demonstrative.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Proof, or Confirmation, and Refutation.

PRoofs are to be applied to something Controverted.

The Controversy in Judicial Orations is, Whether it has been done; whether it
has been hurtful; whether the matter be so great, and whether it be Just, or no.

In a question of Fact, one of the Parties of necessity is faulty (for
ignorance of the Fact is no excuse) and therefore the Fact is chiefly to be
insisted on.

In Demonstratives, the Fact for the most part is supposed: but the honor and
profit of the Fact are to be proved.

In Deliberatives, the question is, Whether the thing be like to be, or likely
to be so Great; or whether it be Just; or whether it be profitable.

Besides the application of the proof to the question, a Man ought to observe,
whether his Adversary have lied in any point without the Cause. For it is a sign
he does the same in the Cause.

The Proofs themselves are either Examples, or Enthymemes.

A Deliberative Oration, because it is of things to come, requires rather
Examples, than Enthymemes.

But a Judicial Oration, being of things past, which have a necessity in them,
and may be concluded Syllogistically, requires rather Enthymemes.

Enthymemes ought not to come too thick together: for they hinder one another
force by confounding the Hearer.

Nor ought a Man endeavor to prove every thing by Enthymeme, least like some
Philosophers, he collect what is known, from what is less known.

Nor ought a Man to use Enthymemes, when he would move the Hearer to some
affection: For seeing diverse Motions do mutually destroy or weaken one another,
he will lose either the Enthymeme, or the affection that he would move.

For the same reason, a Man ought not to use Enthymemes when he would express
Manners.

But whether he would move affection, or insinuate his Manners, he may withal
use Sentences.

A Deliberative Oration is more difficult than a Judicial, because it is of the
future, whereas a Judicial is of that which is past, and that consequently may
be known; and because it has principles, namely the Law; and it is easier to
prove from principles, than without.

Besides, a Deliberative Oration wants those helps of turning to the Adversary,
of speaking of himself; of raising passion.

He therefore that wants matter in a Deliberative Oration, let him bring in
some person to praise or dispraise.

And in Demonstratives he that has nothing to say in commendation or
discommendation of the principal party, let him praise or dispraise some body
else, as his Father, or Kinsman, or the very virtues or vices themselves.

He that wants not Proofs, let him not only prove strongly, but also insinuate
his Manners: but he that has no proof, let him nevertheless insinuate his
Manners. For a good man is as acceptable, as an exact Oration.

Of Proofs, those that lead to an absurdity, please better than those that are
direct or ostensive; because from the comparison of Contraries, namely, Truth
and Falsity, the force of the Syllogism does the better appear.

Confutation is also a part of proof.

And he that speaks first, puts it after his own proofs, unless the
Controversy contain many and different matters. And he that speaks last, puts
it before.

For it is necessary to make way for his own Oration, by removing the Objections
of him that spoke before. For the mind abhors both the Man, and his Oration,
that is damned before hand.

If a Man desire his Manners should appear well, (least speaking of himself he
become odious, or troublesome, or obnoxious to obtrectation; or speaking of
another, he seem contumelious, or scurrilous) let him introduce another person.

Last of all, least he cloy his Hearer with Enthymemes, let him vary them
sometimes with Sentences; but such as have the same force. As here is an
Enthymeme. If it be then the best time to make peace when the best conditions
of peace may be had, than the time is now, while our Fortune is entire. And
this is a Sentence of equal force to it. Wise Men make peace, while their
Fortune is entire.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Interrogations, Answers, and Jests.

THe times wherein it is fit to ask ones Adversary a question are chiefly four.

1. The first is, when of two Propositions that conclude an Absurdity, he has
already uttered one; and we would by Interrogation draw him to confess the
other.

2. The Second, when of two Propositions that conclude an Absurdity, one is
manifest of it self, and the other likely to be fetched out by a question; then
the Interrogation will be seasonable; and the absurd Conclusion is presently to
be inferred, without adding that Proposition which is manifest.

3. The third, when a Man would make appear that his Adversary does contradict
himself.

4. The Fourth, when a Man would take from his Adversary such shifts as these,
In some sort it is so; In some sort it is not so.

Out of these Cases it is not fit to Interrogate. For he whose question succeeds
not, is thought vanquished.

To equivocal questions a Man ought to answer fully, and not to be too brief.

To Interrogations which we foresee tend to draw from us an Answer, contrary
to our purpose, we must, together with our Answer, presently give an Answer to
the objection which is employed in the question.

And where the question exacteth an answer that concludes against us, we must
together with our answer presently distinguish.

Jests are dissolved by serious and grave discourse: and grave discourse is
deluded by Jests.

The several kinds of Jests are set down in the Art of Poetry.

Whereof one kind is Ironia, and tends to please ones self.

The other is Scurrility, and tends to please others.

The latter of these has in it a kind of baseness: the former may become a Man
of good breeding.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Epilogue.

THe Epilogue must consist of one of these four things.

Either of inclining the Judge to favor his own, or disfavour the Adversaries
side: For then when all is said in the cause, is the best season to praise, or
dispraise the Parties.

Or of Amplification or Diminution. For when it appears what is good or evil,
then is the time to show how great, or how little that good or evil is.

Or in moving the Judge to Anger, Love, or other Passion. For when it is
manifest of what kind, and how great the good or evil is, then it will be
opportune to excite the Judge.

Or of Repetition, that the Judge may remember what has been said.

Repetition consists in the matter, and the manner. For the Orator must show,
that he has performed what he promised in the beginning of his Oration, and
how: Namely, by comparing his Arguments one by one with his Adversaries,
repeating them in the same order they were spoken.

FINIS.
THE ART OF Rhetoric Plainly set forth; with Pertinent EXAMPLES For the more
easy understanding and Practice of the same.

By Tho. Hobbes, of Malmsbury.

LONDON. Printed, for W. Crook. 1681.

THE ART OF RHETORIC.
Rhetoric is an Art of speaking finely.

It has two parts.

1. Garnishing of speech, called Elocution.

2. Garnishing of the manner of utterance called Pronunciation.

Garnishing of speech is the first part of Rhetoric, whereby the speech it
self is beautified and made fine.

It is either,

1. The fine manner of words, called a Trope, or,

2. The fine shape or frame of speech, called a Figure.

The fine manner of words is a garnishing of Speech, whereby one word is drawn
from his first proper signification, to another; as in this sentence: Sin lies
at the door: where Sin is put for the punishment of sin adjoined unto it: Lies
at the door signifies at hand; as that which lies at the Door, is ready to be
brought in.

This changing of words was first found out by necessity, for the want of
words; afterward confirmed by Delight, because such words are pleasant and
gracious to the ear. Therefore this change of signification must be shamefaced,
and, as it were, maidenly, that it may seem rather to be led by the hand to
another signification, to be driven by force unto the same: yet sometimes this
fine manner of Speech swerveth from this perfection, and then it is,

Either

1. The abuse of this fine Speech, called Katachresis, or

2. The excess of this fineness, called Hyperbole.

Be not too just, nor too wicked: which speech, although it seem very hard, yet
it does not, without some fineness of Speech, utter thus much, That one seek
not a righteousness beyond the Law of God; and that when none can live without
all sin, yet that they take heed that sin bear not Dominion over them, As, My
Tears are my Meat day and night. Those that hate me are mo in number, than the
Hairs of my Head. Both which do utter by an express of Speech, a great sorrow,
and a great number of Enemies.

The abuse of Speech, is, when the change of Speech is hard, strange, and
unwonted, as in the first example.

The excess of Speech is, when the change of signification is very high and
lofty, as in the second Example, and Ps. 6. 7.

But the excellency, or fineness of Words, or Tropes, is most excellent, when
diverse are,

Shut up in one; or,

Continued in many.

An Example of the first sort is in the 2 Kings: I pray thee, let me have a
double portion of thy Spirit: where by Spirit, is meant the gift of the Spirit;
and by thy Spirit, the gift of the Spirit like to thine.

The continuance of Tropes, called an Allegory, is, when one kind of Trope is
so continued; as, look with what kind of matter it be begun, with the same it
be ended. So in the 23 Psalm. The care of God toward his Church, is set forth
in the words proper to a Shepherd. So in the whole Book of Canticles, the sweet
conference of Christ and his Church, is set down by the words proper to the
Husband and the Wife. So old Age is set down by this garnishing of Speech,
Eccles. 12. 5, 6.

Hitherto of the properties of a fine manner of words, called a Trope.

Now the diverse sorts do follow.

They are those which note out,

1. No Comparison, and are with some Comparison; or,

2. No respect of Division, or some respect.

The first is double:

1. The change of name, called a Metonymie.

2. The mocking speech, called an Ironie.

The change of name, is where the name of a thing, is put for the name of a
thing agreeing with it.

It is double,

1. When the cause is put for the thing caused, and contrariwise,

2. When the thing to which any thing is adjoined, is put for the thing
adjoined; and contrariwise.

The change of name of the cause, is when,

Either the name of the Maker, or the name of the Matter, is put for the thing
made.

Of the Maker, when the finder out, or the Author of the thing, or the
instrument whereby the thing is done, is put for the thing made. So Moses is
put for his Writings: so Love is put for Liberality, or bestowing Benefits, the
fruit of Love: so Faith the Cause, is put for Religious serving of God, the
thing caused. Romans 1. So the tongue, the instrument of speech, is put for the
Speech it self. Rule thy Tongue, James 3.

Of the Matter: Thou art Dust, and to Dust shall thou return; that is, one made
of Dust.

Now on the other side, when the thing caused, or the effect is put for any of
these causes. So the Gospel of God is called the Power of God to Salvation;
That is, the instrument of the power of God. So Love is said to be bountiful;
because it causes one to be bountiful. S. Paul says, The Bread that we break,
is it not in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ? That is, an
instrument of the Communion of the Body of Christ. So, the Body is said to be
an earthly Tabernacle: That is, a Tabernacle made of Earth.

The change of Name, or Metonymie, where the Subject, or that which has any
thing adjoined, is put for the thing adjoined, or adjoynt. So the place is put
for those, or that in the place: Set thine House in an order: That is, thy
Household matters. It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorra: that is, the People
in Sodom and Gomorra. So Moses Chair is put for the Doctrine, taught in Moses
Chair. So, all Jericho and Jerusalem came out: That is, all the Men in Jericho
and Jerusalem. So, before, Sin was put for the punishment of Sin: Let his Blood
rest upon us and our Children: That is the punishment which shall follow his
Death. So Christ said, This is my Body, That is, a sign or Sacrament of my
Body. This Wine is the New Testament in my Blood; That is, a Sign or Seal of
the New Testament in my Blood. So John says, He saw the Spirit descending in
the likeness of a Dove: That is, the sign of the Spirit.

On the other side, the Adjunct is put for the thing to which it is adjoined.
As Christ is called our hope. 1 Tti. That is, on whom our hope did depend: So,
we are justified by Faith, That is, by Christ, applied by Faith: So, Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, That is, those things to which it is adjoined. Hope
for the things hoped for, Romans 8. 28. So in the Epist. to the Ephesians. The days
are evil: That is, the Manner, Conversation, and Deeds of Men in the days.

Hitherto of the Metonymie, or change of name.

Now follows the Mocking speech, or Ironie.

CHAP. II.
THe mocking Trope is, when one contrary is signified by another, as God said,
Man is like to one of us. So Christ says, sleep on; and yet by and by, Arise,
let us go: so Paul says, you are Wise, and I am a Fool.

This Trope is perceived, either by the contrariety of the Matter, or the
Manner of utterance, or both: so Elias said to the Prophets of Baal, Cry a
loud, etc. So the Jews said unto Christ; Hail, King of the Jews.

Hitherto appertains the passing by a thing, which yet with a certain
elegancy notes it: so Philemon, 19. That I say not, thou owe thy self unto
me.

Hitherto of the fineness of words which respect no division.

Now follows that which respects division, called Synechdoche.

A Synechdoche is when the name of the whole is given to the part; or the name
of the part to the whole.

And it is double;

1. When the whole is put for the Member, and contrarily.

2. When the General, or whole kind is put for the Special, or contrarily.

So S. John, Not only for our Sins, but for the Sins of the whole World. So
Righteousness, a Member of Goodness, is put for all goodness: so
Unrighteousness, is put for all manner of Sins.

Examples of the second sort, as these: So Israel is put for those of Juda
sometimes: So Nations for the Heathen: A Minister of Christ, for an Apostle of
Christ, Romans 1. A Minister put for a distributer, Romans 12.

On the other side, one sort or special is put for the whole sort, or general,
in the Examples following. In the Lords Prayer, Bread, one help of life, is put
for all helps: This day, one time, for all times: so Solomon says. The thing
of the day in his day; That is, the thing of the time, in his time.

So sometimes less is spoken, and yet more is understood; which is called
Diminution, or Meiosis: As James says, to him that knows how to do well, and
does not, it is Sin: That is, a great sin. So our Savior Christ says, If they
had not known, they had had no Sin: That is, no such great Sin as they have
now. Likewise the denial by Comparison: so Solomon says, Receive my Words, and
not Silver: That is, my words rather than Silver: so Paul says, I was sent to
Preach, and not to Baptize: That is, not so much to Baptize, as to Preach.

Hitherto of the fineness of Words, which note out no Comparison. Now follows
the fineness of words which notes out Comparison, called a Metaphor.

CHAP. III.
A Metaphor is when the like is signified by the like: as 1 Cor. The Apostle
says, Doctrine must be tried by Fire; That is, the evidence of the Word,
Spirit, trying Doctrine, as Fire does Metals. So Christ is said to Baptize with
Fire: where Fire is put for the power of the Holy Ghost, purging as Fire: so
Christ says, None shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but he that is Born of
the Holy Ghost and Water: so Paul calls himself the Father of the Corinths,
who said, That he begat them in Christ: so he calls Timothy and Titus his
Natural Sons in the Faith.

Hitherto of a Trope, or Garnishing of Speech in one word, where the Metaphor
is most usual; then the change of Name; then the Synechdoche; and last of all,
the Ironie. Now follows the fine Frame or shape of speech; called a Figure.

A Figure is a Garnishing of Speech; wherein the course of the same is changed
from the more simple and plain manner of speaking, unto that which is more full
of Excellency and Grace. For as in the fineness of Words, or a Trope, Words are
considered asunder by themselves: so in the fine shape or frame of Speech or a
Figure, the apt and pleasant joining together of many Words is noted.

The Garnishing of the Shape of Speech or a Figure, is Garnishing of Speech in
Words, or in a Sentence.

The Garnishing of Speech in Words, called Figura dictionis, is wherein the
Speech is Garnished by the pleasant and sweet sound of Words joined together.

This is either,

1. In the measure of sounds; or

2. In the repetition of sounds.

The measure of sounds is belonging either to,

1. Poets, with us called Rhymers; or,

2. Orators, with us called Eloquent Pleaders.

The first is the measure of sounds by certain and continual spaces: And it is
either,

1. Rhyme; or,

2. Verse.

Rhyme is the first sort, containing a certain measure of Syllables ending
alike, and these in the Mother Tongues are most fit for Psalms, Songs, or
Sonnets.

Verses are the second sort, containing certain Feet fitly placed.

A Foot is a measure framed by the length and shortness of Syllables: For the
several sorts whereof, as also of the verses of them, because we have no worthy
examples in our English Tongue, we judge the large handling of them should be
more curious than necessary.

The measure of sounds belonging to Orators is that which, as it is not
uncertain, so it differs altogether from rhyme and verse, and is very
changeable with it self. Therefore in that eloquent Speech you must altogether
leave rhyme and verse, unless you allege it for Authority and Pleasure.

In the Beginning of the Sentence little care is to be had, in the middle least
of all, and in the end chiefest regard is to be had, because the fall of the
Sentence is most marked, and therefore lest it fall out to be harsh and
unpleasant both to the mind and ear, there must be most variety and change.

Now this change must not be above six Syllables from the end, and that must be
set down in feet of two Syllables.

And thus much of garnishing of speech by the measure of sounds, rather to give
some taste of the same to the Readers, than to draw any to the curious and
unnecessary practice of it.

Now follows the repeating of sounds.

CHAP. IV.
REpetition of sounds is either of the Like, or the Unlike sound.

Of the Like, is either continued to the end of, or broken off from the same,
or a diverse sentence.

Continued to the end of the same sentence is, when the same sound is repeated
without any thing coming between, except a Parenthesis; that is, something put
in, without the which, notwithstanding the sentence is full. And it is a
joining of the same sound, as Romans 1. As Unrighteousness, Fornication,
Wickedness. And in the prayer of Christ, My God, my God. From Men by thine
hand, O Lord, from Men, etc. Psalm. 17.

Continued in a diverse Sentence is, either a Redoubling, called Anadyplosis;
or a pleasant climing, called Clymax.

Redoubling is when the same sound is repeated in the end of the former
Sentence, and the beginning of the Sentence following. As, Psalm. 9. 8. The Lord
also will be a refuge to the poor, a refuge, I say, in due time. Psalm. 81. 14.
For this God is our God. But more plain in Psalm. 8. As we have heard, so have
we seen in the City of our God. God will establish it for ever.

A pleasant climing is a redoubling continued by diverse degrees or steps of the
same sounds: As Romans 8. 17. If we be Children, we be Heirs, even Heirs of God,
annexed with Christ. Romans 8. 30. Whom he predestined, them also he called;
and whom he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he
glorified. Also Romans 9. 14. 15.

And hitherto of the same sound continued to the end.

Now follows the same sound broken off.

CHAP. V.
THE same sound broken off is a repetition of the same in the Beginning; or In
the end.

In the Beginning it is called Anaphora, a bringing of the same again; As Romans
8. 38.

Nor death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us etc. So likewise Ephesians. 4. 11. Some to be Apostles, some Preachers,
etc. So Gal. Nor Jew, nor Gentile, etc. So likewise Hebr. 11. 1. 2.

Repetition of the same sound in the end is called Epistrophe, a turning to the
same sound in the end. So Ezech. Behold greater Abominations than these.
Lament. 3. 41. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the
Heavens; we have sinned, and have rebelled therefore thou have not spared.

When both of these are joined together, it is called a coupling or Symplote.
As, 2 Cor. 6. 4. to the 11. But in all things we approve our selves, as the
Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, etc. See also 2 Cor. 22. 23.

Hitherto of the repetitions in the same place.

Now of those that do interchange their place.

They are either Epanalepsis, which signifies to take back; or Epanados which
signifies a turning to the same tune.

The first is when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the ending,
as My Son Absalom, my Son, 2 Samuel 19. 1.

Epanados is when the same sound is repeated in the beginning and the middle,
in the middle and the end, Ezech. 35. 6. I will prepare thee unto Blood, and
Blood shall pursue thee: except thou hate Blood, even Blood shall pursue thee.
And 2 These. 2. So that he that does sit as God, in the Temple of God, shows
himself that he is God.

Hitherto of the repetition of those sounds which are like.

Now of those that are unlike.

CHAP. VI.
UNlike A small changing of the name, as Paronomasia. A small changing of the
end or case, as Polypto^on.

A small change of name is, when a word by the change of one letter or
Syllable, the signification also is changed, As, Patience, Experience. Romans 5.
4. 19. We walk after the flesh, not War in the flesh. So by honor and
dishonor, as unknown and yet known.

A small changing of the end or case, is when words of the same beginning
rebound by diverse ends: Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death
has no more Power over him. He that does righteousness is righteous. If ye
know that he is Righteous, know ye that he that does righteously, is born of
him. And of both these there are many in the Scripture, but the Translations
cannot reach them.

Hitherto of the Garnishing of the shape of speech in words.

Now follows the Garnishing of the shape of speech in a sentence.

CHAP. VII.
GArnishing of the frame of speech in a sentence, is a Garnishing of the shape
of speech, or a figure; which for the forcible moving of affections, does after
a sort beautify the sense and very meaning of a sentence. Because it has in
it a certain manly Majesty, which far surpasses the soft delicacy or dainties
of the former figures.

It is either the Garnishing of speech Alone; or with others.

The Garnishing of speech alone, is when as the sentence is Garnished without
speech had to other. And it is either in regard of the Matter; or of the Person.

In regard of the Matter, it is either

1. A crying out, called Exclamation; or

2. A pulling or calling back of himself, called Revocation.

A crying out or Exclamation is the first, which is set forth by a word of
calling out: Sometimes of wonder, As, Romans 8. O the depth of the Judgments of
God! Psalm. 8. O Lord, how excellent is thy Name!

Sometimes of pity; also these words, Behold, Alas, Oh, be signs of this
figure: As, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which stonest the Prophets. Sometimes of
desperation; As, My Sin is greater than can be forgiven. Behold, thou drivest
me out, etc. Sometimes of wishing: As, O Lord of Hosts, how amiable are thy
Tabernacles? Sometimes of disdaining: As, Romans 7. in the end, O miserable
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin? Sometimes of
mocking: as they which said to our Savior Christ, Ah, thou that, etc.

Sometimes of cursing and detestation, as in David, Let their Table be made a
Snare, and bow down their Back always.

Also when this Figure is used in the end of a Sentence, it is called a
shooting out of the Voice, or Epiphonema; as when the sins of Jezabel were
spoken against, this is added at the end, Seemed it a little to her to do thus
and thus.

So after the high setting forth of the Name of God, David shuts up his
praise with this: Blessed be his glorious Name, and let all the Earth be filled
with his Glory. Sometimes here is used a certain liberty of speech, wherein is
a kind of secret crying out: As Peter, Act. 3. says: Ye Men of Israel, hear
these words. And Paul, 1 Cor. 11. Would to God you could suffer a little my
foolishness, and indeed ye suffer me.

Thus much of crying out.

Now follows the Figure of calling back, or Revocation.

Revocation is when any thing is called back, and it is as it were a cooling
and quenching of the heat of the exclamation that went before.

And this is either a Correction of ones self, called Epanorthrosis; a holding
of ones peace, called Aposiopesis.

Epanorthrosis is correction, when something is called back that went before:
as Paul corrects his doubtfulness of Agrippa's belief, when he says,
Believe thou King Agrippa, I know thou believe. So, 1 Cor. 15. I labored
more abundantly than they all, yet not I, etc.

A keeping of silence or Aposiopesis is, when the course of the sentence bygon
is so stayed, as thereby some part of the sentence not being uttered, may be
understood. So our Savior Christ says, My Soul is heavy: what shall I say?
John 12. 27.

Thus much of a Figure Garnishing the speech alone in regard of the matter.

Now follows the Garnishing of the speech alone in regard of the person.

CHAP. VIII.
GArnishing of the speech alone in regard of the person is double.

Either in turning to the person, called Apostrophe, or feigning of the person,
called, Prosopopoeia.

Apostrophe or turning to the person, is when the speech is turned to another
person, than the speech appointed did intend or require. And this Apostrophe or
turning is diversely seen, according to the diversity of persons. Sometimes it
turns to a Man's person; As David in the 6 Psalm, where having gathered
arguments of his safety, turns hastily to the wicked, saying, Away from me,
all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the Voice of my petition.

Sometimes from a Man to God, as Ps. 3. David being dismayed with the number of
his Enemies, turns himself to God, saying: But thou art my Buckler, etc.

Sometimes to unreasonable Creatures without sense. Esai. 1. and Esai. 20. 1.

Prosopopoeia or a feigning of the person, is whereby we do feign another
person speaking in our speech; and it is double; Imperfect, and Perfect.

Imperfect is when the speech of another person is set down lightly and
indirectly, As in the Psalm. 10. David, brings in the wicked, Who say unto my
Soul, Fly as the Bird unto yonder hill.

A perfect Prosopopoeia is when the whole feigning of the person is set down in
our speech, with a fit entering into the same, and a leaving it off. So Wisd.
Pro. 8. Where the entrance is in the first Verses, her speech in the rest of
the Chapter.

Hitherto of the figures of sentences concerning one speaking alone.

Now follow the other, which concern the speeches of two.

CHAP. IX.
THey which concern the speeches of two, are either in Asking; or in Answering.

That of Asking, is either in Deliberation; or, in preventing an Objection.

Deliberation is when we do ever now and then ask, as it were, reasons of our
consultation, whereby the mind of the hearers wavering in doubt, does set down
some great thing.

This deliberation is either in Doubting; or in Communication.

A Doubting is a deliberating with our selves, as Paul. 1. Phil. 22. doubting
whether it were better to dye than to live, he Garnisheth his speech on this
manner: For I am greatly in doubt on both sides, desiring to be loosed, and to
be with Christ, which is best of all: nevertheless, to abide in the Flesh is
more needful for you.

Communication is a deliberation with others. Gal. 3. 1, 2. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, etc.

And hitherto of the Figure of speech between two, called Deliberation.

Now follows the Figure of speech between two, called the preventing of an
Objection, or occupation.

Occupation is when we do bring an objection, and yield an answer unto it:
Therefore this speech between two in the first part, is called the Setting down
of the Objection or Occupation. In the latter part, an Answering of the
Objection, or the Subjection: as Romans 6. What shall we say then? Shall we
continue still in sin that grace may abound? In which words is set down the
Objection: the Answering in these words, God forbid. And here this must be
marked, that the Objection is many times wanting, which must be wisely supplied
by considering the occasion and answer of it: As, 1 Timothy 5. They will Marry,
having condemnation. Now lest any might say, what, for Marrying? He answers:
No, For denying their first Faith.

Hitherto of the Figures of Asking.

Now follows the Figures of Answering.

They are either in Suffering of a deed, called Permission; or, Granting of an
argument, called Concession.

Suffering of a deed or permission is, when mockingly we give liberty to any
deed; being never so filthy, as Rev. Let him that is filthy be filthy still.
And 1 Cor. 14. If any be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

Concession or granting of an argument is, when an argument is mockingly
yielded unto, as, Eccle. 11. Rejoice, O young Man in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee, etc.

Although the Rules of Sophistry be needless for them that be perfect in
Logic; yet because the knowledge of them brings some profit to young
beginners, both for the ready answering of the subtle arguments, and the better
practicing of Logic and Rhetoric, we have thought good to turn it into the
English Tongue.
SOphistry is the feigned art of Enleches, or colored reasons.

A colorable reason, or Elench, is a show of reason to deceive withal.

It is either when the deceit lies in the Words; or in the default of Logic,
called a Sophism.

In words is, either when the deceit lies in one word; or in Words joined
together. If it were, it should be, Whosoever.

In one word, is either the darkness of a word; or, the doubtfulness of a word.

The darkness of a word, or an insolency deceives, when by a reason the
meaning is not understood, whether the strangeness be through the oldness,
newness, or swelling vanity of the words; and of the last sort, is that spoken
of in 2 Pet. 2. 18.

By this fallacy the Papists conclude, the Fathers to be on their side, for
deserving by good works.

Whosoever says Man's merits are Crowned, they say Man's works do deserve.

But the Fathers say, Man's merits are Crowned.

Therefore the Fathers say, Man's works do deserve.

Where Merits is an old word, put for any works done under the hope of reward
whether it come by desert, or freedom of promise.

Doubtfulness of a word, Likeness of name, is either called Homonymia; or by a
Trope or fineness of speech.

The Likeness of name, or Homonymia, is when one word is given to signify
diverse things: As,

He that believes shall be saved.

The Hypocrites to whom our Savior Christ would not commit himself, believed,

Therefore they shall be saved.

Where Faith does note out both a justifying Faith, and a dead Faith.

Doubtfulness by a Trope, is when a word is taken properly, which is meant
figuratively, or contrarily: As,

That which Christ says is true.

Christ says that Bread is his Body.

Therefore it is true.

Where by body is meant the Sign or Sacrament of his body.

Unto the first, a perfect Logician would answer, that the Proposition is not
an Axiom necessarily true, according to the Rule of truth, because of the
doubtfulness of the old and new signification of merit. And if the word be far
worn out of use, that it be not understood, then the answer must be, I
understand it not, or put your Axiom in plain words.

To the second, he would answer, that the Proposition or first part, is not
according to the Rule of Righteousness, because the proper Subject and Adjunct
are not joined together: which has justifying faith, or believing sincerely,
shall be saved; and then the assumption being in the same sense inferred, is
false.

Unto the third he would answer, that the Assumption is not necessarily true,
because if the word Body be taken properly, it is not then true that is set
down: but if it be taken figuratively, it is true, and therefore would bid him
make the Assumption necessarily true, and then say, Christ says in proper
words, It is my Body; and then it is false.

Hitherto of the fallacies in single words.

Now of those that are joined together.

It is either Amphibolia, or the doubtfulness of speech: or, Exposition, or
unapt setting down of the reason.

The first is, when there is doubtfulness in the frame of speech; as thus, If
any obey not our word by a Letter, note him: where some refer by a Letter, to
the first part of the Sentence, and some to the latter, where the signification
of the word, and right pointing does show, that it must be referred to the
first.

The answer is, that the right and wise placing of the Sentence is perverted.

Unapt setting down of the Reason, is, when the parts of the Question and the
reasons entreated, is not set down in fit words: as,

All sin is evil.

Every Child of God does sin.

Therefore every Child of God is evil.

Here the answer according to Logic, is that the assumption does not take the
argument out of the proposition, but puts in another thing, and so it is no
right Frame of concluding, as appears by the definition of the assumption.

Hitherto of the deceits of reason which lie in words.

Now of the default of Logic, called Sophisme.

It is either General, or Special.

The General are those which cannot be referred to any part of Logic.

They are either begging of the question, called the Petition of the principle,
or bragging of no proof.

Begging of the Question is when nothing is brought to prove but the Question,
or that which is doubtful: As,

That Righteousness which is both by Faith and works, does justify.

But this Righteousness, is inherent Righteousness: Ergo.

Here the Proposition in effect is nothing but a Question.

If together with the Blood of Christ we must make perfect satisfaction for our
sins, before we come to Heaven.

Then there must be Purgatory for them that die without perfection.

But the first is so: Ergo. Where the argument they bring is as doubtful, and
needs as much proof as the Question.

The answer is this out of the definition of the Syllogism, that there is no
new argument invented, therefore it cannot be a certain frame of concluding.

Bragging of no proof, is when that which is brought is too much, called
Redounding.

It is either impertinent to another matter called Heterogenium; or a vain
repetition, called Tautologia.

Impertinent, or not to the purpose, is when any thing is brought for a proof,
which is nothing near to the matter in hand, whereunto the common Proverb
gives answer; I ask you of Cheese, you answer me of Chalk.

A vain repetition is, when the same thing in effect, though not in words, is
repeated; as they that after long time of Prayer say, Let us pray. And this
fallacy our Savior Christ condemns in prayer, Mat. 5. and this is a fault
in Method.

Special are those which may be referred to certain parts of Logic, and they
are of two sorts.

Such as are referred to the spring of reasons, called Invention, or to
Judgment.

Those referred to Invention are, when any thing is put for a reason, which is
not, as no cause for a cause, no effect for an effect, and so of the rest.

In the Distribution this is a proper Fallacy, when any thing simply or
generally granted, thereby is inferred a certain respect or special not meant
nor intended: as,

He that says, there are not seven Sacraments, says true.

He that says, there are only three, says, there are not seven.

Therefore he that says, there are three, says true.

The right answer is, that the Proposition is not necessarily true, for there
may be a way to say, there are not seven, and yet affirm an untruth.

Fallacies of judgment are those that are referred to the judgment of one
sentence, or of more.

Of one Sentence, either to the Proprieties of an Axiom; or to the sorts.

To the Proprieties, as when a true is put for a false, and contrarily: and
Affirmative for a Negative, and contrarily. So some take the words of Saint
John, I do not say concerning it, that you shall not pray, for no denial; when
as it does deny to pray for that sin.

To the sorts are referred, either to the Simple, or Compound.

The first when the General is taken for the Special, and contrarily. So the
Papists by this fallacy do answer to that general saying of Paul; We are
justified by Faith without the works of the Law. Which they understand of works
done before Faith, when that was never called in doubt.

The fallacies which are referred to a compound Axiom, are those which are
referred either to a disjoined, or knitting Axiom.

To a disjoined Axiom when the parts indeed are not disjoined: As, Solomon was
either a King, or did bear Rule.

To a Knitting Axiom is, when the parts are not necessarily knit together,
(...)

If Rome be one Fire, the Popes Chair is burn^

And hitherto of the first sort of Fallacy referred to judgment.

Now follows the second.

And they be either those that are refer^red to a Syllogism; or to Method.

And they again are General, and Special

General which are referred to the general properties of a Syllogism.

It is either when all the parts are Denied or are Particular.

All parts denied: As, No Pope is a Devil. No man is a Devil. Therefore. No man
is a Pope.

And this must be answered, that it is no^ according to the definition of a
Negativ^ syllogism, which must have always one Affirmative.

All particular: As,

Some unlawful thing must be suffered, (...) namely that which cannot be taken
away.

The Stews in some unlawful thing.

Therefore the Stews must be suffered.

This is answered by the definition of ^ special syllogism, which is that has
one part general.

The special are those which are Simple, or Compound.

The Simple is of two sorts.

The first is more Plain.

The second less Plain.

More plain is when the assumption is denied, or the question is not
particular: As,

Every Apostle may Preach abroad:

Some Apostle is not a Pope,

Therefore

Some Pope may not Preach abroad. Also,

Every Pope is a Lord:

Some Pope may give an universal license.

Therefore every Lord may give an universal license.

Less plain has one fallacy in common, when the proposition is special. As,

Some Player is a Rogue:

Every Vagabond is Rogue,

Therefore every Player is a Vagabond. Also,

Some Player is a Rogue:

Every Vagabond is a Player.

Therefore every Player is a Rogue.

The fallacy of the first kind is when all the parts be affirmative: As,

All Paul's Bishops were ordained for unity.

All Archbishops be ordained for unity.

Therefore all Archbishops are Paul's Bishops.

The fallacy of the second kind is when the assumption is denied: As,

Every Puritan is a Christian.

No Lord Bishop is a Puritan,

Therefore no Lord Bishop is a Christian.

Hitherto of the fallacies referred to a simple Syllogism.

Now follow those which are referred to a compound, which are those which are
referred either to the Connexive, or to the disjoined.

Of the first sort one is when the first part or antecedent is denied, that the
second or consequent may be so likewise: As,

If any Man have two Benefices, he may escape unpunished at the Bishops hands.

But he may not have two Benefices,

Therefore

He may not escape unpunished at the Bishops hands.

The second part is affirmed, that the first may be so also. As,

If every ignorant Minister were put out of the Church, and a Preacher in his
place, we should have good order.

But we have good order, Therefore

Every ignorant Minister is put out of the Church; and a Preacher in his place.

Of those referred to the disjoined, the first is, when all the parts of the
Disjunction or Proposition are not affirmed: As,

Every ignorant Minister is to be allowed, or not.

But he is not.

Therefore he is.

The second kind is when the second part of the copulative negative Axiom is
denied, that the first may be so; As,

A Non-Resident, is either a faithful, or unfaithful Minister.

But he is unfaithful, Ergo, etc.

And thus much of the fallacies in a Syllogism.

The fallacy in Method is when, to deceive withal, the end is set in the
beginning, the special before the general, good order be gone, confounded: And
finally when darkness, length and hardness is labored after.

PINIS.
A DIALOGUE Between A PHILOSOPHER AND A STVDENT, OF The Common-Laws of England.
Of the Law of Reason.
Law. WHat makes you say, that the Study of the Law is less Rational, than the
study of the Mathematics?


Phylosoph. I say not that, for all study is Rational, or nothing worth; but I
say that the great Masters of the Mathematics do not so often err as the great
Professors of the Law.


Law. If you had applied your reason to the Law, perhaps you would have been of
another mind.


Ph. In whatsoever Study, I examine whether my Inference be rational, and have
looked over the Titles of the Statutes from Magna Charta downward to this
present time. I left not one unread, which I thought might concern my self,
which was enough for me that meant not to plead for any but my self. But I did
not much examine which of them was more, or less rational; because I read them
not to dispute, but to obey them, and saw in all of them sufficient reason for
my obedience, and that the same reason, though the Statutes themselves were
changed, remained constant. I have also diligently read over Littleton's Book
of Tenures, with the Commentaries thereupon of the Renowned Lawyer Sir Ed.
Coke, in which I confess I found great subtility, not of the Law, but of
Inference from Law, and especially from the Law of Humane Nature, which is the
Law of reason: and I confess that it is truth which he says in the Epilogue to
his Book; that by Arguments and Reason in the Law, a Man shall sooner come to
the certainty and knowledge of the Law: and I agree with Sir Edw. Coke, who
upon that Text farther; That Reason is the Soul of the Law, and upon sect. 138.
Nihil quod est Rationi contrarium est licitum; that is to say, nothing is Law
that is against Reason: and that Reason is the life of the Law, nay the Common
Law it self is nothing else but Reason. And upon Sect. 21. Aequitas est
perfecta quaedam Ratio, quae Jus scriptum interpretatur and emendat, nulla
scriptura comprehensa, sed solus in vera Ratione consistens. i. e. Equity is a
certain perfect Reason that interprets and amendeth the Law written, it self
being unwritten, and consisting in nothing else but right Reason. When I
consider this, and find it to be true, and so evident as not to be denied by
any Man of right sense, I find my own reason at a stand; for it frustrates all
the Laws in the World: for upon this ground any Man, of any Law whatsoever may
say it is against Reason, and thereupon make a pretense for his disobedience. I
pray you clear this passage, that we may proceed.


La. I clear it thus out of Sir Edw. Coke. I Inst. Sect. 138. that this is to
be understood of an artificial perfection of Reason gotten by long Study,
Observation and Experience, and not of every Man's natural Reason; for Nemo
nascitur Artifex. This Legal Reason is summa Ratio; and therefore if all the
Reason that is dispersed into so many several heads were united into one, yet
could he not make such a Law as the Law of England is, because by so many
successions of Ages it has been fined and refined by an infinite number of
Grave and Learned Men.


Ph. This does not clear the place, as being partly obscure, and partly untrue,
that the Reason which is the Life of the Law, should be not Natural, but
Artificial I cannot conceive. I understand well enough, that the knowledge of
the Law is gotten by much study, as all other Sciences are, which when they are
studied and obtained, it is still done by Natural, and not by Artificial
Reason. I grant you that the knowledge of the Law is an Art, but not that any
Art of one Man, or of many how wise soever they be, or the work of one and more
Artificers, how perfect soever it be, is Law. It is not Wisdom, but Authority
that makes a Law. Obscure also are the words Legal Reason; there is no Reason
in Earthly Creatures, but Humane Reason; but I suppose that he means, that the
Reason of a Judge, or of all the Judges together (without the King) is that
Summa Ratio, and the very Law, which I deny, because none can make a Law but he
that has the Legislative Power. That the Law has been fined by Grave and
Learned Men, meaning the Professors of the Law is manifestly untrue, for all
the Laws of England have been made by the Kings of England, consulting with the
Nobility and Commons in Parliament, of which not one of twenty was a Learned
Lawyer.


Law. You speak of the Statute Law, and I speak of the Common Law.


Ph. I speak generally of Law.


La. Thus far I agree with you, that Statute Law taken away, there would not be
left, either here, or any where, any Law at all that would conduce to the Peace
of a Nation; yet Equity, and Reason which Laws Divine and Eternal, which oblige
all Men at all times, and in all places, would still remain, but be Obeyed by
few: and though the breach of them be not punished in this World, yet they will
be punished sufficiently in the World to come. Sir Edw. Coke for drawing to the
Men of his own Profession as much Authority as lawfully he might, is not to be
reprehended; but to the gravity and Learning of the Judges they ought to have
added in the making of Laws, the Authority of the King, which has the
Sovereignty: for of these Laws of Reason, every Subject that is in his Wits, is
bound to take notice at his Peril, because Reason is part of his Nature, which
he continually carries about with him, and may read it, if he will.


Ph. It Is very true; and upon this ground, if I pretend within a Month, or two
to make my self able to perform the Office of a Judge, you are not to think it
Arrogance; for you are to allow to me, as well as to other Men, my pretense to
Reason, which is the Common Law (remember this that I may not need again to put
you in mind, that Reason is the Common Law) and for Statute Law, seeing it is
Printed, and that there be Indexes to point me to every matter contained in
them, I think a Man may profit in them very much in two Months.


Law. But you will be but an ill Pleader.


Ph. A Pleader commonly thinks he ought to say all he can for the Benefit of
his Client, and therefore has need of a faculty to wrest the sense of words
from their true meaning; and the faculty of Rhetoric to seduce the Jury, and
sometimes the Judge also, and many other Arts, which I neither have, nor intend
to study.


La. But let the Judge how good soever he thinks his Reasoning, take heed that
he depart not too much from the Letter of the Statute: for it is not without
danger.


Ph. He may without danger recede from the Letter, if he do not from the
meaning and sense of the Law, which may be by a Learned Man, (such as Judges
commonly are) easily found out by the Preamble, the time when it was made, and
the Incommodities for which it was made: but I pray tell me, to what end were
Statute-Laws ordained, seeing the Law of Reason ought to be applied to every
Controversy that can arise.


La. You are not ignorant of the force of an irregular Appetite to Riches, to
Power, and to sensual Pleasures, how it Masters the strongest Reason, and is
the root of Disobedience, Slaughter, Fraud, Hypocrisy, and all manner of evil
habits; and that the Laws of Man, though they can punish the fruits of them,
which are evil Actions, yet they cannot pluck up the roots that are in the
Heart. How can a Man be Indicted of Avarice, Envy, Hypocrisy, or other vicious
Habit, till it be declared by some Action, which a Witness may take notice of;
the root remaining, new fruit will come forth till you be weary of punishing,
and at last destroy all Power that shall oppose it.


Ph. What hope then is there of a constant Peace in any Nation, or between one
Nation, and another?


La. You are not to expect such a Peace between two Nations, because there is
no Common Power in this World to punish their Injustice: mutual fear may keep
them quiet for a time, but upon every visible advantage they will invade one
another, and the most visible advantage is then, when the one Nation is
obedient to their King, and the other not; but Peace at home may then be
expected durable, when the common people shall be made to see the benefit they
shall receive by their Obedience and Adhaesion to their own Sovereign, and the
harm they must suffer by taking part with them, who by promises of Reformation,
or change of Government deceive them. And this is properly to be done by
Divines, and from Arguments not only from Reason, but also from the Holy
Scripture.


Ph. This that you say is true, but not very much to that I aim at by your
Conversation, which is to inform my self concerning the Laws of England:
therefore I ask you again, what is the end of Statute-Laws?


Of Sovereign Power.
La. I say then that the scope of all Humane Law is Peace, and Justice in every
Nation amongst themselves, and defense against Foreign Enemies.


Ph. But what is Justice?


La. Justice is giving to every Man his own.


Ph. The Definition is good, and yet it is Aristotle's; what is the Definition
agreed upon as a Principle in the Science of the Common Law?


La. The same with that of Aristotle.


Ph. See you Lawyers how much you are beholding to a Philosopher, and it is but
reason, for the more General and Noble Science, and Law of all the World is
true Philosophy, of which the Common Law of England is a very little part.


La. It Is so, if you mean by Philosophy nothing but the Study of Reason, as I
think you do.


Ph. When you say that Justice gives to every Man his own, what mean you by his
own? How can that be given me which is my own already? or, if it be not my own,
how can Justice make it mine?


La. Without Law every thing is in such sort every Man's, as he may take,
possess, and enjoy without wrong to any Man, every thing, Lands, Beasts,
Fruits, and even the bodies of other Men, if his Reason tell him he cannot
otherwise live securely: for the dictates of Reason are little worth, if they
tended not to the preservation and improvement of Men's Lives, seeing then
without Humane Law all things would be Common, and this Community a cause of
Incroachment, Envy, Slaughter, and continual War of one upon another, the same
Law of Reason Dictates to Mankind (for their own preservation) a distribution
of Lands, and Goods, that each Man may know what is proper to him, so as none
other might pretend a right thereunto, or disturb him in the use of the same.
This distribution is Justice, and this properly is the same which we say is one
owns: by which you may see the great Necessity there was of Statute Laws, for
preservation of all Mankind. It is also a Dictate of the Law of Reason, that
Statute Laws are a necessary means of the safety and well being of Man in the
present World, and are to be Obeyed by all Subjects, as the Law of Reason ought
to be Obeyed, both by King and Subjects, because it is the Law of God.


Ph. All this is very Rational; but how can any Laws secure one Man from
another? When the greatest part of Men are so unreasonable, and so partial to
themselves as they are, and the Laws of themselves are but a dead Letter, which
of it self is not able to compel a Man to do otherwise than himself pleases,
nor punish, or hurt him when he has done a mischief.


La. By the Laws, I mean, Laws living and Armed: for you must suppose, that a
Nation that is subdued by War to an absolute submission of a Conqueror, it may
by the same Arm that compelled it to Submission, be compelled to Obey his Laws.
Also if a Nation choose a Man, or an Assembly of Men to Govern them by Laws, it
must furnish him also with Armed Men and Money, and all things necessary to his
Office, or else his Laws will be of no force, and the Nation remains, as before
it was, in Confusion. It Is not therefore the word of the Law, but the Power of
a Man that has the strength of a Nation, that makes the Laws effectual. It was
not Solon that made Athenian Laws (though he devised them) but the Supreme
Court of the People; nor, the Lawyers of Rome that made the Imperial Law in
Justinian's time, but Justinian himself.


Ph. We agree then in this, that in England it is the King that makes the Laws,
whosoever Pens them, and in this, that the King cannot make his Laws effectual,
nor defend his People against their Enemies, without a Power to Leavy
Soldiers, and consequently, that he may Lawfully, as often as he shall really
think it necessary to raise an Army (which in some occasions be very great) I
say, raise it, and Money to Maintain it. I doubt not but you will allow this to
be according to the Law (at least) of Reason.


La. For my part I allow it. But you have heard how, in, and before the late
Troubles the People were of another mind. Shall the King, said they, take from
us what he please, upon pretense of a necessity whereof he makes himself the
Judge? What worse Condition can we be in from an Enemy! What can they take from
us more than what they list?


Ph. The People Reason ill; they do not know in what Condition we were in the
time of the Conqueror, when it was a shame to be an Englishman, who if he
grumbled at the base Offices he was put to by his Norman Masters, received no
other Answer but this, Thou art but an Englishman, nor can the People, nor any
Man that humors them in their Disobedience, produce any Example of a King that
ever raised any excessive Summ's, either by himself, or by the Consent of his
Parliament, but when they had great need thereof; nor can show any reason that
might move any of them so to do. The greatest Complaint by them made against
the unthriftiness of their Kings was for the enriching now and then a
Favorite, which to the Wealth of the Kingdom was inconsiderable, and the
Complaint but Envy. But in this point of raising Soldiers, what is I pray you
the Statute Law?


La. The last Statute concerning it, is 13 Car. 2. c. 6. By which the Supreme
Government Command, and disposing of the Militia of England is delivered to be,
and always to have been the Ancient Right of the Kings of England: But there is
also in the same Act a Proviso, that this shall not be Construed for a
Declaration, that the King may Transport his Subjects, or compel them to march
out of the Kingdom, nor is it, on the contrary declared to be unlawful.


Ph. Why is not that also determined?


La. I can imagine cause enough for it, though I may be deceived. We love to
have our King amongst us, and not be Governed by Deputies, either of our own,
or another Nation: But this I verily believe, that if a Foreign Enemy should
either invade us, or put himself int a readiness to invade either England,
Ireland, or Scotland (no Parliament then sitting) and the King send English
Soldiers thither, the Parliament would give him thanks for it. The Subjects of
those Kings who affect the Glory, and imitate the Actions of Alexander the
Great, have not always the most comfortable lives, nor do such Kings usually
very long enjoy their Conquests. They March to and fro perpetually, as upon a
Plank sustained only in the midst, and when one end rises, down goes the other.


Ph. It Is well. But where Soldiers (in the Judgment of the Kings Conscience)
are indeed necessary, as in an insurrection, or Rebellion at home; how shall
the Kingdom be preserved without a considerable Army ready, and in pay? How
shall Money be raised for this Army, especially when the want of public
Treasure inviteth Neighbor Kings to incroach, and unruly Subjects to Rebel?


La I cannot tell. It is matter of Polity, not of Law; but I know, that there
be Statutes express, whereby the King has obliged himself never to Levy Money
upon his Subjects without the consent of his Parliament. One of which Statutes
is. 25 Ed. 1. c. 6. in these words, We have granted for us, and our Heirs, as
well to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other Folk of the Holy Church, as
also Earls, Barons, and to all the Commonalty of the Land, that for no Business
from henceforth, we shall take such Aids, Taxes, or Prizes, but by the common
Consent of the Realm. There is also another Statute of Ed. 1. in these words,
No Taxes, or Aid shall be taken or Leveyed by us, or our Heirs in our Realm,
without the good will, and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons,
Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land; which Statutes have been
since that time Confirmed by diverse other Kings, and lastly by the King that
now Reigns.


Ph. All this I know, and am not satisfied. I am one of the Common People, and
one of that almost infinite number of Men, for whose welfare Kings, and other
Sovereigns were by God Ordained: For God made Kings for the People, and not
People for Kings. How shall I be defended from the domineering of Proud and
Insolent Strangers that speak another Language, that scorn us, that seek to
make us Slaves? Or how shall I avoid the Destruction that may arise from the
cruelty of Factions in a Civil War, unless the King, to whom alone, you say,
belongs the right of Levying, and disposing of the Militia; by which only it
can be prevented, have ready Money, upon all Occasions, to Arm and pay as many
Soldiers, as for the present defense, or the Peace of the People shall be
necessary? Shall not I, and you, and every Man be undone? Tell me not of a
Parliament when there is no Parliament sitting, or perhaps none in being, which
may often happen; and when there is a Parliament if the speaking, and leading
Men should have a design to put down Monarchy, as they had in the Parliament
which began to sit Nov. 3. 1640. Shall the King, who is to answer to God
Almighty for the safety of the People, and to that end is entrusted with the
Power to Levy and dispose of the Soldiery, be disabled to perform his Office
by virtue of these Acts of Parliament which you have cited? If this be reason,
it is reason also that the People be Abandoned, or left at liberty to kill one
another, even to the last Man; if it be not Reason, then you have granted it is
not Law.


La. It Is true, if you mean Recta Ratio, but Recta Ratio which I grant to be
Law, as Sir Edw. Coke says, 1 Inst. Sect. 138. Is an Artificial perfection of
Reason gotten by long Study, Observation, and Experience, and not every Man's
natural Reason; for Nemo nascitur Artifex. This Legal Reason is summa Ratio;
and therefore, if all the Reason that is dispersed into so many several Heads
were united into one, yet could he not make such a Law as the Law of England
is, because by many Successions of Ages it has been fined and refin^d, by an
infinite number of Grave and Learned Men. And this is it he calls the
Common Law.


Ph. Do you think this to be good Doctrine? though it be true, that no Man is
born with the use of Reason, yet all Men may grow up to it as well as Lawyers;
and when they have applied their Reason to the Laws (which were Laws before
they Studied them, or else it was not Law they Studied) may be as fit for, and
capable of Judicature as Sir Edw. Coke himself, who whether he had more, or
less use of Reason, was not thereby a Judge, but because the King made him so:
And whereas he says, that a Man who should have as much Reason as is dispersed
in so many several Heads, could not make such a Law as this Law of England is;
if one should ask him who made the Law of England? Would he say a Succession of
English Lawyers, or Judges made it, or rather a Succession of Kings; and that
upon their own Reason, either solely, or with the Advice of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, without the Judges, or other Professors of the Law? You
see therefore that the Kings Reason, be it more, or less, is that Anima Legis,
that Summa Lex, whereof Sir Edw. Coke speaks, and not the Reason, Learning,
or Wisdom of the Judges; but you may see, that quite through his Institutes of
Law, he often takes occasion to Magnify the Learning of the Lawyers, whom he
perpetually terms the Sages of the Parliament, or of the Kings Council:
therefore unless you say otherwise, I say, that the Kings Reason, when it is
publicly upon Advice, and Deliberation declared, is that Anima Legis, and that
Summa Ratio, and that Equity which all agree to be the Law of Reason, is all
that is, or ever was Law in England, since it became Christian, besides the
Bible.


La. Are not the Canons of the Church part of the Law of England, as also the
Imperial Law used in the Admiralty, and the Customs of particular places, and
the Bylaws of Corporations, and Courts of Judicature.


Ph. Why not? for they were all Constituted by the Kings of England; and though
the Civil Law used in the Admiralty were at first the Statutes of the Roman
Empire, yet because they are in force by no other Authority than that of the
King, they are now the Kings Laws, and the Kings Statutes. The same we may say
of the Canons; such of them as we have retained, made by the Church of Rome,
have been no Law, nor of any force in England, since the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, but by Virtue of the Great Seal of England.


La. In the said Statutes that restrain the Levying of Money without consent of
Parliament, Is there any thing you can take exceptions to?


Ph. No, I am satisfied that the Kings that grant such Liberties are bound to
make them good, so far as it may be done without sin: But if a King find that
by such a Grant he be disabled to protect his Subjects if he maintain his
Grant, he sins; and therefore may, and ought to take no Notice of the said
Grant: For such Grants as by Error, or false Suggestion are gotten from him,
are as the Lawyers do Confess, Void and of no Effect, and ought to be recalled.
Also the King (as is on all hands Confessed) has the Charge lying upon him to
Protect his People against Foreign Enemies, and to keep the Peace betwixt them
within the Kingdom; if he do not his utmost endeavor to discharge himself
thereof, he Commits a Sin, which neither King, nor Parliament can Lawfully
commit.


La. No Man I think will deny this: For if Levying of Money be necessary, it is
a Sin in the Parliament to refuse, if unnecessary, it is a sin both in King and
Parliament to Levy: But for all that it may be, and I think it is a Sin in any
one that has the Sovereign Power, be he one Man, or one Assembly, being
entrusted with the safety of a whole Nation, if rashly, and relying upon his
own Natural sufficiency, he make War, or Peace without Consulting with such, as
by their Experience and Employment abroad, and Intelligence by Letters, or
other means have gotten the Knowledge in some measure of the strength,
Advantages and Designs of the Enemy, and the Manner and Degree of the Danger
that may from thence arise. In like manner, in case of Rebellion at Home, if he
Consult not with of Military Condition, which if he do, then I think he may
Lawfully proceed to Subdue all such Enemies and Rebels; and that the Soldiers
ought to go on without Inquiring whether they be within the Country, or
without: For who shall suppress Rebellion, but he that has Right to Levy,
Command, and Dispose of the Militia? The last long Parliament denied this. But
why? Because by the Major part of their Votes the Rebellion was raised with
design to put down Monarchy, and to that end Maintained.


Ph. Nor do I hereby lay any Aspersion upon such Grants of the King and his
Ancestors. Those Statutes are in themselves very good for the King and People,
as creating some kind of Difficulty, or such Kings as for the Glory of Conquest
might spend one part of their Subjects Lives and Estates, in Molesting other
Nations, and leave the rest to Destroy themselves at Home by Factions. That
which I here find fault with, is the wresting of those, and other such Statutes
to a binding of our Kings from the use of their Armies in the necessary defense
of themselves and their People. The late long Parliament that in 1648, Murdered
their King (a King that sought no greater Glory upon Earth, but to be indulgent
to his People, and a Pious defender of the Church of England) no sooner took
upon them the Sovereign Power, then they Levied Money upon the People at their
own Discretion. Did any of their Subjects Dispute their Power? Did they not
send Soldiers over the Sea to Subdue Ireland, and others to Fight against the
Dutch at Sea, or made they any doubt but to be obeyed in all that they
Commanded, as a Right absolutely due to the Sovereign Power in whomsoever it
resides? I say, not this as allowing their Actions, but as a Testimony from the
Mouths of those very Men that denied the same Power to him, whom they
acknowledged to have been their Sovereign immediately before, which is a
sufficient Proof, that the People of England never doubted of the Kings Right
to Levy Money for the Maintenance of his Armies, till they were abused in it by
Seditious Teachers, and other prating Men, on purpose to turn the State and
Church into Popular Government, where the most ignorant and boldest Talkers do
commonly obtain the best preferments; again, when their New Republic returned
into Monarchy by Oliver, who durst deny him Money upon any pretense of Magna
Charta, or of these other Acts of Parliament which you have Cited? You may
therefore think it good Law, for all your Books; that the King of England may
at all times, that he thinks in his Conscience it will be necessar for the
defense of his People, Levy as many Soldiers, and as much Money as he please,
and that himself is Judge of the Necessity.


La. Is there no body harkning at the door?


Ph. What are you afraid of?


La. I mean to say the same that you say: but there be very many yet, that hold
their former Principles, whom, neither the Calamities of the Civil Wars, nor
their former Pardon have thoroughly cured of their Madness.


Ph. The Common People never take notice of what they hear of this Nature, but
when they are set on by such as they think Wise; that is, by some sorts of
Preachers, or some that seem to be Learned in the Laws, and withal speak evil
of the Governors. But what if the King upon the sight, or apprehension of any
great danger to his People; as when their Neighbors are born down with the
Current of a Conquering Enemy, should think his own People might be involved in
the same Misery, may he not Levy, Pay, and Transport Soldiers to help those
weak Neighbors by way of prevention, to save his own People and himself from
Servitude? Is that a sin?


La. First, If the War upon our Neighbor be Just, it may be questioned whether
it be Equity or no to Assist them against the Right.


Ph. For my part I make no Question of that at all, unless the Invader will,
and can put me in security, that neither he, nor his Successors shall make any
Advantage of the Conquest of my Neighbor, to do the same to me in time to
come; but there is no Common Power to bind them to the Peace.


La. Secondly; when such a thing shall happen, the Parliament will not refuse
to Contribute freely to the safety of themselves, and the whole Nation.


Ph. It may be so, and it may be not: For if a Parliament then sit not, it must
be called; that requires 6 Weeks time; Debating and Collecting what is given
requires as much, and in this time the Opportunity perhaps is lost. Besides,
how many wretched Souls have we heard to say in the late Troubles; What matter
is it who gets the Victory? We can pay but what they please to Demand, and so
much we pay now: and this they will Murmur, as they have ever done whosoever
shall Reign over them, as long as their Coveteousness and Ignorance hold
together, which will be till Doomsday, if better order be not taken for their
struction in their Duty, both from Reason and Religion.


La. For all this I find it somewhat hard, that a King should have Right to
take from his Subjects, upon the pretense of Necessity what he pleases.


Ph. I know what it is that troubles your Conscience in this Point. All Men are
troubled at the Crossing of their Wishes; but it is our own fault. First, we
wish Impossibilities; we would have our Security against all the World, upon
Right of Property, without Paying for it: This is Impossible. We may as well
Expect that Fish, and Fowl should Boil, Roast, and Dish themselves, and come to
the Table; and that Grapes should squeeze themselves into our Mouths, and have
all other the Contentments and ease which some pleasant Men have Related of the
Land of Cocquam. Secondly, There is no Nation in the World where he, or they
that have the Sovereignty do not take what Money they please, for Defense of
those respective Nations, when they think it necessary for their safety. The
late long Parliament denied this; but why? Because there was a Design amongst
them to Depose the King. Thirdly, There is no Example of any King of England
that I have Read of, that ever pretended any such Necessity for Levying of
Money, against his Conscience. The greatest sounds that ever were Levied
(Comparing the value of Money, as it was at that time, with what now it is)
were Levied by King Edw. 3d. and King Henry the 5th. Kings of whom we Glory
now, and think their Actions great Ornaments to the English History. Lastly, As
to the enriching of now and then a Favorite, it is neither sensible to the
Kingdom, nor is any Treasure thereby Conveyed out of the Realm, but so spent as
it falls down again upon the Common People. To think that our Condition being
Humane should be subject to no Incommodity, were Injuriously to Quarrel with
God Almighty for our own Faults; for he has done his part in annexing our own
Industry and Obedience.


La. I know not what to say.


Ph. If you allow this that I have said; then, say that the People never were,
shall be, or ought to be free from being Taxed at the will of one or other;
being hindered that if Civil War come, they must Levy all they have, and that
Dearly, from the one, or from the other, or from both sides. Say, that adhering
to the King, their Victory is an end of their Trouble; that adhering to his
Enemies there is no end; for the War will continue by a perpetual Subdivision,
and when it ends, they will be in the same Estate they were before. That they
are often Abused by Men who to them seem wise, when then their Wisdom is
nothing else but Envy to those that are in Grace, and in profitable
Employments, and that those Men do but abuse the Common People to their own
ends, that set up a private Man's Propriety against the public Safety. But say
withal, that the King is Subject to the Laws of God, both Written, and
Unwritten, and to no other; and so was William the Conqueror, whose Right it
all Descended to our present King.


La. As to the Law of Reason, which is Equity, it is sure enough there is but
one Legislator, which is God.


Ph. It follows then that which you call the Common Law, Distinct from
Statute Law, is nothing else but the Law of God.


La. In some sense it is, but it is not Gospel, but Natural Reason, and Natural
Equity.


Ph. Would you have every Man to every other Man allege for Law his own
particular Reason? There is not amongst Men an Universal Reason agreed upon in
any Nation, besides the Reason of him that has the Sovereign Power; yet though
his Reason be but the Reason of one Man, yet it is set up to supply the place
of that Universal Reason, which is expounded to us by our Savior in the
Gospel, and consequently our King is to us the Legislator both of Statute Law,
and of Common Law.


La. Yes, I know that the Laws Spiritual, which have been Law in this Kingdom
since the Abolishing of Popery, are the Kings Laws, and those also that were
made before; for the Canons of the Church of Rome were no Laws, neither here,
nor any where else without the Popes Temporal Dominions, farther than Kings,
and States in their several Dominions respectively did make them so.


Ph. I grant that. But you must grant also, that those Spiritual Laws
Legislators of the Spiritual Law; and yet not all Kings, and States make Laws
by Consent of the Lords and Commons; but our King here is so far bound to their
Assents, as he shall Judge Conducing to the Good, and safety of his People; for
Example, if the Lords and Commons should Advise him to restore those Laws
Spiritual, which in Queen Mary's time were in Force, I think the King were by
the Law of Reason obliged, without the help of any other Law of God, to neglect
such Advice.


La. I Grant you that the King is sole Legislator, but with this Restriction,
that if he will not Consult with the Lords of Parliament and hear the
Complaints, and Informations of the Commons, that are best acquainted with
their own wants, he sins against God, though he cannot be Compelled to any
thing by his Subjects by Arms, and Force.


Ph. We are Agreed upon that already, since therefore the King is sole
Legislator, I think it also Reason he should be sole Supreme Judge.


La. There is no doubt of that; for otherwise there would be no Congruity of
Judgments with the Laws. I Grant also that he is the Supreme Judge over all
Persons, The King is the Supreme Judge.
and in all Causes Civil, and Ecclesiastical within his own Dominions, not only
by Act of Parliament at this time, but that he has ever been so by the
Common Law: For the Judges of both the Benches have their Offices by the Kings
Letters Patents, and so (as to Judicature) have the Bishops. Also the Lord
Chancellor has his Office by receiving from the King the Great Seal of
England; and to say all at once, there is no Magistrate, or Commissioner for
Public Business, neither of Judicature, nor Execution in State, or Church, in
Peace, or War, but he is made so by Authority from the King.


Ph. It Is true; But perhaps you may ^^ink otherwise, when you Read such Acts of
Parliament, as say, that the King shall ^ave Power and Authority to do this, or
that by Virtue of that Act, as Eliz. c. 1. That your Highness, your Heirs, and
Successors, Kings, or Queens of this Realm shall have ^^ll Power and Authority,
by Virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England to
Assign, etc. Was it not this Parliament that gave this Authority to the Queen?


La. For the Statute in this Clause is no more than (as Sir Edw. Coke uses to
speak) an Affirmance of the Common Law; For she being Head of the Church of
England might make Commissioners for the de^iding of Matters Ecclesiastical, as
freely ^s if she had been Pope, who did you know pretend his Right from the Law
of God.


Ph. We have hitherto spoken of Laws without considering any thing of the
Nature and Essence of a Law; and now unless we define the word Law, we can go
no ^arther without Ambiguity, and Fallacy, which will be but loss of time;
whereas, on the contrary, the Agreement upon our words will enlighten all we
have to say ^hereafter.


La. I do not remember the Definition of Law in any Statute.


Ph. I think so: For the Statutes were made by Authority, and not drawn from
any other Principles than the care of the safety of the People. Statutes are
not Philosophy as is the Common Law, and other disputable Arts, but are
Commands, or Prohibitions which ought to be obeyed, because Assented to by
Submission made to the Conqueror here in England, and to whosoever had the
Sovereign Power in other Common wealths; so that the Positive Laws of all
Places are Statutes. The Definition of Law was therefore unnecessary for the
makers of Statutes, though very necessary to them, whose work it is to Teach
the sense of the Law.


La. There is an Accurate Definition of a Law in Bracton, Cited by Sir Edw.
Coke () Lex est sanctio justa, jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria.


Ph. That is to say, Law is a just Statute, Commanding those things which are
honest, and Forbidding the contrary. From whence it follows, that in all
Cases it must be the Honesty, or Dishonesty that makes the Command a Law,
whereas you know that but for the Law we could not (as says St. Paul) have
known what is sin; therefore this Definition is no Ground at all for any
farther Discourse of Law. Besides, you know the Rule of Honest, and Dishonest
refers to Honor, and that it is Justice only, and Injustice that the Law
respects. But that which I most except against in this Definition, is, that
it supposes that a Statute made by the Sovereign Power of a Nation may be
unjust. There may indeed in a Statute Law, made by Men be found Iniquity, but
not Injustice.


La. This is somewhat subtle; I pray deal plainly, what is the difference
between Injustice and Iniquity?


Ph. I pray you tell me first, what is the difference between a Court of
Justice, and a Court of Equity?


La. A Court of Justice is that which has Cognizance of such Causes as are to
be ended by the Possitive Laws of the Land; and a Court of Equity in that, to
which belong such Causes as are to be determined by Equity; that is to say, by
the Law of Reason.


Ph. You see then that the difference between Injustice, and Iniquity is this;
that Injustice is the Transgression of a Statute Law, and Iniquity the
Transgression of the Law of Reason, was nothing else but the Law of Reason, and
that the Judges of that Law are Courts of Justice, because the breach of the
Statute Law is Iniquity, and Injustice also. But perhaps you mean by
Common Law, not the Law it self, but the manner of proceeding in the Law (as to
matter of Fact) by 12 Men, Freeholders, though those 12 Men are no Court of
Equity, nor of Justice, because they determine not what is Just or Unjust, but
only whether it be done, or not done; and their Judgment is nothing else but a
Confirmation of that which is properly the Judgment of the Witnesses; for to
speak exactly there cannot possibly be any Judge of Fact besides the Witnesses.


La. How would you have a Law def^n'd?


Ph. Thus; A Law is the Command of him, or them that have the Sovereign Power,
given to those that be his or their Subjects, declaring Publicly, and plainly
what every of them may do, and what they must forbear to do.


La. Seeing all Judges in all Courts ought to Judge according to Equity, which
is the Law of Reason, a distinct Court of Equity seems to me to be
unnecessary, and but a Burden to the People, since Common Law, and Equity are
the same Law.


Ph. It were so indeed; If Judges could not err, but since they may err, and
that the King is not Bound to any other Law but that of Equity, it belongs to
him alone to give Remedy to them that by the Ignorance, or Corruption of a
Judge shall suffer damage.


La. By your Definition of a Law, the Kings Proclamation under the Great Seal
of England is a Law; for it is a Command, and Public, and of the Sovereign to
his Subjects.


Ph. Why not? If he think it necessary for the good of his Subjects: For this
is a Maxim at the Common Law Alleged by Sir Edward Coke himself. 1 Inst. Sect.
306. Quando Lex aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id per quod devenitur
ad illud. And you know out of the same Author, that diverse Kings of ^ngland
have often, to the Petitions in Parliament which they granted, annexed such
exceptions as these, unless there be necessity, saving our Regality; which I
think should be always understood, though they be not expressed; and are
understood so by Common Lawyers, who agree that the King may recall any Grant
wherein he was deceived.


La. Again, whereas you make it of the Essence of a Law to be Publicly and
plainly declared to the People, I see no necessity for that. Are not all
Subjects Bound to take notice of all Acts of Parliament, when no Act can pass
without their Consent?


Ph. If you had said that no Act could pass without their knowledge, then
indeed they had been bound to take notice of them; but none can have knowledge
of them but the Members of the Houses of Parliament, therefore the rest of the
People are excused; or else the Knights of the Shires should be bound to
furnish People with a sufficient Number of Copies (at the Peoples Charge) of
the Acts of Parliament at their return into the Country; that every man may
resort to them, and by themselves, or Friends take notice of what they are
obliged to; for otherwise it were Impossible they should be obeyed: And that no
Man is bound to do a thing Impossible is one of Sir Edw. Cokes Maxims at the
Common Law. I know that most of the Statutes are Printed, but it does not
appear that every Man is bound to Buy the Book of Statutes, nor to search for
them at Westminster or at the Tower, nor to understand the Language wherein
they are for the most part Written.


La. I grant it proceeds from their own Faults; but no Man can be excused by
the Ignorance of the Law of Reason; that is to say, by Ignorance of the
Common Law, except Children, Madmen, and Idiots: But you exact such a notice
of the Statute Law, as is almost Impossible. Is it not enough that they in all
Places have a sufficient Number of the Poenal Statutes?


Ph. Yes; If they have those Poenal Statutes near them, but what Reason can you
give me why there should not be as many Copies abroad of the Statutes, as there
be of the Bible?


La. I think it were well that every Man that can Read had a Statute-Book; for
certainly no knowledge of those Laws, by which Men's Lives and Fortunes can be
brought into danger, can be too much. I find a great Fault in your Definition
of Law; which is, that every Law either forbids or Commands something.
It Is true that the Moral-Law is always a Command or a Prohibition, or at least
Implies it; but in the Levitical-Law, where it is said; that he that Steals
a Sheep shall Restore four Fold; what Command, or Prohibition lies in these
words?


Ph. Such Sentences as that are not in themselves General, but Judgments,
nevertheless, there is in those words Implied a Commandment to the Judge, to
cause to be made a Fourfold Restitution.


La. That Is Right.


Ph. Now Define what Justice is, and what Actions, and Men are to be called
Just.


La. Justice is the constant will of giving to every Man his own; that is to
say, of giving to every Man that which is his Right, in such manner as to
Exclude the Right of all men else to the same thing. A Just Action is that
which is not against the Law. A Just Man is he that has a constant Will to
live Justly; if you require more, I doubt there will no Man living be
Comprehended within the Definition.


Ph. Seeing then that a Just Action (according to your Definition) is that
which is not against the Law; it is Manifest that before there was a Law, there
could be no Injustice, and therefore Laws are in their Nature Antecedent to
Justice and Injustice, and you cannot deny but there must be Lawmakers, before
there was any Laws, and Consequently before there was any Justice, I speak of
Humane Justice; and that Lawmakers were before that which you call Own, or
property of Goods, or Lands distinguished by Meum, Tuum, Alienum.


La. That must be Granted; for without Statute-Laws, all Men have Right to all
things; and we have had Experience when our Laws were silenced by Civil War,
there was not a Man, that of any Goods could say assuredly they were his own.


Ph. You see then that no private Man can claim a Propriety in any Lands, or
other Goods from any Title, from any Man, but the King, or them that have the
Sovereign Power; because it is in virtue of the Sovereignty, that every Man may
not enter into, and Possess what he pleases; and consequently to deny the
Sovereign any thing necessary to the sustaining of his Sovereign power, is to
destroy the Propriety he pretends to. The next thing I will ask you is, how you
distinguish between Law and Right, or Lex and Jus.


La. Sir Ed. Coke in diverse places makes Lex and Jus to be the same, and so Lex
Communis, and Jus Communis to be all one; nor do I find that he does in any
places distinguish them.


Ph. Then will I distinguish them, and make you judge whether my distinction be
not necessary to be known by every Author of the Common Law: for Law obliges
me to do, or forbear the doing of something; and therefore it lies upon me an
Obligation; but my Right is a Liberty left me by the Law to do any thing which
the Law forbids me not, and to leave undone any thing which the Law commands me
not. Did Sir Ed. Coke see no difference between being bound and being free?


La. I know not what he was, but he has not mentioned it, though a man may
dispense with his own Liberty, that cannot do so with the Law.


Ph. But what are you better for your Right, if a rebellious Company at home,
or an Enemy from abroad take away the Goods, or dispossess you of the Lands you
have a right to? Can you be defended, or repaired, but by the strength and
authority of the King? What reason therefore can be given by a man that
endeavors to preserve his Propriety, why he should deny, or malignly
contribute to the Strength that should defend him, or repair him? Let us see
now what your Books say to this point, and other points of the Right of
Sovereignty. Bracton, the most authentic Author of the Common Law, fol. 55.
says thus: Ipse Dominus Rex habet omnia Jura in manu sua, est Dei Vicarius;
habet ea quae sunt Pacis, habet etiam coercionem ut Delinquentes puniat; habet
in potestate sua Leges; nihil enim prodest Jura condere, nisi sit qui Jura
tueatur. That is to say, our Lord the King has all Right in his own Hands; is
Gods Vicar; he has all that concerns the Peace; he has the power to punish
Delinquents; all the Laws are in his power; To make Laws is to no purpose,
unless there be somebody to make them obeyed. If Bracton's Law be Reason, as
I, and you think it is; what temporal power is there which the King has not?
Seeing that at this day all the power Spiritual which Bracton allows the Pope,
is restored to the Crown; what is there that the King cannot do, excepting sin
against the Law of God? The same Bracton Lib. 21. c. 8. says thus; Si autem a
Rege petitur (cum Breve non curret contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quod
factum suum corrigat, and emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit
ad poenam, quod Dominum expectet Vltorem; nemo quidem de factis ejus praesumat
disputare, multo fortius contra factum ejus venire: That is to say, if any
thing be demanded of the King (seeing a Writ lies not against him) he is put
to his Petition, praying him to Correct and Amend his own Fact; which if he
will not do, it is a sufficient Penalty for him, that he is to expect a
punishment from the Lord: No Man may presume to dispute of what he does, much
less to resist him. You see by this, that this Doctrine concerning the Rights
of Sovereignty so much Cried down by the long Parliament, is the Ancient
Common Law, and that the only Bridle of the Kings of England, ought to be the
fear of God. And again Bracton, c. 24. of the second Book says, That the
Rights of the Crown cannot be granted away; Ea vero quae Jurisdictionis and
Pacis, and ea quae sunt Justitiae and Paci annexa, ad nullum pertinent, nisi ad
Coronam and Dignitatem Regiam, nec a Corona separari possunt, nec a privata
persona possideri. That is to say, those things which belong to Jurisdiction
and Peace, and those things that are annexed to Justice, and Peace, appertain
to none, but to the Crown and Dignity of the King, nor can be separated from
the Crown, nor be possessed by a private Person. Again you will find in Fleta (a
Law-Book written in the time of Edw. 2.) That Liberties though granted by the
King, if they tend to the hinderance of Justice, or subversion of the Regal
Power, were not to be used, nor allowed: For in that Book c. 20. concerning
Articles of the Crown, which the Justices Itinerant are to enquire of, the 54th
Article is this, you shall inquire De Libertatibus concessis quae impediunt
Communem J^stitiam, and Regiam Potestatem subvertunt. Now what is a greater
hindrance to Common Justice, or a greater subversion of the Regal Power, than a
Liberty in Subjects to hinder the King from raising Money necessary to
suppress, or prevent Rebellions, which does destroy Justice, and subvert the
power of the Sovereignty? Moreover when a Charter is granted by a King in these
words, Dedita and coram pro me and Haeredibus meis. The grantor by the
Common Law (as Sir Edw. Coke says in his Commentaries on Littleton) is to
warrant his Gift; and I think it Reason, especially if the Gift be upon
Consideration of a price Paid. Suppose a Foreign State should say claim to
this Kingdom ('it is no Matter as to the Question I am putting, whether the Claim
be unjust) how would you have the King to warrant to every Freeholder in
England the Lands they hold of him by such a Charter? If he cannot Levy Money,
their Estates are lost, and so is the Kings Estate, and if the Kings Estate be
gone, how can he repair the Value due upon the Warranty? I know that the Kings
Charters are not so merely Grants, as that they are not also Laws; but they are
such Laws as speak not to all the Kings Subjects in general, but only to his
Officers; implicitly forbidding them to Judge, or Execute any thing contrary to
the said Grants. There be many Men that are able Judges of what is right
Reason, and what not; when any of these shall know that a Man has no Superior,
nor Peer in the Kingdom, he will hardly be persuaded he can be bound by any Law
of the Kingdom, or that he who is Subject to none but God, can make a Law upon
himself, which he cannot also as easily abrogate, as he made it. The main
Argument, and that which so much takes with the throng of People, proceeds
from a needless fear put into their minds by such Men as mean to make use of
their Hands to their own ends; for if (say they) the King may (notwithstanding
the Law) do what he please, and nothing to restrain him but the fear of
punishment in the World to come, then (in case there come a King that fears no
such punishment) he may take away from us, not only our Lands, Goods, and
Liberties, but our Lives also if he will: And they say true; but they have no
reason to think he will, unless it be for his own profit, which cannot be; for
he loves his own Power; and what becomes of his power when his Subjects are
destroyed, or weakened, by whose multitude, and strength he enjoyes his power,
and every one of his Subjects his Fortune? And lastly, whereas they sometimes
say the King is bound, not only to cause his Laws to be observed, but also to
observe them himself; I think the King causing them to be observed is the same
thing as observing them himself: For I never heard it taken for good Law, that
the King may be Indicted, or Appealed, or served with a Writ, till the long
Parliament practiced the contrary upon the good King Charles, for which diverse
of them were Executed, and the rest by this our present King pardoned.


La. Pardoned by the King and Parliament.


Ph. By the King in Parliament if you will, but not by the King, and
Parliament; you cannot deny, but that the pardoning of Injury, to the Person
that is Injured, Treason, and other Offenses against the Peace, and against the
Right of the Sovereign are Injuries done to the King; and therefore whosoever
is pardoned any such Offense, ought to acknowledge he ows his Pardon to the
King alone: But as to such Murders, Felonies, and other Injuries as are done to
any Subject how mean soever, I think it great reason that the parties
endammaged ought to have satisfaction before such pardon be allowed. And in the
death of a Man, where restitution of Life is Impossible, what can any Friend,
Heir, or other party that may appeal, require more than reasonable satisfaction
some other way? Perhaps he will be content with nothing but Life for Life; but
that is Revenge, and belongs to God, and under God to the King, and none else;
therefore if there be reasonable satisfaction tendered, the King, without sin (I
think) may pardon him. I am sure, if the pardoning him be a sin, that neither
King, nor Parliament, nor any earthly Power can do it.


La. You see by this your own Argument, that the Act of Oblivion, without a
Parliament could not have passed; because, not only the King, but also most of
the Lords, and abundance of Common People had received Injuries; which not
being pardonable, but by their own Assent, it was absolutely necessary that it
should be done in Parliament, and by the assent of the Lords and Commons.


Ph. I grant it; but I pray you tell me now what is the difference between a
general Pardon, and an Act of Oblivion?


La. The word Act of Oblivion was never in our Books before; but I believe it
is in yours.


Ph. In the State of Athens long ago, for the Abolishing of the Civil War,
there was an Act agreed on; that from that time forward, no Man should be
molested for any thing (before that Act done) whatsoever without exception,
which Act the makers of it called an Act of Oblivion; not that all Injuries
should be forgotten (for then we could never have had the story) but that they
should not rise up in Judgment against any Man. And in imitation of this Act
the like was propounded (though it took no effect) upon the death of Julius
Caesar, in the Senate of Rome. By such an Act you may easily conceive that all
Accusations for offenses past were absolutely dead, and buried, and yet we have
no great reason to think, that the objecting one to another of the Injuries
pardoned, was any violation of those Acts, except the same were so expressed in
the Act it self.


La. It seems then that the Act of Oblivion was here no more, nor of other
nature than a General Pardon.


Of Courts.
Ph. SInce you acknowledge that in all controversies, the Judicature originally
belongs to the King, and seeing that no Man is able in his own person to
execute an Office of so much business; what order is taken for deciding of so
many, and so various Controversies?


La. There be diverse sorts of Controversies, some of which are concerning Men's
Titles to Lands, and Goods; and some Goods are Corporeal, and Lands, Money,
Cattle, Corn, and the like, which may be handled, or seen; and some
Incorporeal, as Privileges, Liberties, Dignities, Offices, and many other good
things, mere Creatures of the Law, and cannot be handled or seen: And both of
these kinds are concerning Meum, and Tuum. Others there are concerning Crimes
punishable diverse ways; and amongst some of these, part of the punishment is
some Fine, or Forfeiture to the King, and then it is called a Plea of the
Crown, in case the King sue the party, otherwise it is but a private Plea,
which they call an Appeal: And though upon Judgment in an Appeal the King shall
have his Forfeiture; yet it cannot be called a Plea of the Crown, but when the
Crown pleads for it. There be also other Controversies concerning the
Government of the Church, in order to Religion, and virtuous Life. The offenses
both against the Crown, and against the Laws of the Church are Crimes; but the
offenses of one Subject against another, if they be not against the Crown, the
King pretends nothing in those Pleas, but the Reparation of his Subjects
injured.


Ph. A Crime is an offense of any kind whatsoever, for which a penalty is
Ordained by the Law of the Land: But you must understand that damages awarded
to the party injured, has nothing common with the nature of a penalty, but is
merely a Restitution, or satisfaction due to the party grieved by the Law of
Reason, and consequently is no more a punishment than is the paying of a Debt.


La. It seems by this Definition of a Crime you make no difference between a
Crime, and a sin.


Ph. All Crimes are indeed Sins, but not all Sins Crimes. A Sin may be in the
thought or secret purpose of a Man, of which neither a Judge, nor a Witness,
nor any Man take notice; but a Crime is such a Sin as consists in an Action
against the Law, of which Action he can be Accused, and Tried by a Judge, and
be Convinced, or Cleared by Witnesses. Farther; that which is no Sin in it
self, but indifferent, may be made Sin by a positive Law. As when the Statute
was in force; that no Man should wear Silk in his Hat, after the Statute, such
wearing of Silk was a Sin, which was not so before: Nay sometimes an Action
that is good in it self, by the Statute Law may be made a Sin; as if a Statute
should be made to forbid the giving of Alms to a strong and sturdy Beggar; such
Alms after that Law would be a Sin, but not before: For then it was Charity,
the Object whereof is not the strength, or other Quality of the poor Man, but
his Poverty. Again, he that should have said in Queen Mary's time, that the
Pope had no Authority in England, should have been Burnt at a Stake; but for
saying the same in the time of Queen Elizabeth, should have been Commended. You
see by this, that many things are made Crimes, and no Crimes, which are not so
in their own Nature, but by Diversity of Law, made upon Diversity of Opinion,
or of Interest by them which have Authority: And yet those things, whether
good, or evil, will pass so with the Vulgar (if they hear them often with
odious terms recited) for heinous Crimes in themselves, as many of those
Opinions, which are in themselves Pious, and Lawful, were heretofore by the
Popes Interest therein called Detestable Heresy. Again; some Controversies are
of things done upon the Sea, others of things done upon the Land. There need by
many Courts to the deciding of so many kinds of Controversies. What order is
there taken for their Distribution?


La. There be an extraordinary great number of Courts in England; First; there
be the Kings Courts both for Law, and Equity in matters Temporal, which are the
Chancery, the King's Bench, the Court of Common Pleas, and for the Kings Revenue
the Court of the Exchequer, and there be Subjects Courts by Privilege, as the
Court in London, and other priviledg'd places. And there be other Courts of
Subjects, as the Courts of Landlords, called the Court of Barons, and the
Courts of Sherifs. Also the Spiritual Courts are the Kings Courts at this day,
though heretofore they were the Popes Courts. And in the Kings Courts, some
have their Judicature by Office, and some by Commission, and some Authority to
Hear, and Determine, and some only to Inquire, and to Certify into other
Courts. Now for the Distribution of what Pleas every Court may hold; it is
commonly held, that all the Pleas of the Crown, and of all Offenses contrary to
the Peace are to be holden in the Kings Bench, or by Commissioners, for Bracton
says; Sciendum est, quod si Actiones sunt Criminales, in Curia Domini Regis
debent determinari; cum sit ibi poena C^rporalis infligenda, and hoc coram ipso
Rege, si tangat personam suam, sicut Crimen Laesae Majestatis, vel coram
Justitiariis ad hoc specialiter assignatis. That is to say; That if the Plea be
Criminal, it ought to be determined in the Court of our Lord the King, because
there they have power to inflict Corporeal punishment, and if the Crime be
against his person, as the Crime of Treason, it ought to be determined before
the King himself, or if it be against a private person, it ought to be
determined by Justices Assigned; that is to say, before Commissioners. It seems
by this, that heretofore Kings did hear and determine Pleas of Treason against
themselves, by their own Persons; but it has been otherwise a long time, and is
now: For it is now the Office of the Lord Steward of England in the Trial of a
Peer, to hold that Plea by a Commission especially for the same. In Causes
concerning Meum, and Tuum, the King may sue, either in the King's Bench, or in
the Court of Common Pleas, as it appears by Fitzherbert in his Natura Brevium,
at the Writ of Escheat.


Ph. A King perhaps will not sit to determine of Causes of Treason against his
Person, lest he should seem to make himself Judge in his own Cause; but that it
shall be Judged by Judges of his own making, can never be avoided, which is
also one as if he were Judge himself.


La. To the King's Bench also (I think) belongs the Hearing, and Determining
of all manner of Breaches of the Peace whatsoever, saving always to the King
that he may do the same, when he pleases, by Commissioners. In the time of
Henry the 3d, and Edward the 1st, (when Bracton wrote) the King did usually
send down every seven years into the Country Commissioners called Justices
Itinerant, to Hear, and Determine generally all Causes Temporal, both Criminal,
and Civil, whose places have been now a long time supplied by the Justices of
Assize, with Commissions of the Peace of Oyer, and Terminer, and of
Jail-delivery.


Ph. But why may the King only Sue in the King's Bench, or Court of
Common Pleas, which he will, and no other Person may do the same?


La. There is no Statute to the contrary, but it seems to be the Common Law;
for Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. sets down the Jurisdiction of the King's Bench;
which (he says) has; First, Jurisdiction in all Pleas of the Crown. Secondly,
The Correcting of all manner of Errors of other Justices, and Judges, both of
Judgments and Process (except of the Court of Exchequer) which he says, is to
this Court Proprium quarto modo. Thirdly; That it has power to Correct all
Misdemeanors extrajudicial tending to the breach of the Peace, or oppression
of the Subjects, or raising of Factions, Controversies, Debates, or any other
manner of Misgovernment. Fourthly; It may hold Plea by Writ out of the Chancery
of all Trespasses done Vi and Armis. Fifthly; It has power to hold Plea by
Bill for Debt, Detinu, Covenant, Promise, and all other personal Actions; but
of the Jurisdiction of the King's Bench in Actions real he says nothing; save,
that if a Writ in a Real Action be abated by Judgment in the Court of
Common Pleas, and that the Judgment be by a Writ of Error, reversed in the
King's Bench, then the King's Bench may proceed upon the Writ.


Ph. But how is the Practice?


La. Real Actions are commonly decided, as well in the King's Bench, as in the
Court of Common Pleas.


Ph. When the Kng by Authority in Writing makes a Lord-Chief-Justice of the
King's Bench; does he not set down what he makes him for?


La. Sir Edw Coke sets down the Letters Patents, whereby of Ancient time the
Lord Chief Justice was Constituted, wherein is expressed to what end he has
his Office; viz. Pro Conservatione nostra, and tranquilitatis Regni nostri, and
ad Justitiam universis and singulis de Regno nostro exhibendam, Constituimus
Dilectum and Fidelem nostrum P. B. Justitiarium Angliae, quamdiu nobis
placuerit Capitalem, etc. That is to say, for the preservation of our self, and
of the Peace of our Realm, and for the doing of Justice to all and singular our
Subjects, we have Constituted our Beloved and Faithful P. B. during our
pleasure, Chief Justice of England, etc.


Ph. Methinks it is very plain by these Letters Patents, that all Causes
Temporal within the Kingdom (except the Pleas that belong to the Exchequer)
should be decidable by this Lord-Chief-Justice. For as for Causes Criminal, and
that concern the Peace, it is granted him in these words, for the Conservation
of our self, and peace of the Kingdom, wherein are contained all Pleas
Criminal; and, in the doing of Justice to all and singular the Kings Subjects
are comprehended all Pleas Civil. And as to the Court of Common Pleas, it is
manifest it may hold all manner of Civil-Pleas (except those of the Exchequer)
by Magna Charta, Cap. 11. So that all original Writs concerning Civil-Pleas are
returnable into either of the said Courts; but how is the Lord-Chief-Justice
made now?


La. By these words in their Letters Patents; Constituimus vos Justitiarium
nostrum Capitalem ad Placita coram nobis tenenda, durante beneplacito nostro.
That is to say, we have made you our Chief Justice to hold Pleas before our
self, during our pleasure. But this Writ, though it be shorter, does not at all
abridge the power they had by the former. And for the Letters Patents for the
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, they go thus, Constituimus dilectum and
Fidelem, etc. Capitalem Justitiarium de Communi Banco, Habendum, etc. quamdiu
nobis placuerit, cum vadiis and foedis ab antiquo debitis and consuetis. Id
est, We have Constituted our Beloved and Faithful, etc. Chief Justice of the
Common-Bench, To have, etc. during our pleasure, with the ways, and Fees
thereunto heretofore due, and usual.


Ph. I find in History, that there have been in England always a Chancellor
and a Chief Justice of England, but of a Court of Common Pleas there is no
mention before Magna Charta. Common Pleas there were ever both here, and I
think, in all Nations; for Common Pleas and Civil-Pleas I take to be the same.


La. Before the Statute of Magna Charta Common Pleas (as Sir Edw. Coke
grants, 2 Inst. p. 21.) might have been holden in the King's Bench; and that
Court being removeable at the Kings will, the Returns of Writs were Coram Nobis
ubicunque fuerimus in Anglia; whereby great trouble of Jurors ensued, and great
charges of the parties, and delay of Justice; and that for these causes it was
Ordained, that the Common Pleas should not follow the King, but be held in a
place certain.


Ph. Here Sir Edw. Coke declares his Opinion, that no Common-Plea can be holden
in the King's Bench, in that he says they might have been holden then. And yet
this does not amount to any probable proof, that there was any Court of
Common Pleas in England before Magna Charta: For this Statute being to ease the
Jurors, and lessen the Charges of Parties, and for the Expedition of Justice
had been in Vain, if there had been a Court of Common Pleas then standing; for
such a Court was not necessarily to follow the King, as was the Chancery, and
the King's Bench. Besides, unless the King's Bench, wheresoever it was, held Plea
of civil Causes, the Subject had not at all been eased by this Statute: For
supposing the King at York, had not the Kings Subjects about London, Jurors,
and parties as much trouble, and charge to go to York, as the People about York
had before to go to London? Therefore I can by no means believe otherwise, then
that the Erection of the Court of Common Pleas was the effect of that Statute
of Magna Charta, Cap. 11. And before that time not existent, though I think
that for the multiplicity of Suits in a great Kingdom there was need of it.


La. Perhaps there was not so much need of it as you think: For in those times
the Laws, for the most part, were in settling, rather than settled; and the old
Saxon Laws concerning Inheritances were then practiced, by which Laws speedy
Justice was Executed by the Kings Writs, in the Courts of Barons, which were
Landlords to the rest of the Freeholders, and Suits of Barons in County-Courts,
and but few Suits in the Kings Courts, but when Justice could not be had in
those Inferior Courts; but at this day there be more Suits in the Kings Courts,
than any one Court can dispatch.


Ph. Why should there be more Suits now, than formerly? For I believe this
Kingdom was as well Peopled then as now.


La. Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. p. 76. assigns for it six Causes, 1. Peace, 2.
Plenty, 3. The Dissolution of Religious Houses, and dispersing of their Lands
among so many several persons, 4. The multitude of Informers, 5. The number of
Concealers, 6. The multitude of Attorneys.


Ph. I see Sir Edw. Coke has no mind to lay any fault upon the Men of his own
Profession; and that he Assigns for Causes of the Mischiefs, such things as
would be Mischief, and Wickedness to amend; for if Peace, and Plenty, be the
cause of this Evil, it cannot be removed but by War and Beggary; and the
Quarrels arising about the Lands of Religious Persons cannot arise from the
Lands, but from the doubtfulness of the Laws. And for Informers they were
Authorized by Statutes, to the Execution of which Statutes they are so
necessary, as that their number cannot be too great, and if it be too great the
fault is in the Law it self. The number of Concealers, are indeed a number of
Couseners, which the Law may easily Correct. And lastly for the multitude of
Attorneys, it is the fault of them that have the power to admit, or refuse
them. For my part I believe that Men at this day have better learned the Art of
Caviling against the words of a Statute, than heretofore they had, and thereby
encourage themselves, and others, to undertake Suits upon little reason. Also
the variety and repugnancy of Judgments of Common Law do oftentimes put Men to
hope for Victory in causes, whereof in reason they had no ground at all. Also
the ignorance of what is Equity in their own causes, which Equity not one Man
in a thousand ever Studied, and the Lawyers themselves seek not for their
Judgments in their own Breasts, but in the precedents of former Judges, as the
Ancient Judges sought the same, not in their own Reason, but in the Laws of the
Empire. Another, and perhaps the greatest cause of multitude of Suits is this,
that for want of Registring of conveyances of Land, which might easily be done
in the Townships where the Lands ly, a Purchase cannot easily be had, which
will not be litigious. Lastly, I believe the Coveteousness of Lawyers was not
so great in Ancient time, which was full of trouble, as they have been since in
time of Peace, wherein Men have leisure to study fraud, and get employment from
such Men as can encourage to Contention. And how ample a Field they have to
exercise this Mystery in is manifest from this, that they have a power to Scan
and Construe every word in a Statute, Charter, Feofment, Lease, or other Deed,
Evidence, or Testimony. But to return to the Jurisdiction of this Court of the
King's Bench, where, as you say, it has power to correct and amend the Errors
of all other Judges, both in Process, and in Judgments; cannot the Judges of
the Common Pleas correct Error in Process in their own Courts, without a Writ
of Error from another Court?


La. Yes; and there be many Statutes which Command them so to do.


Ph. When a Writ of Error is brought out of the King's Bench, be it either Error
in Process, or in Law, at whose Charge is it to be done?


La. At the Charge of the Clyent.


Ph. I see no reason for that; for the Clyent is not in fault, who never begins
a Suit but by the advice of his Council Learned in the Law, whom he pays for
his Council given. Is not this the fault of his Councellor? Nor when a Judge in
the Common Pleas has given an Erroneous Sentence, it is always likely that the
Judge of the King's Bench will reverse the Judgment (though there be no
Question, but as you may find in Bracton, and other Learned Men, he has power
to do it) because being Professors of the same Common Law, they are persuaded,
for the most part, to give the same Judgments: For Example; if Sir Edw. Coke in
the last Term that he sat Lord-Chief-Justice in the Court of Common Pleas,
had given an Erroneous Judgment, that when he was removed, and made
Lord-Chief-Justice of the King's Bench, would therefore have reversed the said
Judgment, it is possi- he might, but not very likely. And therefore I do
believe there is some other power, by the King constituted, to reverse
Erroneous Judgments, both in the King's Bench, and in the Court of Common Pleas.


La. I think not; for there is a Statute to the contrary, made 4o, Hen. 4. cap.
23. in these words; Whereas, as well in Plea Real, as in Plea Personal, after
Judgment in the Court of our Lord the King, the Parties be made to come upon
grievous pain, sometimes before the King himself, sometimes before the Kings
Council, and sometimes to the Parliament to answer thereof anew, to the great
Impoverishing of the Parties aforesaid, and to the subversion of the Common Law
of the Land, it is ordained and established, that after Judgment given in the
Court of our Lord the King, the Parties, and their Heirs shall be there in
Peace, until the Judgment be undone by Attaint, or by Error, if there be Error,
as has been used by the Laws in the times of the Kings Progenitors.


Ph. This Statute is so far from being repugnant to that, I say, as it seems
to me to have been made expressly to confirm the same: For the substance of the
Statu^e is, that there shall be no Suit made by either of the Parties for any
thing adjudged, either in the King's Bench, or Court of Common Pleas, before the
Judgment be undone by Error, or Corruption proved; and that this was the
Common Law before the making of this Statute, which could not be, except there
were (before this Statute) some Courts authorized to examine, and correct such
Errors as by the Plaintiff should be assigned. The inconvenience which by this
Statute was to be remedied was this, that often Judgment given in the Kings
Courts, by which are meant in this place the King's Bench, and Court of
Common Pleas, the Party against whom the Judgment was given, did begin a new
Suit, and cause his Adversary to come before the King himself; here by the King
himself must be understood the King in Person; for though in a Writ by the
words Coram nobis is understood the King's Bench, yet in a Statute it is never
so; nor is it strange, seeing in those days the King did usually sit in Court
with his Council, to hear (as sometimes King James) and sometimes the same
Parties commenced their Suit before the Privy Council, though the King were
absent; and sometimes before the Parliament the former Judgment yet standing.
For remedy whereof, it was ordained by this Statute, that no Man should renew
his Suit, till the former Judgment was undone by Attaint, or Error; which
Reversing of a Judgment had been impossible, if there had been no Court
(besides the aforesaid two Courts) wherein the Errors might be Assigned,
Examined, and Judged; for no Court can be esteemed in Law, or Reason, a
Competent Judge of its own Errors. There was therefore before this Statute some
other Court existent for the hearing of Errors, and Reversing of Erroneous
Judgments. What Court this was I enquire not yet, but I am sure it could not be
either the Parliament or the Privy Council, or the Court wherein the Erroneous
Judgment was given.


La. The Doctor and Student discourses of this Statute, cap. 18. much otherwise
than you do: For the Author of that Book says, that against an Erroneous
Judgment all Remedy is by this Statute taken away. And though neither Reason,
nor the Office of a King, nor any Law positive can prohibit the remedying of
any Injury, much less of an unjust Sentence, yet he shows many Statutes,
wherein a Man's Conscience ought to prevail above the Law.


Ph. Upon what ground can he pretend, that all Remedy in this case is by this
Statute prohibited?


La. He says it is thereby enacted, that Judgment given by the Kings Courts
shall not be examined in the Chancery, Parliament, nor elsewhere.


Ph. Is there any mention of Chancery in this Act? It cannot be examined before
the King and his Council, nor before the Parliament, but you see that before
the Statute it was examined somewhere, and that this Statute will have it
examined there again.

And seeing the Chancery was altogether the highest Office of Judicature in the
Kingdom for matter of Equity, and that the Chancery is not here forbidden to
examine the Judgments of all other Courts, at least it is not taken from it by
this Statute. But what Cases are there in this Chapter of the Doctor and
Student, by which it can be made probable, that when Law, and Conscience, or
Law and Equity seem to oppugn one another, the written Law should be preferred?


La. If the Defendant wage his Law in an Action of Debt brought upon a true
Debt, the Plaintiff has no means to come to his Debt by way of Compulsion,
neither by Subpoena, nor otherwise, and yet the Defendant is bound in
Conscience to pay him.


Ph. Here is no preferring that, I see, of the Law above Conscience, or Equity;
for the Plaintiff in this case loses not his Debt for want either of Law, or
Equity, but for want of Proof; for neither Law, nor Equity can give a Man his
Right, unless he prove it.


La. Also if the Grand Jury in Attaint affirm a false Verdict given by the
Petty-Jury, there is no farther Remedy, but the Conscience of the party.


Ph. Here again the want of Proof is the want of Remedy; for if he can prove
that the Verdict given was false, the King can give him remedy such way as
himself shall think best, and ought to do it, in case the Party shall find
surety, if the same Verdict be again affirmed, to satisfy his Adversary for
the Damage, and Vexation he puts him to.


La. But there is a Statute made since; viz. 27 Eliz. c. 8. by which that
Statute of Hen. 4. 23. is in part taken away; for by that Statute Erroneous
Judgments given in the King's Bench, are by a Writ of Error to be examined in
the Exchequer-Chamber, before the Justices of the Common-Bench, and the Barons
of the Exchequer, and by the preamble of this Act it appears, that Erroneous
Judgments are only to be reformed by the High Court of Parliament.


Ph. But here is no mention, that the Judgments given in the Court of
Common Pleas should be brought in to be examined in the Exchequer-Chamber, why
therefore may not the Court of Chancery examin^^ Judgment given in the Court of
Common Pleas?


La. You deny not but, by the Ancient Law of England, the King's Bench may
examine the Judgment given in the Court of Common Pleas.


Ph. It Is true; but why may not also the Court of Chancery do the same,
especially if the fault of the Judgment be against Equity, and not against the
Letter of the Law?


La. There is no necessity of that; for the same Court may examine both the
Letter and the Equity of the Statute.


Ph. You see by this, that the Jurisdiction of Courts cannot easily be
distinguished, but by the King himself in his Parliament. The Lawyers
themselves cannot do it; for you see what Contention there is between Courts,
as well as between particular Men. And whereas you say, that Law of 4* Hen. 4.
23. is by that of 27 Eliz. cap. 8. taken away, I do not find it so. I find
indeed a Diversity of opinion between the makers of the former and the latter
Statute, in the preamble of the latter and Conclusion of the former. The
Preamble of the latter is; forasmuch as Erroneous Judgments given in the Court
called the King's Bench, are only to be reformed in the High Court of
Parliament, and the Conclusion of the former is, that the contrary was Law in
the times of the Kings Progenitors. These are no parts of those Laws, but
Opinions only concerning the Ancient Custom in that Case, arising from the
different Opinions of the Lawyers in those different times, neither Commanding,
nor Forbidding any thing; though of the Statutes themselves, the one forbids
that such Pleas be brought before the Parliament, the other forbids it not: But
yet if after the Act of Hen. 4. such a Plea had been brought before the
Parliament, the Parliament might have Heard, and Determined it: For the Statute
forbids not that! nor can any Law have the force to hinder the Law of any
Jurisdiction whatsoever they please to take upon them, seeing it is a Court of
the King and of all the People together, both Lords, and Commons.


La. Though it be, yet seeing the King (as Sir Edw. Coke affirms, 4 Inst. p.
71.) has committed all his power Judicial, some to one Court, and some to
another, so as if any Man would render himself to the Judgment of the King, in
such case where the King has committed all his power Judicial to others, such
a render should be to no effect. And p. 73. he says farther; That in this
Court the Kings of this Realm have sitten on the High Bench, and the Judges of
that Court on the Lower Bench, at his feet; but Judicature belongs only to
the Judges of that Court, and in his presence they answer all Motions.


Ph. I cannot believe that Sir Edw. Coke, how much soever he desired to advance
the authority of himself, and other Justices of the Common Law, could mean that
the King in the King's Bench sat as a Spectator only, and might not have
answered all motions, which his Judges answered, if he had seen cause for it:
For he knew that the King was Supreme Judge then in all causes Temporal, and is
now in all Causes both Temporal, and Ecclesiastical; and that there is an
exceeding great penalty ordained by the Laws for them that shall deny it. But
Sir Edw. Coke as he had (you see) in many places before, has put a Fallacy
upon himself, by not distinguishing between Committing, and Transferring. He
that Transferreth his power, has deprived himself of it, but he that
Commits it to another to be Exercised in his name, and under him, is still
in the Possession of the same power. And therefore if a Man render himself;
that is to say, Appealeth to the King from any Judge whatsoever, the King may
receive his Appeal; and it shall be effectual.


La. Besides these 2 Courts, the King's Bench for Pleas of the Crown, and the
Court of Common Pleas for Causes Civil, according to the Common Law of England,
there is another Court of Justice, that has Jurisdiction in Causes both Civil,
and Criminal, and is as Ancient a Court, at least as the Court of Common Pleas,
and this is the Court of the Lord Admiral, but the proceedings therein are
according to the Laws of the Roman Empire, and the Causes to be determined
there are such as arise upon the Marine Sea: For so it is ordained by diverse
Statutes, and confirmed by many Precedents.


Ph. As for the Statutes they are always Law, and Reason also; for they are
made by the Assent of all the Kingdom, but Precedents are Judgments one
contrary to another; I mean diverse Men, in diverse Ages, upon the same case give
diverse Judgments. Therefore I will ask your Opinion once more concerning any
Judgments besides those of the King, as to their validity in Law. But what is
the difference between the proceedings of the Court of Admiralty, and the Court
of Common Law?


La. One is, that the Court of Admiralty proceeds by two Witnesses, without
any either Grand Jury, to Indict, or Petty to Convict, and the Judge gives
Sentence according to the Laws Imperial, which of old time were in force in all
this part of Europe, and now are Laws, not by the Will of any other Emperor or
Foreign Power, but by the Will of the Kings of England that have given them
force in their own Dominions; the reason whereof seems to be, that the causes
that arise at Sea are very often between us, and People of other Nations, such
as are Governed for the most part by the self same laws Imperial.


Ph. How can it precisely enough be determined at Sea, especially near the
mouth of a very great River, whether it be upon the Sea, or within the Land?
For the Rivers also are, as well as their Banks, within, or a part of one
Country or other.


La. Truly the Question is difficult, and there have been many Suits about it,
wherein the Question has been, whose Jurisdiction it is in.


Ph. Nor do I see how it can be decided, but by the King himself, in case it be
not declared in the Lord Admirals Letters Patents.


La. But though there be in the Letters Patents a power given to hold Plea in
some certain cases; to any of the Statutes concerning the Admiralty the
Justices of the Common Law may send a Prohibition to that Court, to proceed in
the Plea, though it be with a non-obstante of any Statute.


Ph. Methinks that That should be against the Right of the Crown, which cannot
be taken from it by any Subject: For that Argument of Sir Edw. Coke's, that the
King has given away all his Judicial Power, is worth nothing; because (as I
have said before) he cannot give away the Essential Rights of his Crown, and
because by a non-obstante he declares he is not deceived in his Grant.


La. But you may see by the Precedents alleged by Sir Edw. Coke, the contrary
has been perpetually practiced.


Ph. I see not that perpetually; for who can tell, but there may have been
given other Judgments in such cases, which have either been not preserved in
the Records, or else by Sir Edw. Coke (because they were against his opinion)
not alleged: For this is possible, though you will not grant it to be very
likely; therefore I insist only upon this, that no Record of a Judgment is a
Law, save only to the party Pleading, until he can by Law reverse the former
Judgment. And as to the proceeding without Juries by two sufficient Witnesses,
I do not see what harm can proceed from it to the Commonwealth, nor
consequently any just Quarrel that the Justice of the Common Law can have
against their proceedings in the Admiralty: For the Proof of a Fact in both
Courts lies merely on the Witnesses, and the difference is no more, but that
in the Imperial-Law, the Judge of the Court Judges of the Testimony of the
Witnesses, and the Jury does in a Court of Common Law. Besides, if a Court of
Common Law should chance to Incroach upon the Jurisdiction of the Admiral, may
not he send a prohibition to the Court of Common Law to forbid their
proceeding? I pray you tell me what Reason there is for the one, more than for
the other?


La. I know none but long Custom; for I think it was never done.


Ph. The Highest ordinary Court in England is the Court of Chancery, wherein
the Lord Chancellor, or otherwise Keeper of the Great Seal is the only Judge.
This Court is very Ancient, as appears by Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. p. 87. where
he names the Chancellors of King Edgar, King Etheldred, King Edmund, and King
Edward the Confessor. His Office is given to him without Letters Patents by the
Kings delivery to him of the Great Seal of England, and whosoever has the
keeping of the Great Seal of England has the same, and the whole Jurisdiction
that the Lord Chancellor ever had by the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 18. wherein
it is declared, that such is, and always has been the Common Law. And Sir Edw.
Coke says, he has his name of Chancellor from the highest point of his
Jurisdiction; viz. a Cancellando; that is, from Cancelling the Kings Letters
Patents, by drawing strokes through it like a Lattice.


Ph. Very pretty. It is well enough known that Cancellarius was a great Officer
under the Roman Empire, whereof this Island was once a Member, and that the
Office came into this Kingdom, either with, or in Imitation of the Roman
Government. Also it was long after the time of the 12 Caesar's, that this
Officer was created in the State of Rome. For till after Septimius Severus his
time, the Emperors did diligently enough take cognizance of Causes and
Complaints for Judgments given in the Courts of the Praetors, which were in
Rome the same that the Judges of the Common Law are here; but by the continual
Civil Wars in aftertimes for the choosing of Emperors, that diligence by
little and little ceased; and afterward (as I have Read in a very good Author
of the Roman Civil Law) the number of complaints being much increased, and
being more than the Emperor could dispatch, he appointed an Officer as his
Clerk, to receive all such Petitions; and that this Clerk caused a partition to
be made in a Room convenient, in which Partition Wall, at the height of a Man's
reach, he placed at convenient distances certain Bars; so that when a Suitor
came to deliver his Petition to the Clerk, who was sometimes absent, he had no
more to do, but to throw in his Petition between those Bars, which in Latin are
called properly Cancelli; not that any certain Form of those Bars, or any Bars
at all were necessary; for they might have been thrown over, though the whole
space had been left open; but because they were Cancelli, the Clerk Attendant,
and keeping his Office there, was called Cancellarius: And any Court Bar may
properly enough be called Cancelli, which does not signify a Lattice; for that
is but a mere Conjecture grounded upon no History nor Grammar, but taken up at
first (as is likely) by some Boy that could find no other word in the
Dictionary for a Lattice but Cancelli. The Office of this Chancellor was at
first but to Breviate the matter of the Petitions, for the easing of the
Emperor, but Complaints increasing daily, they were too many, considering other
Businesses more necessary for the Emperor to determine, and this caused the
Emperor to commit the Determination of them to the Chancellor again; what
Reason does Sir Edw. Coke allege to prove, that the highest point of the
Chancellors Jurisdiction is to Cancel his Masters Letters Patents, after they
were Sealed with his Masters Seal; unless he hold Plea concerning the validity
of them, or of his Masters meaning in them, or of the surreptitious getting of
them, or of the abusing of them, which are all causes of Equity? Also, seeing
the Chancellor has his Office only by the delivery of the Great Seal, without
any Instruction, or Limitation of the Process in his Court to be used; it is
manifest, that in all Causes whereof he has the hearing, he may proceed by such
manner of hearing, and examining of Witnesses (with Jury, or without Jury) as
he shall think fittest for the Exactness, Expedition and Equity of the Decrees.
And therefore, if he think the Custom of proceeding by Jury, according to the
Custom of England in Courts of Common Law, tend more to Equity (which is the
scope of all the Judges in the World, or ought to be) he ought to use that
method, or if he think better of another proceeding, he may use it, if it be
not forbidden by a Statute.


La. As for this Reasoning of yours I think it well enough; but there ought to
be had also a reverend respect to Customs not unreasonable; and therefore, I
think, Sir Edw. Coke says not amiss; that in such Cases, where the Chancellor
will proceed by the Rule of the Common Law, he ought to deliver the Record in
the King's Bench; and also it is necessary for the Lord Chancellor to take care
of not exceeding as it is limited by Statutes.


Ph. What are the Statutes by which his Jurisdiction is limited? I know that by
the 27 Eliz. cap. 8. He cannot Reverse a Judgment given in the King's Bench for
Debt, Detinue, etc. Nor before the Statute could he ever by virtue of his
Office, Reverse a Judgment in Pleas of the Crown, given by the King's Bench that
has the Cognizance of such Pleas, nor need he; for the Judges themselves, when
they think there is need to relieve a Man oppressed by ill Witnesses, or power of
great Men prevailing on the Jury, or by Error of the Jury, though it be in case
of Felony, may stay the Execution, and Inform the King, who will in Equity
relieve him. As to the regard we ought to have to Custom, we will Consider of
it afterward.


La. First in a Parliament holden the 13th of Rich. 2. the Commons Petitioned
the King, that neither the Chancellor, nor other Chancellor do make any order
against the Common Law, nor that any Judgment be given without due Process of
Law.


Ph. This is no unreasonable Petition; for the Common Law is nothing else but
Equity: And by this Statute it appears, that the Chancellors, before that
Statute, made bolder with the Courts of Common Law, than they did afterward;
but it does not appear that Common Law in this Statute signifies any thing
else, but generally the Law Temporal of the Realm, nor was this Statute ever
Printed, that such as I might take notice of it; but whether it be a Statute or
not, I know not, till you tell me what the Parliament Answered to this Petition.


La. The Kings Answer was, the Wages heretofore shall stand, so as the Kings
Royalty be saved.


Ph. This is slatly against Sir Edw. Coke, concerning the Chancery.


La. In another Parliament, 17 Rich. 2. It is Enacted, at the Petition of the
Commons; That forasmuch as People were Compelled to come before the Kings
Council, or in Chancery, by Writs grounded upon untrue Suggestions, that the
Chancellor for the time being, presently after such Suggestions, be duly found,
and proved untrue, shall have power to Ordain, and Award Damages, according to
his discretion, to him which is so Traveled unduly, as is aforesaid.


Ph. By this Statute it appears, that when a Complaint is made in Chancery upon
undue Suggestions, the Chancellor shall have the Examination of the said
Suggestions, and as he may avoid Damages when the Suggestions are untrue, so
he may also proceed by Process to the detemining of the Cause, whether it be
Real, or Personal, so it be not Criminal.


La. Also the Commons Petitioned in a Parliament of 2 Hen. 4. not Printed; That
no Writs, nor Privy-Seals be sued out of Chancery, Exchequer, or other places
to any Man to appear at a day, upon a pain, either before the King and his
Council, or in any other place, contrary to the ordinary Course of Common Law.


Ph. What Answer was given to this Petition by the King?


La. That such Writs should not be granted without necessity.


Ph. Here again you see the King may deny, or Grant any Petitions in
Parliament, either as he thinks it necessary, as in this place, or as he thinks
it prejudicial, or not prejudicial to his Royalty, as in the Answer of the
former Petition, which is a sufficient proof, that no part of his Legislative
Power, or any other Essential part of Royalty can be taken from him by a
Statute. Now seeing it is granted, that Equity is the same thing with the Law
of Reason, and seeing Sir Edw. Coke, 1 Inst. Sect. 21. Defines Equity to be a
certain Reason comprehended in no Writing, but consisting only in right Reason,
which interprets and amendeth the Written-Law; I would fain know to what end
there should be any other Court of Equity at all, either before the Chancellor
or any other Person, besides the Judges of the Civil, or Common Pleas? Nay I am
sure you can allege none but this, that there was a necessity of a Higher
Court of Equity, than the Courts of Common Law, to remedy the Errors in
Judgment given by the Justices of Inferior Courts, and the Errors in Chancery
were irrevocable, except by Parliament, or by special Commission appointed
thereunto by the King.


La. But Sir Edw. Coke says, that seeing matters of Fact by the Common Law are
Tryable by a Jury of 12 Men, this Court should not draw the matter ad aliud
Examen; i. e. to another kind of Examination, viz. by Deposition of Witnesses,
which should be but evidence to a Jury.


Ph. To the Deposition of Witnesses any more or less, then to evidence to the
Lord-Chancellor? It Is not therefore another kind of Examination; nor is a Jury
more capable of duly examining Witnesses than a Lord-Chancellor. Besides,
seeing all Courts are bound to Judge according to Equity, and that all Judges
in a Case of Equity, may sometimes be deceived, what harm is there to any Man,
or to the State, if there be a subordination of Judges in Equity, as well as of
Judges in Common Law? Seeing it is provided by an Act of parliament to avoid
Vexation, that Subpoenas shall not be granted, till surety be found to satisfy
the Party so grieved and vexed for his Damages and Expenses, if so be the
matter may not be made good which is contained in the Bill.


La. There is another Statute of 31 Hen. 6. cap. 2. wherein there is a Proviso
cited by Sir Edw. Coke in these words; Provided, that no matter determinable by
the Laws of the Realm, shall be by the said Act determined in other Form, then
after the course of the same Law in the Kings Courts having the Determination
of the same Law.


Ph. This Law was made but for Seven years, and never continued by any other
Parliament, and the motive of this Law was the great Riots, Extortions,
Oppressions, etc. used during the time of the Insurrection of John Cade, and
the Indictments and Condemnations wrongfully had by this usurped Authority; and
thereupon the Parliament Ordained, that for 7 years following no Man should
disobey any of the Kings Writs under the Great Seal, or should refuse to appear
upon Proclamation before the Kings Council, or in the Chancery, to Answer to
Riots, Extortions, etc. For the first time he should lose, etc. Wherein there
is nothing at all concerning the Jurisdiction of the Chancery, or any other
Court, but an extraordinary power given to the Chancery, and to the Kings
Privy Council, to Determine of those Crimes which were not before that time
Tryable, but only by the King's Bench, or special Commission: For the Act was
made expressly for the punishment of a great Multitude of Crimes committed by
those that had Acted by the said Cade's Authority; to which Act the Proviso was
added, which is here mentioned, that the Proceeds in those Courts of Chancery,
and of the Kings Council should be such, as should be used in the Courts, to
which the said Courts, before this Act was made, do belong. That is to say,
such causes as were Criminal, should be after the order of the King's Bench, and
such Causes as were not Criminal, but only against Equity, should be Tried
after the manner of the Chancery, or in some cases according to the Proceedings
in the Exchequer. I wonder why Sir Edw. Coke should cite a Statute (as this is)
above two hundred years before expired, and other two Petitions; as if they
were Statutes, when they were not passed by the King; unless he did it on
purpose to diminish (as he endeavors to do throughout his Institutes) the
Kings Authority, or to insinuate his own opinions among the People for the Law
of the Land: For that also he endeavors by Inserting Latin Sentences, both in
his Text, and in the Margin, as if they were Principles of the Law of Reason,
without any Authority of Ancient Lawyers, or any certainty of Reason in
themselves, to make Men believe they are the very grounds of the Law of
England. Now as to the Authority you ascribe to Custom, I deny that any
Custom of its own Nature, can amount to the Authority of a Law: For if the
Custom be unreasonable, you must with all other Lawyers confess that it is no
Law, but ought to be abolished; and if the Custom be reasonable, it is not the
Custom, but the Equity that makes it Law. For what need is there to make Reason
Law by any Custom how long soever when the Law of Reason is Eternal? Besides,
you cannot find in any Statute (though Lex and Consuetudo be often mentioned as
things to be followed by the Judges in their Judgments) that Consuetudines,
that is to say, Customs, or Usages did imply any Long continuance of former
time; but that it signified such Use, and Custom of proceeding, as was then
immediately in being before the making of such Statute. Nor shall you find in
any Statute the word Common Law, which may not be there well Interpreted for
any of the Laws of England Temporal; for it is not the singularity of Process
used in any Court; that can distinguish it so as to make it a different Law
from the Law of the whole Nation.


La. If all Courts were (as you think) Courts of Equity, would it not be
incommodious to the Commonwealth?


Ph. I think not; unless perhaps you may say, that seeing the Judges, whether
they have many, or few causes to be heard before them, have but the same wages
from the King, they may be too much inclined to put off the Causes they use to
hear (for the easing of themselves) to some other Court; to the delay of
Justice, and damage of the Parties suing.


La. You are very much deceived in that; for on contrary the Contention between
the Courts for Jurisdiction, is of who shall have most Causes brought before
them.


Ph. I cry you Mercy, I smelt not that.


La. Seeing also all Judges ought to give their Sentence according to Equity;
if it should chance that a Written Law should be against the Law of Reason,
which is Equity, I cannot Imagine in that Case how any Judgment can be
Righteous.


Ph. It cannot be that a Written Law should be against Reason: For nothing is
more reasonable than that every Man should obey the Law, which he has himself
assented to; but that is not always the Law which is signified by Grammatical
Construction of the Letter, but that which the Legislator thereby intended
should be in Force; which Intention, I Confess, is a very hard matter many
times to pick out of the words of the Statute, and requires great Ability of
understanding, and greater Meditations, and Considerations of such Conjuncture
of occasions, and Incommodities as needed a new Law for a Remedy; for there is
scarce any thing so clearly written, that when the Cause thereof is forgotten,
may not be wrested by an ignorant Grammarian, or a Cavilling Logician, to the
Injury, Oppression, or perhaps Destruction of an honest Man. And for this
Reason, the Judges deserve that Honor and Profit they enjoy; since the
Determination of what particular Causes every particular Court should have
Cognizance, is a thing not yet sufficiently explained, and is in it self so
difficult, as that the Sages of the Law themselves (the Reason Sir Edw. Coke
will leave to Law it self) are not yet agreed upon it; how is it possible for a
Man that is no professed, or no profound Lawyer, to take notice in what Court
he may Lawfully begin his Suit, or give Council in it to his Client?


La. I confess that no Man can be bound to take notice of the Jurisdiction of
Courts, till all the Courts be agreed upon it amongst themselves; but what Rule
to give Judgment by a Judge can have, so as never to contradict the Law
written, nor displease his Legislator I understand not.


Ph. I think he may avoid both, if he take care by his Sentence, that he
neither punish an Innocent, nor deprive him of his ^ammages due from one that
maliciously ^^eth him without reasonable Cause, which ^o the most of Rational
Men, and unbiassed ^s not, in my Opinion, very difficult. And though a Judge
should (as all Men may do) Err in his Judgment, yet there is always such power
in the Laws of England, as may content the Parties, either in the Chancery, or
by Commissioners of their own choosing, Authorized by the King; for every Man
^s bound to acquiesce in the Sentence of the Judges he chooses.


La. In what Cases can the true Construction of the Letter be contrary to the
meaning of the Lawmaker?


Ph. Very many, whereof Sir Edw. Coke names 3, Fraud, Accident, and Breach of
Confidence; but there be many more; for there be a very great many reasonable
Exceptions almost to every General Rule, which the makers of the Rule could not
foresee; and very many words in every Statute, especially long ones, that are,
as to Grammar, of Ambiguous signification, and yet to them that know well, to
what end the Statute was made, perspicuous enough; and many Connections of
doubtful reference, which by a Grammarian may be Cavill'd at, though the
Intention of the Lawmaker be never so perspicuous. And these are the
difficulties which the Judges ought to Master, and can do it in respect of
their Ability for which they are chosen, as well as can be hoped for; and yet
there are other Men can do the same, or else the Judges places could not be
from time to time supplied. The Bishops commonly are the most able and rational
Men, and obliged by their profession to Study Equity, because it is the Law of
God, and are therefore capable of being Judges in a Court of Equity. They are
the Men that teach the People what is Sin; that is to say, they are the Doctors
in Cases of Conscience. What reason then can you show me, why it is unfit, and
hurtful to the Commonwealth, that a Bishop should be a Chancellor, as they
were most often before the time of Hen. 8. and since that time once in the
Reign of King James?


La. But Sir Ed. says, that soon after that a Chancellor was made, which was no
Professor of the Law, he finds in the Rolls of the Parliament a grievous
Complaint by the whole Body of the Realm, and a Petition that the most wise and
able Men within the Realm might be chosen Chancellors.


Ph. That Petition was Reasonable, but it does not say which are Abler Men, the
Judges of the Common Law, or the Bishops.


La. That is not the great Question as to the Ability of a Judge; both of one,
and the other there are Able Men in their own way; but when a Judge of Equity
has need, almost in every Case, to consider as well the Statute Law, as the Law
of Reason, he cannot perform his Office perfectly, unless he be also ready in
the Statutes.


Ph. I see no great need he has to be ready in the Statutes; in the hearing of
a Cause do the Judges of the Common Law Inform the Council at the Bar what the
Statute is, or the Council the Judges?


La. The Council Inform the Judges.


Ph. Why may they not as well Inform the Chancellor? Unless you will say, that
a Bishop understands not as well as a Lawyer what is sense, when he hears it
Read in English. No; no; both the one, and the other are able enough, but to be
able enough is not enough; when, not the difficulty of the Case only, but also
the Passion of the Judge is to be Conquered. I forgot to tell you of the
Statute of the 36 Edw. 3. cap. 9. That if any Person think himself grieved
contrary to any of the Articles above Written, or others contained in diverse
Statutes, will come to the Chancery, or any for him, and thereof make his
Complaint, he shall presently there have Remedy by force of the said Articles,
and Statutes, without elsewhere pursuing to have Remedy. By the words of this
Statute it is very apparent, in my opinion, that the Chancery may hold Plea
upon the Complaint of the Party grieved, in any Case Tryable at the Common Law,
because the party shall have present Remedy in that Court, by force of this
Act, without pursuing for Remedy elsewhere.


La. Yes; but Sir Edw. Coke Answers this Objection, 4 Inst. p. 82. in this
manner. These words, says he, He shall have Remedy, signify no more but that
he shall have presently there a remedial Writ grounded upon those Statutes to
give him Remedy at the Common Law.


Ph. Very like Sir Edw. Coke thought as soon as the Party had his Writ, he had
his Remedy, though he kept the Writ in his Pocket, without pursuing his
Complaint elsewhere; or else he thought, that in the Common-Bench was not
elsewhere than in the Chancery.


La. Then there is the Court of --


Ph. Let us stop here; for this which you have said satisfies me, that seek no
more than to distinguish between Justice, and Equity; and from it I Conclude,
that Justice fulfils the Law, and Equity Interprets the Law; and amends the
Judgments given upon the same Law: Wherein I depart not much from the
Definition of Equity, cited in Sir Edw. Coke, 1 Inst. Sect. 21. viz. Equity is
a certain perfect Reason that Interprets, and Amendeth the Law Written;
though I Construe it a little otherwise than he would have done; for no one can
mend a Law but he that can make it, and therefore I say not it amends the Law,
but the Judgments only when they are Erroneous. And now let us Consider of
Crimes in particular (the Pleas whereof are commonly called the Pleas of the
Crown) and of the punishments belonging to them; and first of the Highest Crime
of all which is High Treason. Tell me what is High Treason.


Of Crimes Capital.
La. THe first Statute that declares what is High Treason, is the Statute of
the 25 Edw. 3. in these words. Whereas diverse Opinions have been before this
time, in what Case Treason shall be said, and in what not; the King, at the
Request of the Lords, and of the Commons, has made Declaration in the manner
as hereafter follows; That is to say, when a Man does Compass, or Imagine the
Death of our Lord the King, of our Lady the Queen, or of their Eldest Son and
Heir; or if a Man does violate the Kings Companion, or the Kings Eldest
Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of the Kings Eldest Son and Heir; or if a Man
do Levy War against our Lord the King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings
Enemies in his Realm, giving to them Aid, and Comfort in the Realm, or
elsewhere, and thereof be provably Attainted by open Deed, by People of their
Condition. And if a Man Counterfeit the Kings Great, or Privy Seal, or his
Money. And if a Man bring false Money into this Realm Counterfeit to the Money
of England, as the Money called Lushburgh, or other like to the said Money of
England, knowing the Money to be false, to Merchandise, and make payment in
deceit of our said Lord the King, and of his People. And if a Man slay the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justices of the one Bench, or the other,
Justices in Air, or Justices of Assizes, and all other Justices Assigned to
Hear, and Determine, being in their Places, and doing their Offices. And is to
be understood in the Cases above rehearsed, that That ought to be adjudged
Treason, which extends to our Royal Lord the King, and his Royal Majesty, and
of such Treason the Forfeiture of the Escheats pertains to our Lord the King,
as well the Lands and Tenements holden of others as himself. And moreover there
is another manner of Treason; that is to say, when a Servant Slays his
Master, or a Wife her Husband; or when a Man Secular, or Religious slays his
Prelate, to whom he owes Faith, and Obedience; and of such Treason the
Escheats ought to pertain to every Lord of his own Fee. And because many other
like Cases of Treason may happen in time to come, which a Man cannot think, nor
declare at this present time, it is accorded, that if any Case supposed
Treason, which is not above specified, does happen before any Justices, the
Justices shall tarry without giving any Judgment of the Treason till the Cause
be showed, and declared before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to
be adjudged Treason, or other Felony.


Ph. I desired to understand what Treason is, wherein no Enumeration of Facts
can give me satisfaction. Treason is a Crime of it self, Malum in se, and
therefore a Crime at the Common Law, and High Treason the Highest Crime at the
Common Law that can be: And therefore not the Statute only, but Reason without
a Statute makes it a Crime. And this appears by the Preamble, where it is
intimated, that all Men, though of diverse Opinions did Condemn it by the name
of Treason, though they knew not what Treason meant, but were forced to request
the King to determine it. That which I desire to know is, how Treason might
have been defined without the Statute, by a Man that has no other faculty to
make a Definition of it, than by mere Natural Reason.


La. When none of the Lawyers have done it, you are not to expect that I should
undertake it on such a sudden.


Ph. You know that Salus Populi is Suprema Lex; that is to say, the safety of
the People, is the highest Law; and that the safety of the People of a Kingdom
consists in the safety of the King, and of the strength necessary to defend
his People, both against Foreign Enemies, and Rebellious Subjects. And from
this I infer, that to Compass (that is) to design the Death of the then present
King, was High Treason before the making of this Statute, as being a Designing
of a Civil War, and the Destruction of the People. 2. That the Design to Kill
the Kings Wife, or to violate her Chastity, as also to violate the Chastity of
the Kings Heir apparent, or of his Eldest Daughter unmarryed, as tending to the
Destruction of the certainty of the Kings Issue, and by Consequence by raising
of Contentions about the Crown, and Destruction of the People in Succeeding
time by Civil War, was therefore High Treason before this Statute. 3. That to
Levy war against the King within the Realm, and Aiding the Kings Enemies,
either within, or without the Realm, are tending to the Kings Destruction, or
Disherison, and was High Treason, before this Statute by the Common Law. 4.
That Counterfeiting the principal Seals of the Kingdom, by which the King
Governs his People, tends to the Confusion of Government, and Consequently
to the Destruction of the People, and was therefore Treason before the Statute.
5. If a Soldier design the Killing of his General, or other Officer in time of
Battle, or a Captain Hover doubtfully with his Troops, with intention to gain
the Favor of him that shall chance to get the Victory, it tends to the
Destruction both of King, and People, whether the King be present, or absent,
and was High Treason before the Statute. 6. If any Man had Imprisoned the Kings
Person, he had made him incapable of Defending his People, and was therefore
High Treason before the Statute. 7. If any Man had, with design to raise
Rebellion against the King, Written, or by words advisedly uttered, denied the
King Regnant to be their Lawful King, he that wrought, Preached, or spoke such
words, living then under the Protection of the Kings Laws, it had been High
Treason before the Statute for the Reasons aforesaid. And perhaps there may be
some other Cases upon this Statute, which I cannot presently think upon; but
the Killing of a Justice, or other Officer as is determined by the Statute, is
not otherwise High Treason, but by the Statute. And to distinguish that which
is Treason by the Common Law, from all other Inferior Crimes; we are to
Consider, that if such High Treason should take effect, it would destroy all
Laws at once; and being done by a Subject, it is a return to Hostility by
Treachery; and consequently, such as are Traitors may by the Law of Reason be
dealt withal, as Ignoble and Treacherous Enemies; but the greatest of other
Crimes, for the most part; are breaches of one only, or at least of very few
Laws.


La. Whether this you say be true, or false, the Law is now unquestionable by a
Statute made in 1 and 2 of Queen Mary, whereby there is nothing to be esteemed
Treason, besides those few Offenses specially mentioned in the Act of 25 Ed. 3.


Ph. Amongst these great Crimes the greatest is that which is Committed by one
that has been trusted, and loved by him whose Death he so designeth: For a Man
cannot well take heed of those, whom he thinks he has obliged, whereas an open
Enemy gives a Man warning before he Acts. And this it is for which the
Statute has declared, that it is another kind of Treason, when a Servant
kills his Master, or Mistress, or a Wife kills her Husband, or a Clerk
kills his Prelate; and I should think it petty Treason also, though it be not
within the words of the Statute; when a Tenant in Fee, that holds by Homage,
and Fealty, shall kill the Lord of his Fee; for Fealty is an Oath of Allegiance
to the Lord of the Fee; saving he may not keep his Oath in any thing Sworn to,
if it be against the King. For Homage, as it is expressed in a Statute of 17
Edw. 2. is the greatest submission that is possible to be made to one Man by
another; for the Tenant shall hold his Hands together between the Hands of his
Landlord, and shall say thus; I become your Man from this day forth for Life,
for Member and for Worldly Honor, and shall owe that my Faith for the Lands
that I shall hold of you, saving the Faith that I owe unto our Sovereign Lord
the King, and to many other Lords: Which Homage, if made to the King, is
Equivalent to a promise of simple obedience, and if made to another Lord, there
is nothing excepted but the Allegiance to the King; and that which is called
Fealty, is but the same Confirmed by an Oath.


La. But Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. p. 11. denies that a Traitor is in Legal
understanding the Kings Enemy; for Enemies (says he) be those that be out of
the Allegiance of the King; and his Reason is; because, if a Subject join with
a Foreign Enemy, and come into England with him, and be taken Prisoner here,
he shall not be Ransomed, or proceeded with as an Enemy shall, but he shall be
taken as a Traitor to the King. Whereas an Enemy coming in open Hostility, and
taken, shall either be Executed by Martial-Law, or Ransomed; for he cannot be
Indicted of Treason, for that he never was in the Protection and Ligeance of
the King, and the Indictment of the Treason says, Contra Ligeantiam suam
debitam.


Ph. This is not an Argument worthy of the meanest Lawyer. Did Sir Edw. Coke.
think it is possible for a King Lawfully to kill a Man, by what Death soever
without an Indictment, when it is manifestly proved he was his open Enemy?
Indictment is a form of Accusation peculiar to England, by the Command of some
King of England, and retained still, and therefore a Law to this Country of
England; but if it were not Lawful to put a Man to Death otherwise than by an
Indictment no Enemy could be put to Death at all in other Nations, because they
proceed not, as we do, by Indictment. Again, when an open Enemy is taken and
put to Death by Judgment of Martial-Law; it is not the Law of the General or
Council of War, that an Enemy shall be thus proceeded with, but the Law of the
King contained in their Commissions; such as from time to time the Kings have
thought fit, in whose Will it always rests, whether an open Enemy, when he is
taken, shall be put to Death, or no, and by what Death; and whether he shall be
Ransomed, or no, and at what price? Then for the Nature of Treason by
Rebellion; is it not a return to Hostility? What else does Rebellion signify?
William the Conqueror Subdued this Kingdom; some he Killed; some upon promise
of future obedience he took to Mercy, and they became his Subjects, and swore
Allegiance to him; if therefore they renew the War against him, are they not
again open Enemies; or if any of them lurking under his Laws, seek occasion
thereby to kill him, secretly, and come to be known, may he not be proceeded
against as an Enemy, who though he had not Committed what he Designed, yet had
certainly a Hostile Design? Did not the long Parliament declare all those for
Enemies to the State that opposed their Proceedings against the late King? But
Sir Edw. Coke does seldom well distinguish when there are two diverse Names for
one and the same thing; though one contain the other, he makes them always
different, as if it could not be that one and the same Man should be both an
Enemy, and a Traitor. But now let us come to his Comment upon this Statute; The
Statute says (as it is Printed in English) when a Man does Compass, or Imagine
the Death of our Lord the King, etc. What is the meaning of the word
Compassing, or Imagining?


La. On this place Sir Edw. Coke says, that before the making of this Act,
Voluntas reputabatur pro facto, the Will was taken for the Deed. And so says
Bracton, Spectatur Voluntas, and non Exitus; and nihil interest utrum quis
occidat, aut causam praebeat; That is to say, the Cause of the killing: Now Sir
Edw. Coke says, this was the Law before the Statute; and that to be a Cause of
the killing, is to declare the same by some open Deed tending to the Execution
of his Intent, or which might be Cause of Death.


Ph. Is there any Englishman can understand, that to Cause the Death of a Man,
and to declare the same is all one thing? And if this were so, and that such
was the Common Law before the Statute, by what words in the Statute is it taken
away?


La. It is not taken away, but the manner how it must be proved is thus
Determined, that it must be proved by some open Deed, as providing of Weapons,
Powder, Poison, Assaying of Armor, sending of Letters, etc.


Ph. But what is the Crime it self which this Statute makes Treason? For as I
understand the words, To Compass, or Imagine the Kings Death, etc. The
Compassing (as it is in the English) is the only thing which is made High
Treason; so that not only the killing, but the Design is made High Treason; or
as it is in the French Record, Fait Compasser; That is to say, the causing of
others to Compass, or Design the Kings Death is High Treason; and the words par
overt fait, are not added as a specification of any Treason, or other Crime,
but only of the Proof that is required by the Law. Seeing then the Crime is the
Design and Purpose to kill the King, or cause him to be killed, and lies
hidden in the Breast of him that is Accused; what other Proof can there be had
of it than words Spoken or Written. And therefore if there be sufficient
Witness, that he by words Declared, that he had such a Design, there can be no
Question, but that he is Comprehended within this Statute: Sir Edw. Coke does
not deny, but that if he Confess this Design, either by Word, or Writing, but
that he is within the Statute. As for that Common saying, that bare words may
make a Heretic, but not a Traitor, which Sir Edw. Coke on this occasion makes
use of, they are to little purpose; seeing that this Statute makes not the
words High Treason, but the Intention, whereof the words are but a Testimony:
and that Common-saying is false as it is generally Pronounced; for there were
diverse Statutes made afterward, though now expired, which made bare words to
be Treason without any other Deed: As, 1 El. cap. 6. and 13. El. cap. 1. If a
Man should Publicly Preach, that the King were an Usurper, or that the Right
of the Crown belonged to any other than the King that Reigned, there is no
doubt but it were Treason, not only within this Statute of E. 3. but also
within the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. c. 12. which are both still in Force.


La. Not only so; but if a Subject should counsel any other Man to kill the
King, Queen, or Heir apparent to the Crown, it would at this day be Judged High
Treason; and yet it is no more than bare words. In the third year of King
James, Henry Garnet, a Jesuit-Priest, to whom some of the Gunpowder Traitors
had Revealed their design by way of Confession, gave them Absolution, without
any Caution taken for their desisting from their purpose, or other provision
against the danger, was therefore Condemned, and Executed as a Traitor, though
such Absolution were nothing else but bare words. Also I find in the Reports of
Sir John Davis, Attorney General for Ireland; that in the time of King Henry
the 6th, a Man was Condemned of Treason, for saying the King was a Natural
Fool, and unfit to Govern; but yet this Clause in the Statute of Edw. 3. viz.
That the Compassing there mentioned ought to be proved by some Overt Act, was
by the Framers of the Statute, not without great Wisdom, and Providence
inserted: For as Sir Edw. Coke very well observes, when Witnesses are Examined
concerning words only, they never or very rarely agree precisely about the
words they Swear to.


Ph. I deny not but that it was wisely enough done. But the Question is not
here of the Treason (which is either Fact, or design) but of the Proof, which,
when it is doubtful, is to be Judged by a Jury of 12 Lawful Men: Now whether
think you is it a better Proof of a Man's Intention to kill, that he declares
that same with his own Mouth, so as it may be Witnessed, or that he provide
Weapons, Powder, Poison, or Assay Arms? If he utter his Design by words, the
Jury has no more to do than to consider the Legallity of the VVitnesses, the
Harmony of their Testimonies, or whether the words were spoken advisedly? For
they might have been uttered in a Disputation for Exercise only, or when he
that spoke them had not the use of Reason, nor perhaps any Design, or wish at
all toward the Execution of what he talked of: But how a Jury from providing,
or buying of Armor, or buying of Gunpowder, or from any other overt Act, not
Treason in it self, can infer a Design of Murdering the King, unless there
appear some words also, signifying to what end he made such Provision, I cannot
easily conceive. Therefore as the Jury on the whole matter Words and Deeds
shall ground their Judgment concerning Design, or not Design, so, in Reason,
they ought to give Verdict. But to come to the Treason of Counterfeiting the
Great, or Privy Seal, seeing there are so many ways for a Cheating Fellow to
make use of these Seals, to the Cousening of the King, and his People; why are
not all such abuses High Treason, as well as the making of a false Seal?


La. So they are: For Sir Edw. Coke produces a Record of one that was Drawn,
and Hanged for taking the Great Seal from an expired Patent, and fastening it to
a Counterfeit Commission to gather Money: But he approves not the Judgment,
because it is the Judgment for Petty Treason; also because the Jury did not
find him Guilty of the Offense laid in the Indictment, which was the
Counterfeiting of the Great-Seal, but found the special matter, for which the
Offender was Drawn, and Hanged.


Ph. Seeing this Crime of taking the Great Seal from one VVriting, and fastening
it to another was not found High Treason by the Jury, nor could be found upon
special matter to be the other kind of Treason mentioned in the same Statute;
what ground had either the Jury to find it Treason, or the Judge to pronounce
Sentence upon it?


La. I cannot tell. Sir Edw. Coke seems to think it a false Record; for
hereupon he says by way of Admonition to the Reader, that hereby it appears
how dangerous it is to Report a Case by the Ear.


Ph. True; but he does not make it apparent, that this Case was untruly
Reported, but on the contrary confesses, that he had perused the same Record;
and a Man may (if it may be done without Proof of the Falsity) make the same
Objection to any Record whatsoever. For my part, seeing this Crime produced the
same mischief that arises from Counterfeiting, I think it reason to understand
it as within the Statute: And for the Difference between the Punishments (which
are both of them Capital) I thing it is not worthy to be stood upon; seeing
Death, which is, Vltimum supplicium, is a satisfaction to the Law; as Sir Edw.
Coke himself has in another place affirmed. But let us now proceed to other
Crimes.


La. Appendent to this is another Crime called Misprision of Treason; which is
the Concealing of it by any Man that knows it; and it is called Misprision from
the French Mespriser, which signifies to contemn, or undervalue; for it is no
small Crime in any Subject, so little to take to Heart a known danger to the
Kings Person, and Consequently, to the whole Kingdom, as not to discover not
only what he knows, but also what he suspecteth of the same, that the Truth
therefore may be Examined. But for such Discovery, tho the thing prove false,
the Discoverer shall not, as I think, be taken for a false Accuser; if for what
he directly affirms, he produce a reasonable Proof, and some probability for
his Suspicion; for else the Concealment will seem justifiable by the Interest,
which is to every Man allowed in the preservation of himself from pain and
damage.


Ph. This I consent to.


La. All other Crimes merely Temporal are comprehended under Felony, or
Trespass.


Ph. What is the meaning of the word Felony? Does it signify any thing that is
in its own Nature a Crime, or that only which is made a Crime by some Statute?
for I remember some Statutes that make it Felony to Transport Horses, and some
other things out of the Kingdom; which Transportation before such Statutes
made, and after the Repealing of the same, was no greater Crime than any other
usual Traffic of a Merchant.


La. Sir Edw. Coke derives the word Felony from the Latin word Fell, the Gall of
a living Creature, and accordingly defines Felony to be an Act done Animo
Felleo; that is to say, a Bitter a Cruel Act.


Ph. Etymologies are no Definitions, and yet when they are true they give much
light toward the finding out of a Definition; but this of Sir Edw. Coke's
carries with it very little of Probability; for there be many things made
Felony by the Statute Law, that proceed not from any bitterness of mind at all,
and many that proceed from the contrary.


La. This is matter for a Critic, to be picked out of the knowledge of History
and Foreign Languages, and you may perhaps know more of it than I do.


Ph. All that I, or, I think, any other can say in this matter will amount to
no more than a reasonable Conjecture, insufficient to sustain any point of
Controversy in Law. The word is not to be found in any of the old Saxon Laws,
set forth by Mr. Lambert, nor in any Statute Printed before that of Magna
Charta; there it is found. Now Magna Charta was made in the time of Hen. the
3d, Grandchild to Hen. the 2d, Duke of Anjou, a Frenchman born, and bred in
the Heart of France, whose Language might very well retain many words of his
Ancestors the German-Franks, as ours does of the German-Saxons; as also many
words of the Language of the Gauls, as the Gauls did retain many words of the
Greek Colonie planted at Marseilles. But certain it is the French Lawyers at
this day use the word Felon, just as our Lawyers use the same; whereas the
Common People of France use the word Filou in the same sense; but Filou
signifies not the Man that has committed such an Act, as they call Felony;
but the Man that makes it his Trade to maintain himself by the breaking and
contemning of all Laws generally; and comprehends all those unruly People
called Cheaters, Cut-purses, Pick-locks, Catch-Cloaks, Coyners of false Money,
Forgers, Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, and whosoever make use of Iniquity on
Land, or Sea, as a Trading, or Living. The Greeks upon the Coast of Asia, where
Homer lived, were they that Planted the Colony of Marseilles; they had a word
that signified the same with Felon, which was (...), Filetes, and this Filetes
of Homer signifies properly the same that a Felon signifies with us: And
therefore Homer makes Apollo to call Mercury (...), Fileteen, and (...); I
insist not upon the truth of this Etymology; but it is certainly more rational
than the Animus Felleus of Sir Edw. Coke. And for the matter it self it is
manifest enough, that which we now call Murder, Robbery, Theft, and other
practices of Felons, are the same that we call Felony, and Crimes in their own
nature without the help of Statute. Nor is it the manner of punishment that
distinguishes the nature of one Crime from another; but the mind of the
Offender and the Mischief he intends, considered together with the
Circumstances of Person, Time, and Place.


La. Of Felonies, the Crime is Murder.


Ph. And what is Murder?


La. Murder is the Killing of a Man upon Malice forethought, as by a Weapon, or
by Poison, or any way, if it be done, upon Antecedent Meditation, or thus,
Murder is the Killing of a Man in cold Blood.


Ph. I think there is a good definition of Murder set down by Statute, 52 Hen.
3. cap. 25. in these words: Murder from henceforth shall not be Judged before
our Justices, where it is found misfortune only, but it shall take place in
such as are slain by Felony. And Sir Edw. Coke Interpreting this Statute, 2
Inst. p. 148. says; That the mischief before this Statute was, that he that
Killed a Man by misfortune, as by doing any Act that was not against Law, and
yet against his Intent, if the Death of a Man ensued, this was adjudged Murder.
But I find no Proof that he alleges, nor find I any such Law amongst the Laws
of the Saxons, set forth by Mr. Lambert. For the word, it is (as Sir Edw. Coke
notes) old Saxon, and amongst them it signified no more than a Man slain in
the Field, or other place, the Author of his death not known. And according
hereunto, Bracton, who lived in the time of Magna Charta, defines it fol. 134,
thus; Murder is the secret killing of a Man, when none besides the killer, and
his Companions saw, or knew it; so that it was not known who did it, nor
fresh-suit could be made after the doer; therefore every such killing was
called Murder before it could be known whether it could be by Felony, or not:
For a Man may be found dead that kills himself, or was Lawfully killed by
another. This name of Murder came to be the more horrid, when it was secretly
done, for that it made every Man to consider of their own danger, and him that
saw the dead Body to boggle at it, as a Horse will do at a dead Horse; and to
prevent the same they had Laws in force to Amerce the Hundred where it was
done, in a sum defined by Law to be the Price of his Life: For in those days
the lives of all sorts of Men were valued by Money; and the value set down in
their Written Laws. And therefore Sir Edw. Coke was mistaken in that he thought
that killing a Man by misfortune before the Statute of Marlebridge was adjudged
Murder, and those secret Murders were abominated by the People, for that they
were liable to so great a Pecuniary Punishment for suffering the Malefactor to
escape. But this grievance was by Canutus, when he Reigned, soon eased: For he
made a Law, that the Country in this Case, should not be Charged, unless he
were an Englishman that was so slain; but if he were a Frenchman (under which
name were comprehended all Forraigners, and especially the Normans) though the
slayer escaped, the County was not to be Amerced. And this Law, though it were
very hard, and Chargeable when an Englishman was so slain, for his Friend to
prove he was an Englishman, and also unreasonable to deny the Justice to a
stranger; yet was it not Repealed till the 14th of King Ed. the 3d. By this you
see that Murder is distinguished from Homicide by the Statute-Laws, and not by
any Common Law without the Statute; and that it is comprehended under the
general name of Felony.


La. And so also is Petit Treason, and I think so is High Treason also; for in
the abovesaid Statute in the 25 Ed. 3d. Concerning Treasons there is this
Clause. And because that many other like Cases of Treason, may happen in time
to come, which a Man cannot think, or declare at the present time; it is
accorded, that if any other Case, supposed Treason which is not above
specified, does happen before any the Justices, the Justices shall tarry
without any going to Judgment of the Treason, till the Cause be showed, and
declared before the King and his Parliament whether it be Treason, or other
Felony; which thereby shows that the King and Parliament thought that Treason
was one of the sorts of Felony.


Ph. And so think I.


La. But Sir Edw. Coke denies it to be so at this day; for 1 Inst. Sect. 745.
at the word Felony, he says; That in Ancient time this word Felony was of so
large an extent, as that it included High Treason -- But afterward it was
resolved, that in the Kings Pardon, or Charter, this word Felony should extend
only to Common Felonies -- And at this day, under the word Felony by Law is
included Petit Treason, Murder, Homicide, burning of Houses, Burglary, Robbery,
Rape, etc. Chance-medley, se defendendo, and Petit Larceny.


Ph. He says it was resolved, but by whom?


La. By the Justices of Assize in the time of Hen. 4. as it seems in the Margin.


Ph. Have Justices of Assize any Power by their Commission to alter the
Language of the Land, and the received sense of words? Or in the Question in
what Case Felony shall be said, it is referred to the Judges to Determine; as
in the Question in what Case Treason shall be said it is referred by the
Statute of Edw. the 3d. to the Parliament? I think not; and yet perhaps they
may be disobliged to disallow a Pardon of Treason, when mentioning all Felonies
it names not Treason, nor specifies it by any description of the Fact.


La. Another kind of Homicide there is simply called so, or by the name of
Manslaughter, and is not Murder, and that is when a Man kills another Man upon
sudden Quarrel, during the heat of Blood.


Ph. If two meeting in the Street chance to strive who shall go nearest to the
Wall, and thereupon Fighting, one of them kills the other, I believe verily he
that first drew his Sword did it of Malice forethought, though not long
forethought; but whether it be Felony or no, it may be doubted. It is true,
that the harm done is the same as if it had been done by Felony; but the
wickedness of the Intention was nothing near so great. And supposing it had
been done by Felony, then it is manifest by the Statute of Marlebridge, that it
was very Murder. And when a Man for a word, or a trifle shall draw his Sword,
and kill another Man, can any Man imagine that there was not some Precedent
Malice?


La. It Is very likely there was Malice more or less, and therefore the Law has
Ordained for it a punishment equal to that of Murder, saving that the Offender
shall have the Benefit of his Clergy.


Ph. The Benefit of Clergy comes in upon another account, and imports not any
extenuation of the Crime; for it is but a Relick of the old usurped Papal
privilege, which is now by many Statutes so pared off, as to spread but to few
Offenses, and is become a Legal kind of Conveying Mercy, not only to the
Clergy, but also to the Laity.


La. The work of a Judge you see is very difficult, and requires a Man that
has a faculty of well distinguishing of Dissimilitudes of such Cases as Common
Judgments think to be the same. A small Circumstance may make a great
Alteration, which a Man that cannot well discern, ought not to take upon him
the Office of a Judge.


Ph. You say very well; for if Judges were to follow one another Judgments in
Precedent Cases, all the Justice in the World would at length depend upon the
Sentence of a few Learned, or Unlearned, ignorant Men, and have nothing at all
to do with the Study of Reason.


La. A Third kind of Homicide is when a Man kills another, either by
misfortune, or in a necessary defense of himself, or of the King, or of his
Laws; for such killing is neither Felony, nor Crime, saving (as Sir Edw. Coke
says, 4. Inst. p. 56.) that if the Act that a Man is a doing when he kills
another Man be Unlawful, then it is Murder. As if A. means to steal a Deer in
the Park of B. Shoots at the Deer, and by the glance of the Arrow kills a
Boy that is hidden in a Bush; this is Murder, for that the Act was Unlawful;
but if the owner of the Park had done the like, shooting at his own Deer, it
had been by Misadventure, and no Felony.


Ph. This is not so distinguished by any Statute, but is the Commonly only of
Sir Ed. Coke. I believe not a word of it. If a Boy be Robbing an Apple Tree,
and falling thence upon a Man that stands under it, and breaks his Neck, but by
the same chance saves his own Life, Sir Edw. Coke, it seems, will have him
Hanged for it, as if he had fallen of prepensed Malice. All that can be called
Crime in this Business is but a simple Trespass, to the damage perhaps of
sixpence or a shilling. I confess the Trespass was an Offense against the Law,
but the falling was none, nor was it by the Trespass, but by the falling that
the Man was slain; and as he ought to be quit of the killing, so he ought to
make Restitution for the Trespass. But I believe the Cause of Sir Edw. Coke's
mistake was his not well understanding of Bracton, whom he cites in the Margin:
For 1206 he says thus: Sed hic erit distinguendum, utrum quis dederit operam
rei licitae, vel illicitae; si illicitae, ut si bapidem projiciebat quis versus
locum per quem consueverunt homines transitum facere, vel dum insequitur equum,
vel bovem, and aliquis ab equo, vel a bove percussus fuerit, and hujusmodi, hoc
imputatur ei, i. e. But here we are to distinguish whether a Man be upon a
Lawful, or Unlawful business; if an unlawful, as he that throws a stone into a
place, where Men use to pass; or if he chase a Horse, or an Ox, and thereby the
Man be stricken by the Horse, or the Ox, this shall be imputed to him: And it
is most reasonable: For the doing of such an unlawful Act as is here meant, is
a sufficient Argument of a Felonious purpose, or at least a hope to kill some
body, or other, and he cared not whom; which is worse than to design the death
of a certain Adversary, which nevertheless is Murder. Also on the contrary,
though the business a Man is doing be Lawful, and it chances sometimes that a
Man be slain thereby; yet may such killing be Felony. For if a Car-man drive
his Cart through Cheapside in a throng of People, and thereby he kill a Man;
though he bare him no Malice, yet because he saw there was very great danger,
it may reasonably be inferred, that he meant to adventure the killing of some
body, or other, though not of him that was killed.


La. He is a Felon also that kills himself voluntarily, and is called, not
only by Common Lawyers, but also in diverse Statute-Laws, Felo de se.


Ph. And it is well so: For names imposed by Statutes are equivalent to
Definitions; but I conceive not how any Man can bear Animum felleum, or so much
Malice toward himself, as to hurt himself voluntarily, much less to kill
himself; for naturally, and necessarily the Intention of every Man aims at
somewhat, which is good to himself, and tends to his preservation: And
therefore, methinks, if he kill himself, it is to be presumed that he is not
compos mentis, but by some inward Torment or Apprehension of somewhat worse
than Death, Distracted.


La. Nay, unless he be compos mentis he is not Felo de se (as Sir Edw. Coke
says, 4 Inst. p. 54.) and therefore he cannot be Judged a Felo de se, unless
it be first proved he was compos mentis.


Ph. How can that be proved of a Man dead; especially if it cannot be proved by
any Witness, that a little before his death he spoke as other men used to do.
This is a hard place; and before you take it for Common Law it had need to be
cleared.


La. I Will think on it. There Is a Statute of 3 Hen. 7. c. 14. which makes it
Felony in any of the Kings Houshold-Servants under the degree of a Lord, to
Compass the Death of any of the Kings Privy Council. The words are these; That
from henceforth the Steward, Treasurer, and Controuler of the Kings House for
that time being, or one of them, have full Authority and Power, to inquire by
12 sad Men, and discreet Persons of the Chequer-Roll of the King's Honorable
Household. If any Servant, admitted to his Servant Sworn, and his name put into
the Chequer-Roll, whatsoever he be serving in any manner, Office, or Room,
reputed, had, or taken under the State of a Lord, make any Confederacies,
Compassings, Conspiracies, or Imaginations with any Person to Destroy, or
Murder the King, or any Lord of this Realm, or any other Person sworn to the
Kings Council, Steward, Treasurer, or Controuler of the Kings House. And if
such Misdoers shall be found Guilty by Confession, or otherwise, that the said
Offense shall be Judged Felony.


Ph. It appears by this Statute, that not only the Compassing the Death (as you
say) of a Privy-Councellor, but also of any Lord of this Realm is Felony; if it
be done by Any of the Kings Household Servants that is not a Lord.


La. No; Sir Edw. Coke upon these words, any Lord of this Realm, or other
Person Sworn of the Kings Council infers 4 Inst. p. 38. that is to be
understood of such a Lord only as is a Privy-Councellor.


Ph. For barring of the Lords of Parliament from this Privilege, he strains
this Statute a little farther (in my Opinion) than it reaches of it self. But
how are such Felonies to be Tried?


La. The Indictment is to be found, before the Steward, Treasurer, and
Controuler of the Kings House, or one of them, by 12 of the Kings Household
Servants. The Petit Jury for the Trial must be 12 other of the Kings Servants,
and the Judges are again the Steward, Treasurer, and Controuler of the Kings
House, or 2 of them; and yet I see that these Men are not usually great
Students of the Law.


Ph. You may hereby be assured, that either the King and Parliament were very
much overseen in choosing such Officers perpetually for the time being, to be
Judges in a Trial at the Common Law, or else that Sir Edw. Coke presumes too
much, to appropriate all the Judicature, both in Law, and Equity, to the
Common-Lawyers; as if neither Lay-Persons, Men of Honor, nor any of the Lords
Spiritual, who are the most versed in the Examination of Equity, and Cases of
Conscience, when they hear the Statutes Read, and Pleaded, were unfit to Judge
of the intention and meaning of the same. I know, that neither such great
Persons, nor Bishops have ordinarily so much spare time from their ordinary
Employment as to be so skilful as to Plead Causes at the Bar; but certainly
they are, especially the Bishops, the best able to Judge of matters of Reason;
that is to say (by Sir Edw. Coke's Confession) of matters (except of Blood) at
the Common Law.


La. Another sort of Felony, though without Manslaughter, is Robbery; and by
Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. p. 68. defined thus, Robbery by the Common Law is a
Felony committed by a violent Assault upon the Person of another, by putting
him in fear, and taking away from him his Money, or other Goods of any value
whatsoever.


Ph. Robbery is not distinguished from Theft by any Statute. Latrocinium
comprehends them both, and both are Felony, and both Punished with Death. And
therefore to distinguish them aright is the work of Reason only. And the first
difference which is obvious to all Men, is, that Robbery is committed by Force,
or Terror, of which neither is in Theft; for Theft is a secret Act, and that
which is taken by violence, or Terror, either from his Person, or in his
Presence is still Robbery; but if it be taken secretly, whether it be by day,
or night from his Person, or from his Fold, or from his Pasture, then it is
called Theft. It Is Force and Fraud only that distinguishes between Theft, and
Robbery, both which are by the Pravity only of the Intention, Felony, in their
Nature. But there be so many Evasions of the Law found out by evil Men, that I
know not in this Predicament of Felony how to place them: For suppose I go
secretly by day, or night, into another Man's Field of Wheat Ripe, and standing,
and Loading my Cart with it I carry it away; Is it Theft, or Robbery?


La. Neither; it is but Trespass: But if you first lay down the Wheat you have
cut, and then throw it into your Cart, and carry it away, then it is Felony.


Ph. Why so?


La. Sir Edw. Coke tells you the Reason of it, 4 Inst. p. 107. for he defines
Theft to be by the Common Law a Felonious, and fraudulent taking and carrying
away by any Man, or Woman, of the mere Personal Goods of another, not from the
Person, nor by night in the House of the owner. From this Definition he Argues
thus, p. 109. Any kind of Corn, or Grain growing upon the ground is a Personal
Chattel, and the Executors of the owner shall have them, though they be not
severed; but yet no Larceny can be Committed of them, because they are annexed
to the Realty: So it is of Grass standing on the Ground, or of Apples, or of
any Fruit upon the Trees, etc. So it is of a Box, or Chest of Charters, no
Larceny can be committed of them, because the Charters concern the Realty, and
the Box, or Chest, though it be of great value, yet shall it be of the same
nature the Charters are of. Omne magis dignum trahit ad se minus.


Ph. Is this Definition drawn out of any Statute, or is it in Bracton, or
Littleton, or any other Writer upon the Science of the Laws?


La. No; it is his own; and you may observe by the Logick-Sentences dispersed
through his Works, that he was a Logician sufficient enough to make a
Definition.


Ph. But if his Definitions must be the Rule of Law; what is there that he may
not make Felony, or not Felony, at his Pleasure? But seeing it is not
Statute Law that he says, it must be very perfect Reason, or else no Law at
all; and to me it seems so far from Reason as I think it ridiculous. But let us
Examine it. There can (says he) be no Larceny of Corn, Grass, or Fruits that
are growing, that is to say, they cannot be stolen; but why? Because they
concern the Realty; that is, because they concern the Land. It Is true that the
Land cannot be stolen, nor the right of a Man's Tenure; but Corn, and Trees, and
Fruit, though growing, may be cut down, and carried away secretly, and
Feloniously, in Contempt, and Despite of the Law. And are they not then
stolen? And is there any Act which is Feloniously committed, that is not more
than Trespass? Can any Man doubt of it that understands the English Tongue?
It Is true, that if a Man pretend a right to the Land, and on that pretense take
the Fruits thereof by way of taking Possession of his own, it is no more than a
Trespass, unless he conceal the taking of them; for in that one Case, he but
puts the Man that was in Possession before to exhibit his complaint, which
purpose is not Felonious, but Lawful; for nothing makes a distinction between
Felony, and not Felony, but the purpose. I have heard that if a Man slander
another with stealing of a Tree standing, there lies no Action for it, and that
upon this ground, To steal a standing Tree is impossible; and that the Cause of
the Impossibility is, that a Man's Freehold cannot be stolen; which is a very
obvious Fallacy; for Freehold signifies, not only the Tenement, but also the
Tenure; and though it be true that a Tenure cannot be stolen, yet every man
sees the standing Trees, and Corn, may easily be stolen; and so far forth as
Trees, etc. are part of the Freehold, so far forth also they are Personal
Goods; for whatsoever is Freehold is Inheritance, and descends to the Heir,
and nothing can descend to the Executors, but what is merely Personal. And
though a Box, or Case of Evidences are to descend to the Heir, yet unless you
can show me positive Law to the contrary, they shall be taken into the
Executors hands, to be delivered to the Heir. Besides, how unconscionable a
thing is it, that he that steals a shillings worth of Wood; which the Wind has
blown down, or which lies Rotten on the ground, should be Hanged for it, and
he that takes a Tree worth 20 or 40 shillings, should Answer only for the
Damage?


La. It Is somewhat hard, but it has been so practiced time out of mind. Then
follows Sodomy, and Rape, both of them Felonies.


Ph. I know that, and that of the former he justly says it is detestable, being
in a manner an Apostacy from Humane Nature: But in neither of them is there
any thing of Animus Felleus. The Statutes which make them Felony are exposed to
all Men's reading; but because Sir Edw. Coke's Commentaries upon them are more
diligent and Accurate than to be free from all uncleanness, let us leap over
them both, observing only by the way, that he leaves an Evasion for an impotent
Offender, though his design be the same, and pursued to the utmost of his Power.


La. Two other great Felonies are breaking, and Burning of Houses, neither of
which are defined by any Statute. The former of them is by Sir Edw. Coke. 4
Inst. p. 63. Defined thus: Burglary is by the Common Law, the Breaking and
Entering into the Mansion House of another, in the night with intent to kill
some reasonable Creature, or to commit some other Felony within the same,
whether his intent be executed, or not; and defines Night to be then, when one
Man cannot know another Face by daylight: And for the parts of a
Mansion House he reckons all Houses that belong to Housekeeping, as Barns,
Stables, Dary-Houses, Buttery, Kitchen, Chambers, etc. But breaking of a House
by day, though Felony, and Punished as Burglary, is not within the Statute.


Ph. I have nothing to say against his Interpretations here, but I like not
that any private Man should presume to determine, whether such, or such a Fact
done be within the words of a Statute, or not, where it belongs only to a Jury
of 12 Men to declare in their Verdict, whether the Fact laid open before them
be Burglary, Robbery, Theft, or other Felony; for this is to give a leading
Judgment to the Jury, who ought not to consider any private Lawyers Institutes,
but the Statutes themselves pleaded before them for directions.


La. Burning, as he defines it, p. 66. is a Felony at the Common Law committed
by any that maliciously and voluntarily in the night, or day, burns the House
of another: And hereupon infers, if a Man sets Fire to the House, and it takes
not, that then it is not within the Statute.


Ph. If a Man should secretly, and maliciously lay a quantity of Gunpowder
under another Man's House, sufficient to Blow it up, and set a Train of Powder
in it, and set Fire to the Train, and some Accident hinder the Effect, is not
this Burning? or what is it? What Crime? It is neither Treason, nor Murder, nor
Burglary, nor Robbery, nor Theft, nor (no damage being made) any Trespass, nor
contrary to any Statute. And yet (seeing the Common Law is the Law of Reason)
it is a sin, and such a sin as a Man may be Accused of, and Convicted, and
consequently a Crime committed of Malice prepensed; shall he not then be
Punished for the Attempt? I grant you that a Judge has no Warrant from any
Statute Law, Common Law, or Commission to appoint the Punishment, but surely
the King has power to Punish him (on this side of Life or Member) as he please;
and with the Assent of Parliament (if not without) to make the Crime for the
future Capital.


La. I know not. Besides these Crimes there is Conjuration, Witchcraft,
Sorcery and Enchantment, which are Capital by the Statute, 1 of King James,
cap. 12.


Ph. But I desire not to discourse of that Subject; for though without doubt
there is some great Wickedness signified by those Crimes; yet I have ever found
my self too dull to conceive the nature of them, or how the Devil has power to
do many things which Witches have been Accused of. Let us now come to Crimes
not Capital.


La. Shall we pass over the Crime of Heresy, which Sir Edw. Coke ranketh
before Murder, but the consideration of it will be somewhat long.


Ph. Let us defer it till the Afternoon.


Of Heresy.
La. COncerning Heresy, Sir Edw. Coke, 4 Inst. p. 39. says, that 5 things fall
into consideration. 1. Who be the Judges of Heresy. 2. What shall be Judged
Heresy. 3. What is the Judgment upon a Man Convicted of Heresy. 4. What the
Law allows him to save his Life. 5. What he shall forfeit by Judgment against
him.


Ph. The principal thing to be considered, which is the Heresy it self, he
leaves out; viz. What it is, in what Fact, or Words it consists, what Law it
violateth, Statute Law, or the Law of Reason. The Cause why he omitteth it, may
perhaps be this; that it was not only out of his Profession, but also out of
his other Learning. Murder, Robbery, Theft, etc. Every Man knows to be evil,
and are Crimes defined by the Statute Law, so that any Man may avoid them, if
he will. But who can be sure to avoid Heresy, if he but dare to give an
Account of his Faith, unless he know beforehand what it is?


La. In the Preamble of the Statute of the 2d, Hen. 4. cap. 15. Heresy is laid
down, as a Preaching or Writing of such Doctrine, as is contrary to the
determination of Holy Church.


Ph. Then it is Heresy at this day to Preach, or Write against Worshipping of
Saints, or the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, or any other determination
of the same Church: For Holy-Church, at that time, was understood to be the
Church of Rome, and now with us the Holy-Church I understand to be the Church
of England; and the Opinions in that Statute are now, and were then the true
Christian Faith. Also the same Statute of Hen. 4. Declares, by the same
Preamble, that the Church of England had never been troubled with Heresy.


La. But that Statute is Repealed.


Ph. Then also is that Declaration, or Definition of Heresy repealed.


La. What, say you, is Heresy?


Ph. I say Heresy is a singularity of Doctrine, or Opinion contrary to the
Doctrine of another Man, or Men, and the word properly signifies the Doctrine
of a Sect, which Doctrine is taken upon Trust of some Man of Reputation for
Wisdom, that was the first Author of the same. If you will understand the truth
hereof, you are to Read the Histories and other Writings of the Ancient Greeks,
whose word it is, which Writings are extant in these days, and easy to be had.
Wherein you will find, that in, and a little before the time of Alexander the
Great; there lived in Greece many Excellent Wits, that employed their time in
search of the Truth in all manner of Sciences worthy of their Labor, and which
to their great Honor and Applause published their Writings; some concerning
Justice, Laws, and Government, some concerning Good, and Evil Manners, some
concerning the Causes of things Natural, and of Events discernable by sense;
and some of all these Subjects. And of the Authors of these, the Principal were
Pythagoras, Plato, Zeno, Epicurus and Aristotle, Men of deep and laborious
Meditation, and such as did not get their Bread by their Philosophy, but were
able to live of their own, and were in Honor with Princes, and other great
Personages. But these Men, though above the rest in Wisdom, yet their Doctrine
in many points did disagree; whereby it came to pass, that such Men as studied
their Writings, inclined, some to Pythagoras, some to Plato, some to Aristotle,
some to Zeno, and some to Epicurus. But Philosophy it self was then so much in
Fashion, as that every Rich Man endeavored to have his Children educated in
the Doctrine of some, or other of these Philosophers, which were for their
Wisdom so much renowned. Now those that followed Pythagoras, were called
Pythagoreans; those that followed Plato, Academicks; those that followed Zeno,
Stoics; those that followed Epicurus, Epicureans, and those that followed
Aristotle, Peripateticks, which are the names of Heresy in Greek, which
signifies no more but taking of an Opinion; and the said Pythagoreans,
Academicks, Stoics, Peripateticks, etc. were termed by the names of so many
several Heresies. All Men (you know) are subject to Error, and the ways of
Error very different; and therefore it is no wonder if these Wise, and diligent
searchers of the Truth did, notwithstanding their Excellent parts, differ in
many points amongst themselves. But this Laudable Custom of Great, Wealthy
Persons to have their Children at any price to learn Philosophy, suggested to
many idle and needy Fellows, an easy and compendious way of Maintenance; which
was to Teach the Philosophy, some of Plato, some of Aristotle, etc. Whose Books
to that end they Read over, but without Capacity, or much Endeavor to examine
the Reasons of their Doctrines, taking only the Conclusions, as they lay; and
setting up with this, they soon professed themselves Philosophers, and got to
be the Schoolmasters to the Youth of Greece; but by Competition for such
Employment, they hated and reviled one another with all the bitter Terms they
could invent; and very often, when upon Occasion they were in Civil Company,
fell first to Disputation, and then to Blows, to the great trouble of the
Company, and their own shame. Yet amongst all their reproachful words the name
of Heretic came never in, because they were all equally Heretics, their
Doctrine not being theirs, but taken upon Trust from the aforesaid Authors. So
that though we find Heresy often mentioned in Lucian, and other Heathen
Authors, yet we shall not find in any of them Haereticus for a Heretic. And
this Disorder among the Philosophers continued a long time in Greece, and
Infecting also the Romans, was at the greatest in the times of the Apostles,
and in the Primitive Church, till the time of the Nicene Council, and somewhat
after. But at last the Authority of the Stoics and Epicureans was not much
Esteemed, only Plato's and Aristotle's Philosophy were much in Credit; Plato's
with the better sort, that founded their Doctrine upon the Conceptions and
Ideas of things, and Aristotle's with those that reasoned only from the names
of Things, according to the Scale of the Categories: Nevertheless there were
always, though not New Sects of Philosophy, yet New Opinions continually
arising.


La. But how came the word Heretic to be a Reproach?


Ph. Stay a little. After the Death of our Savior his Apostles, and his
Disciples, as you know, dispersed themselves into several parts of the World to
Preach the Gospel, and converted much People, especially in Asia the less, in
Greece and Italy, where they Constituted many Churches; and as they Traveled
from place to place, left Bishops to Teach and Direct those their Converts, and
to appoint Presbyters under them to Assist them therein, and to Confirm them by
setting forth the Life, and Miracles of our Savior, as they had received it
from the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists; whereby (and not by the
Authority of Plato, or Aristotle, or any other Philosopher) they were to be
Instructed. Now you cannot doubt but that among so many Heathens converted in
the time of the Apostles, there were Men of all Professions, and Dispositions,
and some that had never thought of Philosophy at all, but were intent upon
their Fortunes, or their Pleasures; and some that had a greater, some a lesser
use of Reason; and some that had studied Philosophy, but professed it not,
which were commonly the Men of the better Rank; and some had Professed it only
for their better Abstinence, and had it not farther, than readily to talk and
wrangle; and some were Christians in good earnest, and others but Counterfeit,
intending to make use of the Charity of those that were sincere Christians,
which in those times was very great. Tell me now of these sorts of Christians
which was the most likely to afford the fittest Men to propagate the Faith by
Preaching, and Writing, or Public or private Disputation; that is to say, who
were fittest to be made Presbyters and Bishops?


La. Certainly those who ( caeteris paribus) could make the best use of
Aristotle's Rhetoric, and Logic.


Ph. And who were the most prone to Innovation?


La. They that were most confident of Aristotle's, and Plato's (their former
Masters) Natural Philosophy: For they would be the aptest to wrest the Writings
of the Apostles, and all Scriptures to the Doctrine in which their Reputation
was engaged.


Ph. And from such Bishops and Priests, and other Sectaries it was, that
Heresy, amongst the Christians, first came to be a Reproach: For no sooner had
one of them Preached, or Published any Doctrine that displeased, either the
most, or the most Leading Men of the rest, but it became such a Quarrel as not
to be decided, but by a Council of the Bishops in the Province where they
Lived; wherein he that would not submit to the General Decree, was called an
Heretic, as one that would not reliquish the Philosophy of his Sect; the rest
of the Council gave themselves the name of Catholics, and to their Church, the
name of Catholic Church. And thus came up the opposite Terms of Catholic and
Heretic.


La. I understand how it came to be a Reproach, but not how it follows that
every Opinion condemned by a Church that is, or calls it self Catholic, must
needs be an Error, or a Sin. The Church of England denies that Consequence, and
that Doctrine as they hold cannot be proved to be Erroneous, but by the
Scripture, which cannot Err; but the Church, being but men, may both Err, and
Sin.


Ph. In this Case we must consider also that Error, in it is own Nature, is no
Sin: For it is Impossible for a Man to Err on purpose, he cannot have an
Intention to Err; and nothing is Sin, unless there be a sinful Intention; much
less are such Errors Sins, as neither hurt the Commonwealth, nor any private
Man, nor are against any Law Positive, or Natural; such Errors as were those
for which Men were burnt in the time when the Pope had the Government of this
Church.


La. Since you have told me how Herefie came to be a name, tell me also how it
came to be a Crime? And what were the Heresies that first were made Crimes?


Ph. Since the Christian Church could declare, and none else, what Doctrine
were Heresies, but had no power to make Statutes for the punishment of
Heretics before they had a Christian King; it is manifest that Heresy could
not be made a Crime before the first Christian Emperor, which was Constantine
the Great. In his time one Arius a Priest of Alexandria in Dispute with his
Bishop, Publicly denied the Divinity of Christ, and Maintained it afterward
in the Pulpit, which was the Cause of a Sedition, and much Blood shed, both of
Citizens, and Soldiers in that City. For the preventing of the like for the
time to come, the Emperor called a General Council of Bishops to the City of
Nice, who being met, he exhorted them to agree upon a Confession of the
Christian Faith, promising whatsoever they agreed on he would cause to be
observed.


La. By the way, the Emperor (I think) was here a little too Indifferent.


Ph. In this Council was Established so much of the Creed we now use, and call
the Nicene Creed, as reaches to the words, I believe in the Holy Ghost. The
rest was Established by the 3 General Councils next succeeding. By the words of
which Creed almost all the Heresies then in being, and especially the Doctrine
of Arius, were Condemned: So that now all Doctrines Published by Writing, or by
Word, and repugnant to this Confession of the first four General Councils, and
contained in the Nicene Creed were, by the Imperial Law forbidding them, made
Crimes; such as are that of Arius denying the Divinity of Christ; that of
Eutiches denying the 2 Natures of Christ; that of the Nestorians denying the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost; that of the Anthropomorphites, that of the
Manichees, that of the Anabaptists, and many other.


La. What Punishment had Arius?


Ph. At the first for refusing to Subscribe, he was deprived and Banished; but
afterward having satisfied the Emperor concerning his future Obedience (for
the Emperor caused his Confession to be made, not for the regard of Truth of
Doctrine, but for the preserving of the Peace, especially among his Christian
Soldiers, by whose valor he had gotten the Empire, and by the same was to
preserve it) he was received again into Grace, but dyed before he could
repossess his Benefice. But after the time of those Councils, the Imperial Law
made the Punishment for Heresy to be Capital, though the manner of the Death
was left to the Praefects in their several Jurisdictions; and thus it continued
till somewhat after the time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, and the
Papacy having gotten the upper hand of the Emperor, brought in the use of
Burning both Heretics, and Apostates; and the Popes from time to time made
Heresy of many other points of Doctrine, (as they saw it conduce to the
setting up of the Chair above the Throne) besides those determined in the
Nicene Creed, and brought in the use of Burning; and according to this
Papal-Law there was an Apostate Burnt at Oxford in the time of William the
Conqueror for turning Jew. But of a Heretic Burnt in England there is no
mention made till after the Statute of 2 Hen. 4. Whereby some followers of
Wiclif (called Lollards) were afterward Burned, and that for such Doctrines,
as by the Church of England, ever since the first year of Queen El. have been
approved for Godly Doctrines, and no doubt were Godly then; and so you see how
many have been Burnt for Godliness.


La. 'Twas not well done; but it is no wonder we read of no Heretics before the
time of H. 4. For in the Preamble to that Statute it is intimated, that before
those Lollards there never was any Heresy in England.


Ph. I think so too; for we have been the tamest Nation to the Pope of all the
World. But what Statutes concerning Heresy have there been made since?


La. The Statute of 2 H. 5. c. 7. which adds to the Burning the Forfeiture of
Lands, and Goods, and then no more till the 25 H. 8. c. 14. which confirms the
two former and gives some new Rules concerning how they shall be Proceeded
with. But by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. All Acts of Parliament formerly
made to punish any manner of Doctrine concerning Religion are repealed. For
therein it is ordained, after diverse Acts specified; that all and every other
Act, or Acts of Parliament concerning Doctrine, or matters of Religion, and
all, and every Branch, Article, Sentence and Matter, Pains and Forfeitures
contained, mentioned, or any wise declared in the same Acts of Parliament or
Statutes shall be from henceforth Repealed, utterly void, and of none effect.
So that in the time of King Ed. 6. not only all Punishments of Heresy were
taken away, but also the Nature of it was changed, to what Originally it was, a
Private Opinion. Again in 12 Phil. and Ma. those former Statutes of 2 H. 4.
cap. 15. 2 H. 5. Cap. 17. 25. H. 8. cap. 14. are Revived, and the Branch of 1
Ed. 6. cap. 12. touching Doctrine (though not specially named) seems to be
this, that the same Statute confirms the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. concerning
Treasons. Lastly, in the first year of Queen Eliz. cap. 1. the aforesaid
Statutes of Queen Mary are taken away, and thereby the Statute of 1 Ed. cap.
12. Revived; so as there was no Statute left for the Punishment of Heretics.
But Queen Eliz. by the Advice of her Parliament gave a Commission (which was
called the High Commission) to certain Persons (amongst whom were very many of
the Bishops) to Declare what should be Heresy for the future; but with a
Restraint, that they should Judge nothing to be Heresy, but what had been so
declared in the first four General Councils.


Ph. From this which you have showed me, I think we may proceed to the
Examination of the Learned Sir Edw. Coke concerning Heresy. In his Chapter of
Heresy, 3 Inst. p. 40. he himself confesses, that no Statute against Heresy
stood then in force: when in the 9th year of King James, Bartholomew Legate was
Burnt for Arianism, and that from the Authority of the Act of 2 Hen. 4. cap.
15. and other Acts cited in the Margin, it may be gathered, that the Diocesan
has the Jurisdiction of Heresy. This I say is not true: For as to Acts of
Parliament it is manifest, that from Acts Repealed; that is to say, from things
that have no being, there can be gathered nothing. And as to the other
Authorities in the Margin, Fitzherbert, and the Doctor and Student, they say no
more than what was Law in the time when they writ; that is, when the Popes
Usurped Authority was here obeyed: But if they had Written this in the time of
King Ed. 6. or Queen Elizabeth, Sir Edw. Coke might as well have cited his own
Authority, as theirs; for their Opinions had no more the force of Laws than
his. Then he cites this Precedent of Legate, and another of Hammond in the time
of Queen Elizabeth; but Precedents prove only what was done, and not what was
well done. What Jurisdiction could the Diocesan then have of Heresy, when by
the Statute of Ed. 6. cap. 12. then in force, there was no Heresy, and all
Punishment for Opinions forbidden: For Heresy is a Doctrine contrary to the
Determination of the Church, but then the Church had not Determined any thing
at all concerning Heresy.


La. But seeing the High Commissioners had Power to Correct, and Amend
Heresies, they must have Power to cite such as were Accused of Heresy, to
appear before them, or else they could not execute their Commission.


Ph. If they had first made, and published a Declaration of what Articles they
made Heresy, that when one Man heard another speak against their Declaration,
he might thereof inform the Commissioners, then indeed they had had Power to
cite, and imprison the Person accused; but before they had known what should be
Heresy; how was it possible that one Man should accuse another? And before he
be accused, how can he be cited?


La. Perhaps it was taken for granted, that whatsoever was contrary to any of
the 4 first General Councils, was to be judged Heresy.


Ph. That granted, yet I see not how one Man might accuse another 'ere the
better for those Councils. For not one Man of ten thousand had ever read them,
nor were they ever Published in English, that a Man might avoid Offending
against them, nor perhaps are they extant; nor if those that we have Printed in
Latin are the very Acts of the Councils (which is yet much disputed amongst
Divines) do I think it fit they were put in the Vulgar Tongues. But it is not
likely that the makers of the Statutes had any purpose to make Heresy of
whatsoever was repugnant to those 4 General Councils: For if they had, I
believe the Anabaptists, of which there was great plenty, in those times, would
one time or other have been questioned upon this Article of the Nicene Creed, I
believe one Baptism for the Remission of sins; nor was the Commission it self
for a long time after Registered, that Men might in such uncertainty take heed
and abstain (for their better safety) from speaking of Religion any thing at
all. But by what Law was this Heretic Legate burnt? I grant he was an Arian,
and his Heresy contrary to the Determination of the Church of England, in the
Highest Points of Christianity; but seeing there was no Statute Law to burn
him, and no Penalty forbidden, by what Law, by what Authority was he burned?


La. That this Legate was accused of Heresy, was no fault of the High
Commissioners, but when he was accused, it had been a fault in them not to have
examined him, or having examined him, and found him an Arian, not to have
judged him so, or not to have certified him so. All this they did, and this was
all that belonged unto them; they meddled not with his Burning, but left him to
the Secular Power to do with him what they pleased.


Ph. Your Justification of the Commissioners is nothing to the Question; the
Question is by what Law he was burned, the Spiritual-Law gives no Sentence of
Temporal Punishment, and Sir Edw. Coke confesses that, he could not be burned,
and Burning forbidden by Statute Law. By what Law then was he burned?


La. By the Common Law.


Ph. What Is that? It is not Custom; for before the time of Henry the 4th, there
was no such Custom in England; for if there had, yet those Laws that came after
were but Confirmations of the Customs, and therefore the Repealing of those
Laws was a Repealing of the Custom. For when King Ed. the 6th, and Queen Eliz.
abolished those Statutes, they abolished all Pains, and consequently, Burning,
or else they had abolished nothing. And if you will say he was burned by the
Law of Reason, you must tell me how there can be Proportion between Doctrine
and Burning; there can be no Equality, nor Majority, nor Minority Assigned
between them. The Proportion that is between them, is the Proportion of the
Mischief which the Doctrine makes, to the Mischief to be Inflicted on the
Doctor; and this is to be measured only by him that has the charge of
Governing the People, and consequently, the Punishing of Offenses can be
determined by none but by the King, and that, if it extend to life or member,
with the Assent of Parliament.


La. He does not draw any Argument for it from Reason, but alleges for it
this Judgment executed upon Legate, and a story out of Hollingshed, and Stow:
But I know that neither History, nor Precedent will pass with you for Law. And
though there be a Writ de haeretico comburendo in the Register (as you may Read
in Fitzherbert) grounded upon the Statutes of 2 H. 4. cap. 15. and 2 H. 5. cap.
7. yet seeing those Statutes are void, you will say the Writ is also void.


Ph. Yes indeed will I. Besides this, I understand not how that is true that he
says; that the Diocesan has Jurisdiction of Heresy, and that so it was put
in ure in all Queen Elizabeth's Reign; whereas by the Statute it is manifest,
that all Jurisdiction spiritual, was given under the Queen, to the High
Commissioners, how then could any one Diocesan have any part thereof without
deputation from them, which by their Letters Patents they could not grant, nor
was it reasonable they should: For the Trust was not committed to the Bishops
only, but also to diverse Lay-Persons, who might have an Eye upon their
Proceedings, lest they should Incroach upon the power Temporal. But at this day
there is neither Statute, nor any Law to Punish Doctrine, but the ordinary
Power Ecclesiastical, and that according to the Canons of the Church of
England, only Authorized by the King, the High Commission being long since
abolished. Therefore let us come now to such Causes Criminal, as are not
Capital.


Of Praemunire.
La. THe greatest Offense not Capital is that which is done against the Statute
of Provisoes.


Ph. You have need to expound this.


La. This Crime is not unlike to that for which a Man is outlawed, when he will
not come in and submit himself to the Law; saving that in Outlawries there is a
long Process to precede it; and he that is outlawed, is put out of the
Protection of the Law. But for the Offense against the Statute of Provisors
(which is called Praemunire facias from the words in the Original Writ) if the
Offender submit not himself to the Law within the space of 2 Months after
notice, he is presently an Outlaw: And this Punishment (if not Capital) is
equivalent to Capital: For he lives secretly at the Mercy of those that know
where he is, and cannot without the like Peril to themselves, but discover him.
And it has been much disputed before the time of Queen Elizabeth, whether he
might not be lawfully killed by any Man that would, as one might kill a Wolf:
It is like the Punishment amongst the old Romans of being barred the use of
Fire and Water, and like the great Excommunication in the Papacy, when a Man
might not eat, or drink with the Offender without incurring the like Penalty.


Ph. Certainly the Offense for which this Punishment was first Ordained, was
some abominable Crime, or of extraordinary Mischief.


La. So it was: For the Pope, you know, from long before the Conquest,
incroached every day upon the Power Temporal. Whatsoever could be made to seem
to be in ordine ad Spiritualia was in every Commonwealth claimed, and haled to
the Jurisdiction of the Pope: And for that end in every Country he had his
Court Ecclesiastical, and there was scarce any cause Temporal, which he could
not, by one shift or other, hook into his Jurisdiction, in such sort as to have
it tried in his own Courts at Rome, or in France, or in England it self. By
which means the Kings Laws were not regarded, Judgments given in the Kings
Courts were avoided, and presentations to Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other
Benefices (founded, and endowed by the Kings, and Nobility of England) were
bestowed by the Pope upon Strangers, or such (as with Money in their Purses)
could travel to Rome, to provide themselves of such Benefices. And suitably
hereunto, when there was a Question about a Tithe, or a Will, though the point
were merely Temporal, yet the Popes Court here would fetch them in, or else one
of the Parties would appeal to Rome. Against these Injuries of the Roman
Church, and to maintain the Right and Dignity of the Crown of England, Ed. 1.
made a Statute concerning Provisors (that is, such as provide themselves with
Benefices here from Rome) for in the 25th year of his Reign he ordained in a
full Parliament that the Right of Election of Bishops, and Right of Advowsans,
and Presentations belonged to himself, and to the Nobility that were the
founders of such Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Benefices. And he enacted
farther, that if any Clerk, which he, or any of his Subjects should present,
should be disturbed by any such Provisor that such Provisor, or Disturber
should be attached by his Body, and if Convicted, lie in Prison till he were
Ransomed at the Kings Will, and had satisfied the Party grieved, renouced his
Title, and sound sureties not to sue for it any farther; and that if they could
not be found, then Exigents should go forth to Outlawrie, and the Profits of
the Benefice in the mean time be taken into the Kings hands. And the same
Statute is confirmed in the 27th year of King Ed. the 3d, which Statute
allows to these Provisors six weeks Day to appear, but if they appear before
they be outlawed, they shall be received to make Answer, but if they render not
themselves, they shall forfeit all their Lands, Goods, and Chattels, besides
that they stand outlawed. The same Law is confirmed again by 16 Rich. 2d. cap.
5. in which is added (because these Provisors obtained sometimes from the Pope,
that such English Bishops as according to the Law were instituted, and inducted
by the Kings Presentees should be excommunicated) that for this also both they,
and the Receivers and Publishers of such Papal Process, and the Procurers
should have the same Punishment.


Ph. Let me see the Statute it self of 27 Ed. 3.


La. It lies there before you set down verbatim by Sir Edw. Coke himself, both
in English, and French.


Ph. It Is well, we are now to consider what it means, and whether it be well,
or ill interpreted by Sir Edw. Coke. And first it appears by the Preamble
(which Sir Edw. Coke acknowledges to be the best Interpreter of the Statute)
that this Statute was made against the Encroachments only of the Church of
Rome, upon the Right of the King, and other Patrons to collate Bishoprics and
other Benefices within the Realm of England, and against the power of the
Courts Spiritual, to hold Plea of Controversies determinable in any of the
Courts of the King, or to reverse any Judgment there given, as being things
that tend to the Disherison of the King, and Destruction of the Common Law of
the Realm always used. Put the case now that a Man had procured the Pope to
reverse a Decree in Chancery, had he been within the danger of Praemunire?


La. Yes certainly; or if the Judgment had been given in the Court of the Lord
Admiral, or in any other Kings Court whatsoever, either of Law, or Equity; for
Courts of Equity are most properly Courts of the Common Law of England, because
Equity, and Common Law (as Sir Ed. Coke says) are all one.


Ph. Then the word Common Law is not in this Preamble restrained to such Courts
only where the Trial is by Juries, but comprehends all the Kings Temporal
Courts, if not also the Courts of those Subjects that are Lords of great
Manors.


La. It Is very likely, yet I think it will not by every Man be granted.


Ph. The Statute also says; That they who draw Men out of the Realm in Plea,
whereof the Cognizance pertains to the Kings Court, or of things whereof
Judgment is given in the Kings Court, are within the Cases of Praemunire. But
what if one Man draw another to Lambeth in Plea, whereof Judgment is already
given at Westminster. Is he by this Clause involved in a Praemunire?


La. Yes: For though it be not out of the Realm, yet it is within the meaning
of the Statute, because the Popes Court, not the Kings Court, was then perhaps
at Lambeth.


Ph. But in Sir Edw. Coke's time the Kings Court was at Lambeth, and not the
Popes.


La. You know well enough, that the Spiritual-Court has no power to hold Pleas
of Common Law.


Ph. I do so; but I know not for what cause any simple Man that mistakes his
right Court, should be out of the Kings Protection, lose his Inheritance, and
all his Goods Personal, and Real; and if taken, be kept in Prison all his Life.
This Statute cannot be by Sir Edw. Cokes Torture made to say it. Besides, such
Men are ignorant in what Courts they are to seek their Remedy: And it is a
Custom confirmed by perpetual usage, that such ignorant Men should be guided by
their Council at Law. It is manifest therefore, that the makers of the Statute
intended not to prohibit Men from their suing for their Right, neither in the
Chancery, nor in the Admiralty, nor in any other Court, except the
Ecclesiastical Courts, which had their Jurisdiction from the Church of Rome.
Again, where the Statute says, which do sue in any other Court, or defeat a
Judgment in the Kings Court, what is the meaning of another Court? Another
Court than what? Is it here meant the King's Bench, or Court of Common Pleas?
Does a Praemunire lie for every Man that sues in Chancery, for that which might
be remedied in the Court of Common Pleas? Or can a Praemunire lie by this
Statute against the Lord Chancellor? The Statute lays it only on the Party that
sueth, not upon the Judge which holds the Plea. Nor could it be laid neither
by this Statute, nor by the Statute of 16 Rich. 2. upon the Judges, which were
then punishable only by the Popes Authority. Seeing then the Party Suing has a
just excuse upon the Council of his Lawyer; and the Temporal Judge, and the
Lawyer both are out of the Statute, the punishment of the Praemunire can light
upon no body.


La. But Sir Edw. Coke in this same Chapter brings two Precedents to prove,
that though the Spiritual-Courts in England be now the Kings Courts, yet
whosoever sueth in them for any thing tryable by the Common Law, shall fall
into a Praemunire. One is, that whereas in the 22d of Hen. 8. all the Clergy of
England in a Convocation by public Instrument acknowledged the King to be
Supreme Head of the Church of England; yet after this, viz. 24 of H. 8. this
Statute was in force.


Ph. Why not? A Convocation of the Clergy could not alter the Right of
Supremacy; their Courts were still the Popes Courts. The other Precedent in
the 25th of Hen. 8. of the Bishop of Norwich may have the same Answer, for the
King was not declared Head of the Church by Act of Parliament, till the 26th
year of his Reign. If he had not mistrusted his own Law, he would not have laid
hold on so weak a Proof as these Precedents. And as to the Sentence of
Praemunire upon the Bishop of Norwich, neither does this Statute, nor that other
of R. 2. warrant it; he was sentenced for threatening to excommunicate a Man
which had sued another before the Mayor: But this Statute forbids not that, but
forbids the bringing in, or publishing of Excommunications, or other Process
from Rome, or any other Place. Before the 26 Hen. 8. there is no Question, but
that for a Suit in the Spiritual Court here in a Temporal Cause, there lay a
Praemunire; and if perhaps some Judge. or other has since that time judged
otherwise, his Judgment was erroneous.


La. Nay but by the Statute of 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5. it appears to the
contrary, as Sir Edw. Coke here will show you. The effect (says he) of the
Statute of Rich. 2. is; That if any Pursue, or cause to be Pursued in the Court
of Rome, or elsewhere any thing which touches the King, against him, his
Crown, or Regality, or his Realm, they, their Notaries, etc. shall be out of
the Kings Protection.


Ph. I pray you let me know the very words of the Statutes as they ly.


La. Presently. The words are, if any Man Purchase, or Pursue, or cause to be
Purchased, or Pursued in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any such
Translations, Processes and Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, Instruments,
or any other things whatsoever, which touch the King, against him, his Crown,
and his Regality, or his Realm, as is aforesaid, etc.


Ph. If a Man bring a Plea of Common Law into the Spiritual Court, which is now
the Kings Court, and the Judge of this Spiritual Court hold Plea thereof: By
what Construction can you draw it within the compass of the words you have now
read. To sue for my Right in the Kings Court, is no pursuing of Translations of
Bishoprics made, or procured in the Court of Rome, or any place else, but only
in the Court of the King, nor is this the suit against the King, nor his Crown,
nor his Regality, nor his Realm, but the contrary. Why then is it a Praemunire?
No. He that brings in, or sets out a Writing in any place whatsoever,
wherein is contained, that the King has so given away his Jurisdiction, as
that if a Subject be condemned falsely, his Submission to the Kings Judgment is
of none effect; or that the King upon no necessity whatsoever can, out of
Parliament time raise Money for the defense of the Kingdom, is, in my opinion,
much more within the Statute of Provisors, than they which begin suit for a
Temporal Matter in a Court Spiritual. But what Argument has he for this Law of
his (since the Statute Law fails him) from the Law of Reason.


La. He says they are called Courts, either because they proceed by the Rules
of other Laws, as by the Canon, or Civil Law, or by other Trials than the
Common Law does Warrant: For the Trials Warranted by the Law of England for
matter of Fact, is by verdict of 12 Men before the Judges of the Common Law, in
matters pertaining to the Common Law, and not upon Examination of Witnesses, as
in the Court of Equity; so that Alia Curia is either that which is governed per
aliam Legem, or which draws the Party ad aliud Examen. For if --


Ph. Stop there. Let us consider of this you have read, for the Trial warranted
by the Law of England, is by Verdict of 12 Men. What means he here by the Law
of England? Does it not warrant the Trials in Chancery, and in the Court of
Admiralty by Witnesses?


La. By the Law of England he means the Law used in the Kings Bench; that is to
say, the Common Law.


Ph. This is just as if he had said, that these two Courts did warrant their
own way of Trial; but other Courts not so, but were warranted by the King only,
the Courts of Common Law were Warrants to themselves: You see that alia Curia
is this way ill expounded. In the Courts of Common Law all Trials are by 12
Men, who are Judges of the Fact; and the Fact known and proved, the Judges are
to pronounce the Law; but in the Spiritual Court, the Admiralty, and in all the
Courts of Equity there is but one Judge, both of Fact, and of Law; this is all
the difference. If this difference be intended by the Statute by alia Curia,
there would be a Praemunire for suing in a Court, being not the Kings Court: The
Kings Bench, and Court of Common Pleas may also be different kinds of Courts,
because the Process is different; but it is plain that this Statute does not
distinguish Courts otherwise than into the Courts of the King, and into the
Courts of the Foreign States, and Princes. And seeing you stand upon the name
of a Jury for the distinguishing of Courts, what difference do you find between
the Trials at the Common Law, and the Trials in other Courts? You know that in
Trials of Fact naturally, and through all the World the Witnesses are Judges,
and it is impossible to be otherwise. What then in England can a Jury judge of,
except it be of the sufficiency of the Testimony. The Justices have nothing to
judge of, nor do, but after the Fact is proved, to declare the Law, which is
not Judgment, but Jurisdiction. Again, though the Trial be in Chancery, or in
the Court of Civil Law, 1. The Witnesses are still Judges of the Fact, and he
that has the Commission to hear the Cause has both the parts; that is to say,
of a Jury to judge of the Testimony, and of a Justice to declare the Law. In
this, I say, lies all the difference, which is indeed enough to make a Dispute
(as the World goes) about Jurisdiction: But seeing it tends neither to the
Disherison of the King, nor of the People, nor to the subversion of the Law of
Reason, i. e. of Common Law, nor to the subversion of Justice, nor to any harm
of the Realm, without some of which these Statutes are not broken, it cannot be
a Praemunire.


La. Let me read on. For if the Freehold Inheritances, Goods and Chattels,
Debts and Duties, wherein the King and Subject have Right and Property by the
Common Law, should be judged per aliam Legem, or be drawn ad aliud Examen, the
3 Mischiefs before expressed, would follow; viz. the destruction of the King, and
his Crown, the Disherison of his People, and the undoing and destruction of the
Common Law always used.


Ph. That is to say, of the Law of Reason. From hence it follows, that where
there are no Juries, and where there are different Laws from ours; that is to
say, in all the World besides, neither King, nor People have any Inheritance,
nor Goods, nor any Law of Reason. I will examine his Doctrine concerning Cases
Criminal no farther. He no where defines a Crime, that we may know what it is:
An odious name suffices him to make a Crime of any thing. He has put Heresy
among the most odious Crimes, not knowing what it signifies; and upon no other
Cause, but because the Church of Rome (to make their usurped Power the more
terrible) had made it by long Preaching against it, and Cruelty shown toward
many Godly, and learned Men of this, and other Reformed Churches, appear to
common People a thing detestable. He puts it in as a Plea of the Crown in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, whereas in her time there was no Doctrine Heresy; but
Justice Stamford leaves it out, because when Heresy was a Crime, it was a Plea
of the Mitre. I see also in this Catalogue of Causes Criminal, he inserteth
costly Feeding, costly Apparel, and costly Building, though they were contrary
to no Statute. It Is true, that by evil Circumstances they become sins; but
these sins belong to the Judgment of the Pastors Spiritual. A Justice of the
Temporal Law (seeing the Intention only makes them sins) cannot judge whether
they be sins or no, unless he have power to take Confessions. Also he makes
flattery of the King to be a Crime. How could he know when one Man had
flattered another? He meant therefore that it was a Crime to please the King:
And accordingly he cites diverse Calamities of such as had been in times past
in great favor of the Kings they served; as the Favorites of Hen. 3. Ed. 2.
Rich. 2. Hen. 6. which Favorites were some imprisoned, some banished, and some
put to death by the same Rebels that imprisoned, banished, and put to death the
same King, upon no better ground than the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and King Charles the first by the Rebels of that time. Empson, and
Dudley were no Favorites of Hen. the 7th, but Spunges, which King Hen. the 8th
did well Squeeze. Cardinal Woolsey was indeed for diverse years a favorite of
Hen. the 8th, but fell into disgrace, not for flattering the King, but for not
flattering him in the business of Divorce from Queen Katharine. You see his
Reasoning here, see also his Passion in the words following. We will for some
Causes descend no lower, Qui eorum vestigiis insistunt, eorum exitus
perhorrescant, this is put in for the Favorite (that then was) of King James.
But let us give over this, and speak of the legal Punishments to these Crimes
belonging.


Of Punishments.
ANd in the first place I desire to know who it is that has the power, for an
Offense committed to define, and appoint the special manner of Punishment; for
suppose you are not of the Opinion of the Stoics in old time, that all faults
are equal, and that there ought to be the same Punishment for killing a Man,
and for killing a Hen.

La. The manner of Punishment in all Crimes whatsoever is to be determined by
the Common Law. That is to say, if it be a Statute that determins it, then the
Judgment must be according to the Statute; if it be not specified by the
Statute, then the Custom in such Cases is to be followed: But if the Case be
new, I know not why the Judge may not determine it according to Reason.


Ph. But according to whose reason? If you mean the natural Reason of this, or
that Judge authorized by the King to have cognizance of the Cause, there being
as many several Reasons, as there are several Men, the punishment of all Crimes
will be uncertain, and none of them ever grow up to make a Custom. Therefore a
Punishment certain can never be assigned, if it have its beginning from the
natural Reasons of deputed Judges, no, nor from the natural of the Supreme
Judge: For if the Law of Reason did determine Punishments, then for the same
Offenses there should be through all the World, and in all times the same
Punishments; because the Law of Reason is Immutable and Eternal.


La. If the natural Reason neither of the King, nor of any else be able to
prescribe a Punishment, how can there be any lawful Punishment at all?


Ph. Why not? For I think that in this very difference between the rational
Faculties of particular Men, lies the true and perfect reason that makes
every Punishment certain. For, but give the authority of defining punishments
to any Man whatsoever, and let that Man define them, and right Reason has
defined them. Suppose the Definition be both made, and made known before the
Offense committed: For such authority is to trump in Card-playing, save that in
matter of Government, when nothing else is turned up, Clubs are Trump.
Therefore seeing every Man knows by his own Reason what Actions are against
the Law of Reason, and knows what Punishments are by this authority for every
evil action ordained; it is manifest Reason, that for breaking the known Laws,
he should suffer the known Punishments. Now the person to whom this authority
of defining Punishments is given, can be no other in any place of the World,
but the same Person that has the Sovereign Power, be it one Man, or one
assembly of Men: For it were in vain to give it to any Person that had not the
power of the Militia to cause it to be executed; for no less power can do it,
when many Offenders be united and combined to defend one another. There was a
Case put to King David by Nathan, of a rich Man that had many Sheep, and of a
poor Man that had but one, which was a tame Lamb: The rich Man had a stranger
in his House, for whose entertainment (to spare his own Sheep) he took away the
poor Man's Lamb. Upon this Case the King gave Judgment, surely the Man that has
done this shall die. What think you of this? Was it a Royal, or Tyrannical
Judgment?


La. I will not contradict the Canons of the Church of England, which
acknowledges the King of England, within his own Dominions has the same
Rights, which the good Kings of Israel had in theirs, nor deny King David to
have been one of those good Kings: But to punish with death without a precedent
Law, will seem but a harsh proceeding with us, who unwillingly hear of
Arbitrary Laws, much less of Arbitrary Punishments, unless we were sure that
all our Kings would be as good as David. I will only ask you by what Authority
the Clergy may take upon them to determine, or make a Canon concerning the
power of their own King, or to distinguish between the Right of a good, and an
evil King.


Ph. It is not the Clergy that makes their Canons to be Law, but it is the
King that does it by the Great Seal of England; and it is the King that gives
them power to teach their Doctrines, in that, that he authoriseth them
publicly to teach and preach the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
according to the Scriptures, wherein this Doctrine is perspicuously contained.
But if they had derogated from the Royal Power in any of their Doctrines
published, then certainly they had been too blame; nay, I believe that had been
more within the Statute of praemunire of 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. than any Judge of a
Court of Equity for holding Pleas of Common Law. I cite not this Precedent of
King David, as approving the breach of the great Charter, or justifying the
Punishment with loss of Life, or Member of every Man that shall offend the
King; but to show you that before the Charter was granted, in all Cases where
the Punishments were not prescribed, it was the King only that could prescribe
them; and that no deputed Judge could punish an Offender, but by force of some
Statute, or by the words of some Commission, and not ex officio. They might for
a contempt of their Courts, because it is a contempt of the King, imprison a
Man, during the Kings pleasure, or fine him to the King, according to the
greatness of the Offense: But all this amounts to no more, than to leave him
to the Kings Judgment. As for cutting off of Ears, and for the Pillory, and the
like corporal Punishments usually inflicted heretofore in the Star Chamber,
they were warranted by the Statute of Hen. 7. that gives them power to punish
sometimes by discretion. And generally it is a rule of Reason, that every Judge
of Crimes, in case the positive Law appoint no Punishment, and he have no other
Command from the King; then to consult the King before he pronounce Sentence of
any irreparable damage on the Offender: For otherwise he does not pronounce
the Law, which is his Office to do, but makes the Law, which is the Office of
the King. And from this you may collect, that the Custom of punishing such and
such a Crime, in such and such a manner, has not the force of Law in it self,
but from an assured presumption, that the Original of the Custom was the
Judgment of some former King. And for this Cause the Judges ought not to run up
for the Customs by which they are warranted to the time of the Saxon Kings, nor
to the time of the Conquest: For the most immediate, antecedent precedents are
the fairest warrants of their Judgments, as the most recent Laws have commonly
the greatest vigor, as being fresh in the memory of all Men, and tacitly
confirmed (because not disapproved) by the Sovereign Legislator. What can be
said against this?


La. Sir Edw. Coke 3 Inst. p. 210. in the Chapter of Judgments and Executions
says, that of Judgments some are by the Common Law, some by Statute Law, and
some by Custom; wherein he distinguishes Common Law, both from Statute Law
and from Custom.


Ph. But you know, that in other places he makes the Common Law, and the Law of
Reason to be all one, as indeed they are, when by it is meant the Kings Reason;
and then his meaning in this distinction must be, that there be Judgments by
Reason without Statute Law, and Judgments neither by Statute Law, nor by
Reason, but by Custom without Reason; for if a Custom be Reasonable, then,
both he, and other Learned Lawyers say, it is Common Law; and if unreasonable,
no Law at all.


La. I believe Sir Edw. Coke's meaning was no other than yours in this point,
but that he inserted the word Custom, because there be not many that can
distinguish between Customs reasonable and unreasonable.


Ph. But Custom, so far forth as it has the force of a Law, has more of the
nature of a Statute, than of the Law of Reason, especially where the question
is not of Lands, and Goods, but of Punishments, which are to be defined only by
authority. Now to come to particulars: What Punishment is due by Law for High
Treason?


La. To be drawn upon a Hurdle from the Prison to the Gallows, and there to be
hanged by the Neck, and laid upon the ground alive, and have his Bowels taken
out, and burnt, whilst he is yet living; to have his Head cut off, his Body to
be divided into four parts, and his Head, and Quarters to be placed as the King
shall assign.


Ph. Seeing a Judge ought to give Judgment according to the Law, and that this
Judgment is not appointed by any Statute, how does Sir Edw. Coke warrant it by
Reason, or how by Custom?


La. Only thus, Reason it is, that his Body, Lands, Goods, Posterity, etc.
should be torn, pulled asunder, and destroyed, that intended to destroy the
Majesty of Government.


Ph. See how he avoids the saying the Majesty of the King. But does not this
Reason make as much for punishing a Traitor as Metius Suffetius, in old time,
was executed by Tullus Hostilius King of Rome, or as Ravillac, not many years
ago in France, who were torn in pieces by four Horses, as it does for Drawing,
Hanging, and Quartering?


La. I think it does. But he confirms it also in the same Chapter, by holy
Scripture. Thus Joab for Treason, 1 Kings 2. 28. was drawn from the horns of
the Altar; that is proof for drawing upon a Hurdle. Esth. 2. 22. Bithan for
Treason was Hanged; there is for hanging. Acts. 1. 18. Judas hanged himself, and
his Bowels were poured out; there is for hanging, and embowelling alive. 2 Samuel
18. 14. Joab pierced Absalom's heart; that is proof for pulling out a Traitors
heart. 2 Samuel 20. 22. Sheba the Son of Bichri had his Head cut off; which is
proof that a Traitors Head ought to be cut off. 2 Samuel 4. 12. They slew Baanah
and Rechab, and hung up their Heads over the Pool of Hebron; this is for
setting up of Quarters. And Lastly for forfeiture of Lands, and Goods, Psalm.
109. v. 9. 10. etc. Let their Children be driven out, and beg, and other Men
make spoil of their labors, and let their Memory be blotted out of the Land.


Ph. learnedly said; and no Record is to be kept of the Judgment. Also the
Punishments divided between those Traitors must be joined in one Judgment for a
Traitor here.


La. He meant none of this, but intended (his Hand being in) to show his
Reading, or his Chaplains in the Bible.


Ph. Seeing then for the specifying of the Punishment in Case of Treason, he
brings no argument from natural Reason; that is to say, from the Common Law;
and that it is manifest that it is not the general Custom of the Land, the same
being rarely, or never executed upon any Peer of the Realm, and that the King
may remit the whole Penalty, if he will; it follows, that the specifying of the
Punishment depends merely upon the authority of the King. But this is certain,
that no Judge ought to give other Judgment, than has been usually given, and
approved either by a Statute, or by Consent express or employed, of the
Sovereign Power; for otherwise it is not the Judgment of the Law, but of a Man
subject to the Law.


La. In Petit Treason the Judgment is, to be drawn to the place of execution,
and hanged by the Neck, or if it be a Woman, to be drawn and burnt.


Ph. Can you imagine that this so nice a distinction can have any other
foundation than the wit of a private Man?


La. Sir Edw. Coke upon this place says, that she ought not to be beheaded, or
hanged.


Ph. No, not by the Judge, who ought to give no other Judgment than the
Statute, or the King appoints, nor the Sheriff to make other execution than the
Judge pronounces; unless he have a special warrant from the King. And this I
should have thought he had meant, had he not said before, that the King had
given away all his Right of Judicature to his Courts of Justice.


La. The Judgment for Felony is --


Ph. Heresy is before Felony in the Catalogue of the Pleas of the Crown.


La. He has omitted the Judgment against a Heretic, because (I think) no Jury
confined Heresy, nor no Judge Temporal did ever pronounce Judgment upon it:
For the Statute of 2 H. 5. c. 7. was, that the Bishop having convicted any Man
of Heresy, should deliver him to the Sheriff, and that the Sheriff should
believe the Bishop. The Sheriff therefore was bound by the Statute of 2 H. 4.
after he was delivered to him, to burn him; but that Statute being repealed,
the Sheriff could not burn him, without a Writ de Heretico comburendo, and
therefore the Sheriff burnt Legate 9. king James by that Writ, which was granted
by the Judges of the Common Law at that time, and in that Writ the Judgment is
expressed.


Ph. This is strange reasoning; when Sir Edw. Coke knew, and confessed, that
the Statutes upon which the Writ de Heretico comburendo was grounded, were all
repealed, how could he think the Writ it self could be in force? Or that the
Statute which repealeth the Statutes for burning Heretics was not made with an
intent to forbid such burning? It is manifest he understood not his Books of
Common Law: For in the time of Hen. 4. and Hen. 5. the word of the Bishop was
the Sheriff's warrant, and there was need of no such Writ; nor could he till
the 25 Hen. 8. when those Statutes were repealed, and a Writ made for that
purpose, and put into the Register, which Writ Fitzherbert cites in the end of
his natura brevium. Again, in the later end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth was
published a correct Register of Original and Judicial Writs, and the Writ de
Haeretico comburendo left out, because that Statute of 25 H. 8. and all
Statutes against Heretics were repealed, and burning forbidden. And whereas he
cites for the granting of this Writ, 9. Jac. the Lord Chief Justice, the Lord
Chief Baron, and two Justices of the Common Pleas, it is, as to all, but the
Lord Chief against the Law; for neither the Judges of Common Pleas, nor of the
Exchequer can hold Pleas of the Crown (without special Commission) and if they
cannot hold Plea, they cannot condemn.


La. The Punishment for Felony is, that the Felon be hanged by the Neck till he
be dead. And to prove that it ought to be so, he cites a Sentence (from whence
I know not) Quod non licet Felonem pro Felonia decollare.


Ph. It is not indeed lawful for the Sheriff of his own Head to do it, or to do
otherwise than is commanded in the Judgment, nor for the Judge to give any
other Judgment, than according to Statute Law, or the usage consented to by the
King, but this hinders not the King from altering his Law concerning Judgments,
if he see good cause.


La. The King may do so, if he please: And Sir Edw. Coke tells you how he
altered particular Judgments in case of Felony, and shows, that Judgment
being given upon a Lord in Parliament, that he should be hanged, he was
nevertheless beheaded; and that another Lord had the like Judgment for another
Felony, and was not hanged, but beheaded; and withal he shows you the
inconveniency of such proceeding, because (says he) if hanging might be
altered to beheading, by the same reason it might be altered to burning,
stoning to Death, etc.


Ph. Perhaps there might be inconveniency in it; but it is more than I see, or
he shows, nor did there happen any inconveniency from the execution he cites:
Besides he grants, that death being ultimum supplicium is a satisfaction to
the Law. But what is all this to the purpose, when it belongs not to consider
such inconveniences of Government but to the King and Parliament? Or who from
the authority of a deputed Judge can derive a power to censure the actions of a
King that has deputed him?


La. For the death of a Man by misfortune, there is (he says) no express
Judgment, nor for killing a Man in ones own defense; but he says, that the Law
has in both Cases given judgment, that he that so kills a Man shall forfeit
all his Goods and Chattels, Debts and Duties.


Ph. If we consider what Sir Edw. Coke says, 1 Inst. Sect. 745. at the word
Felony, these Judgments are very favorable: For there he says, that killing
of a Man by Chance-medley, or se defendendo is Felony. His words are; wherefore
by the Law at this day, under the word Felony in Commissions, etc. is included
Petit Treason, Murder, Homicide, burning of Houses, Burglary, Robbery, Rape,
etc. Chance-medley, and se defendendo. But if we consider only the intent of
him that kills a Man by misfortune, or in his own defense, the same judgments
will be thought both cruel, and sinful Judgments. And how they can be Felony at
this day cannot be understood, unless there be a Statute to make them so. For
the Statute of 25 H. 3. cap. 25. The words whereof, Murder from henceforth
shall not be judged before our Justices, where it is found Misfortune only; but
it shall take place in such as are slain by Felony, and not otherwise, make it
manifest, if they be Felonies, they must also be Murders, unless they have been
made Felonies by some latter Statute.


La. There is no such latter Statute, nor is it to say in Commission; nor can a
Commission, or any thing but another Statute make a thing Felony, that was not
so before.


Ph. See what it is for a Man to distinguish Felony into several sorts, before
he understands the general name of Felony what it means; but that a Man, for
killing another Man by misfortune only, without any evil purpose, should
forfeit all his Goods and Chartels, Debts and Duties, is a very hard Judgment,
unless perhaps they were to be given to the Kindred of the Man slain, by way of
amends for damage. But the Law is not that. Is it the Common Law (which is the
Law of Reason) that justifies this Judgment, or the Statute Law? It cannot be
the Law of Reason, if the Case be mere misfortune. If a Man be upon his
Apple Tree, to gather his Apples, and by ill fortune fall down, and lighting on
the Head of another Man kill him, and by good fortune saves himself; shall he
for this mischance be punished with the forfeiture of his Goods to the King?
Does the Law of Reason warrant this? He should (you will say) have looked to his
Feet; that is true, but so should he that was under have looked up to the Tree.
Therefore in this Case the Law of Reason (as I think) dictates, that they ought
each of them to bear his own misfortune.


La. In this Case I agree with you.


Ph. But this Case is the true Case of mere misfortune, and a sufficient
reprehension of the Opinion of Sir Edw. Coke.


La. But what if this had happened to be done by one that had been stealing
Apples upon the Tree of another Man? Then (as Sir Edw. Coke says, 3 Inst. p,
56.) it had been Murder.


Ph. There is indeed great need of good distinction in a Case of killing by
misfortune; but in this Case the unlawfulness of stealing Apples cannot make it
Murder, unless the falling it self be unlawful. It must be a voluntary unlawful
Act that causes the death, or else it is no Murder by the Law of Reason: Now
the death of the Man that was under the Tree proceeded not from that, that the
Apples were not his that fell, but from the fall. But if a Man shoot with a Bow
or a Gun at another Man's Deer, and by misfortune kill a Man, such shooting
being both voluntary, and unlawful, and also the immediate Cause of the Man's
death, may be drawn perhaps well enough sometimes to Murder by a Judge of the
Common Law. So likewise if a Man shoot an Arrow over a House, and by chance
kill a Man in the Street, there is no doubt but by the Law of Reason it is
Murder, for though he meant no malice to the Man slain, yet it is manifest,
that he cared not whom he slew. In this difficulty of finding out what it is
that the Law of Reason dictates, who is it that must decide the Question?


La. In the Case of misfortune, I think it belongs to the Jury; for it is
matter of Fact only: But when it is doubtful whether the action from which the
misfortune came, were Lawful, or Unlawful, it is to be judged by the Judge.


Ph. But if the unlawfulness of the action (as the stealing of the Apples) did
not cause the death of the Man, then the stealing, be it, Trespass, or Felony,
ought to be punished alone, as the Law requires.


La. But for killing of a Man se defendendo, the Jury (as Sir Edw. Coke here
says) shall not in their Verdict say it was se defendendo, but shall declare
the manner of the Fact in special, and clear it to the Judge, to consider how
it is to be called, whether se defendendo, Manslaughter, or Murder.


Ph. One would think so; for it is not often within the capacity of a Jury to
distinguish the signification of the different and hard names which are given
by Lawyers to the killing of a Man; as Murder and Felony, which neither the
Laws, nor the makers of the Laws have yet defined. The Witnesses say, that thus
and thus the Person did, but not that it was Murder or Felony; no more can the
Jury say, who ought to say nothing but what they hear from the Witnesses, or
from the Prisoner. Nor ought the Judge to ground his Sentence upon any thing
else, besides the special matter found, which according as it is contrary, or
not contrary to the Statute, ought to be pronounced.


La. But I have told you, that when the Jury has found misfortune, or se
defendendo, there is no judgment at all to be given, and the Party is to be
pardoned of course, saving that he shall forfeit his Goods and Chattells, Debts
and Duties to the King.


Ph. But I understand not how there can be a Crime for which there is no
Judgment, nor how any Punishment can be inflicted without a precedent Judgment,
nor upon what ground the Sheriff can seize the Goods of any Man, till it be
judged that they be forfeited. I know that Sir Edw. Coke says, that in the
Judgment of hanging, the Judgment of forfeiture is employed, which I understand
not; though I understand well enough, that the Sheriff by his Office may seize
the Goods of a Felon convicted; much less do I conceive how the forfeiture of
Goods can be employed in a no-judgment, nor do I conceive, that when the Jury
has found the special manner of the Fact to be such, as is really no other than
se defendendo, and consequently, no fault at all, why he should have any
Punishment at all. Can you show me any Reason for it?


La. The Reason lies in the Custom.


Ph. You know that unreasonable Customs are not Law, but ought to be abolished;
and what Custom is there more unreasonable than that a Man should be punished
without a fault?


La. Then see the Statute of 24 Hen. 8. cap. 5.


Ph. I find here, that at the making of this Statute there was a Question
amongst the Lawyers, in case one Man should kill another that attempted
feloniously to Rob, or Murder him in, or near any Common Highway, Court-way,
Horse-way, or Foot-way, or in his Mansion, Message, or Dewlling Place; whether
for the death of such a Man one shall forfeit his Goods and Chattells, as a Man
should do for killing another by Chance-medley, or in his own defense. This is
the Preamble, and penned as well as Sir Edw. Coke could have wished; but this
Statute does not determine that a Man should forfeit his Goods for killing a
Man se defendendo, or for killing him by misfortune; but supposes it only upon
the opinion of the Lawyers that then were. The body of the Statute is, that if
a Man be indicted, or appealed for the death of such Person so attempting as
aforesaid, and the same by verdict be so found and tried, he shall not forfeit
any thing, but shall be discharged as if he had been found not Guilty. You see
the Statute, now consider thereby in the case of killing se defendendo. Frst,
if a Man kill another in his own defense, it is manifest, that the Man slain
did either attempt to Rob, or to Kill, or to Wound him; for else it was not
done in his own defense. If then it were done in the Street, or near the Street
as in a Tavern, he forfeits nothing because the Street is a Highway. So
likewise it is to be said of all other Common-ways. In what place therefore can
a Man kill another in his own defense, but that this Statute will discharge him
of the forfeiture?


La. But the Statute says the attempt must be felonious.


Ph. When a Man assaults me with a Knife, Sword, Club, or other mortal Weapon;
does any Law forbid me to defend my self, or command me to stay so long as to
know whether he have a felonious intent, or no? Therefore by this Statute, in
case it be found se defendendo, the forfeiture is discharged, if it be found
otherwise, it is Capital. If we read the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 9. I think
it will take away the difficulty: For by that Statute, in case it be found by
the Country, that he did it in his own defense, or by misfortune, then by the
report of the Justices to the King, the King shall take him to his Grace, if it
please him. From whence it follows; first, that it was then thought Law, that
the Jury may give the general verdict of se defendendo, which Sir Edw. Coke
denies. Secondly, that the Judge ought to report especial matter to the King.
Thirdly, that the King may take him to his Grace, if he please, and
consequently, that his Goods are not to be seized, till the King (after the
report of the Judge heard) give the Sheriff command to do it. Fourthly, that
the general verdict of the King hinders not the King, but that he may Judge of
it upon the special matter, for it often happens that an ill-disposed Person
provokes a Man with words, or otherwise on purpose to make him draw his Sword,
that he may kill him, and pretend it done in his own defense; which appearing,
the King may, without any offense to God, punish him as the cause shall
require. Lastly (contrary to the Doctrine of Sir Edw. Coke) he may in his own
Person be Judge in the case, and annul the Verdict of the Jury, which a deputed
Judge cannot do.


La. There be some cases wherein a Man, though by the Jury he be found not
Guilty, shall nevertheless forfeit his Goods and Chattells to the King. For
example; a Man is slain, and one A. hating B. gives out that it was B. that
slew him: B. hearing thereof, fearing if he be tried for it, that through the
great power of A. and others that seek his hurt, he should be condemned,
flies, and afterward is taken, and tried; and upon sufficient evidence is by
the Jury found Not Guilty; yet because he fled he shall forfeit his Goods and
Chattels, notwithstanding there be no such Judgment given by the Judge, nor
appointed by any Statute, but the Law it self authoriseth the Sheriff to seize
them to the use of the King.


Ph. I see no reason (which is Common Law) for it, and am sure it is grounded
upon no Statute.


La. See Sir Edw. Coke, Inst. 1. Sect. 709. and read.


Ph. If a Man that is Innocent be accused of Felony, and for fear flies for
the same; albeit that he be judicially acquitted of the Felony, yet if it be
found that he fled for the same, he shall (notwithstanding his Innocence)
forfeit all his Goods and Chattells, Debts and Duties. O unchristian, and
abominable Doctrine! which also he in his own words following contradicts:
For (says he) as to the forfeiture of them, the Law will admit no proof
against the presumption of the Law grounded upon his flight, and so it is in
many other cases: But that the general Rule is, Quod stabitur praesumptioni,
donec probetur in contrarium, but you see it has many exceptions. This general
Rule contradicts what he said before; for there can be no exceptions to a
general Rule in Law, that is not expressly made an exception by some Statute,
and to a general Rule of equity there can be no exception at all. From the
power of Punishing, let us proceed to the power of Pardoning.


La. Touching the power of Pardoning, Sir Edw. Coke says, 3 Inst. p. 236. That
no Man shall obtain Charter of pardon out of Parliament, and cites for it the
Statute of 2 Ed. 3. cap. 2. and says farther, that accordingly in a Parliament
Roll it is said, that for the peace of the Land it would help, that no pardon
were granted but by Parliament.


Ph. What lawful power would he have left to the King, that thus disableth him
to practice Mercy? In the Statute which he cites, to prove that the King ought
not to grant Charters of Pardon, but in Parliament there are no such words, as
any Man may see; for that Statute is in Print; and that which he says is in the
Parliament Roll, is but a wish of he tells not whom, and not a Law; and it is
strange that a private wish should be enrolled amongst Acts of Parliament. If a
Man do you an injury, to whom (think you) belongs the Right of pardoning it?


La. Doubtless to me alone, if to me alone be done that injury; and to the King
alone, if to him alone be done the injury; and to both together, if the injury
be done to both.


Ph. What part then has any Man in the granting of a pardon, but the King and
the party wronged. if you offend no Member of either House, why should you ask
their pardon. It is possible that a Man may deserve a pardon; or he may be such
a one sometimes as the defense of the Kingdom has need of; may not the King
pardon him, though there be no Parliament then sitting? Sir Edw. Coke's Law is
too general in this point, and I believe, if he had thought on it, he would have
excepted some Persons, if not all the Kings Children, and his Heir apparent;
and yet they are all his Subjects, and subject to the Law as other Men.


La. But if the King shall grant pardons of Murder and Felony, of his own head,
there would be very little safety for any Man, either out of his House, or in
it, either by Night, or by Day: And for that very cause there have been many
good Statutes provided, which forbid the Justices to allow of such pardons as
do not specially name the Crime.


Ph. Those Statutes, I confess, are reasonable, and very profitable, which
forbid the Judge to pardon Murders, but what Statute is there that forbids the
King to do it? There is a Statute of 13 Rich. 2. c. 1. wherein the King
promises not to pardon Murder, but there is in it a clause for the saving of
the Kings Regality. From which may be inferred, that the King did not grant
away that power, when he thought good to use it for the Commonwealth. Such
Statutes are not Laws to the King, but to his Judges, and though the Judges be
commanded by the King not to allow pardons in many cases, yet if the King by
writing command the Judges to allow them, they ought to do it. I think, if the
King think in his conscience it be for the good of the Commonwealth, he
sins not in it; but I hold not that the King may pardon him without sin, if
any other Man be damnified by the Crime committed, unless he cause reparation
to be made, as far as the party offending can do it: And howsoever be it sin,
or not sin, there is no power in England that may resist him, or speak evil of
him lawfully.


La. Sir Edw. Coke denies not that; and upon that ground it is that the King,
he says, may pardon high Treason; for there can be no high Treason, but against
the King.


Ph. That Is well; therefore he confesses, that whatsoever the offense be, the
King may pardon so much of it as is an injury to himself, and that by his own
right, without breach of any Law positive, or natural, or of any grant, if his
Conscience tell him that it be not to the damage of the Commonwealth; and you
know that to judge of what is good or evil to the Commonwealth, belongs to
the King only. Now tell me what it is which is said to be pardoned?


La. What can it be but only the offense? If a Man has done a Murder and be
pardoned for the same, is it not the Murder that is pardoned?


Ph. Nay, by your favor, if a Man be pardoned for Murder or any other offense,
it is the Man that is pardoned, the Murder still remains Murder. But what is
pardon?


La. Pardon (as Sir Edw. Coke says, 3 Inst. p. 233) is derived of per and dono,
and signifies thoroughly to remit.


Ph. If the King remit the Murder and not pardon the Man that did it, what does
the remission serve for?


La. You know well enough that when we say a Murder, or any thing else is
pardoned, all Englishmen understand thereby, that the punishment due to the
offense is the thing remitted.


Ph. But for our understanding of one another, you ought to have said so at
first. I understand now, that to pardon Murder or Felony is thoroughly to save
the offender from all the punishment due unto him by the Law for his offense.


La. Not so; for Sir Edw. Coke in the same Chapter, p. 238. says thus: A Man
commits Felony, and is attainted thereof, or is abjured; the King pardons the
Felony without any mention of the attainder or abjuration, the pardon is void.


Ph. What is it to be attainted?


La. To be attainted is, that his Blood be held in Law as stained and
corrupted; so that no inheritance can descend from him to his Children, or to
any that make claim by him.


Ph. Is this attaint a part of the Crime, or of the Punishment?


La. It cannot be a part of the Crime, because it is none of his own Act; it is
therefore a part of the Punishment, viz. a disherison of the offender.


Ph. If it be a part of the Punishment due, and yet not pardoned together with
the rest; then a pardon is not a through remitting of the Punishment as Sir
Edw. Coke says it is. And what is Abjuration?


La. When a Clerk heretofore was convicted of Felony, he might have saved his
life by abjuring the Realm; that is, by departing the Realm within a certain
time appointed, and taking an Oath never to return. But at this day all
Statutes for Abjuration are repealed.


Ph. That also is a Punishment, and by a pardon of the Felony pardoned, unless
a Statute be in force to the contrary. There is also somewhat in the Statute of
13 Rich. 2. c. 1. concerning the allowance of Charters of pardons, which I
understand not well. The words are these; No Charter of pardon for henceforth
shall be allowed before our Justices for Murder, or for the death of a Man by
awayt, or malice prepens'd, Treason, or Rape of a Woman, unless the same be
specified in the same Charter, for I think it follows thence, that if the King
say in his Charter, that he pardons the Murder, then he breaks not the
Statute, because he specifies the offense; or if he says, he pardons the
killing by awayt, or of malice prepensed, he breaks not the Statute, he
specifies the offense. Also if he say so much as that the Judge cannot doubt of
the Kings meaning to pardon him, I think the Judge ought to allow it, because
the Statute saves the Kings liberty and regality in that point; that is to
say, the power to pardon him, such as are these words, notwithstanding any
Statute to the contrary, are sufficient to cause the Charter to be allowed: For
these words make it manifest, that the Charter was not granted upon surprise,
but to maintain and claim the Kings liberty and power to show mercy, when he
sees cause. The like meaning have these words Perdonavimus omnimodam
interfectionem; that is to say, we have pardoned the killing in what manner
soever it was done. But here we must remember that the King cannot pardon,
without sin, any damage thereby done to another Man, unless he causes
satisfaction to be made, as far as possibly the offender can, but is not bound
to satisfy Men's thirst of revenge; for all revenge ought to proceed from God,
and under God from the King. Now (besides in Charters) how are these offenses
specified?


La. They are specified by their names, as Treason, Petit Treason, Murder,
Rape, Felony, and the like.


Ph. Petit Treason is Felony, Murder is Felony, so is Rape, Robbery and Theft,
and (as Sir Edw. Coke says) Petit Larceny is Felony; now if in a
Parliament-pardon, or in a Coronation-pardon all Felonies be pardoned; whether
is Petit Larceny pardoned, or not?


La. Yes certainly it is pardoned.


Ph. And yet you see it is not specified, and yet it is a Crime that has less
in it of the nature of Felony, than there is in Robbery. Do not therefore Rape,
Robbery, Theft, pass under the pardon of all Felonies?


La. I think they are all pardoned by the words of the Statute, but those that
are by the same Statute excepted; so that specification is needful only in
Charters of pardon, but in general pardons not so. For the Statute 13 Rich. 2.
cap. 1. forbids not the allowance of Parliament-pardons, or Coronation-pardons,
and therefore the offenses pardoned need not be specified, but may pass under
the general word of all Felonies. Nor is it likely that the members of the
Parliament who drew up their own pardons, did not mean to make them as
comprehensive as they could: And yet Sir Edw. Coke, 2 Inst. Sect. 745. at the
word Felony, seems to be of another mind; for Piracy is one species of
Felony, and yet when certain Englishmen had committed Piracy in the last year
of Queen Elizabeth, and came home into England, in the beginning of the Reign
of King James, trusting to his Coronation-pardon of all Felonies; they were
indicted (Sir Edw. Coke was then Attorney General) of the Piracy before
Commissioners according to the Statute of 28 H. 8. and being found Guilty were
hanged. The reason he alleges for it is, that it ought to have been specified
by the name of Piracy in the pardon, and therefore the pardon was not to be
allowed.


Ph. Why ought it to have been specified more than any other Felony? He should
therefore have drawn his argument from the Law of reason.


La. Also he does that; for the Trial (he says) was by the Common Law, and
before Commissioners not in the Court of the Lord Admiral, by the Civil-Law,
therefore he says it was an offense whereof the Common Law could not take
notice because it could not be Tried by twelve Men.


Ph. If the Common Law could not, or ought not to take notice of such offenses,
how could the offenders be Tried by twelve Men, and found Guilty, and hanged,
as they were? If the Common Law take no notice of Piracy, what other offense
was it for which they were hanged? Is Piracy two Felonies, for one of which a
Man shall be hanged by the Civil-Law, and for the other by the Common Law?
Truly I never read weaker reasoning in any Author of the Law of England, than
in Sir Edw. Coke's Institutes, how well soever he could plead.


La. Though I have heard him much reprehended by others, as well as by you; yet
there be many excellent things, both for subtility, and for truth in these his
Institutes.


Ph. No better things than other Lawyers have that write of the Law, as of a
Science: His citing of Aristotle, and of Homer, and of other Books which are
commonly read to Gown-men, do, in my opinion, but weaken his Authority, for any
Man may do it by a Servant; but seeing the whole scene of that time is gone and
past, let us proceed to somewhat else. Wherein does an Act of Oblivion differ
from a Parliament-pardon?


La. This word Act of Oblivion was never in our Law Books before the 12 Car. 2.
c. 11. and I wish it may never come again; but from whence it came you may
better know perhaps than I.


Ph. The first, and only Act of Oblivion that ever passed into a Law, in any
State that I have read of, was that Amnestia, or Oblivion of all Quarrels
between any of the Citizens of Athens, at any time before that Act, without all
exception of Crime, or Person. The occasion whereof was this. The Lacedaemonians
having totally subdued the Athenians, entered into the City of Athens, and
ordained that the People should choose thirty Men of their own City to have the
Sovereign Power over them. These being chosen behaved themselves so
outragiously, as caused a Sedition, in which the Citizens on both sides were
daily slain. There was then a discreet Person that propounded to each of the
parties this proposition, that every Man should return to his own, and forget
all that was past; which proposition was made, by consent on both sides, into a
public Act, which for that cause was called an Oblivion. Upon the like
disorder happening in Rome by the Murder of Julius Caesar, the like Act was
propounded by Cicero, and indeed passed, but was within few days after broken
again by Marcus Antonius. In imitation of this Act was made the Act of 12 Car.
2. c. 11.


La. By this it seems, that the Act of Oblivion made by King Charles, was no
other than a Parliament-pardon, because it contains a great number of
exceptions, as the other Parliament-pardons do, and the Act of Athens did not.


Ph. But yet there is a difference between the late Act of Oblivion made here,
and an ordinary Parliament-pardon: For concerning a fault pardoned in
Parliament by a general word, a suit in Law may arise about this, whether the
offender be signified by the word, or not, as whether the pardon of all
Felonies, be a pardon of Piracy, or not: For you see by Sir Edw. Coke's
reports, that notwithstanding a pardon of Felony, a Sea- Felony (when he was
Attorney General) was not pardoned. But by the late Act of Oblivion, which
pardoned all manner of offenses committed in the late Civil War, no question
could arise concerning Crimes excepted. First, because no Man can by Law accuse
another Man of a Fact, which by Law is to be forgotten. Secondly, because all
Crimes may be alleged, as proceeding from the Licentiousness of the time, and
from the silence of the Law occasioned by the Civil War, and consequently
(unless the offenders Person also were excepted, or unless the Crime were
committed before the War began) are within the Pardon.


La. Truly I think you say right: For if nothing had been pardoned, but what
was done by occasion of the War, the raising of the War it self had not been
pardoned.


Ph. I have done with Crimes and Punishments, let us come now to the Laws of
Meum and Tuum.


La. We must then examine the Statutes.


Ph. We must so, what they command and forbid, but not dispute of their
Justice: For the Law of Reason commands that every one observe the Law which he
has assented to, and obey the Person to whom he has promised obedience and
fidelity. Then let us consider next the Commentaries of Sir Edw. Coke upon
Magna Charta, and other Statutes.


Ph. For the understanding of Magna Charta, it will be very necessary to run up
into Ancient times, as far as History will give us leave, and consider not only
the Customs of our Ancestors the Saxons, but also the Law of nature (the most
Ancient of all Laws) concerning the original of Government, and acquisition of
Property, and concerning Courts of Judicature. And first, it is evident, that
Dominion, Government, and Laws, are far more Ancient than History, or any other
writing, and that the beginning of all Dominion amongst Men was in Families; in
which, first, the Father of the Family by the Law of nature was absolute Lord
of his Wife and Children. Secondly, made what Laws amongst them he pleased.
Thirdly, was Judge of all their Controversies. Fourthly, was not obliged by any
Law of Man to follow any Counsel, but his own. Fifthly, What Land soever the
Lord sat down upon, and made use of for his own, and his Families benefit, was
his Propriety by the Law of First-Possession, in case it was void of
Inhabitants before, or by the Law of War, in case they conquered it. In this
Conquest what Enemies they took and saved were their Servants: Also such Men as
wanting Possessions of Lands, but furnished with Arts necessary for Man's life,
came to dwell in the Family for Protection, became their Subjects, and
submitted themselves to the Laws of the Family: And all this is consonant, not
only to the Law of nature, but also to the practice of Mankind set forth in
History Sacred, and Praphane.


La. Do you think it lawful for a Lord that is the Sovereign Ruler of his
Family, to make War upon another like Sovereign Lord, and dispossess him of his
Lands?


Ph. It is Lawful, or not Lawful according to the intention of him that does
it. For, First, being a Sovereign Ruler, he is not subject to any Law of Man;
and as to the Law of God, where the intention is justifiable, the action is so
also. The intention may be Lawful in diverse Cases by the right of nature; one
of those Cases is, when he is constrained to it by the necessity of subsisting.
So the Children of Israel, besides that their leaders, Moses and Joshua had an
immediate command from God to dispossess the Canaanites, had also a just
pretense to do what they did from the right of nature, which they had to
preserve their lives, being unable otherwise to subsist. And as their
preservation, so also is their security a just pretense of invading those whom
they have just cause to fear, unless sufficient caution be given to take away
their fear, which Caution (for any thing I can yet conceive) is utterly
impossible. Necessity, and Security are the principal justifications, before
God, of beginning War. Injuries received justify a War defensive; but for
reparable injuries, if Reparation be tendered, all invasion upon that Title is
Iniquity. If you need examples, either from Scripture, or other History
concerning this right of nature in making War, you are able enough from your
own reading, to find them out at your leisure.


La. Whereas you say, that the Lands so won by the Sovereign Lord of a Family,
are his in propriety, you deny (methinks) all property to the Subjects, how
much soever any of them has contributed to the Victory.


Ph. I do so, nor do I see any reason to the contrary: For the Subjects,
whether they come into the Family, have no title at all to demand any part of
the Land, or any thing else but security, to which also they are bound to
contribute their whole strength, and, if need be, their whole fortunes: For it
cannot be supposed that any one Man can protect all the rest with his own
single strength: And for the Practice, it is manifest in all Conquests, the
Land of the vanquished is in the sole power of the Victor, and at his disposal.
Did not Joshua and the High Priest divide the Land of Canaan in such sort among
the Tribes of Israel, as they pleased? Did not the Roman and Grecian Princes
and States according to their own discretion, send out the Colonies to inhabit
such Provinces as they had Conquered? Is there at this day among the Turks any
inheritor of Land, besides the Sultan? And was not all the Land in England once
in the hands of William the Conqueror? Sir Edw. Coke himself confesses it;
therefore it is an universal truth, that all Conquered Lands, presently after
Victory, are the Lands of him that Conquered them.


La. But you know that all Sovereigns are said to have a double Capacity; viz.
a natural Capacity, as he is a Man, and a a politic Capacity, as a King. In
his politic Capacity I grant you, that King William the Conqueror was the
proper, and only owner once of all the Land in England, but not in his natural
Capacity.


Ph. If he had them in his politic Capacity, then they were so his own as not
to dispose of any part thereof, but only to the benefit of his People, and that
must be either by his own, or by the Peoples discretion; that is, by Act of
Parliament. But where do you find that the Conqueror disposed of his Lands (as
he did some to Englishmen, some to Frenchmen, and some to Normans) to be
holden by diverse Tenures, as Knight Service, Soccage, etc. by Act of
Parliament? Or that he ever called a Parliament to have the assent of the Lords
and Commons of England in disposing of those Lands he had taken from them? Or
for retaining of such and such Lands in his own hands by the name of Forests
for his own Recreation, or Magnificence? You have heard perhaps that some
Lawyers, or other Men reputed wise and good Patriots have given out, that all
the Lands which the Kings of England have possessed, have been given them by
the People, to the end that they should therewith defray the Charges of their
Wars, and pay the wages of their Ministers, and that those Lands were gained by
the Peoples Money; for that was pretended in the late Civil War, when they took
from the King his Town of Kingston upon Hull; but I know you do not think that
the pretense was just. It cannot therefore be denied but that Land which King
William the Conqueror gave away to Englishmen and others, and which they now
hold by his Letters Patents, and other conveyances, were properly, and really
his own, or else the Titles of them that now hold them must be invalid.


La. I assent. As you have showed me the beginning of Monarchies, so let me
hear your opinion concerning their growth.


Ph. Great Monarchies have proceeded from small Families. First, by War,
wherein the Victor not only enlarged his Territory, but also the number and
riches of his Subjects. As for other forms of Commonwealths, they have been
enlarged otherways. First, by a voluntary conjunction of many Lords of Families
into one great Aristocracie. Secondly, by Rebellion proceeded first, Anarchy,
and from Anarchy proceeded any form that the Calamities of them that lived
therein did prompt them to; whether it were that they chose an Hereditary King,
or an elective King for life, or that they agreed upon a Council of certain
Persons (which is Aristocracy) or a Council of the whole People to have the
Sovereign Power, which is Democracy.

After the first manner which is by War, grew up all the greatest Kingdoms in
the World, viz. the Egyptian, Assyrian, Persian and the Macedonian Monarchy;
and so did the great Kingdoms of England, France, and Spain.

The second manner was the original of the Venetian Aristocracy, by the third
way which is Rebellion, grew up in diverse great Monarchies, perpetually
changing from one form to another; as in Rome rebellion against Kings produced
Democracy, upon which the Senate usurped under Sylla, and the People again upon
the Senate under Marius, and the Emperor usurped upon the People under Caesar
and his Successors.


La. Do you think the distinction between natural and politic Capacity is
insignificant?


Ph. No; If the Sovereign power be in an assembly of Men, that Assembly,
whether it be Aristocratical, or Democratical, may possess Lands, but it is in
their politic Capacity, because no natural Man has any right to those Lands,
or any part of them, in the same manner they can command an Act by plurality of
Commands, but the Command of any one of them is of no effect. But when the
Sovereign power is in one Man, the Natural and Politic Capacity are in the
same Person, and as to possession of Lands undistinguishable: But as to the
Acts and Commands, they may be well distinguished in this manner. Whatsoever a
Monarch does Command, or do by consent of the People of his Kingdom, may
properly be said to be done in his politic Capacity; and whatsoever he
Commands by word of Mouth only, or by Letters Signed with his hand, or Sealed
with any of his private Seals is done in his natural Capacity: Nevertheless,
his public Commands, though they be made in his politic Capacity, have their
original from his natural Capacity. For in the making of Laws (which
necessarily requires his assent) his assent is natural: Also those Acts which
are done by the King previously to the passing of them under the Great Seal of
England, either by word of Mouth, or warrant under his Signet, or privy Seal,
are done in his natural Capacity; but when they have past the Seal of England,
they are to be taken as done in his politic Capacity.


La. I think verily your distinction is good: For natural Capacity, and
politic Capacity signify no more than private and public right. Therefore
leaving this argument let us consider in the next place, as far as History will
permit, what were the Laws and Customs of our Ancestors.


Ph. The Saxons, as also all the rest of Germany not Conquered by the Roman
Emperors, nor compelled to use the imperial Laws, were a Savage and Heathen
People, living only by War and Rapine; and as some learned Men in the Roman
Antiquities affirm, had their name of Germans from that their ancient trade of
life, as if Germans and Hommes de guerre were all one. Their rule over their
Family, Servants and Subjects was absolute, their Laws no other than natural
Equity; written Law they had little, or none, and very few there were in the
time of the Caesar's that could write, or read. The right to the Government was
either Paternal, or by Conquest, or by Marriages. Their succession to Lands was
determined by the pleasure of the Master of the Family, by Gift, or Deed in his
life time; and what Land they disposed not of in their life time, descended
after their death to their Heirs. The Heir was the Eldest Son; The issue of the
Eldest Son failing, they descended to the younger Sons in their order, and for
want of Sons, to the Daughters jointly, as to one Heir, or to be divided
amongst them, and so to descend to their Heirs in the same manner: And Children
failing, the Uncle by the Fathers, or Mothers side (according as the Lands had
been the Fathers or the Mothers) succeeded to the inheritance, and so
continually to the next of blood. And this was a natural descent, because
naturally the nearer in Blood, the nearer in kindness, and was held for the Law
of nature, not only amongst the Germans, but also in most Nations before they
had a written Law.

The right of Government, which is called Jus Regni descended in the same
manner, except only that after the Sons, it came to the eldest Daughter first,
and her Heirs; the reason whereof was, that Government is indivisible. And this
Law continues still in England.


La. Seeing all the Land which any Sovereign Lord possessed, was his own in
propriety; how came a Subject to have a propriety in their Lands?


Ph. There be two sorts of Propriety. One is, when a Man holds his Land from
the gift of God only, which Lands Civilians call Allodial which in a Kingdom no
Man can have but the King. The other is when a Man holds his Land from another
Man as given him, in respect of service and obedience to that Man, as a Fee.
The first kind of propriety is absolute, the other is in a manner conditional,
because given for some service to be done unto the giver. The first kind of
propriety excludes the right of all others; the second excludes the right of
all other Subjects to the same Land, but not the right of the Sovereign, when
the common good of the People shall require the use thereof.


La. When those Kings had thus parted with their Lands, what was left them for
the maintenance of their Wars, either offensive, or defensive; or for the
maintenance of the Royal Family in such manner as not only becomes the dignity
of a Sovereign King, but is also necessary to keep his Person and People from
contempt.


Ph. They have means enough; and besides what they gave their Subjects, had
much Land remaining in their own hands afforrested for their recreation: For
you know very well that a great part of the Land of England was given for
Military service to the great Men of the Realm, who were for the most part of
the Kings kindred, or great Favorites, much more Land than they had need of
for their own Maintenance; but so charged with one, or many Soldiers,
according to the quantity of Land given, as there could be no want of
Soldiers, at all times, ready to resist an invading Enemy: Which Soldiers
those Lords were bound to furnish, for a time certain, at their own Charges.
You know also, that the whole Land was divided into Hundreds, and those again
into Decennaries; in which Decennaries all Men even to Children of 12 years of
age, were bound to take the Oath of Allegiance: And you are to believe, that
those Men that hold their Land by the service of Husbandry, were all bound with
their Bodies, and Fortunes to defend the Kingdom against invaders by the Law of
nature: And so also such as they called Villains, and held their Land by baser
drudgery, were obliged to defend the Kingdom to the utmost of their power. Nay,
Women, and Children in such a necessity are bound to do such service as they
can, that is to say, to bring Weapons and Victuals to them that fight, and to
Dig: But those that hold their Land by service Military, have lying upon them a
greater obligation: For read and observe the form of doing homage, according as
it is set down in the Statute of 17 Edw. 2. which you doubt not, was in use
before that time, and before the Conquest.


La. I become your Man for Life, for Member and for worldly Honor, and shall
owe you my faith for the Lands that I hold of you.


Ph. I pray you expound it.


La. I think it is as much, as if you should say, I promise you to be at your
Command; to perform with the hazard of my Life, Limbs and all my Fortune, as I
have charged my self to the reception of the Lands you have given me, and to be
ever faithful to you. This is the form of Homage done to the King immediately;
but when one Subject holds Land of another by the like Military service, then
there is an exception added; viz. saving the faith I owe to the King.


Ph. Did he not also take an Oath?


La. Yes; which is called the Oath of Fealty; I shall be to you both faithful,
and lawfully shall do such customs and services, as my duty is to you at the
terms assigned; so help me God, and all his Saints. But both these services,
and the services of Husbandry were quickly after turned into Rents, payable
either in Money, as in England; or in Corn, or other Victuals, as in Scotland
and France. When the service was Military, the Tenant was for the most part
bound to serve the King in his Wars with one, or more Persons, according to the
yearly value of the Land he held.


Ph. Were they bound to find Horsemen, or Footmen?


La. I do not find any Law that requires any Man, in respect of his Tenancie,
to serve on Horseback.


Ph. Was the Tenant bound, in case he were called, to serve in Person?


La. I think he was so in the beginning: For when Lands were given for service
Military, and the Tenant dying left his Son and Heir, the Lord had the custody
both of Body and Lands till the Heir was twenty one years old; and the reason
thereof was, that the Heir till that Age of twenty one years, was presumed to
be unable to serve the King in his Wars, which reason had been insufficient, if
the Heir had been bound to go to the Wars in Person. Which (methinks) should
ever hold for Law, unless by some other Law it come to be altered. These
services together with other Rights, as Wardships first, possession of his
Tenants inheritance, Licenses for Alienation, Felons Goods, Felons Lands, if
they were holden of the King, and the first years profit of the Lands, of
whomsoever they were holden, Forfeitures, Amercements, and many other aids
could not but amount to a very great yearly Revenue. Add to this all that which
the King might reasonably have imposed upon Artificers and Tradesmen (for all
Men, whom the King protecteth, ought to contribute toward their own
protection) and consider then whether the Kings of those times had not means
enough, and to spare (if God were not their Enemy) to defend their People
against Foreign Enemies, and also to compel them to keep the Peace amongst
themselves.


Ph. And so had had the succeeding Kings if they had never given their rights
away, and their Subjects always kept their Oaths, and promises. In what manner
proceeded those Ancient Saxons, and other Nations of Germany, especially the
Northern parts, to the making of their Laws?


La. Sir Edw. Coke out of diverse Saxon Laws, gathered and published in Saxon
and Latin by Mr. Lambert, infers, that the Saxon Kings, for the making of
their Laws, called together the Lords and Commons, in such manner as is used at
this day in England. But by those Laws of the Saxons published by Mr. Lambert,
it appears, that the Kings called together the Bishops, and a great part of
the wisest and discreetest Men of the Realm, and made Laws by their advice.


Ph. I think so; for there is no King in the World, being of ripe years and
sound mind, that made any Law otherwise; for it concerns them in their own
interest to make such Laws as the people can endure, and may keep them without
impatience, and live in strength and courage to defend their King and Country,
against their potent neighbors. But how was it discerned, and by whom was it
determined, who were those wisest and discreetest Men? It is a hard matter to
know who is wisest in our times. We know well enough who chooses a Knight of
the Shire, and what Towns are to send Burgesses to the Parliament, therefore if
it were determined also in those days, who those wise Men should be, then, I
confess, that the Parliaments of the old Saxons, and the Parliaments of England
since are the same thing, and Sir Edw. Coke is in the right. Tell me therefore,
if you can, when those Towns which now send Burgesses to the Parliament, began
to do so, and upon what cause one Town had this privilege, and another Town,
though much more populous, had not.


La. At what time began this custom I cannot tell; but I am sure it is more
ancient than the City of Salisbury; because there come two Burgesses to
Parliament for a place near to it, called Old Sarum, which (as I Rid in sight
of it) if I should tell a stranger that knew not what the word Burgess meant,
he would think were a couple of Rabbets, the place looks so like a long
Cony-Borough. And yet a good Argument may be drawn from thence, that the
Townsmen of every Town were the Electors of their own Burgesses, and Judges of
their discretion; and that the Law, whether they be discreet or not, will
suppose them to be discreet till the contrary be apparent. Therefore where it
is said, that the King called together the more discreet Men of his Realm; it
must be understood of such Elections as are now in use: By which it is
manifest, that those great and general Moots assembled by the old Saxon Kings,
were of the same nature with the Parliaments assembled since the Conquest.


Ph. I think your reason is good: For I cannot conceive, how the King, or any
other but the inhabitants of the Boroughs themselves, can take notice of the
discretion, or sufficiency of those they were to send to the Parliament. And
for the Antiquity of the Burgess-Towns, since it is not mentioned in any
History, or certain Record now extant, it is free for any Man to propound his
conjecture. You know, that this Land was invaded by the Saxons at several
times, and conquered by pieces in several Wars; so that there were in England
many Kings at once, and every of them had his Parliament, and therefore
according as there were more, or fewer walled Towns within each Kings Dominion,
his Parliament had the more, or fewer Burgesses: But when all these lesser
Kingdoms were joined into one, then to that one Parliament came Burgesses from
all the Buroughs of England. And this perhaps may be the reason, why there be
so many more such Buroughs in the West, than in any other part of the Kingdom;
the West being more populous, and also more obnoxious to invaders, and for that
cause having greater store of Towns Fortified. This I think may be the original
of that privilege which some Towns have to send Burgesses to the Parliament,
and others have not.


La. The Conjecture is not improbable, and for want of greater certainty, may
be allowed. But seeing it is commonly received, that for the making of a Law,
there ought to be had the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; whom do
you account in the Parliaments of the old Saxons for Lords Temporal, and whom
for Lords Spiritual? For the Book called The mode of holding Parliaments,
agrees punctually with the manner of holding them at this day, and was written
(as Sir Edw. Coke says) in the time of the Saxons, and before the Conquest.


Ph. Mr. Seldom (a greater Antiquary than Sir Edw. Coke) in the last Edition of
his Book of Titles of Honor says, that that Book called the Mode, etc. was not
written till about the time of Rich. 2. and seems to me to prove it. But
howsoever that be, it is apparent by the Saxon Laws set forth by Mr. Lambert,
that there were always called to the Parliament, certain great Persons called
Aldermen, alias Earls; and so you have a House of Lords, and a House of
Commons. Also you will find in the same place, that after the Saxons had
received the Faith of Christ, those Bishops that were amongst them, were always
at the great Mootes, in which they made their Laws.

Thus you have a perfect English Parliament, saving that the name of Barons was
not amongst them, as being a French Title, which came in with the Conqueror.


FINIS.

