Humane Nature: OR The Fundamental Elements OF POLICY. BEING A Discovery of the
Faculties Acts and Passions of the SOUL of MAN, From their Original causes;
According to such Philosophical Principles As are not commonly known or
asserted. The Third Edition, Augmented and much corrected by the Authors own
hand.

By Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Gilliflower, Henry Rogers, and Tho. Fox,
Booksellers in Westminster Hall. MDCLXXXIV.

To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM EARL OF NEW CASTLE, Governor to the Prince
his Highness, One of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My most Honored Lord,
FRom the principal parts of Nature, Reason and Passion, have proceeded two
kinds of Learning, Mathematical and Dogmatical: the former is free from
Controversy and Dispute, because it consists in comparing Figure and Motion
only; in which things, Truth, and the Interest of Men, oppose not each other:
but in the other there is nothing undisputable, because it compares Men, and
medleth with their Right and Profit; in which, as often as Reason is against a
Man, so often will a Man be against Reason. And from hence it comes, that they
who have written of Justice and Policy in General, do all invade each other and
themselves with Contradictions. To reduce this Doctrine to the Rules and
Infallibility of Reason, there is no way but, first, put such Principles down
for a Foundation, as Passion, not mistrusting, may not seek to displace; and
afterward to build thereon the Truth of Cases in the Law of Nature (which
hitherto have been built in the Air) by degrees, till the whole have been
inexpugnable. Now, my Lord, the Principles fit for such a Foundation, are those
which heretofore I have acquainted your Lordship withal in private Discourse,
and which by your Command I have here put into a Method. To examine Cases
thereby between Sovereign and Sovereign, or between Sovereign and Subject, I
leave to them that shall find Leisure and Encouragement thereto: For my part, I
present this to your Lordship for the true and only Foundation of such Science.
For the Style, it is therefore the worse, because, whilst I was writing, I
consulted more with Logic than with Rhetoric: But for the Doctrine, it is not
slightly proved; and the Conclusions thereof of such Nature, as, for want of
them. Government and Peace have been nothing else, to this day, but mutual
Fears: And it would be an incomparable benefit to Commonwealth, that every one
held the Opinion concerning Law and Policy here delivered. The ambition
therefore of this Book, in seeking by your Lordships countenance to insinuate
it self with those whom the matter it contains most nearly concerns, is to
be excused. For my self, I desire no greater honor than I enjoy already in
your Lordship's favor, unless it be that you would be pleased, in Continuance
thereof, to give me more Exercise in your commands; which, as I am bound by
your many great Favors, I shall obey, being,

My most honored Lord, Your most humble, and most obliged Servant, THO. HOBBS.
May 9. 1640.
IN Libellum praestantissimi THO. HOBBII Very vere Philosophi, de Natura
Hominis.
QVae magna Coeli moenia, and tractae Maris,
Terraeque fines siquid aut ultra est, capit
Men's ipsa, tandem capitur: Omnia hactenus
Quae nosse potuit, nota jam primum est Sibi.
Accede, Lector, disce quis demum sies;
Tranquilinam jecoris agnoscas tui,
Qui propius haeret nil tibi, and nil tam procul.
Non hic Scholarum frivola, aut cassi loga,
Quales per annos forte plus septem legit;
Ut folle pleno prodeat, Rixae Artifex;
Vanasque merces futili lingua crepet:
Sed sancta Rerum pondera, and sensus graves
Quales parari decuit, ipsa cum fuit
Pingenda Ratio, and vindici suo adstitit.
Panduntur omnes Machinae gyri tuae,
Animaeque Vectes, Trochleae, Cunei, Rotae;
Qua concitetur art, quo sufflamine
Sistatur illa rursus, and constet sibi:
Nec, si Fenestram pectori humano suam
Aptasset ipse Momus, inspiceret magis.
Hic cerno levia Affectuum vestigia,
Gracilesque Sensus lineas; video quibus
Vehantur alis blanduli Cupidines,
Quibusque stimulis urge^nt Ir^ graves.
Hic and Dolores, and Voluptates suos
Produnt recessus; ipse nec Timor latet.
Has norit arts quisquis in foro velit
Animorum habenas flectere, and populos cupit
Aptis ligatos nexibus jungi sibi.
Hic Archimedes publicus figat podem,
Siquando regna machinis politicis
Vrgere satagit, and feras gentes ciet,
Imisque motum sedibus mundum quatit:
Facile domabit cuncta, qui Menti imperat.
Consultor audax, and Promethei potens
Facinoris Anime! quis tibi dedit Deus
Haec intueri saeculis long abdita,
Oculosque luce tinxit ambrosia tuos?
Tu mentis omnis, at Tuae nulla est capax.
Hac laud Solus fruere: Divinum est opus
Animam Creare; proximum huic, Ostendere.
RAD. BATHURST, A. M. Col. Trin. Oxon.

Humane Nature: OR THE Fundamental Elements OF POLICY.
THE true and perspicuous Explication of the Elements of Laws Natural and
Politic (which is my present Scope) depends upon the Knowledge of what is
Humane Nature, what is Body Politic, and what it is we call a Law; concerning
which Points, as the Writings of Men from Antiquity down wards have still
increased, so also have the Doubts and Controversies concerning the same: And
seeing that true Knowledge begets not Doubt nor Controversy, but Knowledge,
it is manifest from the present Controversies, That they which have heretofore
written thereof, have not well understood their own Subject.

2. Harm I can do none, though I err no less than they; for I shall leave Men
but as they are, in Doubt and Dispute: but, intending not to take any Principle
upon Trust, but only to put Men in Mind of what they know already, or may know
by their own Experience, I hope to err the less; and when I do, it must
proceed from too hasty Concluding, which I will endeavor as much as I can to
avoid.

3. On the other side, if Reasoning aright win not Consent, which may very
easily happen, from them that being confident of their own Knowledge weigh not
what is said, the Fault is not mine but theirs; for as it is my Part to show my
Reasons, so it is theirs to bring Attention.

4. Man's Nature is the Sum of his natural Faculties and Powers, as the
Faculties of Nutrition, Motion, Generation, Sense, Reason, etc. These Powers we
do unanimously call Natural, and are contained in the Definition of Man, under
these words, Animal and Rational.

5. According to the two principal Parts of Man, I divide his Faculties into
two sorts, Faculties of the Body, and Faculties of the Mind.

6. Since the minute and distinct Anatomy of the Powers of the Body is nothing
necessary to the present Purpose, I will only sum them up in these Three
Heads, Power Nutritive, Power Motive, and Power Generative.

7. Of the Powers of the Mind there be two Sorts, Cognitive, Imaginative, or
Conceptive and Motive; and first of Cognitive.

For the understanding of what I mean by the Power Cognitive, we must remember
and acknowledge that there be in our Minds continually certain Images or
Conceptions of the Things without us, insomuch that if a Man could be alive,
and all the rest of the World annihilated, he should nevertheless retain the
Image thereof; and all those Things which he had before seen or perceived in
it; every one by his own Experience knowing, that the Absence or Destruction of
things once imagined does not cause the Absence or Destruction of the
Imagination it self; This Imagery and Representations of the Qualities of the
Thing without, is that we call our Conception, Imagination, Ideas, Notice or
Knowledge of them; and the Faculty or Power by which we are capable of such
Knowledge, is that I here call Cognitive Power, or Conceptive, the Power of
Knowing or Conceiving.

CHAP. II.
2. Definition of Sense.

4. Four Propositions concerning the nature of Conceptions.

5. The First proved.

6. The Second proved.

7, 8. The Third proved.

9. The Fourth proved.

10* The main Deception of Sense.

1. HAving declared what I mean by the Word Conception, and other Words
equivalent thereunto, I come to the Conceptions themselves, to show their
Differences, their Causes, and the Manner of the Production, so far as is
necessary for this Place.

2. Originally all Conceptions proceed from the Action of the thing it self,
whereof it is the Conception: Now when the Action is present, the Conception it
produces is also called Sense; and the Thing by whose Action the same is
produced, is called the Object of the Sense.

3 By our several Organs we have several Conceptions of several Qualities in
the Objects; for by Sight we have a Conception or Image composed of Color and
Figure, which is all the Notice and Knowledge the Object imparteth to us of its
Nature by the Eye. By Hearing we have a Conception called Sound, which is all
the Knowledge we have of the Quality of the Object from the Ear. And so the
rest of the Senses are also Conceptions of several Qualities, or Natures of
their Objects.

4. Because the Image in Vision consisting of Color and Shape is the Knowledge
we have of the Qualities of the Object of that Sense; it is no hard matter for
a Man to fall into this Opinion, that the same Color and Shape are the very
Qualities themselves; And for the same cause, that Sound and Noise are the
Qualities of the Bell, or of the Air. And this Opinion has been so long
received, that the contrary must needs appear a great Paradox; and yet the
Introduction of Species visible and intelligible (which is necessary for the
Maintenance of that Opinion) passing to and fro from the Object, is worse than
any Paradox, as being a plain Impossibility. I shall therefore endeavor to
make plain these Points:

That the Subject wherein Color and Image are inherent, is not the Object or
thing seen.

That there is nothing without us (really) which we call an Image or Color.

That the said Image or Color is but an apparition unto us of the Motion,
Agitation, or Alteration, which the Object works in the Brain, or Spirits, or
some internal Substance of the Head.

That as in Vision, so also in Conceptions that arise from the other Senses,
the Subject of their inherence is not the Object, but the Sentient.

5. Every Man has so much Experience as to have seen the Sun and the other
visible Objects by Reflection in the Water and Glasses; and this alone is
sufficient for this Conclusion, that Color and Image may be there where the
Thing seen is not. But because it may be said that notwithstanding the Image in
the Water be not in the Object, but a Thing merely Fantastical, yet there may
be Color really in the Thing it self: I will urge further this Experience,
that diverse Times Men see directly the same Object double; as two Candles for
one, which may happen from Distemper or otherwise without Distemper if a Man
will, the Organs being either in their right Temper, or equally distempered,
the Colors and Figures in two such Images of the same Thing cannot be inherent
therein, because the Thing seen cannot be in two Places.

One of these Images therefore is not inherent in the Object: but seeing the
Organs of the Sight are then in equal Temper or Distemper, the one of them is
no more inherent than the other; and consequently neither of them both are in
the Object; which is the First Proposition, mentioned in the precedent Number.

6. Secondly, that the Image of any Thing by Reflection in a Glass or Water or
the like, is not any Thing in or behind the Glass, or in or under the Water,
every Man may grant to himself; which is the Second Proposition.

7. For the Third, we are to consider, First that every great Agitation or
Concussion of the Brain (as it happens from a Stroke, especially if the
Stroke be upon the Eye) whereby the Optic Nerve suffers any great Violence,
there appears before the Eyes a certain Light, which Light is nothing
without, but an Apparition only, all that is real being the Concussion or
Motion of the Parts of that Nerve; from which Experience we may conclude, That
Apparition of Light is really nothing but Motion within. If therefore from
lucid Bodies there can be derived Motion, so as to affect the Optic Nerve in
such manner as is proper thereunto, there will follow an Image of Light
somewhere in that Line by which the Motion was last derived to the Eye; That is
to say, In the Object, if we look directly on it, and in the Glass or Water,
when we look upon it in the Line of Reflection, which in Effect is the Third
Proposition; namely, That Image and Color is but an Apparition to us of that
Motion, Agitation, or Alteration which the Object works in the Brain or
Spirits, or some internal Substance in the Head.

8. But that from all lucid, shining and illuminate Bodies, there is a Motion
produced to the Eye, and, through the Eye, to the Optic Nerve, and so into the
Brain, by which that Apparition of Light or Color is affected, is not hard to
prove. And first, it is evident that the Fire, the only lucid Body here upon
Earth, works by Motion equally every Way; insomuch as the Motion thereof
stopped or enclosed, it is presently extinguished, and no more Fire. And
further, that that Motion whereby the Fire works, is Dilation, and
Contraction of it self alternately, commonly called Scintillation or Glowing,
is manifest also by Experience. From such Motion in the Fire must needs arise a
Rejection or casting from it self of that part of the Medium which is
contiguous to it, whereby that part also rejects the next, and so
successively one part beats back another to the very Eye; and in the same
manner the exterior part of the Eye presses the interior, (the Laws of
Refraction still observed.) Now the interior coat of the Eye is nothing else
but a piece of the Optic Nerve; and therefore the Motion is still continued
thereby into the Brain, and by Resistance or Re-action of the Brain, is also a
Rebound into the Optic Nerve again; which we not conceiving as Motion or
Rebound from within, do think it is without, and call it Light; as has been
already showed by the Experience of a Stroke. We have no Reason to doubt, that
the Fountain of Light, the Sun, works by any other Ways than the Fire, at
least in this Matter. And thus all Vision has its Original from such Motion as
is here described: for where there is no Light, there is no Sight; and
therefore Color also must be the same Thing with Light, as being the Effect of
the lucid Bodies: their Difference being only this, that when the Light comes
directly from the Fountain to the Eye, or indirectly by Reflection from clean
and polite Bodies, and such as have not any particular Motion internal to alter
it, we call it Light; but when it comes to the Eye by Reflection from une^en,
rough, and coarse Bodies, (or such as are affected with internal Motion of
their own that may alter it) then we call it Color; Color and Light differing
only in this, that the one is pure, and the other perturbed Light. By that
which has been said, not only the Truth of the Third Proposition, but also the
whole Manner of producing Light and Color, is apparent.

9. As Color is not inherent in the Object, but an Effect thereof upon us,
caused by such Motion in the Object, as has been described: so neither is
Sound in the Thing we hear, but in our selves. One manifest Sign thereof, is,
that as a Man may see, so also he may hear double or treble, by Multiplication
of Echoes, which Echoes are Sounds as well as the Original; and not being in
one and the same Place, cannot be inherent in the Body that makes them:
Nothing can make any Thing which is not in it self: the Clapper has no Sound
in it, but Motion, and makes Motion in the internal Parts of the Bell; so the
Bell has Motion, and not Sound, that imparteth Motion to the Air; and the Air
has Motion, but not Sound; the Air imparteth Motion by the Ear and Nerve unto
the Brain; and the Brain has Motion, but not Sound: from the Brain, it
reboundeth back into the Nerves outward, and thence it becomes an Apparition
without, which we call Sound. And to proceed to the rest of the Senses, it is
apparent enough, that the Smell and Taste of the same Thing, are not the same
to every Man; and therefore are not in the Thing smelt or tasted, but in the
Men. So likewise the Heat we feel from the Fire is manifestly in us, and is
quite different from the Heat which is in the Fire: for our Heat is Pleasure or
Pain, according as it is great or moderate; but in the Coal there is no such
Thing. By this the Fourth and last Proposition is proved, viz. That as in
Vision, so also in Conceptions that arise from other Senses, the Subject of
their Inherence is not in the Object, but in the Sentient.

10. And from hence also it follows, that whatsoever Accidents or Qualities
our Senses make us think there be in the World, they be not there, but are
Seeming and Apparitions only: the Things that really are in the World without
us, are those Motions by which these Seemings are caused. And this is the great
Deception of Sense, which also is to be by Sense corrected: for as Sense
tells me, when I see directly, that the Color seems to be in the Object;
so also Sense tells me, when I see by Reflection, that Color is in the
Object.

CHAP. III.
1. Imagination defined.

2. Sleep and Dreams defined.

3. Causes of Dreams.

4. Fiction defined.

5. Phantasms defined.

6. Remembrances defined.

7. Wherein Remembrance consists.

8. Why in a Dream a Man never thinks he dreams.

9. Why few Things seem strange in Dreams.

10. That a Dream may be taken for Reality and Vision.

1. AS standing Water put into Motion by the Stroke of a Stone, or blast of
Wind, does not presently give over moving as soon as the Wind cease, or the
Stone setleth: so neither does the Effect cease which the Object has wrought
upon the Brain, so soon as ever, by turning aside of the Organs the Object
cease to work; that is to say, Though the Sense be past, the Image or
Conception remains; but more obscure while we are awake, because some Object
or other continually plieth and solliciteth our Eyes, and Ears, keeping the
Mind in a stronger Motion, whereby the weaker does not easily appear. And this
obscure Conception is that we call Fantasy, or Imagination: Imagination being
(to define it) Conception remaining, and by little and little decaying from and
after the Act of Sense.

2. But when present Sense is not, as in Sleep, there the Images remaining
after Sense (when there be many) as in Dreams, are not obscure, but strong and
clear, as in Sense it self. The Reason is, That which obscured and made the
Conceptions weak, namely Sense, and present Operation of the Object, is
removed: for Sleep is the Privation of the Act of Sense, (the Power remaining)
and Dreams are the Imagination of them that sleep.

3. The Causes of Dreams (if they be natural) are the Actions or Violence of
the inward Parts of a man upon his Brain, by which the Passages of Sense by
Sleep benumbed, are restored to their Motion. The Signs by which this appears
to be so, are the Differences of Dreams (old Men commonly dream oftener, and
have their Dreams more painful than young) proceeding from the different
Accidents of Man's Body; as Dreams of Lust, as Dreams of Anger, according as the
Heart, or other Parts within, work more or less upon the Brain, by more or less
Heat; so also the Descents of different sorts of Phlegm makes us a Dream of
different Tastes of Meats and Drinks; and I believe there is a Reciprocation of
Motion from the Brain to the Vital Parts, and back from the Vital Parts to the
Brain; whereby not only Imagination begets Motion in those Parts; but also
Motion in those Parts begets Imagination like to that by which it was
begotten. If this be true, and that sad Imaginations nourish the Spleen, then
we see also a Cause, why a strong Spleen reciprocally causes fearful Dreams,
and why the Effects of Lasciviousness may in a Dream produce the Image of some
person that had caused them. Another Sign that Dreams are caused by the Action
of the inward Parts, is the Disorder and casual Consequence of one Conception
or Image to another: for when we are waking, the Antecedent thought or
Conception introduces, and is cause of the Consequent, (as the Water follows
a man's Finger upon a dry and level Table (but in Dreams there is commonly no
Coherence, (and when there is, it is by Chance) which must needs proceed from
this, That the Brain in Dreams is not restored to its Motion in every Part
alike; whereby it comes to pass, that our Thoughts appear like the Stars
between the flying Clouds, not in the Order which a Man would choose to observe
them, but as the uncertain Flight of broken Clouds permits.

4. As when the Water, or any liquid Thing moved at once by diverse Movents,
receives one Motion compounded of them all; so also the Brain or Spirit
therein, having been stirred by diverse Objects, composeth an Imagination of
diverse Conceptions that appeared single to the Sense. As for Example, the Sense
shows at one Time the Figure of a Mountain, and at another Time the Color of
Gold; but the Imagination afterward has them both at once in a golden
Mountain. From the same Cause it is, there appear unto us Castles in the Air,
Chimaera's, and other Monsters which are not in Rerum Natura, but have been
conceived by the Sense in Pieces at several Times. And this Composition is that
which we commonly call Fiction of the Mind.

5. There is yet another Kind of Imagination, which for Clearness contendeth
with Sense, as well as a Dream; and that is, when the Action of Sense has been
long or vehement: and the Experience thereof is more frequent in the Sense of
Seeing, than the rest. An Example whereof is, the Image remaining before the
Eye after looking upon the Sun. Also, those little Images that appear before
the Eyes in the dark; whereof I think every Man has Experience, (but they most
of all, who are timorous or superstitious) are Examples of the same. And these,
for Distinction-sake, may be called Phantasms.

6. By the Senses, which are numbered according to the Organs to be five, we
take Notice (as has been said already) of the Objects without us; and that
Notice is our Conception thereof: but we take Notice also some Way or other of
our Conceptions: for when the Conception of the same Thing comes again, we
take Notice that is again; that is to say, that we have had the same Conception
before; which is as much as to imagine a Thing past; which is impossible to the
Sense, which is only of Things present. This therefore may be accounted a Sixth
Sense, but internal, (not external, as the rest) and is commonly called
Remembrance.

7. For the Manner by which we take Notice of a Conception past, we are to
remember, that in the Definition of Imagination, it is said to be a Conception
by little and little decaying, or growing more obscure. An obscure Conception
is that which represents the whole Object together, but none of the smaller
Parts by themselves; and as more or fewer Parts be represented, so is the
Conception or Representation said to be more or less clear. Seeing then the
Conception, which when it was first produced by Sense, was clear, and
represented the Parts of the 0bject distinctly; and when it comes again is
obscure, we find missing somewhat that we expected; by which we judge it past
and decayed. For Example, a Man that is present in a Foreign City, sees not
only whole Streets, but can also distinguish particular Houses, and Parts of
Houses; but departed thence, he cannot distinguish them so particularly in his
Mind as he did, some House or Turning escaping him: yet is this to remember;
when afterward there escape him more Particulars, this is also to remember,
but not so well. In Process of Time, the Image of the City returns but as a
Mass of Building only, which is almost to have forgotten it. Seeing then
Remembrance is more or less, as we find more or less Obscurity, Why may not we
well think Remembrance to be nothing else but the missing of Parts, which every
man expects should succeed after they have a Conception of the Whole? To see
at a great Distance of Place, and to remember at great Distance of Time, is to
have like Conceptions of the Thing: for there wants Distinction of Parts in
both; the one Conception being weak by Operation at Distance, the other by
Decay.

8. And from this that has been said, there follows, That a Man can never
know he dreameth; he may dream he doubts, whether it be a Dream or no: but
the Clearness of the Imagination represents every Thing with as many Parts as
does Sense it self, and consequently, he can take Notice of nothing but as
present; whereas to think he dreameth, is to think those his Conceptions, that
is to say, obscurer than they were in the Sense: so that he must think them
both as clear, and not as clear as Sense; which is impossible.

9. From the same Ground it proceeds, that Men wonder not in their Dreams at
Place and Persons, as they would do waking: for waking, a Man would think it
strange to be in a Place where he never was before, and remember nothing of how
he came there; but in a Dream, there comes little of that kind into
Consideration. The Clearness of Conception in a Dream, takes away Distrust,
unless the Strangeness be excessive, as to think himself fallen from on high
without hurt, and then most commonly he waketh.

10. Nor is it possible for a Man to be so far deceived, as when his Dream is
past, to think it real: for if he dream of such Things as are ordinarily in his
Mind, and in such Order as he uses to do waking, and withal that he laid him
down to sleep in the Place were he finds himself when he awaketh; all which
may happen: I know no (...) or Mark by which he can discern whether it were a
Dream or not, and therefore do the less wonder to hear a Man sometimes to tell
his Dream for a Truth, or to take it for a Vision.

CHAP. IV.
1. Discourse.

2. The Cause of Coherence of Thoughts.

3. Ranging.

4. Sagacity.

5. Reminiscence.

6. Experience.

7. Expectation.

8. Conjecture.

9. Signs.

10. Prudence.

11. Caveats of concluding from Experience.

1. THe Succession of Conceptions in the Mind, Series or Consequence of one
after another, may be casual and incoherent, as in Dreams for the most part;
and it may be orderly, as when the former Thought introduces the latter; and
this is Discourse of the Mind. But because the Word Discourse is commonly taken
for the Coherence and Consequence of Words, I will, to avoid Aequivocation,
call it Discursion.

2. The Cause of the Coherence or Consequence of one Conception to another, is
their first Coherence or Consequence at that Time when they are produced by
Sense: As for Example, from St. Andrew the Mind runs to St. Peter, because
their Names are read together; from S. Peter to a Stone, for the same Cause;
from Stone to Foundation, because we see them together; and for the same Cause,
from Foundation to Church, and from Church to People, and from People to
Tumult: and according to this Example, the Mind may run almost from any Thing
to any Thing. But as in the Sense the Conception of Cause and Effect may
succeed one another; so may they after Sense in the Imagination: And for the
most part they do so; the Cause whereof is the Appetite of them, who, having a
Conception of the End, have next unto it a Conception of the next Means to that
End; As, when a Man, from a Thought of Honor to which he has an Appetite,
comes to the Thought of Wisdom, which is the next Means thereunto; and from
thence to the Thought of Study, which is the next Means to Wisdom.

3. To omit that kind of Discursion by which we proceed from any Thing to any
Thing, there are of the other Kind diverse Sorts: As first, in the Senses there
are certain Coherences of Conceptions, which we may call ranging: Examples
whereof are; A Man casts his Eye upon the Ground, to look about for some
small Thing lost; the Hounds casting about at a Fault in hunting; and the
Ranging of Spaniels: and herein we take a Beginning arbitrary.

4. Another sort of Discursion is, when the Appetite gives a Man his
Beginning, as in the Example before, where Honor to which a Man has Appetite,
makes him think upon the next Means of attaining it, and that again of the
next, etc. And this the Latins call Sagacitas* and We may call Hunting or
Tracing, as Dogs trace Beasts by the Smell, and Men hunt them by their
Footsteps; or as Men hunt after Riches, Place, or Knowledge.

5. There is yet another Kind of Discursion beginning with the Appetite to
recover something lost, proceeding from the present backward, from Thought of
the Place where we miss at, to the Thought of the Place from whence we came
last; and from the Thought of that, to the Thought of a Place before, till we
have in our Mind some Place, wherein we had the Thing we miss: and this is
called Reminiscence.

6. The Remembrance of Succession of one Thing to another, that is, of what was
antecedent, and what consequent, and what concomitant, is called an Experiment;
whether the same be made by us voluntarily, as when a Man puts any Thing
into the Fire, to see what Effect the Fire will produce upon it: or not made by
us, as when we remember a fair Morning after a red Evening. To have had many
Experiments, is that we call Experience, which is nothing else but Remembrance
of what Antecedents have been followed by what Consequents.

7. No man can have in his Mind a Conception of the future; for the future is
not yet: but of our Conceptions of the past, we make a future; or rather, call
past, future relatively. Thus after a Man has been accustomed to see like
Antecedents follow by like Consequents, whenever he sees the like come to
pass to any Thing he had seen before, he looks there should follow it the same
that followed then: As for Example, because a Man has often seen Offenses
followed by Punishment, when he sees an Offense in present, he thinks
Punishment to be consequent thereto; but consequent unto that which is present,
Men call future: And thus we make Remembrance to be the Prevision of Things to
come, or Expectation or Presumption of the future.

8. In the same Manner, if a Man sees in present that which he has seen
before, he thinks that that which was antecedent to that which he saw before,
is also antecedent to that he presently sees: As for Example, He that has
seen the Ashes remain after the Fire, and now again sees ashes, concludes
again there has been Fire: And this is called again Conjecture of the past, or
Presumption of the Fact.

9. When a Man has so often observed like Antecedents to be followed by like
Consequents, that whenever he sees the Antecedent, he looks again for the
Consequent; or when he sees the Consequent, makes account there has been the
like Antecedent; then he calls both the Antecedent and the Consequent, Signs
one of another, as Clouds are Signs of Rain to come, and Rain of Clouds past.

10. This taking of Signs by Experience, is that wherein Men do ordinarily
think, the Difference stands between Man and Man in Wisdom, by which they
commonly understand a Man's whole Ability or Power cognitive; but this is an
Error: for the Signs are but conjectural; and according as they have often or
seldom failed, so their Assurance is more or less; but never full and evident:
for though a Man have always seen the Day and Night to follow one another
hitherto; yet can he not thence conclude they shall do so, or that they have
done so eternally: Experience concludes nothing universally. If the Signs hit
twenty times for one missing, a Man may lay a Wager of Twenty to One of the
Event; but may not conclude it for a Truth. But by this it is plain, that they
shall conjecture best, that have most Experience, because they have most Signs
to conjecture by; which is the Reason old Men are more prudent, that is,
conjecture better, caeteris paribus, than young: for, being old, they remember
more; and Experience is but remembrance. And men of quick imagination, caeteris
paribus, are more prudent than those whose Imaginations are slow: for they
observe more in less Time. Prudence is nothing but Conjecture from Experience,
or taking of Signs from Experience warily, that is, that the Experiments from
which he takes such Signs be all remembered; for else the Cases are not alike
that seem so.

11. As in Conjecture concerning things past and future, it is Prudence to
conclude from Experience, what is like to come to pass, or to have passed
already; so it is an error to conclude from it, that it is so or so called;
that is to say, We cannot from Experience conclude, that any Thing is to be
called just or unjust, true or false, or any Proposition universal whatsoever,
except it be from Remembrance of the Use of Names imposed arbitrarily by Men:
For Example, to have heard a Sentence given in the like Case, the like Sentence
a thousand times is not enough to conclude that the Sentence is just; though
most Men have no other Means to conclude by: But it is necessary, for the
drawing of such Conclusion, to trace and find out, by many Experiences, what
Men do mean by calling Things just and unjust. Further, there is another Caveat
to be taken in concluding by Experience, from the tenth Section of the second
Chapter; that is, That we conclude such Things to be without, that are within
us.

CHAP. V.
1. Of Marks.

2. Names or Appellations.

3. Names positive and privative.

4. Advantage of Names makes us capable of Science.

5. Names universal and singular.

6. Vniversals not in Rerum Natura.

7. Aequivocal Names.

8. Understanding.

9. Affirmation, Negation, Proposition.

10. Truth, Falsity.

11. Ratiocination.

12. According to Reason, against Reason.

13. Names Causes of Knowledge, so of Error.

14. Translation of the Discourse of the Mind into the Discourse of the Tongue,
and of the Errors thence proceeding.

1. SEeing the Succession of Conceptions in the Mind are caused, as has been
said before, by the Succession they had one to another when they were produced
by the Senses, and that there is no Conception that has not bin produced
immediately before or after innumerable others, by the innumerable Acts of
Sense; it must needs follow, that one Conception follows not another,
according to our Election, and the need we have of them, but as it chances us
to hear or see such Things as shall bring them to our Mind. The Experience we
have hereof, is in such Brute Beasts, which, having the providence to hide the
Remains and Superfluity of their Meat, do nevertheless want the Remembrance of
the Place where they hide it, and thereby make no Benefit thereof in their
Hunger: but Man, who in this Point begins to rank himself somewhat above the
Nature of Beasts, has observed and remembered the Cause of this Defect, and to
amend the same, has imagined or devised to set up a visible or other sensible
Mark, the which, when he sees it again, may bring to his Mind the Thought he
had when he set it up. A Mark therefore is a sensible Object which a Man
erecteth voluntarily to himself, to the End to remember thereby somewhat past,
when the same is objected to his Sense again: As men that have past by a Rock
at Sea, set up some Mark, thereby to remember their former Danger, and avoid it.

2. In the Number of these Marks, are those Humane Voices, which we call the
Names or Appellations of Things sensible by the Ear, by which we recall into
our Mind some Conceptions of the Things to which we gave those Names or
Appellations; as the Appellation White brings to remembrance the Quality of
such Objects as produce that Color or Conception in us. A Name or Appellation
therefore is the Voice of a Man arbitrary, imposed for a Mark to bring into his
Mind some Conception concerning the thing on which it is imposed.

3. Things named, are either the Objects themselves, as a Man; or the
Conception it self that we have of Man, as Shape and Motion: or some Privation,
which is when we conceive that there is something which we conceive not, in
him; as when we conceive he is not just, not finite, we give him the Name of
unjust, of infinite, which signify Privation or Defect; and to the Privations
themselves we give the Names of Injustice and Infiniteness: so that here be Two
Sorts of Names; One of Things, in which we conceive something; or of the
Conceptions themselves, which are called positive: the other of Things wherein
we conceive Privation or Defect, and those Names are called Privative.

4. By the Advantage of Names it is that we are capable of Science, which
Beasts, for want of them are not; nor Man, without the Use of them: for as a
Beast misseth not one or two out of many her young Ones, for want of those
Names of order, One, Two, and Three, and which we call Number; so neither would
a Man, without repeating orally or mentally the Words of Number, know how many
Pieces of Money or other Things lie before him.

5. Seeing there be many Conceptions of one and the same Thing, and for every
Conception we give it a several Name; it follows that for one and the same
Thing, we have many Names or Attributes; as to the same Man we give the
Appellations of Just, Valiant, etc. for diverse Virtues; of Strong, Comely, etc.
for diverse Qualities of the Body. And again, because from diverse Things we
receive like Conceptions, many Things must needs have the same Appellation: as
to all Things we see, we give the same Name of Visible; and to all Things we
see moveable, we give the Appellation of Moveable: and those Names we give to
many, are called universal to them all; as the Name of Man to every particular
of Mankind: such Appellation as we give to one only Thing, we call individual,
or singular; as Socrates, and other proper Names: or, by Circumlocution, he
that writ the Iliads, for Homer.

6. The Universality of one Name to many Things, has been the Cause that Men
think the Things are themselves universal; and so seriously contend, that
besides Peter and John, and all the rest of the Men that are, have been, or
shall be in the World, there is yet something else that we call Man, viz. Man
in general, deceiving themselves, by taking the universal, or general
Appellation, for the thing it signifies: For if one should desire the Painter
to make him the Picture of a Man, which is as much as to say, of a Man in
general; he means no more, but that the Painter should choose what Man he
pleases to draw, which must needs be some of them that are, or have been, or
may be, none of which are universal. But when he would have him to draw the
Picture of the King, or any particular Person, he limiteth the Painter to that
one Person he chooses. It is plain therefore, that there is nothing universal
but Names; which are therefore called indefinite; because we limit them not our
selves, but leave them to be applied by the Hearer: whereas a singular Name is
limited and restrained to one of the many Things it signifies; as when we say,
This Man, pointing to him, or giving him his proper Name, or by some such other
Way.

7. The Appellations that be universal, and common to many Things, are not
always given to all the particulars, (as they ought to be) for like
Conceptions, and like Considerations in them all; which is the Cause that many
of them are not of constant Signification, but bring into our Mind other
Thoughts than these for which they were ordained, and those are called
aequivocal. As for Example, the Word Faith signifies the same with Belief;
sometimes it signifies particularly that Belief which makes a Christian; and
sometime it signifies the keeping of a Promise. Also all Metaphors are by
Profession aequivocal: and there is scarce any Word that is not made aequivocal
by diverse Contextures of Speech, or by Diversity of Pronunciation and Gesture.

8. This Aequivocation of Names makes it difficult to recover those
Conceptions for which the Name was ordained; and that not only in the Language
of other Men, wherein we are to consider the Drift and Occasion, and Contexture
of the Speech, as well as the Words themselves; but also in our Discourse,
which being derived from the Custom and common Use of Speech, represents unto
us not our own Conceptions. It is therefore a great Ability in a Man, out of
the Words, Contexture, and other Circumstances of Language, to deliver himself
from Aequivocation, and to find out the true Meaning of what it said: And this
is it we call Understanding.

9. Of two Appellations, by the Help of this little Verb is, or something
equivalent, we make an Affirmation or Negation, either of which in the Schools
we call also a Proposition, and consists of two Appellations joined together
by the said Verb is: As for Example, Man is a living creature; or thus, Man is
not righteous: whereof the former is called an Affirmation, because the
Appellation, Living Creature is Positive; the latter a Negative, because not
righteous is Privative.

10. In every Proposition, be it Affirmative or Negative, the latter
Appellation either comprehends the former, as in this Proposition, Charity is
a Virtue, the Name of Virtue comprehends the Name of Charity, and many other
Virtues beside; and then is the Proposition said to be true, or Truth: For,
Truth, and a true Proposition, is all one. Or else the latter Appellation
comprehends not the former: as in this Proposition, Every Man is just; the
name of Just comprehends not Every Man; for Unjust is the Name of the far
greater Part of Men: And the Proposition is said to be false, or Falsity:
Falsity and a false Proposition being also the same Thing.

11. In what manner of two Propositions, whether both Affirmative, or one
Affirmative, the other Negative, is made a Syllogism, I forbear to write. All
this that has been said of Names or Propositions, though necessary, is but dry
Discourse: and this Place is not for the whole Art of Logic, which if I enter
further into, I ought to pursue: Besides, it is not needful; for there be few
Men which have not so much natural Logic, as thereby to discern well enough,
whether any Conclusion I shall make in this Discourse hereafter, be well or ill
collected: Only thus much I say in this Place, that Making of Syllogisms is
that we call Ratiocination or Reasoning.

12. Now when a man reasons from Principles that are found indubitable by
Experience, all Deceptions of Sense and Aequivocation of Words avoided, the
Conclusion he makes is said to be according to right Reason: But when from his
Conclusion a Man may, by good Ratiocination, derive that which is contradictory
to any evident Truth whatsoever, then he is said to have concluded against
Reason: And such a Conclusion is called Absurdity.

13. As the Invention of Names has been necessary for the drawing Men out of
Ignorance, by calling to their Remembrance the necessary Coherence of one
Conception to another; so also has it on the other side precipitated Men into
Error: Insomuch, that whereas by the Benefit of Words and Ratiocination they
exceed brute Beasts in Knowledge, and the Commodities that accompany the same;
so they exceed them also in Error: For, true and false are Things not incident
to Beasts, because they adhere not to Propositions and Language; nor have they
Ratiocination, whereby to multiply one Untruth by another, as Men have.

14. It is the Nature almost of every Corporal Thing, being often moved in one
and the same Manner, to receive continually a greater and greater Easiness and
Aptitude to the same Motion, insomuch as in Time the same becomes so habitual,
that, to beget it, there needs no more than to begin it. The Passions of Man,
as they are the Beginning of voluntary Motions; so are they the Beginning of
Speech, which is the Motion of the Tongue. And Men desiring to show others the
Knowledge, Opinions, Conceptions and Passions which are in themselves, and to
that End having invented Language, have by that Means transferred all that
Discursion of their Mind mentioned in the former Chapter, by the Motion of
their Tongues, into Discourse of Words: And Ratio now is but Oration, for the
most part, wherein Custom has so great a Power, that the Mind suggesteth only
the first Word; the rest follow habitually, and are not followed by the Mind;
as it is with Beggars, when they saw their Pater noster, putting together such
Words, and in such manner, as in their Education they have learned from their
Nurses, from their Companies, or from their Teachers, having no Images or
Conceptions in their Mind, answering to the Words they speak: and as they have
learned themselves, so they teach Posterity. Now if we consider the Power of
those Deceptions of the Sense, mentioned Chap 2. Sect. 10 and also how
unconstantly Names have been settled, and how subject they are to Aequivocation,
and how diversified by Passion, (scarce two Men agreeing what is to be called
Good, and what Evil; what Liberality, what Prodigality; what Valor, what
Temerity) and how subject Men are to Paralogism or Fallacy in Reasoning, I may
in a Manner conclude, that it is impossible to rectify so many Errors of any
one Man, as must needs proceed from those Causes, without beginning anew from
the very first Grounds of all our Knowledge and Sense; and instead of Books,
reading over orderly ones own Conceptions: In which Meaning, I take Noste
teipsum for a Precept worthy the Reputation it has gotten.

CHAP. VI
1. Of the two Kinds of Knowledge

2. Truth and Evidence necessary to Knowledge.

3. Evidence defined.

4. Science defined.

5. Supposition defined.

6. Opinion defined.

7. Belief defined.

8. Conscience defined.

9. Belief, in some Cases, no less from Doubt than Knowledge.

1. THere is a Story somewhere, of one that pretends to have been miraculously
cured of Blindness (wherewith he was born) by St. Albane or other Saints, at
the Town of St. Albans; and that the Duke of Gloucester being there, to be
satisfied of the Truth of the Miracle, asked the Man, What Color is this? Who,
by answering, It was Green, discovered himself, and was punished for a
Counterfeit: for though by his Sight newly received he might distinguish
between Green, and Red, and all other Colors, as well as any that should
interrogate him, yet he could not possibly know at first Sight which of them
was called Green, or Red, or by any other Name. By this we may understand,
there be two Kinds of Knowledge, whereof the one is nothing else but Sense, or
Knowledge original, as I have said in the Beginning of the second Chapter, and
Remembrance of the same; the other is called Science or Knowledge of the Truth
of Propositions, and how Things are called; and is derived from Understanding.
Both of these Sorts are but Experience; The former being the Experience of the
Effects of Things that work upon us from without; and the latter Experience Men
have from the proper Use of Names in Language: and all Experience being, as I
have said, but Remembrance, all Knowledge is Remembrance: and of the former,
the Register we keep in Books, is called History; But the Registers of the
latter are called the Sciences.

2. There are two Things necessarily implied in this Word Knowledge; the one is
Truth, the other Evidence: for what is not Truth, can never be known. For, let
a Man say he knows a Thing never so well, if the same shall afterward appear
false, he is driven to Confession, that it was not Knowledge, but Opinion.
Likewise, if the Truth be not evident, though a Man holds it, yet is his
Knowledge thereof no more than theirs who hold the contrary: for if Truth were
enough to make it Knowledge, all Truth were known; which is not so.

3. What Truth is, has been defined in the precedent Chapter; What Evidence
is, I now set down: and it is the Concomitance of a Man's Conception with the
Words that signify such Conception in the Act of Ratiocination: for when a Man
reasons with his Lips only, to which the Mind suggesteth only the Beginning,
and follows not the Words of his Mouth with the Conceptions of his Mind, out
of Custom of so speaking; though he begin his Ratiocination with True
Propositions, and proceed with certain Syllogisms, and thereby make always true
Conclusions; yet are not his Conclusions evident to him, for Want of the
Concomitance of Conception with his Words: for if the Words alone were
sufficient, a Parrot might be taught as well to know Truth, as to speak it.
Evidence is to Truth, as the Sap to the Tree, which, so far as it creeps
along with Body and Branches, keeps them alive; where it forsakes them, they
die: for this Evidence, which is Meaning with our Words, is the Life of Truth.

4. Knowledge therefore which we call Science, I define to be Evidence of
Truth, from some Beginning or Principle of Sense: for the Truth of a
Proposition is never evident, until we conceive the Meaning of the Words or
Terms whereof it consists, which are always Conceptions of the Mind: Nor can
we remember those Conceptions, without the Thing that produced the same by our
Senses. The first Principle of Knowledge is, that we have such and such
Conceptions; the second, that we have thus and thus named the Things whereof
they are Conceptions; the third is, that we have joined those Names in such
Manner as to make true Propositions; the fourth and last is, that we have
joined those Propositions in such Manner as they be concluding, and the Truth
of the Conclusion said to be known. And of these two Kinds of Knowledge,
whereof the former is Experience of Fact, and the later of Evidence of Truth;
as the former, if it be great, is called Prudence; so the latter, if it be
much, has usually been called, both by Ancient and Modern Writers, Sapience or
Wisdom: and of this latter, Man only is capable; of the former, brute Beasts
also participate.

5. A Proposition is said to be supposed, when, being not evident, it is
nevertheless admitted for a Time, to the End, that, joining to it other
Propositions, we may conclude something; and to proceed from Conclusion to
Conclusion, for a Trial whether the same will lead us into any absurd or
impossible Conclusion; which if it do, then we know such Supposition to have
been false.

6. But if, running through many Conclusions, we come to none that are absurd,
then we think the Proposition probable: likewise we think probable whatsoever
Proposition we admit for Truth by Error of Reasoning, or from trusting to
other Men: And all such Propositions as are admitted by Trust or error, we are
not said to know, but think them to be true; and the Admittance of them is
called Opinion.

7. And particularly, when the Opinion is admitted out of Trust to other Men,
they are said to believe it; and their Admittance of it is called Belief, and
sometimes Faith.

8. It is either Science or Opinion which we commonly mean by the Word
Conscience: for Men say that such and such a thing is true in or upon their
Conscience; which they never do, when they think it doubtful; and therefore
they know, or think they know it to be true. But Men, when they say Things upon
their Conscience, are not therefore presumed certainly to know the Truth of
what they say: It remains then, that that Word is used by them that have an
Opinion, not only of the Truth of the Thing, but also of their Knowledge of it,
to which the Truth of the Proposition is consequent. Conscience I therefore
define to be Opinion of Evidence.

9. Belief, which is the admitting of Propositions upon Trust, in many Cases is
no less free from Doubt, than perfect and manifest Knowledge: for as there is
nothing whereof there is not some Cause; so, when there is Doubt, there must be
some Cause thereof conceived Now there be many Things which we receive from
Report of others, of which it is impossible to imagine any Cause of Doubt: for
what can be opposed against the Consent of all Men, in Things they can know,
and have no Cause to report otherwise than they are, (such as is great Part of
our Histories) unless a Man would say that all the World had conspired to
deceive him. And thus much of Sense, Imagination, Discursion, Ratiocination,
and Knowledge, which are the Acts of our Power cognitive, or conceptive. That
Power of the Mind which we call motive, differs from the Power motive of the
Body: for the Power motive of the Body is that by which it moves other Bodies,
and we call Strength; but the Power motive of the Mind, is that by which the
Mind gives animal Motion to that Body wherein it existeth: the Acts hereof are
our Affections and Passions, of which I am to speak in general.

CHAP. VII.
Of Delight, Pain, Love, Hatred.

Appetite, Aversion, Fear.

Good, Evil, Pulchritude, Turpitude.

End, Fruition.

Profitable, Use, Vain.

Felicity.

Good and Evil mixed

Sensual Delight, and Pain; Joy and Grief.

IN the eighth Section of the second Chapter is showed, that Conceptions and
Apparitions are nothing really, but Motion in some internal Substance of the
Head; which Motion not stopping there, but proceeding to the Heart, of
Necessity must there either help or hinder the Motion which is called Vital:
when it helps, it is called Delight, Contentment, or Pleasure, which is
nothing really but Motion about the Heart, as Conception is nothing but Motion
in the Head; and the Objects that cause it are called pleasant or delightful,
or by some Name equivalent; The Latins have Jucundum, a juvando, from helping;
and the same Delight, with Reference to the Object, is called Love: but when
such Motion weakeneth or hinders the vital Motion, then it is called Pain;
and in Relation to that which causes it, Hatred, which the Latins express
sometimes by Odium, and sometimes by Taedium.

2. This Motion in which consists Pleasure or Pain, is also a Solicitation or
Provocation either to draw near to the Thing that pleases, or to retire from
the Thing that displeases; and this Solicitation is the Endeavor or internal
Beginning of animal Motion, which when the Object delights, is called
Appetite; when it displeases, it is called Aversion, in Respect of the
Displeasure present; but in Respect of the Displeasure expected, Fear. So that
Pleasure, Love, and Appetite, which is also called Desire, are diverse Names for
diverse Considerations of the same Thing.

3. Every Man, for his own Part, calls that which pleases, and is delightful
to himself, Good; and that Evil which displeases him: insomuch that while
every Man differs from other in Constitution, they differ also from one
another concerning the common Distinction of Good and Evil. Nor is there any
such Thing as Absolute Goodness, considered without Relation: for even the
Goodness which we apprehend in God Almighty, is his Goodness to us. And as we
call Good and Evil the Things that please and displease; so call we Goodness
and Badness, the Qualities or Powers whereby they do it: And the Signs of that
Goodness are called by the Latins in one Word Pulchritudo, and the Signs of
Evil, Turpitudo; to which we have no Words precisely answerable.

4. As all Conceptions we have immediately by the Sense, are, Delight, or Pain,
or Appetite, or Fear; so are all the Imaginations after Sense. But as they are
weaker Imaginations, so are they also weaker Pleasures, or weaker Pain.

5. As Appetite is the Beginning of animal Motions toward something that
pleases us; so is the attaining thereof, the End of that Motion, which we also
call the Scope, and Aim, and final Cause of the same: and when we attain that
End, the Delight we have thereby is called the Fruition: So that Bonum and
Finis are different Names, but for different Considerations of the same Thing.

6. And of Ends, some of them are called propinqui, that is, near at hand;
others remoti, far off: but when the Ends that be nearer attaining, be compared
with those that be further off, they are called not Ends, but Means, and the
Way to those. But for an utmost End, in which the ancient Philosophers have
placed Felicity, and disputed much concerning the Way thereto, there is no such
Thing in this World, nor Way to it, more than to Vtopia: for while we live, we
have Desires, and Desire presupposes a further End. Those Things which please
us, as the Way or Means to a further End, we call profitable; and the Fruition
of them, Use; and those Things that profit not, vain.

7. Seeing all Delight is Appetite, and presupposes a further End, there can
be no Contentment but in proceeding: and therefore we are not to marvel, when
we see, that as Men attain to more Riches, Honor, or other Power; so their
Appetite continually grows more and more; and when they are come to the
utmost Degree of some Kind of Power, they pursue some other, as long as in any
Kind they think themselves behind any other: of those therefore that have
attained to the highest Degree of Honor and Riches, some have affected Mastery
in some Art; as Nero in Music and Poetry, Commodus in the Art of a Gladiator;
and such as affect not some such Thing, must find Diversion and Recreation of
their Thoughts in the Contention either of Play or Business: and Men justly
complain of a great Grief, that they know not what to do. Felicity therefore,
by which we mean continual Delight, consists not in having prospered, but in
prospering.

8. There are few Things in this World, but either have Mixture of Good and
Evil, or there is a Chain of them so necessarily linked together, that the one
cannot be taken without the other: As for Example, the Pleasures of Sin, and
the Bitterness of Punishment, are inseparable; as is also Labor and Honor,
for the most part. Now when in the whole Chain, the greater Part is good, the
Whole is called Good; and when the Evil over-weigheth, the Whole is called Evil.

9. There are two Sorts of Pleasure, whereof the one seems to affect the
corporeal Organ of the Sense, and that I call sensual; the greatest Part
whereof, is that by which we are invited to give Continuance to our Species;
and the next, by which a Man is invited to Meat, for the Preservation of his
individual Person: The other Sort of Delight is not particular to any Part of
the Body, and is called The Delight of the Mind, and is that which we call Joy.
Likewise of Pains, some affect the Body, and are therefore called the Pains of
the Body; and some not, and those are called Grief.

CHAP. VIII.
1, 2. Wherein consist the Pleasures of Sense.

3, 4. Of the Imagination, or Conception of Power in Man.

5. Honor, honorable, Worth.

6. Signs of Honor.

7. Reverence.

1. HAving in the first Section of the precedent Chapter presupposed, that
Motion and Agitation of the Brain which we call Conception, to be continued to
the Heart, and there to be called Passion; I have therefore obliged my self, as
far forth as I am able, to search out and declare from what Conception
proceeds every one of those Passions which we commonly take notice of: for,
seeing the Things that please and displease, are innumerable, and work
innumerable Ways, Men have not taken notice but of a very few, which also are
many of them without Name.

2. And first, we are to consider, that of Conceptions there are three Sorts,
whereof one is of that which is present, which is Sense; another, of that which
is past, which is Remembrance; and the third, of that which is future, which we
call Expectation: all which have been manifestly declared in the second and
third Chapters; and every of these Conceptions is Pleasure or Pain present. And
first for the Pleasures of the Body which affect the Sense of Touch and Taste,
as far forth as they be Organical, their Conceptions are Sense: so also is the
Pleasure of all Exonerations of Nature: All which Passions I have before named,
Sensual Pleasures; and their contrary, Sensual Pains: to which also may be
added the Pleasures and Displeasures of Odours, if any of them shall be found
Organical, which for the most Part they are not, as appears by this
Experience which every Man has, that the same Smells, when they seem to
proceed from others, displease, though they proceed from our selves; but when
we think they proceed from our selves, they displease not, though they come
from others: the Displeasure of this is a Conception of Hurt thereby from those
Odours, as being unwholesom, and is therefore a Conception of Evil to come, and
not present. Concerning the Delight of Hearing, it is diverse, and the Organ it
self not affected thereby: Simple Sounds please by Aequality, as the Sound of a
Bell or Lute: insomuch as it seems, an Equality continued by the Percussion of
the Object upon the Ear, is Pleasure; the Contrary is called Harshness, such as
is Grating, and some other Sounds, which do not always affect the Body, but
only sometime, and that with a Kind of Horror beginning at the Teeth. Harmony,
or many Sounds together agreeing, please by the same Reason as the Unison,
which is the Sound of equal Strings equally stretched. Sounds that differ in
any Height, please by Inequality and Aequality alternate, that is to say, the
higher Note strikes twice, for one Stroke of the other, whereby they strike
together every second Time; as is well proved by Galileo, in the first Dialogue
concerning local Motion: where he also shows, that two Sounds differing a
fifth, delight the Ear by an Aequality of striking after two Inequalities; for
the higher Note strikes the Ear thrice, while the other strikes but twice. In
like Manner he shows wherein consists the Pleasure of Concord, and the
Displeasure of Discord, in other Difference of Notes. There is yet another
Pleasure and Displeasure of Sounds, which consists in Consequence of one Note
after another, diversified both by Accent and Measure; whereof that which
pleases is called Air; but for what Reason Succession in Tone and Measure is
more Air than another, I confess I know not; but I conjecture the Reason to be,
for that some of them imitate and revive some Passion which otherwise we take
no Notice of, and the other not; for no Air pleases but for a time, no more
does Imitation. Also the Pleasures of the Eye consist in a certain Aequality of
Color: for Light, the most glorious of all Colors, is made by equal Operation
of the Object; whereas Color is perturbed, that is to say, unequal Light, as
has been said, Chap. 2. Sect. 8. And therefore Colors, the more Equality is
in them, the more resplendent they are: and as Harmony is pleasure to the Ear,
which consists of diverse Sounds; so perhaps may some Mixture of diverse
Colors be Harmony to the Eye, more than another Mixture. There is yet another
Delight by the Ear, which happens only to Men of skill in Music, which is
of another Nature, (and not as these) Conception of the present, but rejoicing
of their own Skill; of which nature are the Passions of which I am to speak
next.

3. Conception of the future, is but a Supposition of the same, proceeding from
Remembrance of what is past; and we so far conceive that any Thing will be
hereafter, as we know there is something at the present that has Power to
produce it: and that any Thing has Power now to produce another Thing
hereafter, we cannot conceive, but by Remembrance that it has produced the
like heretofore. Wherefore all Conception of future, is Conception of Power
able to produce something. Whosoever therefore expects Pleasure to come, must
conceive withal some Power in himself by which the same may be attained. And
because the Passions, whereof I am to speak next, consist in Conception of the
future, that is to say, in Conception of Power past, and the Act to come;
before I go any further, I must in the next Place speak somewhat concerning
this Power.

4. By this Power I mean the same with the Faculties of the Body, Nutritive,
Generative, Motive, and of the Mind, Knowledge; and besides these, such further
Power as by them is acquired, viz. Riches, Place of Authority, Friendship or
Favor, and Good Fortune; which last is really nothing else but the Favor of
God Almighty. The Contraries of these are Impotencies, Infirmities, or Defects
of the said Powers respectively. And because the Power of one Man resists and
hinders the Effects of the Power of another, Power simply is no more, but the
Excess of the Power of one above that of another: for equal Powers opposed,
destroy one another; and such their Opposition is called Contention.

5. The Signs by which we know our own Power, are those Actions which proceed
from the same; and the Signs by which other Men know it, are such Actions,
Gesture, Countenance and Speech, as usually such Powers produce: and the
Acknowledgement of Power is called Honor; and to honor a Man inwardly, is to
conceive or acknowledge that that Man has the odds or Excess of that Power
above him with whom he contendeth or compares himself. And honorable are
those Signs for which one Man acknowledges Power or Excess above his
Concurrent in another: As for Example, Beauty of Person, consisting in a lively
Aspect of the Countenance, and other Signs of Natural Heat, are honorable,
being Signs precedent of Power generative, and much Issue; as also, general
Reputation among those of the other Sex, because Signs consequent of the same.
And Actions proceeding from Strength of Body, and open Force, are honorable,
as Signs consequent of Power motive, such as are Victory in Battle or Duel; A
d'avoir tue son homme. Also to adventure upon great Exploits and Danger, as
being a Sign consequent of Opinion of our own Strength, and that Opinion a Sign
of the Strength it self. And to teach or persuade are honorable, because they
be Signs of Knowledge. And Riches are honorable; as Signs of the Power that
acquired them: And Gifts, Cost, and Magnificence of Houses, Apparel, and the
like, are honorable, as Signs of Riches. And Nobility is honorable by
Reflection, as a Sign of Power in the Ancestors: And Authority, because a Sign
of the Strength, Wisdom, Favor or Riches by which it is attained. And Good
Fortune or casual Prosperity is honorable, because a Sign of the Favor of
God, to whom is to be ascribed all that comes to us by Fortune, no less than
that we attain unto by Industry. And the Contraries and Defects of these Signs
are dishonorable; and according to the Signs of Honor and Dishonor, so we
estimate and make the Value or Worth of a Man: for so much worth is every
Thing, as a Man will give for the Use of all it can do.

6. The Signs of Honor are those by which we perceive that one Man
acknowledges the Power and Worth of another; such as these, to praise, to
magnify, to bless, to call happy, to pray or supplicate to, to thank, to offer
unto or present, to obey, to hearken unto with Attention, to speak to with
Consideration, to approach unto in decent Manner, to keep Distance from, to
give way to, and the like, which are the Honor the Inferior gives to the
Superior.

But the Signs of Honor from the Superior to the Inferior, are such as
these; to praise or prefer him before his Concurrent, to hear more willingly,
to speak to him more familiarly, to admit him nearer, to employ him rather, to
ask his advice rather, to take his opinions, and to give him any Gifts rather
than Money; or if Money, so much as may not imply his Need of a little: for
Need of a little is greater Poverty than Need of much. And this is enough for
Examples of the Signs of Honor and Power.

7. Reverence is the Conception we have concerning another, that he has the
Power to do unto us both Good and Hurt, but not the Will to do us Hurt.

8. In the Pleasure men have, or Displeasure from the Signs of Honor or
Dishonor done unto them, consists the Nature of the Passions, whereof we are
to speak in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
1. Glory aspiring, false Glory, vain Glory.

2. Humility and Dejection.

3. Shame.

4. Courage.

5. Anger.

6. Revengefulness.

7. Hope, Despair, Diffidence.

8. Trust.

9. Pity and Hardness of Heart.

10. Indignation.

11. Emulation and Envy.

12. Laughter.

13. Weeping.

14. Lust.

15. Love.

16. Charity,

17. Admiration and Curiosity.

18. Of the Passion of them that flock to see Danger.

19. Of Magnanimity and Pusillanimity.

20. A View of the Passions represented in a Race.

GLory, or internal Gloriation or Triumph of the Mind, is the Passion which
proceeds from the Imagination or Conception of our own Power above the Power
of him that contendeth with us; the Signs whereof, besides those in the
Countenance, and other Gestures of the Body which cannot be described, are,
Ostentation in Words, and Insolency in Actions: and this Passion, of them whom
it displeases, is called Pride; by them whom it pleases, it is termed a just
Valuation of himself. This Imagination of our Power or Worth, may be from an
assured and certain Experience of our own Actions; and then is that Glory just,
and well grounded, and begets an Opinion of increasing the same by other
Actions to follow; in which consists the Appetite which we call Aspiring, or
Proceeding from one Degree of Power to another. The same Passion may proceed
not from any Conscience of our own Actions, but from Fame and Trust of others,
whereby one may think well of himself, and yet be deceived; and this is false
Glory, and the Aspiring consequent thereto procures ill Success. Further, the
Fiction (which is also Imagination) of Actions done by our selves, which never
were done, is Glorying; but because it begets no Appetite nor endeavor to
any further Attempt, it is merely vain and unprofitable; as when a Man
imagines himself to do the Actions whereof he reads in some Romance, or to
be like unto some other Man whose Acts he admireth: And this is called Vain
Glory; and is exemplied in the Fable, by the Fly sitting on the Axletree, and
saying to himself, What a Dust do I make rise! The expression of Vain Glory is
that Wish, which some of the School mistaking for some Appetite distinct from
all the rest, have called Velleity, making a new Word, as they made a new
Passion which was not before. Signs of Vain Glory in the Gesture; are,
Imitation of others, Counterfeiting and Usurping the Signs of Virtue they have
not; Affectation of Fashions, Captation of Honor from their Dreams, and other
little Stories of themselves, from their Country, from their Names, and from
the like.

2. The Passion contrary to Glory, proceeding from Apprehension of our own
Infirmity, is called Humility by those by whom it is approved; by the rest,
Dejection and Poorness: which Conception may be well or ill grounded; if well,
it produces Fear to attempt any Thing rashly; if ill, it utterly cows a Man,
that he neither dares speak publicly, nor expect good Success in any Action.

3. It happens sometimes, that he that has a good Opinion of himself, and
upon good ground, may nevertheless, by Reason of the Frowardness which that
Passion begets, discover in himself some Defect or Infirmity, the
Remembrance whereof dejecteth him; and this Passion is called Shame; by which
being cooled and checked in his Forwardness, he is more wary for the Time to
come, This Passion, as it is a Sign of Infirmity, which is Dishonor; so also
it is a Sign of Knowledge, which is Honor. The Sign of it is Blushing, which
appears less in Men conscious of their own Defect, because they less betray
the Infirmities they acknowledge.

4. Courage, in a large Signification, is the Absence of Fear in the Presence
of any evil whatsoever: but in a Strict and more common Meaning, it is Contempt
of Wounds and Death, when they oppose a Man in the Way to his End.

5. Anger or sudden Courage is nothing but the Appetite or desire of overcoming
present Opposition. It has been defined commonly to be Grief proceeding from
an Opinion of Contempt; which is confuted by the often Experience which we have
of being moved to anger by things inanimate, and without Sense, and
consequently incapable of contemning us.

6. Revengefulness is that Passion which arises from an Expectation or
Imagination of making him that has hurt us, find his own Action hurtful to
himself, and to acknowledge the same; and this is the Height of Revenge: for
though it be not hard, by returning Evil for Evil, to make ones Adversary
displeased with his own Fact; yet to make him acknowledge the same, is so
difficult, that many a Man had rather die than do it. Revenge aims not at the
Death, but at the Captivity or Subjection of an Enemy; which was well expressed
in the Exclamation of Tiberius Caesar, concerning one, that, to frustrate his
Revenge, had killed himself in Prison; Has he escaped me? To kill, is the aim
of them that hate, to rid themselves out of Fear: Revenge aims at Triumph,
which over the Dead is not.

7. Repentance is the Passion which proceeds from Opinion or Knowledge that
the Action they have done is out of the Way to the End they would attain: the
Effect whereof is, to pursue that Way no longer, but, by the Consideration of
the End, to direct themselves into a better. The first Motion therefore in this
Passion is Grief; but the Expectation or Conception of returning again into the
Way, is Joy; and consequently, the Passion of Repentance is compounded and
allayed of both: but the predominant is Joy; else were the Whole Grief, which
cannot be, forasmuch as he that proceeds toward the End, he conceives Good,
proceeds with Appetite; and Appetite is Joy, as has been said, Chap. 7.
Sect. 2.

8. Hope is Expectation of Good to come, as Fear is the Expectation of Evil:
But when there be Causes, some that make us expect Good, and some that make us
expect Evil, alternately working in our Mind; if the Causes that make us expect
Good, be greater than those that make us expect Evil, the whole Passion is
Hope; if contrarily the Whole is Fear. Absolute Privation of hope is Despair, a
degree whereof is Diffidence.

9. Trust is a Passion proceeding from the Belief of him from whom we expect or
hope for Good, so free from Doubt that upon the same we pursue no other Way to
attain the same Good: as Distrust or Diffidence is Doubt that makes him
endeavor to provide himself by other Means And that this is the Meaning of the
Words Trust and Distrust, is manifest from this, that a Man never provideth
himself by a second Way, but when he mistrusteth that the first will not hold

10. Pity is Imagination or Fiction of future Calamity to our selves,
proceeding from the Sense of another Man's Calamity. But when it lights on
such as we think have not deserved the same, the Compassion is greater, because
then there appears more Probability that the same may happen to us: for, the
Evil that happens to an innocent Man, may happen to every Man. But when we
see a Man suffer for great Crimes, which we cannot easily think will fall upon
our selves, the Pity is the less. And therefore Men are apt to pity those whom
they love: for, whom they love, they think worthy of Good, and therefore not
worthy of Calamity. Thence it is also, that Men pity the Vices of some Persons
at the first Sight only, out of Love to their Aspect. The Contrary of Pity is
Hardness of Heart, proceeding either from Slowness of Imagination, or some
extreme great Opinion of their own Exemption from the like Calamity, or from
hatred of all or most Men.

11. Indignation is that Grief which consists in the Conception of good
Success happening to them whom they think unworthy thereof. Seeing therefore
Men think all those unworthy whom they hate, they think them not only unworthy
of the good Fortune they have, but also of their own Virtues. And of all the
Passions of the Mind, these two, Indignation and Pity, are most raised and
increased by Eloquence: for, the Aggravation of the Calamity, and Extenuation
of the Fault, augmenteth Pity; and the Extenuation of the Worth of the Person,
together with the magnifying of his Success, which are the Parts of an Orator,
are able to turn these two Passions into Fury.

12. Emulation is Grief arising from seeing ones self exceeded or excelled by
his Concurrent, together with Hope to equal or exceed him in Time to come, by
his own Ability. But, Envy is the same Grief joined with Pleasure conceived in
the Imagination of some ill Fortune that may befall him.

13. There is a Passion that has no Name; but the Sign of it is that
Distortion of the Countenance which we call Laughter, which is always Joy: but
what joy, what we think, and wherein we triumph when we laugh, is not hitherto
declared by any. That it consists in Wit, or, as they call it, in the Jest,
Experience confuteth: for Men laugh at Mischances and Indecencies, wherein
there lies no Wit nor jest at all. And forasmuch as the same Thing is no more
ridiculous when it grows stale or usual, whatsoever it be that moves
Laughter, it must be new and unexpected. Men laugh often (especially such as
are greedy of Applause from every Thing they do well) at their own Actions
performed never so little beyond their own Expectations; as also at their own
Jests: And in this Case it is manifest, that the Passion of Laughter proceeds
from a sudden conception of some Ability in himself that laugheth. Also Men
laugh at the Infirmities of others, by Comparison wherewith their own Abilities
are set off and illustrated. Also Men laugh at Jests, the Wit whereof always
consists in the elegant Discovering and Conveying to our minds some Absurdity
of another: And in this case also the Passion of Laughter proceeds from the
sudden Imagination of our own Odds and Eminency: for what is else the
Recommending of our selves to our own good Opinion, by Comparison with another
Man's Infirmity or absurdity? For when a Jest is broken upon our selves, or
Friends of whose Dishonor we participate, we never laugh thereat. I may
therefore conclude, that the Passion of Laughter is nothing else but sudden
Glory arising from some sudden Conception of some Eminency in our selves, by
Comparison with the Infirmity of others, or with our own formerly: for Men
laugh at the follies of themselves past, when they come suddenly to
Remembrance, except they bring with them any present Dishonor. It is no wonder
therefore that Men take hainously to be laughed at or derided, that is,
triumphed over. Laughing without Offense, must be at Absurdities and
Infirmities abstracted from Persons, and when all the Company may laugh
together: for, laughing to ones self puts all the rest into Jealousy, and
Examination of themselves. Besides, it is Vainglory, and an Argument of little
Worth, to think the Infirmity of another, sufficient Matter for his Triumph.

14. The Passion opposite hereunto, (whose Signs are another Distortion of the
Face with Tears) called Weeping, is the sudden Falling out with our selves, or
sudden Conception of Defect; and therefore Children weep often: for seeing they
think that every Thing ought to be given them which they desire, of Necessity
every Repulse must be a Check of their Expectation, and puts them in mind of
their too much Weakness to make themselves Masters of all they look for. For
the same Cause Women are more apt to weep than men, as being not only more
accustomed to have their Wills, but also to measure their Powers by the Power
and Love of others that protect them. Men are apt to weep that prosecute
Revenge, when the Revenge is suddenly stopped or frustrated by the Repentance of
their Adversary; and such are the Tears of Reconciliation. Also revengeful Men
are subject to this Passion upon the beholding those Men they pity, and
suddenly remember they cannot help. Other weeping in Men proceeds for the
most part from the same Cause it proceeds from in Women and Children.

15. The Appetite which Men call Lust, and the Fruition that appertains
thereunto, is a Sensual Pleasure, but not only that; there is in it also a
Delight of the Mind: for it consists of two Appetites together, to please,
and to be pleased; and the Delight Men take in delighting, is not sensual, but
a Pleasure or joy of the Mind consisting in the Imagination of the Power they
have so much to please. But the Name Lust is used where it is condemned;
otherwise it is called by the general Word Love: for the Passion is one and the
same indefinite Desire of different Sex, as natural as Hunger.

16. Of Love, by which is understood the Joy Man takes in the Fruition of any
present Good, has been already spoken of in the first Section, Chap. 7. under
which is contained the Love Men bear to one another, or Pleasure they take in
one another Company; and by which Nature, Men are said to be sociable. But
there is another Kind of Love, which the Greeks call (...), and is that which
we mean, when we say that a Man is in Love: Forasmuch as this Passion cannot be
without Diversity of Sex, it cannot be denied but that it participateth of that
indefinite Love mentioned in the former Section. But there is a great
Difference betwixt the Desire of a Man indefinite, and the same Desire limited
ad hunc; and this is that Love which is the great Theme of Poets: But
notwithstanding their Praises, it must be defined by the Word Need: for it is a
Conception a Man has of his Need of that one Person desired. The Cause of this
Passion is not always nor for the most part Beauty, or other Quality in the
Beloved, unless there be withal Hope in the Person that loves: which may be
gathered from this, that in great Difference of Persons, the greater have often
fallen in love with the meaner; but not contrary. And from hence it is, that for
the most part they have much better Fortune in Love, whose Hopes are built upon
something in their Person, than those that trust to their Expressions and
Service; and they that care less, than they that care more: which not
perceiving, many Men cast away their Services, as one Arrow after another,
till, in the End, together with their Hopes, they lose their Wits.

17. There is yet another Passion sometimes called Love, but more properly good
Will or Charity. There can be no greater Argument to a Man, of his own Power,
than to find himself able not only to accomplish his own Desires, but also to
assist other Men in theirs: and this is that Conception wherein consists
Charity. In which, first, is contained that natural Affection of Parents to
their Children, which the Greeks call (...), as also, that Affection wherewith
Men seek to assist those that adhere unto them. But the Affection wherewith Men
many times bestow their Benefits on Strangers, is not to be called Charity, but
either Contract, whereby they seek to purchase friendship; or Fear, which
makes them to purchase peace. The Opinion of Plato concerning honorable Love,
delivered according to his Custom in the Person of Socrates, in the Dialogue
entitled Convivium, is this, That a Man full and pregnant with Wisdom and
other Virtues, naturally seeks out some beautiful Person, of Age and Capacity
to conceive, in whom he may, without sensual Respects, engender and produce the
like. And this is the Idea of the then noted Love of Socrates wise and
continent, to Alcibiades young and beautiful: In which, Love is not the sought
Honor, but the Issue of his Knowledge; contrary to the common Love, to which
though Issue sometimes follows, yet Men seek not that, but to please, and to be
pleased. It should be therefore this Charity, or Desire to assist and advance
others. But why then should the Wise seek the Ignorant, or be more charitable
to the Beautiful than to others? There is something in it savouring of the Use
of that time: in which Matter though Socrates be acknowledged for continent,
yet the Continent have the Passion they contain, as much and more than they
that satiate the Appetite; which makes me suspect this Platonic Love for
merely sensual; but with an honorable Pretense for the Old to haunt the
Company of the young and beautiful.

18. Forasmuch as all Knowledge begins from Experience, therefore also new
Experience is the Beginning of new Knowledge, and the Increase of Experience
the Beginning of the Increase of Knowledge. Whatsoever therefore happens new
to a Man, gives him Matter of Hope of knowing somewhat that he knew not
before. And this Hope and Expectation of future Knowledge from any Thing that
happens new and strange, is that Passion which we commonly call Admiration;
and the same considered as Appetite, is called Curiosity, which is Appetite of
Knowledge. As in the discerning of Faculties, Man leaves all Community with
Beasts at the Faculty of imposing Names; so also does he surmount their Nature
at this Passion of Curiosity. For when a Beast sees any Thing new and strange
to him, he considers it so far only as to discern whether it be likely to
serve his turn, or hurt him, and accordingly approaches nearer to it, or
flees from it: Whereas Man, who in most Events remembereth in what manner they
were caused and begun, looks for the Cause and Beginning of every Thing that
arises new unto him. And from this Passion of Admiration and Curiosity, have
arisen not only the Invention of Names, but also Supposition of such Causes of
all Things as they thought might produce them. And from this Beginning is
derived all Philosophy; as Astronomy from the Admiration of the Course of
Heaven; Natural Philosophy from the strange Effects of the Elments and other
Bodies. And from the Degrees of Curiosity, proceed also the Degrees of
Knowledge amongst Men: For, to a Man in the Chase of Riches or Authority,)
which in Respect of Knowledge are but Sensuality) it is a Diversity of little
Pleasure, whether it be the Motion of the Sun or the Earth that makes the Day,
or to enter into other Contemplations of any strange Accident, than whether it
conduce or not to the End he pursues. Because Curiosity is Delight, therefore
also Novelty is so, but especially that Novelty from which a Man conceives an
Opinion true or false of bettering his own Estate; for, in such Case, they
stand affected with the Hope that all Gamesters have while the Cards are
shuffling.

19. Diverse other Passions there be, but they want Names: whereof some
nevertheless have been by most Men observed: For Example; from what Passion
proceeds it, that Men take pleasure to behold from the Shore the Danger of
them that are at Sea in a Tempest, or in Fight, or from a safe Castle to behold
two Armies charge one to another in the Field? It is certainly, in the whole
Sum, Joy; else Men would never flock to such a Spectacle. Nevertheless there
is in it both Joy and Grief: for as there is Novelty and Remembrance of our own
Security present, which is Delight: so there is also Pity, which is Grief: But
the Delight is so far predominant, that Men usually are content in such a Case
to be Spectators of the Misery of their Friends.

20. Magnanimity is no more than Glory, of the which I have spoken in the first
Section; but Glory well grounded upon certain Experience of a Power sufficient
to attain his End in open Manner. And Pusillanimity is the Doubt of that.
Whatsoever therefore is a Sign of Vain Glory, the same is also a Sign of
Pusillanimity: for sufficient Power makes Glory a Spur to ones End. To be
pleased or displeased with Fame true or false, is a Sign of that same, because
he that relieth on Fame has not his Success in his own Power. Likewise Art and
Fallacy are Signs of Pusillanimity, because they depend not upon our own Power,
but the Ignorance of others. Also Proneness to Anger, because it argues
Difficulty of proceeding. Also Ostentation of Ancestors, because all Men are
more inclined to make show of their own Power when they have it, than of
another. To be at Enmity and Contention with Inferiors, is a Sign of the
same, because it proceeds from Want of Power to end the War. To laugh at
others, because it is an Affectation of Glory from other Men's Infirmities, and
not from any Ability of their own. Also Irresolution, which proceeds from
Want of power enough to contemn the little Difficulties that make Deliberations
hard.

21. The Comparison of the Life of Man to a Race, though it hold not in every
Part, yet it holds so well for this our Purpose, that we may thereby both see
and remember almost all the Passions before mentioned. But this Race we must
suppose to have no other Goal, nor other Garland, but being foremost, and in it

To endeavor, is Appetite.

To be remiss, is Sensuality.

To consider them behind, is Glory.

To consider them before, is Humility.

To lose Ground with looking back, Vainglory.

To be holden, Hatred.

To turn back, Repentance.

To be in breath, Hope.

To be weary, Despair.

To endeavor to overtake the next, Emulation.

To supplant or overthrow, Envy.

To resolve to break through a Stop foreseen, Courage.

To break through a sudden Stop, Anger.

To break through with Ease, Magnanimity.

To lose Ground by little Hindrances, Pusillanimity.

To fall on the sudden, is Disposition to weep.

To see another fall, is Disposition to laugh.

To see one out-gone whom we would not, is Pity.

To see one out-goe whom we would not, is Indignation.

To hold fast by another, is to love.

To carry him on that so holds, is Charity.

To hurt ones self for have, is Shame.

Continually to be out-gone is Misery.

Continually to out-go the next before, is Felicity.

And to forsake the Course, is to die.

CHAP. X.
1. HAving showed in the precedent Chapters, that Sense proceeds from the
Action of external Objects upon the Brain, or some internal Substance of the
Head; and that the Passions proceed from the Alteration there made, and
continued to the Heart: It is consequent in the next Place, seeing the
Diversity of Degrees in Knowledge in diverse Men, to be greater than may be
ascribed to the diverse Tempers of their Brain, to declare what other Causes may
produce such Odds, and Excess of Capacity, as we daily observe in one Man
above another. As for that Difference which arises from Sickness, and such
accidental Distempers, I omit the same, as impertinent to this Place, and
consider, it only in such as have their Health, and Organs well disposed. If
the Difference were in the natural Temper of the Brain, I can imagine no Reason
why the same should not appear first and most of all in the Senses, which being
equal both in the wise and less wise, infer an equal Temper in the common Organ
(namely the Brain) of all the Senses.

2. But we see by Experience, that Joy and Grief proceed not in all Men from
the same Causes, and that men differ very much in the Constitution of the Body;
whereby, that which helps and furthereth vital Constitution in one, and is
therefore delightful, hinders it and crosses it in another, and therefore
causes Grief. The Difference therefore of Wits has its Original from the
different Passions, and from the Ends to which the Appetite leads them.

3. And first, those Men whose Ends are sensual Delight, and generally are
addicted to Ease, Food, Onerations and Exonerations of the Body, must needs be
the less thereby delighted with those Imaginations that conduce not to those
Ends, such as are Imaginations of Honor and Glory, which, as I have said
before, have Respect to the future: For Sensuality consists in the Pleasure
of the Senses, which please only for the present, and take away the Inclination
to observe such Things as conduce to Honor, and consequently makes Men less
curious, and less ambitious, whereby they less consider the Way either to
Knowledge or other Power: in which two consists all the Excellency of Power
cognitive. And this is it which Men call Dullness, and proceeds from the
Appetite of sensual or bodily Delight. And it may well be conjectured, that
such Passion has its Beginning from a Grossness and Difficulty of the Motion
of the Spirit about the Heart.

4. The Contrary hereunto, is that quick Rangeing of Mind described, Chap. 4.
Sect. 3. which is joined with Curiosity of comparing the Things that come into
the Mind, one with another: in which Comparison, a Man delights himself
either with finding unexpected Similitude of Things, otherwise much unlike, in
which Men place the Excellency of Fancy, and from whence proceed those grateful
Similies, Metaphors, and other Tropes, by which both Poets and Orators have it
in their Power to make Things please or displease, and show well or ill to
others, as they like themselves; or else in discerning suddenly Dissimilitude
in Things that otherwise appear the same. And this Virtue of the Mind is that
by which Men attain to exact and perfect Knowledge; and the Pleasure thereof
consists in continual Instruction, and in Distinction of Places, Persons, and
Seasons, and is commonly termed by the Name of Judgment: for, to judge is
nothing else, but to distinguish or discern: And both Fancy and Judgment are
commonly comprehended under the Name of Wit, which seems to be a Tenuity and
Agility of Spirits, contrary to that Restiness of the Spirits supposed in those
that are dull.

5. There is another Defect of the Mind, which Men call Levity, which betrayeth
also Mobility in the Spirits, but in Excess. An Example whereof is in them that
in the midst of any serious Discourse, have their Minds diverted to every
little Jest or witty Observation; which makes them depart from their Discourse
by a Parenthesis, and from that Parenthesis by another, till at length they
either lose themselves, or make their Narration like a Dream, or some studied
Nonsense. The Passion from whence this proceeds, is Curiosity, but with too
much Equality and Indifference: for when all Things make equal Impression and
Delight, they equally throng to be expressed.

6. The Virtue opposite to this Defect, is Gravity, or Steadiness; in which the
End being the great and Master-Delight, directs and keeps in the Way
thereto all other Thoughts.

7. The Extremity of Dullness is that natural Folly which may be called
Stolidity: But the Extreme of Levity, though it be natural Folly distinct from
the other, and obvious to every Man's Observation, I know not how to call it.

8. There is a Fault of the Mind called by the Greeks (...), which is
Indocibility, or Difficulty of being taught; the which must needs arise from a
false Opinion that they know already the Truth of that is called in question:
for certainly Men are not otherwise so unequal in capacity as the Evidence is
unequal between what is taught by the Mathematicians, and what is commonly
discoursed of in other Books: and therefore if the Minds of Men were all of
white Paper, they would all most equally be disposed to acknowledge whatsoever
should be in right Method, and by right Ratiocination delivered to them: But
when Men have once acquiesced in untrue Opinions, and registered them as
Authentical Records in their Minds, it is no less impossible to speak
intelligibly to such Men, than to write legibly upon a Paper already scribled
over. The immediate Cause therefore of Indocibility, is Prejudice; and of
prejudice, false Opinion of our own Knowledge.

9. Another, and a principal Defect of the Mind, is that which Men call
Madness, which appears to be nothing else but some Imagination of some such
Predominancy above the rest, that we have no Passion but from it; and this
Conception is nothing else but excessive vain Glory, or vain Dejection: which
is most propable by these Examples following, which proceed in Appearance every
one of them from Pride, or some Dejection of Mind. As first, we have had the
Example of one that preached in Cheapside from a Cart there, instead of a
Pulpit, that he himself was Christ, which was spiritual Pride or Madness. We
have had also diverse Examples of Learned Madness, in which Men have manifestly
been distracted upon any Occasion that has put them in Remembrance of their
own Ability. Amongst the learned Men, may be remembered (I think also) those
that determine of the Time of the Worlds End, and other such the Points of
Prophecy. And the gallant Madness of Don Quixotte is nothing else but an
Expression of such Height of vain Glory as reading of Romance may produce in
pusillanimous Men. Also Rage and Madness of Love, are but great Indignations of
them in whose Brains is predominant Contempt from their Enemies, or their
Mistresses. And the Pride taken in Form and Behavior, has made diverse Men run
mad, and to be so accounted, under the Name of Fantastic.

10. And as these are the Examples of Extremities, so also are there Examples
too many of the Degrees, which may therefore be well accounted Follies; as it
is a Degree of the first, for a Man, without certain Evidence, to think himself
to be inspired, or to have any other Effect of Gods holy Spirit than other
godly Men have. Of the second, for a Man continually to speak his mind in a
Cento of other Men's Greek or Latin Sentences. Of the third, much of the
present Gallantry in Love and Duel. Of Rage, a Degree is Malice; and of
Fantastic Madness, Affection.

11. As the former Examples exhibit to us Madness, and the Degrees thereof,
proceeding from the Excess of Self-Opinion; so also there be other Examples of
Madness, and the Degrees thereof, proceeding from too much vain Fear and
Dejection; as in those melancholy Men that have imagined themselves brittle as
Glass, or have had some other like Imagination: and Degrees hereof are all
those exorbitant and causless Fears, which we commonly observe in melancholy
Persons.

CHAP. XI.
1. HItherto of the Knowledge of Things natural and of the Passions that arise
naturally from them. Now forasmuch as we give Names not only to Things natural,
but also to supernatural; and by all Names we ought to have some Meaning and
Conception: It follows in the next Place, to consider what Thoughts and
Imaginations of the Mind we have, when we take into our Mouths the most blessed
Name of GOD, and the Names of those Virtues we attribute unto him; as also,
what Image comes into the Mind at hearing the Name of Spirit, or the Name of
Angel, good or bad.

2. And forasmuch as God Almighty is incomprehensible, it follows, that we
can have no Conception or Image of the Deity, and consequently, all his
Attributes signify our Inability and Defect of Power to conceive any Thing
concerning his Nature, and not any Conception of the same, excepting only this,
That there is a God: For the Effects we acknowledge naturally, do include a
Power of their producing, before they were produced; and that Power
presupposes something existent that has such Power: And the Thing so existing
with Power to produce, if it were not Eternal, must needs have been produced by
somewhat before it, and that again by something else before that, till we come
to an Eternal (that is to say, the first) Power of all Powers, and first Cause
of all Causes: And this is it which all Men conceive by the Name of GOD,
implying Eternity, Incomprehensibility, and Omnipotency. And thus all that will
consider, may know that God is, though not what he is: even a Man that is born
blind, though it be not possible for him to have any Imagination what Kind of
thing Fire is; yet he cannot but know that somewhat there is that Men call
Fire, because it warmeth him.

2. And whereas we attribute to God Almighty, Seeing, Hearing, Speaking,
Knowing, Loving, and the like, by which Names we understand something in Men to
whom we attribute them, we understand nothing by them in the Nature of God:
For, as it is well reasoned, Shall not the God that made the Eye, see; and the
Ear, hear? So it is also, if we say, Shall God, which made the Eye, not see
without the Eye; or that made the Ear, not hear without the Ear; or that made
the Brain, not know without the Brain; or that made the Heart, not love without
the Heart? The Attributes therefore given unto the Deity, are such as signify
either our Incapacity or our Reverence: Our Incapacity, when we say
Incomprehensible and Infinite; our Reverence, when we give him those Names,
which amongst us are the Names of those Things we most magnify and commend, as
Omnipotent, Omniscient, Just, Merciful, etc. And when God Almighty gives those
Names to himself in the Scriptures, it is but (...), that is to say, by
descending to our Manner of speaking; without which we are not capable of
understanding him.

4. By the Name of Spirit, we understand a Body natural, but of such Subtilty,
that it works not upon the Senses; but that fills up the Place which the
Image of a visible Body might fill up. Our Conception therefore of Spirit
consists of Figure without Color; and in Figure is understood Dimension, and
consequently, to conceive a Spirit, is to conceive something that has
Dimension. But Spirits supernatural commonly signify some Substance without
Dimension; which two Words do flatly contradict one another: and therefore when
we attribute the Name of Spirit unto God, we attribute it not as the Name of
any Thing we conceive, no more than we ascribe unto him Sense and
Understanding; but, as a Signification of our Reverence, we desire to abstract
from him all corporal Grosness.

5. Concerning other Things, which some Men call Spirits incorporeal, and some
corporeal, it is not possible by natural Means only, to come to Knowledge of so
much, as that there are such Things. We that are Christians acknowledge that
there be Angels good and evil, and that there are Spirits, and that the Soul of
Man is a Spirit, and that those Spirits are immortal: but, to know it, that is
to say, to have natural Evidence of the same, it is impossible: For, all
Evidence is Conception, as it is said, Chap. 6. Sect. 3. and all Conception is
Imagination, and proceeds from Sense, Chap. 3. Sect. 1. And Spirits we
suppose to be those Substances which work not upon the Sense; and therefore not
conceptible. But though the Scripture acknowledge Spirits, yet does it no where
say, that they are incorporeal, meaning thereby, without Dimension and Quality:
Nor, I think, is that Word Incorporeal at all in the Bible; but it is said of
the Spirit, that it abides in Men; sometimes that it dwells in them,
sometimes that it comes on them, that it descends, and goes, and comes;
and that Spirits are Angels, that is to say, Messengers: all which Words do
imply Locality; and Locality is Dimension; and whatsoever has Dimension, is
Body, be it never so subtle. To me therefore it seems, that the Scripture
favors them more, who hold Angels and Spirits corporeal, than them that hold
the contrary. And it is a plain Contradiction in natural Discourse, to say of
the Soul of Man, that it is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet Part Corporis,
grounded neither upon Reason nor Revelation, but proceeding from the Ignorance
of what those Things are which are called Spectra, Images, that appear in the
dark to Children, and such as have strong Fears, and other strange
Imaginations, as has been said, Chap. 3. Sect. 5. where I call them Phantasms:
For, taking them to be Things real, without us, like Bodies, and seeing them to
come and vanish so strangely as they do, unlike to Bodies; what could they call
them else, but incorporeal Bodies? which is not a Name, but an Absurdity of
Speech.

6. It is true, that the Heathens, and all Nations of the World, have
acknowledged that there be Spirits, which for the most part they hold to be
incorporeal; whereby it might be thought, that a Man by natural Reason, may
arrive, without the Scriptures, to the Knowledge of this, That Spirits are: But
the erroneous Collection thereof by the Heathens, may proceed, as I have said
before, from the Ignorance of the Cause of Ghosts and Phantasms, and such other
Apparitions. And from thence had the Grecians their Number of Gods, their
Number of Demons good or bad, and for every Man his Genius; which is not the
Acknowledging of this Truth, That Spirits are; but a false Opinion concerning
the Force of Imagination.

7. And seeing the Knowledge we have of Spirits, is not natural Knowledge, but
Faith from supernatural Revelation given to the holy Writers of the Scriptures;
it follows, that of Inspirations also, which is the Operation of Spirit in
us, the Knowledge which we have, must all proceed from Scripture. The Signs
there set down of Inspiration, are Miracles, when they be great, and manifestly
above the Power of Men to do by Imposture: As for Example, the Inspiration of
Elias was known by the miraculous Burning of the Sacrifice. But the Signs to
distinguish whether a Spirit be good or evil, are the same by which we
distinguish whether a Man or a Tree be good or evil, namely, Actions and Fruit:
For there are lying Spirits, wherewith Men are inspired sometimes, as well as
with Spirits of Truth. And we are commanded in Scripture, to judge of the
Spirits by their Doctrine, and not of the Doctrine by the Spirits. For
Miracles, our Savior has forbidden us to rule our Faith by them, Matthew.
24.24. And Saint Paul says, Gal. 1.8. Though an Angel from Heaven preach to
you otherwise, etc. let him be accursed. Where it is plain, that we are not to
judge whether the Doctrine be true or not, by the Angel; but whether the Angel
say true or no, by the Doctrine. So likewise, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every
Spirit: for false Prophets are gone out into the World. Verse. 2. Hereby shall
ye know the Spirit of God. Verse. 3. Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God: and this is the Spirit of
Antichrist. Verse. 15. Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, in him
dwells God, and he in God. The Knowledge therefore we have of good and evil
Inspiration, comes not by Vision of an Angel that may teach it, nor by a
Miracle that may seem to confirm it; but by Conformity of Doctrine with this
Article and Fundamental Point of Christian Faith, which also Saint Paul says
is the sole Foundation, That Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, 1 Cor. 3.11

8. But if Inspiration be discerned by this Point, and this Point be
acknowledged and believed upon the Authority of the Scriptures; How (may some
Men ask) know we that the Scripture deserves so great Authority, which must be
no less than that of the lively Voice of God; that is, how we know the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? And first, it is manifest, that if by
Knowledge we understand Science infallible and natural, as is defined, Chap. 6.
Sect. 4. proceeding from Sense, we cannot be said to know it, because it
proceeds not from the Conceptions ingendered by Sense. And if we understand
Knowledge as supernatural, we cannot have it but by Inspiration: And of that
Inspiration we cannot judge, but by the Doctrine: It follows, that we have
not any Way, natural or supernatural, of the Knowledge thereof, which can
properly be called Infallible Science and Evidence. It remains, that the
Knowledge that we have that the Scriptures are the Word of God, is only Faith,
which Faith therefore is also by Saint Paul defined, Heb. 11.1. to be the
Evidence of Things not seen; that is to say, not otherwise evident but by
Faith: for, whatsoever either is evident by Natural Reason, or Revelation
supernatural, is not called Faith; else should not Faith cease, no more than
Charity, when we are in Heaven; which is contrary to the Doctrine of the
Scripture. And, we are not said to believe, but to know those Things that be
evident.

9. Seeing then the Acknowledgment of Scriptures to be the Word of God, is not
Evidence, but Faith, and Faith (Chap. 6. Sect. 7.) consists in the Trust we
have of other Men, it appears plain, that the Men so trusted, are the holy
Men of Gods Church succeeding one another from the Time of those that saw the
wondrous Works of God Almighty in the Flesh. Nor does this imply that God is
not the Worker or Efficient Cause of Faith, or that Faith is begotten in Man
without the Spirit of God: for, all those good Opinions which we admit and
believe, though they proceed from Hearing, and Hearing from Teaching, both
which are natural, yet they are the Work of God: for, all the Works of Nature
are his, and they are attributed to the Spirit of God: As for Example, Exodus
28.3. Thou shall speak unto all cunning Men, whom I have filled with the SPIRIT
of Wisdom, that they may make Aaron's Garments for his Consecration, that he
may serve me in the Priests Office. Faith therefore wherewith we believe, is
the Work of the Spirit of God in that Sense, by which the Spirit of God gives
to one Man Wisdom and cunning in Workmanship more than another, and by which he
effects also in other Points pertaining to our ordinary Life; that one Man
believes that, which, upon the same Grounds, another does not; and one Man
reverenceth the Opinion, and obeys the Commands of his Superior, and others
not.

10. And seeing our Faith, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, began from
the Confidence and Trust we repose in the Church; there can be no Doubt but
that their Interpretation of the same Scriptures (when any Doubt or
Controversy shall arise, by which this Fundamental Point, That Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, may be called in question) is safer for any Man to trust to,
than his own, whether Reasoning or Spirit, that is to say, his own Opinion.

11. Now concerning Men's Affections to Godward, they are not the same always
that are described in the Chapter concerning Passions There, for to love, is to
be delighted with the Image or Conception of the Thing loved; but God is
unconceivable: To love God therefore, in the Scripture, is to obey his
Commandments, and to love one another. Also to trust God, is different from our
trusting one another: for, when a Man trusts a Man, (Chap. 9. Sect. 8.) he
lays aside his own Endeavors: but if we do so in our Trust to God Almighty,
we disobey him; and how shall we trust to him whom we know we disobey? To trust
to God Almighty therefore, is to referr to his good Pleasure all that is above
our own Power to effect: and this is all one with Acknowledging one only God,
which is the first Commandment. And to trust in Christ, is no more but to
acknowledge him for God; which is the fundamental Article of our Christian
Faith: And consequently, to trust, rely, or, as some express it, to cast and
roll our selves on Christ, is the same Thing with the Fundamental Point of
Faith, namely, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God.

12. To honor God internally in the Heart, is the same Thing with that we
ordinarily call Honor amongst Men: for it is nothing but the Acknowledging of
his Power; and the Signs thereof, the same with the Signs of the Honor due to
our Superiors, mentioned Chap. 8. Sect. 6. viz. to praise, to magnify, to
bless; to pray to him, to thank him, to give Oblations and Sacrifices to him,
to give Attention to his Word, to speak to him in Prayer with Consideration, to
come into his Presence with humble Gesture, and in decent Manner, and to adorn
his Worship with Magnificence and Cost: and these are natural Signs of our
honoring him internally: And therefore the Contrary hereof, To neglect prayer,
to speak to him extempore, to come to Church slovenly, to adorn the Place of
his Worship worse than our own Houses, to take up his Name in every idle
Discourse, are the manifest Signs of Contempt of the Divine Majesty. There be
other Signs which are arbitrary; as, to be uncovered, (as we be here); to put
off their Shoes, as Moses at the fiery Bush, and some other of that Kind,
which in their own Nature are indifferent, till, to avoid Indecency and
Discord, it be otherwise determined by common Consent.

CHAP. XII.
1. IT has been declared already, how external Objects cause Conceptions, and
Conceptions, Appetite and Fear, which are the first unperceived Beginnings of
our Actions: for either the Actions immediately follow the first Appetite, as
when we do any Thing upon a sudden; or else to our first Appetite there
succeeds some Conception of Evil to happen to us by such Actions, which is
Fear, and which holds us from proceeding. And to that Fear may succeed a new
Appetite, and to that Appetite another Fear alternately, till the Action be
either done, or some Accident come between, to make it impossible; and so this
alternate Appetite and Fear cease. This alternate Succession of Appetite and
Fear during all the time the Action is in our Power to do or not to do, is that
we call Deliberation; which Name has been given it for that Part of the
Definition wherein it is said that it lasts so long as the Action, whereof we
deliberate, is in our Power: for, so long we have Liberty to do or not to do;
and Deliberation signifies a Taking away of our own Liberty.

2. Deliberation therefore requires in the Action deliberated two Conditions;
one, that it be future; the other, that there be Hope of doing it, or
possibility of not doing it; for, Appetite and Fear are Expepectations of the
future; and there is no Expectation of Good, without Hope; or of Evil, without
Possibility: of Necessaries therefore there is no Deliberation. In
Deliberation, the last Appetite, as also the last Fear, is called Will, viz.
the last Appetite, Will to do, or Will to omit. It is all one therefore to say
Will, and last Will: for, though a Man express his present Inclination and
Appetite concerning the disposing of his Goods, by Words or Writing; yet shall
it not be counted his Will, because he has still Liberty to dispose of them
other ways: but when Death takes away that Liberty, then it is his Will.

3. Voluntary Actions and Omissions are such as have Beginning in the Will; all
other are involuntary, or (...) voluntary, such as a Man does upon Appetite or
Fear; involuntary, such as he does by Necessity of Nature, as when he is
pushed, or falls, and thereby does Good or hurt to another: mixed, such as
participate of both; as when a Man is carried to Prison, Going is voluntary, to
the Prison, is involuntary: The Example of him that throws his Goods out of a
Ship into the Sea, to save his Person, is of an Action altogether voluntary;
for, there is nothing therein involuntary, but the Hardness of the Choice,
which is not his Action, but the Action of the Winds: what he himself does, is
no more against his Will, than to flee from Danger is against the Will of him
that sees no other Means to preserve himself.

4. Voluntary also are the Actions that proceed from sudden Anger, or other
sudden Appetite in such Men as can discern Good or Evil: for, in them the Time
precedent is to be judged Deliberation; for then also he deliberateth in what
Cases it is good to strike, deride, or do any other Action proceeding from
Anger or other such sudden Passion.

5. Appetite, Fear, Hope, and the rest of the Passions are not called
voluntary; for they proceed not from, but are the Will, and the Will is not
voluntary: for, a Man can no more say he will will, than he will will will, and
so make an infinite Repetition of the Word [ will]; which is absurd, and
insignificant.

6. Forasmuch as Will to do is Appetite, and Will to omit, Fear; the Cause of
Appetite and Fear is the Cause also of our Will: But the propounding of the
Benefits and of Harms, that is to say, of Reward and Punishment, is the Cause
of our Appetite, and of our Fears, and therefore also of our Wills, so far
forth as we believe that such Rewards and Benefits as are propounded, shall
arrive unto us; and consequently, our Wills follow our Opinions, as our Actions
follow our Wills; in which Sense they say truly, and properly, that say the
World is governed by Opinion.

7. When the Wills of many concur to one and the same Action and Effect, this
Concourse of their Wills is called Consent; by which we must not understand one
Will of many Men (for every Man has his several Will) but many Wills to the
producing of one Effect: But when the Wills of two diverse Men produce such
Actions as are reciprocally resistant one to the other, this is called
Contention; and, being upon the Persons one of another, Battle: whereas Actions
proceeding from Consent, are mutual Aid.

8. When many Wills are involved or included in the Will of one or more
consenting, (which how it may be, shall be hereafter declared) then is that
involving of many Wills in one or more, called Union.

9. In Deliberations interrupted, as they may be by Diversion of other
Business, or by Sleep, the last Appetite of such Part of the Deliberation is
called Intention, or Purpose.

CHAP. XIII.
1. HAving spoken of the Powers and Acts of the Mind, both cognitive and
motive, considered in every Man by himself, without Relation to other^; it will
fall fitly into this Chapter, to speak of the Effects of the same Power one
upon another; which Effects are also the Signs, by which one takes notice what
another conceives and intends. Of these Signs, some are such as cannot
easily be counterfeited; as Actions and Gestures, especially if they be sudden,
whereof I have mentioned some; (for Example, look in Chap. 9.) with the several
Passions whereof they are Signs: Others there are which may be counterfeited;
and those are Words or Speech; of the Use and Effects whereof, I am to speak in
this Place.

2. The first Use of Language, is the expression of our Conceptions, that is,
the begetting in one another the same Conceptions that we have in our selves;
and this is called Teaching; wherein, if the Conception of him that teaches
continually accompany his Words, beginning at something true in Experience,
then it begets the like Evidence in the Hearer that understands them, and
makes him to know something, which he is therefore said to learn: but if there
be not such Evidence, then such teaching is called Persuasion, and begets no
more in the Hearer, than what is in the Speakers bare Opinion. And the Signs of
two Opinions contradictory one to another; namely, Affirmation and Negation of
the same Thing, is called Controversy: but both Affirmations, or both
Negations, Consent in Opinion.

3. The infallible Sign of teaching exactly, and without error, is this, that
no Man has ever taught the Contrary: Not that few, how few soever, if any; for
commonly Truth is on the side of a few, rather than of the Multitude: But when
in Opinions and Questions considered and discussed by many, it happens that
not any one of the Men that so discussed them differ from another, then it may
be justly inferred, they know what they teach, and that otherwise they do not.
And this appears most manifestly to them that have considered the diverse
Subjects wherein they have exercised their Pens, and the diverse Ways in which
they have proceeded, together with the Diversity of the Success thereof: for,
those Men who have taken in hand to consider nothing else but the Comparison of
Magnitudes, Numbers, Times, and Motions, and how their Proportions are to one
another, have thereby been the Authors of all those Excellencies by which we
differ from such savage People as now inhabit diverse places in America; and as
have been the Inhabitants heretofore of those Countries where at this day Arts
and Sciences do most flourish: for, from the Studies of these Men, have
proceeded whatsoever comes to us for Ornament by Navigation, and whatsoever we
have beneficial to humane Society by the Division, Distinction, and
Portraicting the Face of the Earth; whatsoever also we have by the Account of
Times, and Foresight of the Course of Heaven; whatsoever by Measuring
Distances, Plains, and Solids of all Sorts; and whatsoever either elegant or
defensible in Building: All which supposed a Way, what do we differ from the
wildest of the Indians? Yet to this day was it never heard of, that there was
any Controversy concerning any Conclusion in this Subject; the Science whereof
has nevertheless been continually amplified and enriched by the Conclusions of
most difficult and profound Speculation. The Reason whereof is apparent to
every Man that looks into their Writings; for they proceed from most low and
humble Principles, evident even to the meanest Capacity; going on slowly, and
with most scrupulous Ratiocination; viz. from the Imposition of Names, they
infer the Truth of their first Propositions; and from two of the first, a
third; and from any two of the three, a fourth; and so on, according to the
Steps of Science, mentioned Chap. 6. Sect. 4. On the other side, those Men who
have written concerning the Faculties, Passions, and Manners of Men, that is to
say; of Moral Philosophy, and of Policy, Government, and Laws, whereof there be
infinite Volumes, have been so far from removing Doubt and Controversy in the
Questions they have handled, that they have very much multiplied the same: Nor
does any Man at this day so much as pretend to know more than has been
delivered Two thousand Years ago by Aristotle: and yet every Man thinks that in
this Subject he knows as much as any other; supposing there needs thereunto
no Study but that accrueth unto them by natural Wit; though they play, or
employ their Mind otherwise in the Purchase of Wealth or Place. The Reason
whereof is no other, than that in their Writings and Discourses they take for
Principles those Opnions which are already vulgarly received; whether true or
false, being for the most part false. There is therefore a great deal of
Difference between Teaching and Persuading; the Sign of this being
Controversy; the Sign of the former, no Controversy.

4. There be two Sorts of Men that commonly be called learned: One is that Sort
that proceeds evidently from humble Principles, as is described in the last
Section; and those Men are called Mathematici: The other are they that take up
Maxims from their Education, and from the Authority of Men, or of Custom, and
take the habitual Discourse of the Tongue for Ratiocination; and these are
called Dogmatici. Now seeing in the last Section those we call Mathematici are
absolved of the Crime of breeding Controversy, and they that pretend not to
Learning cannot be accused, the Fault lies altogether in the Dogmaticks, that
is to say, those that are imperfectly learned, and with Passion press to have
their Opinions pass every where for Truth, without any evident Demonstration
either from Experience, or from Places of Scripture of uncontroverted
Interpretation.

5. The Expression of those Conceptions which cause in us the Experience of
Good while we deliberate, as also of those which cause our Expectation of Evil,
is that which we call Counselling, and is the internal Deliberation of the Mind
concerning what we our selves are to do or not to do. The Consequences of our
Actions are our Counselors, by alternate Succession in the Mind. So in the
Counsel which a Man takes from other Men, the Counselors alternately do make
appear the Consequences of the Action, and do not any of them deliberate, but
furnish among them all, him that is counseled with Arguments whereupon to
deliberate with himself.

6. Another Use of Speech is Expression of Appetite, Intention, and Will; as
the Appetite of Knowledge by Interrogation; Appetite to have a Thing done by
another, as Request, Prayer, Petition: Expressions of our Purpose or intention,
as Promise, which is the Affirmation or Negation of some Action to be done in
the future: Threatening, which is the Promise of Evil; and Commanding, which is
that Speech by which we signify to another our Appetite or Desire to have any
Thing done, or left undone, for Reasons contained in the Will it self: For it
is not properly said, Sic volo, sic jubeo, without that other Clause, Stet pro
Ratione Voluntas: And when the Command is a sufficient Reason to move us to
Action, then is that Command called a Law.

7. Another Use of Speech is Instigation and Appeasing, by which we increase or
diminish one another Passion: It is the same Thing with Persuasion; the
Difference not being real; for, the Begetting of Opinion and Passion is the
same. But whereas in Persuasion we aim at Getting Opinion from Passion; here,
the End is, to raise Passion from Opinion. And as in raising an Opinion from
Passion, any Premises are good enough to enforce the desired Conclusion; so,
in raising Passion from Opinion, it is no matter whether the Opinion be true or
false, or the Narration historical or fabulous: for, not the Truth, but the
Image, makes Passion: and a Tragedy, well acted, affects no less than a
Murder.

8. Though words be the Signs we have of one another Opinions and Intentions,
because the Aequivocation of them is so frequent according to the Diversity of
Contexture, and of the Company wherewith they go, which, the Presence of him
that speaks, our Sight of his Actions, and Conjecture of his Intentions, must
help to discharge us of; it must therefore be extreme hard to find the Opinions
and Meaning of those Men that are gone from us long ago, and have left us no
other Signification thereof than their Books, which cannot possibly be
understood without History, to discover those aforementioned Circumstances, and
also without great Prudence to observe them.

9. When it happens that a Man signifies unto us two contradictory Opinions,
whereof the one is clearly and directly signified, and the other either drawn
from that by Consequence, or not known to be contradictory to it; then (when he
is not present to explicate himself better) we are to take the former for his
Opinion; for that is clearly signified to be his, and directly; whereas the
other might proceed from error in the Deduction, or Ignorance of the
Repugnancy. The like also is to be held in two contradictory Expressions of a
Man's Intention and Will, for the same Reason.

10. Forasmuch as whosoever speaks to another, intends thereby to make him
understand what he says, if he speak unto him either in a Language which he
that hears understands not, or use any Word in other Sense than he
believes is the Sense of him that hears, he intends also not to make him
understand what he says; which is a Contradiction of himself. It is therefore
always to be supposed, that he which intends not to deceive, allows the
private Interpretation of his Speech to him to whom it is addressed.

11. Silence, in him that believes that the same shall be taken for a Sign of
his Intent, is a Sign thereof indeed: for, if he did not consent, the Labor of
Speaking so much as to declare the same, is so little, as it is to be presumed
he would have done it.

CONCLUSION.
THus have we considered the Nature of Man so far as was requisite for the
finding out the first and most simple Elements wherein the Compositions of
Politic Rules and Laws are lastly resolved; which was my present Purpose.

FINIS.

