De Corpore Politico. OR THE ELEMENTS OF LAW, Moral and Politic. WITH
Discourses upon several Heads; as Of The Law of Nature. Oaths and Covenants.
Several kinds of Government.

With the Changes and Revolutions of them.

By Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for J. Ridley, and are to be sold at the Castle in
Fleetstreet, by Ram-Alley. 1652.

To The Reader.
Reader,
YOu may be pleased to take notice, That the first Part of the Work depends
upon a former Treatise of Humane Nature written by Mr. Hobbs, and by a Friend
of his committed to the Press for the benefit of Mankind. It was thought fit,
that nothing of so worthy an Author should be left unprinted, especially
considering, that this Piece is most useful for the Society of reasona^le
Creatures, being the Grounds and Principles of Policy, without which there
would be nothing but Confusion in the World. I am confident, if men's Minds were
but truly fixed upon the Center of this Discourse, they would not prove such
Weather-cocks, to be turned about with the wind of every false Doctrine, and
vain Opinion. We should then be free from those Disorders which threaten
distraction to the Soul, and Destruction to the Common Wealth. But let others
write never so well, if our practice do not second their instructions, we may
be wise enough to foresee our misery, but never know how to prevent it. What
pity is it, that such rare Conclusions as these are, should produce no other
effect, but to inform our Knowledge, and confute our Conversation; whilst we
neglect the Truth that is apprehended. Yet there is some hope, that such
Observers, whose VVisdome has received the stamp of Goodness, will improve
their skill to a real Advancement of those benefits, which lie horded up in
this curious Cabinet, To whose use and behoof, these excellent notions are
commended, as the best that ever were writ in this kind, and may serve for a
general Ground and Foundation to all regular Conceptions, that concern the
Essence and Existence of Man, the Government of Kingdoms and Common-VVealths,
and by consequence our eternal Salvation.

De Corpore Politico.
CHAP. I. 1.2. Men by Nature Equal. 3. By vain glory indisposed to allow
equality with themselves, to others. 4. Apt to provoke another by Comparisons.
5. Apt to incroach one upon another. 6. Right defined. 7. Right to the End,
implies right to the Means. 8 Every Man his own Judge by Nature. 9. Every Man's
strength and knowledge for his own Use. 10. Every Man by nature has right to
all things. 11. War and Peace defined. 12. Men by noture in the state of War.
13. In Manifest Inequality, Might is Right. 14. Reason dictateth Peace.
IN a former Treatise of Humane nature already printed, has been set forth
the whole nature of Man, consisting in the Powers natural of his Body and
Mind, and may all be comprehended in these four, Strength of Body, Experinece,
Reason, and Passion.

2. In this, it will be expedient to consider in what estate of security this
our Nature has placed us, and what probability it has left us, of continuing
and preserving our selves against the violence of one another. And first, if we
consider how little Odds there is of Strength or knowledge, between Men of
Mature Age, and with how great facility he that is the weaker in strength, or
in Wit, or in both, may utterly destroy the Power of the stronger; since there
needs but little force to the taking away of a Man's life, we may conclude
that men, considered in mere Nature, ought to admit amongst themselves
Equality; and that he that claims no more, may be esteemed Moderate.

3. On the other side, considering the great difference there is in Men, from
the Diversity of their Passions, how some are vainly glorious, and hope for
precedence and superiority above their fellows, not only when they are equal
in power, but also when they are Inferior; we must needs acknowledge that it
must necessarily follow, that those men who are moderate, and look for no more
but Equality of nature, shall be obnoxious to the Force of others, that will
attempt to subdue them. And from hence shall proceed a general diffidence in
mankind, and mutual fear one of another.

4. Farther, since Men by natural passion are diverse ways offensive one to
another, every man thinking well of himself, and hating to see the same in
others, they must needs provoke one another by Words, and other signs of
contempt and hatred, which are incident to all comparison, till at last, they
must determine the pre-eminence by Strength and force of Body.

5. Moreover, considering that many men's Appetites carry them to one and the
same end; which end sometimes can neither be enjoyed in common, nor divided, it
follows, that the stronger must enjoy it alone and that it be decided by
Battle who is the stronger. And thus the Greatest part of Men, upon no
assurance of Odds, do nevertheless through Vanity, or Comparison, or Appetite,
provoke the Rest, that otherwise would be contented with Equality.

6. And forasmuch as necessity of nature makes men to will and desire Bonum
sibi, that which is good for themselves, and to avoid that which is hurtful;
but most of all, the terrible enemy of Nature, Death, from whom we expect both
the loss of all Power, and also the greatest of bodily pains in the losing:
It is not against Reason, that a man does all he can, to preserve his own body
and limbs, both from Death and Pain. And that which is not against reason, men
call Right, or Jus, or Blame^esse liberty, of using our own natural Power and
Ability. It is therefore ^ right of nature, That every man may preserve his
own life and limbs, with all the Power he has.

7. And because where a man has right to the End, and the end cannot be
attained without the Means; that is, without such things as are necessary to
the End, it is consequent that it is not against Reason, and therefore right
for a man to use all means, and do whatsoever action is necessary for the
preservation of his Body.

8. Also every man by right of Nature, is Judge himself of the necessity of the
means, and of the greatness of the Danger. For if it be against reason, that I
be Judge of mine own danger my Self, then it is reason, that another Man be
Judge thereof. But the same Reason that makes another man Judge of those
Things that concern me, makes me also Judge of that that concerns him. And
therefore I have reason to Judge of his sentence, whether it be for my benefit,
or not.

9. As a man's Judgment in right of nature is to be employed for his own
benefit, so also the Strength, Knowledge, and Art, of every man is then rightly
employed, when he uses it for himself; else must not a man have right to
preserve himself.

10. Every man by Nature has right to all Things, that is to say, to do
whatsoever he lists to whom he lists, to possess, use, and enjoy all
things he will and can. For seeing all things he wills, must therefore be Good
unto him in his own judgment, because he wills them, and may tend to his
preservation some time or other, or he may judge so, and we have made him Judge
thereof, Sect. 8. it follows, that all things may rightly also be done by
him. And for this cause it is rightly said, Natura dedil omnia omnibus, that
nature has given all things to all men; insomuch that Jus and Utile, Right and
Profit, is the same thing. But that right of all men to all things, is in
effect no better than if no man had Right to any thing. For there is little use
and benefit of the Right a Man has, when another as strong, or stronger then
himself has Right to the same.

11. Seeing then to the Offensivenesse of Man's nature one to another, there is
added a Right of every man to every thing, whereby one man invadeth with right,
and another man with Right resists, and men live thereby in perpetual
Diffidence, and study how to p^eoccupate each other: The estate of men in this
natural Liberty, is the estate of War. For War is nothing else but that Time
wherein the Will and Contention of contending by Force, is either by words or
Actions sufficiently declared; and the time which is not War, is Peace.

12. The estate of Hostility and War being such, as thereby nature it self is
destroyed, and men kill one another: (as we know also that it is, both by the
experience of Salvage Nations that live at this day, and by the Histories of
our Ancestors, the old Inhabitants of Germany, and other now civil Countries,
where we find the people few, and short-lived, and without the ornaments and
comforts of life, which by Peace and Society are usually invented and procured)
He therefore that desires to live in such an estate as is the estate of
liberty and right of all to all, contradicts himself. For every man by
natural necessity desires his own good, to which this estate is conttary,
wherein we suppose contention between men by nature equal, and able to destroy
one another.

13. Seeing this Right of Protecting our selves by our own discretion and force
proceeds from danger, and that danger from the Fquality between men's Forces,
much more reason is there, that a man prevent such Equality before the Danger
comes, and before the necessity of Battle. A man therefore that has another
man in his power to rule or govern, to do good to, or harm, has right, by the
advantage of this his present power, to take Caution at his pleasure, for his
security against that other in time to come. He therefore that has already
subdued his Adversary, or gotten into his power any other, that either by
Infancy, or weakness, is unable to resist him, by right of nature may take the
best caution, that such Infant, or such feeble and subdued person can give him,
of being ruled and governed by him for the time to come. For seeing we intend
allwaies our one safety and preservation, we manifestly contradict that our
intention, if we willingly dismiss such a one, and suffer him at once to gather
strength and be our Enemy. Out of which may also be collected, That
inresistable Might in the state of Nature is Right.

14. But since it is supposed by the Equality of strength and other natural
faculties of men, that no man is of might sufficient, to assure himself for
any long time, of preserving himself thereby, whiles he remains in the state
of Hostility and War; Reason therefore dictateth to every man for his own good,
to seek after Peace, as far forth as there is Hope to attain the same: and
strengthen himself with all the help he can procure, for his own defense
against those, from whom such Peace cannot be obtained: and to do all those
things which necessarily conduce thereunto.

CHAP. II. 1. The Law of Nature consists not in consent of men, but reason.
2. That every man devests himself of the Right he has to all things is one
precept of nature. 3. What it is to relinquish and transferr ones Right. 4. The
Will to transfer, and the will to accept, both necessary to the passing away of
Right. 5. Right not transferred by words, De futuro, only. 6. Words De futuro,
together with other signs of the Will, may transferr Right. 7. Free Gift
defined 8. Contract, and the sorts of it. 9. Covenant defined. 10. Contract of
mutual trust, is of no validity in the Estate of Hostility. 11. No Covenant of
men but with one another. 12. Covenant how dissolved. 13. Covenant extorted by
fear, in the Law of nature, valid. 14. Covenant contrary to former Covenant,
void. 15. An oath defined. 16. Oath to be administered to every man in his own
Religion. 17. Oath adds not to the Obligation. 18. Covenants bind but to
endeavor.
WHat it is we call the Law of Nature, is not agreed upon by those, that have
hitherto wtitten. For the most part such writets as have occasion to affirm,
that any thing is against the law of Nature, do allege no more than this, That
it is against the consent of all Nations, or the wisest and most civil
Nations. But it is not agreed upon, who shall judge which Nations are the
Wisest. Others make that against the Law of Nature, which is contrary to the
consent of all Mankind, which Definition cannot be allowed, because then no man
could offend against the Law of Nature; for the Nature of every man is
contained under the Nature of Mankind. But forasmuch as all men are carried
away by the violence of their Passion, and by evil customs, do those things
which are commonly said to be against the Law of Nature; It is not the consent
of Passion, or consent in some Error gotten by Custom, that makes the Law of
Nature. Reason is no less of the nature of man then Passion, and is the same in
all men, because all men agree in the Will to be directed and governed in the
way to that which they desire to attain, namely, their own Good which is the
work of Reason, there can therefore be no other Law of Nature then Reason, nor
no other Precepts of Natural Law, then those which declare unto us the ways of
Peace, where the same may be obtained, and of Defense where it may not.

2. One Precept of the Law of Nature therefore this is, That every man divest
himself of the right he has to all things by Nature. For when diverse men
having Right not only to all things else, but to one another persons, if they
use the same, there arises thereby Invasion on the one part, and Resistance on
the other, which is War, and therefore contrary to the Law of Nature, the Sum
whereof consists in making Peace.

3. Wen a man devesteth and puts from his Right, he either simply
relinquisheth it, or transferreth the same to another man. To Relinquish it, is
by sufficient signs to declare, that it is his will no more to do that Action,
which of right he might have done before. To Transfer Right to another, is by
sufficient signs to declare to that other accepting thereof, that it is his
Will not to resist, or hinder him, according to that Right he had thereto
before he transferred it. For seeing that by Nature every man has right to
every thing, it is impossible for a man to transfer unto another any right that
he had not before. And therefore all that a man does in transferring of Right,
is no more but a Declaring of the Will, to suffer him to whom he has so
transferred his Right, to make benefit of the same, without molestation. As for
example, when a man gives his Lands or Goods to another, he takes from
himself the Right to enter into, and make use of the said Lands or Goods, or
otherwise to hinder him of the Use of what he has given.

4. In transferring of Right, two things therefore are required, One on the
part of him that transferreth, which is a sufficient signification of his will
therein: The other, on the part of him to whom it is transferred which is a
sufficient signification of his Acceptance thereof. Either of these failing
the Right remains where it was: nor is it to be supposed, that he which
gives his Right to one that accepts it not, does thereby simply relinquish
it, and transfer it to whomsoever will receive it: in as much as the cause of
transferring the same to one, rather then to another, is in the one, rather
then in the rest.

5. When there appear no other Signs that a man has relinquished, or
transferred his Right, but only Words, it behooves that the same be done in
Words, that signify the present Time, or the time past, and not only the Time
to come. For he that says of the Time to come (as for example) to morrow, I
will give, declares evidently, that he has not yet given. The right therefore
remains in him to day, and so continues, till he have given actually. But he
that says, I give, presently, or have given to another any thing, to have and
enjoy the same to morrow, or any other time future, has now actually
transferred the said Right, which otherwise he should have had at the time that
the other is to enjoy it.

6. But because words alone are not a sufficient Declaration of the mind, as
has been showed, Chap. 13. Sect. 8 Words spoken, De Futuro, when the Will of
him that speaks them may be gathered by other Signs, may be taken very often,
as if they were meant De Praesenti. For when it appears, that he that gives,
would have his words so understood by him to whom he gives, as if he did
actually transfe^r his Right, then he must needs be understood to will all that
is necessary to the same.

7. When a man transferreth any right of His to another, without consideration
of reciprocal benefit past, present, or to come, this is called Free Gift. And
in Free Gift, no other words can be binding, but those which are De Praesenti,
or De Praeterito. For being De Futuro only, they transfer nothing, nor can they
be understood, as if they proceeded from the will of the Giver; because being a
Free Gift, it carries with it no Obligation greater then that which is
enforced by the Words. For he that promises to give, without any other
consideration but his own affection, so long as he has not given, deliberateth
still, according as the causes of the Affections continue, or diminish: And he
that deliberateth, has not yet willed, because the will is the last Act of his
deliberation. He that promises therefore, is not thereby a Donor, but Doson;
which name was given to that Antiochus, that promised often, but seldom gave.

8. When a man transferreth his Right upon consideration of reciprocal benefit,
this is not Free Gift, but mutual Donation, and is called Contract. And in all
Contracts, either both Parties presently perform, and put each other into a
certainty and assurance of enjoying what they contract for. As when men buy or
sell, or barter: Or one Party performs presently, and the other promises, as
when one sells upon Trust: Or else neither Party performs presently, but
trust one another. And it is impossible there should be any kind of Contract
besides these three. For either both the Contractors trust, or neither, or else
one trusts, and the other not.

9. In all Contracts where there is trust, the promise of him that is trusted,
is called a Covenant. And this though it be a promise, and of the time to come,
yet does it transfer the Right, when that time comes, no less then an actual
Donation. For it is a manifest sign, that he which did perform, understood it
was the Will of him that was trusted, to perform also. Promises therefore,
upon consideration of reciprocal benefit, are Covenants and signs of the will,
or last Act of Deliberation, whereby the liberty of performing, or not
performing, is taken away, and consequently are obligatory. For where Liberty
cease, there begins Obligation.

10. Nevertheless, in Contracts that consist of such mutual trust, as that
nothing be by either Party performed for the present, when the Contract is
between such as are not compellable, he that performs first, considering the
disposition of men to take advantage of every thing for their benefit, does but
betray himself thereby to the Covetousness or other Passion of Him with whom
he contracteth. And therefore such Covenants are of none effect. For there is
no reason why the one should perform first, if the other be likely not to
perform afterward. And whether he be likely or not, He that doubts shall be
Judge himself, as has been said, Chap. 1. Sect. 8. as long as they remain in
the Estate and Liberty of Nature. But when there shall be such Power Coercive
over both the Parties, as shall deprive them of their private Judgments in
this point, then may such Covenants be effectual, seeing he that performs
first shall have no reasonable cause to doubt of the performance of the other,
that may be compelled thereunto.

11. And forasmuch as in all Covenants, and Contracts, and Donations, the
Acceptance of him to whom the Right is transferred, is necessary to the Essence
of those Covenants, Donations, etc. It is impossible to make a Covenant or
Donation to any, that by nature, or absence, are unable; or if able, do not
actualty declare their acceptance of the same. First of all therefore, it is
impossible for any man to make a Covenant with God Almighty, farther then it
has pleased him to declare who shall receive and accept of the said Covenant
in his name. Also it is impossible to make Covenant with those living
Creatures, of whose wills we have no sufficient sign, for want of common
language.

12. A Covenant to do any action at a certain time and place, is then dissolved
by the Covenantor, when that time comes, either by the Performance, or by the
Violation. For a Covenant is void that is once impossible. But a Covenant not
to do without time limited, which is as much as to say, a Covenant never to do,
is dissolved by the Covenantor then only, when he violateth it or dies. And
generally, all Covenants are dischargeable by the Covenantee, to whose benefit,
and by whose right, he that makes the Covenant is obliged. This Right
therefore of the Covenantee relinquished, is a release of the Covenant. And
universally, for the same reason, all Obligations are determinable at the will
of the Obliger.

13. It is a Question often moved, Whether such Covenants oblige, as are
extorted from men by Fear. As for example, Whether if a man for fear of Death,
has promised to give a Thief an hundred pounds the next day, and not discover
him, whether such Covenant be obligatory, or not. And though in some Cases such
Covenant may be void, yet it is not therefore void, because extorted by Fear.
For there appears no reason, why that which we do upon Fear, should be less
firm then that which we do for Covetousness. For both the One and the Other
makes the Action Voluntary. And if no Covenant should be good, that proceeds
from fear of Death, no conditions of Peace between Enemies, nor any Laws,
could be of Force, which are all consented to from that Fear. For who would
lose the liberty that nature has given him, of governing himself by his own
will and power, if they feared not Death in the retaining of it? What Prisoner
in War might be trusted to seek his Ransom, and ought not rather to be killed,
if he were not tied by the Grant of his life, to perform his Promise? But after
the Introduction of Policy and Laws, the case may alter, for if by the Law the
performance of such a Covenant be forbidden, then he that promises any thing
to a Theif, not only may, but must refuse to perform it. But if the Law forbid
not the performance, but leave it to the will of the Promiser, then is the
performance still lawful; and the Covenant of things lawful is obligatory,
even toward a Theif.

14. He that gives, promises, or covenanteth to one, and after gives,
promises, or covenanteth the same to another, makes void the later Act. For
it is impossible for a man to transfer that Right which he himself has not;
and that Right he has not, which he himself has before transferred.

15. An Oath is a clause annexed to a Promise, containing a Renuntiation of
Gods mercy by him that promises, in case he perform not as far as is lawful
and possible for him to do. And this appears by the words which make the
Essence of the Oath, So help me God. So also was it amongst the Heathen. And
the form of the Romans was, Thou Jupiter kill him that breaks, as I kill
this Beast. The Intention therefore of an Oath being to provoke Vengeance upon
the Breakers of Covenant; it is to no purpose to swear by Men, be they never
so great, because their punishment by diverse Accidents may be avoided, whether
they will or no, but Gods Punishment not. Though it were a Custom of many
Nations, to swear by the life of their Princes; yet those Princes being
ambitious of Divine Honor, give sufficient Testimony, that they believed,
Nothing ought to be sworn by, but the Deity.

16. And seeing men cannot be afraid of the Power they believe not, and an Oath
is to no purpose, without fear of him they swear by, it is necessary that he
that swears, do it in that form which himself admits in his own
Religion, and not in that form which he uses, that puts him to the oath.
For though all men may know by nature, that there is an Almighty Power,
nevertheless they believe not, that they swear by him in any other form or
name, then what their own (which they think the true) Religion teaches them.

17. And by the definition of an Oath, it appears, that it adds not a
greater Obligation to perform the Covenant sworn, then the Covenant carries
in it self, but it puts a man into greater danger, and of greater punishment.

18 Covenants and Oaths are De Voluntariis, that is, De Possibilibus. Nor can
the Covenantee understand the Covenantor to promise Impossibles; for they fall
not under Deliberation: and consequently (by Chap. 13. Sect. 10. which makes
the Covenanter Interpreter) no Covenant is understood to bind further, then to
our best endervour, either in performance of the thing promised, or in
something Equivalent.

CHAP. III. 1. That men stand to their Covenants. 2. Injury defined. 3. That
Injury is done only to the Covenantee. 4. The signification of those Names,
Just, Unjust. 5. Justice not rightly divided into Commutative, and
Distributive. 6. It is a Law of Nature, that He that is trusted, turn not that
trust to the Damage of Him that trusts. 7. Ingratitude defined. 8. It is a
Law of Nature, to endeavor to accommodate one another. 9. And that man forgive
upon caution for the future. 10. And that revenge ought to respect the future
only. 11. That reproach and contempt declared, is against the Law of Nature.
12. That Indifference of Commerce is of the law of nature. 13. That Messengers
employed to procure or maintain Peace, ought to be safe by the Law of Nature.
IT is a common saying, that nature makes nothing in vain. And it is most
certain, that as the truth of a conclusion, is no more but the truth of the
premises that make it, so the force of the Command, or Law of Nature, is no
more then the Force of the Reasons inducing thereunto. Therefore the Law of
Nature mentioned in the former Chapter, Sect. 2. namely, That every man should
divest himself of the Right, etc. were utterly vain, and of none effect, if
this also were not a Law of the same Nature, That every man is obliged to stand
to, and perform, those Covenants he makes. For what benefit is it to a man
that any thing be promised, or given unto him, if he that gives, or promises,
performs not, or retains still the Right of taking back what he has given?

2. The breach or violation of Covenant, is that which men call Injury,
consisting in some Action or Omission, which is therefore called Unjust. For it
is Action or Omission without Jus, or right, which was transferred or
relinquish before. There is a great Similitude between that we call Injury, or
Injustice in the Actions and Conversations of Men in the World, and that which
is called Absurd in the arguments and Disputations of the Schools. For as he
which is driven to contradict an Assertion by Him before maintained, is said to
be reduced to an Absurdity; so he that through passion does, or omitteth that
which before by Covenant he promised to do, or not to omit, is said to commit
Injustice: And there is in every breach of Covenant a contradiction properly so
called. For he that covenanteth, wills to do, or omit, in the time to come.
And he that does any Action, wills it in that present, which is part of the
future time contained in the Covenant. And therefore he that violateth a
Covenant, wills the Doing and the not doing of the same thing, at the same
time, which is a plain contradiction. And so Injury is an Absurdity of
conversation, as Absurdity is a kind of Injustice in Disputation.

3. In all violation of Covenant (to whom soever accrueth the Damage) the
Injury is done only to him to whom the Covenant was made. For example, If a
man covenant to obey his Master, and the Master command him to give Money to a
Third, which he promises to do, and does not, though this be to the Damage of
the third, yet the Injury is done to the Master only. For he could violate no
covenant with him with whom none was made, and therefore does him no Injury.
For Injury consists in violation of covenant, by the definition thereof.

4. The Name of Just, Unjust, Justice, Injustice; are Equivocall, and signify
diversely. For Justice and Injustice, when they be attributed to Actions,
signify the same thing with No Injury, and Injury, and denominate the Action
Just, or Unjust, but not the Man so. For they denominate him Guilty or Not
Guilty. But when Justice or Injustice, are attributed to Men, they signify
Pronenesse, and Affection, and Inclination of Nature, that is to say, Passions
of the mind, apt to produce Just and unjust Actions. So that when a man is
said to be Just, or Unjust; not the Action, but the Passion and Aptitude, to do
such Actions, is considered. And therefore a Just man may have committed an
unjust Act; and an unjust man may have done justly, not only one, but most of
his actions. For there ts an Oderunt peccare in the unjust as well as in the
Just, but from different Causes. For the unjust man who abstaineth from
Injuries for fear of punishment, declares plainly, that the Justice of his
Actions depends upon Civil Constitution, from whence punishments proceed,
which would otherwise in the Estate of Nature be unjust, according to the
Fountain from whence they spring. This distinction therefore of Justice and
Injustice, ought to be remembered, that when Injustice is taken for Guilty, the
Action is unjust, but not therefore the Man; and when Justice is taken for
Guiltlesness, the Actions are just, and yet not always the Man. Likewise when
Justice and Injustice are taken for habits of the mind, the Man may be just, or
unjust, and yet not all his Actions so.

5. Concerning the Justice of Actions, the same is usually divided into two
kinds, whereof men call the one Commutative, and the other Distributive; and are
said to consist, the one in proportion Arithmetical, the other in Geometrical:
And Commutative Justice, they place in Permutation, as Buying, Seling, and
Barter; Distributive, in giving to every man according to their deserts. Which
distinction is not well made, in as much as Injury, which is the Injustice of
Action, consists not in the Inequality of the things changed, or distributed,
but in the Inequality that men (contrary to nature and reason) assume unto
themselves above their Fellows. Of which Inequality, shall be spoken
hereafter. And for Commutative Justice placed in Buying and Selling, though the
thing bought be unequal to the price given for it; yet for as much as both the
Buyer and the seller are made Judges of (...) Value, and are thereby both
satisfied, there can be no Injury done on either side, neither Party having
trusted, or covenanted with the other. And for Distributive Justice, which
consists in the Distribution of our own benefits, seeing a thing is therefore
said to be our own, because we may dispose of it at our own pleasure, it can be
no Injury to any man, though our liberality be farther extended toward
another, then toward him; unless we be thereto obliged by Covenant: and then
the Injustice consists in the Violation of that Covenant, and not in the
Inequality of Distribution.

6. It happens many times, that man benefitteth, or contributeth to the Power
of another, without any Covenant, but only upon confidence and trust of
obtaining the grace and favor of that other, whereby he may procure a greater,
or no less benefit and assistance to himself. For hy necessity of Nature,
every man does in all his voluntary Actions intend some good unto Himself. In
this Case it is a Law of nature, That no man suffer him, that thus trusts to
his Charity, or good affection toward him, to be in the worse Estate for his
trusting. For if he shall so do, men will not dare to confer mutually to each
others defense, nor put themselves into each others mercy, upon any terms
whatsoever, but rather abide the utmost and worst even of Hostility, by which
general diffidence, men will not only be enforced to War, but also afraid to
come so much within the danger of one another, as to make any Overture of
Peace. But this is te be understood of those only, that confer their benefits
(as I have said) upon trust only, and not for triumph or ostentation. For as
when they do it upon trust, the End they aimed at, namely to be well used, is
the Reward; so also when they do it for Ostentation, they have the Reward in
themselves.

2. But seeing in this Case there passes no Covenant, the breach of this Law
of nature is not to be called Injury. It has another Name, to wit, Ingratitude.

8. It is also a Law of Nature. That every man do help and endeavor to
accommodate each other as far as may be, without danger of their Persons, and
loss of their Means, to maintain and defend themselves. For seeing the Causes
of War and Desolation proceed from those Passions, by which we strive to
accommodate our selves, and to leave others as far as we can behind us, it
follows, that tha^ Passion by which we strive mutually to accommadate each
ather, must be the cause of Peace. And this Passion is that Charity defined,
Chap. 9. Sect. 17.

9. And in this Precept of Nature, is included and comprehended also this, That
man forgive and pardon him that has done him wrong, upon his repentance and
caution for the Future. For Pardon, is Peace granted to him that (having
provoked to War) demands it. It is not therefore Charity, but Fear, when a
man gives Peace to him that repents not, nor gives caution for maintaining
thereof in the time to come. For he that repents not, remains with the
affection of an Enemy; as also does he that refuses to give caution, and
consequently, is presumed not to seek after Peace, but advantage. And therefore
to forgive Him is not commanded in this Law of nature, nor is Charity, but may
sometime be prudence. Otherwise, not to pardon upon repentance and caution,
considering men cannot abstain from provoking one another, is never to give
Peace. And that is against the general definition of the Law of Nature.

10. And seeing the Law of Nature commands Pardon, when there is repentance
and caution for the Future, it follows, that the same Law ordains, That no
Revenge be taken upon the consideration only of the offense past, but of the
benefit to come, that is to say, That all Revenge ought to tend to amendment,
either of the Person offending, or of others, by the example of his punishment;
which is sufficiently apparent, in that the Law of Nature commands Pardon,
where the future time is secured. The same is also apparent by this, That
revenge when it considers the offense past, is nothing else, but present
Triumph and Glory, and directs to no End: and what is directed to no end, is
therefore unprofitable; and consequently the Triumph of Revenge, is Vainglory:
And whatsoever is vain, is against Reason; and to hurt one another without
Reason, is contrary to that, which by supposition is every man's Benefit, namely
Peace, and what is contrary to peace, is contrary to the Law of Nature.

11. And because all signs which we show to one another of Hatred and Contempt,
provoke in the highest degree to Quarrel and Battle, (in as much as Life it
self, with the condition of enduring scorn, is not esteemed worth the enjoying,
much less Peace) it must necessarily be employed as a Law of Nature, That no
man reproach, revile, deride, or any otherwise declare his Hatred, Contempt, or
Disesteem of any other. But this Law is very little practiced. For what is more
ordinary then reproaches of those that are rich, toward them that are not? or
of those that sit in place of Judicature, toward those that are accused at the
Bar? although to greive them in that manner, be no part of the punishment for
their Crime, nor contained in their Office. But Use has prevailed, That what
was lawful in the Lord toward the Servant whom he maintains, is also
practiced a^ lawful in the more Mighty toward the less though they contribute
nothing toward their maintenance.

12. It is also a Law of Nature, That one man allow Commerce and Traffic
indifferently to one another. For he that allows that to one man, which he
denies to another, declares his hatred to Him, to whom he denies. And to
declare Hatred, is War. And upon this title was grounded, the great War
between the Athenians, and the Peloponnesians. For would the Athenians have
condescended to suffer the Megareans, their Neighbors, to traffic in their
Ports, and Markets, that War had not begun.

13. And this also is a Law of Nature, That all Messengers of Peace, and such
as are employed to procure and maintain Amity between Man and Man, may safely
come and go. For seeing Peace is the general Law of Nature, the means thereto
(such as are these men) must in the same Law be comprehended.

CHAP. IV. 1. A Law of Nature, that every man acknowledge other for his Equal.
2. Another, That men allow aequalia aequalibus. 3. Another, that those things
which cannot be divided, be used in common. 4. Another, That things indivisible
and incommunicable, be divided by Lot. 5. Natural Lot, Primogeniture, and first
possession. 6. That men submit to arbitration. 7. Of an Arbitrator. 8. That no
man press his counsel upon any man against his will. 9. How to know suddenly
what is the Law of Nature. 10. That the Law of Nature takes place after
security from others to observe the same. 11. The Right of Nature not to be
taken away by Custom, nor the Law of Nature abrogated by any Act. 12. Why the
Dictates of Nature are called Laws. 13. Whatsoever is against Conscience in a
man that is his own Judge, is against the Law of Nature. 14. Of Malum Poenae,
Malum Culpae; Virtue and Vice. 15. Aptitude to society, fulfilleth the Law of
Nature.
THe Question which is the Better man, is determinable only in the Estate o^
Government and Policy, though it be mistaken for a Question of Nature, not
only by Ignorant men, that think One man Blood better then Another by
Nature, but also by Him, whose Opinions are at this day and in these parts, of
greater authority then any other humane writings. For he puttet so much
difference between the Powers (...) men by Nature, that he doubts not to s^
down as the ground of all his Politic, That some men are by Nature worthy to
govern and Others by Nature ought to serve Which Foundation has not only
weakne^ the whole Frame of his Politics, but has also given men Color and
Pretenses, whereby to disturb and hinder the Peace of one another. For though
there were such a Difference of Nature, that Master and Servant were not by
consent of men, but by Inherent Virtue, yet who has that Eminency of Virtue
above others and who is so stupid, as not to govern himself, shall never be
agreed upon amongst men, who do every one naturally think himself, as able, at
the least to govern another, as another to govern him. And when there was any
contention between the Finer and the Courser Wits, (as there has been often in
Times of Sedition and Civil War) for the most part, these latter carried away
the Victory; and as long as men arrogate to themselves more Honor then they
give to others, it cannot be imagined, how they can possibly live in Peace: and
consequently we are to suppose, that for Peace sake, Nature has ordained this
Law, That every man acknowledge other for his Equal. And the Breach of this
Law, is that we call Pride.

2. As it was necessary that a man should not retain his Right to every thing,
so also was it, that he should retain his right to some Things; to his own Body
(for example) the Right of Defending, whereof he could not transfer; To the Use
of Fire, water, Free Air, and Place to live in, and to all things necessary
for Life. Nor does the Law of Nature command any devesting of other Rights,
then of those only which cannot be retained without the loss of Peace. Seeing
then many Rights are retained, when we enter into peace one with another,
Reason and the Law of Nature dictateth, Whatsoever Right any man requires to
retain, he allow every other man to retain the same. For he that does not so,
allows not the Equality mentioned in the former Section. For there is no
acknowledgement of Worth, without attribution of the Equality of Benefit and
Respect. And this allowance of aequalia aequalibus, is the same thing with the
allowing of Proportionalia Proportionalibus. For when a man allows to every
man a like, the allowance he makes, will be in the same proportion, in which
are the Numbers of men to whom they are made. And this is it men mean by
distributive Justice, and is properly termed Equity. The Breach of this Law is
that which the Greeks call (...), which is commonly rendered coveteousness, but
seems to be more precisely expressed by the word Incroaching.

3. If there pass no other Covenant, the Law of Nature is, That such things as
cannot be divided, be used in common, proportionably to the numbers of them
that are to use the same, or without Limitation, when the Quantity thereof
suffices. For first supposing the thing to be used in common, not sufficient
for them, that are to use it without Limitation, if a few shall make more use
thereof then the rest, that equality is not observed, which is required in the
second Section. And this is to be understood, as all the rest of the Laws of
Nature, without any other Covenant antecedent: for a man may have given away
his Right of Common, and so the case be altered.

4. In those things which neither can be divided, nor used in common, the Rule
of Nature must needs be one of these, Lot, or Alternate use: for besides these
two ways, there can no other equality be imagined; and for alternate Use, he
that begins, has the advantage; and to reduce that advantage to Equality,
there is no other way but Lot. In things therefore indivisible and
incommunicable, it is the Law of Nature, That the Use be alternate, or the
Advantage given away by Lot; because there is no other way of Equality. And
Equality is the Law of Nature.

5. There be two sorts of Lots; One Arbitrary, made by men, and commonly known
by the Names of Lot, Chance, Hazard, and the like; and there is Natural Lot,
such as is Primogeniture, which is no more but the Chance, or Lot, of being
first born, which it seems they considered, that call Inheritance by the name
of Kleronomia, which signifies Distribution by Lot. Secondly, Prima occupatio,
first feizing, or finding of a thing whereof no man made Use before, which for
the most part also is merely Chance.

6. Although men agree upon these Laws of Nature, and endeavor to observe the
same; yet considering the Passions of men, that make it difficult to understand
by what actions, and circumstances of Actions, those Laws are broken, there
must needs arise many great controversies about the Interpretation thereof, by
which the peace must need^ be dissolved, and men return again to their former
estate of hostility. For the taking away of which Controversies, it is
necessary that there be some common Arbitrator and Judge, to whose sentence,
both the Parties to the Controversies ought to stand. And therefore it is a Law
of Nature, That in every Controversy, the Parties thereto ought mutual^^ to
agree upon an Arb^trator, whom they bot^ trust, and mutually to covenant to
stand to the Sentence he shall give ther^in. For where every man is his own
Judge, there properly is no Judge at all; as wh^re every man ca^veth out his own
right, it has the same effect, as if there were no right at all: and where is
no Judge, there is no End of Controversy* And therefore the Right of Hostility
remains.

7. An Arbitrator therefore, or he that is Judge, is trusted by the Parties to
any controversy, to determine the same by the Declaration of his own Judgment
therein. Out of which follows first, that the Judge ought not to be concerned
in the Controversy he ends; for in that case he is a Party, and ought by the
same Reason to be judged by another. Secondly, that he makes no Covenant with
either of the Parties, to pronounce sentence for the One, more then for the
Other. Nor does he covenant so much, as that his sentence shall be just; for
that were to make the Parties Judges of the Sentence, whereby the Controversy
would remain still undecided. Nevertheless for the Trust reposed in him, and
for the Equality which the law of nature requires him to consider in the
Parties, he violateth that Law, if for favor, or hatred to either party, he
give other sentence then he thinks Right. And thirdly, that no man ought to
make himself Judge in any Controversy between others, unless they consent and
agree thereto.

8. It is also the Law of Nature, That no man obtrude or press his Advice or
Counsel to any man, that declares himself unwil^ing to hear the same. For
seeing a man takes Counsel concerning what is Good or Hurt of himself only,
and not of his Counselor, and that Counsel is a Voluntary Action, and
therefore tends also to the good of the Counselor, there may be often just
cause to suspect the Counselor: and though there be none, yet seeing Counsel
unwillingly heard, is a needless offense to him that is not willing to hear
it, and offenses tend all to the Breach of Peace, it is therefore against the
Law of Nature to obtrude it.

9. A man that shall see these Laws of Nature set down and inferred with so
many words, and so much ado, may think there is yet much more difficulty and
subtilty required to acknowledge and do according to to the said Laws in every
sudden occasion, when a man has but a little time to consider. And while we
consider man in most passions, as of Anger, Ambition, Coveteousness,
Vainglory, and the like, that tend to the excluding of natural Equality, it is
true. But without these Passions, there an easy rule to know upon a sudden,
whether the Action I be to do, be against the Law of Nature, or not. And it is
but this; That a man imagine Himself in the Place of the Party with whom He
has to do, and reciprocally him in His. Which is no more but a changing (as it
were) of the Scales. For every man's Passion weighs heavy in his own Scale,
but in the Scale of his Neighbor. And this Rule is very well known and
expressed in this Old Dictate, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.

10. These Laws of Nature, the Sum whereof consists, in forbidding us to be
our own Judges, and our own Carvers, and in commanding us to accommodate one
another; In case they should be observed by some, and not by others, would make
the Observers but a prey to them that should neglect them, leaving the good
both without Defense against the Wicked, and also with a Charge to assist them:
which is against the scope of the said Laws, that are made only for the
protection, and defense of them that keep them. Reason therefore, and the Law
of Nature over and above all these particular Laws, does dictate this Law in
general, That those particular Laws be so far observed, as they subi^ct us not
to any Incommodity, that in ou^ own Judgments may arise, by the neglect
thereof in those toward whem we observe them; and consequently requires no
more, but the Desire and constant Intention to endeavor, and be ready to
observe them, unless there be cause to the contrary in other men's refusal to
observe them toward us. The Force therefore of the Law of Nature, is not in
foro externo, till there be security for men to obey it, but is always In foro
interno, wherein the Action of obedience being unsafe, the Will and Readiness
to perform, is taken for the Performance.

11. Amongst the Laws of Nature, Customs and Prescriptions are not numbered.
For whatsoever Action is against Reason, though it be reiterated never so
often, or that there be never so many Precedents thereof, is still against
Reason, and therefore not a Law of Nature, but contrary to it. But consent and
Covenant may so alter the Cases, which in the Law of Nature may be put by
changing the Circumstances, that that which was Reason before, may afterward
be against it; and yet is Reason still the Law. For though every man be bound
to allow equally to another, yet if that other shall see cause to renounce the
same, and make himself inferior, then, if from thenceforth he consider him as
inferior, he breaks not thereby that Law of Nature, that commands to allow^
Equallity. In sum, A man's own Cons^nt may abridge him of the liberty which the
Law of Nature leaves him, but custom not; nor can either of them abrogate
either these, or any other Law of Nature.

12. And forasmuch as Law (to speak properly) is a Command, and these Dictates
as they proceed from Nature, are not Commands, they are not therefore called
Laws, in respect of Nature, but in respect of the Author of Nature, God
Almighty.

13. And seeing the Laws of Nature concern the Conscience, not he only breaks
them that does any Action contrary, but also he whose action is conformable to
them, in case he think it contrary. For though the Action chance to be right,
yet in his Judgment he despises the Law.

14. Every man by natural passion, calls that Good which pleases him for
the present, or so far forth as he can foresee; and in like manner, that which
displeases him, Evil. And therefore he that foreseeth the whole way to his
Proservation, (which is the End that every one by nature aymeth at,) must also
call it good, and the contrary evil. And this is that Good and Evil, which not
every man in passion calls so, but all men by Reason. And therefore the
fulfilling of all these Laws is Good in Reason, and the breaking of them Evil.
And so also the habit, or disposition, or intention to fulfill them Good; and
the Neglect of them Evil. And from hence comes that Distinction of Malum
Poen^, and Malum Culpae,; for Malum P^n^ is any pain or molestation of the Mind
whatsoever; but Malum Culpae is that action which is contrary to Reason, and
the Law of Nature: As also the habit of doing according to these and other Laws
of Nature, that tend to our preservation, is that we call Virtue, and the
Habit of doing the contrary, Vice. As for Example, Justice is that Habit by
which we stand to Covenants, Injustice the contrary Vice; Equity that Habit by
which we allow Equality of Nature, Arrogance the contrary Vice; Gratitude the
Habit whereby we requite the Benefit and trust of others, Ingratitude the
contrary Vice; Temperance the Habit, by which we abstain from all things that
tend to our Destruction, Intemperance the contrary Vice; Prudence the same with
Virtue in general. As for the common opin^on, that Virtue consists in
Mediocrity and Vice in extremes, I see no ground for it, nor can find any such
Mediocrity. Courage may be Virtue, when the Daring is Extreme, if the Cause be
Good; and extreme fear no Vice, when the danger is Extreme. To give a man more
then his Due, is no injustice, though it be to give him less: and in Gifts, it
is not the sum that makes liberality, but the reason. And so in all other
Virtues and Vices. I know that this Doctrine of Mediocrity is Aristole's, but
^is Opinions concerning Virtue and Vice, are no other then those which were
received then, and are still by the generality of men, unstudyed, and therefore
not very likely to be accurate.

15. The Sum of Virtue is to be Sociable with them that will be Soc^able, and
Formidable to them that will not. And the same is the Sum of the Law of Nature:
For in being Sociable, the Law of Nature takes place by the way of Peace and
Society; and to be Formidable, is the Law of Nature in War, where to be feared
is a Protection a man has from his own Power: and as the ^ormer consists in
Actions of Equity and Justice, the latter consists in Actions of Honor. And
Equity, Justice, and Honor, contain all virtues whatsoever.

CHAP. V. A Confirmation out of holy Scripture of the principal points
mentioned in the two last Chapters concerning the Law of Nature.
THe Laws mentioned in the former Chapters, as they are called the Laws of
Nature, for that they are the Dictates of Natural Reason, and also Moral
Laws, because they concern the Manners and Conversation, one toward another,
so are they also Divine Laws in respect of the Author thereof, God Almighty;
and ought therefore to agree, or at least not to be Repugnant to the Word of
God, revealed in Holy Scripture. In this Chapter therefore, I shall produce
such places of Scripture, as appear to be most consonant to the said Laws.

2. And first, the Word of God seems to place the Divine Law in Reason, by
all such Texts as ascribe the same to the Heart and understanding; as Psalm.
40.8. Thy Law is in my Heart: Heb. 8.10. After those Days says the Lord, I
will put my Laws in their Mind. And Heb. 10.16. The same Psalm. 37.31. speaking
of the Righteous man he says, The Law of God in his Heart, Psalm. 19.7, 8. The
Law of God is perfect, converting the soul. It gives Wisdom to the simple,
and light unto the eyes. Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their Hearts. And Joh. 1. The Lawgiver Himself, God Almighty,
is called by the Name of (...), which is also called, ver. 4. The Light of men.
And verse. 9. The light which lights every man which comes in^o the World.
All which are Descriptions of Natural Reason.

3. And that the Law Divine, for so much as is Moral, are those Precepts which
tend to Peace, seems to be much confirmed by such places of Scripture, as
these, Rom 3.17. Righteousness (which is the fufilling of the Law) is called,
The way of Peace. And Psa. 85.10. Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each
other. And Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers. And Heb. 7.2. Melchisedeck
King of Salem, is interpreted King of Righteousness, and King of Peace. And
ver. 21. Our Savior Christ is said to be, a Priest for ever after the order of
M^lchisedeck: Out of which may be inferred, that the Doctrine of our Savior
Christ annexeth the Fulfilling of the Law to peace.

4. That the Law of Nature is unalterable, is intimated by this, that the
Preisthood of Melchisedeck is everlasting; and by the Words of our Savior,
Matthew. 5.18. Heaven and Earth, shall pass away, but one jot, or tittle of the
Law shall not pass till all things be fulfilled.

5. That Men ought to stand to their Covenants, is taught, Psalm. 15. Where the
Question being asked, verse. 1. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tavernacle, etc. It
is answered, verse. 4. He that swears to h^s own hinderance, and yet changes
not. And that men ought to be gratified, where no Covenant passes, Deuteronomy. 25.4.
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn, which S. Paul, 1 Cor.
9.9. interprets not of Oxen but of Men.

6. That men content themselves with Equality, as it is the Foundation of
Natural Law, so also is it of the second Table, of the Divine Law, Matthew. 22
39.40. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Laws depend the
whole Law and the Prophets; which is not so to be understood, as that a man
should study so much his Neighbors profit as his own, or that he should divide
his Goods amongst his Neighbors; but that he should esteem his Neighbor
worthy all Rights and Privileges that himself enjoys; and attribute unto
him, whatsoever he looks should be attributed unto himself: which is no more,
but that he should be humble, meck, and content with Equality.

7. And that in Distributing of Right amongst Equals, that Distribution is to
be made according to the Proportions of the Numbers, which is the giving of
aequalia aequalibus, and proportionalia proportionalibus; we have, Numb.
26.53.54. the Commandment of God to Moses; Thou shall divide the land
according to the Number of Names; to many thou shall give more, to few thou
shall give less, to every one according to his Number. That Decision by Lot is
a Means of Peace. Prove. 18.18. The lot causes contention to cease, and makes
Partition among the Mighty.

8. That the Accommodation and forgiveness of one another, which have before
been put for Laws of Nature, are also Law Divine, there is no Question. For
they are the Essence of Charity, which is the Scope of the whole Law, that we
ought not to repr^ach, or reprehend one another, is the Doctrine of our
Savior, Matthew. 7.1. Judge not that ye be not judged. verse. 3. Why see thou
the Mote that is in thy Brothers eye, and see not the Beam that is in thine
own eye? Also the Law that forbids us to press our Council upon others
further then they admit, is a Divine Law. For after our Charity and desire to
rectify one another is rejected, to press it farther, is to reprehend him,
and condemn him, which is forbidden in the text last recited; as also Romans
14.12. Every one of us shall give account of himself to God. Let us not
therefore judge one another any more, but use your Judgment rather in this,
that no man put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block before his Brother.

9. Farther, The Rule of men concerning the Law of Nature, Quod tibi fieri non
vis, alteri ne feceris, is confirmed by the like, Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever
therefore you would have men do unto you, that do you unto them: for this is
the Law and the Prophets. And Romans 2.1. In that thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self, etc.

10. It is also manifest by the Scriptures, That these Laws concern only the
Tribunal of our Conscience; and that the Actions contrary to them, shall be no
farther punished by God Almighty, then as they proceed from Negligence, or
Contempt. And first that these Laws are made to the Conscience, appears,
Matthew. 5.20. For I say unto you, Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Now the Pharisees were the most exact among the Jews in the
external performance; they therefore must want the sincerity of Conscience;
else could not our Savior have required a greater Righteousness then theirs.
For the same Reason our Savior Christ says, The Publican departed from the
Temple justified rather then the Pharisee. And Christ says, his Yoke is easy,
and his Burden Light, which proceeds from this, that Christ required no more
then our best Endeavor. And Romans 14.23. He that doubts is condemned, if he
eat. And in innumerable places both in the Old and New Testament, God Almighty
declares, that he takes the Will for the Deed, both in Good and Evil
Actions. By all which it plainly appears, that the Divine Law is dictated to
the Conscience One the other side is no less plain; that how many and heinous
actions soever a man commit through Infirmity, he shall nevertheless,
whenever he shall condemn the same in his own Conscience, be freed from the
punishments that to such actions otherwise belong. For at what time soever a
sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his Heart, I will put
all his Iniquties out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

11. Concerning Revenge which by the Law of Nature ought not to aim (as I have
said, Chap. 3. Sect 10.) at present delight, but future profit, there is some
difficulty mad^, as if the same accorded not with the Law Divine, by such as
object the continuance of punishment after the Day of Judgment, when there
shall be no place, neither for amendment nor for example. This Objection had
been of some force, if such punishment had been ordained after all sins were
past; but considering the punishment was instituted before sin, it serves to
the benefit of Mankind, because it keeps men in peaceable and virtuous
conversation by the terror. And therefore such Revenge was directed to the
Future only.

12. Finally, There is no Law of Natural Reason that can be against the Law
Divine: for God Almighty has given Reason to a man to be a Light unto him. And
I hope it is no Impiety to think, that God Almighty will require a strict
Account thereof, at the Day of Judgment, as of the Instructions which we were
to follow in our Peregrination here, notwithstanding the opposition and
affronts of supernaturalists now adays, to rational and moral Conversation.

CHAP. VI. 1. That men notwithstanding these Laws, are still in the State of
War, till they have security one against another. 2. The Law of Nature in War,
is nothing but Honor. 3. No Security without the Concord of many. 4. That
Concord of many cannot be maintained without power to keep them all in awe. 5.
The cause why Concord remains in a multitude of some irrational Creatures,
and not of men. 6. That Union is necessary for the maintaining of Concord. 7
How Union is made. 8. Body politic defined. 9. Corporation defined. 10.
Sovereign Subject defined. 11. Two sorsts of Bodies Politic, Patrimonia, and
Common Wealth.
IN Chap. 12. Sect. 16. of the treatise of human Nature, it has been showed
that the Opinions men have of the Rewards and Punishments which are to follow
their Actions, are the Causes that make and govern the Will to those Actions.
In this Estate of man therefore, wherein all men are equal, and every man
allowed to be his own Judge, the Fears they have one of another are equal, and
every man's hopes consist in his own slight and strength: and consequently when
any man by his natural passion, is provoked to break these Laws of Nature,
there is no security in any other man of his own Defense but Anticipation. And
for this cause, every man's right (howsoever he be inclined to peace) of doing
whatsoever seems good in his own eyes, remains with him still, as the
necessary means of his Perservation. And therefore till there be security
amongst men for the keeping of the Law of Nature one toward another, men are
still in the Estate of war, and nothing is unlawful to any man that tends to
his own safety or Commodity: And this safety and commodity consists in the
mutual aid and Help of one another, whereby also follows the mutual Fear of
one another.

2. It is a proverbiall saying, Inter arma silent Leges. There is little
therefore to be said concerning the Laws that men are to observe one toward
another in Time of War, wherein every man's Being and W^ll-being is the rule of
his Actions. Yet thus much the Law of Nature commands in War, that men
satiate not the cruelty of their present Passions, whereby in their own
Conscience they foresee no benefit to come. For that betrayeth not a necessity,
but a disposition of the mind to war, which is against the Law of Nature. And
in old Time we read, that Rapine was a Trade o^ life, wherein nevertheless many
of them that used it, did not only spare the lives of those they invaded, but
left them also such things, as were necessary to preserve that life which they
had given them; as namely, their Oxen and Instruments for Tillage, though they
carried away all their other Cattle and substance. And as the Rapine it self
was warranted in the Law of Nature, by the want of security otherwise to
maintain themselves, so the exercise of cruelty was forbidden by the same Law
of Nature, unless Fear suggested any thing to the contrary. For nothing but
Fear can just^fie the taking away of another life. And because Fear can hardly
be made manifest, but by some Action dishonorable, that bewrays the
Conscience of ones own Weakness, all men, in whom the Passion of Courage or
Magnanimity has been Predominant, have abstained from cruelty, insomuch, that
though there be in War no Law, the breach whereof is Injury, yet there are in
War those Laws the breach whereof is dishonor. In one word therefore, the
only Law of Actions in War, is Honor, and the Right of War, Providence.

3. And seeing Natural aid is necessary for Defense, as mutual fear is
necessary for Peace, we are to consider how great Ayds are required for such
Defense, and for the causing of such mutual fear, as men may not easily
adventure on one another. And first it is evident, that the mutual Aid of two
or three men is of very little security. For the odds on the other side, of a
man or two, gives sufficient encouragement to an assault. And therefore before
men have sufficient security in the help of one another, their number must be
so great, that the Odds of a few which the enemy may have, be no certain and
sensible advantage.

4. And supposing how great a number soever of men assembled together for their
mutual defense, yet shall not the effect follow, unless they all direct their
Actions to one and the same End; which direction to one and the same End is
that, which Chap. 12. Sect. 7. is called Consent. This consent (or concord)
amongst so many men, thoug^ it may be made by the fear of a present Invader, or
by the hope of a present Conquest, or Booty, and endure as long as that action
endures, nevertheless, by the Diversity of Judgments and Passions in so many
men contending naturally ^or honor and advantage one above another; it is
impossible, not only that their consent to aid each other against an enemy,
but also that the Peace should last between themselves, with out some mutual
and common fear to rule them.

5. But contrary hereunto may be objected, the experience we have of certain
living Creatures irrational, that nevertheless continually live in such good
Order and Government for their common benefit, and are so free from Sedition
and War amongst themselves, that for Peace, Profit, and Defense, nothing more
can be imaginable. And the Experience we have in this, is in that little
Creature the Be, which is therefore reckoned amongst Animalia Politica. Why
therefore may not men that foresee the Benefit of Concord, continually maintain
the same without compulsion, as well as they? To which I answer, That amongst
other living Creatures, there is no Question of Precedence in their own
Species, nor strife about Honor, or acknowledgement of one another wisdom,
as there is amongst Men, from whence arise Envy and Hatred of one toward
another, and from thence Sedition and War. Secondly, those living Creatures aim
every one at Peace, and Food common (...) the Will of Man being voluntary, but
the Beginning of Voluntary actions, is not subject to Deliberation and
Covenant, yet when a man covenanteh to subject his Will to the command of
another, he obliges himself to this, that he resign his strength and means
to him, whom he covenanteth to obey. And hereby he that is to command, may by
the use of all their means and strength, be able by the terror thereof, to
frame the Will of them all to Unity and Concord, amongst themselves.

8. This Union so made, is that which men call now adays, A Body Politic, or
Civil Society and the Greeks call it (...), that is to say, a City, which may
be defined to be a multitude of men, united as one Person, by a common power,
for their common Peace, Defense and Benefit.

9 And as this Union into a City or Body Politic, is instituted with common
Power over all there particular Persons, or Members thereof, to the common good
of them all, so also may there be amongst a multitude of those Members
instituted, a subordinate Union of certain men, for certain common actions to
be don by those men for some common Benefit of theirs, or of the whole City; a^
for subordinate Government, for Counsel for Trade, and the like. And these
Subordinate Bodies Politic are usually calle^ Corporations; and their power
such over the particulars of their own Society, as the whole City whereof they
are Members have allowed them.

10. In all Cities, or Bodies politic not Subordinate, but Independent, that
One man, or one Council, to whom the particular Members have given that common
Power, is called their Sovereign, and his power the Sovereign power; which
consists in the power and the strength, that every of the Members have
transferred to him from themselves by Covenant And because it is impossible for
any man really to transfer his own strength to another, or for that other to
receive it, it is to be understood, that to transfer a man's power and strength,
is no more, but to lay by or relinquish his own Right of Resisting him to whom
he so transferreth it. And every Member of the Body Politic, is called a
Subject, to wit, to the Sovereign.

11. The cause in general, which moves a man to become subject to another, is
(as I have said already) the fear of not otherwise preserving himself. And a
man may subject himself to him that invadeth, or may invade him, for fear of
him; or men may join amongst themselves, to subject themselves to such as they
shall agree upon for fear of others, and when many men subject themselves the
former way, there arises thence a Body politic, as it were naturally. From
whence proceeds Dominion, Paternal, and Despotique. And when they subject
themselves the other way, by mutual agreement amongst many, the Body politic
they make, is for the most part called a Common Wealth in distinction from the
former, though the name be the general name for them both. And I shall speak
in the first place of Common wealths, and afterward of Bodies politic,
Patrimoniall, and despotical.

The Second part.
CHAP. I. 1. Introduction. 2. A Multitude before their Union, etc. 3. Express
Consent of every particular, etc. 4. Democratical, Aristocraticall, Monarchiall
Union, may be instituted for ever, or, etc. 5. Without security no private
Right relinquished. 6. Covenants of Government without Power of Coertion are no
Security. 7. Power coercive, etc. 8. The Sword of War, etc. 9. Decision in all
Debates etc. annexed to the Sword. 10. Laws Civil, etc. 11. Appointment of
Magestrates, etc. 12. Sovereign Power includes Impunity. 13. A supposed Common
Weal^h, where Laws are made first, and the Commonwealth after. 14. The same
refelled. 15. Mixed Forms of Government sup^osed in Sovereignty. 16. That
refelled. 17. Mixed Government, etc. 18. Reason and Experience to prove absolute
Sovereignty some where in all Common Wealths. 19. Some principal, etc. marks of
Sovereignty.
IN that Treatise of humane nature which was formerly printed, has been wholly
spent in the consideration of the natural power, and the Natural Estate of
Man, namely, of his cognition and Passions in the first eleven Chapters, and
how from thence proceed his Actions; in the Twelfth, how men know one another
minds: In the last, in what Estate Men's passions set them. In the first Chapter
of this Treatise, what Estate they are directed unto by the Dictates of reason,
that is to say, what be the principal Articles of the Law of Nature, in the
2.3.4.5. And lastly, how a multitude of persons Natural, are united by
Covenants into one person civil, or Body Politic. In this part therefore shall
be considered, the Nature of a Body politic, and the Laws thereof, otherwise
called Civil Laws. And whereas it has been said in the last Chapter, and last
Section of the former part, that there be two ways of erecting a Body
politic; One by Arbitrary Institution of many men assembled together which is
like a creation out of nothing by humane Wit; the other by Compulsion, which is
as it were a Generation thereof out of natural force; I shall first speak of
such erection of a Body politic, as proceeds from the Assembly and consent
of a Multitude.

2. Having in this place to consider, a multitude of men about to unite
themselves into a Body politic, for their security, both against one another,
and against common Enemies, and that by Covenants, the knowledge of what
Covenants they must needs make, depends on the Knowledge of the persons, and
the knowledge of their end. First, for their persons they are many, and (as
yet) not one; nor can any Action done in a multitude of People met together, be
attributed to the multitude, or truly called the Action of the multitude,
unless every man's Hand, and every man's Will, (not so much as one excepted) have
concurred thereto. For Multitude, though in their persons they run together,
yet they concur not always in their Designs. For even at that time when men
are in tumult, though they agree a number of them to one mischeife, and a
number of them to one another; yet in the whole, they are amongst themselves in
the state of Hostility, and not of Peace; like the seditious Jews besieged in
Jerusalem, that could join against their enemies, and fight amongst themselves.
Whenever therefore any man says, that a number of men has done any Act, it
is to be understood, that every particular man in that number has consented
thereunto, and not the greatest part only. Secondly, Though thus assembled with
intention to unite themselves, they are yet in that Estate in which every man
has right to every thing, and consequently as has been said, Chap. 1. Sect.
10. in an Estate of inioying nothing. And therefore Meum and Tuum, has no
place amongst them.

3. The first thing therefore they are to do is expressly, every man to consent
to something by which they may come near to their Ends, which can be nothing
else imaginable, but this, that they allow the Wills of the mayor part of their
whole number, or the Wills of the mayor part of some certain number of men by
them determined and named; or lastly, the Will of some one man, to involve and
be taken for the Wllis of every man. And this done they are united, and a Body
Politic. And if the mayor part of their whole Number be supposed to involve
the Wills of all the particulars, then (...) the wills of the particulars, then
are they said to be a Democracie, that is to say, a Government wherein the
whole Number, or so many of them as please, being assembled together, are the
Sovereign, and every particular man a Subject. If the major part of a certain
number of men named or distinguished from the rest, be supposed to involve the
wills of every one of the particulars, then are they said to be an Oligarchy,
or Aristocracy, which two words signify the same thing, together with the
diverse Passions of those that use them. For when the men that be in that Office
please, they are called an Aristocracy, or otherwise an Oligarchy, where in
those the major part of which declare the Wills of the whole multitude being
assembled, are the Sovereign, and every man severally a Subject. Lastly, if
their Consent be such, that the Will of one man whom they name, shall stand for
the Wills of them all, then is their Government or Union called a Mornarchy,
and that one man a Sovereign, and every of the rest a Subject.

4. And those several sorts of Unions, Governments, and Subiections, of Man's
Will may be understood to be made, either absolutely, that is so say, for all
future time, or for a time limited only. But forasmuch as we speak here of a
Body politic, instituted for the perpetual Benefit and defense of them that
make it; which therefore men desire should last for ever, I will omit to speak
of those that be temporary, and consider of those that be for ever.

5. The end for which one man gives up, and relinquisheth to another, or
others the right of protecting and defending himself by his own power, is the
security which he expects thereby, of protection and defense from those to
whom he does so relinquish it; and a man may then account himself in the estate
of security, when he can foresee no violence to be done unto him, from which
the Doer may not be deterred by the power of that Sovereign, to whom they have
every one subjected themselves: and without that security, there is no reason
for a man to deprive himself of his own Advantages, and make himself a prey to
others. And therefore when there is not such a Sovereign power erected, as may
afford this security, it is to be understood that every man's right of doing
whatsoever seems good in his own eyes, remains still with him; and
contrariwise, where any Subject has right by his own Judgment and discretion,
to make use of his force, it is to be understood that every man has the like,
and consequently that there is no Common Wealth at all established. How far
therefore in the making of a Common Wealth, man subiecteth his Will to the
power of others, must appear from the End, namely, Security. For whatsoever is
necessary to be by Covenant transferred for the attaining thereof, so much is
transferred, or else every man is in his natural Liberty to secure himself.

6. Covenants agreed upon by every man assembled for the making of a Common
Wealth; and put in writing without erecting of a power of Coercion, are no
reasonable Security for any of them that so covenant, nor are to be called
Laws, and leave men still in the Estate of Nature and Hostility. For seeing the
Wills of most men are governed only by Fear, and where there is no power of
Coercion, there is no Fear, the Wills of most men will follow their Passions of
Covetousness, Lust, Anger, and the like, to the breaking of those Covenants,
whereby the rest also, who otherwise would keep them, are set at liberty, and
have no Law, but from themselves.

7. This power of Coercion as has been said, Chap. 2. Sect. 3. of the former
part consists in the transferring of every man's right of Resistance against
him, to whom he has transferred the Power of Coercion. It follows therefore,
that no man in any Common Wealth whatsoever has right to resist him, or them,
on whom they have transferred this Power Coercive, or (as men use to call it
the Sword of Justice, supposing the not Resistance possible. For part 1. Chap.
2. Sect. 18. Covenants bind but to the utmost of our endeavor.

8. And forasmuch as they who are amongst themselves in security, by the means
of this Sword of Justice, that keep them all in awe, are nevertheless in danger
of enemies from without, if there be not some means found, to unite their
Strength^ and natural forces, in the resistance of such enemies, their peace
amongst themselves is but in vain. And therefore it is to be understood as a
Covenant of every Member, to contribute their several forces fore the Defense
of the whole, whereby to make one power as sufficient, as is possible for their
Defense. Now seeing that every man has already transferred the Use of his
strength to him, or them, that have the Sword of Justice, it follows, that
the Power of Defense, that is to say, the Sword of war, be in the same Hands,
wherein is the Sword of Justice; and cons^quently those two Swords are but One,
and that inseperably and essentially annexed to the Sovereign Power.

9. Moreover, seeing to have the Right of the Sword, is nothing else but to
have the Use thereof depending only on the Judgment and discretion of Him or
Them that have it, it follows, that the Power of Indenture in all
Controversies, wherein the Sword of Justice is to be used; and in all
deliberations concerning War, (wherein the Use of that Sword is required) the
right of Resolving and determining what is to be done, belong to the same
Sovereign.

10. Farther, considering it is no less, but much more necessary to prevent
Violence and Rapine, then to punish the same when it is committed, and all
violence proceeds from Controversies that arise between men concerning Meum
and Tuum, Right and Wrong, Good and Bad, and the like which men use every one
to measure by their own Judgments, it belongs also to the Judgment of the
same Sovereign Power, to set forth and make known the common measure by which
every man is to know what is his, and what another; what is good and what bad,
and what he ought to do and what not, and to command the same to be observed.
And these measures of the Actions of the Subjects are those, which men call
Laws politic, or Civil. The making whereof, must of right belong to him that
has the power of the Sword, by which men are compelled to observe them; for
otherwise they should be made in vain.

11. Farthermore, seeing it is impossible that any one man that has such
Sovereign Power, can be able in person, to hear and determine all
Controversies, to be present at al deliberations concerning common good, and to
execute and perform all those common actions that belong thereunto, whereby
there will be necessity of Magistrates, and Ministers of public affairs; it
is consequent that the appointment, nomination, and limitation of the same be
understood, as an inseparable part of the same sovereignty, ^o which the sum of
all judicature, and execution has been already annexed.

12. And forasmuch as the right to use the forces of every particular member,
is transferred from themselves, to their sovereign, a man will easily fall upon
this conclusion of himself, that to sovereign power (whatsoever it does) there
belongs Impunity.

13. The sum of these Rights of Sov^r^ignty; namely the absolute use of the
Sword in Peace and War, the making and abrogating of Laws, Supreme, Judicature,
and Decision, in all Debate judicial and deliberative, the nomination of all
Magistrates, and Ministers, with other Rights contained in the same, make the
sovereign power no less absolute in the commonwealth, then before
Commonwealth, every man was absolute in himself, to do, or not to do, what he
thoughr good; which men that have not had the experience of that miserable
estate, to which men are reduced by long War, think so hard a condition, that
they can not easily acknowledge such covenants, and subjection on their parts,
as are here set down to have been ever necessary to their peace. And therefore
some have imagined that a Commonwealth may be constituted in such manner as
the Sovereign Power may be so limited, and moderated, as they shall think fit
themselves. For Example; They suppose a Multitude of men to have agreed upon
certain Articles, (which they presently call Laws) declaring how they will be
governed, and that done, to agree farther upon some man, or number of men, to
see the same Articles performed, and put in execution; and to enable Him, or
Them thereunto, they allot unto them a Provision limited, as of certain Lands,
taxes, Penalties, and the like then, which (if misspent) they shall have no
more, without a new Consent of the same men that allowed the former. And thus
they think they have made a Common Wealth, in which it is unlawful for any
private man to make use of his own Sword for his Security; wherein they
deceive themselves.

14. For first, if to the Revenue, it did necessarily follow, that there might
be Forces raised and procured at the Will of him that has such Revenue, yet
since the Revenue is limited, so must also the Forces: b^t limited Forces
against the Power of an Enemy, which we cannot limit, are unsufficient.
Whenever therefore there happens an Invasion greater then those Forces are
able to resist, and there be no other right to levy more, then is every man by
Necessity of Nature, allowed to make the best provision he can for himself; and
thus is the Private Sword, and the estate of War again reduced. But seeing
Revenue, without the right of commanding men, is of no use, neither in Peace
nor War, it is necessary to be supposed, that he that has the Administration
of those Articles, which are in the former Section supposed, must have also
right to make use of the strengths of particular men. And what reason soever
gives him that right over any one, gives him the same over all. And then is
his Right absolute. For he that has Right to all their Forces, has right to
dispose of the same. Again, supposing those limited forces and Revenue, either
by the necessary, or negligent use of them to fail, and that for a supply the
same multitude be again to be assembled, who shall have power to assemble them,
that is to compel them to come together? If he that demands the supply, has
that Right, to wit, the right to compel them all, then is his Sovereignty
absolute; if not, then is every particular man at liberty to come, or not; to
frame a new Common wealth, or not, and so the right of the private Sword
returns but suppose them willingly, and of their own accord assembled to
consider of this supply, if now it be still in their choice, whether they shall
give it, or not, it is also in their choice, whether the Common Wealth shall
stand, or not. And therefore there lies not upon any of them any civil
Obligation that may hinder them from using force, in case they think it tend to
their defense. This Device therefore of them that will make Civil Laws first,
and then a Civil Body afterward (as if Policy made a Body Politic, and not a
Body Politic made Policy) is of no effect.

15. Others, to avoid the hard condition, as they take it, of absolute
subjection (which (in hatred thereto) they also call slaverie) have despised a
Government, as they think, mixed of three sorts of Sovereignty. As for Example;
They suppose the power of making Laws, given to some great Assembly
Democratical, the Power of Judicature to some other Assembly, and the
Administration of the Laws to a Third, or to some one Man; and this Policy they
call mixed Mona^chy, or mixed Aristocracy, or mixed Democracy, according as any of
these three sorts do most visibly predominate. And in this estate of
Government, they think the use of the Private Sword excluded.

16. And supposing it were so, How were this condition which they call slavery,
eased thereby. For in this Estate they would have no man allowed, either to be
his own Judge, or own Carver, or to make any Laws unto himself; and as long as
these three agree they are as absolutely subject to them, as is a Child to the
Father, or a Slave to the Master, in the state of Nature. The ease therefore of
this Subjection, must consist in the disagreement of those amongst whom they
have dist^ibuted the rights of sovereign power. But the same Disagreement is
War. The division therefore of the Sovereignty, either works no effect to the
taking away of simple Subjection, or introduces War, wherein the private Sword
has place again. But the Truth is, as has been already showed in 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. precedent Sections, the Sovereignty is indivisible. And that
seeming mixture of several kinds of Government, not mixture of the things
themselves, but Confusion in our understandings, that cannot find out readily
to whom we have subjected our selves.

17. But though the Sovereignty be not mixed, but be always either simple
Democracy, or simple Aristocracy, or pure Monarchy, nevertheless in the
Administration thereof, all those sorts of government may have place
subordinate. For Suppose the Sovereign power be Democracy, as it was sometimes
in Rome, yet at the same time they may have a Counsel Aristocratical, such as
was the Senate; and at the same time they may have a Subordinate Monarch, such
as was their Dictator, who had, for a time, the exercise of the whole
Sovereignty, and such as are all Generals in war. So also in Monarchy there may
be a Council Aristocratical of men, chosen by the Monarch, or Democratical of
men chosen by the consent (the Monarch permitting) of all the particular men of
the Common Wealth. And this mixture is it that imposes, as if it were the
mixture of sovereignty. As if a man should think, because the great Council of
Venice does nothing ordinarily but choose Magistrates, Ministers of State,
Captains, and Governors of Towns, Ambassadors, Counselors, and the like, that
therefore their part of the soveraigt, is only choosing of Magistrates: and that
the making of War, and Peace, and Laws were not theirs, but the part of such
Counselors as they appointed thereto; whereas it is the part of these to do it
but subordinately, the supreme authority thereof being in the Great Council that
choose them.

18. And as Reason teaches us, that a man considered out of subjection to
Laws, and out of all Covenants obligatory to others, is free to do and undo,
and deliberate as long as he lists; every member being obedient to the Will
of the whole man, that Liberty being nothing else but his natural Power,
without which he is no better then an inanimate Creature, not able to help
himself; so also it teaches us, that a Body politic, of what kind soever, nor
subject to another, nor obliged by Covenants, ought to be free, and in all
actions to be assisted by the members, every one in their place, or at least
not resisted by them. For otherwise, the power of a Body politic (the Essence
whereof, is the not resistance of the Members) is none, nor a Body politic of
any Benefit. And the same is confirmed by the Use of all Nations and
Commonwealths, wherein that man or Council which is virtually the whole, has
any absolute power over every particular member; or what Nation or
Commonwealth is there, that has not power and Right to constitute a General
in their wars? But the power of a General is absolute; and consequently there
was absolute power in the Common Wealth, from whom it was derived. For no
person, natural or civil, can transfer unto another more power then himself
has.

19. In every Common Wealth, where particular men are deprived of their Right
to protect themselves there resideth an Absolute Sovereignty; as I have already
showed. But in what man, or in what Assembly of men the same is placed, is not
so manifest, as not to need some Marks, whereby it may be discerned. And first,
it is an infallible mark of absolute Sovereignty in a man or in an Assembly of
men, if there be no Right in any other person, Natural or Civil, to punish
that man, or to dissolve that Assembly. For he that cannot of right be
punished, cannot of Right be resisted; and he that cannot of right be resisted,
has coercive power ove^ all the rest, and thereby can frame and govern their
Actions at his pleasure, which is absolute sovereignty. Contrariwise, he that
in a Commonwealth is punishable by any, or that Assembly that is dissolvable,
is not sovereign. For a greater power is always required to punish and
dissolve, then theirs who are punished or dissolved; and that Power cannot be
called Sovereign, then which there is a greater. Secondly, that man or
Assembly, that by their own right not derived from the present right of any
other, may make Laws, or abrogate them at his or their pleasure, have the
Sovereignty absolute. For seeing the Laws they make, are supposed to be made by
right, the Members of the Common Wealth to whom they are made, are obliged to
obey them, and consequently not resist the Execution of them, which not
resistance, makes the power absolute of him that ordains them. It is
likewise a mark of this sovereignty, to have the Right Original of appointing
Magistrates, Judges, Counselors, and Ministers of State. For without that
Power, no Act of Sovereignty or Government can be performed. Lastly, and
generally, whosoever by his own authority independent, can do any act, which
another of the same Common Wealth may not, must needs be understood to have the
sovereign power. For by Nature men have equal Right. This Inequality therefore
must proceed from the Power of the Commonwealth. He therefore that does any
Act lawfully by his own Authorit^, which another may not, does it by the Power
of the Commonwealth in himself, which is Absolute Sovereignty.

CHAP. II. 1. Democracy precedeth all other, etc. 2. The Sovereign people
covenanteth not with the Subjects. 3. The Sovereign, etc. cannot, etc. do
injury, etc. 4. The faults of the Sovereign People, etc. 5 Democracy, etc. an
Aristocracy of Orators. 6. Aristocracy how made. 7. The Body of the Optimates
not properly said to iniure the Subjects. 8. The Election of the Optimates,
etc. 9. An Elective King, etc. 10. A Conditional King, etc. 11. The word People
Equivocal. 12. Obedience discharged by Release. 13. How such Releases are to be
understood. 14. Obedience discharged by Exile. 15. By Conquest. 16. By
ignorance of the Right of Succession.
HAving spoken in general concerning instituted Policy in the former Chapter,
I come in this, to speak of the sorts thereof in special, how every of them is
instituted. The first in order of time of these three sorts, is Democracy; and
it must be so of necessity, because an Aristocracy and a Monarchy, require
nomination of persons agreed upon, which agreement in a great multitude of men
must consist in the consent of the major part; and where the Votes of the mayor
part involve the votes of the rest, there is actually a democracie.

2. In the making of a Democracie, there passes no Covenant between the
Sovereign and any Subject. For while the Democracy is a making, there is no
Sovereign with whom to contract. For it cannot be imagined, that the Multitude
should contract with it seif, or with any one man, or number of men parcel of
it self, to make it self Sovereign nor that a mulritude considered as One
Aggregate, can give it self any thing which before it had not. Seeing then that
Sovereignty Democraticall is not conferred by the Covenant of any multitude,
which supposes Union and Sovereignty already made; it rests that the same be
conferred by the particular Covenants of evry several man, that is to say,
every man with every man, for and in consideration of the Benefit of his own
Peace and Defense, covenanteth to stand to and obey whatsoever the mayor part
of their whole number, or the Mayor part of such a number of them, as shall be
pleased to assemble at a certain time and place, shall determine and command.
And this is that which gives being to a Democracy, wherein the sovereign
Assembly was called of the Greeks, by the name of Demus, (that is, the People)
from whence comes Democracy. So that, where to the supreme and Independent
Court, every man may come that will and give his vote, there the Sovereign is
called the People.

3. Out of this that has been said, may readily be drawn, that whatsoever the
People does to any one particular Member or Subject of the Common Wealth, the
same by him ought not to be styled Injury. For first Injury (by the Definition,
Part 1. Chap. 3. Sect. 2.) is Breach of Covenant; but Covenants (as has been
said in the precedent Section) there passed none from the People to any private
man; and consequently (to wit the People) can do him no Injury. Secondly, how
unjust soever the action be, that this Sovereign D^mus shall do, is done by
the will of every particular man subject to him, who are therefore guilty of
the same. If therefore they style it Injury, they but accuse themselves. And it
is against Reason for the same man, both to do and complain, implying this
Contradiction, that whereas he first ratified the Peoples Acts in general, he
now disalloweth the same of them in particular. It is therefore said truly,
Volenti non fit Injuria. Nevertheless nothing does hinder but that diverse
Actions done by the people may be unjust before God Almighty, as Breaches of
the Law of Nature.

4. And when it happens, that the People by plurality of voices, that decree or
command any thing contrary to the Law of God or Nature, though the Decree and
Command be the act of every man, not only present in the assembly, but also
absent from it, yet is not the Injustice of the Decree, the Injustice of every
particular man, but only of those men, by whose express-sufferag^s the Decree
or Command was passed. For a Body politic, as it is a Fictious Body, so are
the Faculties and will thereof Fictious also. But to make a particular man
unjust which consists of a Body and Soul natural, there is required a
Natural and very Will.

5. In all Democracies, though the Right of Sovereignty be in the Assembly
which is virtually the whole Body, yet the use thereof is always in one, or a
few particular men. For in such great Assemblies, as those must be, whereinto
every man may enter at his pleasure, there is no means any ways to deliberate
and give Council what to do but by long and set Orations, whereby to every man
there is more or less hope given to incline and sway the Assembly to their own
Ends. In a multitude of speakers therefore where always either one is eminent
alone, or a few being equal amongst themselves are eminent above the rest, that
one or few must of necessity sway the whole. Insomuch that a Democracy, in
effect is no more then an Aristocracy of Orators, interrupted sometimes with
the temporary Monarchy of one Orator

6. And seeing a Democracy is by Institution, the beginning both of Aristocracy
and Monarchy, we are to consider next, how Aristocracy is derived from it. When
the particular Members of the Common Wealth growing weary of attendance at
public Courts, as dwelling far off, or being attentive to their private
Businesses, and withal, displeased with the Government of the People, assemble
themselves to make an Aristocracy, there is no more required to the making
thereof, but putting to the Question one by one, the Names of such men as it
shall consist of, and assenting to their Election; and by plurality of Vote to
transfer that power, which before the People had, to the number of men so named
and chosen.

7. And from this manner of erecting an Aristocracy, it is manifest, that the
Few, or Optimates, have entered into no Covenant with any of the particular
Members of the Common Wealth, whereof they are Sovereign; and consequently
cannot do any thing to any private man, that can be called Injury to him,
howsoever their act be wicked before Almighty God, according to that which has
been said before Sect ^. Farther it is impossible, that the People, as one Body
Politic, should covenant with the Aristocracy or Optimates, on whom they
intend to transfer their Sovereignty. For no sooner is the Aristocracy erected,
but the Democracy is annihilated, and the Covenants made unto them void.

8. In all Aristocracies the Admission of such as are from time to time to have
Vote in the sovereign assembly, depends on the Will and Decree of the present
Optimates. For they being the Sovereign, have the nomination (by the 11.
Section of the former Chapter) of all Magistrates, Ministers, and Counselors
of State whatsoever, and may therefore choose either to make them elective, or
hereditary, at their pleasure.

9. Out of the same Democracy, the Institution of a Political Monarch
proceeds in the same manner, as did the Institution of the Aristocracy, to
wit, by a Decree of the Sovereign People, to pass the Sovereignty to One Man
named and approved by Plurality of Suffrage. And if this Sovereignty be truly
and indeed transferred, the Estate or Commonwealth is an absolute Monarchy
wherein the Monarch is at liberty, to dispos^ as well of the Succession, as of
the Possession and not an Elective Kingdom. For suppos^ a Decree be made first
in this manner, Tha^ such a One shall have the Sovereignty for hi^ life, and
that afterward they will choose a new* In this Case, the Power of the People is
dissolved, or not; if dissolved, then after the Death of him that is chosen,
there is no man bound to stand to the Decrees of them that shall, as Private
men, run together to make a new Election; and consequently, if there be any
man, who by the advantage of the Reign of Him that is dead, have strength
enough to hold the multitude in Peace and Obedience, he may lawfully, or rather
is by the Law of Nature obliged so to do; if this power of the people were not
dissolved at the choosing of their King for life, then is the people Sovereign
still, and the King a Minister thereof only, but so, as to put the whole
Sovereignty in Execution, A Great Minister, but no otherwise for his time, then
a Dictator was in Rome. In this case at the death of him that was chosen, they
that meet for a new Election, have no new, but their old Authority for the
same. For they were the Sovereign all the time, as appears by the Acts of
those Elective Kings, that have procured from the People, that their children
might succeed them. For it is to be understood, when a man receives any thing
from the Authority of the people, he receives it not from the People his
Subjects, but from the people his Sovereign. And farther though in the Election
of a King for his life, the People grant him the Exercise of their Sovereignty
for that time; Yet if they see cause, they may recall the same before the Time.
As a Prince that conferreth an Office for life, may nevertheless upon suspicion
of Abuse thereof, recall it at his pleasure; in as much as Offices that require
lobour and care, are understood to pass from him that gives them, as Onera,
Burdens, to them that have them; the recalling whereof are therefore not
Injury, but Favor. Nevertheless if in making an Elective King, with Intention
to reserve the Sovereignty, they reserve not a Power at certain known and
determined times and places to assemble themselves, the reservation of their
Sovereignty is of no effect, in as much as no man is bound to stand to the
Decrees and Determinations of those that assemble themselves without the
Sovereign Authortiy.

10. In the former Section is showed, that elective Kings that exercise their
Sovereignty for a Time, which determines with their Life, either are Subjects,
or not Sovereigns; And that it is, when the people in Election of them, reserve
unto themselves the right of Assembling at certain times and places limited
and made known; Or else Absolute Sovereigns to dispose of the Succession at
their Pleasure, and that is, when the people in their Election have declared no
time nor place of their meeting, or have left it to the power of the Elected
King, to assemble and dissolve them at such times as he himself shall think
good. There is another kind of Limitation of time to him that shall be elected
to use the Sovereign Power, (which whether it has been practiced any where, or
not I know not, but it may be imagined, and has been objected against the
Rigor of Sovereign Power) and it is this, that the People transfer their
Sovereignty upon Conditions. As for Example, for so long as he shall observe
such and such Laws, as they then prescribe him. And here as before in elected
Kings, the Question is to be made, whether in the Electing of such a Sovereign,
they reserved to themselves a right of Assembling at times and places limited
and known, or not; if not, then is the Sovereignty of the People dissolved, and
have neither power to judge of the Breach of the Conditions given him, nor to
command any Forces for the Deposing of him, whom on that Condition they had set
up, but are in the Estate of war amongst themselves, as they were before they
made themselves a Democracy; and consequently, if he that is elected by the
advantage of the possession he has of the public means, be able to compel
them to Unity and Obedience, he has not only of the right of Nature to warrant
him, but of the Law of Nature to Oblige him thereunto. But if in Electing him,
they reserved to themselves a right of Assembling, and appointed certain times
and places to that purpose, then are they Sovereign still, and may call their
conditional King to account at their pleasure, and deprive him of his
Government, if they judge he deserve it, either by breach of the condition set
him, or otherwise. For the Sovereign power can by no Covenant with a subject be
bound to continue him in the charge he undergoeth by their Command, as a Burden
imposed not particularly for his good, but for the good of the Sovereign People.

11. The Controversies that arise concerning the Right of the People, proceed
from the Equivocation of the Word. For the word People has a double
signification. In one sense it signifies only a Number of Men, distinguished
by the place of their habitation; as the People of England, or the People of
France, which is no more, but the Multitude of those particular persons that
inhabit those Regions, without consideration of any Contracts or Covenants
amongst them, by which any one of them is obliged to the rest. In another
sense, it signifies a Person civil, that is to say, either one Man or one
Council, in the Will whereof is included and involved, the Will of every one in
particular. As for example; in this later sense, the lower House of Parliament
is all the Commons as long as they sit there with authority and right thereto;
but after they be dissolved, though they remain, they be no more the People nor
the Commons, but only the Aggregate, or Multitude of the particular men there
sitting, how well soever they agree, or concur, in Opinions amongst themselves;
whereupon they that do not distinguish between these two significations, do
usually attribute such rights to a dissolved Multitude, as belong only to the
People virtually contained in the Body of the Common Wealth or Sovereignty. And
when a great number of their own authority flock together in any nation, they
usually give them the name of the whole Nation. In which sense they say the
People rebelleth, or the People demands, when it is no more then a dissolved
multitude, of which though any one man may be said to demand or have right to
something, yet the heap, or multitude, cannot be said to demand or have right
to any thing. For where every man has his right distinct, there is nothing
left for the multitude to have right unto: and when the particulars say, this
is mine, this is thine, and this is his, and have shared all amongst them,
there can be nothing whereof the Multitude can say, this is mine; nor are they
one Body as behooves them to be, that demand any thing under the name o Mine,
or His: and when they say Ours every man is understood to pretend in several,
and not the multitude: On the other, side, when the Multitude is united into a
Body politic, and thereby are a People in the other signification, and their
wills virtually in the Sovereign, there the rights and Demands of the
particulars do cease; and he or they that have the Sovereign Power, does for
them all demand and vindicate under the name of his, that which before they
called in the plural, Theirs.

12. We have seen how particular men enter into subjection by transferring
their Rights; It follows to consider, how such subjection may be discharged.
And first, if He or they that have the Sovereign Power, shall relinquish the
same voluntarily, there is no doubt, but every man is again at Liberty to obey
or not. Likewise, if he or they retaining the Sovereignty over the rest, do
neverthless exempt some one or more, from their subjection, every man so
exempted, is discharged, for he or they to whom any man is obliged, has the
power to release him.

13. And here it is to be understood, that when he or they that have the
Sovereign power, give such exemption, or Privilege, to a Subject, as is not
seperable from the Sovereignty, and nevertheless directly retains the
Sovereign Power, not knowing the consequence of the privilege they grant, the
Person or persons exempted or privileged, are not thereby released. For in
contradictory significations of the will, Part 1. Chap. 13. Sect. 9. That which
is directly signified, is to be understood for the will, before that which is
drawn from it by Consequence.

14. Also Exile perpetual, is a Release of Subjection, forasmuch, as being out
of the protection, of the Sovereignty that expelled him, he has no means of
subsisting but from himself. Now every man may lawfully defend himself, that
has no other Defense; else there had been no necessity, that any man should
enter into voluntary subjection, as they do in Common Wealths.

15. Likewise a man is released of his subjection by conquest. For when it
comes to pass, that the Power of a Common wealth is overthrown, and any
particular man thereby lying under the sword of his Enemy, yeildeth himself
Captive, he is thereby bound to serve him that takes him, and consequently
discharged of his Obligation to the former. For no man can serve two Masters.

16. Lastly, Ignorance of the Succession discharges Obedience. For no man can
be understood to be obliged to obey he knows not whom.

CHAP. III. 1.2. Titles to Dominion; Master and Servant, etc. 3. Chains and
other, etc. Bonds etc. Slave defined. 4. Servants have no property against
their Lord, etc. 5. The Master has right to alienate his Servant. 6. The
Servant of the Servant, etc. 7. How Servitude is discharged. 8. The middle
Lord. etc. 9. The title of Man, etc. Over Beasts.
HAving set forth in the two preceding Chapters, the Nature of a Common Wealth
Institutive by the Consent of many men together, I come now to speak of
Dominion, or a Body politic by acquisition, which is commonly called a
Patrimonial Kingdom. But before I enter thereinto, it is necessary to make
known upon what Title one man may acquire Right, that is to say, Property or
Dominion over the person of another. For when one Man has Dominion over
another, there is a little Kingdom. And to be a King by Acquisition, is
nothing else but to have acquired a Right or Dominion over many.

2. Considering men therefore again in the Estate of Nature, without Covenants
or Subjection one to another, as if they were but even now all at once created
Male and Female, there be three Titles only, by which one man may have Right
and Dominion over another; whereof two may take place presently, and those are,
voluntary offer of Subjection, and yiedling by Compulsion: The third is to take
place upon the supposition of Children begotten amongst them. Concerning the
first of these three Titles, it is handled before in the two last Chapters. For
from thence comes the Right of sovereigns over their Subjects in a Common
Wealth Institutive. Concerning the second Title, (which is when a man
submits to an Assailant for fear of Death) thereby accrueth a Right of
Dominion. For where every man (as it happens in this case) has Right to all
things, there needs no more for the making of the said Right effectual but a
Covenant from him that is overcome, not to resist him that overcomes. And thus
comes the victor to have right of absolute Dominion over the conquered. By
which there is presently constituted a little Body politic, which consists
of two Persons, the one Sovereign, which is called the Master or Lord; the
other subject, which is called the Servant. And when a man has acquired right
over a number of Servants so considerable, as they cannot by their Neighbors
be securely invaded, this Body politic is a Kingdom Despotical.

3. And it is to be understood that when a Servant taken in the Wars, is kept
bound in natural Bonds, and Chains and the like, or in prison, there has
passed no covenant from the Servant to his Master. For those natural Bonds have
no need of strengthening by the verbal Bonds of Covenant, and they show, that
the Servant is not trusted. But Covenant, (Part 1. Chap. 15. Sect. 9.)
supposes Trust. There remains therefore in the Servant thus kept bound, or
in Prison, a Right of delivering himself, if he can, by what means soever. This
kind of Servant is that which ordinarily, and without passion, is called a
Slave. The Romans had no such distinct name, but comprehended all under the
name of Servus; whereof such as they loved and durst trust, were suffered to go
at liberty, and admitted to places of Office, both near to their Persons, and
in their affairs abroad; the rest were kept chained, or otherwise restrained
with natural impediments to their Resistance. And as it was amongst the
Romans, so it was amongst other Nations, the former sort having no other Bond
but a supposed Covenant, without which the Master had no reason to trust them;
the later being without Covenant, and no otherwise tied to Obedience, but by
Chains, or other like forcible custody.

4. A Master therefore is to be supposed to have no less right over those,
whose Bodies he leaves at Liberty, then over those he keeps in Bonds and
Imprisonment, and has absolute Dominion over both, and may say of his servant,
that he is his, as he may of any other thing: And whatsoever the servant had,
and might call his is now the Master's; for he that disposes of the Person,
disposes of all the person could dispose of: insomuch, as though there be Meum
and Tuum among servants distinct from one another by the dispensation and for
the benefit of their Master, yet there is no Meum and Tuum belonging to any of
them against the Master himself, whom they are not to resist, but to obey all
his Commands as Law.

5. And seeing both the Servant and all that is committed to him, is the
property of the Master, and every man may dispose of his own, and transfer the
same at his pleasure, the Master may therefore alienate his Dominion over them,
or give the same by his last Will to whom he list.

6. And if it happen, that the Master himself by Captivity or voluntary
subjection, become servant to another, then is that other Master Paramount; and
those servants of him that becomes servant, are no farther obliged, then their
Master Paramount shall think good; forasmuch as he disposing of the Master
subordinate, disposes of all he has, and consequently of his servants. So
that the restriction of absolute Power in Masters, proceeds not from the Law
of Nature, but from the Political Law of him, that is their Master Supreme or
Sovereign.

7. Servants immediate to the supreme Master, are discharged of their
servitude, or subjection in the same manner that subjects are released of their
Allegiance in a Common Wealth Institutive. As first, by Release. For he that
captiveth, (which is done by accepting what the captive transferreth to him)
sets again at l^berty, by transferring back the same. And this kind of
Release is called Manumission. Secondly, by Exile. For that is no more but
Manumission given to a Servant, not in the way Benefit, but punishment.
Thirdly, By a new Captivity, where the Servant having done his Endeavor to
defend himself, has thereby performed his Covenant to his former Master, and
for the safety of his life, entering into new Covenant with the Conqueror, is
bound to do his best endeavor to keep that likewise. Fourthly, Ignorance of
who is Successor to his diceased Master, discharges him of Obedience: for no
Covenant holds longer then a man knows to whom he is to perform it. And
lastly, that Servant that is no longer trusted, but committed to his Chains and
Custody, is thereby discharged of the Obligation in foro interno, and therefore
if he can get loose, may lawfully go his way.

8. But servants subordinate, though manumitted by their immediate Lord, are
not thereby discharged of their subjection to their Lord Paramount, for the
Immediate Master has no property in them, having transferred his Right before
to another, namely, to his own and supreme Master. Nor if the chief Lord should
manumit his immediate servant, does he thereby release his servants of their
Obligation to him that is so manumitted. For by this Manumission, he recovereth
again the absolute Dominion he had over them before. For after a Release,
(which is the discharge of a Covenant) the Right stands as it did before the
Covenant was made.

9. This Right of Conquest, as it makes one man master over another, so also
makes it a man to be master of the irrational Creatures. For if a man in the
state of Nature be in Hostility with men, and thereby have lawful Title to
subdue or kill, according as his own Conscience and Discretion shall suggest,
unto him for his safety and Benefit, much more may he do the same to Beasts;
that is to say, save and preserve for his own service, according to his
Discretion, such as are of Nature apt to obey, and commodious for use; and to
kill and destroy with perpetual War, all other, as fierce and noisome to him.
And this Dominion is therefore of the Law of Nature, and not of the Divine Law
Positive. For if there had been no such Right, before the revealing of Gods
Will in the Scripture, then should no man to whom the Scripture has not come,
have right to make use of those his Creatures, either for his Food or
sustenance. And it were a hard Condition of mankind, that a fierce and salvage
Beast, should with more right kill a man, then a man a Beast.

CHAP. IV. 1. The Dominion over the Child, etc. 2. Pre-eminence of Sex gives
not the Child to the Father, rather then to the Mother. 3. The Title of the
Father or Mother, etc. 4. The Child of a Woman-servant, etc. 5. The Right to
the Child given from the Mother, etc. 6. The Child of the Concubine, etc. 7.
The Child of the Husband and the Wife, etc. 8. The Father, or he or she that
brings up the Child, have absolute power over Him. 9. Freedom in Subjects
what it is. 10. A Great Family is a Patrimonial Kingdom. 11. Succession of the
Sovereign Power, etc. 12. Though the Successor be not declared, yet there is
always One to be presumed. 13. The Children preferred to the succession, etc.
14. The Males before Females. 15. The Eldest before the rest of the Brothers.
16. The Brother next to the Children. 17. The Succession of the Possessor, etc.
OF three ways by which a man becomes subject to another, mentioned Sect. 2.
Chap. the last, namely, Voluntary Offer, Captivity and Birth, the former two
have been spoken of, under the name of Subjects and Servants. In the next
place, we are to set down the Third way of subjection, under the name of
Children, and by what Title one-man comes to have propriety in a Child, that
proceeds from the Common Generation of two, (to wit) of Male and Female. And
considering men again dissolved from all Covenants one with another, and that
(Part 1. Chap. 4. Sect. 2.) every man by the Law of Nature, has right or
propriety to his own Body, the Child ought rather to be the propriety of the
Mother, (of whose Body it is part, till the time of separation) then of the
Father. For the understanding therefore of the Right that a man or woman has
to his or their Child, two things are to be considered; First, what Title the
mother, or any other originally has, to a child new born: Secondly, how the
Father, or any other man, pretends by the Mother.

2. For the first, they that have written of this subject have made Generation
to be a Title of Dominion over persons, as well as the consent of the persons
themselves. And because Generation gives Title to two, namely, Father, and
Mother, whereas Dominion is Indivisible, they therefore ascribe Dominion over
the Child to the Father only, Ob praestantiam Sexus; but they show not, neither
can I find out by what coherence, either Generation infers Dominion, or
Advantage of so much strength, which, for the most part, a man has more then a
woman, should generally and universally entitle the Father to a propriety in
the Child and take it away from the Mother.

3. The Title to Dominion over a Child, proceeds not from the Generation, but
from the preservation of it; and therefore in the Estate of Nature, the Mother,
in whose power it is to save or destroy it, has right thereto by that power,
according to that which has been said, Part 1. Chap. 1. Sect. 13. And if the
Mother shall think fit to abandon, or expose her C^ild to Death, whatsoever man
or woman shall find the child so exposed shall have the same Right which the
Mother had before; and for this same reason, namely, for the Power not of
Generating, but preserving. And though the child thus preservd, do in time
acquire strength, whereby he might pretend Equality with him or her that has
preserved him, yet shall that pretense be thought unreasonable, both because
his strength was the Gift of him, against whom be pretends, and also because
it is to be presumed that he which gives sustenance to another, whereby to
strengthen him, has received a Promise of Obedience in Consideration thereof.
For else it would be Wisdom in men, rather to let their Children perish, while
they are Infants, then to live in their Danger or Subjection, when they are
grown.

4. For the Pretenses which a man may have to dominion over a child by the
right of the Mother, they be of diverse kinds. One by the absolute Subjection of
the Mother; another, by some particular Covenant from her, which is less then a
Covenant of such subjection. By absolute subjection, the Master of the Mother
has Right to her Child, according to Sect. 6. Chap. 3. whether he be the
Father thereof, or not. And thus the Children of the servant are the Goods of
the Master in Perpetuum

5. Of Covenants that amount not to subjection between Man and Woman, there be
some which are made for a time; they are Covenants of Cohabitation, or else of
Copulation only. And in this later case, the children pass by Covenants
particular. And thus in the Copulation of the Amazones with their Neighbors,
the Fathers by Covenant had the Male children only, the Mothers retaining the
Females.

6. And Covenants of Cohabitation are either for Society of Bed, or for Society
of all things; if for Society of Bed only, then is the Woman called A
Concubine. And here also the Child shall be his or hers, as they shall agree
particularly by Covenant. For although for the most part, a Concubine is
supposed to yield up the Right of her Children to the Father, yet does not
Concubinate enforce so much.

7. But if the Covenants of Cohabitation be for society of all things; it is
necessary that but one of them govern and dispose of all that is common to them
both; without which, (as has been often said before) Society cannot last. And
therefore the man, to whom for the most part, the woman yeildeth the
Government, has for the most part also, the sole Right and Dominion over the
Children. And the man is called the Husband, and the Woman the Wife. But
because sometimes the Government may belong to the Wife only, sometimes also
the Dominion over the Children shall be in her only. As in the case of a
Sovereign Queen, there is no Reason that her Marriage should take from her the
Dominion over her Children.

8. Children therefore, whether they be brought up and preserved by the Father,
or by the Mother, or by whomsoever are in most absolute subjection to Him or
Her, that so brings them up, or preserves them. And they may alienate them,
that is, assign his or her Dominion, by selling, or giving them, in Adoption or
Servitude, to others; or may pawn them for Hostages, kill them for Rebellion,
or sacrifice them for Peace, by the Law of Nature, when he or she, in his or
her conscience, think it to be necessary.

9. The Subjection of them who institute a Common Wealth amongst themselves, is
no less absolute then the subjection of servants. And therein they are in equal
estate. But the hope of those is greater then the hope of these. For he that
subiecteth himself uncompelled, thinks there is no reason he should be better
used then he that does it upon Compulsion; and coming in freely calls
himself, though in subjection, a Freeman; whereby it appears that Liberty is
not any exemption from subjection and obedience to the Sovereign power, but a
State of better hope then theirs, that have been subjected by force and
conquest. And this was the reason, that the Name which signifies Children in
the Latin tongue, is Liberi, which also signifies Free men. And yet in Rome
nothing at that time was so obnoxious to the power of others, as children in
the Family of their Fathers. For both the State had power over their life
without consent of their Fathers, and the Father might kill his son by his own
authority, without any warrant from the State. Freedom therefore in
Commonwealths, is nothing but the Honor of Equality of Favor with other
Subjects, and Servitude the Estate of the rest. A Freeman therefore may expect
employments of Honor, rather then a Servant. And this is all that can be
understood by the Liberty of the Subject. For in all other senses, Liberty is
the State of him that is not subject.

10. Now when a father that has children has servants also, the children (not
by the right of the child, but by the natural indulgence of the Parents) are
such fremen. And the whole consisting of the Father or Mother, or both, and of
the children, and of the servants, is called a Family, wherein the Father or
Mother of the Family is sovereign of the same, and the rest (both children and
servants equally) subjects. The same Family, if it grow by multiplication of
children, either by Generation or Adoption; or of servants, either by
Generation, Gonquest, or voluntary submission, to be so Great and Numerous, as
in probability it may protect it self, then is that Family called a
Patrimoniall Kingdom, or Monarchy by acquisition, wherein the Sovereignty is
in one man, as it is in a Monarch made by Political institution. So that
whatsoev^r Rights be in the One, the same also be in the other. And therefore I
shall no more speak of them as distinct, but of Monarchy in general.

11. Having showed by what right the several sorts of Commonwealths,
Democracy, Aristocracy, and Monarchy, are erected, it follows, to show by
what right they are continued. The Right by which they are continued, is called
the Right of Succession to the Sovereign Power; whereof there is nothing to be
said a Democracy, because the Sovereign dies not, as long as there be Subjects
alive. Nor in any Aristocracy, because it cannot easily fall out, that the
Optimates should every one fail at once: And if it should so fall out, there is
no question, but the Common Wealth is thereby dissolved. It is therefore in a
Monarchy only, that there can happen a Question concerning the Succession. And
first, forasmuch as a Monarch, which is absolve Sovereign, has the Dominion in
his own Right, he may dispose thereof at his own Will. If therefore by his last
Will, he shall name his Successor, the Right passes by that Will.

12. Nor if the Monarch dye without any Will concerning the Succession
declared, it is not therefore to be presumed, it was his Will his Subjects,
which are to him as his children and Servants, should return again to the State
of Anarchy, that is to War and Hostility. For that were expressly against the
Law of Nature, which commands to procure Peace, and to maintain the same. It
is therefore to be conjectured with reason, that it was the intention to
bequeath them Peace, that is to say, a Power Coercive, whereby to keep them
from sedition amongst themselves; and rather in the Form of a Monarchy, then
any other Government; forasmuch as he, by the exercise thereof in his own
person, has declared, that he approves the same.

13. Farther, it is to be supposed, his Intention was, that his own Children
should be preferred in the Succession (when nothing to the contrary, is
expressly declared) before any other. For men naturally seek their own Honor,
and that consists in the honor of their Children after them.

14. Again, seeing every Monarch is supposed to desire to continue the
Governmen^ in his Successors, as long as he may; and that generally men are
endued with greate^ parts of Wisdom and Courage, by which al^ Monarchies are
kept from dis^olution, then Women, are it is to be presumed, where no express
Will is extant to the contrary, he prefers his Male children before the
Female. Not but that Women may govern and have in diverse ages and places
governed wisely, but are not so apt thereto in generals, as men.

15. Because the Sovereign Power is indivisible, it cannot be supposed, that he
intended the same should be divided, but that it should descend entirely upon
one of them, which is do be presumed, should be the Eldest, assigned thereto by
the Lot of Nature, because he appointed no other Lot for the Decision thereof.
Besides, what difference of ability soever there may be amongst the Brethren,
the Odds shall be adjudged to the Elder, because no Subject has authority
otherwise to judge thereof.

16. And for want of issue in the possessor, the Brother shall be presumed
Successor. For by the Judgment of Nature, next in Blood, is next in Love, and
next in Love, is next to preferment.

17. And as the Succession follows the first Monarch, so also it follows
Him or Her that is in possession; and consequently, the Children of Him in
possession, shall be prefe^red before the Children of his Father, or
Predecessor.

CHAP. V. 1. The Utility of the Commonwealth, etc. 2. The loss of liberty,
etc. 3. Monarchy approved, etc. 4. Monarchy less subject to Passion, etc. 5.6.
Subjects in Monarchy, etc. 7. Laws in Monarchy less changeable, etc. 8.
Monarchies less subject to dissolution.
HAving set forth the Nature of a Person Politic, and the three sotts thereof,
Democracy, Aristocracy, and Monarchy, In this Chapter shall be declared, the
Convencies, and Inconveniences, that arise from the same, both in general; and
of the said several sorts in particular. And first, seeing a Body Politic is
erected only for the ruling and governing of particular men, the benefit and
damage thereof consieth in the benefit or damage of being ruled. The benefit is
that for which a Body Politic was instituted, namely, the Peace and
Preservation of every particular man, then which it is not possible there can
be a greater, as has been touched before, Part 1. chap. 1. Sect. 12. And this
Benefit extends equally both to the Sovereign and to the Subjects. For he or
they that have the Sovereign Power, have but the Defense of their Persons, by
the Assistance of the Particulars; and every particular man has his Defense by
their Union in the Sovereign. As for other Benefits, which pertain not to their
safety and sufficiency, bu^ to their well and delightful being, such as are
superfluous riches, they so belong to the Sovereign, as they must also be in
the Subject; and so to the Subject, as they must also be in the Sovereign. For
the Riches and Treasure of the Sovereign, is the Dominion he has over the
riches of his Subjects. If therefore the Sovereign provide not so, as that
particular men may have means, both to preserve themselves, and also to preserve
the Public the common or sovereign treasure can be none. And on the other
side, if it were not for a common and public Treasure belonging to the
Sovereign Power, Men's private Riches would sooner serve to put them into
Confusion and War, then to secure and maintain them. Insomuch, as the profit of
the Soveraiegn and Subject goes always together. That distinction therefore
of Government, that There is one Government for the good of him that governs,
and another for the good of them that be governed; whereof the former is
Despotical, (that is Lordly) the other, a Government of freemen, is not right.
No more is the Opinion of them that hold it to be no city, which consists of
a Master and his Servants. They might as well say, it were no City that
consisted in a Father and his own issue, how numerous soever they were. For to
a Master that has no Children, the Servants have in them all those respects,
for which men love their Children. For they are his Strength, and his Honor.
And his power is no greater over them, then over his Children.

2. The inconvenience arising from Government in general, to him that governs
consists partly in the continual care and trouble about the business of
other men, that are his Subjects, and partly in the danger of his Person. For
the Head always is that part, not only where the care resideth, but also
against which the stroke of an Enemy most commonly is directed. To balance
this incommodity, the Sovereignty, together with the necessity of this Care and
Danger, comprehends so much Honor; Riches and Means, whereby to delight the
mind, as no private man's Wealth can attain unto. The inconveniences of
Government, in general to a Subject are none at all, if well considered, but
in appearance. There be two things that may trouble his mind, o^ two general
grievances, The one is loss of Liberty; The other, the uncertainty of Meum and
Tuum. For the first, it consists in this, That a Subject may no more govern
his own Actions according to his own discretion and judgment, (which is all
one) Conscience, as the present occasions from time to time shall dictate to
him, but must be tied to do according to that Will only, which once for all,
he had long ago laid up, and involved in the Wills of the mayor part of an
Assembly, or in the Will of some One man. But this is really no inconvenience.
For, as it has been showed before, it is the Only Means, by which we have any
possibility of preserving our selves. For if every man were allowed this
liberty, of following his Conscience, in such difference of Consciences, they
would not live together in peace an hour. But it appears a great
Inconvenience to every man in particular, to be debarred of this liberty,
because every one a part considers it as in himself, and not as in the rest,
by which means, L^berty appears in the likeness of Rule and Government over
others. For where one man is at Liberty, and the rest bound, there that One
has government; which honor, he that understands not so much, demanding by
the name simply of Liberty, thinks it a great grievance and injury to be
denied it. For the second grievance concerning Meum and Tuum, it is also none,
but in appearance only; it consists in this, That the Sovereign Power, takes
from him that which he used to enjoy, knowing no other propriety but use and
custom. But without such Sovereign Power, the Right of men is not Propriety
to any thing, but a community, no better then to have no right at all, as has
been showed, Part. 1. Chap. 1. Sect. 10. Propriety therefore being derived from
the Sovereign power, is not to be pretended against the same, especially, when
by it every subject has his propriety against every other Subject, which when
Sovereignty cease, he has not, because in that case they return to war
amongst t^ems^lves. Those Levies therefore which are made upon men's estates, by
the Sovereign Authority, are no more but the price of that Peace and Defense
which the sovraignty maintains for them. If this were not so, no Money nor
forces for the Wars, not any other public occasion, could justly be levied in
the World. For neither King, nor Democracy, nor Aristocracy, nor the Estates of
any Land, could do it, if the Soverainty could not. For in all those cases it
is levied by virtue of the Sovereignty. Nay more, by the three Estates, here
the Land of one man may be transferred to another, without Crime of his from
whom it was taken, and withomt pretense of public benefit, as has been done;
and this without injury, because done by the Sovereign Power. For the power
whereby it is done, is no less then Sovereign, and cannot be greater. Therefore
this Greivance for Meum and Tuum is not real, unless more be exacted then is
necessary; but it seems a Greivance, because to them that either know not the
Right of Sovereignty, or to whom that right belongs, it seems an injury,
and injury howsoever little the damage is always grievous as putting us in
mind of our disability to help our selves, and into Envy of the Power to do us
wrong.

3. Having spoken of the Inconveniences of the subject, by Government in
general, let us consider the same in the three several sorts thereof, namely,
Democracy, Aristocracy and Monarchy; whereof the two former are in effect but
one. For (as I have showed before) Democracy is but the Government of a few
Orators. The comparison therefore will be between Monarchy and Aristocracy: And
to omit that the World as it was created, so also it is governed by One God
Almighty; and that all the Ancients have have preferred Monarchy before other
Governments, both in opinion, because they feigned a Monarchial government
amongst their Gods, and also by their custom; for that in the most ancient
times all people were so governed; and that paternal Government which is
Monarchy, was instituted in the beginning from the Creation, and that other
Governments have proceeded from the dissolution thereof, called by the
Rebellious Nature of Mankind, and be but Pieces of broken Monarchies cemented
by Humane Wit, I will insist only on this comparison upon the inconvenies that
may happen to the subjects, in consequence to each of these Governments.

4. And first, it seems inconvenient there should be committed so great a
Power to one Man, as that it might be lawful to no other man or men to resist
the same; and some think it inconvenient eo nomine, because he has the power.
But this reason we may not by any means admit. For it makes it inconvenient to
be ruled by Almighty God, who without question has more power over every man,
then can be conferred upon any Monarch. This inconvenience therefore must be
derived, not from the Power, but from the affections and passions which reign
in every one, as well Monarch, as Subject, by which the Monarch may be swayd to
use that Power amiss. And because an Aristocracy consists of men, if the
passions of many men be more violent when they are assembled together, then the
passions of one man alone, it will follow, that the Inconvenience arising from
Passions will be greater in an Aristocracy then a Monarchy. But there is no
doubt, when things are debated in great Assemblies, but every man delivering
his opinion at large without interruption endeavour^th to make whatsoever he is
to set forth for Good, better; and what he would have apprehended as evil,
worse, as much as is possible, to the end his Counsel may take place; which
Counsel also is never without aim at his own benefit, or honor; every man's
end ^e^ng some good to himself. Now this cannot be done without working on the
Passions of the rest. And thus the Passions of these that are singly moderate,
are altogether vehement, even as a great many Coals, though but warm asunder,
being put together, inflame one another.

5. Another Inconvenience of Monarchy, is this, That the Monarch, besides the
Riches necessary for the Defense of the Common Wealth, may take so much more
from the Subjects, as may enrich his Children, Kindred and Favorites, to what
degree he pleases; which though it be indeed an Inconvenience, if he should so
do, yet is the same both greater in an Aristocracy, and also more likely to
come to pass. For their, not One only, but many have Children, Kindred, and
Friends to raise. And in that point they a^e as twenty Monarchs for One, and
likely to set forward one another Designs mutually, to the Oppression of all
the rest. The same also happens in a Democracy, if they all do agree,
otherwise they bring a worse Inconvenience, to wit, Sedition.

6. Another Inconvenience of Monarchy, is the Power of Dispencing with the
Execution of Justice, whereby the Family and Friends of the Monarch may with
impunity, commit outrages upon the People, or oppress them with Extortion. But
in Ar^stocracies, not only One, but many have Power of taking men out of the
Hands of Justice, and no man is willing his Kindred or Friends should be
punished according to their Demerits. And therefore they understand amongst
themselves without further speaking, as a tacit Covenant, Hodie mihi, cras
tibi.

7. Another Inconvenience of Monarchy, is the Power of altring Laws.
Concerning which, it is necessary that such a Power be, that Laws may be
altered, according as men's manners charg, or as the Coniuncture of all
Circumstances within and without the Common Wealth shall require; the change of
Law being then Inconvenient, when it proceeds from the Change, not of the
occasion, but of the minds of him or them, by whose Authority the Laws a^e
made. Now it is manifest enough of it self, that the mind of one man is not so
variable in that point, as are the Decrees of an Assembly. For not only they
have all their natural changes, but the change of any one man may be enough
with eloquence and reputation, or by solicitation and faction, to make that Law
to day, which another by the very same means shall abrogate to morrow.

8. Lastly, the greatest inconvenience that can happen to a Common Wealth, is
the Aptitude to dissolve into civil War, and to this are Monarchies much less
subject then any other Governments. For where the Union or Band of a common
Wealth is one Man, there is no distraction whereas in Assemblies, those that
are of different Opinions, and give different Counsel are apt to fall out
amongst themselves, and to cross the designs of the Common Wealth for one
another sake: and when they cannot have the honor of making good their own
devices, they yet seek the Honor to make the Counsels of the Adversaries prove
vain. And in this contention, when the opposite Factions happen to be any thing
equal in strength. they presently fall to war. Wherein necessity teaches both
sides, that an absolute Monarch, to wit, a General, is necessary both for their
Defense against one another, and also for the Peace of each Faction within it
self. But this Aptitude to Dissolution, is to be understood for an
Inconvenience in such Aristocracies only, where the Affairs of State are
debated in great and numerous Assemblies, as they were anciently in Athens, and
in Rome; and not in such as do nothing else in great Assemblies, but choose
Magistrates and Counselors, and commit the handling of State-affaires to a
Few; such as is the Aristocracy of Venice at this Day. For these are no more
apt to dissolve from this occasion, then Monarchies, the Counsel of State being
both in the one and the other alike.

CHAP. VI. 1. A Difficulty concerning absolute subjection to man, arising from
our absolute subjection to God Almighty, propounded. 2. That this Difficulty is
only amongst those Christians, that deny the Interpretation of Scripture, to
depend upon the Sovereign Authority of the Commonwealth. 3. That Humane Laws
are not made to govern the consciences of men, but their words and a^^ions. 4.
Places of Scripture to prove Obedience due from Chr^stians to their Sovereign
in all things. 5. A distinction propounded betwe^n a Fundamental point of
Faith, and a Superstruction. 6. An explication of the Points of Faith, that be
fundam^ntal. 7. The bel^ef of those Fundamental points, is all that is required
to salvation, as of Faith. 8. That other points not Fundamen^all, are not
necessary to salvation, as matter of Faith; and that no more is required by way
of Faith to the salvation of one man, th^n to another. 9. That Super^^ructions
are not points of the faith necessary to a Christian. 10. How faith and Justice
c^ncurre to salvation. 11. That in Christian Commonwealths, Obedience to God
and man stand well together. 12. This Tenet, Whatsoever is against the
conscience, is sin, interpreted 13. That all men do confess the necessity of
submitting of controversies to some Humane Authority. 14. That Christians under
an Infidel, are discharged of the Injustice of disobeying them, in that which
concerns the faith necessary to salvation, by not resisting.
HAving showed, that in all Commonwealths whatsoever, the necessity of Peace
and Government requires, that there be existent some Power, either in One man,
or in One Assembly of men, by the Name of the Power Sovereign, to which it is
not lawful for any Member of the same Commonwealth to disobey; There
occurreth now a difficulty, which if it be not removed, makes it unlawful for
a man to put himself under the Command of such Absolute Sovereignty, as is
required thereto. And the difficulty is this; We have amongst us the Word of
God for the Rule of our Actions: Now if we shall subject our selves to men
also, obliging our selves to do such Actions, as shall be by them commanded,
when the Commands of God and Man shall differ, we are to obey God, rather then
man; And consequently, the Covenant of general Obedience to man is unlaw^ull.

2. This difficulty has not been of very great Antiquity in the World. There
was no such Dilemna amongst the Jews; for their Civil Law, and Divine Law, was
one and the same Law of Moses; the Interpreters whereof were the Priests, whose
Power was subordinate to the Power of the King; as was the Power of Aaron to
the Power of Moses. Nor is it a controversy that was ever taken notice of
amongst the Grecians, Romans, or other Genti^es: for amongst these their
several Civil Laws, were the Rules whereby not only Righteousness and
Virtue, but also Religion, and the External Worship of God was ordered and
approved; that being esteemed the true worship of God which was (...),
according to the Laws Civil. Also those Christians that dwell under the
Temporal Dominion of the Bishop of Rome, are free from this Question; for that
they allow unto him (their Sovereign) to interpret the Scriptures, which are
the Law of God as he in his own Judgment shall think Right. This difficulty
therefore remains amongst, and troubles those Christians only, to whom it is
allowed, to take for the sense of the Scripture, that which they make thereof,
either by their own private Interpretation, or by the Inte^pretation of such as
are not called thereunto by public Authority; they that follow their own
Interpretation continually demanding Liberty of Conscience; and those that
follow the Interpretation of Others not ordained thereunto by the Sovereign of
the Commonwealth, requiring a Power in matters of Religion, either above the
Power Civil, or at least not depending on it.

3. To take away this scruple of Conscience, concerning Obedience to Humane
Laws, amongst those that interpret to themselves the Word of God in the Holy
Scriptures, I propound to their Consideration, first, That no humane Law is
intended to oblige the Conscience of a man, unless it break out into Action,
either of the Tongue, or other part of the Body. The Law made thereupon would
be of none effect, because no man is able to discern, but by Word or other
action, whether such Law be kept or broken. Nor did the Apostles themselves
pretend Dominion over men's Consciences concerning the faith they preached, but
only persuasion and instruction. And therefore S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.24.
writing to the Corinthians, concerning their controversies, that he and the
rest of the Apostles had no Dominion over their Faith, but were helpers of
their Joy.

4. And for the Actions of men which proceed from their consciences, the
regulating of which actions is the only Means of Peace, if they might not stand
with Justice, it were impossible that Justice toward God, and Peace amongst
men, should stand together in that Religion that teaches us, that Justice and
Peace should kiss each other, and in which we have so many precepts of absolute
Obedience to humane Authority; as Mat. 23.2, 3. we have this Precept. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe that observe and do. And yet were the Scribes and Pharisees not
priests, but men of temporal Authority. Again, Luke 11.17. Every Kingdom
divided against it self shall be desolate; and is not that Kingdom divided
against it self, where the actions of every one shall be ruled by his private
opinion or conscience, and yet those actions such as give occasion of offense
and Breach of Peace. Again, Romans 13.5. Wherefore you must be subject, not
because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake, Tit. 3.1. Put them in
remembrance, that they be subject to Principalities and Powers, 1. Pet.
2.13.14. submit your selves unto all manner of ordinance of Man, for the Lords
sake, whether it be unto the King, as unto the Superior, or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers. Jude verse
8. These Dreamers also that defile the flesh, and despise Government, and
speak evil of them that are in Authority. And forasmuch as all Subjects in
Common Wealths are in the nature of Children and servants, that which is a
command to them is a command to all Subjects. But to these S. Paul says,
Colos. 3.20.22. Children obey your Parents in all things, Servants be obedient
to your Masters according to the flesh in all things. And verse 23. Do it
heartily as to the Lo^d. These places considered, it seems strange to me,
that any man in a Christian common wealth, should have any occasion to deny his
Obedience to public Authority, upon this ground, that It is better to obey God
then Man. For though S. Peter and the Apostles did so answer the Council of the
Jews, that forbade them to preach Christ, there appears no reason that
Christians should allege the same against their Christian Governors that
command to preach Christ. To reconcile this seeming co^tradiction of simple
Obedience to God, and simple Obedience to man, we are to consider a christian
subject, as under a christian sovereign, or under an Infidel.

5. And under a Christian Sovereign we are to consider, what Actions we are
forbidden by God Almighty to obey them in, and what not. The Actions we are
forbidden to obey them in, are such only, as imply a denial of that Faith which
is necessary to our Salvation: for otherwise there can be no pretense of
disobedience; for why should a man incur the danger of a temporal death, by
displeasing of his superior, if it were not for fear of eternal Death
hereafter. It must therefore be inquired, what those propositions and Articles
be; the Belief whereof our Savior or his Apostles have declared to be such as
without beleiving them a man cannot be saved; and then all other points that
are now controverted and made distinction of Sects, Papists, Lutheran,
Calvinists, Arminians etc. as in old Time, the like made Paulists, Apollonians,
and Cephasians, must needs be such, as man needs not for the holding thereof,
deny Obedience to his Superiors. And for the points of Faith necessary to
Salvation, I shall call them Fundamental, and every other point a
Superstruction.

6. And without all controversy, there is not any more necessary Point to be
believed for man's salvation then this, That Jesus is the Messiah, that is, the
Christ; which Proposition is explicated in sundry sorts, but still the same in
effect; as that he is Gods anointed, for that is signified by the word Christ.
that He was the true and lawful King of Israel, The Son of David, the Savior
of the World, The Redeemer of Israel, The Salvation of God He that should come
into the World, the Son of God, and (which I desire by the way to have noted,
against the now Sect of Arrians) The begotten Son of God, Act. 3.13. Heb. 55.
The only begotten Son of God, 1 John 1.14.18. Joh. 3.16, 18. 1 John 4.9. That
he was God Joh. 1 1 John 20.28. That the Fullness of the God^ead dwelt in him
bodily. Moreover, The Holy one, the Holy one of God, The Forgiver ^f sins,,
That he is risen from the Dead. These are Explications, and Parts of that
General Article, that Jesus is the Christ. This Point therefore, and all the
Explications thereof are Fundamental; as also all such, as be evidently
inferred from thence: as, Belief in God the Father. Joh. 12.44. He that
beleveth in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me: 1 John 2.23, He
that denies the Son, has not the Father, Belief in God the Holy Ghost, of
whom Christ says, Joh. 14.26. But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my Name. And Joh. 15.16. But when the comforter shall
come whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth.
Belief of the scriptures, by which we believe those points, and of the
immortality of the Soul, without which we cannot believe that he is a Savior.

7. And as these are the fundamental points of faith necessary to salvation,
so also are they only necessary as matter of faith and also essential to the
calling of a christian; as may appear by many evident places of Holy Scripture:
Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eteral life,
and they are they which testify of me. Now, forasmuch as by the Scripture, is
meant there the Old Testament (the New being then not written) the belief of
that which was written concerning our Savior in the old Testament, was
sufficient belief for the obtaining of Eternal Life: but in the old Testament
there is nothing revealed concerning Christ, but that he is the Messiah, and
such things as belong to the Fundamental Points thereupon depending. And
therefore those fundamental Points are sufficient to salvation as of Faith. And
Joh. 6.28.29. Then said they unto him, what shall we do, that we might work the
works of God? Jesus answered and said unto them, this is the work of God, that
ye believe in him, whom he has sent. So that the Point to be believed is, That
Jesus Christ came forth from God, and he which believes it, works the works
of God. Joh. 11.26.27. Whosoever lives and beleiveth in me, shall never dye.
Beleevest thou this? She said unto him, yea Lord, I believe that thou art the
Christ the Son of God, which should come into the World. Hence follows, He
that beleiveth this shall never dye. Joh. 20.31. But these things are wri^ten
that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that in
beleiving, ye might have life through his Name. By which appears, that this
Fundamental Point is all that is required, as of Faith to our Salvation. 1 John 4.2. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come into the flesh
is of God: 1 John 5.1. Whosoever beleiveth that J^s^s is the Christ is born of
God, and ver. 5. Who is it that overcomes the World, but he that beleiveth
that Jesus is the Son of God: and verse. 13. These things have I written unto
you that believe in the Name of The Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
^ternall life. Act. 8.36.37. The Eunuch said, Here is Water, what does let me
to be baptized? And Philip said unto him, if thou beleevest with i^ thy heart,
thou may. He answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. This point therefore was sufficient for the reception of Man into
Baptism, that is to say, to Christianity. And Act. 16.30. The Keeper of the
Prison, fell down before Paul and Silas, and said, Sirs, what shall I do to be
saved? And they said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. And the Sermon of S.
Peter upon the day of Pentecost, was nothing else but an explication, that
Jesus was the Christ. And when they had heard him, asked him, what shall we do,
he said unto them, Ac. 2.38. Amend your lives, and be baptized evry one of you
in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins. Romans 10.9. If thou shall
conf^ss with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God
raised him up from the Dead, thou shall be saved. To these places may be added,
that wheresoever our Savior Christ does approve the Faith of any man, the
Proposition believed (if the same to be collected out of the Text) is always
some of those Fundamental Points before mentioned, or something Equivalent: as
the Faith of the Centurion, Mat. 8.8. Speak the word only, and my Servant
shall be healed, beleiving he was omnipotent: The Faith of the Woman, which had
an Issue of Blood, Math, 9.21. If I may but touch the Hem of his Garment,
implying, he was the Messiah, The Faith required of the blind men, Mat. 9.28.
Believe you that I am able to do this? The Faith of the Canaanitish Woman,
Matthew. 15.22. That he was the Son of David, implying the same. And so it is in
every one of those places (none excepted) where our Savior commends any man's
Faith, which because they are too many to insert here, I omit, and refer them
to his Inquisition that is not otherwise satisfied. And as there is no other
Faith required, so there was no other preaching: for the Prophets of the Old
Testament, preached no other, and John the Baptist preached only the Approach
of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is to say, of the Kingdom of Christ, the same
was the commission of the Apostles, Mat. 10.7. Go preach, saying, the kingdom
of Heaven is at hand. And Paul preaching amongst the Jews, Act. 18.5. did but
testify unto the Jews that, Jesus was the Christ. And the Heathens took notice
of Christians no otherwise, but by this name that they believed Jesus to be a
King, crying out. Act. 17.6. These are they that have subverted the state of
the World, and here they are, whom Jason has received. And these all do
against the Decrees of Caesar, saying, that there is another King, One Jesus.
And this was the Sum of the Predictions, the Sum of the Confessions of them
that believed, as well Men as Devils. This was the Title of his Cross, Jesus
of Nazareth, King of the Jews; This the occasion of the Crown of Thorns,
Scepter of Reed, and a man to carry his Cross; This was the Subject of the
Hosan^a's; And this was the Title, by which our Savior commanding to take
another man's goods, bad them say, The Lord has need: And by this Title, he
purged the Temple of the profane market kept there. Nor did the Apostles
themselves believe any more, then that Jesus was the M^ssiah, nor understand so
much; for they understood the Messiah to be no more then a Temporal King, till
after our Saviors Resurrection. Furthermore, this Point, that Christ is the
Messiah, is particularly set forth for Fundamental by that word, or some other
equivalent thereunto in diverse places. Upon the Confession of Peter, Matthew.
16.16. Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God, Our Savior ver. 18.
says, Upon this Rock will I build my Church. This point therefore is the whole
Foundation of Christ's Church. Romans 15.20. S. Paul raith, I so enforced my self
to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should have built upon
another man's foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10. S. Paul when he had reprehended the
Corinthians for their Sects, and curious Doctrines and Questions, he
distinguishes between Fundamental Points, and Superstruction; and says, I
have laid the Foundation, and another builds thereupon; but let every man
take heed how he builds upon it, For other Foundation can no man lay, then
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Colos. 2.6. As you have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and builded in him, and
stablished in the Faith.

8. Having showed this Proposition, Jesus is the Christ, to be the only
Fundamental and necessary point of Faith, I shall set down a few places more,
to show, that Other Points, though they may be true, are not so necessary to be
believed, as that a man may not be saved, though he believe them not. And
first, If a man could not be saved without assent of the Heart to the truth of
all Controversies, which are now in agitation concerning Religion, I cannot
see, how any man living can be saved; so full of subtilty, and curious
knowledge it is to be so great a Divine. Why therefore should a man think that
our Savior, who, Mat. 11.30. says, that His Yoke is easy, should require a
matter of that difficulty? or how are little Children said to believe. Mat.
18.6. or how could the good Thief be thought sufficiently catechized upon the
Cross? or S. Paul so perfect a Christian presently upon his Conversion? and
though there may be more Obedience required in him that has the Fundamental
points explicated unto him, then in him that has received the same but
implicitly; yet there is no more faith required for salvation in one man, then
in another. For if it be true, that Whosoever shall confess with his mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in his heart, that God raised him from the Dead, shall
be saved; as it is, Romans 10.9. and that Whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God, the Belief of that point is sufficient for the
salvation of any man whosoever he be, for as much as concerns Faith. And
seeing he that believes not that Jesus is the Christ, whatsoever he believe
else, cannot be saved, it follows, that there is no more required to the
salvation of one man, then another, in matter of Faith.

9. About these points Fundamental, there is little Controversy amongst
Christians, though otherwise of different Sects amongst themselves. And
therefore the Controversies of Religion, are altogether about Points
unnecessary to salvation; whereof some are Doctrines raised by Humane
Ratiocination, from the points Fundamental. As for Example; such Doctrines as
concern the Manner of the Real Presence, wherein are mingled tenets of Faith
concerning the Omnipotency and Divinity of Christ, with the Tenets of Aristotle
and the Peripatelicks, concerning Substance and Accidents, Species, Hypostasis,
and the Subsistence and Migration of Accidents from place to place; Words some
of them without meaning, and nothing but the Canting of Grecian Sophisters. And
these Doctrines are condemned expressly, Col. 2.8. where after S. Paul had
exhorted them to be rooted and builded in Christ, he gives them this farther
Caveat; Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceits, through the Traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the
World. And such, are such Doctrines, as are raised out of such places of the
Scriptures, as concern not the Foundation, by men's natural Reason; as about the
Concatenation of Causes, and the Manner of Gods Predestination; which are also
mingled with Philosophy: as if it were possible for men that know not in what
manner God sees, hears, or speaks, to know nevertheless the manner how he
intends, and predestinateth. A man therefore ought not to examine by Reason
any point, or draw any Consequence out of Scripture, by Reason, concerning the
nature of God Almighty, of which Reason is not capable. And therefore S. Paul,
Romans 12.3. gives a good Rule, That no man presume to understand above that
which is meet to understand, but that he understand according to Sobriety,
which they do not, who presume out of Scripture, by their own Interpretation,
to raise any Doctrine to the Understanding, concerning those things, which are
incomprehensible. And this whole controversy concerning the Predestination of
God, and the Free Will of Man, is not peculiar to Christian men. For we have
huge volumes of this subject, under the name of Fate and Contingency, disputed
between the Epicurians and the Stoics, and consequently it is not matter of
Faith, but of Philosophy: and so are also all the Questions concerning any
other Point, but the Foundation before named: and God receives a man which
part of the Question soever he holds. It was a Controversy in S. Paul's time,
whether a Christian Gentile might eat freely of any thing which the Christian
Jews did not: and the Jew condemned the Gentile that he did eat, to whom S.
Paul says, Romans 14.3, Let not him that eats not, judge him that eats: for
God has received him. And verse. 6. in the Question concerning the observing of
Holy Days, wherein the Gentiles the Jews differed, he says unto them, He
that observes the Day, observes it to the Lord, and he that observes not the
Day, observes it not to the Lord. And they who strive concerning such
Questions, and divide themselves into Sects, are not therefore to be accounted
zealous of the Faith, their strife being but carnal, which is confirmed by S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 3.4. When one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos,
are ye not carnal? For they are not Questions of Faith, but of wit, wherein
carnally men are inclined to seek the Mastery one of another. For nothing is
truly a Point of Faith, but that Jesus is the Christ; as S. Paul testifies, 1
Cor. 2.2. For I esteemed not the knowledge of any thing amongst you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. And 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timotheus, keep that which is
committed un^o thee, and avoid profane and vain bablings, and Opposition of
Science falsely so called, which while some profess, they have erred concerning
the Faith. 2 Timothy 2.16. Stay profane and vain bablings, etc. verse. 17. Of
which sort is Hymeneus and Philetus, which as concerning the truth, have erred,
saying, that the Resurrectionis past already. Whereby S. Paul showed, that the
Raising of Questions by Humane Ratiocination, though it be from the Fundamental
Points themselves, is not only not necessary, but most dangerous to the Faith
of a Christian. Out of all these places, I draw only this Conclusion in
general, That neither the points now in Controversy amongst Christians of
different Sects, or in any point that ever shall be in Controversy, excepting
only those that are contained in this Article, Jesus is the Christ, are
necessary to salvation, as of faith; though in matter of obedience, a man may
be bound not to oppose the same.

10. Although to the obtaining of Salvation, there be required no more, as has
been already declared out of the Holy Scriptures, as matter of Faith, but the
Belief of those Fundamental Articles before set forth, nevertheless, there are
required other things, as matter of obedience. For as it is not enough in
Temporal Kingdoms (to avoid the punishment which Kings may inflict) to
acknowledge the Right and Title of the King, without Obedience also to his
Laws; So also it is not enough, to acknowledge our Savior Christ to be the
King of Heaven, in which consists Christian Faith, unless also we endeavor
to obey his Laws, which are the Laws of the Kingdom of Heaven, in which
consists Christian Obedience. And forasmuch as the Laws of the Kingdom of
Heaven, are the Laws of Nature, as has been showed, Part. 1. Chap. 5. not only
Faith, but also the Observation of the Law of Nature, which is that for which a
man is called Just or Righteous, (in that sense, in which Justice is taken not
for the Absence of Guilt, but for the Endeavor and constant Will to do that
which is Just) not only Faith, but this Justice, which also from the effect
thereof, is called Repentance, and sometimes Works, is necessary to salvation.
So that Faith and Justice do both concur thereto; and in the several
acceptance of this word Justification, are properly said both of them to
justify; and the want of either of them is properly said to condemn. For not
only he that resists a King upon doubt of his Titl^, but also he that does it
upon the inordinatenesse of his Passions, deserves punishment. And when Faith
and Works are separated, not only the Faith is called Dead without Works, but
also Works are called Dead Works without Faith, And therefore S. James, Chap.
2.17. says, Even so the Faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self, and
verse. 26. For as the Body without the Spirit is dead, even so Faith without
works is dead. And S. Paul, Heb. 6.1. calls Works without Faith, Dead Works,
where he says; Not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from Dead Works.
And by these Dead Works, is understood not the Obedience and Justice of the
inward Man, but the opus operatum, or external Action, proceeding from fear of
punishment, or from vain glory, and desire to be honored of men: and these may
be separated from Faith, and conduce no way to a Man's Justification. And for
that cause, S. Paul, Romans 4. excludes the Righteousness of the Law, from
having part in the Justification of a sinner. For by the Law of Moses, which is
applied to men's Actions, and requires the Absence of Guilt, all men living are
liable to Damnation, and therefore no man is justified by Works, but by Faith
only. But if Works be taken for the endeavor to do them, that is, if the
Will be taken for the Deed, or Internal, for External Righteousness, then do
works contribute to Salvation. And then takes place that of S. James, Chap.
2.24. Ye see then how that of works a man is iustisted, and not of faith only.
And both of these are joined to salvation, as in S. Mark. 1.5. Repent and
believe the Gospel. And Luke 18.18. when a certain Ruler asked our Savior,
what he ought to do to inherit eternal life, he propounded to him the keeping
of the Commandments; which when the Ruler said he had kept, he propounded to
him the Faith, Sell all that thou have, and fellow me. And Joh. 3.36. He that
believes in the Son, has everlasting life. And He that obeys not the Son,
shall not see life. Where he manifestly joins Obedience and Faith together.
And Rom 1.17. The Just shall live by Faith: not every one, but the Just. For
also the Devils believe and tremble. But though both Faith and Justice (meaning
still by Justice, not absence of Guilt, but the Good Intentions of the Mind,
which is called Righteousness by God, that takes the Will for the Deed) be
both of them said to justify, yet are their Parts in the Act of Justification
to be distinguished. For Justice is said to justify, not because it absolveth,
but because it denominates him Just, and sets him in an estate, or capacity
of salvation, whenever he shall have Faith. But faith is said to justify,
that is, to absolve, because by it a just man is absolved of, and forgiven his
unjust Actions. And thus are reconciled the places of S. Paul, and S. James,
that Faith only justifies, and A man is justified by Faith only: and showed
how Faith and Repentance must concur to salvation.

11. These things considered, it will easily appear, That under the Sovereign
power of a Christian Common Wealth, there is no Danger of Damnation from
simple Obedience to Humane Laws: for in that the Sovereign allows
Christianity, no man is compelled to renounce that Faith, which is enough for
his Salvation, that is to say, the Fundamental Points. And for other Points,
seeing they are not neces^ary to salvation, if we conform our Actions to the
Laws, we do not only what we are allowed, but also what we are commanded by
the Law of Nature, which is the moral Law taught by our Savior Himself. And
it is part of that Obedience, which must concur to our Salvation.

12. And though it be true, whatsoever a man does against his Conscience, is
sin, yet the Obedience in these Cases is neither sin, nor against the
Conscience. For the Conscience being nothing else but a Man's settled judgment
and Opinion, when he has once transferred his Right of Judging to another,
that which shall be commanded, is no less his Judgment, then the Judgment of
that other. So that in Obedience to Laws, a man does still according to his
own Conscience, but not his private Conscience. And whatsoever is done
contrary to private Conscience, is then a Sin, when the Laws have left him to
his own liberty, and never else. And then whatsoever a man does, not only
believing it is ill done, but doubting whether it be ill or not, is done ill,
in case he may lawfully omit the doing.

13. And as it has been proved, that a man must submit his Opinions in matter
of Controversy to the Authority of the Common Wealth, so also is the same
confessed by the practice of every one of them that otherwise deny it. For who is
there differing in Opinion from another, and thinking himself to be in the
right, and the other in the wrong, that would not think it reasonable, if he be
of the same Opinion that the whole State allows, that the other should submit
his opinion also thereunto; or that would not be content, if not that one or a
few men, yet all the Divines of a whole Nation, or at least an Assembly of all
those he likes, should have the Power to determine all the Controversies of
Religion? or, who is there that would not be content, to submit his Opinions
either to the Pope, or to a Genenerall Council, or to a Provincial Council, or
to a Presbytery of his own Nation? And yet in all these Cases he submits
himself to no greater then Humane Authority.

Nor can a man be said to submit himself to Holy Scripture, that does not
submit himself to some or other for the Interpretation thereof. Or, why should
there be any Church Government at all instituted, if the Scripture it self
could do the Office of a Judge in Controversies of Faith,? But the Truth is
apparent, by continual Experience, that men seek not only Liberty of
Conscience, but of their Actions, nor that only, but a farther Liberty of
persuading others to their Opinions; nor that only, for every man desires
that the Sovereign Authority, should admit no other Opinions to be
maintained, but such as he himself holds.

14. The difficulty therefore of obeying both God and Man in a Christian Common
Wealth is none: All the difficulty rests in this Point, Whether he that has
received the Faith of Christ, having before subjected himself to the
Authority of an Infidel, be discharged of his Obedience thereby, or not, in
matters of Religion.

In which case it seems reasonable to think, that since all Covenants of
Obedience are entered into for the preservation preservation of a man's life, if
a man be content without Resistance to lay down his life, rather then obey the
commands of an Infidel, in so hard a Case he has sufficiently discharged
himself thereof. For no Covenant binds farther then to endeavor; and if a
man cannot assure himself to perform a just Duty, when thereby he is assured of
present Death, much less it can be expected, that a man should perform that,
for which he believes in his heart he shall be damned eternally. And thus much
concerning the Scruple of Conscience, that may arise concerning Obedience to
Humane Laws, in them that interpret the Law of God to themselves. It
remains, to remove the same scruple from them, that submit their
controversies to others not ordained thereunto by the Sovereign Authority. And
this I refer to the Chapter following.

CHAP. VII. 1. The Questions propounded, who are the Magistrates in the
Kingdom of Christ. 2. The Questions exemplified, in the Controversies between
Moses and Aaron, and between Moses and Corah. 3. Amongst the Jews, the Power
Temporal and Spiritual in the same Hand. 4. Parallel of the Twelve Princes of
Israel, and the twelve Apostles. 5. Parallel of Seventy Elders, and Seventy
Disciples. 6. The Hierarchy of the Church in our Saviors time, consisted in
the Twelve, and in the Seventy. 7. Why Christ ordained not Priests for
Sacrifices, as Moses did. 8. The Hierarchy of the Church in the Apostles time,
Apostles, Bishops, and Priests. 9. The Preaching of the Gospel, was not
commanding, but persuading. 10. Excommunication. Sovereigns immediate Rulers
Ecclesiastical under Christ. 11. That no man has any just Pretense of
Religion against Obedience to Commonwealth. God speaks to Man by his
Vicegerents.
IN the former Chapter have been removed those difficulties opposing our
Obedience to Humane Authority; which arise from misunderstanding of our
Saviors Title and Laws: in the former whereof, namely, his Title, consists
our Faith; and in the latter, our Justice. Now they who differ not amongst
themselves concerning his Title, and Laws, may nevertheless have different
opinions concerning his Magistrates, and the Au^hority he has given them. And
this is the cause, why many Christians have denied Obedience to their Princes,
pretending that our Savior Christ has not given this Magistracy to them but
to others. As for example, some say, to the Pope universally; some to a Synod
Aristocratical; Some, to a Synod Democraticall in every several Common Wealth;
and the Magistrates of Christ being they by whom he speaks, the Question is,
Whether he ^peak unto us by the Pope, or by Convocations of Bishops and
Ministers, or by Them that have the Sovereign Power in every Commonwealth.

2. This Controversy was the cause of those two Mutinies, that happened
against Moses in the Wilderness. The first by Aaron and his Sister Miriam, who
took upon them to censure Moses for marrying an Ethiopian woman. And the state
of the Question between them and Moses, they set forth, Numb. 12.2. in these
words, What has the Lord spoken but only by Moses? has be not spoken also by
us? and the Lord heard this, etc. and punished the same in Miriam, forgiving
Aaron upon his Repentance. And this is the case of all them that set up the
Priesthood against the Sovereignty. The other was of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, who with two hundred and fifty Captains gathered themselves together
against Moses, and against Aaron. The state of their Controversy was this,
Whether God were not with the Multitude, as well as with Moses, and every man
as holy as he. For Numb. 16.3. thus they say, You take too much upon you,
seeing all the Congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is amongst
them: wherefore then lift ye your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?
And this is the case of them that set up their private Consciences, and unite
themselves to take the Government of Religion out of the hands of Him or Them,
that have the Sovereign Power of the Common Wealth: which how well it pleases
God, may appear by the hideous punishment of Corah and his Accomplices.

3. In the Government therefore of Moses, there was no power neither Civil, nor
Spiritual, that was not derived from him. Nor in the State of Israel under
Kings, was there any Earthly Power by which those Kings were compellable to any
thing, or any Subject allowed to resist them in any case whatsoever. For though
the Prophets by extraordinary calling, did often admonish and threaten them,
yet they had no Authority over them. And therefore amongst the Jews, the power
Spiritual and Temporal, was always in the same Hand,

4. Our Savior Christ, as he was the rightful King of the Jews in particular,
as well as King of the Kingdom of Heaven, in the ordaining of Magistrates,
received that form of Policy, which was used by Moses. According to the number
of the Children of Jacob, Moses took unto him by the appointment of God, Numb.
1.4. twelve men, every one of the chief of their Tribe, which were to assist
him in the Muster of Israel. And these twelve, verse. 24. are called the Princes
of Israel, Twelve men, every one for the house of their Fathers, which are said
also, Numb. 7.2. To be heads over the Houses ^f their Fathers and Princes of
the Tribes, and ^ver them that were numbered. And these were every one equal
amongst themselves, In like manner our Savior took unto him Twelve Apostles
to be next unto him in Authority, of whom he says, Matthew. 19.28. When the Son
of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Majesty, ye shall follow me in the
Regeneration, shall sit also upon Twelve Thrones, and judge the Twelve Tribes
of Israel. And concerning the equality of the Twelve Apostles amongst
themselves, our Savior says, Matthew. 20.25. Ye know that the Lords of the
Gentiles have Domination over them, etc. verse. 26. But it shall not be so
amongst you; but whosoever will be greatest among you, let him be your servant.
And Matthew. 23.11. He that is greatest among you, let him be your Servant, And a
little before, verse. 8. Be not called Rabbi, for one is your Doctor, Christ,
and all ye are Brethren. And Act. 1. in the choosing of Matthias to be an
Apostle, though S. Peter used the part of a Prolocutor, yet did no man take
upon him the Authority of Election, but referred the same to Lot.

5. Again Moses had the command of God, Number. 11.16. Gather to me seventy men of
the Elders of Israel, whom thou know that they are the Elders of the People,
and Governors over them, and bring them unto the Tabernacle, etc. And Moses did
accordingly, verse. 24. And these were chosen to help Moses in bearing the
burden of the Government, as appears verse. 17. of the same Chapter. And as
the Twelve Princes of the Tribes were according to the number of Jacobs
Children; so were the seventy Elders according to the number of the persons
that went down with Jacob into Egypt. In like manner our Savior in his
Kingdom of Heaven, the Church, out of the whole number of those that believed
in him, ordained seventy Persons, which peculiarly were called the seventy
Disciples, to whom he gave power to preach the Gospel and Baptize.

6. In our Saviors time therefore, the Hierarchy of the Church consisted
(besides Himself that was the Head) of Twelve Apostles, who were equal amongst
themselves, but ordained over others, as were the twelve Heads of the Tribes,
or seventy Disciples, who had every one of them power to Baptize and Teach, and
help to govern the whole Flock.

7. And whereas in the Common Wealth instituted by Moses, there was not only an
High Priest for the present, but also a Succession and Order of Priest; it may
be demanded Why our Savior Christ did not ordain the like? To which may be
answered, That the High Priesthood, for as much as concerns the Authority
thereof, was in the Person of Christ, as he was Christ, that is, King. So also
was it in Moses, Aaron having the Ministerial part only. For notwithstanding
that Aaron was the High Priest, yet the consecration of him belonged to Moses
Exodus 29.1. All the Utensils of sacrifice, and other holy Things, were ordered
by Moses, and in sum, the whole Levitical Law was delivered by God, by the hand
of Moses, who was to Aaron a God; and Aaron to him a Mouth. And for the
Ministerial part, there could no High Priest be ordained but himself: for
seeing our Savior was himself the Sacrifice, who but himself could offer him
up? And for the celebration of that sacrifice for ever after, our Savior
annexed the Priesthood to those whom he had appointed to govern in the Church.

8. After the ascension of our Savior, the Apostles dispersed themselves for
the spreading of the Gospel, and continually as they converted any number of
men, in any city, or region, to the Faith; they chose out such as they thought
fittest to direct them in matter of conversation and life, according to Christ's
law, and to explicate unto them, that Mystery of Christ come in the flesh,
that is to say, to unfold unto them at large the office of the Messiah. And of
those Elders some were subordinate to others, according as the Apostles who
ordained them, thought meet: so S. Paul gave power unto Titus, to ordain Elders
in Crete, and to redress things that were amiss. So that Titus was an Elder and
ordained Elders. Tit. 1.5. For this cause I left thee in Creet, that thou
should continue to redress the things that remain, and ordain Elders in
every City, where the word is (...) that is constitute; whereby it appears,
that in the Apostles times, one Elder had authority over another, to ordain and
rule them. For, 1 Timothy 5.16. Timothy an Elder, is made judge of accusations
against other Elders. And Act. 14.23. The Disciples are said to ordain Elders,
for all the congregations of the cities, they had preached in. And though the
word there be (...), yet it signifies not election, by holding up of hands,
but simply and absolutely Ordination. For the ordinary choosing of Magistrates
amongst the Grecians, which were all either popularly governed, or else by
Oligarehy, being performed by holding up of hands, made that word be taken
simply, for an Election, or Ordination, howsoever made. And thus in the
Primitive Church, the Hierarchy of the Church was Apostles, Elders that
governed other Elders, and Elders that ruled not, but their office was to
preach, to administer the Sacraments, to offer up prayers and thanksgiving in
the name of the People. But at that time there appeared no distinction between
the names of Bishop and Elder. But immediately after the Apostles time, the word
Bishop was taken to signify such an Elder as had the government of Elders; and
other Elders, were called by the name of Priests, which signifies the same
that Elder does. And thus the Government of Bishops has a Divine pattern in
the twelve Rulers, and seventy Elders of Israel, in the twelve Apostles, and
seventy Disciples of our Savior, in the ruling Elders, and not Ruling-Elders
in the time of the Apostles.

9. And thus much of the Magistrates over Christ's Flock in the primitive
Church. For the office of a Minister, or Ministress was to be subject to the
Flock, and to serve them in those things which appertained to their temporal
business. The next thing to be considered is the Authority which our Savior
gave to them, either over those whom they had converted, or those whom they
were about to convert. And for these latter, which as yet were without the
Church, the authority which our Savior gave to his Apostles was no more but
this, To preach unto them that Jesus was the Christ, and to explicate the same
in all points, that concern the Kingdom of Heaven, and to persuade men to
embrace our Saviors Doctrine, but by no means to compel any man to be subject
to them: for seeing the Laws of the Kingdom of Heaven, as has been showed,
Par. 1. chap. 5. Sect. 10. are dictated to the conscience only, which is not
subject to compulsion and constraint, it was not congruent to the style of the
King of Heaven to constrain men to submit their actions to him, but to advise
them only; nor for him that professes the Sum of his law to be love, to extort
any duty from us with fear of temporal punishment. And therefore as the
mighty men in the world, that hold others in subjection, by force, are called
in Scripture by the name of hunters, so our Savior calls those whom he
appointed to draw the world unto him, by subduing their affections, Fishers.
And therefore he says to Peter and Andrew, Math 4.19. Follow me and I will
make ye fishers of men. And Luke 10.3. Behol^ (says Christ) I send ye forth
as Lambs amongst Wolves. And it were to no end to give them the right of
compelling without strengthing the same with greater power then of Lambs
amongst Wolves. Moreover, Math 10. where our Savior gives a commission to his
twelve Apostles. to go forth and convert the Nations to the Faith, he gives
them no authority of Coercion and punishment, but only says, verse. 14.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that house or that City, shake off the dust of your fee. It shall be easier for
the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgmemt then for that city.
Whereby it is manifest, that all that the Apostles could do by their authority,
was no more than to renounce communion with them, and leave their punishment to
God Almighty, in the day of Judgment. Likewise the comparisons of the Kingdom
of Heaven, to the seed Math 13.3. and to the Leven, Math 13.33. does intimate
unto us, that the increase thereof ought to proceed from internal operation of
Gods Word preached, and not from any Law or compulsion of them that preach it.
Moreover our Savior himself says Joh. 18.36. That his Kingdom is not of
this World, and consequently his Magistrates derive not from him any authority
of punishing men in this World. And therefore also Math 26.52. After S. Peter
had drawn his sword in his defense, our Savior says, Put up thy sword into
his place. For all that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. And verse.
54. How then shall the Scriptures be fullfilled, which say, that it must be so?
showing out of the Scriptures, that the Kingdom of Christ was not to be
defended by the sword.

10. But concerning the authority of the Apostles or Bishops over those who
were all-^eady converted and within the Church, ^here be that think it greater
then over them without. For some have said. Though the Law of Christ deprive no
Prince of his Dominion, and Paul did rightly appeal unto Caesar, whilst Kings
were ^nfidells and out of the Church, yet when they became Christians, and of
their own accord under went the Laws of the Gospel, presently as sheep to a
shepherd, and as Members to the Head, they became subject to the Prelate of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Bell. Lib. De Romans Pont. Chap. 29. which whether it
be true or not, is to be considered by that light which we have from the holy
Scripture, concerning the power of our Savior and his Apostles* over such as
they had converted. But our Savior, as he imitated the commonwealth of the
Jews in his Magistrates, the twelve and the seventy, so did he also in the
Censure of the Church, which was Excommunication; but amongst the Jews, the
Church did put the Excommunicated persons from the Congregation, which they
might do by their Power Temporal; but our Savior and his Apostles, who took
upon them no such Power, could not forbid the Excommunicated person to enter
into any place and Congregation, into which he was permitted to enter, by the
Prince, or Sovereign of the place. For that had been to deprive the Sovereign
of his Authority. And therefore the Excommunication of a Person subject to an
Earthly power, was but a Declaration of the Church, which did excommunicate,
that the person so excommunicated was to be reputed still as an Infidel, but
not to be driven by their Authority out of any company, he might otherwise
lawfully come into. And this is it our Savior says, Math. 18.17. If he refuse
to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican. So
that the whole effect of excommunicating a Christan Prince, is no more then he
or they that so excommunicate him depart and banish themselves out of his
Dominion. Nor can they thereupon discharge any of his subjects of their
obedience to him; for that were to deprive him of his Dominion; which they may
not do, for being out of the Church. It is confessed by them that make this
objection, and proved in the former Section, that our Savior gave no Authority
to his Apostles to be judges over them. And therefore in no case can the
Sovereign power of a Commonwealth be subject to any Authority Ecclesiastical,
besides that of Christ himself. And though he be informed concerning the
Kingdom of Heaven and subject himself thereto, at the persuasions of persons
Ecclesiastical, yet is he not thereby subject to their Government and Rule. For
if it were by their Authority he took that Yoke upon him, and not by their
Persuasion, then by the same Authority he might cast it off. But this is
unlawful. For i^ all the Churches in the World should renounce the Christian
Faith, yet is not this sufficient Authority for any of the Members to do the
same. It is manifest therefore, that they who have Sovereign Power, are
Immediate Rulers of the Church under Christ, and all other but subordinate to
them. If that were not, but Kings should command one thing upon pain of Death,
and Priests another, upon pain of Damnation, it would be impossible that Peace
and Religion should stand together.

11. And therefore there is no just Cause for any man to withdraw his Obedience
from the Sovereign State, upon pretense, that Christ had ordained any State
Ecclesiastical above it. And though Kings take not upon them the Ministerial
Priesthood, yet are they not so merely Laick, as not to have Sacerdotall
Jurisdiction. To conclude this Chapter; Since God speaks not in these Days
to any man by his private Interpretation of the Scriptures, nor by the
Interpretation of any Power above or not depending on the Sovereign Power of
every Common Wealth, it remains, that he speaks by his Vice-Gods, or
Lievtenants here on Earth, that is to say, by Sovereign Kings, or such as have
Sovereign Authority as well as they.

CHAP. VIII 1. The things that dispose to Rebellion, Discontent, Pretense, and
hope of Success. 2. Discontent that disposes to Sedition, consists partly
in fear of Want, or punishment. 3. Partly in Ambition. 4. Six heads of
pretenses to Rebellion 5. The first of them, That men ought to do nothing
against Conscience, confuted. 6. The second, That Sovereigns are subject to
their own Laws, confuted. 7. The third, That the Sovereignty is divisible,
confuted. 8. The fourth, That Subjects have a Propertye distinct from the
Dominion of the Sovereign confuted. 9. The fifth. That the People is a Person
distinct from the Sovereign, confuted. 10. The sixth, That tirannicide is
lawful confuted. 11. Four Heads of Hope of success in Rebellion. 12. Two
things necessary to an Author of Rebellion, much Eloquence, and little Wisdom.
13. That the Authors of Rebellion necessarily are to be men of little Wisdom.
14. That the same are necessarily Eloquent. 15. In what manner they concur to
their common Effects.
HItherto of the Causes why, and the Manner how, men have made Common Wealths.
In this Chapter I shall show briefly by what causes, and in what manner they be
again destroyed; Not meaning to say any thing concerning the Dissolution of a
Common Wealth, from foreign Invasions, which is as it were the violent Death
thereof. I shall speak only of Sedition, which is also the Death of the
Commonwealth, but like to that which happens to a man from sickness and
Distemper. To dispose men to Sedition, three things concur. The first is
discontent; for as long as a man thinks himself well, and that the present
Government stands not in his way to hinder his proceeding from well to
better, it is impossible for him to desire the change thereof. The second is
pretense of Right; for though a man be Discontent, yet if in his own Opinion
there be no just Cause of stirring against, or resisting the Government
established, nor any Pretense to justify his Resistance, and to procure Aid, he
will never show it. The third is hope of success: For it were madness to
attempt without hope, when to fail, is to dye the Death of a Traitor. Without
these three, Discontent, Pretense, and Hope, there can be no Rebellion: and
when the same are all together, there wants Nothing thereto, but a Man of
Credit to set up the Standard, and to blow the Trumpet.

2. And as for Discontent, it is of two sorts: For it consists either in
Bodily Pain present or expected, or else in Trouble of the Mind; (which is the
general Division of Pleasure and Pain, Part 1. Cha. 7 Sect. 9.) The Presence of
Bodily Pain disposes not to Sedition; The fear of it does. As for Example;
When a great Multitude or Heap of people, have concurred to a Crime worthy of
Death, they join together, and take Arms to defend themselves for fear
thereof. So also the Fear of Want, or in present Want, the Fear of Arrests
and Imprisonment dispose to Sedition. And therefore great Exactions, though the
Right thereof be acknowledged, have caused great Seditions. As in the time of
Hen 7. the Seditions of the Cornish men that refused to pay a Subsidy, and
under the Conduct of the Lord Audley, gave the King Battle upon Black Heath;
and that of the Northern People, who in the some Kings Time, for demanding a
Subsidy granted in Parliament, murdered the Ea^l of Northumberland in his
house.

3. Thirdly, the other sort of Discontent, which troubles the Mind of them who
otherwise live at ease, without fear of Want, or danger of Violence, arises
only from a sense of their Want of that Power, and that Honor and Testimony
thereof, which they think is due unto them. For all Joy and Grief of mind
consisting (as has been said Part 1. Chap. 9. Sect. 21.) in a contention for
Precedence to them with whom they compare themselves, such men must needs take
it ill, and be greived with the State, as find themselves postposed to those
in Honor, whom they think they excel in Virtue and Ability to govern. And
this is it for which they think themselves regarded but as Slaves. Now seeing
Freedom cannot stand together with Subjection, Liberty in a Common Wealth is
nothing but Government and Rule, which because it cannot be divided, men must
expect in Common; and that can be no where but in the Popular State or
Democracy. And Aristotle says well, lib. 6. c. 2. of his Politics, The Ground
or Intention of a Democracy, is Liberty. Which he confirms in these words;
For men ordinarily say this, That no man can partake of Liberty, but only in a
Popular Common Wealth: Whosoever^ therefore in a Monarchical Estate* where the
Sovereign Power is absolutely in one Man, claims Liberty, claims (if the
hardest construction should be made thereof) either to have the Sovereignty in
his turn, or to be Colleague with him that has it; or to have the Monarchy
changed into a Democracy. But if the same be construed (with pardon of that
unskilful expression) according to the Intention of him that claims, then
does he thereby claim no more but this, That the Sovereign should take notice
of his Ability and Deserving, and put him into employment and place of
subordinate Government, rather then others that deserve less. And as one
claims, so does another, every man esteeming his own Desert greatest. Amongst
all those that pretend to, or are ambitious of such Honor, a few only can be
served, unless it be in a Democracy; the rest therefore must be Discontent.
And so much of the first Thing that disposes to Rebellion, namely, Discontent
consisting in Fear, and Ambition.

4. The second thing that disposes to Rebellion, is Pretense of Right. And
that is when men have an Opinion, or pretend to have an Opinion, That in
certain cases they may lawfully resist Him or Them that have the Sovereign
Power, or deprive him or them of the Means to execute the same. Of which
Pretenses, there be six special Cases. One is, when the Command is against
their Conscience, and they believe, it is unlawful for a Subject at the Command
of the Sovereign Power, to do any Action, which he thinks in his own
Conscience not lawful for him to do, or to omit any Action, which he thinks
not lawful for him to omit. Another is, when the Command is against the Laws,
and they think the Sovereign Power in such sort obliged to his own Laws, as
the Subject is; and that when he performs not his Duty, they may resist his
Power. A Third is, when they receive Commands from some man or men, and a
Supersedeas to the same from others, and think the Authority is equal, as if
the Sovereign power were divided. A fourth is, when they are commanded to
contribute their Persons or Money to the Public service, and think they have a
Propriety in the same distinct from the Dominion of the Sovereign Power; and
that therefore they are not bound to contribute their Goods and Persons, no
more then every man shall of himself think fit. A Fifth, when the Commands seem
hurtful to the People; and they think every one of them, that the Opinion and
Sense of the People, is the same with the Opinion of himself, and those that
consent with him, calling by the Name of People, any Multitude of his own
Faction. The sixth is, when the Commands are grievous; and they account him
that commands grievous things, a Tyrant; and a Tyrannicide, that is the
killing of a Tyrant, not only Lawful, but also Laudable.

5. All these Opinions are maintained in the Books of the Dogmaticks, and
diverse of them taught in public Chaires, and nevertheless are most
incompatible with Peace and Government, and contradictory to the necessary and
demonstrable rules of the same. And for the first, namely, That a man may
lawfully do or omit any thing against his Conscience, and from whence arise
all Seditions concerning Religion and Ecclesiastical Government, it has been
plainly declared in the two last Chapters, that such Opinion is erroneous. For
those two Chapters have been wholly spent, to prove, That Christian Religion
not only forbids not, but also commands, that in every Common Wealth,
every Subject should in all things to the uttermost of his Power, obey the
Commands of him or them that is the Sovereign thereof, and that a man in so
obeying, does according to his Conscience and Judgment, as having deposited
his Judgment in all Controversies in the hands of the Sovereign Power; and
that this Error proceeds from the Ignorance of What and by Whom God Almighty
speaks.

6. As for the second Opinion, which is this, That the Sovereign is in such
sort obliged to his own Laws, as the Subject is; the contrary thereof has been
showed, Part 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. by which it appears, That
the Sovereign Power is not to be resisted; That it carries the Sword both of
War and Justice; That it has Right of deciding all Controversies, both
Judicial, and Deliberative; that it has the the making of all the Laws
Civil, That it appoints Magistrates and Public Ministers, and That it
implies an Universal Impunity. How can He or They be said to be subject to
the Laws which they may abrogate at their pleasure, or break without fear of
punishment? And this Error seems to proceed from this, That men ordinarily
understand not aright, what is meant by this word Law, confounding Law and
Covenant, as if they signify the same Thing. But Law implies a Command;
Covenant is but a Promise. And not every Command is a Law, but only (Part 1.
Chap. 13. Sect. 6.) when the Command is the Reason we have of doing the Action
commanded. And then only is the Reason of our Actions in the Command, when the
Omitting is therefore Hurtful, because the Action was commanded, not because it
was hurtful of it self; and doing contrary to a Command, were not at all
Hurtful, if there were not a Right in him that commands to punish him that so
does. He or They that have all Punishments in their own disposing, cannot be so
commanded, as to receive hurt for disobeying, and consequently no Command can
be a Law unto them. It is an Error therefore to think, That the Power which is
virtually the whole Power of the Common Wealth, and which in whomsoever it
resideth, is usually called Supreme, ^r Sovereign, can be subject to any Law
but that of God Almighty.

7. The third Opinion, That the Sovereign Power may be divided, is no less an
Error then the former, as has been proved, Part 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 15. And if
there were a Common Wealth wherein the Rights of Sovereignty were divided, we
must confess with Bod^n, lib. 2. Chap. 1. De Repub. That they are not rightly
to be called Common Wealths but the Corruption of Common Wealths. For if one
part should have power to make the Laws for all, they would by their Laws at
their pleasure, forbid others, To make Peace or War, To levy Taxes, or To yield
Fealty and Homage without their leave; and they that had the Right to make
Peace and War, and command the Militia, would forbid the making of other Laws,
then what themselves liked. And though Monarchies stand long, wherein the Right
of Sovereignty has seemed so divided, because Monarchy of it self is a durable
kind of Government, yet Monarchs have been thereby diverse times thrust out of
their Possession. But the truth is, that the Right of Sovereignty is such, as
He or They that have it, cannot (though they would) give away any part thereof,
and retain the Rest. As for example; If we should suppose the People of Rome
to have had the absolute Sovereignty of the Roman State, and to have chosen
them a Council by the Name of the Senate, and that to this Senate they had
given the Supreme Power of making Laws, Reserving nevertheless to themselves
in direct and express Terms, the whole Right and Title of the Sovereignty;
(which may easily happen amongst them that see not the inseparable Connection
between the Sovereign Power, and the Power of making Laws) I say, this Grant
of the People to the Senate, is of no effect, and the Power of making Laws is
in the People still. For the Senate understanding it to be the Will, in
intention of the People to r^tain the Sovereignty, ought not to take that for
granted, which was contradictory thereto, and passed by Error. For Part 1.
Chap. 13. Sect. 9. In contradictory Promises, that which is directly promised,
is preferrd before that which is oppositp thereunto by Consequence, because the
Consequence of a thing is not always obscured, as is the Thing it self. The
Error concerning Mixed Government has proceeded from want of Understanding of
what is meant by this word, Body Politic, and how it signifies not the
Concord, but the Union of many men. And though in the Chapters of subordinate
Corporations, a Corporation being declared to be one Person in Law, yet the
same has not been taken notice of in the Body of a Common Wealth or City, nor
have any of those inumerable Writers of Politics, observed and such Union.

8. The Fourth Opinion, to wit, That Subjects have their Meum, Tuum, and Suum,
in property, not only by Virtue of the Sovereign Power over them all, distinct
from one another, but also against the Sovereign himself, by which they would
pretend to contribute nothing to the Public, but what they please, has been
already confuted, by proving the Absoluteness of the Sovereignty and more
perticularly, Part 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 2. and arises from this, That they
understand not ordinarily that before the Institution of Sovereign Power, Meum
and Tuum employed no Propriety, but a Community, where every man had right to
every Thing, and was in state of war with every man.

9. The fifth opinion, That the People is a distinct Body from Him or Them that
have the Sovereignty over them, is an Error already confuted Part 2. Chap. 2.
Sect. 11. where is showed, that when men say, The People rebelleth, it is to be
understood of those particular persons only and not of the whole Nation. And
when the People claims any thing otherwise then by the Voice of the Sovereign
Power, it is not the claim of the people, but only of those particular men,
that claim in their own persons. And this Error arises from the equivocation
of the word People.

10 Lastly, for the Opinion, That Tyrannicide is lawful, meaning by a Tyrant,
any man in whom resideth the Right of Sovereignty, is no less false and
pernicious to Humane Society, then frequent in the Writings of those Moral
Philosophers, Seneca and others, so greatly esteemed amongst us. For when a man
has the Right of Sovereignty, he cannot justly be punished, as has been often
showed already, and therefore much less deposed, or put to Death. And
howsoever he might deserve punishment, yet punishment is unjust without
Judgment preceding, and Judgment unjust without Power of Judicature, which a
Subject has not over a Sovereign. But this Doctrine proceeds from the
Schools of Greece, and from those that writ in the Roman State, in which not
only the Name of a Tyrant, but of a King was hateful.

11. Beside Discontent to the disposing of a Man to Rebellion, and Pretense
there is required in the third place, Hope of Success, which consists in
four Points: 1. That the discontented have mutual Intelligence. 2. That they
have sufficient Number. 3. That they have Arms. 4. That they agree upon an
Head. For these four must concur to the making of one Body of Rebellion, in
which Intelligence is the Life, Number the Limbs, Arms the strength, and an
Head the Unity, by which they are directed to one and the same Action.

12. The Authors of Rebellion, that is, the men that breed these Dispositions
to Rebel in others, of necessity must have in them these three Qual^ties. 1. To
be discontented themselves. 2. To be men of mean Judgment and Capacity. And
thirdly, to be Eloquent men, or good Orators. And as for their Discontent, from
whence it may proceed, has been already declared And for the second and third,
I am to show now, first, how they may stand together; for it seems a
contradiction, to place small Judgment, and great Eloquence, or (as they call
it) Powerful speaking in the same man. And then in what manner they concur, to
dispose other men to Sedition.

13. It was noted by Salust, That in Catiline (who was Author of the greatest
Sedition that ever was in Rome) there was Eloquentiae Satis, Sapientiae parum,
Eloquence sufficient but little Wisdom. And perhaps this was said of Catiline,
as he was Catiline. But it was true of him, as an Author of Sedition. For, the
Conjunction of these two Qualities made him not Catiline, but Seditious. And
that it may be understood, how want of Wisdom, and store of Eloquence, may
stand together, we are to consider, what it is we call Wisdom, and what
Eloquence. And therefore I shall here again remember some things, that have
been said already, Part 1. chap. 5.6. It is manifest that Wisdom consists in
Knowledge. Now of Knowledge there are two kinds; whereof the one is the
Remembrance of such Things, as we have conceived by our Senses, and of the
Order, in which they follow one another. And this Knowledge is called
Experience; and the Wisdom that proceeds from it, is that Ability to
conjecture by the present, of what is past, and to come, which men call
Prudence. This being so, it is manifest presently, that the Author of Sedition,
whosoever he be, must not be Prudent. For if he consider and take his
Experience aright, concerning the Success which they have had, who have been
the Movers and Authors of Sedition, either in this or any other State, he shall
find, that for one man that has thereby advanced himself to honor, twenty
have come to a Reproachful end. The other kind of Knowledge, is the Remembrance
of the Names or Appellations of things, and how every thing is called, which is
in matters of Common Conversation, a Remembrance of Pacts and Covenants of men
made amongst themselves, concerning how to be understood of one another. And
this kind of Knowledge is generally called Science, and the conclusions thereof
Truth. But when men remember not how things are named, by general agreement,
but either mistake and mis-name things, or name them aright by chance, they are
not said to have Science, but Opinion, and the Conclusions thence proceeding,
are uncertain, and for the most part erroneous. Now that Science in particular,
from which proceed the true and evident conclusions of what is Right and Wrong,
and what is Good and Hurtful to the Being, and Well-being of Mankind, the
Latins call Sapientia, and we by the general Name of Wisdom. For generally,
not he that has skill in Geometry, or any other Science speculative, but only
he that understands what conduces to the good and government of the people,
is called a Wise man. Now that no Author of Sedition can be wise in this
Acceptance of the Word, is sufficiently proved, in that it has been already
demonstrated, that no Pretense of Sedition can be right or Just. And therefore
the Authors of Sedition must be ignorant of the Right of State, that is to say,
Unwise. It remains therefore, that they be such, as name things, not
according to their true and generally agreed upon Names, but call Right and
Wrong, Good and Bad, according to their Passions, or according to the
Authorities of such, as they admire, as Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and others
of like Authority, who have given the names of Right and Wrong, as their
Passions have dictated; or have followed the Authotity of other men, as we do
theirs. It is required therefore in an Author of Sedition, that he think Right,
that which is Wrong; and profitable, that which is pernicious; and consequently
that there be in him Sapientiae parum, little Wisdom.

14. Eloquence is nothing else but the Power of winning Belief of what we say.
And to that end we must have Aid from the Passions of the Hearer. Now to
Demonstration and Teaching of the Truth, there are required Long Deductions,
and great Attention, which is unpleasant to the Hearer. Therefore they which
seek not Truth, but Belief, must take another way, and not only derive what
they would have to be believed from somewhat believed already, but also by
Aggravations and Extenuations, make Good and Bad, Right and VVrong, appear
Great or Less, according as shall serve their turns. And such is the Power of
Eloquence, as many times a man is made to believe thereby, that he sensibly
feels smart and damage, when he feels none, and to enter into rage and
indignation, without any other cause, then what is in the words and passion of
the speaker. This considered, together with the Business that he has to do,
who is the Author of Rebellion, namely, to make men believe, that their
Rebellion is just, their Discontents grounded upon great Injuries, and their
Hopes great; There needs no more to prove, there can be no Author of
Rebellion, that is not an Eloquent and Powerful Speaker, and withal (as has
been said before) a man of little Wisdom. For the Faculty of speaking
powerfully, consists in an Habit gotten of putting together passionate Words,
and applying them to the present passions of the Hearer.

15. Seeing then Eloquence and want of Discretion concur to the stirring of
Rebellion, it may be demanded, what part each of these acts therein. The
Daughters of Pelias King of Thessaly, desiring to restore their old Decrepit
Father to the Vigor of his Youth, by the Counsel of Medea, chopped him in
pieces, and set him a boiling with I know not what Herbs in a Cauldron, but
could not revive him again. So when Eloquence and want of Judgment go
together, ^ant of Judgment like the Daughters of Pelias consents through
Eloquence, which is as the Witchcraft of Medea, to cut the common Wealth in
pieces, upon Pretense, or Hope of Reformation, which when things are in
combustion, they are not able to effect.

CHAP. IX. 1. The Law over Sovereigns, Salus Populi. 2. That Sovereigns ought
to establish the Religion they hold, for best. 3. That to forbid unnatural
copulation, promiscuous use of Women etc. is the Law of Nature. 4. That to
leave man as much Liberty as may be, etc is the Duty of a Sovereign by the Law
of Nature. 5. Meum and Tuum to be set out to the Subjects distinct from one
another, etc. a Duty of Sovereigns by the Law of Nature. 6. An extraordinary
Power for Judging the Abuses of Magistrates necessary, etc. 7. The suppressing
of Popularity, etc. necessary, etc. 8. The Institution of Youth, etc.
necessary, etc. 9. Avoiding of unnecessary War, a necessary Duty of the
Sovereign, ctc.
HAving hitherto set forth how a Body Politic is made, and how it may be
destroyed, this place requires to say something concerning the preservation of
the same, not purposing to enter into the particulars of the Art of Government,
but to sum up the general Heads, wherein such Art is to be employed, and in
which consists the Duty of Him or Them that have the Sovereign Power. For the
Duty of a Sovereign consists in the Good Government of the People. And
although the Acts of Sovereign power be no Injuries to the Subjects who have
consented to the same by their implicit Wills, yet when they tend to the hurt
of the people in general, they be Breaches of the Law of Nature, and of the
Divine Law; and consequently the contrary Acts are the Duties of Sovereigns,
and required at their hands to the utmost of their endeavor by God Almighty,
under the pain of Eternal Death. And as the Art and Duty of Sovereigns consist
in the same Acts, so also does their Profit. For the end of Art is Profit, and
Governing to the Profit of the Subjects, is Governing to the Profit of the
Sovereign, as has been showed Part 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 1. And these three: 1.
The Law over them that have Sovereign power 2. Their Duty; 3. Their Profit, are
one and the same thing contained in this sentence, Salus Populi Suprema Lex. By
which must be understood, not the mere preservation of their lives, but
generally their Benifit and Good. So that this is the general Law for
Sovereigns, That they procure to the uttermost of their Endeavor, the Good of
the People.

2. And for as much as Eternal, is better ^^en Temporal Good, it is evident,
that they ^ho are in Sovereign Authority, are by the ^aw of Nature obliged to
further the esta^lishing of al such Doctrines and Rules, and ^he Commanding of
all such Actions, as in their Conscience they believe to be the true ^ay
thereunto. For unless they do so, it cannot be said truly, that they have done
the ^ttermost of their Endeavor.

3. For the Tempo^al Good of the people, ^^consisteth in four points: 1.
Multitude (...) Commodity of living. 3. Peace amongst themselves. 4. Defense
against Foreign ^ower. Concerning Multitude. It is the ^uty of them that are
in Sovereign Autho^^ty, to increase the people; in as much as ^^ey are
Governors of Mankind under God ^lmighty, who having created but One ^an, and
One Woman, declared, That it ^as his Will they should be multiplied and
^ncreased afterward. And seeing this is to ^e done by Ordinances concerning
copu^ation, they are by the Law of Nature bound ^o make such Ordinances
concerning the ^ame, as may tend to the Increase of Man^ind. And hence it
comes, that in them ^ho have Sovereign Authority, not to for^id such
Copulations as are against the Use (...) Nature; not to forbid the promiscuous
Use ^f Women, not to forbid one Women to ^ave many Husbands, not to forbid
Marriages within certain Degrees of Kindred and Affinity, are against the Law
of Nature. For though it be not evident, that a private man living under the
Law of Natural Reason only, does break the same, by doing any of the Things
aforesaid, yet it is manifestly apparent, that being so prejudicial as they are
to the Improvement of Mankind, that not to forbid the same, is against the Law
of Natural Reason, in him that has taken into his hands any portion of Mankind
to improve.

4. The Comodity of Living consists in Liberty and Wealth. By Liberty I
mean, that there be no Prohibition without necessity of any thing to any man,
which was lawful to him in the Law of Nature, that is to say, That there be no
Restraint of Natural Liberty, but what is necessary for the Good of the Common
Wealth, and that well-meaning men may not fall into the Danger of Laws, as
into snares, before they be aware. It appertains also to this Liberty, That a
man may have commodious passage from place to place, and not be imprisoned or
confined with the Difficulty of ways, and want of means for transportation of
things necessary. And for the wealth of people it consists in three things,
The well ordering of Trade, Procuring of Labor, and Forbiding the superfluous
consuming of Food and Apparel. All those therefore that are in Sovereign
Authority, and have taken upon them the Government of People, are bound by the
Law of Nature to make Ordinances consisting in the Points before named, as being
contrary to the Law of Nature, unnecessarily either for ones own Fancy, to
inthrall, or ty men so, as they cannot move without danger, or to suffer them
whose maintenance is our benefit, to want any thing necessary for them, by our
Negligence.

5. For maintaiinng of Peace at home, there be so many Things necessary to be
considered, and taken order in, as there be several Causes concurring to
Sedition. And first, it is necessary to set out to every Subject, his Propriety
and distinct Lands and Goods, upon which he may exercise, and have the Benefit
of his own Industry, and without which, men would fall out amongst themselves,
as did the Heardsmen of Abraham and Lot, every man enchroaching and usurping as
much of the common Benefit as he can, which tends to Quarrel and Sedition.
Secondly, to divide the Burdens and Charges of the Common Wealth
proportionably. Now there is a Proportionably to every man's Abilily, and there
is a Proportionably to his Benefit by Common Weath. And this latter is it,
which is according to the Law of Nature. For the Burdens of the Common Wealth
being the Price that we pay for the Benefit thereof, they ought to be measured
thereby. And there is no reason, when two men equally enjoying by the benefit
of the Common Wealth, their Peace and Liberty, to use their Industry to get
their Livings, where of one spares, and lays up somewhat, the other spends
all he gets, why they should not equally contribute to the common charge. That
seems therefore to be the most equal way of dividing the burden of public
charge, when every man shall contribute according to what he spends, and not
according to what he gets. And this is then done, when men pay the Common
Wealths Part in the payments they make for their own Provision. And this
seems not only most equal, but also least sensible, and least to trouble the
mind of them that pay it. For there is nothing so aggravateth the grief of
parting with money to the Public, as to think they are over-rated, and that
their Neighbors whom they envy, do thereupon insult over them, and this
disposes them to Resistance, and (after that such Resistance has produced a
mischief) to Rebellion.

6. An other thing necessary for the maintaining of peace, is the due execution
of justice* which consists principally in the right performance of their
Duties, which are the Magistrates, ordained for the same by and under the
Authority of the Sovereign Power, which being private men in respect of the
Sovereign, and consequently such as may have private Ends, whereby they may be
corrupted with gifts, or Intercession of Friends, ought to be kept in awe by an
higher Power, lest people (greived by their Injustice) should take upon them to
make their own Revenges, to the Disturbance of the common Peace; which can by
no way be avoided in the prineipal and immediate Magistrates, without the
Judicature of the Sovereign himself, or some extraordinary power delegated by
him. It is therefore necessary, that there be a power extraordinary, as there
shall be occasion from Time to Time, for the syndication of Judges and other
Magistates, that shall abuse their Authority, to the Wrong and discontent of
the People, and a free and open way for the presenting of Grievances to him or
them that have the Soueraign Authority.

7. Besides these Considerations, by which are prevented the Discontents that
arise from Oppression, there ought to be some means for the keeping under of
those, that are disposed to Rebellion by Ambition; which consist principally in
the constancy of him that has the Sovereign Power, who ought therefore
constantly to grace and encourage such, as being able to serve the Common
Wealth, do nevertheless contain themselves within the bounds of Modesty,
without repining at the Authority of such as are employed, and without
aggravating the (...) Errors which (as men) they may commit, especially when
they suffer not in their own particular; and constantly to show displeasure,
and dislike of the contrary. And not only so, but also to ordain severe
punishments for such, as shall by Reprehension of public Actions, affect
popularity and applause amongst the multitude, by which they may be enabled to
have a faction in the Common Wealth at their Devotion.

8. Another thing necessary, is the rooting out of the Consciences of men all
those opinions which seem to justify and give pretense of Right to Rebellious
Actions; such as are the Opinions, That a man can do nothing lawfully against
his private Conscience; That they who have the Sovereignty, are subject to the
civil Laws: That there is an Authority of Subjects, whose Negative may hinder
the Affirmative of the Sovereign Power; That any Subject has a propriety
distinct from the Dominion of the Common Wealth; That there is a body of the
People without him or them that have the Sovereign power; and that any lawful
Sovereign may be resisted under the name of a Tyrant; which Opinions are they,
which Part 2. Chap. 8. Sect. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. have been declared, to dispose
men to Rebellion And because Opinions which are gotten by education, and in
length of time, are made habitual, cannot be taken away by force, and upon the
sudden; they must therefore be taken away also by Time and Education. And
^eeing the said Opinions have proceeded from private and public Teaching, and
those Teachers have received them from Grounds and Principalls, which they have
^earned in the Universities, from the Doctrine of Aristotle, and others, who
have dilivered nothing concerning Morality and Policy demonstratively, but
being passionately addicted to Popular Government, have insinuated their
Opinions by eloquent Sophistry. There is no doubt, if the true Doctrine
concerning the Law of Nature, and the Properties of a Body Politic, and the
Nature of Law in general, were prespicuously set down and taught in the
Universities, but that Young men, who come thither void of prejudice and whose
minds are as white paper, capable of any Instruction, would more easily receive
the same, and afterward teach it to the people, both in Books and otherwise,
then now they do the contrary.

9. The last Thing contained in that Supreme Law, Salus Populi, is their
Defense, and consists partly in the Obedience and Unity of the Subjects, of
which has been already spoken, and in which consists the Means of levying
Soldiers, and of having Money, Arms, Ships, and Fortified places in readiness
for Defense; and partly, in the avoiding of unnecessary Wars. For such Common
Wealths, or such Monarchs, as affect War for it self, that is to say, out of
Ambition, or of Vain Glory, or that make account to revenge every little
Injury, or Disgrace done by their Neighbors, if they ruin not themselves,
their Fortune must be better then they have reason to expect.

CHAP. X. 1. All Expressions, etc. concerning future Actions, are either
Covenant, Council or Command. 2. The Difference between a Law and a Covenant,
3. The Command of him whose Command is Law in one thing, is Law in every thing.
4. The Difference between Law and Counsel. 5. The difference between Jus and
Lex. 6. The Division of Laws, ctc. 7. That the Divine Moral Law, and the Law
of Nature, is the same. 8. That the Civil Laws are the Common Measure of Right
and Wrong, etc. 9. Martial Law is Civil Law. 10. Written Laws, etc. unwritten,
etc. Customs and Opinions, etc.
THus far concerning the Nature of man, and the constitution and properties of
a Body Politic. There remains only for the last Chapter, to speak of the
Nature and sorts of Law. And first, it is manifest, that all Laws are
Declarations of the Mind, con^erning some Action future to be done, or omitted.
And all Declarations and Expres^ions of the Mind concerning Future Actions and
Omissions, are either Promissive, as I will do, or not do, or provisive. As for
Example, If this be done or not done, this will follow; or Imperative, as Do
this, or do it not. In the first sort of these Expressions, consists the
Nature of a Covenant, in the second, consists Counsel, in the third, Command

2. It is evident when a man does, or forbeareth to do any action, if he be
moved thereto by this only Consideration, that the same is Good or evil in it
self; and that there be no reason why the will or pleasure of another, should
be of any weight in his Deliberation, that then neither to do nor omit the
Action deliberated is any Breach of Law-And consequently, whatsoever is a Law
to a man, respects the Will of another, and the Declaration thereof. But a
Covenant is a Declaration of a man's own Will. And therefore a Law and a
Covenant differ: And though they be both obligatory, and a Law obliges no
otherwise then by virtue of some covenant made by him who is subject thereunto,
yet they oblige by several sorts of promises. For a Covenant obliges by
promise of an Action, or Omission especially named and limited; but a Law
binds by a promise of Obedience in general, whereby the Action to be done, or
left undone, is referred to the determination of him, to whom the Covenant is
made. So that the Difference between a Covenant and a Law, stands thus: In
Simple Covenant, the Action to be done, or not done, is first limited and made
known, and then follows the Promise to do or not to do; but in a Law, the
obligation to do or not to do, precedeth, and the Declaration what is to be
done, or not done, follows after.

3. And from this may be deduced, that which to some may seem a Paradox, That
the Command of him, whose Command is a Law in one thing, is a Law in every
thing. For seeing a man is obliged to obedience before what he is to do be
known, he is obliged to obey in general, that is to say, in every thing.

4. That the Counsel of a man is no Law to him that is counseled, and that he
who allows another to give him counsel, does not thereby oblige himself to
follow the same, is manifest enough. And yet men usually call Counselling, by
the name of Governing, not that they are not able to distinguish between them,
but because they envy many times those men that are called to Counsel, and are
therefore angry with them that they are Counseled* But if to Counselors
there should be given a Right to have their Counsel followed, then are they no
more Counselors, but Masters of them whom they Counsel; and their Counsels no
more Counsels, but Laws. For the difference between a Law and a Counsel being
no mor but this, that in Counsel the Expression is Do, because it is best; In a
Law Do, because I have a right to compel you; or Do, because I say Do; when
Counsel should give the Reason of the Action it advises to, because the reason
thereof it self is no more Counsel, but a Law.

5. The Names Lex and Jus, that is to say, Law and Right, are often confounded,
and yet scarce are there any two words of more contrary signification. For
Right is that Liberty which Law leaves us, and Laws those Restraints by which
we agree mutually to abridge on another Liberty. Law and Right therefore are
no less different then Restraint and Liberty, which are contrary, and
whatsoever a man does, that lives in a Common Wealth Jure, he does it Jure
Civili, Jure Naturae, and Jure Divino. For whatsoever is against any of these
Laws, cannot be said to be Jure. For the Civil Law cannot make that to be done
Jure, which is against the Law Divine, or of Nature. And therefore whatsoever
any Subject does, if it be not conrary to the Civil Law, and whatsoever a
Sovereign does, if it be not against the Law of Nature, he does it Jure Divino,
by Divin right. But to say Lege divina, by Divine Law, is another thing. For
the Laws of God and Nature allowing greater liberty then is allowed by the Law
Civil; (for subordinate Laws do still bind mo^e then Superior Laws, the Essence
of Law being not to loose, but to bind) A man may be commanded that by a Law
Civil, which is not commanded by the Law of Nature, nor by the Law Divine. So
that of things done Leg^, that is to say, by Command of the Law, there is some
place for a Distinction between Lege Divina and Lege Civili. As when a man
gives an Alms, or helps him that is in need, he does it not Lege Civili but
Lege Divina, by the Divine Law, the Precept whereof is Charity. But for things
that are done Jure, nothing can be said done Jure Divino, that is not also Jure
Civili, unless it be done by them that having Sovereign Power, are not subject
to the civil Law.

6. The Differences of Law, are according to the Differences either of the
Authors and Lawmakers, or of the promulgation, or of those that are subject to
them. From the Difference of the Authors, or Law makers, comes the Division of
Law into Divine, Natural, and Civil. From the Difference of Promulgation,
proceeds the Division of Laws, into Written and unwritten. And from the
Difference of the persons to whom the Law appertains, it proceeds, that
some Laws are called simply Laws, and some Penal. As for Example, Thou shall
not steal is simply a Law; but this, He that steals an Ox, shall restore
fourfold, is a Penal or as other ^all it a Judicial Law. Now in those Laws
which are simply Laws, the Commandment is addressed to every man; but in Penal
Laws the Commandment is addressed to the Magistrate, who is only guilty of the
Breach of it when the Penalties ordained, are not i^flicted: To the Rest
appertains Nothing but to take notice of their Danger.

7. As for the first Division of Law into Divine, Natural, and Civil, the first
two Brea^hes are one and the same law. For the law of Nature, which is also the
Moral law, is the law of ^he Author of Nature, God Almighty; and the law of God
taught by our Savior Christ, is the Moral law. For the Sum of Gods law is;
Thou shall love God above all and thy Neighbor as thy self; and the same is
the sum of the Law of Nature, as has been showed, Part 1. Chap. 5. And
although the Doctrine of our Savior be of three Parts, Moral, Theological and
Ecclesiastical, the former part only, which is the Moral, is of the Nature of
a Law Universal; the latter part is a Branch of the Law Civil; and the
Theological which contains those Articles concerning the Divinity and
Kingdom of our Savior, without which there is no Salvation, is not dilivered
in the Nature of Laws, but of Counsel and Direction, how to avoid the
punishment, which by the Violation of the Moral Law, men are subject to. For it
is not Infidelity that condemns, (though it be Faith that saves) but the
Breach of the Law and Commandments of God, Written first in man's heart, and
afterward in Tables, and delivered to the Jews by the Hands of Moses.

8. In the state of Nature where every man is his own Judge, and differs from
other concerning the Names and Appellations of things, and from those
Differences arise Quarrels and breach of Peace, it was necessary there should be
a common measure of all things, that might fall in Controversy. As for
Example; Of what is to be called Right, what Good, what Virtue, what Much, what
Little, what Meum and Tuum, what a Pound, what a Quarter, etc. For in these
Things Private Judgments may differ, and beget Controversy. This Common
measure, some say is Right Reason, with whom I should consent, if there were
any such thing to be found or known in rerum natura. But commonly they that
call for Right Reason to decide any controversy, do mean, their own. But this
is certain, seeing Right Reason is not existent, the Reason of some Man or Men
must supply the place thereof, and that man or men is He or They, that have the
Sovereign Power, as has been already proved; and consequently the Civil Laws
are to all Subjects the Measures of their Actions whereby to determine whether
they have Right or Wrong, Profitable, or Unprofitable, Virtuous or Vicious, and
by them the Use and Definition of all Names not agreed upon, and tending to
controversy, shall be established. As for Example, When upon the occasions of
some strange and deformed Birth it shall not be decided by Aristotle, or the
Philosophers, whether the same be a man, or no, but by the Laws, the Civil Law
containing in it the ecclesiastical, as a part thereof, proceeding from the
Power of Ecclesiastical government, given by our Savior to all Christian
Sovereigns, as his immediate Vicars, as has been said Part 2. Chap. 7. Sect.
10.

9. But seeing it has been said, That all Laws are either Natural, or Civil,
it may be demanded, to which of these shall be referred that Law, which is
called Martial Law, and by the Romans, Disciplina militaris? And it may seem to
be the same with the law of nature; because the Laws by which a multitude of
Soldiers are governed in an Army are not constant, but continually changing
with the Occasion; and that is still a Law, which is Reason for the present,
and Reason is the Law of Nature. It is nevertheless true, that Martial Law is
Civil Law, because an Army is a Body Politic, the whole Power whereof is in
the General, and the Laws thereof made by him; and though they still follow and
change as Reason requires, yet it is not as the Reason of every Private man
but as the Reason of the General requires.

10. When He or They in whom is the Sovereign power of a Common Wealth, are to
ordain Law for the government and good Order of the People, it is not possible
they should comprehend all Cases of Controversy that may fall out, or perhaps
any considerable diversity of them; but as time shall instruct them by the
rising of new ocasions, so are also Laws from time to time to be ordained: and
in such Cases where no special Law is made, the Law of Nature keeps its
Place, and the Magistrates ought to give sentence according thereunto, that is
to say, according to Natural Reason. The Constitutions therefore of the
Sovereign Power, by which the Liberty of Nature is abridged, are written,
because there is no other way to take notice of them, whereas the Laws of
Nature are supposed to be written in men's hearts, Written Laws therefore are
the constitutions of a Common Wealth expressed; and Unwritten, are the laws of
Natural Reason. Custom of it self makes no laws. Nevertheless when a Sentence
has been once given by them that judge by their Natural Reason, whether the
same be Right or Wrong, it may attain to the vigor of a law; not because the
like Sentence has of Custom been given in the like case, but because the
Sovereign Power is supposed tacitly to have approved such Sentence for Right,
and thereby it comes to be a Law, and numbered amongst the Written laws of the
Common Wealth. For if Custom were sufficient to introduce a law, then it would
be in the power of every one that is deputed to hear a Cause, to make his
Erours laws. In the like manner, those that go under the Title of Respons a
Prudentum, that is to say, the Opinions of Lawyers, are not therefore Laws,
because Responsa Prudentum, but because they are admitted by the Sovereign; and
from this may be collected, That when there is a Case of private contract
between the Sovereign and the Subject, a President against reason shall not
prejudice the cause of the Sovereign; no President being made a Law, but upon
supposition that the same was reasonable from the beginning. And thus much
concerning the Elements and general grounds of Laws Natural and Politic. As
for the Law of Nations, it is the same with the Law of Nature. For that which
is the Law of Nature between Man and Man, before the constitution of Common
Wealth, is the Law of Nations between Sovereign and Sovereign after.

FINIS.

