THE HISTORY OF THE Whiggish-Plot: Or, A brief Historical ACCOUNT OF THE Charge
and Deefnce OF

William Lord Russel Capt. Tho. Walcot John Rouse William Hone Captain Blague
Algernoon Sidney Esquire; Sir Sam. Barnardiston John Hambden, Esquire; Lawrence Braddon
Hugh Speak, Esquire;
Together with an Account of the Proceedings upon the Outlawry against James
Holloway, and Sir Thomas Armstrong.

Not Omitting any one material Passage in the whole Proceeding.

Humbly Dedicated to his ROYAL HIGHNESS.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
STATIONERS' HALL, MDCLXXXIV.

To the most Illustrious and Serene PRINCE James Duke of York AND ALBANY, etc.
May it please Your Highness,
IT was the Design of the Author of the following Papers, a Person very
faithful to the Interest of the Crown, to make an Humble Present of himself and
them, to Your Highness; but being at this time under great Indisposition, I was
desired to present his Duty by Proxy, and lay his Performance at Your Royal
Highnesses Feet. I will acknowledge to Your Highness, that I am no Friend to
Epitomies, especially in Law, where the Truth and the whole Truth is so
strictly required: But I look upon this to be one of the faithfullest and
perfectest that ever I have seen, having carefully perused the whole, to say
nothing of that Candor and Ingenuity of Temper, which makes some New Discovery
of it Self in every Page of the whole Work, being very far from a Design of
Imposing any thing False, or Aggravating any thing beyond the naked Truth, and
abounding every where with many unquestionable Strokes of a Courteous and
Gentle Nature, very fit if Honestly and Wisely managed, to poyse and balance
these uneven Times.

The irrefragable clearness of the Proof, added to the Conciseness of this
Author's Method, will show Your Highness at once, as in a Glass, the imminent
Dangers the King and You have escaped, and with You the Clergy, the Nobility,
nay, the Commons themselves, who would most of them, before this time, have
been Buried in Confusion, and Rolling in Blood, which as in all it ought to
Create a Mortal and Vatinian Hatred of those Horrid Principles, by which the
Enemies of this Church and Monarchy are Acted, and of those Barbarous, though
Natural Conclusions that issue from them; so more particularly in Your Royal
Highness, there is no doubt, but the Reflection upon such Villainy as this, will
inflame so Generous and so Loyal an Heart with an ardent Affection for that
Church, which long and sad Experience has told us, is to be the only true Prop
and Supporter of the Crown.

That God would Guide Your Royal Highness by his Council, and after a long and
fortunate Old Age, receive You into Glory, is the Humble and Affectionate
Prayer of,

May it please your Royal Highness, Your Royal Highnesses most Humble, Dutyfull
and Obedient Servant, JOHN TURNER.

THE HISTORY OF THE Whiggish-PLOT.
UPON the Discovery of the late Hellish Conspiracy, which was made by Mr.
Keeling upon the Twelfth of June, in the Year, 1683. as will at large appear
upon his Evidence against Captain Walcot, His Majesty set forth two
Proclamations, the one bearing Proclamations issued out against the
Conspirators.
Date the 23d. and the other the 28th. of the same Month; The first for the
Discovery and Apprehension of Colonel John Rumsey, Richard Rumbold, Richard
Nelthorpe Esquire; Nathaniel Wade, Gent. Richard Goodenough, Captain Walcot,
William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone, a Joyner: The latter for the
Apprehending of James Duke of Monmouth, Ford The Names of the Conspirators.
Lord Gray, who being Apprehended, made hi^ Escape out of the Hands of the
Sergeant at Arms; Sir Thoma^ Armestrong, and Robert Ferguson, who was the
Common Agitatour, entrusted by all Parties in the several Conspiracies. Besides
all these, several others were soon detected, as the Lord Melvin, Sir John
Couchrane, Francis Goodenough, William Rumbold, Joseph Elby, Samuel Gibbs,
Francis Charleton, Joseph Tyley, -- Casteers, -- Lobb, both Nonconformist
Ministers, Edward Norton, John Row, John Aytoss and John Atherton; Several of
which having notice of Warrants issued out for their Apprehension, fled from
Justice. Nevertheless, they did not all escape; For of superior Quality were
taken the Lord Russel, the Lord Howard of Escrich, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hamden,
Jun. and the Earl of Essex, who The Earl of Essex kills himself.
being Committed to the Tower for High Treason, killed himself: Of meaner
Quality were Apprehended, Mr. West, Colonel Rumsey, Captain Walcot, and Hone
the Joyner, and of these the Mean persons taken.
Lord Howard, Colonel Rumsey, and Mr. West, were reserved to give Evidence
against the Others, whose Charges and Defenses, together with their
Confessions, complete the Body of this History. Besides these, also were
Apprehended the Lord Brandon, Mr. Booth, Mr. Charleton, Mr. Wildman, and Mr.
Trench^rd, and sent to the Tower, who at the beginning of the following Term,
were admitted to give Bail for their Appearance the first Day of the next Term
ensuing.

Upon the 27th. of July came forth His Majesty's Declaration, concerning the
Treasonable Conspiracy against His Person and Government, giving an Account of
the Principal and Main Designs of it, which appeared to be in short as follows:

About the beginning of October, 1682. when the Heads of the Faction saw the
Magistracy of London settled in Persons of Loyal Principles, they fell
immediately to Consult about Rising in Arms; for which some thought their
Party so well prepared, that they could not fail of attaining their Ends, when
they should break out into Open Force.

Upon which some of the Principal Conspirators met, to agree They Consult to
Master the Guards, and seize the Kings Person, but lay that Design aside till
they had settled a Correspondence to know their strength.
about the best way to Master the Guards, and S^ize His Maj^sties Person; but
upon deep Consideration, finding it necessary to prepare their Friends in the
several Counties and the Disaffected Party in Scotland to join with them,
without which any Attempts in the City upon the Guards seemed to be too rash,
they laid aside the Thoughts of a Present Rising, and disposed themselves to
find the safest way by Correspondence, how far they might be assisted by a
General Insurrection, so that in all Humane Probability they might not fail of
success

While these Designs were forming, some Villains were carrying The
Assassination of the K. and D. of York Designed.
on that Execrable Plot of Assassinating His Maj^sties Person, and His Royal
Highness, in their coming from New Market, to which purpose Money was
deposited; but were prevented by the shortness of Time, and N^cessary
Preparations.

Thereupon they Consulted about Attempting the same Villainy A second design in
March at His Maj^sties going to New Market.
again at His Majesty's next going to New Market in March was a Tw^lvemonth.
But fearing the strength of the Guards that are usually left behind after the
King's Departure, and because they were not then neither sufficiently ready,
they agreed to do it at his Return from New Market.

The Plate appointed was Rumbold's House, called The Rye, near The place
appointed, was Rumbolds House* called, The Rye.
Hoddesdon; where it was so contrived, That Forty Persons under the Command of
Rumbold, should hide themselves in or near the House, and when the King's Coach
should come over against them, then to kill the Postilion and Horses by
Discharging three or four Blunderb^sses, and if they failed others were to be
ready in the way in Laborers Habit to turn a Cart in the Road to stop the
Coach, while some Shot into the Coach that carried His Majesty, and His Royal
Highness, and others Fired upon the Guards. It Several Ld^. and great Persons
to be invited into the City to Dianer, to appear among the people upon arrival
of the News.
was also farther concluded, That the same Day several Lords, and other Persons
of Quality, should be Invited into the City to Dinner, to be ready to appear
among the Citiz^ns upon the arrival of the News. For the Actors had for their
escape contrived a nearer Passage then the usual Rode, in hopes to get to
London before, or as soon, as the News could be carried thither.

To palliate the Blackness of such an Action as far as they could, they had
prepared a Remonstrance, which was ready to be dispersed among the People in
that Confusion, and to prevent any stop to be put to their Career by the
Magistrates and Officers of the The Mayor and Sheriffs, etc. to be Massacre.
City, they had designed for immediate slaughter, the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs,
and the most Eminent for their Loyalty.

But the sudden Fire at New Market, defeated these bloody Counsels,
necessitating his Majesty's Return from thence before he had intended.

Nor did these disappointments discourage those Villains from proposing and
hoping some more convenient Opportunities to prosecute their I^pious Design,
either between Windsor and Hampton Court, in his Journey to Winchester, or as
he went in his Barge by Water, or at the Bull Feast, which was to be in Red
Lion Fields, Arms ready upon all occasions.


To which purpose they had always lying ready a certain number of Arms upon all
occasions that should offer. And for the more easy drawing their party
together, at the time of Execution, they had divided the City into twenty
Parts, from every one of which they expected five hundred Men, to Embody upon
the first Onset, having in every one their distinct Agitators, to take care of
that particular Affair, to Head which Parties there were a Hundred Old Officers
that had been engaged in the A Hundred old Officers of the late Rebellion
concealed in the Town to command the raised Men.
late Reb^llion, who la^ close in ^own till the Discovery was made.

On the other hand, the Chief Conspirators were driving on for the General
Insurrection, which was to be in both Kingdoms; which the Earl of Shaftsbury
would have had before the seventeenth of November, or else upon that day at
farthest; but finding they would not adventure without farther Preparation,
conveyed himself secretly into Holland, to avoid the danger of being
discovered.

Upon his withdrawing, a new Council of six Persons were to A Council of six
erected to carry on the Insurrection, and Scotch Correspondency.
have had the chief Managem^nt of Affairs, in order to the designed General
Insurrection and Scotch Correspondence: To which purpose a Person was by them
sent into Scotland, to invite the Heads of the disaffected Party in that
Kingdom to come into this, under a specious pretense of purchasing in Carolina,
to consult the surest means for carrying on the Confed^racy jointly in both
Kingdoms. Thereupon Archibald Campbel late Earl of Argile, as Argile treated
with, he accepts of ten thousand 1. to buy Arms in Holland.
being already Attainted of Treason, was treated with, who accepted of ten
Thousand Pounds to be paid for buying Arms in Holland, and making Provisions
for a Rebellion in Scotland.

In the same Council of Six they had debated, and at length concluded that the
Rising should be in all Parts at the same time, least the City being defended
by its own Militia, the Guards might have leisure to be sent to suppress the
Country Insurrections.

This was the Sum of this most Horrid and Execrable Design, by Providence so
often disappointed, and at length when it was fully Ripe, mowed down by the
clear Discoveries of Heavens overruling Power.

And this it was which his Majesty thought fit to make known to all his loving
Subjects, that they being sensible of the Mercy of God in so great a
Deliverance, might the more cheerfully and devoutly join with their Sovereign,
in returning solemn Thanks to the Preserver of Kings for the same.

To which end His Majesty was pleased to appoint the 9th. of The 9th. of
September appointed for a solemn Thanksgiving day, and the Declaration then to
be publicly Read.
September, 1683. for a general day of Thanksgiving over all England and Wales,
and that his Declaration should be publicly read in all Churches and Chapples,
as well upon Sunday the Second of September, as upon the Thanksgiving day it
self.

As the Terror and Dismay was not to be imagined, which had seized the minds of
all good Men, out of an Apprehension of the frightful dangers, so near the
Persons of His Majesty and His Royal Highness, so there was nothing could be
greater to exceed it, then their General joy to find by the Discovery, those
dismal Clouds of Treason dispersed that threatened the Ruin of their Prince and
Country, which produced Address^s from all parts of the Kingdom, acknowledging
the sacred Preservations of Heaven, and Congratulating the Happy Deliverance of
their Sovereign and His Royal Brother.

The first Address was from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commen-Council of the
City of London.

That whereas they had received with Astonishment the Discovery The City
Address to his Majesty upon Discovery of the Plot.
of a most Traiterous and Horrid Conspiracy of diverse Ill-affected and
Desperate Persons, to compass the Death and Destruction of His Royal Person,
and His Dearest Brother James Duke of York, to which purpose they had held
several Treasonable Consultations to Levy Men and make an Insurrection, and
made Provision of Arms. A Design immediately tending to the Destruction not
only of all His Majesty's best Subjects, but of His Majesty's Sacred Person,
the best of Princes, and to involve this and future Generations in Confusion,
Blood and Misery, carried on, notwithstanding under specious Pretenses, by
known Dissenting Conventiclers and Atheistical Persons.

Therefore in the first place, having offered up their Solemn Thanks to
Almighty God for his watchful Providence, in bringing to Light that Impious and
Execrable Machination.

They did in the next place offer to His Majesty, the deep Resentment of their
Loyal Hearts concerning the same; beseeching his Majesty to rest fully assured,
that as no Interest in the World was valuable to them, in Comparison of His
Majesty's Service and Safety, so they were determined readily to expose their
Lives and Fortunes in defense of His Majesty's Person, His Heirs and
Successors, and His Government, as established in Church and State, and
particularly for the Discovering, Defeating and Addresses to the same purpose
from all parts of England, etc.
Destroying all such Confederacies, Associations and Attempts whatsoever.

London having thus led the Van, was seconded by Addresses of the same Nature,
varying only in Style and Words, but altogether the same in sense, not only
from all Parts of England and Wales, but out of Ireland and several of his
Majesty's distant Plantations; so that the Plot, instead of doing the Harm
which it intended, did but rather serve to winnow and separate the Tares and
Darnel from the Wheat, to show the Rancor and Malice of some few Malcontents,
but the universal Loyalty of Multitudes, to open the Eyes of the Deluded, and
to rivet his Majesty deeper into the Hearts and Affections of his Subjects.

THE HISTORY OF THE Charge and Defense OF Captain T. Walcott.
THE First of the Confederates whom Justice called to an account from this
Bold-Conspiracy was Captain Thomas Captain Waicott brought to his Trial.
VValcott, who was tried at the Old Baily Sessions, upon the 12. of July, 1683.
He was Indicted for compassing and conspiring the Death of the King, the
Subversion His Charge.
of his Government, and for endeavoring and intending to raise a Rebellion and
general Insurrection in the Kingdom, to which he pleaded not Guilty.

After some Exceptions the following Jury was Sworn.

Nicholas Charleton Christoph^r Pitts Robert Bedingfield John Pelling William
VVinbury Thomas Seaton William Rutland. Thomas Short. Th^ophilus Man John
Genew John Short. Thomas Nicholas.
This being done and the Enditement opened by the Kings Council and the
Attorney General; Colonel Rumsey was called and Rumsey gives his Evidence.
sworn, and first ordered to give an Account of any Rising that he had heard
of; who thereupon declared, that about the end of October, or beginning of
November, he was with the Lord Shaftsbury late at Night, who told him, that the
Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Russel, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong were
at one Mr, Shepherds House near Lumb^rd-Street, and therefore desired me to go
and know what they had done about raising Arms a^ Taunton, upon which he went,
and being carried up by Mr. Shepherd, he received for answer, that Mr.
Trenchard had failed them about the men, and they could proceed no farther at
that time, and therefore he must be contented, that he went The Lord Shaftsbury
p^^pares for Holland.
to the Lord Shaftsbury and told him what they said: who thereupon prepared to
be gone for Holland.

Being asked what Discourse he had thereupon with the Lord Shaftsbury, and what
made him believe he made Prepar^tion to be gone? He Answered, That my Lord
should say, Th^re was no Dependence upon those Gentlemen that met, and
therefore he would leave England. Then proceeding in his Evidence, he declared,
That about a fort-night or three-weeks afterward, there was a Meeting at Mr.
VVest's Chamber, where was Mr. West, A Meeting at Mr. West his Chamber.
Mr. Goodenough, and Mr. VVade together, with somebody else, whose Name he did
not remember, for Captain VValcot was then in Holland. That there it was
proposed, That nothing was to be done by a General Rising, but that there was
no surer way then to take of the King and the Duke, which they could Mr.
Ferguson sent for out of Holland for that purpose.
not carry on neither, without Mr. Ferguson; whereupon he was writ for into
Holland, and that he came out of Holland upon that Letter, and Captain VValcot
with him. That after Mr. Ferguson's coming back out of Holland, there was very
suddenly a Meeting again, and then it was concluded, That nothing was to be
effected without taking off the King and the Duke, or to that purpose, but that
Mr. Ferguson was not at that Meeting. There were two or three Meetings before
Captain VValcot was there, to find out Men, and they could not find out Men,
without which Mr. Rumbold would not undertake it; But that about three or four
Meetings after, Captain VValcot came, and was resolved at Cap^. Walcot
undertakes to Fight the Guards, but refuses to seize the King.
last to join in the Matter, but that he would not have a hand in attacking the
Coach, only he would command a Party that should Charge the Guards.

Being asked after what manner it was settled that it should be done? He
Answered, That there were several Parties; one small Party was to have Killed
the Postilion, another to Kill the Horses, Mr. Rumbold with another Party to
seize the Coach, and Captain VValcot the Guards.

Being asked where it was to be done? He said, at Mr. Rumbold's House near
Hodd^sdon.

Being asked for what purpose Mr. Rumbold, and those other Men were to attack
the Coach? He made Answer, To Murder the King and the Duke.

Being asked how it was Designed to be done? He Replied, By Blunderbusses, and
if they missed, by Swords.

Being asked when this was to be done? He made Answer, When the King was last
at New Market, the Saturday before Easter.

Being asked about what time this Resolution was taken? He Answered, In
February last; Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Walcot coming to Town upon Ash Wednesday,
and then was the first Meeting that the Prisoner at the Bar came in, which was
at Mr. West's Chamber, before the King came from New Market; So that there were
several Meetings afterward at Mr. West's Chamber, to Consult whether they
could raise the Number they insisted upon. The Witness then added, That there
were Notes brought by Mr. Goodenough, and Mr. Rumbold, of many Names, to see
that they might not be deceived in the Number: and that at that time Captain
Walcot was there, and did undertake to go to Mr. Rumbold's House, and as he
thought did go down to the very Place.

Being asked whether there was any Number of Men insisted upon for doing the
Villainy? He Answered, That Rumbo^d Rumbold desires 50 Men.
insisted upon Fifty Men, but that Captain Walcot had no perfect Number
allotted him.

Being asked the Reason why this was not effected when the The Assassination
preve^^ed by the Fire, the King returning so^ner then expected.
King returned from New Market? The Witn^ss Answered, Because the Fire hapened,
which brought the King sooner home from New Market then the Men could be got
ready: for that the King returned upon Tu^sday, whereas he was not expected
till Saturday.

That upon Intelligence of the Fire, and that the King would return upon
Tuesday, Mr. Ferguson, who then Lodged in Covent Garden, sent to several to
come to him, to see if Men could be got ready by Tuesday, but it could not be
done, and so it was laid aside for that time. That after this Disappointment,
Mr. West, Mr. Goodenough, and Captain Walcot, had a Meeting, were it was
Resolved, That no Accident afterward might hinder the Attempt to buy Arms,
Mr. F^rguson undertaking to provide Money, and Arms resolved to be bought
Ferguson undertakes for Money, West to provide the Arms and Rumbold and
Goodenough to procure Men.
Mr. West undertaking to procure the Arms for the Men, Mr. Rumbold, and Mr.
Goodenough undertook to provide them.

Being asked whether they had any farther Design upon the King after this
Disappointment? The Evidence made Answer, That it was to be done coming from
Windsor to London, or from Windsor to Hampton Court, or at the Playhouse,
therefore that Arms might be ready against any Opportunity that should happen,
let it be what it would: Mr. West undertook to buy the Arms, and did buy them,
as he told the Witnesses, but did not get his Money in five or six Weeks, and
then that Mr. F^rguson paid.

Being asked what other Meetings he was at with Captain Walcot? He Replied, At
the Salutation in Lumbard-Stre^t, and the Green-Dragon on Snow-Hill; where the
business in Discourse was, about dividing the City into twenty parts, to see
how many could be raised out of every part, which were again to be sub-divided
into Fifteenths, and every Man to lead a Fifteenth, that they might not be at a
loss. That Mr. Goodenough gave an Account of seven parts of the twenty; out of
which, he said there would be raised two Thousand Men, but that the other
Fifteen would not raise as many more, the other being the most considerable
parts, as Wapping and Southwark. That by Virtue of this Division, the general
Rising was intended to be ready against the first Opportunity that happened.

Being asked where was the last time they not before the Discovery? He made
Answer, That it was as he thought, the very Th^rsday before the Discovery, at
the Salutation in Lumbard-Street, where was Captain Walcot, Mr. West, Mr. Wade,
the two Goodenoughs, Mr. Nelthorp, and the Witness himself; where the
Resolution continued still to carry on the Busin^ss. But that the particular
Occasion of their Meeting, was to know of Mr. Goodenough, what was done about
the other Thirteen Parts, to which he made Answer, That he had no Account, but
thought he should have a Meeting on Saturday in the Afternoon, at the George
upon Ludgate Hill, to have his Answer: But the Discovery coming, there only
met Mr. Norton, Mr. Bourn, and a fourth Person, whose Name the Witness did not
remember.

That upon the Monday after the Discovery they met at Captian A Meeting after
the Discovery.
Traci^s, viz. Captain Walcot, Nr. West, Mr. Wade, Mr. Nelthorp, the two
Goodenoughs, and Mr. Ferguson, where there was nothing done, but only
Exclaimations against Mr. Keeling, and taking Mr. Keeling Exclaimed against,
and Resolutions taken to retire.
Resolutions to be gone.

Being asked whether he ever was in Mr. Keelings Company? He Answered, That at
the time they met at the Salutation Tavern, he came in there for a quarter of
an Hour, by the same token, That there being a Report of a Rising at Coleign,
headded by one Gulic, Mr. West told him, That he should be our Gulick, saying,
That Gulick and Keeling were all one: for that Gu was Kee, and Lick was Ing.

Captain Walcot being then admitted to ask the Witness any Questions, desired
the Court to ask, whether ever he met at Mr. West's Chamber, till after the
King's return from New Market? To which Colonel Rumsey replied in the
Affirmative, and Sir George Jefferies made this Remark upon it, That he was to
have undertaken the Guards, which was before the King returned from New Market.

The Witness also added one Instance more, That there was a Meeting at the Five
Bells in the Strand, where was only West, Ferguson, Rumbold, Goodenough, and
the VVitness, and then Mr. Ferguson told them, That Mr. VValcot would come the
next Meeting they had at Mr. VVest's Chambers, and that he came accordingly,
which was while the King was at New Market, and consequently before his return.

Here Captain Walcot would have begun his Defense, but the Court told him he
was not to break in upon the King's Evidence, till that were all heard, and so
he Desisted.

Then Mr. Keeling being called and Sworn, was desired to tell Mr. Keeling Sworn.
the Court and the Ju^y, what he knew of the Conspiracy, and the Prisoner at
the Bar; who gave in Evidence, That some-time before the King went to
New Market, he was at the Sun-Tavern with Richard Rumbold, Richard Goodenough,
and some others: At what time Goodenough called him forth, and asked him what
Men he had procured? That the W^tness asked him for what purpose? who Answered,
To go down to N^w-Ma^ket. That the Witness Goodenough asked him what Men he had
got to Kill the King.
asked him again for what end? who Answered, To Kill the King, and the Duke of
York: And then the Witness Replied, That he thought none. That before the King
came from New Market, the said Goodenough renewed the same Qu^stion to the
Witness, who in the mean time had discoursed Burton and Thomson, and that
Burton told him, That Barbar and Thomson would be concerned. That upon the
Friday, which was the Day that the News Rumbold comes to him to see the Men.
came of the Fire, Mr. Rumbold came to the Witness's House, to see what Men he
could procure, and desired to see them on the Morrow, which was the Saturday
before the King returned. That the next Day he met Mr. Rumb^ld upon the
Exchange, who then put him again in mind of the business; That thereupon he
went to Burton, Thompson, and Barber, who met with Mr. Rumbold the same Day at
the Miter-Tavern near Dukes-Place; where the substance of the Discourse was,
Whether they were willing to go down to his House, called The Rye; the said
Rumbold alleging, That there was no greater Convenience then that, scarce in
England, for the Executing such a D^sign, being a House very entire to it self,
and remote from Neighbors, besides the advantage of a Court-Wall. That among
other Discourse, this was an Argument to prevail with those Persons; That it
would be a keeping Rumbold's Argument to persuade Burton. etc. to the
u^dertaking.
one of the Commandments, to Kill the King and the Duke of York, in regard that
unless that were done, there would be a great deal of Bloodshed committed. That
he there also told the way how he had Designed to effect it at his House. That
he had a Convenience The Method to Beard.
for their Horses, and that there would be so many appointed to Shoot the
Postilion, and their Horses: that there would be so many appointed at the
Coach, and so many to attack the Guards. That if there was a failer in Shooting
the Coach-Horses, that then there should be Men in the Habit of Countrymen,
with a Cart in the Lane, and that they should run the Cart a thwart the Lan^,
and so stop the Coach. That from thence they went to the Exchang^, and in the
Afternoon met at the Dolvin-Tavern in Bartholomew-Lane with Rumbold, West,
Goodenough, and Hone the Jorner. That after they had been there a little while,
West asked R^mbold, Whether he heard the King would come home that Night? who
answered, Yes, he heard so: to which West Replied, That he believed he would
not come home till Monday, and hoped he would not return till Saturday, which
was the Day appointed to go down to the Rye, to meet the King and the Duke of
York.; to which Rumbold returned, That he hoped they would not come back till
them. But that then, said West, if they do come, How many Swans Quills must you
have? How many Goose Quills? And how many Crows Quills with Sand and Ink? To
which they Answered, Six Swans Quills, Twenty Goose Quills, and Twenty or
Thirty Crows Quills, That he asked West or Rumbold, or both, What they
intended by it? Who told him, That Swans Quills were Blunderbusses, Goose
Quills Muskets, Crows Quills Pistols, and Sand and Ink Powder and Bullets.
Which was all he could say, as to the Design in General.

Being asked what he could say as to the Prisoner at the Bar? He Answered, That
he was at the Salutation Tavern, at what time Captain VValcot was there. That
when he came in, somebody called him Gulick, which when he was not a little
startled at, some one of the Company cried, Here Is a Health to our English
Gulick; Upon which Mr. West said, That Gulick in Dutch, was the same as
Keeling in English. Adding farther, That he hoped to see Mr. Keeling at the
Head of as good an Army at Waping, as Gulick was at Collen; Which was all he
could say to the Prisoner at the Bar.

Here the Prisoner asked the VVitnesses whether he called him Gulick? which the
VVitness denied, but affirmed that he was by at the same time.

Being asked upon what Motives he made the Discovery? He The Motives that
induced him to make the Discovery.
made Answer, That sometime before the Thing was Discovered, Goodenough came to
his House, and that he went to Drink a Dish of Coffee with him, in the Company
of Richard Rumbold, and his Brother William, which he believed Mr. VValcot
knew. That when they were by themselves, Mr. Goodenough pulled out some Papers
out of his Pocket, and gave him one for himself. That the VVitness asked him
what he meant? to which the other replied, Proof of the Cities being divided
into twenty parts.
That he had divided the City and Suburbs into twenty p^rts, and that there was
three Divisions, adding withal, That I knew the Persons better than he did, and
who to trust. Therefore he said, That one was for my self, and that he would
have me take to my assistance Nine or Ten Men, whom I knew to be true: and that
then we were to go to several Persons, and ask them, Supposing the Papists
should Rise, or there should be a General Insurrection, or a French Invasion,
Are you in a Posture of D^fence? That at the same time the said Goodenough told
the Goodenough discloses to him the Design of Killing the King.
VV^tn^ss, That there was a Design to Kill the King, and the Duke of York,
which was Designed to be at the Bull-Feast, and that then those Men were to be
in a readiness, it being D^sign'd, That the Thing should be laid upon the
Papists, as a Branch of the Popish-Plot. That there was also a Declaration
drawing, A Declaration to be drawn upon the Grievance of Chimney-Mony, to
inv^aglethe common People.
which would relieve Poor People of that which seemed most burdensome to them,
which was Chimney Money, and that then the Common People would fall in with
them the more readily. That after he heard these things, he was very much
troubled in mind about them, and Declared, That that was the only Reason of his
Discovery. That he thought he did very ill in not Discovering, in Regard he had
no Peace nor Satisfaction, nor Content, nor could mind his Business, nor could
take that Rest which at other times he did, which was the moving Cause, and no
other. For he thought, if it were a Sin in David to cut off the Hem of Saul's
Garment, it was much more a Sin in him to Kill the King.

Being asked whither there were any Post assigned him, and what was required of
him to do? He made Answer, That he was in the first place to Raise some Men;
that he thought they looked upon him as one that was to go down with the Men he
had raised; but he did not remember the Question was asked him.

Being asked to whom he made his Dis^overy? He Replied, That he offered it
first to a Minister of the Church of England, whom he thought too careless,
and therefore went to Mr. Peckham; That from thence he went to the Lord of
Dartmouth, and from thence was carried to Mr. Secretary Jenkins.

Being asked whether there were no Design to take off the Major, Goodenough
tells him of the Design to secu^e the Major and Sheriffs, and secure the Tower.
He A^rested the Lord Mayor, as a Special B^yliff to the Coroner. Zacharius
Bou^n^ giving Evidence.
and the Sheriffs? He Answered, That as he was told by Mr. Goodenough, there
was a Design to secure the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, as also to secure the
Tower. And being asked about Arresting the Lord Mayor? He Answered, That he did
Arrest the Lord Mayor, and did it as a Special Baliff under the Coroner, being
put upon it by Goodenough.

Here Captain Walcot being asked by the Court what he had to say? made Answer,
He had nothing to say:

The next Witness Sworn was Zacbarius Bourne, who being Svvorn, Deposed, That
he came acquainted with Captain VValcot by means of Mr. Ferguson, that Lodged
at his House. That Mr. VVade came to him, and told him, He must needs meet at
the Green-Dragon upon Snow-Hill, where Captain Walcot was with several others,
and that the business was a Design to raise Men, and d^vide the City into
twenty Divisions, in order to the securing His Majesty, and the Duke of York,
and setting up the Duke of Mon^o^th; and that as he thought, Captain Walcot was
there every time. That he was once at the Salutation in Lumbard-Street, where
it was pressed, That all Expedition imaginable should be Expedition pre^a'd at
the Salutation-Tavorn.
made for the Raising of Men out of the twenty Divisions, into which the City
was to be divided; but that the Agitators were not to tell their business, but
only under a pretense to know their Str^ngth if there should be Occasion, or if
the Papists should Rise. That Mr. Goodenough brought an Account of between
three and four Thousand Men, out of those Divisions he had in Charge, at what
time Captain Walcot was there, as also when the Discourse of securing the King
and the Duke was a Foot.

That Captain Walcot was at three of the Consults, where it Walcot at three
Consults to seize the Lord Mayor, etc.
was Designed to seize the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, some of the Aldermen, and
the Chief Ministers of State about the Town. That Mr. West told him, It should
be his business to secure the Lord K^eper, whom he would call to an Account
with all his Heart, and put him in mind of College. But the Evidence told him,
That he did not ca^e to meddle with any of his Neighbors.

Being asked whether he were employed to speak with any of Mr. West unwilling
he should speak to any Ministers, as Destroyers of all Designs.
the Nonconformist Ministers? He Answered, He would have spoken to two, but
that Mr. West was unwilling, saying, The Ministers had destroyed all Designs
ever since Constantine's Time. He further added, That upon the Monday after the
Discovery they met at Colonel Tracies, viz. Captain Walcot, Mr. Ferguson, Mr.
Goodenough, Mr. West, Mr. Norton, and the Witness, and Colonel Rumsey; where he
left them Debating about killing Mr. Keeling to be Killed for Discovering.
K^elling, because he had made the Discovery. That there was also some
Discourse of standing to it with their Swords in their Hands, which they said
was the better way, then to be Hanged.

Here Captain Walcot desired that the Witness might be asked whether he ever
heard him say any thing more or less of Assassinating the King.

To which the Witness answered that he did never hear him discourse of that
Matter; but that he had several times heard a discourse of Lopping, by which
was meant, Taking off the King and the Duke, and supposed that the Captain had
been at the hearing of it too, as being the Discourse of several Meetings.

To all which Captain Walcot made answer, that he had no hand in any Design of
securing the King.

Then was Mr. West called, who being sworn, was ordered Mr. West Sworn.
to tell the Court and the Jury the whole Story.

Thereupon he deposed as follows.

That he came acquainted with the Prisoner at the Bar the last He came
acquainted with the Pr^soner by the means of Captain Walcot.
Summer Vacation, by the means of one Mr. VVilcox, who returned his Money out
of Ireland.

That the fair Characters they heard of one another, inclined them to Intimacy
and Freedom of Discourse.

That about the middle of October he observed a General Discontent in the City,
and was afraid there was some design in hand, and being Inquisitive to know
what it was, he thought fit to enquire of Captain Walcot, being informed, That
the Earl of Shaftsbury had sent for him out of Ireland. That thereupon Captain
Walcot told him, That the Earl of Shaftsbury was likewise sending for some
Scotch Gentlemen, under a pretense of business in Carolina. That one Morning
Captain VValcot came to his Chamber, and Discoursed with him, concerning the
Election Walcot discourses Mr. West at his Chamber.
of the Sheriffs, carried on as was thought contrary to Justice. That thereupon
he put the Question, Whether the People would do nothing to secure themselves?
That then the Captain told him a Secret, That there was a Design of an
Insurrection, within three VVeeks or a Month, that would set us all free, or
worse. That the Lord of Shaftsbury was engaged in such a Design, and had
engaged him in it, and asked him, Whether he would take a Command? That at the
same time the Captain told him, to the best of his Remembrance, That the Earl
of Shaftsbury had another The Earl of Shaftsbury designs the Assassination as
the King came from Newmarket.
Design upon the King and the Duke as they came from New Market in October; but
that he abhorred any such thing, as being ungenerous, and would not be
concerned but only in a General Insurrection. That in the Discourse of the
Insurrection, the Captain desired the VVitness to lend him a Suit of Silk
Armor, which the VVitness had bought some Years before, and to bespeak him a
stiff Tuck, which he did, but that the Plot being Discovered, the Tuck was left
upon his Hands; and that this was about the Ninth of November.

That after this he understood by Captain VValcot, that Mr. Mr. Ferguson
manages the Assassinattion, and the Insurrection.
Ferguson had the management of the Assassination in October, and that he was
likewise acquainted with the Insurrection, and was a great Man in it. That
among many ways proposed of killing the King and the Duke, Captain VValcot told
him, That one was Designed at the Lord Mayor's Feast in the Hall, or upon their
return home in Paul's Churchyard, or at Ludgate, but that the King not Dining
there, the thing was wholly disappointed, and that Mr. Ferguson told him the
same thing. Then Mr. Ferguson proposed another way, That it should be done, as
the King and Duke went down the River, by Persons that were to lie behind some
small Ships in a Hoy, and so overrun their Barges, or if that failed, to break
a Plank with their Blunderbusses, and so sink them. Another way was, At the
Playhouse, where Forty or Fifty Men were to get into the Pit, which had
Blunderbusses, Pistols, and Swords, and when the Music struck up between the
Acts, should Fire upon the Box. But that this way seeming Hazardous, they
thought it better to do it as he came back, and pitched upon Covent Garden,
under Bedford-VVall, in regard there was a Convenience for a great many Men to
Walk in the Piazza, and another parcel of Men might be planted in
Covent-Garden-Church-Po^ch, and within the Rails, where Horses could not come,
and that while the Men within the Rails Fired, Men in the Piazza might engage
the Guards, while they in the Porch came down and prevented them from escaping.
And that all this was before Mr. Ferguson went for Holland.

That afterward there was another way propounded, and as he thought it was
Colonel Rumsey who said, that he wondered Lords and Great men who were so fond
of the thing, did not buy somebody an Office, who should rail against the Duke
of Monmouth and the whiggs, and by that means get an Opportunity of Access to
the Kings Person. That after the Lord Shaftsbury retired into Holland, Mr.
Ferguson did so too, and Captain Walcot Ferguson flies into Holland.
went with him. That in the mean time the Witness met Colonel Rumsey several
times; and that several things were offered, but nothing resolved upon. That a
little after Christmas there was a meeting at the Salutation in Lumbard Street,
where it was agreed that Mr. Ferguson should be sent for, to which purpose the
Witness wrote a Canting Letter to him, that he should come over for his Health,
for that He was the only man that could manage the Affair. That after his
coming over, there were several Meetings at the Witnesses Chamber, where Mr.
Ferguson, He returns and me^ts at Mr. Wests Chamber,
Mr Rumbold and Mr. Goodenough undertook to provide Men for the Assassination.

That the Assassination was agreed to be done, either upon the going to, or
returning back of the King from New Market. Upon which arose several Debates.
That against doing it, upon Several debates, when to execute the design.
going down; it was objected, that the Guards were left here and there, and
they went together, but very often they returned apart, and therefore it was
not the safest way going down; and besides nothing else being prepared, it was
resolved to be done coming back. That then it was considered what Arms were to
be provided, which matter Mr. Rumbold undertook to manage and to procure some
Blunderblusses, some Carbines and some Pistols, but as for other persons, they
were to provide every one for himself. The Witness further added, that he asked
Mr. Ferguson what provision of Money he had made, who answered that he should
have Money when the Men were provided. That there were several debates about
the manner of Conveighance of the Arms to Rumbolds House, but no Resolution
taken. Then it was considered how they should put the Design in Execution, upon
which it was proposed, That one party was to fall upon the Coach-Horses, a
second upon the Coach, and a third upon the Guards, and that for Captain Walcot
he would undertake nothing but the Guards. Capt. Walcot would undertake nothing
but the Guards.


Here Captain Walcot interrupted the Witness with an Interrogatory, calling
out, what do you say Sir? to which the Kings Evidence made answer with an
Affirmative, that the Prisoner at the Bar was at his Chamber, and said that he
was to command the Party of Horse that were to attack the Guards, who were
to lie perdue at Rumbolds House, till the King just came down upon them.

Being asked where the Arms were to be carried? He said to Rumbolds House,
who said he could keep them all private where no body could see them till the
time of Execution; that there was a Gate which he could shut upon the Guards
to prevent their coming into the Rescue, that Mr. Rumbold said he would bring
them off, and because it was dangerous for them to go the road way, he would
carry them over the Meadows, and come in by Hackney Marsh.

But the way which the Prisoner at the Bar did most approve Walcot's way to get
off when the business was done.
of, was to retire within the Wall, and there keep close till night, as being a
place which they could defend against any force for a days time; and that this
Resolution was taken at his Chamber.

Then the Witness recollecting himself, told the Court, there was one thing
which he had omitted, which was that in the first Discourse with Captain
VValcot concerning the Insurrection in November, the Prisoner at the Bar told
him, that the Lord Shaftsbury was preparing a Declaration to be published, in
case of an Assassination or Insurrection, and asked him if he would undertake
to draw one, telling him, that he had made some Collect^ons toward it himself,
and showed him a Paper which was a Collection of all the Passages in the Raigns
of King James, K. Charles the First and this King, which he called Attempts to
introduce Arbitrary Government and Popery, taxing them with some personal
Vices, and concluding that the Government was Dissolved, and that therefore
they were free to se^^le another, to which the Witness made answer, that such
an Untertaking required Mr. West refuses to draw a Declaration.
an exact Knowledge in History, and that he would not undertake a thing for
which he was not Competent, and that hereupon Captain Walcot desired him to
burn the Paper which he did.

Being asked what Meetings there were after the disappointm^nt? He answered,
that when the News of the Fire came, they Adjourned to his Chamber and there
considered what they had to do, and endeavored to put things in a posture to
see if it could be done another day. To which purpose as far as he could
remember, they met Thursday and Friday Night. But because they said the King
would be at home the next day, the business was laid aside.

That about a day or two after he met Colonel Rumsey at the The reason why
the Arms were called Swans-Quills, etc.
Dolphin Tavern, at what time Mr. Keeling came in; that there Colonel Rumsey
was talking of Pistols and Blunderbusses in down right English. That
thereupon the Witn^ss admonished them, that it was a foolish thing to talk so
before Drawers, which was the occasion of calling them by the Names of
Swansquills, Goose-quills and Crows-quills. That the next week the Prisoner at
the Bar Mr. Goodenough Mr. Ferguson, one N^rton, and one Ayliff met at the
George and Vulture; where, after some discourse of the late Disappointment,
the reason of which was that they had not Arms in Readiness, they agreed that
Arms should be bought, ten Blunderbusses Twenty or two and Twenty Inches in the
Ba^rel, Thirty Carbines Eighteen Inches, and Thirty Cases of Pistols of
Fourteen Inches. That the Witn^ss was ordered to provide these Arms, because
he could be no other way serviceable to them, and could have a pretense for
buying them, because he had a Plantation in America. That he did bespeak the
said Arms and pay for them, but had not his money a good while after, but at
length was paid Fourscore and Thirteen Guneys, which was something more then
the Arms cost; and that he believed the Money was paid by Mr. Charleton; That
in case the Assassination had gone on, they had designed to kill the Lord Mayor
and the Sh^riffs, as many of the Lieutenancy as they could get, and the The
Mayor, Sheriff^, etc. to be killed, as also the Earl of Roch^ster, Lord K^^per,
Lord Hallifax,
Principal Ministers of State. The Lord Rochester, as being like to stand to
the Duke's Interest; The Lord Keeper, because he had the Great Seal, whom they
also intended to hang upon the same Post that College was hanged upon, for his
Death. The Lord Hallifax, as being one that professed himself of the Party
before, and turned from the Right side. That Sir John Moore was to be killed as
Sir John Moor.
a Betrayer of the Rights and Liberties of the City, that the Judges were to be
flead and stuffed, and hung up in Westminster Hall; and several of the Pentionary
Parliament, as Betrayers of the Rights of the People. And that the Prisoner at
the Bar was sometimes at these Meetings, when these things were discoursed of,
though not so often as the rest.

That after the News of the Fire, the Prisoner said that he believed God showed
his Disappointment of these things, and desired to have his Name concealed,
upon which Mr. Ferguson asked him, why he should be ashamed? saying that it was
a glorious Action which he hoped to see publicly gratified by the Parliament,
and questioned not but the Prisoner would be famed for it, and have Statues
erected for him, with the Title of Liberator Patriae.

The Witness farther added, that when the Mayor and Sheriffs Papillion and
Dubois designed Sheriffs, and Ald. Cornish Mayor.
were killed, they designed that Mr. Papillion and Dubois should be forced to
take the Office of Sheriffs upon them, which if they refused to do, they should
be used as the rest, and that Sir Thomas Gold, Sir John Shorter, or Alderman
Cornish, should be set up for Lord Mayor, but rather Alderman Cornish as the
fitter Person. That being asked by the Witness what they intended to do with
the Kings Natural Sons, they said they were good lusty Fellows, and would serve
for Porters or Watermen, and that for the Lady Ann, they would marry her to
some Country Gentleman for a Breed to keep out Foreign Pretenses.

Being asked what he knew as to the C^ntinu^tion of the Rising, The Design
continued and carried on by the Lords etc.
and whether it were continued? He made Answer, That about Christmas, Colonel
Rumsey told him there was a Design carrying on among the Lords and Great Men,
by whom he always understood the Duke of Monmouth, the Lords Russel, Gray, and
Howard, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Wildman, and Mr. Hampden, for an Insurrection which
was Designed to be done about March. That Colonel Rumsey and he Discoursing of
it, the Colonel thought fit to draw up some things that were to be required in
behalf of the People, which was done, but that the Lord Russel said it was
rejected, in regard that all should be left to the Parliament.

That at the Young Devil Tavern, he met with the Prisoner at Mr. Holloway
proposes to try what Forces they could raise without assistance from Scotland.
the Bar, Colonel Rums^y, Mr. Wade, Mr. Goodenough, and one Holloway, a
Merchant of Bristol; where Mr. Holloway proposed, That since the Scotch
Business was broken off, they should try what Forces they could Raise here. He
farther added,

That the City was to be divided into twenty parts, and every twentieth part
into fourteenths, and fifteenths, and the Streets and Lanes were allotted out.
That one Principal Man was to have a twentieth part, and so many Men under him;
and that they might not interfere one with another, they bought a great Map of
the City. That at one of the Meetings, Mr. Goodenough Reported, That there were
1500 Men out of two of the Hamlets, and that there were several Meetings about
this Affair; And being asked whether the Prisoner was at those several
Meetings? He Answered, Yes, and that he showed himself ready to act his part.

Being asked whether they met after the Discovery? He Answered, That on the
Monday Morning next, after the Discovery, A Meeting after the Discovery.
of which he had notice upon the Sunday before, he met pretty early at Captain
Walcot's Lodging, whether soon after came all the rest who had agreed to meet,
but that they Designed to go beyond Sea; But understanding the Messengers were
abroad, and believing the River was beset, every Man shifted for himself. That
being thus retired, they got Mr. Keeling into the City, that Rumbold Discoursed
him in the presence of several Persons; but that Mr. Keeling wished a great
many Imprecations upon himself, if he had Discovered. That then, after some
Discourse of Killing him, they proposed to him to go out of Town which he
refused. That the same Night they traced him from place to place, and finding
that he was gone to the Secretaries Lodgings, they took it for granted that the
Discovery was made, and that every Man must shift for himself. That upon that,
Mr. Wade said, That if the Duke of Monmouth would go into the West, they might
try a push for it still, and that the Prisoner at the Bar said, That he was
satisfied God would deliver the Nation, but that he Walcot satisfied, that God
did not like the present Instruments, but would deliver the Nation.
did not approve of the present Instruments.

Thus the sum of what was fastened upon the Prisoner was, That he was at several
Consults about Killing or Securing the King. That he went down to Rumbold's
House, to view the place where it might be done with most safety, and that he
undertook to Fight the Guards, if he might have a considerable number of Men.

To this Captain Walcot Pleaded, That he never was at Rumbold's House, but once
as he Traveled from York by Norwich, and so to London.

To which Colonel Rumsey Replied, That the Prisoner did buy a Horse, and said
he intended to go down, and to the best of his Remembrance, said, He was down.
But that he bought a Horse which cost him 20 l. for that purpose he was certain.

But the Prisoner still denying the Matter of Fact, and Pleading that he lay
Sick of the Gout, all the while the King was at New Market, a Letter was
produced under his own hand to Sir Lionel Jenkins, Secretary of State,
purporting, A Letter under his hand to Sir Lionel Je^kins produced.
That being troubled to see himself in His Majesty's Proclamation, he resolved
to lay himself at His Majesty's Feet, let him do with him what he pleased; and
acknowledging his Crime, which he says was the first that he had Committed
since his Majesty's Restoration, he purposed to Discover to him all that he
knew Relating to England, Ireland, and Scotland, which he supposed might be
more then the Original Discoverer was able to acquaint His Majesty with; And
farther, That if His Majesty thought fit, he would follow those Lords and
Gentlemen who were fled, and as soon as he could, would inform His Majesty what
measures they intended to take next. Otherwise he Resolved to give His Majesty
no farther trouble, but to lie at his Mercy, let him do with him what he
pleased.

Then Captain Richardson being Sworn, made Oath, That on Cpt. Walcot sends for
Captain Richardson.
Sunday Night Captain Walcot sent for him, and seemed very desirous to wait
upon His Majesty, and to unbosom himself to the King. That Yesterday Morning
his Son coming to him, he sent his Clark along with him to his Father, who
Discovered a little Paper in his Hand, which he had intended to have given to
his Son, which afterward the Prisoner desired him to make no use of since he
had Discovered it. The Letter was to Captain Tracy his Landlord, to speak to
Colonel Rumsey, to be tender of him, and to tell him he had Ground enough to
serve the King upon other Men, and to speak to Mrs. West, to desire the same
thing of her Husband; and that the last words of the Note were, If you cannot
be private, leave the Issue to God.

To the whole the Prisoner Pleaded, That the Witnesses had The Prisoner pleads
his being out of England.
made long Speeches, though very little, and yet too much Relating to him; Of a
Design to Assassinate the King, and carry on a War, when he was out of the
Kingdom; Of a Declaration drawn up at Mr. Shepherd's House, and of things not
being ready upon Mr. Trenchard's failing, when he was in Holland.

That as to his undertaking to Charge the Guards when he came into England, it
was an improbable thing, for that he knew there was no difference between
Killing the King, and securing the Guards. But it was plain, That the Witnesses
had sufficiently dipped themselves, and therefore to save their own Lives, they
had combined to take away his.

He denied that the VVitness made it out, That he was privy He de^ves himself
privy to Good^noughs Notes.
to Mr. Goodenough's Notes about Raising of Men, or that he knew any of them.

That the Meetings at his Lodging were by Colonel Rums^y's Appointment, of
which he knew nothing; and that he came among them accidentally sometimes only
to hear News; neither was any thing agirated there that he knew of concerning
Killing the King, or Levying War. He confessed he heard there was a Design by
a great many Lords and Gentlemen, and others, for asserting their Liberties and
Properties, but that he never was in any Consultation with them, or any Message
to them, or ever saw the Face of any of those Lords that were said to be
concerned; and therefore it was improbable that he should be so far concerned
as the VVitness seemed to represent him.

Being asked why he frequented the Company where he heard those things? He
Answered, It was his Folly, and conceived it was only Misprision of Treason:
For it was true, he had heard a great deal of what the VVitnesses had said
touching an Insurrection, but that he had no hand directly or indirectly in it,
nor did the Death of the King ever enter into his thoughts directly or
indirectly; And that when some Gentlemen talked to him of it, he abominated it
as a Scandalous Thing, a reproach to the Protestant Religion, and that his
Children would bear the reproach of it. But the Court told him he failed in his
Law, for though to hear of Treason accidentally or occasionally and conceal it
was but Misprision, yet if a Man would be at a Consult where Treason was
Hatched, and then concealed it, he was then Guilty of Treason it self.

The Jury then desiring he might be asked what he had to say He alleges his
undertaking in his Letter, to be upon his intimacy with Mr. Ferguson.
to the Letter? the Prisoner made Answer, That what he promised he undertook
upon his Intimacy with Mr. Ferguson, by whose means he believed he should have
an Interest with the rest. That he did according to his promise, give an
Account of what he had heard, but that the King was not pleased with him,
because he did not descend to particulars, which he could not do, in regard he
had never been in their Company, nor knew any thing but what he had by a
private hand.

As for his Confession that it was his first Crime, it was only as far as
Misprission went, having never acted or intended the Treason.

In the last place he produced one VVitness to prove when he He produces a
Witness about his Gout.
fell ill of the Gout, and how long it continued; who said, That he could not
certainly tell, but believed it was about three Months; nor could he certainly
tell when it began.

After this, the King's Sergeant having summed up the Evidence, the Lord Chief
Justice gave his Charge to the Jury, who after He is found Guilty.
about half a quarter of an Hours Consideration, returned, and brought the
Prisoner in Guilty.

THE Charge and Defense OF William Hone.
UPON Friday the 19th, of July, William Hone having been Arraigned the Day
before, and after some frivolous Ev^sions pleaded not Guilty, was brought to
his Tryel for C^nspiring and Int^nding the Death of the King, and the
Subversion of the Government, and for providing himself with Arms to that
purpose, To this being a second time asked according to the usual Custom,
whether Guilty or not Guilty, he would have retracted his Plea of not Guilty
and pleaded Guilty. Upon Hone desires to retract his Plea and plead Guilty.
which being demanded by the Court whether he did confess the whole Indictment?
He answered Y^s, but being asked again whether he confessed that he did
conspi^e the Death of the King, and provide Arms to do the wicked Act? He
answered that he did not provide any Arms, that his Deposition before Sir
William Turner was true, and that he was asked by Mr. Richard Goodenough to go
along with him, that he asked whether? and then understood it was to kill the
King and the Duke of York, but was not told the place.

Which not being taken for a full Confession, the Kings Sergeant desired he
might be tried. So that the Jury were sworn without any Challenges.

Nicholas Charleton Christopher Pitts Robert Beddingfield John Pelling William
Winbury Thomas Seaton William Rutl^nd Thomas Short Theophilus Man John Jenew
John Short Thomas Nicholas.
Which done and the Endictment opened, Mr. Josias Keeling was Mr. Keeling Sworn.
sworn, who declared, that he saw the Prisoner at the Dolphin Tavern, where the
Arms were agreed upon. That at the same time were present Mr. West, Mr.
Goodenough, and Mr. Rumbold, and that he remembered the Prisoner particularly.
That it was then discoursed of the Kings coming home from Newmarket the
Saturday after the Fire, and the several Reports of the Town concerning it.
That upon their hopes that the King would not return upon Monday, Mr. West
asked Rumbold how many Swansquills, Goose-quills and Crows-quills, and what
Sand and Ink he must have; and that the Prisoner was by, and heard all the
Discourse. Being asked what was meant by all that? He answered, that by
Swans-quills were meant Blunderbusses, by Goose-quills, Muskets, and by
Crows-quills, Pistols, and by Sand and Ink, Powder and Bullet. That after that
Meeting the Prisoner took acquaintance with him, and after some time told him,
that he was one of those that was to Assassinate the King. That after that, at
a He told the Witness he was put down to Assassinate the King.
Coffee-House in Swithins Alley, the Prisoner told him, that it would never be
well till the Blackbird and the Gold Finch were knocked o'th Head, and that
asking him what he meant by those Terms, he answered the King and the Duke of
York.

Then the Prisoner being admitted to ask the Witness any Questions, he said
that he owned it as to the Blackbird, but that as to the Goldfinch he never
heard a word of it till then.

Mr West being sworn, declared that he was at the Meeting before Mr, West's
Testimony.
mentioned when Mr. Keeling came in; that several things were said of
Swans-quills, etc. but that this Man did not come in till that Discourse was
over, and that he was sure he did not speak of any thing of that nature before
this Man in his Life. That Mr. Goodenough did undertake to provide the Man, and
said he would try him whether he would attempt upon the Duke without the King.
That he asked the Prisoner, whether he had seen Mr. Goodenough? Who answered,
that he had; and that he had spoke to him about a little Job for the Duke; and
that Mr. Goodenough said he had spoken to him fully about the thing. That he
saw him often in the Company of Manning, who was designed to be another of the
Aslassinaters. That being once at his Chamber, the Prisoner said to him,
Master, shall we do nothing? adding, that if the Duke of M. would be but true,
and appear, he would bring 50 or 60 honest Men of the other side of the Water,
who would do the business. That upon asking him what business? he answered
either a Brisk Push, which the Witness took for an Insurrection, or the two
Brothers. That upon asking him what two Brothers he meant? He replied, the
Captain and Lieutenant, which were the Terms they used since the Van Herring
was Printed. Here Mr. West put in, that he thought the Prisoner was a good
honest Fellow before that time, but that he thought he was deluded by
Goodenough.

Upon which the Lord Chief Justice asked him, whether he came to justify those
things?

Mr. West replied that he had been basely deluded, and that he was sorry for
the poor Fellow.

Which caused the Lord Chief Justice to tell him that it was an unusual thing
for men in his Condition to use such Expressions in such a Case. And being
afterward told by the Kings Sergeant, that he found him not worthy the Mercy
the King had shown him, then Mr. West replied. that it was a word he put from
him unawares.

Then Sir Nicholas Butler being sworn, declared, That he had Sir Nicholas
Butler proves the Prisoner always ready for such evil design^.
known the Prisoner for many Years, and had always known him Guilty of Plotting
and Contriving, and upon all occasions ready to embrace any thing for those
purposes laid to his Charge. Particularly, that when Sir Francis Chaplain was
Lord Mayor, and that the King stood at Mr. Waldo's, the Angel being much
shaken, the Prisoner came to his House and told him, that now they had a fair
Oppor^unity to take off the King and the Duke at once; to which purpose there
were to be half a dozen with Cross-Bows, who would go into the Steeple, where
there was a Window just opposite to the Balconey. That thereupon he went to the
King and the Duke of York, and gave them this account, and desired them to set
some to watch the Place, and to search if any were got into the Steeple before
they came. That one Horsel was appointed to watch them accordingly, but none
came. And that when he was examined before the King, the Prisoner confessed all
those things.

Captain Richa^dson being sworn gave evidence, That he went along with Sir
Nicholas when he examined the Prisoner as to this thing. Who then said, that
Mr. Goodenough came to him and told him he wanted L^bo^rers. That Mr Goodenough
told He agrees with Goodenough to kill the King and the Duke of York.
him, it was to kill the King and the Duke of York, and that he confess^d he
did agree to be one of the Persons would undertake it; and that Goodenough
promised him Twenty Pound to buy him an Horse and Arms. That he confessed the
business of Rye, which place he did not know, but said it was the place where
the King was to be murdered.

To all this the Prisoner said little or nothing, only that he did not know the
place where, nor when it was proposed about the Rye, and that he was drawn into
it by Mr. Goodenough.

That as to the Cross-bows, he was only told it, but never designed it.

Being asked what Religion he professed, he answered, That he heard sometimes
Baptists, sometimes Independents, and sometimes Presbyterians.

After a short Charge, the Jury brought him in Guilty, without stirring from
the Bar.

THE Charge and Defense OF THE Lord RUSSEL.
THE same Friday Morning being the 13th of July, the Lord Russel was set to the
Bar, within the Bar.

He was charged as were the former, for compassing, imagining and intending the
death of the King, and the Subversion of the Government.

To this being required to plead, he desired that he might have a Copy of what
was laid to his Charge. But the Court informing him, that they could grant
nothing till he had pleaded, he then pleaded not Guilty.

Which done, he told the Court that he thought no Prisoner had been Arraigned
and Tried at the same time: and urged that he had been a Close Prisoner. To
which the Court replied that it was continually done in Crimes of this Nature:
and it was farther told him, That he has had a great deal of Favor shown The
Court makes him sensible of the favor shown him.
him already, in that he had been acquainted with his Crimes, and that he had
had the Liberty of Couns^l, which had not been known granted to any under his
Circumstance.

The Prisoner alleged that he had only heard some general Questions, and that
he had Witnesses which he believed would not be in Town till Night, and
therefore thought it very hard that he could not have one day more.

To which it was answered that he had notice upon the Monday was a seven night
before, and that the Questions he was examined upon, where a favor to him,
that he might know the matter he was charged with, and therefore if the Kings
Counsel did not think it fit, the Court could not put off his Trial.

The next thing he desired was a Copy of his Panel, to which He d^sire^ a Copy
of the Panel which was proved to be delivered to his Gentleman.
the Lord Chief Justice replied that it had been ordered him, and the Attorney
General said that he had indulged him so far, that he might have a Note of the
Men returned: The Secondaries also affirmed, that they had delivered it to his
Gentleman. To which my Lords Gentleman made answer that he had only some Names
out of a Book. Whereupon my Lord insisting that he had no Pann^l but only some
Names of Persons usually upon Juries, it was told him by the Court that no
other Panel could be given him, and then the S^condary being asked affirmed,
that he had had the Copy of a Hundred Names.

Nevertheless his Lordship still urging for a Copy of the Panel, and that his
Trial might be put off till the afternoon, in regard he had a Witness that was
not in Town, the Lord Chief Justice condescended so far as to ask the Attorney
General, why the Trial might not be respited till the Afternoon? But the
Attorney General giving no Answer to it, the Court Proceeded.

Then the Prisoner desired to know whether he might have Pen He is allowed Pen
and Ink and two to write for him.
and Ink, and a person allowed to write for him; to which it was answered him,
that he might have two if he pleased.

Sir Andrew Foster being then called, he said that his Name was not in his
List; but it was replied that he was not called as one of the Jury.

After which, the Court Proceeding to call the Jury, and John The Prisoner
insists upon Fr^eholders.
Martin being named, the Lord Russel asked whether he were a Freeholder of
Forty Shillings a Year; saying that He thought that none were allowed but such
as were Freeholders.

To this the Court replied, that no Panel was made in London by Fr^eholders,
for that the Estates in London belonging either to the Nobility and Gentry that
lived out of it, or to Corporations, London was excepted.

To this the Prisoner urged the Statute of the 2 of Henry 5th. wherein he said
it was positive that in cases of Life and Death, no man should be judged but by
those that have Forty Shillings a Year.

But the Attorney G^neral not allowing the Prisoners Exc^ption, the Lord
Russels Counsel were called and assigned him again by the Court, Mr. Poluxfen,
Mr. Holt and Mr. Ward; who after they had learnedly argued what they took to be
the Law in that case, were so fully answered by the Kings Counsel, that it was
adjudged by the whole Court, that in case of Tr^ason, Freehold was no good
Cause of Callenge. However it was told him he would have as g^od a Jury and
better then he would have had in the Country, of four pound a Year Freeholders.
The reason of the Law being, to the end no slight Persons should be put upon
the Jury, where the Life or Estate of a Man comes in Question, but that in the
City the Persons. Impannelled were Men of Substance, who had a great deal to
lose, and therefore his Lordship had the same in Effect, as if a Challenge were
allowed of a Freeholder. And this was the Opinion of eight of the Judges being
present.

This Dispute being over, the Jurymen were called, and after the Prisoner had
challenged one and thirty, the following persons were sworn. The Jury sworn.


John Martin William Rouse Jervas Seaton William Fashion Thomas Short George
Toriano William Butler James Pickering Thomas Jeve Hugh Noden Robert Brough
Thomas Oneby.
The Jury being thus sworn, and the Indictment opened by the Kings Counsels,
Colonel Rumsey was first sworn; who gave in Evidence.

That about the latter end of October or beginning of November, he was at the
Lord Shaftsbury's Lodgings, where he lay near Wapping, and that he told him,
there were met at one Mr. Shepheard's House, the D. of M. the Lords Russel and
Gray, Sir Tho. Armstrong and Mr. Ferguson. That his Lordship desired him to
speak to them, to know what Resolution they were come to about the Rising at
Taunton. That he went to Mr. Shepherds, who carried him up where they were,
and that the Answer which was then made him was, That Mr. Trenchard had failed
them, and there would be no more done in the Matter at that time: for that he
had promised a Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse, but could not perform
it, and therefore that the Lord Shaftsbury must be content. That Mr. Ferguson
spoke most of the Answer, and that as far as he remembers, the Lord Gray said
something to the same purpose; but that the Lord Russel and the Duke of
Monmouth were present; and that thereupon the Lord Shaftsbury prepared to be
gone.

Being asked how long he was at Mr. Shepherds? He said, About a Quarter of an
Hour.

Being asked what Discourse happened while he was there? He Answered, He was
not certain whether he heard it there, or whether Mr. Ferguson Reported to the
Earl of Shaftsbury, that they had debated it there.

The Witness farther added, That there was some Discours^ by The Guards
undertaken to be viewed, and the Prisoner then present.
all the Company that was there, about seeing in what posture the Guards at the
Savoy and Mews were: which was first began by Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Mr.
Ferguson, and the business undertaken by the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Gray,
and Sir Thomas Armstrong, and that the Prisoner was there when they undertook
to take the view.

As to the Rising he farther added, That it was to have been the 19th. of
November, that it was determined, and that he was The Rising to have been on
the 19th. of November.
to have gone to Bristol by the order of the Earl of Shaftsbury.

Being asked whether the Lord Russel gave his consent? the Witness made Answer,
He did.

The Lord Russel being now permitted to ask the Witness what Questions he
pleased, desired to know whether he gave any Answer to the Message about the
Rising? The Witnes^ Replied in the Affirmative, That the Prisoner did speak
about the Rising at Taunton.

And then being asked by his Lordship, Whether he in particular gave his
consent to the Rising? he again confirmed what he had said before.

Mr. Shepherd being Sworn, Declared, That in October, as far as he remembered,
Mr. Ferguson came to him in the Duke of Monmouths name, and desired the
convenience of his House for him, and some other Persons of Quality to meet.
That in the Evening came the Duke of Monmouth, the Lords Gray and Russel, Sir
Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Rumsey, and Mr. Ferguson. The Duke of Monmouth, the
Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, go to view the Guards.
That Sir Thomas Armstrong desired him, that none of his Servants might come
up, but that they might be private. That the Substance of their Discourse was,
How to surprise the Guards, in order to which, as far as he remembered, the Duke
of Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, went one Night to the
Mews to view the Guards. That the next time they came to his House, he heard
Sir Thomas Armstrong say, That the Guards were very remiss in ^h^ir places, and
not like Soldiers, and that the thing was feasible if they had strength to do
it.

Being asked whether they came in Coaches, and in the Dark? He Replied, That
they came in the Evening imediately one after another, but he did not let them
in.

Being asked whether the Prisoner were there both times? He Answered, Yes, to
the best of his remembrance.

Being asked whether there were any Coaches at his Door? He A Declaration read,
setting forth the G^evances of the Nation.
Answered, None that he saw.

Being asked whether he remembered any Papers read at that time? He Answered,
upon Recollecting his Memory, That there was a Paper in the Nature of a
Declaration, setting forth the Grievances of the Nation read by Mr. Ferguson,
but who was present at the Reading, whether all or no, he could not remember;
particularly he could not say the Lord Russel was there at the reading it.

The L. Howard being next Sworn, gave a long Evidence, The sum of which was
after he had made a Recapitulation of several Designs of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, that upon the Earl of Shaftsbury's withdrawing, those Persons who
were concerned, began to lie under the same Apprehensions that the Earl of
Shaftsbury did. That they had gone too far and Communicated the Design to so
many, that it was unsafe to make a Retreat, That therefore it being considered,
that so great an Affair, consisting of so many nice particulars, could not be
managed but by some general Council, that should take care of the whole, they
resolved to erect a little Cabal among themselves, consisting of six Persons,
which were the Duke of Monmouth, the Lord Russel, the Earl of Essex, Mr Hampden
Junior, Algernoon Sidney, Esquire; and Himself.

That these six Persons met about the middle of February, at Mr. Hampden's
House, where it was agreed what their Business was, which was, to take care of
the whole. That as to particulars, the things that Challenged their care should
be, Whether the Insurrection were most proper to be begun in London, or in the
Country, or both in an Instant?

What Countries and Towns were fittest, and most disposed to Acti^n.

What Arms were necessary to be got, and how to be disposed.

How to Raise a Common Bank of 25 or 30000 l. to answer all Occasions.

And lastly how to order it so, as to draw Scotland to consent with them, it
being thought necessary that all Diversion should be given.

That there was another Meeting of all the same six Persons ten days after at
the Lord Russel's House, where they came to a Resolution, A Council of six
erected, of which the Prisoner one. A second meeting at the Lord Russel's House.
That some Persons should be sent to the Lord Arguile, to settle an
Understanding with him, and that some Mess^ngers should be send into Scotland
to invite some Persons hither, that were judged most able to understand the
State of Scotland, and give an Account of it. That the Persons agreed on were
Sir John Cockrane, and the Lord Melvin, with one more, whose Name he since
understood to be Sir -- Campbel. And that in Discourse it was referred to
Colonel Sidney, to take care of that Business.

That afterward Colonel Sidney told him, he had sent Aaron Smith, and given
sixty Guineys for his Journey.

Being asked whether he was sure the Lord Russel was at that The Lord Russel at
the Meeting about Scotland, and consented to it.
Meeting? He Answered, That he wished he could not say it.

Being asked whether he consented? the Lord Howard made Answer, That they did
not put it to the Vote, but it went without Contradiction, and he so took it,
that all that were present gave their consent.

The Lord Russel being now permitted to ask the Lord Howard any Questions,
said, That what the Lord Howard had said of him was only Hearsay. That the two
times they met, it was upon no formed Design, only to talk of News and Things
in General. That the Lord Howard was a Man of a voluble Tongue, talked well,
was full of Discourse, and they were delighted to hear him. That for the Scotch
Gentlemen, he never saw any of them, only the Lord Melvil he had seen, but not
upon this Account. There the Attorney General urged, That Aaron Smith did go
into Scotland, and that Campbel he went for was taken, and then called Mr.
Atterbury Mr. Atterbury swear. Sir Hugh Campbel in Custody.
the Messenger to prove his Apprehension; who being Sworn Declared, That Sir
Hugh Campbel was then in his Custody, and that he had been by his own
Confession four days in London before he was Apprehend^d.

Then Mr. West being Sworn, Declared, That as to the Lord Russel, he never had
any Conversation with him at all, but that Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Rumsey, told
him, That the Lord Russel intended to go down and take his Post in the West,
where Mr. Trenchard The Lord Russel the person most looked upon by the Party.
had failed them; And that they always said, The Lord Russel was a Man they
most depended upon, because he was a Person looked upon as of great Sobriety.

Here the Court Declared, That what Colonel Rumsey, or Mr. Ferguson told Mr.
West, was no Evidence, so that the King's Council resolved to rest upon what
they had already proved.

The sum then o^ the Evidence against the Lord Russel was, That Colonel Rumsey
was sent upon a Traiterous Message by the Earl of Shaftsbury, to a Meeting
where his Lordship was, and that the Answer was returned his Lordship being
there; and that there was a Discourse at the same time of an Insurrection to be
made, and a Declaration read, to be Printed upon the Rising, seting forth the
Oppressions and Grievances of the Nation, and Discourse of surprising the
Guards. That six Persons, of which his Lordship was one, did erect themselves
into a Council to manage the Insurrection and Raising of Men.

To all this the Lord Russel made Answer, That he could not but think himself
mighty unfortunate to stand there Charged His Defense.
with so high a Crime, and that intermixed with the Horrid: Practices and
Speeches of other People, while the King's Council took all advantages to
heighten things against him. That he was no Lawyer, and a very unready Speaker,
and altogether a Stranger to things of this Nature. That he was sensible he was
not so provided, as to make his Defense as otherwise he should do; But that his
Lordship thought the Gentlemen of the Jury were Men of Consciences that valued
Innocent Blood, and hoped they would consider the Witnesses, that they Swore to
save their own Liv^s. Neither was what Colonel Rumsey Swore enough to take away
his Life; or if it were, the time was Elapsed by the 13th. of the King, which
limits Prosecution to Six Months. Neither was the Design of L^vying War,
Treason, unless it appeared by some Overt Act, as appears by the 25th. of
Ed^ard the 3d. And then desiring to know upon what Statute he was Endicted, it
was told him by the Statute of the 25th of Edward the 3d. upon which he
insisted He insists upon two Points of the Law, and desires Council.
upon these two Points as Matter of Law, and prayed to be heard by his Council,
whether the Treason were duly proved, und if it were, whether it were
punishable by the Statute.

In Answer to which the Court informed him, That if he were contented that the
Fact should be taken as proved against him, and desired Counsel upon what was
bare Matter of Law, he he should have it granted; but that there could be no
Matter of Law admitted, but upon a Fact admitted and stated. And whereas he
insisted, that the business a^ Mr. Shepheard's House was sworn to only by one
Witness; It was Answered, That if there were one Witness of one Act of Treason,
another of a second, another of a third, that manifested the same Treason, it
was sufficient.

After the Lord Russel had several times insisted upon the same The Lord
Anglesey.
Objections, and had received several undeniable Answers to the same effect,
the Lord Anglesey stood up, who declared, That upon a Visit which he gave the
Earl of Bedford, in his trouble for the Affliction of his Son, the Lord Howard
came in while he was there, and to comfort the Earl used these Expressions. My
Lord, you are happy in h^ving a wise Son, and a worthy Pers^n, one that can
never sure be in such a Plot as this, or suspected for it, which may give your
Lordship Reason to expect a very good Issue concerning him. I know nothing
against him or any Body else, and therefore your Lordship may be comforted
concerning him.

After him Mr. Edward Howard stood up, who declared, That Mr. Edward Howard.
upon serious Discourse with the Lord Howard, he took it upon his Honor and
his Faith, That he knew nothing of any Man concerned in the Plot, and
particularly of my Lord Russel, whom he Vindicated with all the Honor in the
World. So that if the Ld. Howard had the same heart on Monday that he had on
Saturday, it could not be true what he Swore against the Lord Russel. To which
he added, That he thought the Lord Russel did not only unjustly suffer, but he
took God and Man to Witness, That he thought him the wortiest Person in the
World.

Dr. Burnet declared, That the Lord Howard was with him the Dr. Burnet.
Night after the Plot broke out, and did then as he had done before, with Hands
and Eyes lifted up to Heaven protest, That he knew nothing of any Plot, nor
believed any, and Treated it with great Scorn and Contempt.

The Lord Cavendish declared, That he had the Honor to be The Lord Cavendish.
acquainted with the Lord Russel a long time, and that he always thought him a
Man of great Honor, and too Prudent and Wary; to be concerned in so vile and
desperate a Design as this, and from which he would receive so little
advantage. He said he could say no more, but that two or three days after the
Discovery of the Plot, upon Discourse about Colonel Rumsey, the Lord Russel did
express something as if he had a very ill Opinion of the Man, and therefore it
was not likely he would entrust him with such a Secret.

Dr. Burnet again declared, That he had been for many Years last Dr. Burnet.
past acquainted with the Lord Russel, and always judged him a Person of great
Worth and Integrity, and had declared himself with much Confidence to him, and
had always upon all Occasions expressed himself against all Risings, and when
he spoke of some People that would provoke to it, he expressed himself so
determined against that Matter, that no Man could do more.

Doctor Thomas Cox declared, That having been very much Dr. Cox.
with the Lord Russel of late, that is to say for a Month or Six Weeks before
the Plot brake out, he had occasion to speak with him in Private upon these
public Matters. But that he always found that his Lordship was against all
manner of Risings, and thought it the greatest Folly and Madness, till things
should come in a Parliamentary-way. That he had heard him profess solemnly,
that he thought it would ruin the best Cause in the World, to use any of those
Irregular ways for preserving it, and particularly that his Lordship had
expressed himself concerning those two Persons, the Lord Howard, that he was a
Man of Luxuriant parts, but had the ill luck not to be much trusted by any
Party; and Colonel Rumsey that he knew him Little, and that he had nothing to
do with Him, but in the Lord Shaftsbury's Business.

The Duke of Somerset declared that he had known the Lord The Duke of Somerset.
Russel for about two years, and had much Conversation with him, but never
heard any thing from him, but what was Just, Honorable and Loyal.

Here the Gentlemen of the Jury desired to ask the Lord Howard The Jury desires
the Lord Howard to answer the point testified by the Ld. Anglesey,
something upon the point, the Lord Anglesey testified, and to know what Answer
he made to the Lord Anglesey.

Thereupon the Lord Chief Baron asked him what he said to it, that he told his
Father, he was a Discreet Man, and he need not fear his Engagement in any such
thing?

To which the Lord Howard answered, that he confessed he did Which he doe^.
say it, for he was at that time to outface the thing both for himself and his
Party, and did not intend to come to that Place and Act that Part. But God well
knew how it was brought upon him, and with what unwillingness he sustained it,
but his Duty to God, the King and his Country required it. Besides that it was
upon that which every man was committed for, that he took hold, when he made
his solemn Protestations, for all that were committed for a Design of Murdering
the King; and so were he an Enemy to the Lord Russel, and brought in a Witness
against him, he was bound to have declared in the Presence of God and Men, that
he did not think he had any Design to Murder the King.

After this the Lord Clifford declared, That he always took the Lord Russel to
be a very worthy honest man, and that he never saw any thing in his
Conversation, to make him believe otherwise.

Mr. L -- Gore declared, that he had been acquainted with Mr. L -- Gore.
the Lord Russel several Years, and conversed much with him, but that in all
his Discourse with him, he never heard any thing fall that tended in the least
to any Rising or any thing like it. That he took him to be one of the best
Sons, one of the best Fathers, one of the best Masters, one of the best
Husbands, one of the best Friends, and one of the best Christians in the Land.

Mr. Spencer declared, that he had known the Lord Russ^l many Mr. Spencer.
Years, and had been much with him in his House, but never saw any thing by
him, but that he was a most Virtuous and Prudent Gentleman, and that he had
Prayers constantly twice aday in his House.

Doctor Fitz Williams declared, That by all the Conversation of fourteen Years
which he had had with the Lord Russel, he ever esteemed him a Man of that
Virtue, that he could not be Guilty of such a Crime, as the Conspiracy he
stands Charged with.

Then the Lord Russel himself made a short Conclusion, wherein he declared that
he had always had a Heart sincerely Loyal and Affectionate to the King and the
Government, the best Government in the World. That he prayed as sincerely for
the Kings long and happy Life as any Man alive, and therefore for him to go
about to raise a Rebellion, which he looked upon as so wick^d and unpracticable
was unlikely. Besides that if he had been inclined to it, by all the
observation he had made in the Country, there was no tendency to it, That he
was always for the Government, and never desired any thing to be redressed but
in a Parliamentary way. That he had been always against Innovations, and all
Irregularities whatsoever, and should be as long as he lived, whither sooner or
later. Then applying himself to the Jury, Gentlemen said He, I am n^w in your
Hands Eternally, my Honor, my Life and All, and I hope the Heats and
Animosities that are among you, will not so bias you, as to make you in the
least incline to find an Innocent Man Guilty; I call Heaven and Earth to
Witness, that I never had in my Life a Design against the Kings Life. I am in
your Hands, so God direct you.

The Lord Russel having thus concluded his Defense, the Kings Counsel proceeded
to Sum up the Evidence, after which the Lord Chief Justice delivered his Charge
to the Jury, and so the Court adjourned till four a Clock in the Afternoon, at
what time the Court being met again, the Jury returned and brought in the Lord
Russel Guilty of the High Treason laid to his Charge.

THE Charge and Defense OF John Rouse.
UPON Friday in the Afternoon, being the 13th. John Rouse brought to his Trial.
of July, John Rouse who had been Arraigned and Pleaded not Guilty was again
brought to the Bar.

His Charge was for Conspiring the Death of the King, and declaring it by Overt
Acts, that is endeavoring to raise Men to sieze the Tower, and to make an
Insurrection and Rebellion within the Kingdom.

Before the Jury was sworn, he moved the Court for longer time, alleging that
he had had no longer notice of his Trial then since Monday Morning, and that he
had had no advantage of his Notice, for though notice was then given him, he
had no Liberty of sending for any body till Wednesday, and that about eight or
nine a Clock on Wednesday Night, one came and told him that he should have no
Liberty of Counsel, unless he had it from the Court, so that he had not been
able to get his Witnesses ready. That he desired nothing but as an Englishman,
to which the Court replied, that as an Englishman he could demand no time to
prepare for Trial, for they that will commit Crimes must be ready to answer for
them and defend themselves.

That 'twas matter of Fact he was charged with, and therefore he could not but
know long ago what he was to be tried for; for he was taken up and charged with
High Treason, that he might then have reasonably considered what Evidence would
be against him. That if he were an Innocent Person, he might defend himself
without Question, That if he had done an ill thing, the Law did not design to
shelter him under any Subterfuge, as to prepare Witnesses to testify an
untruth for him.

Here the Kings Sergeant signified, that in regard Capt. Blague Capt. Blague to
be tried seperately from Rouse.
did desire not to be joined with the other, that the Kings Counsel were
content that Rouse should be tried first, Thereupon after several Challenges
the Jury sworn were.

Robert Benningfield John Pelling William Winbury Theophilus Man John Short
Thomas Nicholas Richard Hoare Thomas Barnes Henry Robbins Henry Kemp Ed.
Raddish Ed. Kemp.
The Indictment being opened by the Kings Counsel, Thomas Leigh was sworn; But
before he could speak, the Prisoner excepted against him, wondering with what
Confidence he could He Objects against the Evidence.
look him in the Face at that time. The Prisoner objected against him, that he
was a person who was sworn against by two Persons, to have a hand in the Plot,
and that being taken up and Conscious to himself, that he was Guilty of such
notorious Crimes, and knowing he was pretty well acquainted with him, he was
afraid the Prisoner would swear against him, and therefore he took the boldness
to swear against him first.

But this was not allowed to be any Objection, so that the Witness being
ordered to proceed, delivered his Evidence:

That he had been concerned in the Conspiracy, and knew something of it, but
that he believed the Prisoner knew a great deal more. That Mr. Rouse took him
to the King's Head Tavern in Swithings Alley, whither after some time Mr.
Goodenough came, there being then a Club of Men that were of the Conspiracy.
That he had seen Goodenough before, who had acquainted him that there was
apprehension of the Rights and Liberties of the People being invaded, and that
it was time for them to look to themselves, for Popery and Arbitrary Power were
designed, and therefore desired to know whither he would engage in that Affair
to prevent it; withal he told him the City of London and Middlesex was divided
into Twenty parts. That he told him his Acquaintance did not lie where he
lived, but he would get a Party where his Acquaintance lay. That he acquainted
Rouse and Goodenough what men he had spoke to. That Mr. Goodenough told him the
Design was to set up the Duke of Monmouth and Kill the King and the Duke of
York, but that all Parties must not know it, that they were to tell some
People, there was like to be a Foreign Invasion, and ask them what readiness
they were in? and if they were found to be Compliant in that, then they might
discourse with them about the other matter.

That he discoursed with several men about the Affairs.

That Goodenough told him that Sir John Moor was to be killed, and the
Aldermen, and their Houses plundered, and that there Sir Joh^ Moor and several
Aldermen to be killed.
would be riches enough which would serve to maintain the Army. That then he
acquainted Mr. Rouse with this business, but that he knew of it before, and
told him he could raise Arms for a hundred Men, but said nothing was to be done
unless the King were seized upon, saying we might remember since 41. that the
King went and set up his Standard; therefore said He, we will sieze them that
they may not set up their Standard, but withal, he said he was for siezing
them, but not for shedding of Blood. That Mr. Rouse acquainted him it was a
very convenient thing to have a Ball played upon Black Heath, and to that end
that some Sea Captains should be spoken with, and said, He would engage ten A
Ball to be played ^^on Black-H(...)
who should manage that Affair, and he that won the Ball should The T(...) to
be siez
take it. But that when they had so done, that every Captain should take his
Party, and tell them they had other work, and ^^en go with long-Boats and Arms,
and seize the Tower.

That he acquainted Goodenough with this, who asked him the Charge of a Golden
Ball? which Mr. Rouse had told him, would be ten or a dozen Pound; to which
Goodenough replied, That if it were forty Pound, he would be at the Charge of
it all. That Rouse had spoke several such Discourses to several Men, at the
King's Head Tavern, in his hearing. That he heard he was Sworn against at the
King's Head, in the Company of Rouse and Goodenough; and that Rouse told him he
should lie at his House. That Rouse cut off his Hair, and went to Mr. Batemans,
and fetched him Rouse Disguises the witness.
a Periwigg. That Rouse and he went several times to view the Tower, and took
Mate Lee along with them. That some time before that, they had appointed to
meet at Waping, to speak with the Sea Captains. That in Order to this business,
the Prisoner met the first day at the Amsterdam-Coffee-house, and as he told
the Witness met with two Sea Captains that were to Officiate in the busin^ss,
whom he carried to the Angel and Crown. That within an Hour and Half, Rouse
came to the Witness, and told him he had spoken with the Sea Captains, who were
willing, but that one was going to New Jersey, and therefore the work must be
done before he went. That another time he appointed Mate Lee to meet at the
Anchor in Wapping. That the Prisoner always undertook to get ten Sea Captains,
and to provide Arms for a Hundred Men. That after he was Sworn against Mr.
Nelthorp and Goodenough came to him at Rouse's House, and bid him not be
Discouraged, but let the business go on, and that whenever he was taken into
Custody, he should deny All, and it could not take away his Life.

Being asked about what time this was? He Answered, In June last. That they
never agreed upon any Method for Killing the King; but they told him they had a
Thousand Horse ready in the Country, and Five Hundred in the City, and that the
King should be Killed coming from Windsor. That they were contriving to send
Arms by Night to some private place, where they were to Arm themselves in the
Night. That some brisk men were to be sent to Windsor to know when the King
came, and to give Information, that he might be set upon in some convenient
place, and that both the King and the Duke were to be taken off together. That
Mr. Rouse should say, Take them off, for th^n no Man can have a Commission to
Fight for them. The King, and the Duke, to be taken off both together, that no
body might have a Commission to fight for them.


The Prisoner being now at Liberty to ask the Witness what Questions he thought
convenient, demanded of him, whether he ever spoke to him of any Design against
the King and the Government, and whether the Witness did not begin with him
first?

To which the Witness Answered, That the Prisoner was the first Man that ever
he heard promise that the King and the Duke might be both secured. More then
that, That the Prisoner, as a Traveller, should say both to him and in Company,
That the King was Sworn both in France and Spain, to bring in Arbitrary Power,
and that it was no Sin to take him off. And farther told him, He had it under
his own hand.

The Prisoner asked him in what place it was, where he b(...) to speak any
thing of this D^sign? who made Answer, At the King's Head.

The Prisoner asked who was with them? to which the Witness replied, Goodenough
and others.

The Prisoner asked whether he ever put the Witness upon any thing of that
Nature? and whither he did not tell him there was a Design to over-turn the
Government, but he would not shed Blood?

The Witness Answered, He could not be positive who discoursed the thing first,
but that when the business was Discoursed, the Prisoner was very zealous to get
ten Captains, and that the Ball might be played, and the Tower seized.

Mate Lee being called, Swore, That the Prisoner had several Lee Sworn.
times treated with him to get S^amen fitting to make Commanders of Ships; and
that being asked what he would do with those S^ame^, and where he would have
those Ships? He Answered, Some of the King's Men of War, that lay at Deptford
and Woolwich, for that the Tower and White Hall was to be secured, or else they
could d^ nothing.

Mr. Thomas Corbin being Sworn, deposed, That he took great care to settle a
Correspond^nce at Oxford, during the S^ssions of Parliament t^ere. That being
in Compa^y with the Prisoner, when he was asked what he thought of the Session?
the Prisoner undertook the Reply, and said, That he thought it would be a very
short Sessions; adding farther, That those frequent Proroga^ions and
Dissolutions of Parliament should not avail him, for that whatever the King
had, the Parliam^n^ gave him, and they might take it away. Upon which one
biding him have a care, he replied, The King had forfeited his Crown, and had
no more right to it then he had.

Mr. Richarson being Sworn, deposed, That when he was first He denies his Name
to the Officer.
seized, he denied his Name to be Rouse, and said his Name was Johnson.

The Prisoner being called to his Defense, instead of defending and clearing
himself by Opposition of Testimony, endeavored to retreat the Accusation upon
the W^tn^ss, alleging, That the Witness first Discoursed these Treasons to
him, which he only list'ned to, to pump out the bottom of his D^sign, that he
might Discover them.

The Court therefore told him, That he did but invert the Witnesses Disc^urse,
that he had Sworn it against him, and he was not in a Capacity to Swear against
the Witnesses.

As to his saying, The King had forfeit^d his Crown, and had no That he had
been tried for the words before.
more right to it, then any of the Persons he spoke to, he urged that it was a
thing revived that was out of Doors two Years since, besides that, they were to
be explained by the occasion of the Discourse, which was upon the Popes Power
to depose Kings; upon which he had only said, That if the Pope had any such
Power, then the Crown of England was as much his as any other Man's.

As to his saying the Parliament might take it away, he denied He denies he
said the Parliament might take away the Kings Crown.
that ever he uttered any such words.

Being told that was not the Crime which was laid to his Charge, but his
Designing and Conspiring to secure the King, seize the Tower, and cause a
Reb^llion within the Kingdom; all he had to say was, That he declared in the
presence of God, before whom he stood, That it never entered into his Heart. So
that after the Lord Chi^f Justice had in few words sum'd up the Evidence, and
He is found Guilty.
the D^ficiency of the Prisoners D^fence, the Jury brought him in Guilty,
without stirring from the Bar.

THE Charge and Defense OF Cpt. William Blague.
WHO being set to the Bar next after Rouse Cpt. Blague Tried.
upon the same Fryd^y July the 13th. was Charged with Compassi^g the Death of
the King, and Conspiring with one Rous^ and several others to seize the Tow^r,
and to provide A^ms in order to a Rebellion.

The Prisoner made no Chall^nges, and so the same Jury that had He makes no
Challenges.
passed upon Rouse, was again Sworn upon him.

The first Witn^ss called was, Leigh, who Swore, That the Prisoner in Discourse
with himself and Goodenough, at the King's Head Taven near Chancery Lane, how to
seize the To^er, he told them that the only way was to do it with
Morter-Pieces, that he would venture his own Ship, and provide two Hundred Men.

That he cautioned the Witness not to Discourse with his Mate such a one, but
that his Mate Lee was an Honest Fellow, and said, That he would undertake once
in twenty times to dismount the five pi^ces that faced toward Southwark-side,
to which end, as he told the Witness, he would bring his own Ship, and lay it
on Southwark sid^, and make up the 14 Guns he had already 24.

That he asked Mr. Goodenough, What Money was provided? who Answering 4000 l.
He Answered, The Seamen would swallow that up presently. To which Goodenough
Replied, There was more provided at any time:

Mate Lee Swore, That as he Rode with the Captain in a Coach, the Prisoner
should say, One of these Days we shall have a Ball to Mate Lee Sworn.
toss, which he afterward understood by Rouse and Lee, was the Ball that was
to be tossed upon Black Heath. That the Prisoner and he one time walking about
the Tower, and Discoursing of seizing it, his way was to scale it, but that the
Captain said, The best way was to shoot Morter-Pieces upon Southwark-side; but
denied he could say any thing about the Ship.

To this the Captain in his own Defense made Answer, That all his busin^ss with
Mr. Rouse was, to procure him a sum of Money, as being a Brok^r, and that his
attending upon him for that purpose brought him sometimes into Goodenough's
Company, wherein he was frequently at one Tavern or other: but that if ever he
Disc^urs'd with Goodenough about any Public Affairs, or any thing t^nding to
the Public Disturbance, he was no Ch^istian. That as to the seizing of the
Tower, it was only accidental Discourse to the Watermen that Rowed him from
his Ship by the Tower, to whom he was saving, That the place was not well
fortified, and that if any Occasion should happen, that part next the Water was
in more peril, then any place of the T^wer; And that upon farther Discourse,
and a Supposition that the French should take, that then the Pris^ner said, it
was but going over against the other side, and flinging half a dozen Bambo's to
them, and setting them out again. That for his having 200 Men, it was
impossible, for his Vess^l was but a Pink that would not hold a 100 Men, Women,
That his Vessel wa^ but a Pink that would no^ hold a 100 Men.
and Children. And for the Arms he bought, he bought them with the Ship, for
his Def^nce at Sea; four Blund^rbusses, two Jav^lins, and some few ball-Pikes.

That as to any bank of Money, he never Discoursed it, and that as to the Ball,
he knew no more to that very day, then one who had never seen a Ball.

He added farther, That when they fixed the time that he was to lay his Ship
against the Tower, it was not in his Possession to bring thither, as not having
had her above three weeks, to the very time of his Trial.

Then M^te Lee was asked on the Prisoner's behalf, Whether The Witness denies
he knew of any Provision mad^ to seize the Tower.
there were any Projections or Provisions made for seizing the Tower?

To which he Answered, There was nothing of Men or Guns that he knew or heard
of.

Being asked whether he had any Order from any other Persons to Discourse
Captain Blague in Order to this Attempt? He Answered, No; for that Captain
Blague, Mr. Rouse, and Mr. L^igh, were commonly together.

Then the Jury desired the Witness might be asked, Whether the Captain knew he
went to view the Tower?

To which the Witness Answered, He could not be positive in that. They told him
they had vievv'd the Tower, but he did not remember what Obs^rvations the
Captain made upon it.

The Ju^y desired to know farther, Whether the Prisoner heard any thing of
tossing the Ball? to which Mr. Lee replied, That Mr. Rouse told him the
Captain was acquainted with it, but that he never Discoursed with the
Priso^er about it himself.

The Prisoner then calling his Witnesses, one Chapel a Carpenter, Declared,
That the Vessel was not able to do any Service upon the Water three Weeks ago,
and that he had been Shipped four Months and a half, to go for New York.

Wright declared, That he had waited on the Cap^ain ever since he had been
Shipped, and was in his pay before he had the Ship in his Possession.

The Surgeon declared, That he had belonged to the Ship seven The Prisoner's
Witness^s declare the time how long they had belonged to the Captain.
Weeks, and to the Captain before he had a Ship.

Being asked by the Jury, How many Guns belonged to the Ship?

He Answered, Fourteen Sahers, of which four were wooden ones; six above Deck,
and four in the Hold.

The Prisoner having thus made his Defense, the Lord Chief Justice sum'd up the
Evidence to the Ju^y, who withdrawing to consider of their Verdict, in a short
time returned, and brought the Prisoner in Not Guilty.

The next day, being the 14th. of July, the several Prisoners found Guilty of
High Treason, were brought to receive Judgment.

And first the Lord Russel being set to the Bar, and asked why The Lord Russel
desires the Indictment may be read.
Senten^e of D^a^h should not pass against him according to the Law, desired to
hear his Indictment read in English? the which being gran^ed, the Clark of the
Crown read on till he came to the Words of Conspiring the Death of the King; at
what time the Lord Russel desiring him to hold, told the Recorder, That he
thought he had not been Charged with Compassing and Conspiring the Death of the
King; To which the Attorney General replied, Yes. Upon which his Lordship
appealed to the Recorder and the Court, whether if all that the Witnesses had
Sworn against him were true, whether he were Guilty within the Statute of the
25th. of Edward the 3d. they having Sworn a Conspiracy only to Levy War, but no
intention of Killing the King, and therefore he thought Judgment was not to
pass for Conspiring the Death of the King?

To this the Attorney General Answered, That it was no exception.

Then the Recorder told him, That it was an exception proper, (and he thought
he did make it) before the V^rdict, whether the But his Objections are held
Insufficient.
Evid^nce do amount to prove the Charge which is proper for the Jury to
observe, for if the Evidence come short of the Indictment, they cannot find the
Verdict. But when the Jury has found it, their Verdict passes for Truth; and
the Court is bound to go by what the Jury have found, not the Evidence.

To which his Lordship put the Question, Whether without any He moves an Arrest
of Judgment.
Proof? But it was Answered, The Jury must be Governed by their Evidence.

His Lordship replied, It was hard he must be Condemned upon a Point that there
was nothing of it Sworn; therefore he thought that he might legally demand an
Arrest of Judgment?

To which the Recorder Answered, That he hoped his Lordship would consider it
was not the Court could give a V^rdict, but that it must be the Jury. Thereupon
the Attorney General demanding Judgment, the Recorder passed Sentence according
to the Law.

Walcot had nothing to say, But that his Son and some Friends might come and
see him.

Hone had no more to say, but begged the same favor. Rouse pretended there was
a vast difference between the Indictment which was for Words and Discourses,
that passed the 2d. of March, and that the Oaths Sworn were, that the words
were not spoken then, but the last of June, but had nothing more to say.

Thereupon Judgment was given against all three, as against the Lord Russel.

Upon the same day that the Lord Russel was tried, the Earl The Earl of Essex
kills himself in the Tower.
of Essex killed himself in the Tower.

The next day the Coroner sat upon him, and the Verdict of the Coron^rs Jury
was, That Arthur Earl of Essex, did give himself a Mortal Wound with a Razor,
by cutting his Throat from the one Jugular to the other, and through the
Windpipe and Gullet, to the very Vertebras of his Neck; and that he did
Feloniously and Voluntarily Murder himself.

Upon Friday the 20th. of July, Walcot was drawn to Tyburn Walcot, Hone and
Rouse carried to Tyburn.
in one Hurdle, and Rouse and Hone in another, and there put into a Cart, at
what time the Dean of Rippon, Dr. Cartwright, and the Ordinary of N^wgate,
undertaking to perform the last Office of Ministers, to Persons in their
Conditions, admonished them to make an ingenious Discovery of what they knew
touching the Conspiracy and Treasons for which they were then to suffer.

Walcot replied he had some Papers in his Pocket of what he had prepared to say
in Writing, and there desired they might be pulled out and he would read them.

Then looking upon his Paper, he read a long Harangue, wherein Walcot reads his
Speech.
he first gave an account of his Faith and Religion, his hope of Salvation by
the Merits of Christ, and his belief of the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith
and Method of Worshipping God.

As to the occasion of his Death, he confessed himself to be so He Confesses
himself guilty of being at several Meetings.
unfortunate and as unhappy to be invited by Colonel Rumsey to some Meetings,
where some things were discoursed of, in order to the asserting the Liberties
and Properties of the Subject, and that while he lay ill of the Gout, Mr. West
came frequently to visit him, and that his discourse was still of Lopping the
Sparks. That tho he had deserved to dye by the Law, and that the King might
justly put him to death, for being in those Meetings where And that he had
deserved Death by the Law.
a War was Debated, yet he thought those men were Guilty of his Blood that were
as deep as he, and had betrayed him, and taken his Life away. He desired his
Friends to be wary how they heard any Man speak, or spoke themselves, for there
was no such thing as Faith in Man to Man. He forgave all the World, especially
Mr Shepherd, who as He said, promised to carry him into Holland, but instead
of that, brought him into the Condition wherein he then was.

He averred in the presence of God, that he knew of no English He knew no
Protestant in Ireland guilty of any Plot.
Man or Protestant in Ireland, that was engaged in the Conspiracy.

He said he could not excuse the Witnesses for aggravating things against him,
and making them worse then really they were. To which when the Doctor was about
to Reply, -- Pray Sir give me leave, said he, for a Man to Invite a Man to a
Meeting, to Importune a Man to a Meeting, to be perpetually Soliciting him,
and then to deliver him up to be hanged, as they had done Him --

He confessed he was present at many Meetings, but that there were several
Meetings, wherein the Business of the Kings Life was never spoke of; for he
said they were for asserting the Liberties and Properties of the People: And
being pressed to explain that, he said they were under general Apprehensions,
and so were the Lords that were likely to suffer, of Popery and Slaveries
coming in.

Upon the whole being told by the Dr. that he had confessed himself Guilty
enough to take away his Life? He replied, That he was so. And being farther
told, that to say, he could not forgive the Witnesses, he at length said he did
forgive them, and prayed God to forgive them.

Nevertheless, soon after his Execution there was a Paper Printed, A Paper
printed in his Name after his Execution, reflecting upon the Evidence.
which was said to be Written by Captain Walcot in Newgate, and delivered to
his Son before his Execution, little differing from his Speech at the Gallows,
wherein he seemed to complain of the Evidence, and endeavored to deny his
undertaking to charge the Guards, while others did the business. But in Answer
to this, Mr. West published another Paper, maintaining and asserting Answered
by Mr. West, to public satisfaction.
the Truth of his Testimony, particularly as to his intention to charge the
Guards; declaring, He had omitted an Expression of the Captains upon that
Subject, which he let slip in the multitude of particulars he delivered at the
Trial. That he should say, He looked upon the Action to be so lawful and
justifiable, that he could Dye in it with a safe Conscience. And that whereas
he taxed the Witnesses for Swearing him out of his Life to save their own, it
appeared by his Letter to the S^cretary, that he would gladly have saved his
own so; and desired to have made the Duke of Monmouth, and other Pers^ns of
Quali^ies Blood, to use his own Phrase, the price of his own Life. Observing
very well at last, that he did not think fit to express in his Paper any S^nse
of his Guilt or Repentance for it, but rather seemed to retain his Old Opinion
of its being a Lawful thing. That he only blamed his own Credulity, and advised
his Friends only against trusting Men, not against his Crime.

As for Hone, he acknowledged himself Guilty of the Crime according Hone
acknowledges himself guilty.
to the Law of the Land, and the Law of God.

Rouse made a long Speech, not much to the purpose, as being only a Repetition
of what was done in Court. However, at length Rouse acknowledges himself guilty.
he acknowledged himself Guilty of concelaing and maintaining Traiterous
Correspondency: and that it was just in God in the first place, and righteous
and just with the King in the second place that he Dyed.

The next day being Saturday, the Lord Russel having taken leave The Lord
Russel carried to a Scaffold erected in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
of his Lady, the Lord Cavendish, and several others of his Friends at N^wgate,
took Coach with Dr. T^ll^tson, and Dr. Burnet, who accompanied him to the
Scaffold Built in Lincolns-Inn-Fields; whether being come, after a short pause,
he told the Sheriff, That he expected the noise would be such that he should
not be heard, and therefore he had set down in Writing what he thought fit to
leave behind him, protesting his Innocence of any Designs against the King's
Person, or of altering the Government.

He then told the Sheriff, that he had been Informed, That Captain Walcot had
spoken some things concerning his Knowledge of the Plot, and therefore desired
to know whether the Report were true?

To which the Sheriff Answered, That he did not hear him so much as Name his
Lordship.

His Lo^^^hip replied, He hoped he did not, for that to his Knowledge, he had
never seen or spoken with him in his Life; and then in the words of a Dying
Man, he professed, He knew nothing of a Plot, either against the King's Life or
Government: But that he had done with the World as going to a better, that he
had forgave all the World heartily, and thanked God he Dyed in Charity with all
Men. He wi^hed all the Protestants might love one another, and not make way for
Popery by their Animosities.

Then kneeling his Lordship prayed to himself, after which, Dr. His behavior
before he lay down.
Tillotson kneeled down and prayed with him, and then he prayed a second time
by himself; which being done, after he had made himself ready, and ordered the
Executioner, after he had layn down a small moment, to do his Office, without a
Sign, he laid himself down upon the Block. And then it was, that the
Executioner missing his first stroke, though with the first stroke he took away
Life at two more he severed his Head from his Body, which was ordered by the
Sheriff to be delivered to his Lordships Friends and Servants, as being given
them by His Majesty's favor and bounty. The substance of the Paper Delivered
to the Sheriff, was this:

In the first place he blessed God for the many Blessings which he had besto^ed
upon him through the whole Course of his Life; That he was Born of worthy good
Parents, and had had the advantage of a Religious Education, which for many
Years had so Influenced and poss^ssed him, that he felt the effects of it in
his present Extremity.

That as he had lived, so he died a true and sincere Protestant, and He dyed a
Protestant of the reformed Religion.
in the Communion of the Church of England, though he could never yet comply
with, or rise up to all the heigths of some People.

That he had always loved his Country much more than his Life, and never had
any Design of changing the Government, which he valued and looked upon as one
of the best Governments in the World, and would have suffered any Extremity,
rather then have consented to any Design to take away the Kings Life; Neith^r
had any Man the Impudence to propose a thing so base and barbarous to him. And
that he looked upon it as a very unhappy and uneasy part of his present
Condition, that there should be so much as mention of so vile a Crime.

That for the King he wished him well, and sincerely prayed for Him. He prays
for the King.
That the Protestant Religion, the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom might
flourish under his Government, and that he in his Person might be happy both
here and hereafter.

That as for the share which he had in the prosecution of the Popish His
Opinion of the Popish-Plot.
Plot, he proceeded in it in the sincerity of his Heart, as being fully
convinced, that there was a Conspiracy against the King, the Nation, and the
Protestant Religion.

That as for his present Condition, he had no Repineing in his Heart at it.

That he freely forgave the World, and those that were concerned in taking away
his Life, conjuring his Friends never to think of Revenge. He denied himself
privy to any Design to seize the Guards, but confessed he had heard some
general Discourse of that Nature at the Lord Shaftsburies, but that he fl^w out
into Exclamations against it.

But when he came to speak of the Sentence of Death that was passed upon him,
he reflected upon the Witnesses, as if they had done him wrong, and spoke more
undecently of the Judges, the Kings Council, and the Jury, then became a Person
under his Circumstances, which did not a little offend the Sovereign Authority,
and justly blemish his last Exit.

THE Charge and Defense OF Algernoon Sidney, ESQVIRE.
UPON the 7th, of November, 1683. Algernoon Col. Sidney brought to the Bar.
Sidney, Esquire; was by Writ of Habeas Corpus, brought up from the Tower to the
Bar of the King's Bench Court, where after he had held up his Hand, he was
Charged with an Indictment of High Treason.

The general Heads of his Charge were, For Contriving with others to disturb
the Peace of the Kingdom, Conspiring and Compassing the Deposing and Death of
the King, and the Subversion of his Conspiring the Death of the King.
Government

For the fulfilling and perfecting which wicked Treasons, he had met several of
the Conspiraters at sundry Consultations for carrying on their Traiterous
Designs. That he had sent Aaron Smith into Scotland, to invite diverse of the
King's Subjects in that Kingdom Sends Aaron Smith into Scotland.
into the Conspiracy, and to come to London, to Consult of aid and assistance
to be given by them. That he had composed and written, or caused to be made and
written, a certain Traiterous and Seditious Libel, wherein where these Words.
The Power Originally in the People of England is delegated to the Parliament:
He (meaning his present Majesty) is subject as a Man to the People that makes
him King; in as much as he is a King, the Law sets a measure to that
Subjection, and the Parliament judges of the particular Cases thence arising.
He must b^ content to submit his Interest to theirs, sinc^ he is no more then
any one of them, in any other respect than that he is by the consent of All,
raised abov^ any other. If he does not like this Condition, he may renounce his
Crown; but if he receive it upon that Condition, as all Magistra^es do the
Power they rec^ive, and swear to perform it; he must ^xpect that the
performance will be exacted, or revenge taken by those he has betrayed. And in
another place these words. We may therefore change o^ take away Kings without
breaking any Yoke, or that is made a Yoke which ought not to be one; the Injury
therefore is in ma^ing and imposing, and can be none in breaking.

The Charge being read, and Colonel Sidney urged to plead Guilty or Not Guilty
he objected first against the Validity of the Indictment, which, he said, was a
heap of Crimes put together, distinct in Nature one from another, and
distinguished by Law; and therefore the Indictment being erroneous, was not to
be Answered to. He added farther, That there were in the Indictment some
Treasons or reputed Treasons, that might come within the Statute of the 13th.
of this King, the Pr^s^cution of which must be within six Months, and the
Indictm^nt within three. So that if the business mentioned were six Months
before his Commitment, or above three before the Indictment, he was not to
Answer to those things. That in the Case of Sir H. Vane, the Sir H. V^nes Case
in(...)'d.
Court then said it, and offered him, that he might put in his Exc^ptions, and
plead Not Guilty afterward. That if he pleaded to an erroneous Indictment and
were acquitted, he might be Indicted again. Bills of Attaind^r having been upon
Errors in Oririginal Indictments, as that of the Duke of Somerset. That as
there were several things distinct in Nature, distinguished by Law put together
in the Ind^ctment, it was an impossible thing to make a possitive Answer to any
one. That if he were Charged with any particular Fact, he could say, He either
did it or not. But that in the I^dictm^nt he found nothing specified, nor could
he tell upon what Statute he was In^icted; and then he prayed to see the Record.

To all his the Court made Answer, That they could not let him see the Record,
but if he would hear it read again, he might. That there was no way, but either
to plead or demur, if he thought the Indictment void, which if he did, he
should be allowed to make what Exceptions he pleased. That as to what he
alleged in reference to the 1 (...) of this King, whether he were without the
time limited, they were not bound to examine that before he had pleaded. Till
when, let the Indictment be never so vicious, there were no exceptions to be
admitted.

Then the Prisoner offered a Parchment to the Court, which he He offers a Plea
in Parchment to the Court.
said was a Plea. But the Court advised him to consider himself and his L^fe;
for that if he put in a Plea, and the Attorney General demurred, if his Plea
were not found good; his Life was gone.

Upon that, the Colonel desired a days time to consider of it. To which the
Court replied, That they could not introduce new methods for any Body.

Here the Attorney General informed the Court, That Mr. Williams Mr. Williams
reproved.
exceeded his Commission, and told the Prisoner several things; for which he
was reproved by the Lord Chief Justice.

Thus, when the Prisoner saw he could gain nothing by contesting The Prisoner
pleads not Guilty.
with the Court, he at length pleaded Not Guilty. Which when he had done, he
desired a fortnights time to prepare himself for his Trial, which was allowed
him. Next he desired a Copy of the Indictment, which the Court told him they
could not grant by Law. Then he prayed that Counsel might be assigned him; but
that was likewise denied him, unless he could produce any Point of Law, which
the Court should think fit to be worth debating. This drew from the Prisoner an
Expostulation, whether the Court would oblige him that was ignorant in the Law
to raise Points in Law upon only hearing a long Indictment for things he knew
nothing of? To which the Lord Chief Justice replied, That it was not the
Judges, but the Law that obliged him. Therefore he was not to go away, and say
that they sat there to impose upon him; for that they only fat to Administer
the Justice of the Nation. However, the Court offered him that he might hear
the Indictment read again, if he desired it, which at his request was done, and
then he was remanded back to the Tower.

Upon the 21st. of November, Colonel Sidn^y was brought to his The Colonel
brought to h^s Trial.
Trial at the Kings-Bench-Bar, where he first urged, That whereas he had before
desired a Copy of his Indictment, and thought the Law allowed it him, he was
still of the same mind, and believed he could give a better Testimony, that it
was so upon the Statute of the 46 of Edward the 3d. wherein it was expressed,
That all People should have a Copy of the Record, enumerating several Matters,
as well that against the King, as other People, which general Law was still in
force. He farther instanced, That the Earl of Strafford had a Copy, the Lord
Stafford, and the Lords in He urges the Earl of Staffords Case.
the Tower had Copies of their Indictments; and therefore he thought it was
never more necessary than for him, whose Charge was so long and so confused:
and then offered a Copy of the Statute to the Court.

To this the Lord Chief Justice replied, That he remembered the Law very well:
however, as the Court had denied him a Copy then, so they did still;
notwithstanding, they would deny him nothing that was Law. For whereas he had
alleged before the Case of Sr. H. Vane, he gave the Prisoner to understand,
that it was then the Opinion of all the Judges, that no Copy should be given
either of the whole or any part of the Indictment. Which Case he had ordered to
be read in Court when his Counsel last moved for a Copy, and thought he had
thereby given them full satisfaction; besides that, by the Opinion of all the
Judges of England, the Lord Russ^l was in like manner denied a Copy of his
Indictment. Nevertheless he had heard his Indictment read in Latin, which was
denied to Sir H. Vane, and that therefore the Court had shown him more The
extraordinary savor of the Court toward him.
savor, then perhaps in strictness they ought to have done. Thereupon he
ordered the Clark to proceed upon the Arraignment, as not becoming the Court to
spend time in Discourses to Captivate the People. So that after several
Challeng^s, the following persons were Sworn upon the Jury.

John Anger Richard White William Lynn Lawrence Wood Adam Andrews Emerie
Arguise. Josiah Clark George Glisby Nicholas Baxter William Reeves William
Grove, and John Burt.
Here the Lord Chief Justice gave a caution to the Jury, not to admit any
persons to whisper to them, with a Charge to inform the Court if any did so.

After this the particulars of the Matter in Evidence being first shortly
opened by Mr. Dolben, and enlarged upon by the Attorney General, the Witnesses
were called, and first of all Mr. West. Col. Sidney excepts against Mr. VV^st.
Upon whose appearance, before he was Sworn, the Prisoner urged, That Mr. W^st
had confessed many Treasons, and therefore desired to know whether he were
pardoned or no? alleging that otherwise he could not be a good Witness; But
the The objection against him not allowed.
Lord Chief Justice declaring, That he knew no legal Objection against him, and
that he had been a good Witness in the Lord Russel's Trial, he was Sworn, and
gave in Evidence.

That Captain Walcot came to him in October last, and told him, That the Lord
Shaftsbury had designed an Insurrection in November, against which he used some
Arguments to diswade him. That soon after he came to him again and told him,
the thing was wholly disappointed, upon which the Earl of Shaftsbury went into
H^ll^nd. That about Christmas, Colonel Rumsey told him, There were some Lords
and Gentlemen intended to make an Insurrection. That the persons were the Duke
of Monmouth, the Lord of Essex, the Lords Howard and Russel, the Prisoner at
the Bar, and Mr. Hampden Junior. That sometime after the said Colonel told him,
that the said persons had altered their measures, and were resolved not to
venture upon an Insurrection in England, till they had a Concurrency in
Scotland.

That Mr. Nelthorp told him, That the Prisoner at the Bar had Aaron Smith s^nt
into Scotland.
sent Aaron Smith into Scotland, and had given him a sum of Money to bear his
Charges, and sent Letters to some Scotch Gentlemen, to invite them to Town.
That the Letter bore a Cant of settling business in Ca^olina, that really it was
about coming up in order to the Insurrection. That afterward Mr. Smith
returned, and some Scotch Gentl^men. And that Mr. Ferguson gave an Account of
that Affair; How that the Scots proposed, That if they might have 30000 l. in
ready Money, they would undertake to make an Insurrection in Scotland, without
the Concurrence of England; which Proposal he said was agreed to, that the
Money would be soon ready, and that Mr. Shepherd would return the Money. That
the Arms were ready bought, and that the Earl of Argile would go into Scotland
and head the Scots. That The Earl of Argile to head the Scots.
when things were thus settled, some difference arose about raising Money; but
that at last the Lord Gray offered to raise 10000 l. out of his own Estate, if
the rest would pay their proportion. That then the Scots came down to less, but
were not complied with. That the places for Rising were Bristol, Taunton, York,
Chester, Exeter, London. That there had been some debates whether they should
begin at London, or other places, and that at last it was resolved they should
begin at London, with the rest of the places. That this was the Account of the
Matter in Ge neral which he had from Mr. Ferguson; who farther added, That the
Prisoner at the Bar, and Major Wildman, were very Instrumental in working of
the agreement with the Scots, because Mr. VVildman, and the Prisoner at the
Bar, instrumental in working of the agreement with the Scots.
they could not agree upon the Declaration to be made upon the Insurrection.
For that the English were for a Commonwealth, but that the Scotch Gentlem^n
answered it might come fairly to it in time, but that the Nobility there would
not agree to it at present. That as to the Prisoner himself, he knew nothing of
him in particular, nor did ever speak with him till since the Discovery.

The next Witness was Colonel Rums^y, who declared, That Col. Rumsey gives his
testimony.
about the latter end of October, or beginning of November, he was desired by
the Earl of Shaftsbury to go to Mr. Shepherds, to know of the Gentlemen that
were met there, what was done about the Rising intended at Taunton? Who
Answered, That Mr. Trenchard had failed them, and that it must cease for that
time.

That after that, he met several times in March, April, and May, at Mr. Wests
Chamber, and other places with Captain Walcot, Mr. West, the two Goodenoughs,
Mr. Bourn, and Mr. VVade, where they had divided the City into twenty parts, of
seven parts of which Mr. Good^nough brought an Account, but said nothing of the
other thirteen, because he had not spoken with those who were to tell him how
many Men they would afford for the Insurrection.

Being asked who he met at Mr. Shepherds? He Answered, There was the Duke of
Monmouth, the Lords Gray and Russel, Who were at Mr. Shepherds.
Sir Thomas Armstrong, Mr. F^rguson, and Mr. Shepherd.

Being asked who was to manage the Rising? He Answered, That Mr. West, and
Colonel Rumsey told him, That there was Who were the Council of six.
a Council, which where the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the Lord
Howard, Colonel Sidney, Mr. Hambden, and the Lord Russel.

Here Colonel Sidney pressed the Court to consider whether it were an usual
thing to examine Men upon Indictments of Treason concerning him, that he never
saw or heard of in his Life? To which when the Lord Chief Justice replied,
That all that Evidence did not effect him, and that he likewise told the Jury
so, the Prisoner Ansvver'd, That hovvever it prepossessed the Jury.

Mr. Keeling being then called and Svvorn, was demanded in Mr. Keeling Sworn
gives a general testimony.
general, what he knevv of the Rising to have been last Spring? who declared,
That some time the last Summer, Mr. G^odenough came to him, and brought him
three Papers numbered on the back side. Of which when the Witness asked the
meaning, the other told him that one was for himself, and that he was to
deliver the other two to whom he could trust in the two Divisions. That the
VVitness asked Mr. Goodenough what the Design was? who said, To raise Men.
That thereupon the VVitness asked him, whether he Designed a General
Insurrection? To which the other replied, That if he did not, if the King was
taken off, this would do well, for then the People would know how to have
recourse to a formidable Body: Lastly, That he had heard the said Goodenough
say, That Colonel Sidney, whom he knew Col. Sidney had a considerable part in
the Plot.
not, had a considerable part in the management of that Affair.

The Lord Howard being next Sworn, and desired to acquaint the Judge and Jury,
what transactions there had been with the Prisoner about the Affair of a
general Rising? declared, That about the middle of January last, it was
considered by some of those that met together, That it was very necessary to an
Enterprise that had then been long in hand, and at that time fallen A Cabal to
be set up by the Conspirators.
flat, that it should be revived by some select Cabal, that should be set up to
give it Life, and govern its motions. That the first movers of this, for ought
he knew, were the Duke of Monmouth, Colonel Sidney, and himself. Where it was
farther agreed, That they should think of some few, not to exceed five, or at
the most seven. Which agreement being at first between them three, the Duke of
Monmouth undertook to engage the Lord Russel and the Earl of Salisbury, and the
Prisoner at the The Prisoner undertakes to engage the Earl of Essex and Mr.
Hambdon.
Bar undertook to engage the Earl of Essex, and Mr. Hambden: who being
presently put together, constituted a little Cabal of as many as were intended.
That between the middle and latter end of January, as he the Witness was told,
the said Persons agreed to enter into a Conjunction of Counsels, and met
accordingly The first meeting of the Cabal at Mr. Hambden's House.
at Mr. Hambden's House, whither he was also invited. That when he came to Mr.
Hambdens House, which ranges in the same Row with Southampton House, he found
there the Duke of Monmouth, the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, Colonel Sidney,
and Mr. Hambden. That Mr. Hambden took upon him to open the Mr. Hambden opens
the Sessions.
Sessions, and in his Discourse recapitulated some Design that had been chiefly
carried on before by the E. of Shaftsbury, before that time Dead. He also took
notice of the ready disposition of the minds of Men to go on with it, and gave
one instance of his Judgment of it; That being a Design Communicated to so
many, there had not so much as a whisper gone about it. From whence he took an
Occasion to tell the rest, That it was absolutely necessary, that there should
be some Council which should be as a Spring, a little to govern the motions of
the rest: there being diverse things, which if not taken care of by particular
persons, the whole would miscarry. That from thence the said Mr. Hambden made a
Transition to some particular things which were principally to be taken care
of. The time when, the places where, and the persons by whom these things were
to be carried on, which lead into a particular consideration of some of those
Heads. For the time, that it should be shortly, least the minds of Men should
chil; and then as to the place where, whether in the City or Country, or both
jointly; In which some Opinions were given, but not settled to any Resolution,
being committed to all their thoughts to Consult of afterward. They were also
to consider what Magazines were to be got, and with what they should be gotten,
and that was Money; Upon which there was a considerable sum propounded to be
raised: to which purpose the Duke of Monmouth, to the best of the Witnesses
remembrance, propounded the raising of twenty five, or thirty thousand Pounds:
after which it was considered how this Money should be raised without drawing
Observation and Jealousy. That these were the heads then agreed upon to be
afterward considered. But the Resolutions taken at present were, How to make A
Coalition with Scotland debated.
a Coalition of Counsels with Scotland; for which purpose some fit Persons was
to made choice of to be sent thither. That these were the debates of the first
Meeting. That about a fortnight or three weeks after, all the same Persons met
again, at Southampton-House, at the Lord Russels, where it was warmly urged by
Mr. Hambden, though at that time thought unseasonably. That since they were now
united into such an undertaking, it could not be expected but that it would be
a Question put to many of Some things unseasonably urged by Mr. Hambden.
them, To what end all this was, where they intended to terminate, and into
what they intended to resolve? That they were Questions which he, meaning Mr.
Hambden, met with, and every one would meet with from those Persons, whose
asistance was to be expected; and that if there were any thing of personal
interest designed, there were but very few of those whose Hearts were with
them, but would fall off; and that therefore they were to resolve themselves
into such Principles, as should put the Liberties and Properties of the People
into such hands, as should not be easily invaded by such as were entrusted with
the Supreme Authority of the Land: and that at length it was mentioned to
resolve all into the power of a Parliament. That this being propounded All to
be resolved into the Power of the Parliament, which sounded harsh to some of
the rest.
by Mr. Hambden, sounded a little harshly to some of the rest: However, it was
consented to, that it was nothing but a public Good which all intended. That
after this the Council debated about sending into Scotland, and settling a
Correspondency with the Earl of Argile. That other Gentlemen were named, as the
Lord Melvin, Sir John Cockram, and the Cambells. Which Col. Sidney undertakes
to send into Scotland.
being propounded, it was offered by Colonel Sidney, that he would take care of
the Person, and that he had one in his thughts, whom he thought to be a fit
Person.

Being asked by the Attorney General what Aaron Smith was to The Duke of
Monmouth undertakes to bring up the Lord Melvin.
do? the Witness made Answer, That there was no particular deed for him more
then to carry a Letter. That the Duke of Monmouth undertook to bring the Lord
Melvin hither, because he had a particular dependency upon him; but that to Sir
John Cockram, a Letter was to be sent under the Disguise of carrying on some
business of Carolina; which Letter as he thought was wrote by the Lord Russel,
as being personally known to him, an^ none of the rest of the Cabal.

Being asked to what purpose those Gentlemen were to come up? he Answered, To
acquaint them how they found Scotland tempered, and what Opportunities there
were of putting them into a Commotion, how Men might be raised, how they would
fall under Argile, and also to keep time and place with England. That after
this he was with Colonel Sidney when he was going Col. Sidney puts a parcel of
Guineys in his pocket for Aaron Smith.
into London, at what time he took out about sixty Guineys, as he thought, and
put them in his Pocket, which he said were to give Aaron Smith; but whether he
gave them or not he could not tell. However, after that he was sent in
pursuance of their debate, as Colonel Sidney told him, upon Inquiry, and withal
that he had not heard of him but once in three Weeks, when he Aaron Smith sent
in purs^ance of the ^ebates.
was at New Castle. That after this, his Occasions called him into the
Country, and afterward he went to the Bath.

The Lord Howard having thus concluded, the Court demanded of Colonel Sidney,
whether he had any Questions to ask the Witness? who replied that he had no
Questions to ask him. Upon which the Attorney General replied Silence -- You
know the Proverb,

After which Sir Andrew Foster, and Mr. Atterbury, were called The Scotch
Gentlemen proved to be in London.
to prove that the Scotch Gentlemen came up presently after Aaron Smith was
sent; and first Sir Andrew declared, That about the end of the Spring, or
beginning of Summer, Sir John Cockram, Commissionary Monro, and the two
Cambells, Father and Son came up hither. That he did not see the Senior
Cambell, but the Younger he saw upon the Day of the Lord Russels Trial; but
that he saw the other two, as he thought, a little before the Discovery.

Being asked what they pretended to come about? He made The pretense of their
coming.
Answer, That Sir John Cockram, and Manro, pretended they came about making a
purchase in Carolina, and showed him a Commission to that purpose from the
Persons said to be concerned in the Design.

Being asked what became of those Gentlemen upon the rumor of the Plot? He
Answered, That Sir John Cockram absconded; but Manro did not; and as for the
Cambells, he heard they were seized, changing their Lodgings.

Then Mr. Atterbury being Sworn, informed the Court, That Mr. At^erbury Sworn
as to the apprehending of the Scotch Gentlemen.
about the end of June, or beginning of July, he was sent for into Lond^n, upon
a Discovery of some Scotch Gentlemen that lay about Blackfriars: but that when
he came there, the Common Sergeant had been before him, and found Sir Hugh
Cambel, and Sir John Cockram, making an escape into a Boat, together with a
third Person, who was committed to the Gate House by the Council as soon as
brought thither.

This done, the Attorney General went about to prove, that while the English
Emissary was in Scotland, the Colonel at the same time (which would be another
Overt Act of Treason) was Writing a Treasonable Pamphlet; to which purpose Sir
Phillip Sir Phillip Lloyd Sworn as to the Papers found in Colonel Sidneys House.
Lloyd being first Sworn, declared, That having a Warrant from the Secretary by
the King and Council, to seize Mr. Algernoon Sidney's Papers, he went to his
House, where he found a great many upon a Table, which he first put up in a
Pillowbear, and ^hen in a Trunk, to which he desired the Colonel to put his
Seal; but he refusing, he took his own Seal, sealed up the Trunk, and had it
carried before him to Mr. Secretary Jenkin's Office. That when the Committee
sat, he was Commanded to undo the Trunk, and did so, and found his own Seal
upon it, and then took out the Papers out of the bag as he put them in before.

Being asked whether Colonel Sidney were present when he Col. Sidney p^esent
when h^s papers were seized.
seized the Papers? He Answered, Yes. And being farther asked whether those
Papers shown in Court were some of those Papers?

He made Answer, That he verily believed it. Being asked when they were seized?

He replied, Toward the latter end of June last.

Then three Witnesses were called to prove the Hand to be his.

Mr. Shepherd Swore, That he was acquainted with his hand, Mr. Shepherd
called to prove the Colonels hand.
and that he believed the Writing shown him was his hand; for that he had seen
him Write the Indorsement upon several Bills of Exchange.

Mr. Carry Swore, That he had seen his Indorsement upon Bills, Mr. Carry to the
same purpose.
and that it was very like what came to him for his hand Writing, and that he
believed it to be his hand.

Mr. Cook Swore, That he had seen several Notes that came to Mr. Cook to the
same intent.
him with Indorsment of Colonel Sidney's Name, and had paid them, and that it
was like the hand showed him; nor was he ever called to an Account for
mispayment.

The Attorney General insisting to have as much read as was necessary to prove
the Indictment, the Prisoner desired it might be all read. But the Court made
Answer, that Mr. Attorney must have what part he desired, and that he should
have what part he would read afterward.

Then the Paper was read in these Words:

There was no absurdity in this, though it was their own Case but to The Paper
read.
the contrary, because it was their own Case: That is concerning themselves
only, and they had no Superior. They only were the competent Judges; they
decided the Controversies, as every Man in his own Family does, such as arise
between him and his Children, and his Servants. This Power has no other
restriction, then what is put upon it by the Municipal Law of the Country, and
has no other force, then as a Man is understood to have consented to it. Thus
in England every Man in his degree, has a right of a Chastizing them, and in
many places, even by the Law of God, the Master has a Power of Life and Death
over his Servant. It were a most absurd folly to say, That a Man might not put
away, or in some places, Kill an Adulterous Wife, a Disobedient Son, or an
unlawful Servant, because he is Party and Judge. For the Case admits of no
other, unless he had abridg'd his own Right by entering into a Society where
other Rules are agreed upon, and a Superior Judge constituted; th^re being
none such between King and People. That People must needs be the Judge of
things happening between them and him they did constitute: Not that he might be
Great, Glorious, and Rich, but that he might Judge them, and Fight their
Battles, or otherwise do good unto them as they should direct. In this Sense he
is Singulis Major, and ought to be obliged by every Man in his just and lawful
Commands tending to the public good; and must be suffered to do nothing
against it, not in any respect more than the Law does allow.

For this Reason Bracton says that the King has three Superiors, Deum, Legem,
and Parliamentum: that is, The Power Originally in the People of England is
delegated to the Parliament. He is subject to the Law of God as a Man, to the
People that makes him King, in as much as he is a King. The Law sets a measure
to that subjection, and the Parliament Judges of the particular Cases thereupon
arising. He must be content to submit his Interest to theirs, since he is no
more then any of them in any other respect then that he is by the common
Consent of all raised above any other.

If he does not like the Condition he may renounce his Crown; but if he receive
it upon that Condition (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive) and Swear
to perform it, he must expect the performance will be exacted, or revenge taken
by those he has betrayed.

If this be not so, I desire to know of the Author, How one or more Men can
come to be guilty of Treason against the King; As Lex facit ut sit reus. No Man
can owe more to him than to any other, or he unto every other Man by any R^le
but the Law. And if he must not be Judge in his own Case, neither he nor any
other by Power received from him, would ever try any Man for an Offense against
him or the Law.

There was much more read, all insisting upon the same Argument, and
endeavoring to fix the supreme Power in the People, too long for this
Observation; only two short passages must not be left out, which were these,
both read by the Clark of the Crown. That the general Revolt of a Nation from
its own Magistrates could not be called a Rebellion. And that the Power of
calling and dissolving Parliam^nts is not in the King.

The Sheets being shown to the Prisoner, He Answered, That The Lord Russ^ls
Conviction given in Evidence.
he could not tell what to make of it, to read it in pieces in that manner. And
then being asked by the Court, what pieces he would have read? He made this
reply, Let him give an account of it, that made it.

After this the Attorney General said, He had only one piece of Evidence to
give more: That he was one of the Accomplices of the Lord Russel, and therefore
he would give in Evidence his Conviction. To which purpose the Lord Howard was
asked, Whether he was not Sworn as a Witness at the Trial of the Lord Russel?
who Ansering, Yes; The next Question was, Whether in those debates, there were
any Reflections upon the King that he Reflections upon the Kings Misgovernment,
particularly for imposing upon the City
had broken his Duty? to which the Lord Howard Answered, Not personally upon
the King, but upon his Misgovernment, and principally that which they thought
was the general disgust of the Nation, their imposing upon the City at that
time: which was the thing then complained of, and looked upon as the chief
Grievance.

Then the Copy of the Conviction, being Sworn by Mr. T -- to be a true Copy
examined by the Original was read.

Here the Attorney General rested, unless the Jury desired to hear the Words of
the Libel read again, which they did not. So that Colonel Sidn^y being now free
to make his Defense, desired The Prisoner desires to know upon what Statute he
was Indicted? Is Answered upon the 25th. of Edward the 3d.
in the first place to know upon what Statute he was Indicted? to which it was
Answered by the Attorney General, that he was Indicted upon the Statute of the
25th. of Edward the 3d.

The Prisoner desired to know upon what Branch of the Statute? It was replied,
Upon the first Branch, for Conspiring and Compassing the Death of the King.

To which the Prisoner replied, That then he conceived, that what came not
within that Statu^e, did not touch him; and desired to know what the Witn^sses
had Sworn against him upon that Point? the Lord Chief Justice told him,
repeating the Att^rney Generals Words, That he was Indicted upon the Statute of
the 25th. of Edward the 3d. which makes it High Treason to Conspire the Death
of the King, and that the Overt Act was sufficiently set forth in the
Indictment; the Question was, Whether 'twere proved?

To which the Prisoner pleaded, That they had proved a Paper found in his Study
of Caligula and N^ro, and asked whether that He puts a Question as to his Paper.
were Compassing the Death of the King?

The Lord Chief Justice replied, He should tell the Jury that, Aswered by the
Court.
and told them that the Point in Law they were to receive from the Court, but
whether there were Fact sufficient, was their Duty to consider.

Then Colonel Sidney undertook his Defense, saying, That since he was Indicted
upon that Statute, he was not to take notice of any other. That he was Indicted
for Conspiring the Death of the King, because such a Paper was found in his
Study. That under favor, he thought that would be nothing to him. For that tho
Sir Phillip Lloyd did ask him whether he would put his Seal to it? He did not
ask him, till he had been in his Clos^t, and he did not know what he had put
in, and therefore he told him he would not do it. That then came the Gentlemen
upon similitude of Hands: to which he Answered, That it was well known what
similitude of Hands was in this Age. That a Person came to him, He denies the
similitude of hands to be a good proof.
and told him but about two days before, that one came to him, and offered him
to counterfeit any hand he should show him in half an Hour; and therefore he
had nothing to say to those Papers.

Then for Point of Witness, that he could not be Indicted, much He alleges two
Witnesses to the branch to which the Treason relates.
less Tried or Condemned upon the 25th. of Edward the 3d. for that by that Act
there must be two Witnesses to that very Branch to which the Treason relates,
which must be distinguished. For the Levying of War, and Conspiring the Death
of the King, are two different things, distinct in Nature and Reason, and so
distinguished in the Statute: and therefore the Conspiring the Death of the
King was Treason, the other not. That the 1st. of Edward the 8th. 12th. and
5th. Edw. 6. 11. did expressly say, there must be two Witnesses in either of
those Acts. That then there was the Lord Howard, who only spoke of six Men,
whom he called a Select Council, and yet Selected by no Person in the World. He
desired to know, Who Selected the Lord Howard, or who Selected Him? That if
they were Selected by no Body, it was a Bull to say they were a Select^d
Council. That if they were not Selected, but Erected themselves into a Cabal,
then they had either Confid^nce in one another, or found they were never able
to assist one another in the Design. But there was nothing of all that, for
that those six Men were Strangers one to another. That for his part, he never
spoke with the Duke of Monmouth but three times in his Life, and that one time
was when ^he Lord Howard brought him to the Prisoners House, and cozened them
both, by telling the Duke, that the Prisoner had invited him and the Prisoner,
that the Duke invited himself, and neither true.

Now that such Men as those were, hardly knowing one another, should presently
fall into a great and intimate Friendship, and trust and management of such
businesses as those were, was a thing utterly improbable, unless they were mad.
That he found in the Lord Howards Deposition against the Lord Russel, That they
were in Prosecution of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Design, and yet acknowledged
that the Duke of Monmouth said he was mad, and that he himself said so too:
That therefore should they have joined with four more in the Prosecution of the
Design of a Madman, they must be mad too. Only whether the Lord Howard would
have it thought he was mad, because a Madman could not be Guilty of Treason,
he could not tell. That the Lord Howard in his last Deposition had fixed the
two Meetings, one about the middle of January, and the other ten days after;
but that now he had fixed the one to be the latter end of January, and the
other about the middle of February: and that then he made it to be the
Prosecution of the Lord Shaftsbury's Design; but he did not find that any one
there had any thing to do with the Lord Shaftsbury; that for his part he had
not, neither had he seen his Face in two Years. Then the next thing that he
went upon was, That The Lord Howard but one Witness.
what ever the Lord Howard were, he was but one Witness. That the Law of God
and Man required two Witnesses; So that for one to come and speak of an
Imaginary Council, another of a Libel, Written no Body knew when, was such a
thing that never could be got over. That if the Law of God were, that there
must be He p^rsues his Argument for the necessity of two Witnesses.
two Witnesses to one Fact, there was an end of the Matter, and that under the
Judicial Law, the penalty would have been in such a Case to put a Man to Death.
That then there were but two things, which if allowed, no Man would be safe
for Perjury. The one was to suffer Men to give their Testimony, one to one
thing, and another to another, that the fraud could not be Discovered, and the
other was to take away the Punishment. That the Punishment was in some
measure taken away, and if the other Point were taken away whereby the
fraud could not be Discovered, then no Defense could be made. Then he instanced
the Story of Susannah, that both Witnesses should be to the same Point;
Therefore if there were two Witnesses to prove the Conspiracy, and that those
Matters were done in it which were Treason, he was to answer it; if there
were not, he presumed And desires Council upon the Point.
he needed not say any thing to it; which if it might not be allovv'd him, he
desired Council to argue it.

To that the Court made Answer, That it was a Point of Fact, The Answer of the
Court.
whether there were two Witnesses? allowing that one Witness was not
sufficient.

From whence the Prisoner inferring that there was the Lord Howard and never
another, the Court admonished him not to make those Inferences; and that the
Jury should be told, That if there were not two Witnesses, as the Law
required in the Case, they were to acquit him.

Upon this the Prisoner said, He was Confounded; and pleading He expostulates
with the Court.
by way of Interrogatories, asked the Court what was a Conspiracy to Kill
the King? and whether there were any more Witnesses then one for Levying War?

In Answer to which the Court bid him not deceive himself, or And is answered.
think that the Court intended to enter into a Dialogue with him, but Answer
what he could to the Fact.

To which the Prisoner replied, That then there being but one Witness, he was
not to Answer to it at all.

The Court told him, If he relied upon that, they would proceed to direct the
Jury presently.

The Prisoner continued, That then again for Levying War, there was no Evidence
as to that: He Challenged the Lord Howard He taxes the Lord Howard of varying
in his Evidence.
also, to reconcile what he had said at the Lord Russels Trial, with what he
said then. That he had there declared he had said all he could, but that now he
had got he knew not how many things, that were never spoken of there: upon
which the Prisoner appealed to the Court, Whether he had ever spoken a word of
what he said then concerning Mr. Hambden? That he set forth his Evidence very
Rhetorically, but that it did not become a Witness, who was only to tell what
was said and done; but that he did not tell what was done and said. That he had
said they took upon them to consider, but does not say what one Man said, or
what one Man resolved, much less what the Prisoner did. That if those things
were not to be distinguished but to be jumbl'd together, he then knew not what
to say.

Here the Court again advertised the Prisoner to Answer the The Prisoner put
upon it by the Court to bring his Witnesses.
Matter of Fact, or if he had any Testimony to disparage the Witnesses, to
produce it.

Thereupon the Prisoner urged against the Lord Howard, That he had accused
himself of diverse Treasons, and had no pardon for any, that he was under the
terror and punishment of those Treasons. That he had said he could not get his
Pardon, till he was past the Drudgery of Swearing. That he owed the Prisoner a
considerable That the Lord Howard owed him Money.
sum of Money, lent him in time of his great Necessity; and that when his
Mortgage was forfeited, and the Prisoner was to take the advantage of the Law,
he had found out a way to have him laid up in the Tower. That he came to the
Prisoner's House when he was put in the Tower, and in the hearing of the
Prisoner's Servants, Swore, as in the presence of God, That the Plot was but a
Sham, and that he knew nothing of it. That he would not only have paid the
Debt due to the Prisoner by his Testimony, but would fain have got his Plate
and other Goods into his hands under pretense of securing them. That he had
protested the same thing to Dr. Burnet, as he had done to the Prisoner's
Servants; and that when he came to Answer it, he said he was to face it out,
and make the best of it he could, which he did bravely against God, but was
very timorous of Man. That he had declared at the Lord Russels Trial, That he
believed that the Religious Obligation of an Oath did not consist in the
formality of applying it to the place, but in calling God to Witness. So that
when he called God to Witness before Dr. Burnet and some others, if what he
affirmed to them were not consistent with his present Oath, it could not be
true, or if he Swore both under the Religion of an Oath, he Swore himself
perjured.

As for Aaron Smith, he had Sworn also that the Prisoner sent him, but that no
Body else spoke a word of it.

As for the Papers, he was not to give any Account of them, He urges that as to
the Papers similitude of hands was no proof.
nor did he think they were before the Court, in regard there was nothing but
the similitude of hands offered for Proof. For this he instanced in the Case of
the Lady Car, Indicted of Perjury, for proof of which some Letters of hers were
produced, which were contrary to what she Swore in Chancery, and it was proved
her hand was like it, but the Lord Chief Justice Keeling directed the Jury,
that in Criminal Causes it was no proof at all.

That as to Sir Phillip Lloyd, he thought him to be no Witness, He objects
against Sir Philip Floyd.
as being the King's Officer, and he being prosecuted at the King's Suit; For
which, he urged a Case of a great Minister in France, whose Treasonable Papers
being inventory'd by one of the King's Officers, was the reason why they could
not be made use of. He added farther, That the Papers were old Ink, and might
be written twenty Years ago for ought he knew.

As for the Consult, it was strange that such Men as they who had no Followers,
should undertake so vast a Design, and very unlikely, when they had neither
Officers nor So^ldiers, no time, nor place, nor Money for it. That he had
spoken the last time of 20 or 3000 l. but no Man knew where it was to be had,
only he said the last time it was spoken in Jest. That it was a pretty Cabal,
for six Men to meet about a business, and neglect every one of the Points
relating to the business they met about, or if any one did speak of it, that it
was but in Jest. Descending then again to the Point of the Papers, he began to
open the Argument of Filmer's Book, alleging it was a Book of ill
Fundamentals, to which those Papers seemed only to be an Answer. But then the
Court interrupted him, and admonishing him not to spend theirs nor his own
time, asked him whether he owned the Paper? which when he denied, the Court
bid him to proceed to that which was pertinent.

Colonel Sidney insisted that he had several Points in Law, particularly He
insists upon several Points of Law.
whether Conspiring to Levy War were Treason?

To which the Court replied, That there could be no doubt in Point of Law, till
there were a settlement in Point of Fact, that if he would agree the
Conspiracy, they would tell him their Opinions, but that they could give no
Opinion in Law till the Point were stated. That the Conspiracy was proved by
one Witness, and therefore if he had any thing to take off his Credibility
'twas to the purpose. They also allowed him to have any part of the Papers
read, either to execute, or explain the Treason which was imputed to him in the
Libel.

So that at length after several Repetitions of the same Objections, He calls
his witnesses.
and a long Patience of the Court, Colonel Sidney called his Witnesses. And
first,

The Earl of Anglesey declared, That being in Company with the The Testimony of
the Earl of Anglesey.
Earl of Bedford, when the Lord Howard came to give him a visit, and to comfort
him in his Affliction for his Sons being taken, he told him he was not to be
troubled, for that he had a discreet, a wise, and a virtuous Son, and that he
could not be in any such Plot, and his Lordship might therefore well expect a
good Issue of that business, and he might well believe his Son secure: for he
believed he was neither Guilty, nor so much as to be suspected. He proceeded
farther, and said he knew of no such barbarous Design, and could not Charge the
Lord Russel with it, nor any Body else.

The Earl of Clare declared, That as for Colonel Sidney, the Lord Howard did
with several asseverations assert, after the Colonel Of the Earl of Clare.
was taken, That he was as Innocent as any Man breathing, and used great
Encomiums in his praise, and then seemed to bemoan his misfortune, which he
thought real; for that he believed, never any Man had been more engaged to
another, then he was to Colonel Sidney. And upon talking of some Papers that
were found, he said he was sure nothing could be made of any Papers of his. And
that this was about a Week before the Lord Howard was taken.

Mr. Philip Howard declared, That when the Plot first broke Of Mr. Phillip
Howard.
out, he used to meet the Lord Howard very often at his Brothers House; and
that coming from White Hall one day, and being asked what News? he told him,
That there were abundance of People that had confessed a Horrid Design of
Murdering the King, and that their Names were Colonel Rumsey, West, Walcot, and
others that were in a Proclamation. That he asked his Lordship what he thought
of the Business? to which he Answered, That he was in an amaze. That he adviz'd
him to lay hold upon the Opportunity to speak to the discontented Lords, to
join in an Address to the King, to show their Detestation and Abhorrence of the
thing, as a means to reconcile all things: That the Lord Howard promised him to
go about it, but because the Earl of Essex was out of Town, it went off.

That the next day he met the Lord Howard again at his Brothers House, and
being by him asked what News? that he Answered, The Lord Russel was sent to the
Tower; to which he replied, Then we are all undone, and desired him to go to
the Lord Privy Seal, and see whether he was to be taken up: for that he doubted
it was a Sham-Plot, for if it were a True-Plot, he should fear nothing. That he
refused to go, not thinking it probable that his Lordship would resolve him
such a Question; but that he farther asked him, If he were not Guilty, why he
would have him go? to which the Lord Howard replied, Because he feared 'twas no
True-Plot, but a Plot made upon them, and therefore no Man was free.

That he met him a third day at the same place, and found him very melancholy,
and that asking him the reason? he Answered, Because Colonel Sidney was taken.
Upon which he asked him again, Why he was not troubled the Day before for the
Lord Russel, who was of his Blood? he replied, Because he had that particular
Obligation from Colonel Sidney, that no one Man had from another.

Dr. Burnet declared, That the Day after the Plot broke out, Of Dr. Burnet.
the Lord Howard came to see him, and upon some Discourse of the Plot, with
hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven protested, He knew nothing of any Plot,
believed nothing of it, and said he looked upon it as a Ridiculous Thing.

Joseph Ducas declared, That the next Day after the Colonel Of Joseph Ducas.
was taken, the Lord Howard came to the Colonels House, and asked him where
Colonel Sidney was? that he replied, He was taken by an Order of the King; to
which his Lordship cried, O Lord what is that for! That he adviz'd him to carry
all the things out of the House where they might b^ safe. That he came aga^n
about seven a Clock at N^ght: and that then he told his Lordship of the Report
of a Plot to Kill the King and the Duke, and of a general Insurrection, and of
C^lonel Sidneys sending into Scotland; to which the Lord Howard replied, God
knows, he knew nothing of all that, and that he was sure, had Colon^l Sidney
be^n concerned in the Mat^er, he would have told him something, but he knew
nothing.

The Lord Paget declared, That the Lord Howard was with him Of the Ld. Paget.
presently after the breaking out of the Plot, and that he told him he was glad
to see him abroad, and that he was not concerned in the Disord^r: to which he
replied, That he had joy from several concerning it, and he took it as an
injury, for it looked as if he were Guilty, but that he knew nothing of
himself, or any Body else; and that though he were free in Discourse, and free
to go into any Company, yet he had not seen any body that could say any thing
of him, or give him any occasion to say any thing of any body else.

Mr. Edward Howard declared, That as soon as the Plot broke Of Mr. Edward
Howard.
out, the Lord Howard having a great Intimacy with him, he expressed a great
detestation and surprising in himself to hear of it, and assured him under
great asseverations, that he could neither accuse himself, nor any Man living.
That he told him moreover, That there were certain Persons of Quality whom he
was very much concerned for, that they should be so much reflected upon, or
troubled, and condol'd their Condition very much, both before and after.

That upon Discourse at another time (which he had omitted at the Lord Russels
Trial, by reason of the reproof that was accidentally given him) upon Discourse
of the Plot, the Lord Howard assured him. That it was certainly a Sham, even to
his knowledge, too black for any Minister of public Employment to have
devised, but that it was forged by People in the Dark, such as Jesuits and
Papists, and that it was in his Conscience. That thereupon he adviz'd him to
make an Address to the King under his hand to testify his abhorrency of the
Thing. Then being asked by his Lordship to whom he should apply himself, he
pitched upon the Lord Hallifax, and going to him, told him, that the Lord
Howard was willing to set it under his hand, his detestation of the Plot, and
that there was no such thing to his knowledge: but that upon the Lord Russels
being taken, the thing was laid aside.

Mr. Blake declared, That about six Weeks since, the Lord Howard Of Mr. Blake.
sent for him to come and see him. That he went upon Discourse of News, he told
the Lord Howard, That he heard no body had their Pardon, but he that first
Discovered the Plot; to which the Lord Howard Answered, No; but that he had a
Warrant for it, and that he had their Word and Honor for it, but he would do
nothing in it, till he had farther Orders. That he heard nothing of it, and
could Ascribe it to no other Reason, but that he must not have his Pardon till
the drudgery of Swearing was over.

Grace Tracey declared, That the Lord Howard protested he Of Grace Tracy.
knew nothing of a Plot, and that he was sure Colonel Sidney knew nothing of
it; And farther added, That if he had known any thing of it, he must needs have
known of it, for that he knew as much of his Concerns as any one in the World:
and took God to Witness of his Protestation.

Elizabeth Penwick declared, That the Lord Howard asked for Of Elizabeth
Penwick.
him? and they said he was taken away by a Man to the Tower for a Plot; upon
which he took God to Witness, that he knew nothing of it, neither did the
Colonel; but said it was only Malice, desiring withal that the Colonels Plate
might be sent to his House to be secured.

Then one Mr. Wharton stood up, and offered to the Court, that Mr. Wharton
offers to imitate the hand.
if the sheets might be shown him, he would undertake to imitate them in a
little time, that they should not know which was which.

Then the Prisoner proceeding to his Defense, set forth, That The Prisoner
proceeds in his defense. He argues upon the Statute of the 25th. of Edward the
3d.
there was a large Complication of Crimes laid to his Charge. That he
understood they were under the Statute of the 25th. of Edward the 3d. That the
Statute had two Branches, one relating to War, the other to the Person of the
King. That that which related to the Person of the King, made the Conspiring,
Imagining, and Compassing the Death of the King to be Criminal. That the Branch
concerning War was not so, unless it were levied. That he could not imagine to
which of the two they referred his Crime; For that to say that a Man did meet
to Conspire the Kings Death, and for him that gave the Account of the business
not to say one word of it seemed extravagant.

For that Conspiracies had always their Denomination from that Point to which
they tended. That the King had two Capacities Natural and Politic: that the
Politic could not be within the Statute, for in that sense he never died; so
it was absurd, to say it should be a fault to Kill the King who never died.
That then it must be understood in the Natural Sense, which was to be done
either by Sword, Pistol, or other violent way. So that if there were not one
word of this, then it was utterly at an end, though the Witness had been good.

That as to the Point of Levying War it was made Treason, so it He argues as to
the Point of Levying War.
were proved by an Overt Act, but that there never was an Overt Act, or could
be pretended in his Case. So that if the War were not Levied, it was not within
the Act. Therefore in his Case it was implied, it was first imagined, that he
intended to raise a War, and then it was imagined that that War should tend to
the Destruction of the King, which though it might follow, was neither Natural
or Necessary, and so could not be so understood by the Law. That therefore it
was two distinct things to make War, and ^o endeavor to kill the King; and
that as there was no manner of pretense that he should endeavor to Kill the
King directly, so it could not be by Inference, because it was Treason under
another Species. Upon which he cited the Lord Colce, who says it is the
Overthrow of Justice to confound Membra Devid^ntia. From whence he argued, That
if the making of War could not be understood to be a Conspiring the Death of
the King, that then he was not Guilty of the Indictment; but in his Case there
was neither Conspiring the Death of the King, nor making War, nor Conspiring to
make War: besides that, the Law required two Witnesses.

That as to the business of Aaron Smith, the Lord Howard told The business of
Aaron Smith conjecturally and implecitely Sworn.
it so imperfectly, and so merely conjecturally, that there was nothing in it
but his Rhetoric to set it out; for that he never told by whom it was Writ, nor
what was in it, or whether it were delivered or no. And whereas it was urged
that the Scotch Gentlemen came to To^n, he professed he never heard of their
Names till they were named to him in the Tower.

That as to the Papers, if any thing were to be made of them, His Plea in
reference to the Papers.
they were to produce the whole, for that it was impossible to make any thing
of a part of them. But though some Papers were found in his Study (though it
were a Question whether they were found there or no, or whether they were not
Counterfeit) yet the hand was such as showed they had been Written many Years.
He then put it to the Court by way of Question, If any body had found Papers in
his own hand or another, that were not justifyable, whether that were Treason?
whether that imagined the Death of the King? And if ever any Man could say he
ever publish^ a Sh^et in his Life, he would submit to punishment.

Then he asked what Concat^nation those Papers could have with His Plea as to
the Council of six.
the Select Council, Selected by no Body, to pursue the Design of the Earl of
Shaftsbury? Then what was it to do? This was nothing by the Testimony of the
Witness, were he Credible, he said, but a few Men talking at large what might,
or what might not be; what was like to fall out without any manner of
Intention, or doing any thing. That they did not so much as enquire, whether
there were Men, Arms, or Ammunition. That it was a War to be made by five or
six Men not knowing one another, nor trusting one another: for which he
instanced Dr. Cox', Evidence at the Lord Russels Trial.

Something more he said to the same purpose, but concluded as to this Point,
that the Court was not to make any Constructive Treasons, but to go according
to plain proof; Constructive Treaons belonging only to the Parliament, as by
the immediate Proviso in the Act, and by several other Acts of Parliament
appeared. And therefore he thought it impossible for the Jury to find the
Matter: for that the first Point was only proved by the Lord Howard, who as he
thought was no Body, and the last concerning the Papers, was only imaginary,
from the similitude of Hands.

The Prisoner having thus made his Defense, the Solicitor General summed up the
Evidence, and answered all the Prisoners Objections with that Learning and
Eloquence, that nothing could be more convincing.

When he had done, the Prisoner offered again to have spoken to the Court; but
it was told him, that after the Kings Council had concluded, the Prisoner was
never admitted to say any thing more. And then the Lord Chief Justice told the
Jury in particular, That what the Prisoner had said, that was not proved; and
what the Kings Council had said, of which there was no proof to make it out,
was not to be taken into any Consideration.

Then the Solicitor General desired one word more as well for The Solicitor
Generals request to the Court, in his own and Prisoners behalf.
his own as the Prisoners Sake; That if he had said any thing that was not Law,
or misrepeated, or misapplied the Evidence that had been given, he made it his
Request to the Court to rectify those Mistakes, as well in Point of Fact, as in
Point of Law.

This done, the Lord Chief Justice delivered his Charge to the The Lord Chief
Justice delivers his Charge to the Jury.
Jury, which was so full and so clear, that after he had concluded, the Jury
withdrawing, stayed no longer then about half an Hour in Consultation; and then
returning, brought the Prisoner in Guilty.

Upon Monday, November the 26th. Colonel Sidney was again He is brought to
receive Judgment.
brought up to the Bar of the King's Bench to receive his Sentence, and being
asked the usual Question? He Pleaded first,

That he conceived he had had no Trial, for that he was to be Tried by his
Country, but he did not find his Country in the Jury that Tried him, in regard
there were some of them that were not Freeholders; and therefore if he had had
no Trial, there could be no Judgment.

To which the Court replied, That it had been the Opinion of all the Judges of
England in the Case last proceeding his, that by the Statute of Queen Mary, the
Trial of Treason was put as it was at Common Law, and that there was no such
Challenge at Common Law.

He then desired a Day and Council to argue it; but it was told him, It was not
in the Power of the Court to do it.

He then desired the Indictment might be read again, which being done, he urged
that it was void, because it deprived the King of his Title of Defensor Fidei,
which was Treason by the Law. But the Court did not think it a material
Objection.

He urged there was no Treason in the Papers, and nothing proved of them: to
which it was answered, That there was not a Line but what was Treason.

Next he desired that the Duke of Monmouth might be sent for, and offered to
acknowledge what ever they pleased, if he would say there was any such thing as
a Design, or knew any thing of it.

But it was told him that was over, since he had been Tried for the Fact. Upon
which he put forth these words, If you will He gives Offense to the Court.
call it a Trial; which was ill-resented by the Court, as if he went about to
Arraign the Justice of the Nation.

Then he complained that the Jury were not summoned by the Baliff, but were
agreed upon by the under Sheriff and others, and asked whether that were a good
Jury? to which the Court made Answer, That they could take notice of nothing
but what was upon the Record, and it appeared that the Sheriff had made his
return.

What he alleged more, was nothing but what he had urged The Court pronounces
Judgment.
in his Defense upon the Point of Constructive Treason; So that the Court
proceeded to Judgment, which was given accordingly. Which Sentence being
afterward mitigated by His Majesty's Grace and Favor, he was upon -- the --
Day of -- carried from the Tower of London, to the public Scaffold upon Col.
Sidney beheaded.
Tower Hill. Where after a very short Preparation, with little or no Ceremony,
he laid himself down, and had his Head struck from his Body by the common
Executioner.

Upon the Scaffold he delivered a Paper to the Sheriffs in the Nature of a
Speech, in which he was so fa^ from Repenting for the Crime which he suffered,
that he rather justified himself by complaining of the rigor of his Trial, and
broaching those very Opinions to the subversion of Monarchy, which were the
Subject of those Treasonable Papers for which he was in part Condemned. But the
Speech has been Printed, and therefore there needs no Repetition of a Matter so
scandalous.

On the other side the Lord Brandon, Mr. Booth, Major Wildman The Lord Brandon,
Mr. Trenchard, and several others discharged.
Mr. Charleton, and Mr. Trenchard, and some others that were Bailed the last
Term, were then fully Discharged.

THE Charge and Defense OF John Hambden, Esquire;
THE 6th. of February, 1683. Term. Sancti Hillar. John Hambden was Tried before
the Lord Chief Justice Jefferies, upon an Indictment of High Misdemeanour, for
contriving and practicing to disturb the Kings Peace, and stirring up Sedition
in the Kingdom.

The stress of the Evidence against the Prisoner, was upon the The Lord Howards
Evidence. The first Meeting.
Lord Howards single Testimony; who Swore, That about the middle of Janua^y, in
the Year, 1682/3. The Council of Six, of which Mr. Hambden was one, met at the
Prisoners House, where they received from his own Lips, a general hint and
intimation of the ends of their Meeting, which were to consult and advise one
with another, how to put things into a better Method, and posture than
formerly. That the Questions were started severally: while one spoke of the
time, when it should be, whether now, or when? Another whether to be begun in
the City or the Country, or both together? what Persons to be prepared in the
several Countries to be assisting in it that were probable to carry it on? what
Money should be raised? and that lastly it was concluded at the same Meeting,
That there should be a Concurrence and Correspondency with Scotland, that so
Diversions might be given both at home and abroad at one and the same time.

That about a fortnight after there was another Meeting at the The second
Meeting.
Lord Russels, where the Prisoner was also present; where they came to a
Resolution, that some body should be sent into Scotland, upon which Colonel
Sidney propounded Aaron Smith, which was consented to by Mr. Hambden, and the
rest of the Company.

To prove the Credibility of the Lord Howards Testimony, he Aaron Smith sent
into Scotland.
Swears the Circumstances of Aaron Smith being sent into Scotland, which was
Corroborated by the Innkeeper of Newcastle, at whose House he lay, and where
he hired him a Guide to carry Aaron Smith the next way into Scotland; who also
knew Aaron Smith again, when he saw him at the Council Table.

The next Circumstance was this, That the Scotch Gentlemen did come to London,
under pretense of a purchase in Carolina.

This was made out upon Oath by Sir Andrew Foster, and Mr. The Evidence of Sir
Andrew Foster, and Mr. Atterbury.
Atterbury. The first had seen Sir John Cockram, Mr. Monro, and Cambel the Son.
The second Swore, That Sir Hugh Cambel, Sir George Cambel, Bayley, and some
others were taken in Blackfriars: and that he took the rest in a cunning Hole
in Moor-Fields, who were afterward sent Prisoners into Scotland,

Thus the sum of the Evidence against the Prisoner was a Consultation in Order
to the raising of Men to infest the Government. The sum of the Evidence.
A Discourse concerning the raising of Money and Arms for that end: the places
where, and the time when: and the Conciliating a friendship with some
discontented Persons in Scotland, to join with the Conspirators in England.

To this the Prisoner by his Council Mr. Williams made Answer, Mr. Williams
answers for the Defendant.
That whereas the Lord Howard was positive and particular as to some things in
reference to Persons, Places, and Times, yet in what most effected the
Defendant, he was not any thing like positive as to the times of. the Meeting,
but only that it was about the middle of January, and the beginning of
February. And thereupon he made this Observation, That since the Evidence would
not be particular as to the Time, it might be apprehended that he gave himself
a little loose, that he might not be contradicted in that Circumstance.

2. That the Witness were particular as to many Facts and Things relating to
the Lord Shaftsbury, where he Names other particular Persons and Discourses,
yet he had not made use of any one Circumstance of Fact in the Case of the
Defendant, save only that of Aaron Smith.

In the next place it was urged, That in regard there were other Witnesses
before, and beside the Evidence, to the Discovery of the Plot, it concerned the
Lord Howard to give a home Evidence in the Case, or else he could have no
expectation of his Pardon; and that therefore he was concerned perhaps to
strain, that he might make such a Discovery as might answer his end; which the
Counsel supposed would Naturally arise out of this Case, since it was something
long before he got his Pardon, but that now he had it.

After this, several Persons of Quality were produced, to prove the Lord
Howards denial of a Plot, that he knew of none, and believed the whole thing a
Contrivance.

Others were called, to prove Mr. Hambden a Person of a retired To prove the
Prisoners Conversation.
Life, addicted to his Studies, free from Turbulency, and meddling in business,
and of great esteem, respect, and duty, which he always expressed for the King
and the Government.

This being done, the Lord Chief Justice himself made a most The Lord Chief
Justice summing up the Evidence.
elaborate R^capitulation of what had been offered in Evidence by the Kings
Council, and what the Council for the Prisoner had objected against it. Which
Objections, though it were Confessed, that they were Ingeniously made by Mr.
Williams, for the advantage of his Client, yet were they all cleared by the
Lord Chief Justice with that satisfaction as he went along, both to the Court
and all that heard him, that the Jury returning within half an Hour after they
withdrew from the Bar, brought in the Prisoner Guilty of the Trespass and
Misdemeanour whereof he was Indicted.

The JURY Sworn were these:
Sir Charles Gerard, Bar. Roger Jennings, Esquire; H^nry Hodges, Esquire; Thomas
Harriots, Esquire; Thomas Earsby, Esquire; William Avery, Esquire; John Sharp, Esquire; Charles
Good, Esquire; Samuel Rouse, Esquire; Hugh Squire, Esquire; Nehemiah Arnold, Esquire; John
Bifi^ld, Esquire;
Upon the 12th of February, the Attorney General moved for Judgment upon this
Conviction; upon which the Prisoner being ordered to come into Court, the
Judgment of the Court was, That a Fine of 40000 l. should be set upon him, that
he should be committed till he paid it, and that he found Sureties for his good
behavior during Life. Then Mr. Williams prayed his Bayl might be Discharged,
which was agreed, he being Committed. And for the High Treason it was concluded
that ^he was Discharged by the Habeas Corpus Act, there being no Prosecution.

The Charge and Defense of Lawrence Braddon, and Hugh Speak, who were Tried at
the Kings-Bench-Bar, the Seventh of February, 1683.
THEY were both Charged together upon an Informamation, That they Conspired
together, to make the The Charge in general.
People believe, That whereas the Earl of Essex Murdered himself, and so it was
found by the Inquisition, yet that Inquisition was taken unduly, and
irrigularly obtained, and that they did Conspire to procure false Witnesses to
make these things out.

There was a third thing Charged upon Braddon, That he went about by Papers and
otherwise to publish it, that he was a Person employed to Prosecute the Murder
of the Earl of Essex.

For the Information it self there was this Evidence, first Mr. The ^eads of
the Information.
Evans Swore, That he had heard at the Custom-House from the Father of the Boy,
as though there had been a Report came to him from home at ten that Morning,
upon which the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat, of a Razer thrown out of the
Earls Window; and that in the Afternoon he came to him again, and told him, he
had examined the Matter farther, and his Boy had confirmed the Truth of it.
Farther the same Mr. Evans Swore, That after this, Mr. Braddon and one Hatsal,
came to the place where he was in Essex, at what time Hatsal took out of his
Pocket a Printed Copy of the Inquisition, and then Mr. Evans said something
about the Report he had heard, which seemed to contradict the Inquisition. That
some time after being at a Coffee-Hous^, Braddon and Edwards came to him, and
there they began to talk, and Edwards said, that Braddon had been with his
Child to examine him, to bear Testimony about flinging the Razor out of the
Window, upon the Report which the Boy had made out: upon which he adviz'd them
to forbear talking any farther about the Matter, for that it might do Braddon
and Edwards both an Injury.

Edwards Swore, that he heard the Report first from his Family, Edwards's
Evidence.
and that afterward the Boy confirmed the Truth of it; but afterward he heard
the Boy had denied it, which was after Braddon had been there to enquire
concerning it. Then he Swore that Braddon came to him again, and that then he
had got a note dictated by himself, and not by the Boy, which being tendered to
the Boy, the Boy refused to put his hand to it. Upon which Mr. Braddon came
again another time, though he was told, the Boy had denied it, and then the Boy
did set his hand to it. Withal he said, the Boy was used to tell Lies very
often, which his Family told him also, and that more especially to make Excuses
when he played Truant.

The Boy being put upon his Oath, with all the tenderness and The Boy upon his
Oath.
admonitions that could be used, Swore positively, That he told his Mother and
Mr. Braddon, what he had Reported concerning the Razor was true at first; but
when his Sister bid him be sure to tell nothing but what was Truth, then he
said, Truly it was not Truth.

He farther Swore, That Mr. Braddon offered him a Paper to Sign, but he would
not Sign it: and being asked the Question why he would not? He Answered,
Because it was not true: and being asked whether Braddon had notice of this,
both the Mother and Sisters all Swore, That Braddon had notice that the Boy had
denied it. The Boy denied also upon his Oath, That he had ever said, He was
going to see the Lord Gerard of Brandon's Lodgings, though Braddon had put it
into the Paper which he made him Sign.

He farther Swore, That Mr. Braddon came to him a second time, after he had
refused, and that then it was that Mr. Brandon imposing upon him, and
pretending there was no harm to him, but that if there were, it would redound
to Braddon himself, he was then prevailed upon to put his Name to that which
was notoriously false.

Dr. Hawkins's Son of the Tower deposed, That he likewise D. Hawkins his Sons
Testimony.
played Truant that Morning; that upon the Report of the Earl of Essex's having
cut his Throat, he went back to the Tower, and was there a considerable time
gaping among the People, and that he saw Edwards's Boy there, that he was there
all the time he was there, that they went out of the Tower together, and that
there was no such thing, nor any grounds for such a Report.

Mr. Brathwayt, who was present when Mr. Braddon was before Mr. Brathwayt.
the King, deposed, That the Boy and the Girl were fetched and all Persons
examined, and that after this it was told him, That all that the Boy had said
was false, and by his Faith it was a Lie. That Braddon confessed he would have
got some Justices of the Peace to have examined the Boy, and to that purpose
applied himself to Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir John Lawrence, but because they
would not do it privately, he would not let them do it at all.

That the right Words of one of the Sisters being examined before the King, to
the best of his remembrance was, That Braddon compelled the Boy to Sign it.

Mr. Monstevens deposed, That Mr. Braddon came to him, and showed him the Boys
Information, which he read, and thereupon by way of caution told him, That he
wondered Sir H. Capel did not appear in a Matter of that Moment! To which
Braddon replied, That Sir H. Capel was ill, and could not come himself. But
being told that Sir H. Capel was not so ill, but that he had been with the Earl
of Sunderland and the King too, since the Death of the Earl of Essex, he made
no Answer, only that he did it out of the Duty he owed to the Memory of the
Lord of Essex.

Sir H. Capel upon Oath declared, That Mr. Braddon came to Sir H. Capel.
him, to tell him he had some Discovery to make concerning the Death of the
Earl of Essex; to whom Sir Henry replied, That if he had any thing of that
Nature, he should go to a Secretary of State.

Mr. Beech being Sworn, deposed, That when he was seized in Mr. Beech's
deposition.
the Country by the Warrant of one Mr. Aires, there was found about him severel
Informations of his own contriving, as of Edwards's Boy, of the little Girl
Lodeman, a L^tter from one Burgess a Pinmaker in Marleborough to the
Postmaster of Froom, to this effect: Pray call to mind such a business of a
Report of my Lord The substance of Burgess's Letter.
of Essex's cutting his Throat, upon Friday the 13th. of July last. Pray
recollect your self, and impart it to this Bearer.

In this Letter it appeared, That Mr. Burgess had put it in his Letter the 6th.
of June; but upon Mr. Braddons telling him that he had mistaken, it must be the
13th. the same Burges's accordingly interlin'd the 13th. of July, to make it
humor the Story.

Against Mr. Speak there was no other Evidence than the Letter Speak's Letter.
which was taken out of Braddons Pocket in the Country, directed to Sir Robert
Atkins, and by Mr. Brathwayt Sworn to have been owned by Mr. Speak himself
before the King and Council.

The substance of which was, That Braddon, a very Honest Gentleman, the
Prosecutor of the Murder of the Earl of Essex, had made a considerable
Discovery of it, notwithstanding the hard stream he ran against. That he had
sent him his Man, for fear he should be stabbed, or knocked in the head in those
Parts, and desired Sir Robert' s advice how he should proce^d, admonishing him
withal, to call him by the Name of Johnson. Then going on in the first Person
Plural, we hope, said he, to bring on the Earl of Essex's Murder to a Trial,
before they can any of th^se in the Tower, etc. We labor under many
difficulties, as the Tide runs at present, etc.

To this the chief of Mr. Speaks Defense was, That he wrote the Letter at such
a time at Night, after he had been at the Tavern, His Defense.
that he knew not well what he wrote. That he knew nothing but what he had from
Braddon, and that he was no otherwise concerned, or knew any of the Matter. So
that the Lord Chief Justice left it to the Jury, whether they believed he had
written the Letter with a Design to have the Lie spread abroad, for that then
he was as guilty in every Circumstaace as the other, as to the Design in
general laid in the Information; though not equally guilty about the
management. For Braddon several Evidences were called, who were all examined by
Braddon himself.

Lewis asserted, That one day as he was going up a Hill near Andover, he heard
the News of the Earl of Ess^x's cutting his Throat, and said it was upon a
Friday, but what Week or Month it was, only that it was in Summ^r, he could not
tell.

F^ilder being called, asserted, That at Andover, the Wednesday before the Earl
Murdered himself, it was all the talk of the Town, that he had cut his Throat,
and that it was all the talk of the Town at that time, though the F^ct were not
committed till Friday; but could not remember the Name so much as of one
Person, though the Town were so full of People.

Mrs. Edwards being called, asserted, That when Braddon came first to enqu^re
about the Boys Report, they were a little startled; Mrs. Edwards the Mother.
that thereupon the Daughter went to the Boy, and told him such a Person had
been there about such a thing, and bid him speak the Truth. Why? says the Boy,
Will any harm come of it? I cannot tell, said she, but tell you the Truth. Then
said the Boy, All the Story is false.

The Daughter, young Mrs. Edwards, affirmed the same thing, That the Boy did
tell them such a Story at first, but that afterward Mrs. Edwards the Daughter.
he affirmed it was all a Story, and merely his own Invention.

Being asked by Braddon, whether she did not frighten him, by threatening his
Father would be turned out of his place? she Answered, No; being upon her Oath.

Jane Loadman being Sworn, deposed, That she saw a hand throw a Razor out of a
Window, but she could not tell what Window Jane Loadman.
it was; presently after which she heard either two shrieks or two groans, she
could not tell which. That there were a great many people there, who could not
choose but see the same: but the people she did not know.

Being asked whether the Razor were thrown on the inside of the Pales, or the
outside? she Answered, The outside, in contradiction to the Boy who had said
the inside. Then again having Sworn in Braddons Examination, That she saw the
Razor thrown out of the Lord of Essex's Lodgings, she denied in Court upon her
Oath, that she knew where his Lodgings were. In her Information she affirms she
heard, Go fetch up the Razor. In Court she Swore, She heard no Soldier speak
at all. And all this done in open Day when there were abundance of People
there, though she could not tell any particular Body. Upon which the Lord Chief
Justice made this Remark, That it was strange, that out of a hundred People,
which if the Girl said true, were there, Braddon could not satisfy himself to
enquire after some of them, but must pick up a Child of thirteen Years of Age,
to practice upon in that villainous manner.

Moreover, by the Account which C. Hawley gave of his House, it was impossible
that the Girl could see a Coach at the Door: it was impossible there should be
a Crowd of people in the Yard, because the Sentinel that stood at the Door must
have seen all that past in and out: and besides, the Pales were so high, that
nothing could be flung over, that could easily be discerned.

Mrs. Barton deposed, That Braddon did engage the Boy at Mrs. Mrs. Barton.
Edwards's House to tell Truth, and put him in mind of the 5th. Chapter of the
Acts: but observing that after he had so talked thus to the Boy, he was going
to take Pen, Ink and Paper, and fearing to be drawn in for a Witness, she went
out of the Room.

Then Glasbrook being called, who had set his Hand to Loadman's Examination or
Information, it was proved upon reading Will. Glasbrook.
the Information to be no more, then that the Girl should say, That after the
Earl of Essex had Murdered himself, he flung the Razor out at Window; as if
after he had been his own Executioner, he had got to Life again, and threw away
the Instrument with which he did the Fact.

Then Smith a Barber being called, spoke much to the same effect.

Upon the whole, the Lord Chief Justice so clearly displayed the Contradictions
of the Testimony, and the Improbability of the Circumstances, and so plainly
traced them through all their Obscurities and Ambiguities, that the Jury found
Braddon guilty of the whole Matter Charged upon him in the Information, and Mr.
Speak guilty of all, but Conspiring to procure false Witnesses.

Thereupon the Court set a Fine of 2000 l. upon Mr. Braddon, with Order to find
Sureties for his good Behavior during Life, and to be committed till the same
be performed.

Upon Mr. Speak they set a Fine of 1000 l. with the same Order for Sureties and
commitment.

The Charge and Defense of Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Tried for High Misdemeanour
the 14th. of February, 1683. before the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice
Jefferies, at the Sessions of Nisi Prius for the City of London, after the Term.
The Names of the JVRY were:
Thomas Vernon Percival Gilburn Edward Bovery William Withers, Sen. James Wood
Robert Masters Samuel Newton George Torriano Kenelm Smith Thomas Goddard Thomas
Amy Richard Blackburn.
THE Information against the Defendant was, for Scandalising The Information
and substance of the Letters.
and Vilifying the Evidence in the last Horrid Plot, which he did in several
Letters, in one of which he Related the great Favor into which the Duke of
Monmouth was returned: and seemed to Triumph, that all the Prisoners that were
in the late Sham Protestant-Plot, were Discharged upon Bayl, that Braddon was
not Prosecuted, that the passing Sentence upon the Author of Julian, etc. and
the Printer of the Lord Russels Speech were passed over in silence, etc.

To which he added these Expressions: It Is generally said the Earl of Essex was
Murdered. The brave Lord R^sse^ is afresh lamented. The Plot is lost here,
unless you can find it in the Country among the Addressers and Abhorrers. That
^he High Tories and Clergy were mortified, and Sir George ^as grown humble.

This was the substance of the rest of the Letters, with some alterations of
Words.

To prove him the Author of the several Letters, Mr. Brathwayt Mr. Brath-Wayt.
was Sworn, who deposed, That Sir Samuel, upon the 10th of December, before the
King and the Lords of the Council, owned three of the Letters to be of his own
hand writing. Being asked whether Sir Samuel said they were published by him,
or sent to any person? the Witness Answered, That he did not deny but that he
had published and sent them.

Mr. Atterbury being Sworn, deposed, That he owned three of the Letters to be
written by him: and that being asked by His Mr. Atterbury.
Majesty who subscribed them? he Answered, They were subscribed by one of his
Servants, and so ordered to be sent to the Post House.

Mr. Osland being called and Sworn, deposed, That he wrote one of the Letters
out of a Copy, given him by Sir Samuel, as he Mr. Osland.
was his Servant, to go down into the Country to Sir Phillip Skippon.

The same Witness being asked what became of the Letters after they were
subscribed? made Answer, That he believed they all went to the Post House.

To this Mr. Williams of Counsel for the Defendant pleaded, That there was no
proof of Sir Samuels publishing the Letters, only what Mr. Brathwayt said, That
he did not deny the publishing of them, and what Mr. Atterbury said, That Sir
Samuel should say they were sent to the Post House. Upon which Mr. Williams put
it to the Court, Whether if a Gentleman writes a Letter to a private Friend,
that was a publishing of a Libel? neither was Sir Samuels Servant positive as
to the Letter which he Copied, whether he delivered it back to Sir Samuel or
no, or whether he delivered it in at the Post House, but only as he believed.

Then it was urged that there was no Evidence given about his Malice. To which
the Lord Chief Justice replied, That the thing was Evidence of it self; For
that if any person wrote Libels, or published any Expressions which in
themselves, carried Sedition and Faction, and ill will to the Government, they
could not be otherwise expressed in his Accusation, then by the words
Maliciously, Seditiously, and Factiously; and the very proof of the thing it
self, proved the Evil Mind wherewith it was done.

Then as to the first Objection about the writing and publishing, it was
delivered as the Judgment of the Court, that there was as full and plain proof
of the dictating and writing of the Letters, as could be made.

Then as to what Mr. Williams objected against the publishing it, was asked
him, whether it were not very absurd, to think that such a person as Sir
Samuel, should take such a wonderful deal of pains and care to write such a
deal of Malicious Factious Stuff, give them his Man to Copy out, subscribe and
seal them to carry in his Pocket. Besides that, they were directed to Persons
where Sir Samuel was known to have a Correspondence: and farther, the purport
of the Letters, which was, To desire their Friends to bestir themselves, to get
in sober Men, and to be sure to keep the sober Party up, spoke in its own
Nature, that the L^tters were intended and written with a Design, that they
should be Communicated.

In short the Proof was so full, and the Defense so weak, that the Jury gave in
their Verdict without stirring from the Bar, and found Sir Samuel Barnardiston
guilty of the Offense and Misdemeanour charged upon him in the Information.

The Sentence of the Court was, That he should pay to the King a Fine of 10000
l. and to find Sureties for his good Behavior during Life, and to be Committed
till the same be performed.

The Narrative, Arraignment, Condemnation, Confession and Execution of James
Holloway.
UPON the 21st of April, 1684. James Holloway was brought by Habeas Corpus from
Newgate, there to show cause why Execution should not be awarded against him,
upon an Outlawry for High Treason against him.

This James Holloway being deeply concerned in the Plot, upon the first
Discovery had made a shift to make his Escape in a small Vessel which he hired
for 20 l. per. Month, from Bristol to Rochel; where having laden his Vessel
with Brandy and other Goods, he Sailed away for Barbado's: but understanding
there that his Name was in the Gazett, he hastened to Antego; but neither
thinking it safe to lie long there, he resolved to visit the Charibdee Islands,
and so went down to Montferrat, Mevis, St. Christophers, Sancta-Estatia, and
Anguilla, and so back again to St. Christophers, which he supposed to be the
safest place, as being unknown to any there. Where after he had stayed three
Weeks, he wrote to his Factor in Mevis, to even his Accounts, who upon receipt
of his Letter Discovered him. So that Sir William Stapleton presently sent his
Warrant to St. Christophers, to Apprehend him; but being removed from thence to
Estatia, he was pursued thither, and there taken by the Deputy Governor of St.
Christophers, to whom he submitted, from thence he was sent into England, and
so committed to Newgate.

While he was there he wrote a Paper, which he called, His free Confession and
Narrative, Addressed to His Majesty, and delivered by himself to Mr. Secretary
Jenkins. But there does not appear to be any thing more in it, then what has
been opened and discovered at the Trials of the several Malefactors Executed
before him; unless it were what was to have been Acted in Bristol, which was to
have been secured by surprise, with about 350 Men, of which 200 were to be
raised in and about the City, and the rest to have been sent from Taunton;
toward the conclusion of which Narrative, he tells the World, That he had given
to his Majesty the Names of several other persons, besides those already known,
who were to have been concerned in the Plot: which is all wherein he materially
differs from the rest of the Discoverers:

Being therefore brought to the Bar, and demanded what he had to say, why
Execution should not be awarded against him, upon the attainder of Outlawry for
Treason? he Answered, That he had made an Ingenius Confession to His Majesty,
and begged his Mercy.

Then the Court told him, That notwithstanding the Outlawry against him, if he
had a mind to try the Fact, and thought he could defend himself, he should have
the Liberty.

To which the Prisoner Answered, That he could not undertake to defend himself,
for that he had Confessed before His Majesty, that he was guilty of many things
in the Indictment.

When he came to the place of Execution, he Confessed his Belief of a Plot, and
that he was concerned in it; but notwithstanding his Contrition, he could not
choose but accuse the Government of managing several things ill, and against the
King, and the Kingdoms Interest: and then by way of Direction, he thought it
His Majesty's best way to call a Parliament, and pass an Act of Oblivion for
all the Plotters in England; and then by way Admonition, he wished the King
would Consult his own safety, and the safety of the Nation, and that there
might be an end put to all News-mongers.

He detested the Design upon the King at the Rye, but owned to be in a Plot for
seizing the King, as being informed, That if the King could but once have been
acquainted with those things that were done contrary to his knowledge, he would
have come over to them that stood for his assistance.

Being urged to give the Names of such persons as he had spoken of? he
Answered, It would be a Folly in him to abuse Men that he knew not whether they
would be concerned or no, though he believed, that if he should Name all that
he thought would have been concerned in his Design, he might Name three parts
of London. His last wheedle was, That he had no Design against His Majesty's
Person, but that what was intended, was only for the good of the King and
Kingdom, and that so he supposed it would have been.

The Paper Delivered to the Sheriffs, was but an Epitemy of his Confession to
the King; which has been already said, was no more then an Account of what has
been already Printed in all the considerable Trials of the late Executed
Offenders, or rather not so much.

Lastly, As for his Religion, he professed himself neither a Dissenter from the
Church of England, nor joined with them altogether: concluding his last Words,
That the Scriblers might be put down, as having done the Kingdom more Mischief
then any thing else.

After which being asked whether he had any more to say? he Answered, No; and
then the Sheriff desired of God to have Mercy on his Soul.

FINIS.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE King's Bench AT WESTMINSTER AGAINST Sr.
Thomas Armstrong, Upon an Outlawry for High Treason, upon Saturday June, the
14h. 1684.
BY ANOTHER HAND.
SIR Thomas Armstrong being then brought to the Bar of the said Court by Virtue
of a Writ of Habeas Corpus directed to the Keeper of Newgate, and the return of
the Writ being read by the Clerk of the Crown, it appeared he was in Custody of
the said Keeper, by a Warrant from the Honorable Sidney Godolphin, Esquire; one of
His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Which Warrant being read in
Court, and the Award of Execution upon the Outlawry being demanded by His
Majesty's Attorney General, and Sir Thomas being thereupon Arraigned, and asked
what he had to say for himself, why Execution should not be awarded against him
according to Law? At first he seemed as having nothing to say for himself, only
begged a Trial; which being denied him as a thing, which indeed it was not in
the Power of the Judges themselves to grant, he then insisted upon a Statute
made in the Sixth of Edward the Sixth, by which it was provided, That if the
Person Outlawed, should within one Year after the Outlawry was pronounced, or
Judgment given thereupon, yield himself to the Chief Justice of England for the
time being, and after to Traverse the Indictment, or Appeal, whereupon the said
Outlawry was pronounced, that then he should be received to the Traverse, etc.
And though Sir Thomas pretended to render himself within the Year, being then
present at the Kings-Bench-Bar, yet the Court did not think this a yielding in
the Sense of the Statute, being at that time under restraint, and not at his
own disposal, without any semblance that he would otherwise have yielded up
himself to Justice at all. And indeed it is very strange, that yielding, and
being at Mercy whether a Man will or no, should be Interpreted the same, as if
a voluntary act, and a necessary misfortune, in which we are only passive, were
the same: besides that, he that yields only in this Sense and Circumstance,
when it is impossible for him to fly any longer, is in reason still looked
upon as a flying Person, because his Will still flies though his Body cannot;
and he that in all appearance would still continue to fly if he were able,
there being before his Apprehension, no Antecedent appearance of a voluntary
surrender, is by no means within the Favor of the Traverse, because the Reason
of the Award is founded upon a supposed acknowledgment of Guilt, which is
expressed by flight, and this tacit Acknowledgment does still remain, if the
Person do no otherwise surrender himself but by force, and because it was not
in his Power to have avoided it, though he would never so fain. Sir Thomas
his Affair may be Illustrated by a parallel Instance; Suppose a French Army,
set down before one of the Spanish Towns in Flanders, the General sends a
Summons, and offers such or such Conditions in Case of a surrender before such
a day, which Conditions are rejected by the Governor of the Town, who stands
wholly upon his Defense, and will hear of no sort of Overtures whatsoever: It
so happens upon this, that the Town is taken by Storm before that day comes,
the Question is, Whether Burgess of this Town may lay claim to the performance
of the said Conditions? And my Opinion is, That a Town taken may be as
properly said to yield, as Sir Thomas Armstrong. Besides, that is very strange,
that an Act of Parliament, which is in other Cases so Nice and Circumspect,
sometimes by heaping up Synonimous Words, and all other Words of a different
signification, the better to prevent all exception, should in this be so
careless, as to Confound Liberty and Necessity together, the two things of all
the World that are the most Distant from, and Opposite to one another.

Sir Thomas after this laid what hold he could on the Favor shevvn to
Holloway a little before, but that being merely an Act of Grace from the King,
who is the best Judge, and the only Proprietor of his own Favors; and so not
lying before the Court, after some Altercation, Execution was ordered upon the
Friday following; and for his Behavior at the place of Execution, I refer you
to the Sheriffs Papers.

FINIS.

