The HISTORY of the most famous and most renowned JANNY GEDDES.
WHEN Janny Geddes, well did mark,
Black Papery, wrapped, in a white Sark;
Just when the Service did begin,
The Belldam, thought it, all over, Sin;
Then, up she took, her folding Stool,
And made the Priest, look like a Fool,
When she had almost knocked him down;
Which made proud Prelates, fly the Town;
And then, such Mobbing, did commence,
As proved, of fatal Consequence;
For it produced, that dreadful Cant,
The Solemn League and Covenant --
Which brought about, so great a Change,
As was, most wonderful and strange --
So -- when a scolding Woman, mad is,
She Is called, e're since, A JANNY GEDDES. --
Again, -- Despotick Power commencing,
And with, all penal Laws, dispensing,
There was set forth, a Declaration,
To be proclaimed, all over the Nation,
For universal Toleration --
That every one, might do, by Right,
What, should seem good, in their own Sight,
Which, had they read, in every Church,
Had left their Priestcraft, in the Lurch:
Seven lordly Prelates then, had Meeting,
At Lambeth-House, with doleful Greeting;
Contriving some Way, for their Glories,
Like sturdy Whigs, more like, than Tories:
But, all their Glory was, that they,
Petitioned, in submissive Way,
To be excused -- Since they could plead it,
No Priest of Theirs, was safe, to read it:
Because, against all Law and Reason,
And might be made, a Sort of Treason:
Besides, to give them all their due,
It was, against their Interest too:
No Wonder then, they did abhore it,
And suffer, like true Martyrs for it:
But when absolved, ^s says the Story,
Both, for their own, and Nation's Glory,
It did unite, both Whig and Tory --
Which, brought about, -- What, something, sad is,
Without the Help of Janny Geddes. --
But lo! those Prelates, stood in Awe,
Because, it was against the Law!
Which, we, it is certain, cannot plead,
Since Law, ordains it, to be read:
Yet we, though Lordships disavowed,
And Grace, -- to none of us, allowed;
And though no Lords Spiritual,
Are true, Archbishops, one and all:
And We -- more gloriously, than They,
In Spite of Law, do boldly say, --
We -- neither can, nor will obey. --
Shall we, submit to Laymens Laws.
Such Champions, for The good old Cause?
No sure! For till We say -- Amen, --
They Will find, such Laws, are all in vain.
They might as well presume to teach,
Our Presbyters, to pray, and preach,
As, penal Laws, to make Us, read,
It sets the Lubies, well indeed! --
Christ only, is, Our supreme Head.
But though, Christ -- bids us, when We pray,
No vain Tautologies to say;
And does direct, a Form of Prayer,
Which, GOD, will most delight to hear*
Yet, 'cause it stints, the Spirit's Aid,
Even Christ himself, is not obeyed:
How can they think then, we'll obey
Either, to read, or preach, or pray,
What saucy Laymen, bid us, say.
No Form of Words, that can be made,
Scarce, even The Bible, must be read,
In Presbyterian Kirks, we say;
Because, it is the Prelatick Way.
And even The Creed, and Ten Commands,
'Cause, used, in proud prelatick Lands,
Are banished, by Presbytry,
Which cannot endure Morality. --
When lawful Powers, make lawful Laws,
Which, we think, for our Kirk and Cause;
Their Powers of God, we then, allow it;
But otherwise, -- we disavow it.
They! -- render us incapable!
We'll let them know our Principle,
Is, that, whoever did ordain it,
It Is Sacrilege -- we will maintain it;
For by late Laws of Presbytrie,
When two, or three, or four agree;
Then -- a Secession, we can make,
Both, from the Kirk, and from the State;
And, Church Judicatories be,
When we think fit, whilst we agree.
And should they make it, even High Treason*
Spite of all Law; and Sense, and Reason,
They Will find, that we will be so bold,
Our Benefices, still to hold --
For, though, all Powers by GOD appointed,
It Is we that make the LORD's Anointed*
And so, they will find, old Samuel made,
Saul King -- But when he disobeyed,
The Prophet, made the King to bend;
And 'cause, he did the Mantle rend;
Therefore, he rent the Kingdom, from him*
And then -- great Vengeance fell upon him.
Since then, the Seer, set Saul aside,
To give the Right, to Judah's Tribe:
And since it is so, that we do make 'em;
They Would best take Care, least we forsake 'em;
And leave them, as the Prophet did,
To What the Deil, puts in their Head.
We scorn all Mitres, Crowns, and Copes,
Yet claim, as much Power, as the Popes:
And can proclaim, whenever, we will,
Now! -- To your Tents O Israel, --
If they, had not at all, decreed it,
That we should be compelled, to read it;
We might have read it, if we would;
But no Compulsion, ever did good;
Except, when we think, it may be,
For Benefit of Presbytrie:
But since their Law, so very mad is,
They Will find perhaps -- some Janny Geddes,
May make the Danger, very great;
But let the Wisuks, look to that. --

