ELEMENTS OF PHILOSOPHY, THE FIRST SECTION, CONCERNING BODY. Written in Latin
by THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY. And now translated into ENGLISH. To which are
added Six Lessons to the Professors of Mathematics of the Institution of Sr.
HENRY SAVILE, in the University of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for Andrew Crocke, at the Green Dragon
in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

THE TRANSLATOR To the Reader.
IF when I had finished my Translation of this first Section of the Elements of
Philosophy, I had presently committed the same to the Press, it might have come
to your hands sooner then now it does. But as I undertook it with much
diffidence of my own ability to perform it well; so I thought fit before I
published it, to pray Mr. Hobbes to view, correct and order it according to his
own mind and pleasure. Wherefore, though you find some places enlarged, others
altered, and two Chapters (the 18th and 20th) almost wholly changed, you may
nevertheless remain assured, that as now I present it to you, it does not at
all vary from the Authors own sense and meaning. As for the six Lessons to the
Savilian Professors at Oxford, they are not of my translation, but were
written, as here you have them in English, by Mr. Hobbes himself; and are
joined to this Book, because they are chiefly in defense of the same.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatory, TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, My most Honored LORD,
WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire.
THis first Section of the Elements of Philosophy, the Monument of my Service,
and your Lordships bounty, though (after the third Section published) long
deferred, yet at last finished, I now present (my most Excellent Lord) and
dedicate to your Lordship. A little Book* but full; and great enough, if men
count well for great; and to an attentive Reader versed in the Demonstrations
of Mathematicians that is, to your Lordship (...) and easy to understand; and
almost new througho^^* without any offensive Novelty. I know that that part of
Philosophy wherein are considered Lines and Figures, has been delivered to us
notably improved by the Ancients; and withal a most perfect pattern of the
Logique by which they were enabled to find out and demonstrate such excellent
Theoremes as they have done. I know also that the Hypothesis of the Earths
Diurnal Motion was the invention of the Ancients; but that both it, and
Astronomy (that is, Celestial Physiques) springing up together with it, were
by succeeding Philosophers strangled with the snares of Words. And therefore
the beginning of Astronomy (except Observations) I think is not to be derived
from farther time then from Nicolaus Copernicus; who in the Age next preceding
the present, revived the opinion of Pythagoras, Aristarchus and Philolaus.
After him, the Doctrine of the Motion of the Earth being now received, and a
difficult Question thereupon arising concerning the Descent of Heavy Bodies,
Galilaeus in our time striving with that difficulty, was the first that opened
to us the (...) Natural Philosophy Universal, which is the knowledge of the
Nature of Motion. So that neither can the Age of Natural Philosophy be reckoned
higher then to him. Lastly, the Science of Man's Body, the most profitable part
of Natural Science, was first discovered with admirable sagacity by our
Countryman Doctor Harvey, principal Physician to King James and King Charles,
in his Books of the Motion of the Blood and of the Generation of Living
Creatures; who is the only man I know, that conquering envy, has established
a new Doctrine in his life time. Before these, there was nothing certain in
Natural Philosophy but every man's Experiments to himself, and the Natural
Histories, if they may be called certain, that are no certainer then Civil
Histories* But since these, Astronomy and Natural Philosophy in general have
for so little time been extraordinarily advanced by Joannes Keplerus, Petrus
Gassendus, and Marinus Mersennus; and the Science of Humane Bodies in special
by the wit and industry of Physicians (the only true Natural Philosophers)
especially of our most Learned Men of the College of Physicians in London.
Natural Philosophy is therefore but young; but Civil Philosophy yet much
younger, as being no older (I say it provoked, and that my Detractors may know
how little they have wrought upon me) then my own Book de Cive. But what? Were
there no Philosophers Natural nor Civil among the ancient Greeks? There were
men so called; Witness Lucian, by whom they are derided; Witness diverse Cities,
from which they have been often by public Edicts banished. But it follows not
that there was Philosophy. There walked in old Greece a certain Phantasme, for
superficial gravity (though full within of fraud and filth) a little like
Philosophy; which unwary men thinking to be it, adhered to the Professors of
it, some to one, some to another (though they disagreed among themselves) and
with great Salary put their children to them to be taught, in stead of Wisdom,
nothing but to dispute; and neglecting the Laws, to determine every Question*
according to their own fancies. The first Doctors of the Church next the
Apostles, born in those times, whilst they endeavored to defend the Christian
Faith against the Gentiles by Natural Reason, began also to make use of
Philosophy, and with the Decrees of Holy Scripture to mingle the Sentences of
Heathen Philosophers; and first some harmless ones of Plato; but afterward
also many foolish and false ones out of the Physics and Metaphysics of
Aristotle; and bringing in the Enemies betrayed unto them the Citadel of
Christianity From that time, in stead of the Worship of God, there entered a
thing called School Divinity, walking on one foot firmly, which is the Holy
Scripture, but halted on the other rotten foot, which the Apostle Paul called
Vain, and might have called Pernicious Philosophy; for it has raised an
infinite number of Controversies in the Christian World concerning Religion,
and from those Controversies Wars. It is like that Empusa in the Athenian
Comic Poet, which was taken in Athens for a Ghost that changed shapes, having
one brazenleg, but the other was the leg of an Ass, and was sent (as was
believed) by Hecate, as a sign of some approaching evil fortune. Against this
Empusa I think there cannot be invented a better Exorcisme, then to distinguish
between the Rules of Religion, that is, the Rules of Honoring God, which we
have from the Laws, and the Rules of Philosophy, that is, the Opinions of
private men; and to yield what is due to Religion to the Holy Scripture, and
what is due to Philosophy to Natural Reason. And this I shall do, if I but
handle the Elements of Philosophy truly and clearly* as I endeavor to do.
Therefore having in the ^d Section which I have published and dedicated to your
Lordship long since* reduced all Power Ecclesiastical and Civil by strong
Argu^en^^ of Reason, without repugnance to Gods Word, to one and the same
Sovereign Authority; I intend now, by putting into a clear Method the true
Foundations of Natural Philosophy, to fright and drive away this Metaphysical
Empusa; not by skirmish, but by letting in the light upon her. For I am
confident (if any confidence of a Writing can proceed from the Writers fear,
circumspection and diffidence) that in the three former parts of this Book, all
that I have said is sufficiently demonstrated from Definitions; and all in the
fourth part, from Suppositions not absurd. But if there appear to your Lordship
any thing less fully demonstrated then to satisfy every Reader, the cause was
this, that I professed to write not all to all, but some things to
Geometricians only. But that your Lordship will be satisfied J cannot doubt.

There remains the second Section, which is concerning Man. That part thereof
where J handle the Optiques, containing six Chapters, together with the Tables
of the Figures belonging to them, I have already written and engravenlying by
me above these six years. The rest shall, as soon as J can, be added to it;
though by the contumelies and petty injuries of some unskilful men, I know
already by experience how much greater thanks will be due, then paid me, for
telling Men the truth of what Men are. But the burden I have taken on me I
mean to carry through; not striving to appease, but rather to revenge my self
of Envy, by increasing it. For it contents me that I have your Lordships
favor; which, (being all you require) J acknowledge; and for which, with my
prayers to Almighty God for your Lordships safety, J shall (to my power) be
always thankful.

London, April 23, 1655. YOUR LORDSHIPS most humble Servant Thomas Hobbes.

The Authors Epistle To the Reader.
THink not (courteous Reader) that the Philosophy the Elements whereof I am
going to set in order, is that which makes Philosophers Stones, nor that which
is found in the Metaphsique Codes. But that it is the Natural Reason of Man
busily flying up and down among the Creatures, and bringing back a true report
of their Order, Causes and Effects. Philosophy therefore, the Child of the
World and your own Mind, is within your self; perhaps not fashioned yet, but
like the World its Father, as it was in the beginning, a thing confused. Do
therefore as the Statuaries do, who by hewing off that which is superfluous, do
not make but find the Image. Or imitate the Creation. If you will be a
Philosopher in good earnest, let your Reason move upon the Deep of your own
Cogitations and Experience. Those things that lie in Confusion must be set
asunder, distinguished, and every one stamped with its own name set in order;
that is to say, your Method must resemble that of the Creation. The order of
the Creation was, Light, Distinction of Day and Night, the Firmament, the
Luminaries, Sensible Creatures, Man; and after the Creation, the Commandment.
Therefore the order of Contemplation will be, Reason, Definition, Space, the
Stars, Sensible Quality, Man; and after Man is grown up, Subjection to
Command. In the first part of this Section which is entitled Logique, I set up
the light of Reason. In the Second (which has for title the Grounds of
Philosophy) I distinguish the most common Notions by accurate definition, for
the avoiding of confusion and obscurity. The third part concerns the Expansion
of Space, that is, Geometry. The fourth contains the Motion of the Stars,
together with the doctrine of Sensible Qualities.

In the second Section (if it please God) shall be handled Man. In the third
Section the doctrine of Subjection is handled already. This is the Method I
followed; and if it like you you may use the same; for I do but propound, not
commend to you any thing of mine. But whatsoever shall be the Method you will
like, I would very fain commend Philosophy to you, that is to say, the study of
Wisdom, for want of which we have all suffered much damage lately. For even
they that study Wealth, do it out of love to Wisdom; for their Treasures serve
them but for a Looking-glass, wherein to behold and contemplate their own
Wisdom. Nor do they that love to be employed in public business, aim at any
thing but place wherein to show their Wisdom. Neither do Voluptuous men
neglect Philosophy, but only because they know not how great a pleasure it is
to the Mind of Man to be ravished in the vigorous and perpetual embraces of the
most beauteous World. Lastly, though for nothing else, yet (because the Mind of
Man is no less impatient of Empty Time, then Nature is of Empty Place) to the
end you be not* forced for want of what to do, to be troublesome to men that
have business, or take hurt by falling into idle Company, but have somewhat of
your own wherewith to fill up your time, I recommend unto you the Study of
Philosophy. Farewell.

T. H.

The Titles of the CHAPTERS.
The first Part, or Logique.
CHAP. 1 Of Philosophy. CHAP. 2 Of Names. CHAP. 3 Of Proportion. CHAP. 4 Of
Syllogism. CHAP. 5 Of Erring, Falsity and Captions. CHAP. 6 Of Method.
The Second Part, or The first Grounds of Philosophy.
CHAP. 7 Of Place and Time. CHAP. 8 Of Body and Accident. CHAP. 9 Of Cause and
Effect. CHAP. 10 Of Power and Act. CHAP. 11 Of Identity and Difference. CHAP.
12 Of Quantity. CHAP. 13 Of Analogisme, or the Same Proportion. CHAP. 14 Of
Straight and Crocked, Angle and Figure.
The third Part, Of the Proportions of Motions and Magnitudes.
CHAP. 15 Of the Nature, Properties, and diverse considerations, of Motion and
Endeavor. CHAP. 16 Of Motion Accelerated and Uniform, and of Motion by
Concourse. CHAP. 17 Of Figures Deficient. CHAP. 18 Of the Equation of Straight
Lines, which the Crooked Lines of Parabolas, and other Figures made in
imitation of Parabolas. CHAP. 19 Of Angles of Incidence and Reflection, equal by
supposition. CHAP. 20 Of the Dimension of a Circle, and the Division of Arches
or Angles. CHAP. 21 Of Circular Motion. CHAP. 22 Of other Variety of Motions.
CHAP. 23 Of the Center of Equiponderation of Bodies pressing downwards in
straight parallel lines. CHAP. 24 Of Refraction and Reflection.
The fourth Part, of Physiques, or the Phenomenon of Nature.
CHAP. 25 Of Sense and Animal Motion. CHAP. 26 Of the World and of the
Stars. CHAP. 27 Of Light, Heat, and of Colors. CHAP. 28 Of Cold, Wind, Hard,
Ice, Restitution of Bodies bent, Diaphanous, Lightning and Thunder, and of the
Heads of Rivers. CHAP. 29 Of Sound, Odor, Savor, and Touch. CHAP. 30 Of
Gravity.
COMPUTATION OR LOGIQUE.
CHAP. I. Of Philosophy.
1* The Introduction. 2 The Definition of Philosophy explained. 3 Ratiocination
of the Mind. 4 Properties what they are. 5 How Properties are known by
Generation, and contrarily. 6 The Scope of Philosophy. 7 The Utility of it. 8
The Subject. 9 The Parts of it. 10 The Epilogue.
PHILOSOPHY seems to me to be amongst men now, in the same manner as Corn and
Wine are said to have been in the world in ancient time. For from the beginning
there were Vines and Ears of Corn growing here and there in the fields; but no
care was taken for the planting and sowing of them. Men lived therefore upon
Akorns; or if any were so bold as to venture upon the eating of those unknown
and doubtful fruits, they did it with danger of their health. In like manner,
every man brought Philosophy, that is, Natural Reason, into the world with
him; for all men can reason to some degree, and concerning some things: but
where there is need of a long series of Reasons, there most men wander out of
the way, and fall into Error for want of Method, as it were for want of sowing
and planting, that is, of improving their Reason. And from hence it comes to
pass, that they who content themselves with daily experience, which may be
likened to feeding upon Akorns, and either reject, or not much regard
Philosophy, are commonly esteemed, and are indeed, men of sounder judgment,
then those, who from opinions, though not vulgar, yet full of uncertainty, and
carelessly received, do nothing but dispute and wrangle, like men that are not
well in their wits. I confess indeed, that that part of Philophy by which
Magnitudes and Figures are computed, is highly improved. But because I have not
observed the like advancement in the other parts of it, my purpose is, as far
forth as I am able, to lay open the few and first Elements of Philosophy in
general, as so many Seeds, from which pure and true Philosophy may hereafter
spring up by little and little.

I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is to weed out of men's minds such
inveterate opinions as have taken root there, and been confirmed in them by the
authority of most eloquent Writers; especially, seeing true (that is accurate)
Philosophy, professedly rejects not only the paint and false colors of
Language, but even the very ornaments and graces of the same; and the first
Grounds of all Science, are not only not beautiful, but poor, aride, and in
appearance deformed. Nevertheless, there being certainly some men, though but
few, who are delighted with Truth and strength of Reason in all things, I
thought I might do well to take this pains for the sake even of those few. I
proceed therefore to the matter, and take my beginning from the very Definition
of Philosophy, which is this.

2 PHILOSOPHY is such knowledge of Effects or Appearances, as we acquire by
true Ratiocination from the knowledge we have first of their Causes or
Generation: And again, of such Causes or Generations as may be from knowing
first their Effects.

For the better understanding of which Definition, we must consider; first,
that although Sense and Memory of things, which are common to Man and all
living Creatures, be Knowledge, yet because they are given us immediately by
Nature, and not gotten by Ratiocination, they are not Philosophy.

Secondly, Seeing Experience is nothing but Memory; and Prudence, or Prospect
into the future time, nothing but Expectation of such things as we have already
had experience of, Prudence also is not to be esteemed Philosophy.

By RATIOCINATION, I mean Computation. Now to compute, is either to collect the
sum of many things that are added together, or to know what remains when one
thing is taken out of another. Ratiocination therefore is the same with
Addition and Substraction; and if any man add Multiplication and Division, I
will not be against it, seeing Multiplication is nothing but Addition of equals
one to another, and Division nothing but a Substraction of equals one from
another, as often as is possible. So that all Ratiocination is comprehended in
these two operations of the mind, Addition and Substraction.

3 But how by the Ratiocination of our Mind, we Add and Substract in our
silent thoughts, without the use of words, it will be necessary for me to make
intelligible by an example or two. If therefore a man see something a far off
and obscurely, although no appellation had yet been given to any thing, he will
notwithstanding have the same Idea of that thing, for which now by imposing a
name on it, we call it Body. Again, when by coming nearer, he sees the same
thing thus and thus, now in one place and now in another, he will have a new
Idea thereof, namely that, for which we now call such a thing Animated.
Thirdly, when standing nearer he perceives the figure, hears the voice, and
sees other things, which are signs of a Rational mind, he has a third Idea,
though it have yet no appellation, namely, that for which we now call any thing
Rational. Lastly, when by looking fully and distinctly upon it he conceaves
all that he has seen as one thing, the Idea he has now, is compounded of his
former Ideas, which are put together in the Mind, in the same order, in which
these three single names Body, Animated, Rational, are in speech compounded
into this one name Body-Animated-Rationall, or Man. In like manner, of the
several conceptions of four sides, equality of sides, and right angles, is
compounded the conception of a Square. For the mind may conceive a figure of
four sides without any conception of their equality; and of that equality
without conceiving a right angle; and may join together all these single
conceptions into one conception or one Idea of a Square. And thus we see how
the Conceptions of the mind are compounded. Again, whosoever sees a man
standing near him, conceives the whole Idea of that man; and if as he goes away
he follow him with his eyes only, he will lose the Idea of those things which
were signs of his being Rational, whilst nevertheless the Idea of a
Body-Animated remains still before his eyes; so that the Idea of Rational is
subtracted from the whole Idea of Man, that is to say of
Body-Animated-Rationall, and there remains that of Body-Animated; and a while
after at a greater distance the Idea of Animated will be lost, and that of Body
only will remain; so that at last, when nothing at all can be seen, the whole
Idea will vanish out of sight. By which examples, I think it is manifest
enough, what is the internal Ratiocination of the Mind, without words.

We must not therefore think that Computation, that is, Ratiocination, has
place only in numbers; as if man were distinguished from other living
Creatures (which is said to have been the opinion of Pythagoras) by nothing but
the faculty of numbering; for Magnitude, Body, Motion, Time, Degrees of Quality,
Action, Conception, Proportion, Speech and Names (in which all the kinds of
Philosophy consist) are capable of Addition and Substraction. Now such things
as we add or substract, that is, which we put into an account, we are said to
consider, in Greek (...); in which language also (...) signifies to Compute,
Reason or Reckon.

4 But Effects and the Appearances of things to sense, are faculties or Powers
of Bodies, which make us distinguish them from one another; that is to say,
conceive one Body to be equal or unequal, like or unlike to another Body; as
in the example above, when by coming near enough to any Body, we perceive the
Motion and Going of the same, we distinguish it thereby from a Tree, a Column
and other fixed Bodies; and so that motion, or going is the Property thereof,
as being proper to living creatures, and a faculty by which they make us
distinguish them from other Bodies.

5 How the knowledge of any Effect may be gotten from the knowledge of the
Generation thereof, may easily be understood by the example of a Circle: For if
there be set before us a plain figure having as near as may be the figure of a
Circle, we cannot possibly perceive by sense whether it be a true Circle or no;
then which nevertheless nothing is more easy to be known, to him that knows
first the Generation of the propounded figure. For let it be known that the
figure was made by the circumduction of a Body whereof one end remained
unmoved, and we may reason thus; a Body carried about, retaining always the
same length, applies it self first to one Radius, then to another, to a third,
a fourth, and successively to all; and therefore the same length, from the same
point, touches the circumference in every part thereof; which is as much to
say as all the Radii are equal. We know therefore that from such generation
proceeds a figure, from whose one middle point all the extreme points are
reached unto by equal Radii. And in like manner, by knowing first what figure
is set before us, we may come by Ratiocination to some Generation of the same,
though perhaps not that by which it was made, yet that by which it might have
been made; for he that knows that a Circle has the property above declared,
will easily know whether a Body carried about, as is said, will generate a
Circle or no.

6 The End or Scope of Philosophy, is, that we may make use to our benefit of
effects formerly seen; or that by application of Bodies to one another; we may
produce the like effects of those we conceive in our mind, as far forth as
matter, strength and industry will permit, for the commodity of humane life.
For he inward glory and triumph of mind that a man may have, for the mastering
of some difficult and doutfull matter, or for the discovery of some hidden
truth, is not worth so much pains as the study of Philosophy requires; nor
need any man care much to teach another what he knows himself, if he think
that will be the only benefit of his labor. The end of Knowledge is Power;
and the use of Theoremes (which among Geometricians serve for the finding out
of Properties) is for the construction of Problemes; and lastly, the scope of
all speculation is the performing of some action, or thing to be done.

7 But what the Utility of Philosophy is, especially of Natural Philosophy and
Geometry, will be best understood by reckoning up the chief commodities of
which mankind is capable; and by comparing the manner of life of such as enjoy
them, with that of others which want the same. Now the greatest commodities of
mankind are the Arts, namely of measuring Matter and Motion; of moving
ponderous Bodies; of Architecture; of Navigation; of making instruments for all
uses; of calculating the Celestial Motions, the Aspects of the Stars, and the
parts of Time; of Geography, etc. By which Sciences, how great benefits men
receive, is more easily understood then expressed. These benefits are enjoyed
by almost all the people of Europe, by most of those of Asia, and by some of
Africa; but the Americans, and they that live near the Poles do totally want
them. But why? Have they sharper wits then these? Have not all men one kind of
soul, and the same faculties of mind? What then makes this difference, except
Philosophy? Philosophy therefore is the cause of all these benefits. But the
Utility of Moral and Civil Philosophy is to be estimated not so much by the
commodities we have by knowing these Sciences, as by the calamities we receive
from not knowing them. Now all such calamities as may be avoided by humane
industry arise from war, but chiefly from Civil war; for from this proceed
Slaughter, Solitude, and the want of all things. But the cause of war is not
that men are willing to have it; for the Will has nothing for Object but Good,
at least that which seems good. Nor is it from this, that men know not that
the effects of war are evil; for who is there that thinks not poverty and loss
of life to be great evils? The cause therefore of Civil war, is that men
know not the causes neither of War nor Peace, there being but few in the
world that have learned those duties which unite and keep men in peace, that is
to say, that have learned the rules of civil life sufficiently. Now the
knowledge of these rules is Moral Philosophy. But why have they not learned
them, unless for this reason that none hitherto have taught them in a clear
and exact method? For what shall we say? Could the ancient Masters of Greece,
Egypt, Rome, and others persuade the unskillfull multitude to their innumerable
opinions concerning the nature of their Gods, which they themselves knew not
whether they were true or false, and which were indeed manifestly false and
absurd; and could they not persuade the same multitude to civil duty, if they
themselves had understood it? Or shall those few writings of Geometricians
which are extant, be thought sufficient for the taking away of all controversy
in the matters they treat of, and shall those innumerable and huge Volumes of
Ethics be thought unsufficient, if what they teach had been certain and well
demonstrated? What then can be imagined to be the cause that the writings of
those men have increased science, and the writings of these have increased
nothing but words, saving that the former were written by men that knew, and
the later by such as knew not the doctrine they taught only for ostentation of
their wit and eloquence? Nevertheless, I deny not but the reading of some such
books is very delightful; for they are most eloquently written, and contain
many clear, wholesome and choice sentences; which yet are not universally true,
though by them universally pronounced. From whence it comes to pass, that the
circumstances of times, places and persons being changed, they are no less
frequently made use of to confirm wicked men in their purposes, then to make
them understand the precepts of Civil duties. Now that which is chiefly
wanting in them, is a true and certain rule of our actions, by which we might
know whether that we undertake be just or unjust. For it is to no purpose to be
bidden in every thing to do Right, before there be a certain Rule and measure
of Right established; which no man hitherto has established. Seeing therefore
from the not knowing of Civil duties, that is, from the want of Moral science
proceed Civil wars, and the greatest calamities of mankind, we may very well
attribute to such science the production of the contrary commodities. And thus
much is sufficient, to say nothing of the praises and other contentment
proceeding from Philosophy, to let you see the Utility of the same in every
kind thereof.

8 The Subject of Philosophy, or the matter it treats of, is every Body of
which we can conceive any generation, and which we may by any consideration
thereof compare with other Bodies; or which is capable of composition and
resolution; that is to say, every Body, of whose Generation or Properties we
can have any knowledge.. And this may be deduced from the Definition of
Philosophy, whose profession it is to search out the Properties of Bodies from
their Generation, or their Generation from their Properties; and therefore
where there is no Generation nor Property, there is no Philosophy. Therefore it
excludes Theology, I mean the doctrine of God, Eternal, Ingenerable,
Incomprehensible, and in whom there is nothing neither to divide nor compound,
nor any Generation to be conceived.

It excludes the doctrine of Angels; and all such things as are thought to be
neither Bodies, nor properties of Bodies; there being in them no place neither
for composition, nor division, nor any capacity of more and less; that is to
say, no place for Ratiocination.

It excludes History, as well Natural as Political, though most useful (nay
necessary) to Philosophy; because such Knowledge is but Experience, or
Authority, and not Ratiocination.

It excludes all such Knowledge as is acquired by Divine Inspiration, or
Revelation, as not derived to us by Reason, but by Divine grace in an instant,
and as it were by some sense supernatural.

It excludes, not only all Doctrines which are false, but such also as are not
well grounded; for whatsoever we know by right Ratiocination, can neither be
false nor doubtful; and therefore Astrology, as it is now held forth, and all
such Divinations rather then sciences, are excluded.

Lastly, the doctrine of Gods Worship is excluded from Philosophy, as being not
to be known by natural reason, but by the authority of the Church; and as
being the object of Faith, and not of Knowledge.

9 The principal parts of Philosophy are two. For two chief kinds of Bodies,
and very different from one another, offer themselves to such as search after
their Generation and Properties; One whereof being the work of Nature, is
called a Natural Body; the other is called a Commonwealth, and is made by the
wills and agreement of men. And from these spring the two parts of Philosophy
called Natural and Civil. But seeing that for the knowledge of the Properties
of a Commonwealth, it is necessary first to know the Dispositions, Affections
and Manners of men, Civil Philosophy is again commonly divided into two
parts; whereof one which treats of men's Dispositions and Manners is called
Ethics, and the other which takes cognizance of their Civil Duties is caled
Politics or simply Civil Philosophy. In the first place therefore (after I
have set down such Premises as appertain to the nature of Philosophy in
general) I will discourse of Bodies Natural; in the second, of the
Dispositions and Manners of men; and in the third, of the Civil Duties of
Subjects.

10 To conclude, seeing there may be many who will not like this my Definition
of Philosophy, and will say that from the liberty which a man may take of so
defining as seems best to himself, he may conclude any thing from any thing
(though I think it no hard matter to demonstrate, that this Definition of mine
agrees with the sense of all men;) yet lest in this point there should be any
cause of dispute betwixt me and them, I here undertake no more then to deliver
the Elements of that Science, by which the Effects of any thing may be found
out from the known Generation of the same, or contrarily the Generation from
the Effects; to the end that they who search after other Philosophy, may be
admonished to seek it from other Principles.

CHAP. II. Of Names.
1 The necessity of sensible Moniments or Marks for the help of Memory, A Mark
defined. 2 The necessity of Marks for the signification of the conceptions of
the Mind. 3 Names supply both those necessities. 4 The Definition of a Name. 5
Names are Signs not of Things, but of our Cogitations. 6 What it is we give
Names to. 7 Names Positive and Negative. 8 Contradictory Names. 9 A Common
Name. 10 Names of the first and second Intention. 11 Universal, Particular,
Individual, and Indefinite Names. 12 Names Univocall and Equivocal. 13
Absolute and Relative Names. 14 Simple and Compounded Names. 15 A Praedicament
described. 16 Some things to be noted concerning Praedicaments.
1 HOw unconstant and fading men's thoughts are, and how much the recovery of
them depends upon chance, there is none but knows by infallible experience in
himself. For no man is able to remember Quantities without sensible and present
Measures, nor Colors without sensible and present Patterns, nor Number without
the Names of Numbers disposed in order and learned by heart. So that whatsoever
a man has put together in his mind by ratiocination without such helps, will
presently slip from him, and not be revocable but by beginning his
ratiocination anew. From which it follows, that for the acquiring of
Philosophy some sensible Moniments are necessary, by which our past thoughts
may be not only reduced, but also registered every one in its own order. These
Moniments I call MARKS, namely, sensible things taken at pleasure, that by the
sense of them such thoughts may be recalled to our mind, as are like those
thoughts for which we [took them.]

2 Again, though some one man, of how excellent a wit soever, should spend all
his time, partly in reasoning and partly in inventing Marks for the help of his
memory, and advancing himself in learning; who sees not, that the benefit he
reapes to himself will not be much, and to others none at all? For unless he
communicate his notes with others, his science will perish with him. But if the
same notes be made common to many, and so one man's inventions be taught to
others, sciences will thereby be increased to the general good of mankind. It
is therefore necessary for the acquiring of Philosophy that there be certain
Signs, by which what one man finds out may be manifested and made known to
others. Now those things we call SIGNS, are the Antecedents of their
Consequents, and the Consequents of their Antecedents, as often as we observe
them to go before or follow after in the same manner. For example, a thick
Cloud is a Sign of Rain to follow; and Rain a Sign, that a Cloud has gone
before, for this reason only, that we seldom see Clouds without the
Consequence of Rain, nor Rain at any time but when a Cloud has gone before. And
of Signs some are Natural, whereof I have already given an example; others are
Arbitrary, namely, those we make choice of at our own pleasure; as a bush hung
up, signifies that Wine is to be sold there; a stone set in the ground,
signifies the bound of a field; and words so and so connected, signify the
Cogitations and Motions of our Mind. The difference therefore betwixt Marks
and Signs is this, that we make those for our own use, but these for the use
of others.

3 Words so connected, as that they become signs of our Thoughts, are called
SPEECH, of which every part is a Name. But seeing (as is said) both Marks and
Signs are necessary for the acquiring of Philosophy, (Marks by which we may
remember our own thoughts, and Signs by which we may make our thoughts known
to others,) Names do both these offices; but they serve for Marks before they
be used as Signs. For though a man were alone in the world, they would be
useful to him in helping him to remember; but to teach others, (unless there
were some others to be taught,) of no use at all. Again, Names* though standing
singly by themselves, are Marks, because they serve to recall our own thoughts
to mind; but they cannot be Signs, otherwise then by being disposed and
ordered in Speech, as parts of the same. For example, a man may begin with a
word, whereby the hearer may frame an Idea of something in his mind, which
nevertheless he cannot conceive to be the Idea which was in the mind of him
that spoke, but that he would say something which began with that word, though
perhaps not as by it self, but as part of another word. So that the nature of
a name consists principally in this, that it is a Mark ta ken for Memories
sake; but it serves also by accident, to signify and make known to others what
we remember our selves; and therefore I will define it thus:

4 A NAME is a Word taken at pleasure to serve for a Mark, which may raise in
our Mind a thought like to some thought we had before, and which being
pronounced to others, may be to them a Sign of what thought the speaker had or
had not before in his mind. And it is for brevities sake that I suppose the
Original of Names to be Arbitrary, judging it a thing that maybe assumed as
unquestionable. For considering that new Names are daily made, and old ones
laid aside; that diverse Nations use different Names, and how impossible it is
either to observe similitude, or make any comparison betwixt a Name and a
Thing, how can any man imagine that the Names of Things were imposed from their
natures? For though some Names of living creatures and other things, which our
first Parents used, were taught by God himself; yet they were by him
arbitrarily imposed, and afterward both at the Tower of Babel, and since in
process of time, growing every where out of use, are quite forgotten, and in
their rooms have succeeded others, invented and received by men at pleasure.
Moreover, whatsoever the common use of words be, yet Philosophers, who were to
teach their knowledge to others, had always the liberty, and sometimes they
both had and will have a necessity, of taking to themselves such Names as they
please for the signifying of their meaning, if they would have it understood.
Nor had Mathematicians need to ask leave of any but themselves to name the
figures they invented Parabolas, Hyperboles, Cissoeides, Quadratrices, etc. or
to call one Magnitude A, another B.

5 But seeing Names ordered in speech (as is defined) are signs of our
Conceptions, it is manifest they are not signs of the Things themselves; for
that the sound of this word Stone should be the sign of a Stone, cannot be
understood in any sense but this, that he that hears it, collects that he that
pronouunces it thinks of a Stone. And therefore that disputation, whether
Names signify the Matter or Form, or something compounded of both, and other
like subtleties of the Metaphysics, is kept up by erring men, and such as
understand not the words they dispute about.

6 Nor indeed is it at all necessary that every Name should be the Name of some
Thing. For as these, a Man, a Tree, a Stone, are the Names of the Things
themselves; so the Images of a Man, of a Tree and of a stone, which are
represented to men sleeping, have their Names also, though they be not Things,
but only fictions and Phantasmes of things. For we can remember these; and
therefore it is no less necessary that they have Names to mark and signify
them, then the Things themselves. Also this word Future is a Name, but no
future thing has yet any being, nor do we know whether that which we call
Future, shall ever have a being or no. Nevertheless, seeing we use in our mind
to knit together things Past with those that are Present, the Name Future
serves to signify such knitting together. Moreover, that which neither is, nor
has been, nor ever shall or ever can be, has a name, namely, That which neither
is, nor has been, etc. Or more briefly this, Impossible. To conclude, this word
Nothing, is a name, which yet cannot be the name of any thing. For when (for
example) we substract 2 and 3 from 5, and so nothing remaining we would call
that substraction to mind, this speech Nothing remains, and in it the word
Nothing is not unusefull. And for the same reason we say truly Less then
Nothing remains, when we substract More from Less; for the mind feigns such
remains as these for Doctrines sake, and desires as often as is necessary, to
call the same to memory. But seeing every name has some relation to that which
is named, though that which we name be not always a thing that has a being in
Nature, yet it is lawful for Doctrines sake to apply the word Thing, to
whasoever we name; as if it were all one whether that thing be truly existent
or be only feigned.

7 The first distinction of Names, is that some are Positive, or Affirmative;
others Negative, which are also called Privative and Indefinite* Positive are
such as we impose for the likeness, Equality or Identity of the things we
consider; Negative for the diversity, Unliknesse, or Inequality of the same.
Examples of the former are a Man, a Philosopher; for a Man denotes any one of a
multitude of men, and a Philosopher any one of many Philosophers by reason of
their similitude; Also Socrates is a Positive name, because it signifies
always one and the same man. Examples of Negatives are such Positives as have
the Negative particle Not added to them, as Not-Man, Not-Philosopher. But
Positives were before Negatives; for otherwise there could have been no use at
all of these. For when the name of White was imposed upon certain things, and
afterward upon other things the names of Black, Blew, Transparent, etc. the
infinite dissimilitudes of these with White could not be comprehended in any
one Name, save that which had in it the Negation of White, that is to say, the
Name Not-White, or some other equivalent to it, in which the word White is
repeated, such as Unlike to white, etc. And by these Negative*names, we take
notice our selves, and signify to others what we have not thought of.

8 Positive and Negative names are Contradictory to one another, so that they
cannot both be the name of the same thing. Besides, of Contradictory names, one
is the name of any thing whatsoever; for whatsoever is, is either Man or
Not-man, White or Notwhite, and so of the rest. And this is so manifest, that
it needs no further proof or explication; for they that say the same thing
cannot both be, and not be, speak obscurely; but they that say, Whatsoever is,
either is, or is not, speak also absurdly and ridiculously. The certainty of
this Axiom, viz. Of two Contradictory Names, one is the Name of any thing
whatsoever, the other not, is the original and foundation of all
Ratiocination, that is, of all Philosophy; and therefore it ought to be so
exactly propounded, that it may be of it self clear and perspicuous to all
men; as indeed it is, saving to such, as reading the long discourses made upon
this subject by the Writers of Metaphysics (which they believe to be some
egregious learning) think they understand not, when they do.

9 Secondly, of Names, some are Common to many things, as a Man, a Tree; others
Proper to one thing, as he that writ the Iliad, Homer, this man, that man. And
a Common name, being the name of many things severally taken, but not
collectively of all together (as Man is not the name of all mankind, but of
every one, as of Peter, John, and the rest severally) is therefore called an
Universal name; and therefore this word Universal is never the name of any
thing existent in nature, nor of any Idea or Phantasme formed in the mind, but
always the name of some word or name; so that when a Living creature, a Stone,
a Spirit, or any other thing is said to be Universal, it is not to be
understood, that any Man, Stone, etc. ever was or can be Universal, but only
that these words, Living creature, Stone, etc. are Universal names, that is,
Names common to many things; and the Conceptions answering them in our mind,
are the Images and Phantasmes of several Living Creatures, or other things.
And therefore for the understanding of the extent of an Universal name, we need
no other faculty but that of our imagination, by which we remember that such
names bring sometimes one thing, sometimes another into our mind. Also of
Common Names some are more, some less Common. More Common, is that which is
the name of more things; Less Common, the name of fewer things. As
Living-Creature is more Common then Man, or Horse or Lion, because it
comprehends them all; and therefore a more Common name, in respect of a less
Common, is called the Genus or a General name; and this in respect of that,
the Species, or a Special Name.

10 And from hence proceeds the third distinction of Names, which is, that some
are called names of the First, others of the Second Intention. Of the first
Intention are the names of Things, a Man, Stone, etc. of the second are the
names of names and speeches, as Universal, Particular, Genus, Species,
Syllogism, and the like. But it is hard to say why those are called names of
the First, and these of the Second Intention, unless perhaps it was first
intended by us to give names to those things which are of daily use in this
life, and afterward to such things as appertain to science, that is, that our
Second Intention was to give names to Names. But whatsoever the cause hereof
may be, yet this is manifest, that Genus, Species, Definition, etc. are names
of Words and Names only; and therefore to put Genus and Species for Things,
and Definition for the nature of any thing, as the Writers of Metaphysics have
done, is not right, seeing they be only significations of what we think of the
nature of Things.

11 Fourthly, some Names are of certain* and determined, others of uncertain
and undetermined signification. Of determined and certain signification is,
first, that name which is given to any one thing by it self, and is called an
Individual Name; as Homer, this tree, that living Creature, etc. Secondly that
which has any of these words All, Every, Both, Either, or the like added to it;
and it is therefore called an Universal Name, because it signifies every one
of those things to which it is Common; and of certain signification for this
reason, that he which hears, conceives in his mind the same thing that he
which speaks would have him conceive. Of Indefinite signification is, first,
that Name which has the word some, or the like added to it, and is called a
Particular name; Secondly a Common Name set by it self without any note either
of Universality or Particularity, as Man, Stone, and is called an Indefinite
Name; but both Particular and Indefinite names are of uncertain signification,
because the Hearer knows not what thing it is the Speaker would have him
conceive; and therefore in Speech, Particular and Indefinite names are to be
esteemed equivalent to one another. But these words, All, Every, Some, etc.
which denote Universality and Particularity, are not Names, but parts only of
Names; So that Every Man, and That Man which the Hearer conceives in his mind,
are all one; and Some Man, and That Man which the Speaker thought of signify
the same. From whence it is evident, that the use of signs of this kind, is
not for a man's own sake, or for his getting of knowledge by his own private
meditation (for every man has his own, Thoughts sufficiently determined without
such helps as these) but for the sake of others; that is, for the teaching and
signifying of our Conceptions to others; nor were they invented only to make
us remember, but to make us able to discourse with others.

12 Fifthly, Names are usually distinguished into Univocall, and Equivocall.
Univocall are those which in the same train of Discourse signify always the
same thing; but Equivocall those which mean sometimes one thing, and sometimes
another. Thus, the Name Triangle is said to be Univocall, because it is always
taken in the same sense; and Parabola to be Equivocall, for the signification
it has sometimes of Allegory or Similitude, and sometimes of a certain
Geometrical figure. Also every Metaphor is by profession Equivocall. But this
distinction belongs not so much to Names, as to those that use Names; for some
use them properly and accurately for the finding out of truth; others draw them
from their proper sense, for Ornament, or Deceit.

13 Sixthly, of Names, some are Absolute, others Relative. Relative are such as
are imposed for some Comparison, as Father, Son, Cause, Effect, Like, Unlike,
Equal, Unequal, Master, Servant, etc. And those that signify no Comparison at
all are Absolute Names. But as it was noted above, that Universality is to be
attributed to Words and Names only, and not to Things; so the same is to be
said of other distinctions of Names; for no Things are either Univocall or
Equivocall, or Relative or Absolute. There is also another distinction of Names
into Concrete and Abstract; but because Abstract Names proceed from
Proposition, and can have no place where there is no Affirmation, I shall
speak of them hereafter.

14 Lastly there are Simple and Compounded Names. But here it is to be noted,
that a name is not taken in Philosophy, as in Grammar, for one single word, but
for any number of words put together to signify one Thing; for among
Philosophers Sentient Animated Body, passes but for one Name, being the Name of
every living Creature; which yet, among Gra^marians is accounted three Names.
Also a Simple Name is not here distinguished from a Compounded Name by a
Preposition, as in Grammar. But I call a Simple Name, that which in every kind
is the most Common or most Universal; and that a Compounded Name, which by the
joining of another Name to it is made less Universal, and signifies that more
conceptions then one were in the mind, for which that later Name was added. For
example, in the conception of Man (as is shown in the former Chap.) First, he
is conceived to be something that has Extension, which is marked by the word
Body. Body therefore is a Simple Name, being put for that first single
Conception; Afterward, upon the sight of such and such motion, another
Conception arises for which he is called an Animated Body; and this I here call
a Compounded Name, as I do also the name Animal, which is equivalent to an
Animated Body. And in the same manner an Animated Rational Body, as also a Man,
which is equivalent to it, is a more Compounded Name. And by this we see how
the Composition of Conceptions in the mind is answerable to the Composition of
Names; for as in the mind one Idea or Phantasme succeeds to another, and to
this a third; so to one Name is added another and another successively, and of
them all is made one Compounded Name. Nevertheless we must not think Bodies,
which are without the Mind, are compounded in the same manner, namely that
there is in Nature a Body, or any other imaginable Thing existent, which at the
first has no Magnitude, and then by the addition of Magnitude, comes to have
Quantity, and by more or less Quantity to have Density or Rarity, and again by
the addition of Figure to be Figurate, and after this by the injection of Light
or Color, to become Lucid or Colored; though such has been the Philosophy of
many.

15 The Writers of Logique have endeavored to digest the Names of all the
kinds of Things into certain Scales or Degrees, by the continual subordination
of Names less Common, to Names more Common. In the Scale of Bodies they put in
the first and highest place Body simply, and in the next place under it less
Common Names, by which it may be more limited and determined, namely Animated
and Inanimated, and so on till they come to Individualls. In like manner in the
Scale of Quantities they assign the first place to Quantity, and the next to
Line, Superficies, and Solid, which are Names of less latitude; and these
Orders or Scales of Names they usually call Praedicaments and Categories; And
of this Ordination not only Positive but Negative Names also are capable;
which may be exemplified by such Forms of the Praedicaments as follow.

The Form of the Praedicament of Body.
Not-Body; or Accident Body Not animated Animated Not Living-Creature
Living-Creature Not Man Man Not Peter Peter



Both Accident and Body are considered Absolutely as, Quantity, or so much
Quality, or such
or Comparatively, which is called their Relation

The Form of the Praedicament of Quantity.
Quantity Not Continual, as Number, Continual Of it self, as Line Superficies
Solid
By Accident, as -- Time, by Line Motion, by Line and Time Force, by Motion and
Solid



Where it is to be noted, that Line, Superficies and Solid may be said to be of
such and such Quantity, that is, to be originally and of their own nature
capable of Equality and Inequality; But we cannot say there is either Majority
or Minority, or Equality, or indeed any Quantity at all, in Time, without the
help of Line and Motion; nor in Motion, without Line and Time; nor in Force,
otherwise then by Motion and Solid.

The Form of the Praedicament of Quality.
Quality Perceptio^ by Sense Primary Seeing Hearing Smelling Tasting Touching
Secondary Imagination Affection -- Pleasant Unpleasant


Sensible Quality By Seeing, as Light and Color By Hearing, as Sound By
Smelling, as Odors By Tasting, as Savours By Touching, as Hardness, Heat,
Cold, etc.


The form of the Praedicament of Relation.
Relation of Magnitudes, as Equality and Inequality Qualities, as Likeness and
Unlikenesse Order Together In Place In Time
Not together In Place Former Later
In Time Former Later




16 Concerning which Praedicaments it is to be noted in the first place, That
as the division is made in the first Praedicament into Contradictory Names, so
it might have been done in the rest. For as there, Body is divided into
Animated and Not-Animated, so in the second Praedicament Continual Quantity
may be divided into Line and Not-line, and again, Not-line into Superficies and
Not-Superficies, and so in the rest; but it was not necessary.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that of Positive Names the former comprehends
the later; but of Negatives the former is comprehended by the later. For
example Living-Creature is the Name of every Man, and therefore it comprehends
the Name Man; but on the contrary Not-Man is the Name of every Thing which is
Not-Living-Creature, and therefore the Name Not-Living-Creature which is put
first, is comprehended by the later Name Not-Man.

Thirdly, we must take heed we do not think, that as Names, so the diversities
of Things themselves may be searched out and determined by such Distinctions as
these; or that arguments may be taken from hence (as some have done
ridiculously) to prove that the kinds of Things are not infinite.

Fourthly, I would not have any man think I deliver the Forms above for a true
and exact Ordination of Names; for this cannot be performed as long as
Philosophy remains imperfect; Nor that by placing (for example) Light in the
Praedicament of Qualities, while another places the same in the Praedicament of
Bodies, I pretend that either of us ought for this to be drawn from his
opinion; for this is to be done only by Arguments and Ratiocination, and not
by disposing of words into Classes.

Lastly, I confess I have not yet seen any great use of the Praedicaments in
Philosophy. I believe Aristotle when he saw he could not digest the Things
themselves into such Orders, might nevertheless desire out of his own
Authority to reduce Words to such Forms, as I have done; but I do it only
for this end, that it may be understood what this Ordination of Words is, and
not to have it received or true, till it be demonstrated by good reason to be
so.

CHAP. III. Of Proposition.
1 Diverse Kinds of Speech. 2 Proposition defined. 3 Subject, Praedicate and
Copula what they are, and Abstract and Concrete what. The Use and Abuse of
Names Abstract. 5 Proposition Universal and Particular. 6 Affirmative and
Negative. 7 True and False. 8 True and False belongs to Speech, and not to
Things. 9 Proposition Primary, not Primary, Definion, Axiom, Petition. 10
Proposition Necessary and Contingent. 11 Categoricall and Hypotheticall. 12 The
same Proposition diversely pronounced. 13 Propositions that may be reduced to
the same Categoricall Proposition, are Equipollent. 14 Universal Propositions
converted by Contradictory Names, are Equipollent. 15 Negative Propositions are
the same, whether the Negation be before or after the Copula. 16 Particular
Propositions simply converted, are Equipollent. 17 What are Subaltern,
Contrary, Subcontrary and Contradictory Propositions. 18 Consequence what it
is. 19 Falsity cannot follow from Truth. 20 How one Proposition is the Cause of
another.
1FRom the Connection or Contexture of Names arise diverse kinds of Speech,
whereof some signify the Desires and Affections of Men; such are first
Interrogations, which denote the desire of Knowing; as Who is a good Man? In
which speech there is one Name expressed, and another desired and expected from
him of whom we ask the same. Then Prayers, which signify the desire of having
something; Promises, Threats, Wishes, Commands, Complaints, and other
significations of other Affections. Speech may also be Absurd and
Insignificant; as when there is a succession of Words, to which there can be no
succession of Thoughts in the mind to answer them; and this happens often to
such, as understanding nothing in some subtle matter, do nevertheless, to
make others believe they understand, speak of the same incoherently; For the
connection of incoherent Words, though it want the end of Speech (which is
Signification) yet it is Speech; and is used by the Writers of Metaphysics
almost as frequently as Speech significative. In Philosophy there is but one
kind of Speech useful, which some call in Latin Dictum, others Enuntiatum
and Pronunciatum; but most men call it Proposition, and is the speech of those
that Affirm or Deny, and expresses Truth or Falsity.

2 A PROPOSITION is a Speech consisting of two Names copulated by which he that
speaks signifies he conceives the later Name to be the Name of the same thing
whereof the former is the Name; or (which is all one) that the former Name is
comprehended by the later. For example, this speech Man is a Living Creature,
in which two Names are copulated by the verb Is, is a Proposition, for this
reason, that he that speaks it conceives both Living Creature and Man to be
Names of the same thing, or that the former Name Man is comprehended by the
later Name Living Creature. Now the former Name is commonly called the Subject,
or Antecedent, or the Contained Name, and the later the Praedicat, Consequent
or Containing Name. The sign of Connection amongst most Nations is either some
word, as the word is in the Proposition Man is a living Creature, or some Case
or Termination of a word, as in this Proposition, Man walks (which is
equivalent to this, Man is walking) the Termination by which it is said he
walks, rather then he is walking, signifies that those two are understood to
be copulated, or to be Names of the same Thing.

But there are, or certainly may be some Nations that have no word which
answers to our Verb Is, who nevertheless form Propositions by the position
only of one Name after another, as if instead of Man is a Living Creature, it
should be said Man a Living Creature; for the very order of the Names may
sufficiently show their connection; and they are as apt and useful in
Philosophy, as if they were copulated by the Verb Is.

3 Wherefore in every Proposition three things are to be considered, viz. the
two Names, which are the Subject and the Praedicate, and their Copulation; both
which Names raise in our Mind the Thought of one and the same Thing; but the
Copulation makes us think of the Cause for which those Names were imposed on
that Thing. As for example, when we say a Body is moveable, though we conceive
the same thing to be designed by both those Names, yet our Mind rests not
there, but searches further what it is to be a Body, or to be Moveable, that
is, wherein consists the difference betwixt these and other Things, for which
these are so called, others are not so called. They therefore that seek what
it is to be any thing, as to be Moveable, to be Hot, etc. seek in Things the
causes of their Names.

And from hence arises that distinction of Names (touched in the last Chap.)
into Concrete and Abstract. For Concrete is the Name of any thing which we
suppose to have a being, and is therefore called the Subject, in Latin
Suppositum, and in Greek (...); as Body, Moveable, Moved, Figurate, a Cubit
high, Hot, Cold, Like, Equal, Appius, Lentulus and the like; and Abstract is
that which in any Subject denotes the Cause of the Concrete Name, as to be a
Body, to be Moveable, to be Moved, to be Figurate, to be of such Quantity, to
be Hot, to be Cold, to be Like, to be Equal, to be Appius, to be Lentulus,
etc. Or Names equivalent to these, which are most commonly called Abstract
Names, as Corporeity, Mobility, Motion, Figure, Quantity, Heat, Cold,
Likeness, Equality, and (as Cicero has it) Appiety and Lentulity. Of the same
kind also are Infinitives; for to Live and to Move are the same with Life and
Motion, or to be Living, and to be Moved. But Abstract Names denote only the
Causes of Concrete Names, and not the Things themselves. For example when we
see any thing, or conceive in our Mind any Visible thing, that Thing appears
to us, or is conceived by us, not in one Point, but as having Parts distant
from one another, that is, as being extended and filling some space. Seeing
therefore we call the Thing so conceived Body, the cause of that name is, that
that Thing is extended, or the Extension or Corporeity of it. So when we see a
Thing appear sometimes here, sometimes there, and call it Moved or Removed,
the Cause of that Name is that it is Moved or the Motion of the same.

And these Causes of Names; are the same with the Causes of our Conceptions,
namely some Power or Action, or Affection of the Thing conceived, which some
call the Manner by which any thing works upon our senses, but by most men they
are called Accidents; I say Accidents, not in that sense in which Accident is
opposed to Necessary; but so, as being neither the Things themselves, nor parts
thereof, do nevertheless accompany the Things in such manner, that (saving
Extension) they may all perish and (...) destroyed, but can never be abstracted.

4 There is also this difference betwixt Concrete and Abstract Names, that
those were invented before Propositions, but these after; for these could have
no being till there were Propositions, from whose Copula they proceed. Now in
all matters that concern this life, but chiefly in Philosophy, there is both
great Use and great Abuse of Abstract Names; and the use consists in this, that
without them we cannot for the most part either Reason, or compute the
Properties of Bodies; for when we would multiply, divide, add or substract
Heat, Light, or Motion, if we should double or add them together by Concrete
Names, saying (for example) Hot is double to Hot, Light double to Light, or
Moved double to Moved, we should not double the Properties, but the Bodies
themselves that are Hot, Light, Moved, etc. which we would not do. But the
Abuse proceeds from this, that some men seeing they can consider, that is (as I
said before) bring into account the Increasings and Decreasings of Quantity,
Heat and other Accidents, without considering their Bodies or Subjects (which
they call Abstracting, or making to exist apart by themselves,) they speak of
Accidents, as if they might be separated from all Bodies. And from hence
proceed the gross errors of writers of Metaphysics; for, because they can
consider Thought without the consideration of Body, they infer there is no
need of a ^^inking-Body; and because Quantity may be considered without
considering Body, they think also that Quantity may be without Body, and Body
without Quantity; and that a Body ^as Quantity by the addition of Quantity to
it. From the same fountain spring those insignificant words, Abstract
Substance, Separated Essence and the like; as also that confusion of words
derived from the Latin Verb Est, as Essence, Essentiality, Entity, Entitative;
besides Reality, Aliquiddity, Quiddity, etc. which could never have been heard
of among such Nations as do not Copulate their Names by the Verb Is, but by
Adjective Verbs, as Runs, Reads, etc. or by the mere placing of one Name
after another; and yet seeing such Nations Compute and Reason, it is evident
that Philosophy has no need of those words Essence, Entity and other the like
barbarous Terms.

There are many Distinctions of Propositions, whereof the first is, that some
are Universal, others Particular, others Indefinite, and others Singular; and
this is commonly called the distinction of Quantity. An Universal Proposition
is that whose subject is affected with the sign of an Universal Name, as Every
man is a Living Creature. Particular, that whose subject is affected with the
sign of a Particular Name, as Some Man is learned. An Indefinite Proposition
has for its Subject a Common Name, and put without any sing; as Man is a Living
Creature, Man is Learned. And a Singular Proposition is that whose Subject is a
singular Name, as Socrates is a Philosopher, This man is black.

6 The Second Distinction is into Affirmative and Negative, and is called the
Distinction of Quality. An Affirmative Proposition is that whose Praedicate is
a Positive Name, as Man is a Living Creature. Negative, that whose Praedicate
is a Negative Name, as Man is Not-a-stone.

7 The third Distinction is, that one is True, another False. A True
Proposition is that, whose Praedicate contains, or comprehends its Subject, or
whose Praedicate is the Name of every thing, of which the Subject is the Name;
as Man is a Living Creature is therefore a True Proposition, because whatsoever
is called Man, the same is also called Living Creature; and Some Man is sick,
is True, because sick is the Name of Some Man. That which is not True, or that
whose Praedicate does not contain its Subject, is called a False Proposition,
as Man is a Stone.

Now these words True, Truth, and True Proposition are equivalent to one
another; For Truth consists in Speech, and not in the Things spoken of; and
though True be sometimes opposed to to Apparent or Feigned, yet it is always
to be referred to the Truth of Proposition; for the Image of a Man in a Glass,
or a Ghost, is therefore denied to be a very Man, because this Proposition, A
Ghost is a man, is not True; for it cannot be denied but that a Ghost is a very
Ghost. And therefore Truth or Verity is not any Affection of the Thing, but of
the Proposition concerning it. As for that which the Writers of Metaphysics
say, that A thing, One thing, and a Very thing, are equivalent to one another,
it is but trifling and childish; for who does not know, that A Man, One Man,
and a Very Man, signify the same.

8 And from hence it is evident, that Truth and Falsity have no place but
amongst such Living Creatures as use Speech. For though some brute Creatures,
looking upon the Image of a Man in a Glass, may be affected with it as if it
were the Man himself, and for this reason fear it or fawn upon it in vain;
Yet they do not apprehend it as True or False, but only as Like; and in this
they are not deceived. Wherefore, as men owe all their True Ratiocination to
the right understanding of Speech; So also they owe their Errors to the
misunderstanding of the same; and as all the Ornaments of Philosophy proceed
only from Man, so from Man also is derived the ugly absurdity of False
opinions. For Speech has something in it like to a Spiders Web (as it was said
of old of Solons laws;) for by contexture of words tender and delicate Wits are
ensnared and stopped; but strong Wits break easily through them.

From hence also this may be deduced, that the first Truths were arbitrarily
made by those that first of all imposed Names upon Things, or received them
from the imposition of others. For it is true (for example) that Man is a
Living Creature; but it is for this reason, that it pleased men to impose both
those Names on the same thing.

9 Fourthly, Propositions are distinguished into Primary and not Primary.
Primary is that wherein the Subject is explicated by a Praedicate of many
Names, as Man, is a Body Animated Rational; for that which is comprehended in
the Name Man is more largely expressed in the Names Body, Animated, and
Rational joined together; and it is called Primary, because it is first in
Ratiocination; for nothing can be proved, without understanding first the name
of the Thing in question. Now Primary Propositions are nothing but Definitions,
or parts of Definitions, and these only are the principles of Demonstration,
being Truths constituted arbitrarily by the Inventors of Speech, and therefore
not to be demonstrated. To these Propositions, some have added others, which
they call Primary and Principles; namely Axioms and Common Notions; which
(though they be so evident that they need no proof, yet) because they may be
proved, are not truly Principles; and the less to be received for such, in
regard Propositions not intelligible, and sometimes manifestly false, are
thrust on us under the Name of Principles by the clamor of Men, who obtrude
for evident to others all that they themselves think True. Also certain
Petitions are commonly received into the number of Principles; as for example,
That a straight line may be drawn between two points, and other Petitions of
the Writers of Geometry; and these are indeed the Principles of Art or
Construction, but not of Science and Demonstration.

10 Fifthly, Propositions are distinguished into Necessary, that is, necessarily
True; and True, but not necessarily, which they call Contingent. A Necessary
Proposition is when nothing can at any time be conceived or feigned, whereof
the Subject is the Name, but the Praedicate also is the Name of the same thing;
as Man is a Living-Creature is a necessary Proposition, because at what time
soever we suppose the name Man agrees with any thing, at that time the name
Living-Creature also agrees with the same. But a Contingent Proposition is that
which at one time may be true, at another time false; as Every Crow is Black;
which may perhaps be true now, but false hereafter. Again, in every Necessary
Proposition, the Praedicate is either equivalent to the Subject, as in this,
Man is a Rational Living-Creature; or part of an equivalent Name, as in this,
Man is a Living-Creature, for the Name Rational Living-Creature, or Man, is
compounded of these two, Rational and Living-Creature. But in a Contingent
Proposition this cannot be; for though this were true, Every Man is a Liar, yet
because the word Liar is no part of a Compounded name equivalent to the Name
Man, that Proposition is not to be called Necessary, but Contingent, though it
should happen to be true always. And therefore those Propositions only are
Necessary, which are of Sempiternal Truth, that is, true at all times. From
hence also it is manifest, that Truth adheres not to Things, but to Speech
only; for some Truths are eternal; for it will be eternally true, if Man, then
Living-Creature; but that any Man, or Living-Creature should exist eternally,
is not necessary.

11 A sixth Distinction of Propositions is into Categorical and Hypotheticall.
A Categoricall Proposition is that which is simply or absolutely pronounced, as
Every Man is a Living Creature, No Man is a Tree; and Hypotheticall is that
which is pronounced conditionally, as, If any thing be a Man the same is also a
Living Creature, If any thing be a Man the same is also Not-a-stone.

A Categoricall Proposition, and an Hypothetical answering it, do both
signify the same, if the Propositions be Necessary; but not if they be
Contingent. For example, if this, Every Man is a Living-Creature, be true, this
also will be true, If any thing be a Man, the same is also a Living-Creature;
but in Contingent Propositions, though this be true, Every Crow is Black; yet
this, If any thing be a Crow the same is Black, is false. But an Hypotheticall
Proposition is then rightly said to be true, when the Consequence is true; as
Every Man is a Living-Creature is rightly said to be a true Proposition,
because of whatsoever it is truly said That is a Man, it cannot but be truly
said also The same is a Living-Creature. And therefore whenever an
Hypotheticall Proposition is true, the Categoricall answering it is not only
true, but also necessary; which I thought worth the noting, as an argument,
that Philosophers may in most things reason more solidly by Hypotheticall then
Categoricall Propositions.

12 But seeing every Proposition may be and uses to be pronounced and written
in many forms, and we are obliged to speak in the same manner as most men
speak; yet they that learn Philosophy from Masters, had need to take heed
they be not deceived by the Variety of expressions. And therefore whenever
they meet with any obscure Proposition, they ought to reduce it to its most
Simple and Categoricall form; in which the Copulative word Is must be
expressed by it self, and not mingled in any manner either with the Subject or
Praedicate, both which must be separated and clearly distinguished one from
another. For example, if this Proposition Man can not sin, be compared with
this, Man cannot sin, their difference will easily appear if they be reduced
to these, Man is able not to sin, and Man is not able to sin, where the
Praedicates are manifestly different. But they ought to do this silently by
themselves, or betwixt them and their Masters only; for it will be thought
both ridiculous and absurd, for a man to use such language publicly. Being
therefore to speak of Equipollent Propositions, I put in the first place all
those for Equipollent, that may be reduced p^rely to one and the same
Categoricall Proposition.

13 Secondly, that which is Categoricall and Necessary, is Equipollent to its
Hypotheticall Proposition; as this Categorical, A Right-lined Triangle has its
three Angles equal to two Right angles, to this Hypotheticall, If any Figure be
a Right-lined Triangle, the three Angles of it are equal to two Right Angles.

14 Also, any two Universal Propositions, of which the Terms of the one (that
is, the Subject and Praedicate) are Contradictory to the Terms of the other,
and their Order inverted, as these, Every man is a Living Creature, and Every
thing that is not a Living Creature, is not a Man, are Equipollent. For seeing
Every Man is a Living Creature is a true Proposition, the Name Living Creature
contains the Name Man; but they are both Positive Names; and therefore (by the
last Article of the praecedent Chapter) the Negative Name Not Living Creature
contains the Negative Name Not Man; Wherefore Everything that is not a Living
Creature is not a Man is a true Proposition. Likewise these, No Man is a Tree,
No Tree is a Man, are Equipollent. For if it be true that Tree is not the Name
of any Man, then no one thing can be signified by the two Names Man and Tree,
wherefore No Tree is a Man is a true Proposition. Also to this, Whatsoever is
not a Living Creature is not a Man, where both the Terms are Negative, this
other Proposition is Equipollent, Only a Living Creature is a Man.

15 Fourthly, Negative Propositions, whether the particle of Negation be set
after the Copula as some Nations do, or before it, as it is in Latin and
Greek, if the Terms be the same, are equipollent; as for example, Man is
not-a-Tree and Man is not-a-Tree, are equipollent, though Aristotle deny it.
Also these, Every Man is not a Tree, and No Man is a Tree are equipollent, and
that so manifestly, as it needs not be demonstrated.

16 Lastly, all Particular Propositions that have their Terms inverted, as
these, Some Man is Blind, Some Blind thing is a Man, are equipollent; for
either of the two Names, is the Name of some one and the same Man; and
therefore in which soever of the two Orders they be connected, they signify
the same Truth.

17 Of Propositions that have the same Terms, and are placed in the same
Order, but varied either by Quantity or Quality, some are called Subaltern,
others Contrary, others Subcontrary, and others Contradictory.

Subaltern, are Universal and Particular Propositions of the same Quality; as,
Every Man is a Living Creature, Some Man is a Living Creature; or, No Man is
Wise, Some Man is not Wise. Of these i^ the Universal be true, the Particular
will be true also.

Contrary, are Universal Propositions of different Quality; as Every Man is
happy, No Man is happy. And of these if one be true the other is false; also
they may both be false, as in the example given.

Subcontrary, are Particular Propositions of different Quality; as Some Man is
learned, Some Man is not learned; which cannot be both false, but they may be
both true.

Contradictory are those that differ both in Quantity and Quality; as Every Man
is a Living Creature, Some Man is not a Living Creature; which can neither be
both true, nor both false.

18 A Proposition is said to follow from two other Propositions, when these
being granted to be true, it cannot be denied but the other is true also. For
example, let these two Propositions, Every Man is a Living Creature, and Every
Living Creature is a Body, be supposed true, that is, that Body is the Name of
Every Living Creature, and Living Creature, the Name of Every Man. Seeing
therefore, if these be understood to be true, it cannot be understood that Body
is not the name of Every man, that is, that Every Man is a Body, is false, this
Proposition will be said to follow from those two, or to be necessarily
inferred from them.

19 That a true Proposition may follow from false Propositions, may happen
sometimes; but false from true, never. For if these, Every Man is a Stone, and
Every Stone is a Living Creature, (which are both false) be granted to be true,
it is granted also that Living Creature is the name of Every Stone, and Stone
of Every Man, that is, that Living Creature is the Name of Every Man; that is
to say, this Proposition Every Man is a Living Creature, is true, as it is
indeed true. Wherefore a true Proposition may sometimes follow from false. But
if any two Propositions be true, a false one can never follow from them. For if
true follow from false, for this reason only, that the false are granted to be
true, then truth from two truths granted will follow in the same manner.

20 Now seeing none but a true Proposition will follow from true, and that the
understanding of two Propositions to be true, is the cause of understanding
that also to be true which is deduced from them; the two Antecedent
Propositions are commonly called the Causes of the inferred Proposition, or
Conclusion. And from hence it is that Logicians say, the Premises are Causes
of the Conclusion; which may pass, though it be not properly spoken; for
though Understanding be the cause of Understanding, yet Speech is not the cause
of Speech. But when they say, the Cause of the Properties of any thing, is the
Thing it self, they speak absurdly. Eor example, if a Figure be propounded
which is Triangular; Seeing every Triangle has all its angles together equal to
two right angles, from whence it follows that all the angles of that Figure are
equal to two right angles, they say for this reason, that that Figure is the
Cause of that Equality. But seeing the Figure does not it self make its angles,
and therefore cannot be said to be the Efficient-Cause, they call it the
Formall-Cause; whereas in deed it is no Cause at all; nor does the Property of
any Figure follow the Figure, but has its Being at the same time with it; only
the Knowledge of the Figure goes before the Knowledge of the Properties; and
one Knowledge is truly the Cause of another Knowledge, namely the
Efficient-Cause.

And thus much concerning Proposition; which in the Progress of Philosophy is
the first Step, like the moving toward of one Foot. By the due addition of
another Step I shall proceed to Syllogism, and make a complete Pace. Of which
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Of Syllogism.
1 The Definition of Syllogism. 2 In a Syllogism there are but three Terms.
3 Major, Minor and Middle Term; also Major and Minor Proposition, what they
are. 4 The Middle Term in every Syllogism ought to be determined in both the
Propositions to one and the same thing. 5 From two Particular Propositions
nothing can be concluded. 6 A Syllogism is the Collection of two Propositions
into one Sum. 7 The Figure of a Syllogism what it is. 8 What is in the mind
answering to a Syllogism. 9 The first Indirect Figure how it is made. 10 The
second Indirect Figure how made. 11 How the third Indirect Figure is made 12
There are many Moods in every Figure, but most of them Useless in Philosophy.
13 An Hypotheticall Syllogism when equipollent to a Categoricall.
1. A Speech consisting of three Propositions, from two of which the third
follows, is called a SYLLOGISM; and that which follows is called the
Conclusion; the other two Premises. For example this Speech, Every man is a
Living Creature, Every Living Creature is a Body, therefore, Every Man is a
Body, is a Syllogism, because the third Proposition follows from the two
first; that is, if those be granted to be true, this must also be granted to be
true.

2 From two Propositions which have not one Term common, no Conclusion can
follow; and therefore no Syllogism can be made of them. For let any two
Premises, A man is a Living Creature, A Tree is a Plant, be both of them true,
yet because it cannot be collected from them that Plant is the Name of a Man,
or Man the Name of a Plant, it is not necessary that this Conclusion, A Man is
a Plant should be true. Corollary, Therefore in the Premises of a Syllogism
there can be but three Terms.

Besides there can be no Term in the Conclusion, which was not in the
Premises. For let any two Premises be, A Man is a Living Creature, A Living
Creature is a Body, yet if any other Term be put in the Conclusion, as Man is
two footed; though it be true, it cannot follow from the Premises, because
from them it cannot be collected, that the Name Two footed belongs to a Man;
and therefore again, In every Syllogism there can be but three Terms.

3 Of these Terms, that which is the Predicate in the Conclusion, is commonly
called the Major; that which is the Subject in the Conclusion, the Minor, and
the other is the Middle Term; as in this Syllogism, A Man is a Living
Creature, A Living Creature is a Body, therefore, A Man is a Body, Body is the
Major, Man the Minor and Living Creature the Middle Term. Also of the
Premises, that in which the Major Term is found, is called the Major
Proposition, and that which has the Minor Term the Minor Proposition.

4 If the Middle Term be not in both the Premises determined to one and the
same singular thing, no Conclusion will follow, nor Syllogism be made. For let
the Minor Term be Man, the Middle Term Living Creature, and the Major Term
Lion; and let the Premises be Man is a Living Creature, Some Living Creature
is a Lion, yet it will not follow that, Every or Any Man is a Lion. By which it
is manifest, that in every Syllogism, that Proposition which has the Middle
Term for its Subject, ought to be either Universal or Singular, but not
Particular nor Indefinite. For example, this Syllogism, Every man is a Living
Creature, some Living Creature is four-footed, therefore some Man is
four-footed, is therefore faulty, because the Middle Term, Living Creature, is
in the first of the Premises determined only to Man, for there the Name of
Living Creature is given to Man only, but in the later Premisse it may be
understood of some other Living Creature besides Man. But if the later Premisse
had been Universal, as here, Every Man is a Living Creature, Every Living
Creature is a Body, therefore Every Man is a Body, the Syllogism had been
true; for it would have followed that Body had been the Name of Every Living
Creature, that is of Man, that is to say, the Conclusion Every Man is a Body
had been true. Likewise when the Middle Term is a Singular Name, a Syllogism
may be made, I say a true Syllogism, though useless in Philosophy, as this,
Some Man is Socrates, Socrates is a Philosopher, therefore Some Man is a
Philosopher; for the Premises being granted, the Conclusion cannot be denied.

5 And therefore of two Premises, in both which the Middle Term is
Particular, a Syllogism cannot be made; for whether the Middle Term be the
Subject in both the Premises, or the Predicate in both, or the Subject in one
and the Predicate in the other, it will not be necessarily determined to the
same thing. For let the Premises be, Some Man is blind Some Man is learned
In both which the Middle Term is the Subject,

It will not follow, that Blind is the Name of any learned Man, or Learned the
Name of any Blind Man, seeing the Name Learned does not contain the Name
Blind, nor this that; and therefore it is not necessary that both should be
Names of the same Man. So from these Premises. Every Man is a Living Creature
Every Horse is a Living Creature
In both which the Middle Term is the Predicate,

Nothing will follow. For seeing Living Creature is in both of them Indefinite,
which is equivalent to Particular, and that Man may be one kind of Living
Creature, and Horse another kind, it is not necessary that Man should the be
Name of Horse, or Horse of Man. Or if the Premises be, Every Man is a Living
Creature Some Living Creature is four-footed
In one of which the Middle Term is the Subject, and in the other the
Predicate,

The Conclusion will follow, because the Name Living Creature being not
determined, it may in one of them be understood of Man in the other of Not-Man.

6 Now it is manifest from what has been said, that a Syllogism is nothing but
a Collection of the sum of two Propositions, joined together by a common
Term, which is called the Middle Term. And as Proposition is the Addition of
two Names, so Syllogism is the adding together of three.

7 Syllogismes are usually distinguished according to their diversity of
Figures, that is, by the diverse position of the Middle Term. And again in
Figure there is a distinction of certain Moods, which consist of the
differences of Propositions in Quantity and Quality. The first Figure is that,
in which the Terms are placed one after another according to their latitude of
Signification; in which order the Minor Term is first, the Middle Term next,
and the Major last; as if the Minor Term be Man, the Middle Term Living
Creature and the Major Term Body, then, Man is a Living Creature, is a Body,
will be a Syllogism in the first Figure; in which, Man is a Living Creature,
is the Minor Proposition; the Major, Living Creature is a Body, and the
Conclusion or sum of both Man is a Body. Now this Figure is called Direct,
because the Terms stand in direct Order; and it is varied by Quantity and
Quality into four Moods; of which the first is that wherein all the Terms are
Positive, and the Minor Term Universal, as Every Man is a Living Creature,
Every Living Creature is a Body; in which all the Propositions are Affirmative
and Universal. But if the Major Term be a Negative Name, and the Minor an
Universal Name, the Figure will be in the second Mood, as, Every Man is a
Living Creature, Every Living Creature is not a Tree, in which the Major
Proposition and Conclusion are both Universal and Negative. To these two are
commonly addded two more, by making the Minor Term Particular. Also it may
happen that both the Major and Middle Terms are Negative Terms, and then there
arises another Mood, in which all the Propositions are Negative, and yet the
Syllogism will be good; as, if the Minor Term be Man, the Middle Term Not a
Stone, and the Major Term, Not a Flint, this Syllogism, No Man is a Stone,
Whatsoever is not a Stone is not a Flint, therefore No Man is a Flint, is true,
though it consist of three Negatives. But in Philosophy, the Profession whereof
is to establish Universal Rules concerning the Properties of Things, seeing
the difference betwixt Negatives and Affirmatives is only this, that in the
former the Subject is affirmed by a Negative Name, and by a Positive in the
later, it is superfluous to consider any other Mood in direct Figure, besides
that, in which all the Propositions are both Universal and Affirmative.

8. The Thoughts in the mind answering to a Direct Syllogism, proceed in this
manner; First, there is conceived a Phantasme of the thing named, with that
Accident or Quality thereof for which it is in the Minor Proposition called by
that name which is the Subject; next, the Mind has a Phantasme of the same
thing with that Accident or Quality for which it has the name that in the same
Proposition is the Predicate; Thirdly, the Thought returns of the same thing as
having that Accident in it, for which it is called by the Name that is in the
Predicate of the Major Proposition; and lastly, remembering that all those are
the Accidents of one and the same thing, it concludes that those three Names
are also Names of one and the same thing; that is to say, the Conclusion is
true. For example, when this Syllogism is made, Man is a Living Creature, A
Living Creature is a Body, therefore Man is a Body, the Mind conceives first an
image of a Man speaking or discoursing, and remembers that that which so
appears, is called Man; then it has the image of the same Man moving, and
remembers that that which appears so is called Living Creature; thirdly, it
conceives an image of the same Man as filling some place or space, and
remembers that what appears so is called Body; and lastly, when it remembers,
that that thing which was extended, and moved and spoke, was one and the same
thing, it concludes that the three Names Man, Living Creature, and Body, are
Names of the same thing, and that therefore Man is a Living Creature is a true
Proposition. From whence it is manifest, that Living Creatures that have not
the use of Speech, have no Conception or Thought in the Mind, answering to a
Syllogism made of Universal Propositions; seeing it is necessary to Think
not only of the Thing, but also by turns to remember the diverse Names, which
for diverse considerations thereof are applied to the same.

9 The rest of the Figures arise either from the Inflexion, or Inversion of the
first or direct Figure; which is done by changing the Major, or Minor, or both
the Propositions into converted Propositions aequipollent to them.

From whence follow three other Figures; of which, two are Inflected, and the
third Inverted. The first of these three is made by the Conversion of the Major
Proposition. For let the Minor, Middle and Major Terms stand in direct order,
thus, Man is a Living Creature, Is not a Stone, which is the first or direct
Figure; the Inflexion will be by converting the Major Proposition in this
manner,

Man is a Living Creature,

A stone is not a Living Creature; And this is the second

Figure, or the first of the Indirect Figures; in which the Conclusion will be,
Man is not a stone. For (having shown in the last Chap. 14 Article, that
Universal Propositions converted by contradiction of the Terms are
aequipollent,) both those Syllogismes conclude alike; so that if the Major be
read (like Hebrew) backwards, thus, A Living Creature is not a Stone, it will
be direct again, as it was before. In like manner this Direct Syllogism, Man
is not a Tree, is not a Pear Tree, will be made Indirect by converting the
Major Proposition (by contradiction of the Terms) into another aequipollent to
it, thus,

Man is not a Tree,

A Pear Tree is a Tree; for the same Conclusion will follow, Man is not a
Pear Tree.

But for the Conversion of the Direct Figure into the first Indirect Figure,
the Major Term in the Direct Figure ought to be Negative. For though this
Direct, Man is a Living Creature, is a Body be made Indirect, by converting the
Major Proposition, thus,

Man is a Living Creature.

Not a Body is not a Living Creature, Therefore

Every Man is a Body; yet this Conversion appears so obscure, that this Mood
is of no use at all. By the Conversion of the Major Proposition, it is
manifest, that in this Figure, the Mi dle Term is always the Predicate in
both the Premises.

10 The second Indirect Figure is made by converting the Minor Proposition, so
as that the Middle Term is the Subject in both. But this never concludes
Uniuersally, and therefore is of no use in Philosophy. Nevertheless I will set
down an example of it; by which this Direct.

Every Man is a Living Creature,

Every Living Creature is a Body, by Conversion of the Minor Proposition will
stand thus,

Some Living Creature is a Man,

Every Living Creature is a Body, Therefore

Some Man is a Body.

For Every Man is a Living Creature, cannot be converted into this, Every
Living Creature is a Man; and therefore if this Syllogism be restored to its
Direct form, the Minor Proposition will be Some Man is a Living Creature, and
consequently the Conclusion will be Some Man is a Body, seeing the Minor Term
Man, which is the Subject in the Conclusion, is a Particular Name.

11 The third Indirect or Inverted Figure, is made by the Conversion of both
the Premises. For Example, this Direct Syllogism,

Every Man is a Living Creature,

Every Living Creature is not a Stone, Therefore

Every Man is not a Stone; being Inverted will stand thus,

Every Stone is not a Living Creature

Whatsoever is not a Living Creature, is not a Man, Therefore

Every Stone is not a Man. Which Conclusion is the Converse of the Direct
Conclusion, and aequipollent to the same. The Figures therefore of Syllogisms,
if they be numbered by the diverse situation of the Middle Term only, are but
three; in the first whereof the Middle Term has the Middle place; in the
second, the last; and in the third, the first place. But if they be numbered
according to the situation of the Terms simply, they are four; for the first
may be distinguished again into two, namely into Direct and Inverted. From
whence it is evident, that the controversy among Logicians concerning the
fourth Figure, is a mere (...), or contention about the Name thereof; for as
for the thing it self, it is plain, that the situation of the Terms (not
considering the Quantity or Quality by which the Moods are distinguished) makes
four differences of Syllogismes, which may be called Figures, or have any other
Name at pleasure.

12 In every one of these Figures there are many Moods, which are made by
varying the Premises according to all the differences they are capable of, by
Quantity and Quality; as namely, in the Direct Figure there are six Moods; in
the first Indirect Figure, four; in the second, fourteen; and in the third,
eighteen. But because from the Direct Figure I rejected as superfluous all
Moods besides that which consists of Universal Propositions, and whose Minor
Proposition is Affirmative, I do together with it reject the Moods of the rest
of the Figures which are made by Conversion of the Premises in the Direct
Figure.

13 As it was showed before, that in Necessary Propositions a Categoricall and
Hypotheticall Proposition are aequipollent; so likewise it is manifest that a
Categoricall and Hypotheticall Syllogism are aequivalent. For every
Categoricall Syllogism, as this,

Every Man is a Living Creature,

Every Living Creature is a Body, Therefore

Every Man is a Body, is of equal force with this Hypotheticall Syllogism.

If any thing be a Man, the same is also a Living Creature,

If any thing be a Living Creature, the same is a Body, Therefore

If any thing be a Man, the same is a Body. In like manner, this Categorical
Syllogism in an Indirect Figure

No Stone is a Living Creature,

Every Man is a Living Creature, Therefore

No Man is a Stone, or

No Stone is a Man, is aequivalent to this Hypotheticall Syllogism.

If any thing be a Man, the same is a Living Creature,

If any thing be a a Stone, the same is not a Living Creature, Therefore

If any thing be a Stone, the same is not a Man, or

If any thing be a Man, the same is not a Stone.

And thus much seems sufficient for the nature of Syllogismes; (for the
doctrine of Moods and Figures is clearly delivered by others that have written
largely and profitably of the same.) Nor are Precepts so necessary as Practice
for the attaining of true Ratiocination; and they that study the Demonstrations
of Mathematicians, will sooner learn true Logic, then they that spend time in
reading the Rules of Syllogi^ing which Logicians have made; no otherwise then
little Children learn to go, not by Precepts, but by exercising their feet.
This therefore may serve for the first Pace in the way to Philosophy.

In the next place I shall speak of the Faults and Errors, into which men that
reason unwarily, are apt to fall; and of their Kinds and Causes.

CHAP. V. Of Erring, Falsity and Captions.
1. Erring and Falsity how they differ. Error of the Mind by it self without
the use of Words, how it happens. 2 A sevenfold Incoherency of Names, every one
of which makes always a false Proposition. 3. Examples of the first manner of
Incoherency. 4 Of the second. 5 Of the third. 6 Of the fourth. 7 Of the fifth.
8 Of the sixth. 9 Of the seventh. 10 Falsity of Propositions detected by
resolving the Terms with Definitions continued till they ^ome to Simple Names,
or Names that are the most General of their kind. 11 Of the fault of a
Syllogism consisting in the Implication of the Terms which the Copula 12 Of
the fault which consists in Equivocation. 13 Sophistical Captions are oftener
faulty in the matter then in the form of Syllogismes.
1 MEn are subject to Err not only in Affiming and Denying; but also in
Perception, and in silent Cogitation. In Affirming and Denying, when they call
any thing by a Name, which is not the Name thereof; as if from seeing the Sun
first by reflection in Water, and afterward again directly in the Firmament,
we should to both those appearances give the Name of Sun, and say there are
two Suns; which none but men can d^e; for no other Living Creatures have the
use of Names. This kind of Error only deserves the name of Falsity, as
arising, not from sense, nor from the Things themselves but from pronouncing
rashly; for Names have their constitution, not from the Species of Things, but
from the Will and Consent of Men. And hence it comes to pass, that men
pronounce Falsely by their own negligence, in departing from such appellations
of things as are agreed upon, and are not deceived neither by the Things, nor
by the Sense; for they do not perceive that the thing they see is called Sun,
but they give it that Name from their own will and agreement. Tacit Errors,
or the Errors of Sense and Cogitation, are made, by passing from one
Imaginatition to the Imagination of another different thing; or by feigning
that to be Past, or Future, which never was, nor ever shall be; as when by
seeing the Image of the Sun in Water, we imagine the Sun it self to be
there; or by seeing swords, that there has been or shall be fighting, because
it uses to be so for the most part; or when from Promises we feign the mind of
the Promiser to be such and such; or lastly, when from any Sign we vainly
imagine something to be signified, which is not. And Errors of this sort are
common to all things that have sense; and yet the Deception proceeds neither
from our senses, nor from the Things we perceive; but from our selves, while we
feign such things as are but mere Images, to be something more then Images.
But neither Things, nor Imaginations of Things can be said to be False, seeing
they are truly what they are; nor do they as Signs promise any thing which
they do not perform; for they indeed do not promise at all, but we from them;
nor do the Clouds, but we from seeing the Clouds, say it shall rain. The best
way therefore to free our selves from such Errors as arise from natural
Signs, is first of all, before we begin to reason concerning such conjecturall
things, to suppose our selves ignorant, and then to make use of our
Ratiocination; for these Errors proceed from the want of Ratiocination; whereas
Errors which consist in Affirmation and Negation, (that is, the Falsity of
Propositions) proceed only from Reasoning amiss. Of these therefore, as
repugnant to Philosophy, I will speak principally.

2 Errors which happen in Reasoning, that is, in Syllogizing, consist either in
the Falsity of the Premises, or of the Inference. In the first of these cases,
a Syllogism is said to be faulty in the Matter of it; and in the second case,
in the Form. I will first consider the Matter, namely how many ways a
Proposition may be false; and next the Form, and how it comes to pass, that
when the Premises are True, the Inference is notwithstanding False.

Seeing therefore that Proposition only is True, (Chap. 3. Art. 7.) in which
are copulated two Names of one and the same thing; and that always False, in
which Names of different things are copulated; look how many ways Names of
different things may be copulated, and so many ways a False Proposition may be
made.

Now all things to which we give Names, may be reduced to these four kinds,
namely, Bodies, Accidents, Phantasmes, and Names themselves; and therefore in
every true Proposition it is necessary that the Names copulated, be both of
them Names of Bodies, or both Names of Accidents, or both Names of Phantasmes,
or both Names of Names. For Names otherwise copulated are incoherent, and
constitute a False Proposition. It may happen also that the Name of a Body, of
an Accident, or of a Phantasme may be copulated with the Name of a Speech. So
that copulated Names may be Incoherent seven manner of ways.

1 If the Name of a Body be copulated with the Name of an Accident. 2 If the
Name of a Body be copulated with the Name of a Phantasme. 3 If the Name of a
Body be copulated with the Name of a Name. 4 If the Name of an Accident be
copulated with the Name of a Phantasme. 5 If the Name of an Accident be
copulated with the Name of a Name. 6 If the Name of a Phantasme be copulated
with the Name of a Name. 7 If the Name of a Body, of an Accident or of a
Phantasme be copulated with the Name of a Speech.
Of all which I will give some examples.

3 After the first of these ways Propositions are false, when Abstract Names
are copulated with Concrete Names; as (in Latin and Greek) Esse est Ens,
Essenti^ est Ens, (...) ( i.) Quidditas est Ens, and many the like which are
found in Aristotle's Metaphysics. Also, the Understanding works, the
Understanding understands, the Sight sees, A Body is Magnitude, A Body is
Quantity, A Body is Extension, To Be a Man is a Man, Whiteness is a White
thing, etc. which is as if one should say The Runner is the Running, or the
Walk Walks. Moreover, Essence is separated, Substance is Abstracted; and
others like these, or derived from these (with which common Philosophy
abounds). For seeing no Subject of an Accident, (that is, No Body) is an
Accident; no Name of an Accident ought to be given to a Body, nor of a Body to
an Accident.

4 False in the second Manner are such Propositions as these, A Ghost is a
Body, or a Spirit, that is, a thin Body; Sensible Species fly up and down in
the Air, or are moved hither and thither, which is proper to Bodies; also, A
Shadow is Moved, or is a Body; Light is Moved, or is a Body; Color is the
Ob^ect of Sight, Sound of Hearing; Space or Place is Extended; and innumerable
others of this kind. For seeing Ghosts, sensible Species, a Shadow, Light,
Color, Sound, Space, etc. appear to us no less sleeping then waking, they
cannot be things without us, but only Phantasmes of the mind that imagins
them; and therefore the Names of these, copulated with the Names of Bodies,
cannot constitute a true Proposition.

5 False Propositions of the third kind, are such as these; Genus est Ens,
Universale est Ens, Ens de Ente Praedicatur. For Genus, and Universale, and
Praedicare are Names of Names, and not of Things. Also Number is Infinite, is a
false Proposition; for no number can be Infinite, but only the word Number is
then called an Indefinite Name when there is no determined Number answering to
it in the Mind.

6 To the fourth kind belong such false Propositions as these, * An Object is
of such Magnitude or Figure as appears to the Beholders; Color, Light, Sound,
are in the Object; and the like. For the same Object appears sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser, sometimes square, sometimes round according to the
diversity of the Distance and Medium; but the true Magnitude and Figure of the
thing seen is always one and the same; so that the magnitude and figure which
appears, is not the true magnitude and figure of the Object, nor any thing but
Phantasme; and therefore in such Propositions as these, the Names of Accidents
are copulated with the Names of Phantasmes.

7 Propositions are false in the fifth manner, when it is said that The
Definition is the Essence of a thing; Whiteness, or some other Accident is the
Genus, or Universal. For Definition is not the Essence of any thing, but a
speech signifying what we conceive of the Essence thereof; and so also not
Whiteness it self, but the word Whiteness, is a Genus, or an Universal Name.

8 In the sixth manner they Err, that say the Idea of any thing is Universal;
as if there could be in the Mind an Image of a Man which were not the Image of
some one Man, but of Man simply, which is impossible; for every Idea is one,
and of onething; but they are deceived in this, that they put the Name of the
thing for the Idea thereof.

9 They err in the seventh manner, that make this distinction between things
that have being, that some of them exist by themselves, others by Accident;
Namely, because Socrates is a Man is a Necessary Proposition, and Socrates is a
Musician a Contingent Proposition, therefore they say some things exist
necessarily or by themselves, others contingently or by Accident; whereby,
seeing Necessary, Contingent, By it self, By Accident, are not Names of
Things, but of Propositions, they that say any thing that has being, exists by
Accident, copulate the Name of a Proposition with the Name of a Thing. In the
same manner also they Err, which place some Ideas in the Understanding, others
in the Fancy; as if from the Understanding of this Proposition Man is a Living
Creature, we had one Idea or Image of a Man derived from sense to the Memory,
and another to the Understanding; wherein that which deceives them is this,
that they think one Idea should be answerable to a Name, another to a
Proposition; which is false; for Pr^position signifies only the order of those
things one after another, which we observe in the same Idea of Man; so that
this Proposition Man is a Living Creature, raises but one Idea in us, though in
that Idea we consider that first, for which he is called Man, and next that for
which he is called Living Creature. The Falsities of Propositions in all these
several manners, is to be discovered by the Definitions of the Copulated Names.

10 But when Names of Bodies are copulated with Names of Bodies, Names of
Accidents with Names of Accidents, Names of Names with Names of Names, and
Names of Phantasmes with Names of Phantasmes, if we nevertheless remain still
doubtful whether such Propositions are true; we ought then in the first place
to find out the Definition of both those Names, and again the Definitions of
such Names as are in the former Definition, and so proceed by a continual
Resolution till we come to a simple Name, that is, to the most General or most
Universal Name of that kind; and if after all this the Truth or Falsity
thereof be not evident, we must search it out by Philosophy, and Ratiocination,
beginning from Definitions. For every Proposition Universally true, is either a
Definition, or part of a Definition, or the evidence of it depends upon
Definitions.

11 That fault of a Syllogism which lies bid in the Form thereof, will
always be found either in the implication of the Copula with one of the
Terms, or in the Aequivocation of some word; and in either of these ways
there will be four Terms, which (as I have shown) cannot stand in a true
Syllogism. Now the implication of the Copula with either Term, is easily
detected by reducing the Propositions to plain and clear Praedication; as (for
example) if any man should argue thus,

The Hand touches the Pen,

The Pen touches the Paper, Therefore

The Hand touches the Paper; the Fallacy will easily appear by reducing it,
thus,

The Hand, is, touching the Pen,

The Pen, is, touching the Paper, Therefore

The Hand, is, touching the Paper; where there are manifestly these four
Terms, The Hand, Touching the Pen, The Pen, and Touching the Paper. But the
danger of being deceived by Sophismes of this kind, does not seem to be so
great, as that I need insist longer upon them.

12 And though there may be Fallacy in Aequivocal Terms, yet in those that be
manifestly such there is none at all; nor in Metaphors; for they profess the
transferring of Names from one thing to another. Nevertheless sometimes
Aequivocalls (and those not very obscure) may deceive; as in this
argumentation, It belongs to Metaphysics, to treat of Principles; But the
first Principles of all, is, that the same thing cannot both exist and not
exist at the same time; and therefore it belongs to Metaphysics to treat
whether the same thing may both exist and not exist at the same time; where the
Fallacy lies in the Aequivocation of the word Principle; for whereas Aristotle
in the beginning of his Metaphysics says, that the treating of Principles
belongs to primary science, he understands by Principles, Causes of things, and
certain Existences which he calls Primary; but where he says a Primary
Proposition is a Principle, by Principle there he means the beginning and cause
of Knowledge, that is the understanding of words, which if any man want, he is
incapable of learning.

13 But the Captions of Sophists and Scepticks, by which they were wont of old
to deride and oppose Truth, were faulty for the most part, not in the Form,
but in the Matter of Syllogism; and they deceived not others oftener then they
were themselves deceived. For the force of that famous argument of Zeno against
Motion, consisted in this Proposition, Whatsoever may be divided into parts
infinite in number, the same is infinite; which he without doubt thought to be
true, yet nevertheless is false. For to be divided into infinite parts, is
nothing else but to be divided ^^^o as many parts as any man will. But it is
not necessary that a Line should have parts infinite in number, or be infinite,
because I can divide and subdivide it as often as I please; for how many parts
soever I make, yet their number is finite; but because he that says Parts,
simply, without adding how many, does not limit any number, but leaves it to
the determination of the Hearer, therefore we say commonly a line may be
divided infinitely; which cannot be true in any other sense.

And thus much may suffice concerning Syllogism, which is as it were the first
Pace toward Philosophy; in which I have said as much as is necessary, to teach
any man from whence all true argumentation has its force. And to enlarge this
Treatise with all that may be heaped together, would be as superfluous, as if
one should (as I said before) give a young child Precepts for the teaching of
him to go; for the Art of Reasoning is not so well learned by Precepts as by
Practice, and by the reading of those books in which the Conclusions are all
made by severe Demonstration. And so I pass on to the way of Philosophy, that
is, to the Method of Study.

CHAP. VI. Of Method*
1 Method and Science defined. 2 It is more easily known concerning Singular
then Universal things, That they are; and contrarily, it i^ more easily known
concerning Universal then Singular things, Why they are, or what are their
Causes. 3 What it is Philosophers seek to know. 4 The first Part, by which
Principles are found out is purely Analyticall. 5 The highest Causes, and most
Universal in every kind, are known by themselves. 6 Method from Principles
fonnd out, tending to Science simply, what it is. 7 That Method of Civil and
Natural Science which proceeds from Sense to Principles, is Analytical; and
again that which begins at Principles, is Syntheticall. 8 The Method of
searching out, whether any thing propounded, be Matter or Accident. 9 The
Method of seeking whether any Accident be in this, or in that Subject. 10 The
Method of searching after the Cause of any Effect propounded. 11 Words serve to
Invention, as Marks; to Demonstration, as Signs. 12 The Method of
Demonstration is Syntheticall. 13 Definitions only are Primary and Universal
Propositions. 14 The Nature and Definition of a Definition. 15 The Properties
of a Definition. 16 The Nature of a Demonstration. 17 The Properties of a
Demonstration, and Order of things to be demonstrated. 18 The Faults of a
Demonstration. 19 Why the Analyticall Method of Ge^metricians cannot be treated
of in this place.
1 FOr the understanding of Method, it will be necessary for me to repeat the
definition of Philosophy, delivered above (Chap. 1. Art. 2.) in this manner,
Philosophy is the knowledge we acquire by true Ratiocination, of Appearances,
or apparent Effects, from the knowledge we have of some possible Production or
Generation of the same; and of such Production as has been or may be, from the
knowledge we have of the Effects. METHOD therefore in the Study of Philosophy,
is the shortest way of finding out Effects by their known Causes, or of Causes
by their known Effects. But we are then said to know any Effect, when we know,
that there be Causes of the same, and in what Subject those Causes are, and in
what Subject they produce that Effect, and in what Manner they work the same.
And this is the Science of Causes, or as they call it of the (...). All other
Science, which is called the (...), is either Perception by Sense, or the
Imagination, or Memory remaining after such Perception.

The first Beginnings therefore of Knowledge, are the Phantasmes of Sense and
Imagination; and that there be such Phantasmes we know well enough by Nature;
but to know why they be, or from what Causes they proceed, is the work of
Ratiocination; which consists (as is said above, in the 1. Chap. 2. Art.) in
Composition, and Division or Resolution. There is therefore no Method, by which
we find out the Causes of things, but is either Compositive, or Resolutive, or
partly Compositive, and partly Resolutive. And the Resolutive is commonly
called Analyticall Method, as the Compositive is called Syntheticall.

2 It is common to all sorts of Method, to proceed from known things to
unknown; and this is manifest from the cited Definition of Philosophy. But in
Knowledge by Sense, the whole object is more known, then any part thereof; as
when we see a Man, the Conception or whole Idea of that Man is first or more
known, then the particular Ideas of his being figurate, animate, and rational;
that is, we first see the whole Man, and take notice of his Being, before we
observe in him those other Particulars. And therefore in any knowledge of the
(...), or that any thing is, the beginning of our search is from the whole
Idea; and contrarily, in our knowledge of the (...), or of the Causes of any
thing, that is, in the Sciences, we have more knowledge of the Causes of the
Parts, then of the Whole. For the Cause of the Whole is compounded of the
Causes of the Parts; but it is necessary that we know the things that are to be
compounded, before we can know the whole Compound. Now by Parts, I do not here
mean Parts of the thing it self, but Parts of its Nature; as, by the Parts of
Man I do not understand his Head, his Shoulders, his Arms, etc. but his Figure,
Quantity, Motion, Sense, Reason, and the like; which Accidents being compounded
or put together, constitute the whole Nature of Man, but not the man himself.
And this is the meaning of that common saying, namely, that some things are
more known to us, others more known to Nature; for I do not think that they
which so distinguish, mean, that something is known to Nature, which is known
to no man; and therefore, by those things that are more known to Us, we are to
understand, things we take notice of by our Senses, and by more known to
Nature, those we acquire the knowledge of by Reason; for in this sense it is,
that the Whole, that is, those things that have Universal Names, (which for
brevities sake I call Universal) are more known to us then the Parts, that
is, such things as have Names less Universal, (which I therefore call
Singular;) and the Causes of the Parts, are more known to Nature then the Cause
of the Whole; that is, Universalls then Singulars.

3 In the Study of Philosophy men search after Science either Simply, or
Indefinitely; that is, to know as much as they can, without propounding to
themselves any limited question; or they enquire into the Cause of some
determined Appearance, or endeavor to find out the certainty of something in
question; as what is the cause of Light, of Heat, of Gravity, of a Figure
propounded, and the like; or in what Subject any propounded Accident is
inhaerent; or what may conduce most to the generation of some propounded Effect
from many Accidents; or in what manner particular Causes ought to be compounded
for the production of some certain Effect. Now according to this variety of
things in question, sometimes the Analyticall Method is to be used, and
sometimes the Syntheticall.

4 But to those that search after Science indefinitely, which consists in the
knowledge of the Causes of all things, as far forth as it may be attained, and
the Causes of Singular things are compounded of the Causes of Universal or
Simple things, it is necessary that they know the Causes of Universal things,
or of such Accidents as are common to all Bodies, that is, to all Matter,
before they can know the Causes of Singular things, that is, of those Accidents
by which one thing is distinguished from another. And again they must know
what those Universal things are, before they can know their Causes. Moreover,
seeing Universal things are contained in the Nature of Singular things, the
knowledge of them is to be acquired by Reason, that is, by Resolution. *For
example, if there be propounded a Conception or Idea of some Singular thing, as
of a Square, this Square is to be resolved into a Plain, terminated with a
certain number of equal and straight lines and right angles. For by this
Resolution we have these things Universal or agreeable to all Matter, namely,
Line, Plain, (which contains Superficies,) Terminated, Angle, Straightness,
Rectitude and Equality; and if we can find out the Causes of these, we may
compound them all together into the Cause of a Square. Again, if any man
propound to himself the Conception of Gold, he may by Resolving come to the
Ideas of Solid, Visible, Heavy, (that is, tending to the Center of the Earth,
or downwards,) and many other more Universal then Gold it self; and these he
may Resolve again, till he come to such things as are most Universal. And in
this manner by Resolving continually, we may come to know what those things
are, whose Causes being first known severally, and afterward compounded, bring
us to the Knowledge of Singular things. I conclude therefore, that the Method
of attaining to the Universal Knowledge of Things, is purely Analyticall.

5 But the Causes of Universal things (of those at least that have any Cause)
are manifest of themselves, or (as they say commonly) known to Nature; so that
they need no Method at all; for they have all but one Universal Cause, which
is Motion. For the variety of all Figures arises out of the variety of those
Motions by which they are made; and Motion cannot be understood to have any
other Cause besides Motion; nor has the Variety of those things we perceive by
Sense, as of Colors, Sounds, Savours, etc. any other Cause then Motion,
residing partly in the Objects that work upon our Senses, and partly in our
selves, in such manner, as that it is manifestly some kind of Motion, though we
cannot without Ratiocination come to know what kind. For though many cannot
understand till it be in some sort demonstrated to them, that all Mutation
consists in Motion; yet this happens not from any obscurity in the thing it
self, (for it is not intelligible that any thing can depart either from Rest,
or from the Motion it has, except by Motion;) but either by having their
Natural Discourse corrupted with former Opinions received from their Masters,
or else for this, that they do not at all bend their mind to the enquiring out
of Truth,

6 By the Knowledge therefore of Universalls, and of their Causes (which are
the first Principles by which we know the (...) of things,) we have in the
first place their Definitions, (which are nothing but the explication of our
Simple Conceptions.) For example, he that has a true Conception of Place,
cannot be ignorant of this Definition, Place is that space which is possessed
or filled adaequately by some Body; and so, he that conceives Motion aright,
cannot but know, that Motion is the privation of one Place, and the acquisition
of another. In the next place, we have their Generations or Descriptions; as,
(for example,) that a Line is made by the Motion of a Point, Superficies by the
Motion of a Line, and one Motion by another Motion, etc. It remains, that we
enquire, what Motion begets such and such Effects; as, what Motion makes a
Straight line, and what a Circular; what Motion thrusts, what draws, and by
what way; what makes a thing which is seen or heard, to be seen or heard
sometimes in one manner, sometimes in another. Now the Method of this kind of
Enquiry, is Compositive. For first we are to observe what Effect a Body moved
produces, when we consider nothing in it besides its Motion; and we see
presently that this makes a Line, or length; next, what the Motion of a long
Body produces, which we find to be Superficies; and so forwards, till we see
what the Effects of Simple Motion are; and then in like manner, we are to
observe what proceeds from the Addition, Multiplication, Substraction and
Division of these Motions, and what Effects, what Figures, and what Properties
they produce; from which kind of Contemplation sprung that part of Philosophy
which is called Geometry.

From this consideration of what is produced by Simple Motion, we are to pass
to the consideration of what Effects one Body moved works upon another; and
because there may be Motion in all the several parts of a Body, yet so as that
the whole Body remain still in the same place, we must enquire, first, what
Motion causes such and such Motion in the whole, that is, when one Body
invades another Body which is either at Rest, or in Motion, what way, and with
what swiftness the invaded Body shall move; and again, what Motion this second
Body will generate in a third, and so forwards. From which Contemplation shall
be drawn that part of Philosophy which treats of Motion.

In the Third place we must proceed to the Enquiry of such Effects, as are made
by the Motion of the Parts of any Body, as, how it comes to pass, that things
when they are the same, yet seem not to be the same, but changed. And here the
things we search after are sensible Qualities, such as Light, Color,
Transparency, Opacity, Sound, Odor, Savor, Heat, Cold and the like; which
because they cannot be known till we know the Causes of Sense it self,
therefore the consideration of the Causes of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting
and Touching belongs to this third place; and all those qualities and Changes
above mentioned are to be referred to the fourth place; which two
considerations comprehend that part of Philosophy which is called Physiques.
And in these four parts is contained whatsoever in Natural Philosophy may be
explicated by Demonstration properly so called. For if a Cause were to be
rendered of Natural Appearances in special, as, what are the Motions and
Influences of the heavenly Bodies, and of their parts, the reason hereof must
either be drawn from the parts of the Sciences above mentioned, or no reason at
all will be given, but all left to uncertain conjecture.

After Physiques we must come to Moral Philosophy; in which we are to consider
the Motions of the Mind, namely Appetite, Aversion, Love, Benevolence, Hope,
Fear, Anger, Emulation, Envy, etc. what Causes they have, and of what they be
Causes. And the reason why these are to be considered after Physiques, is, that
they have their Causes in Sense and Imagination, which are the Subject of
Physical Contemplation. Also the reason why all these Things are to be
searched after in the order abovesaid, is, that Physiques cannot be understood,
except we know first what Motions are in the smallest parts of Bodies; nor such
Motion of Parts, till we know what it is that makes another Body move; nor
this, till we know what Simple Motion will effect. And because all Appearance
of things to sense is determined, and made to be of such and such Quality and
Quantity by Compounded Motions, every one of which has a certain degree of
Velocity, and a certain and determined way; therefore in the first place we
are to search out the ways of Motion simply, (in which Geometry consists;)
next the ways of such generated Motions as are manifest; and lastly the ways
of internal and invisible Motions, (which is the Enquiry of Natural
Philosophers.) And therefore they that study Natural Philosophy, study in
vain, except they begin at Geometry; and such Writers or Disputers thereof, as
are ignorant of Geometry, do but make their Readers and Hearers lose their time.

7 Civil and Moral Philosophy do not so adhere to one another, but that they
may be severed. For the Causes of the Motions of the Mind are known not only
by Ratiocination, but also by the Experience of every man that takes the pains
to observe those Motions within himself. And therefore not only they that have
attained the knowledge of the Passions and Perturbations of the Mind, by the
Syntheticall Method and from the very first Principles of Philosophy, may by
proceeding in the same way come to the Causes and Necessity of constituting
Commonwealths, and to get the Knowledge of what is Natural Right, and what
are Civil Duties; and in every kind of Government, what are the Rights of the
Commonwealth, and all other Knowledge appertaining to Civil Philosophy, for
this reason, that the Principles of the Politiques consist in the Knowledge of
the Motions of the Mind, and the Knowledge of these Motions from the knowledge
of Sense and Imagination; but even they also that have not learned the first
part of Philosophy, namely Geometry and Physiques, may notwithstanding attain
the Principles of Civil Philosophy, by the Analyticall Method. For if a
Question be propounded, as Whether such an Action be Just or Unjust; if that
Unjust be resolved into Fact against Law, and that notion of Law into the
Command of him or them that have Coercive Power; and that Power be derived from
the Wills of Men that constitute such Power to the end they may live in Peace,
they may at last come to this, that the Appetites of Men and the Passions of
their Minds are such, that unless they be restrained by some Power, they will
always be making war upon one another; which may be known to be so by any
man's experience, that will but examine his own Mind. And therefore from hence
he may proceed by Compounding, to the determination of the Justice or Injustice
of any propounded Action. So that it is manifest by what has been said, that
the Method of Philosophy to such as seek Science simply, without propounding to
themselves the Solution of any Particular question, is partly Analyticall, and
partly Syntheticall; namely, that which proceeds from Sense to the invention of
Principles, Analyticall; and the rest Syntheticall.

8 To those that seek the Cause of some certain and pro pounded Appearance or
Effect, it happens sometimes, that they know not whether the thing whose Cause
is sought after, be Matter or Body, or some Accident of a Body. For though in
Geometry, when the Cause is sought of Magnitude, or Proportion, or Figure, it
be certainly known that these things, namely Magnitude, Proportion and Figure
are Accidents; yet in Natural Philosophy, where all questions are concerning
the Causes of the Phantasmes of sensible things, it is not so easy to discern
between the things themselves from which those Phantasmes proceed, and the
Appearances of those things to the sense; which have deceived many, especially
when the Phantasmes have been made by Light. For Example, a Man that looks upon
the Sun, has a certain shining Idea of ^^e Magnitude of about a fo^t over;
and this he calls the Sun, thoug^e know the Sun to be truly a great deal
bigger and in like (...), the Phantasme of the same thing appears sometimes
^^und* by being (...) a ^arre off, and sometimes square, by being nearer.
Whereupon ^t may well be doubted whether that Phantasme be Man* or some Body
Natural, or only some Accident of a Body; in the examination of which doubt
we may use this Method. The Properties of Matter and Accidents already found
out by Us by the Syntheticall Method from their Definitions, are to be compared
with the Idea we have before us; and if it agree with the Properties of Matter
or Body, then it is a Body; otherwise it is an Accident. Seeing therefore
Matter cannot by any endeavor of ours be either Made or Destroyed, or
Increased, or Diminished, or Moved out of its place, whereas that Idea
Appears, Vanishes, is Increased, and Diminished, and Moved hither and thither
at pleasure; we may certainly conclude that it is not a Body, but an Accident
only. And this Method is Syntheticall.

9 But if there be a doubt made concerning the Subject of any known Accident,
(for this may be doubted sometimes, as in the praecedent example doubt may be
made in what Subject that Splendour and apparent Magnitude of the Sun is) then
our enquiry must proceed in this manner. First, Matter in General must be
divided into parts, as into Object, Medium, and the Sentient it self, or such
other parts as seem most conformable to the thing propounded. Next, these parts
are severally to be examined how they agree with the Definition of the Subject;
and such of them as are not capable of that Accident are to be rejected. For
example, If by any true Ratiocination the Sun be found to be greater then its
apparent Magnitude, then that Magnitude is not in the Sun; If the Sun be in
one determined straight line, and one determined distance, and the Magnitude
and Splendour be seen in more lines and distances then one, as it is in
Reflection or Refraction, then neither that Splendour nor apparent Magnitude are
in the Sun it self, and therefore the Body of the Sun cannot be the Subject of
that Splendour and Magnitude. And for the same reasons the Air and other parts
will be rejected, till at last nothing remain which can be the Subject of that
Splendour and Magnitude but the Sentient it self. And this Method, in regard
the Subject is divided into parts is Analitycall; and in regard the Properties
both of the Subject and Accident are compared with the Accident concerning
whose Subject the enquiry is made, it is Syntheticall.

10 But when we seek after the Cause of any propounded Effect; we must in the
first place get into our Mind an exact Notion or Idea of that which we call
Cause, namely, that A Cause is the Sum or Aggregate of all such Accidents
both in the Agents and the Patient, as concur to the producing of the Effect
propounded; all which existing together, it cannot be understood but that the
Effect existeth with them; or that it cannot possibly exist if any one of them
be absent. This being known, in the next place we must examine singly every
Accident that accompanies or praecedes the Effect, as far forth as it seems
to conduce in any manner to the production of the same, and see whether the
propounded Effect may be conceived to exist, without the existence of any of
those Accidents; and by this means separate such Accidents as do not concur,
from such as concur to produce the said Effect; which being done, we are to
put together the concurring Accidents, and consider whether we can possibly
conceive that when these are all present, the Effect propounded will not
follow; and if it be evident that the Effect will follow, then that Aggregate
of Accidents is the entire Cause, otherwise not; but we must still search out
and put together other Accidents. For example, if the Cause of Light be
propounded to be sought out; first, we examine things without us, and find that
whenever Light appears, there is some principal Object, as it were the
fountain of Light, without which we cannot have any perception of Light; and
therefore the concurrence of that Object is necessary to the generation of
Light. Next we consider the Medium, and find that unless it be disposed in a
certain manner, namely, that it be transparent, though the Object remain the
same, yet the Effect will not follow; and therefore the concurrence of
Transparency is also necessary to the generation of Light. Thirdly, we observe
our own Body, and find that by the indisposition of the Eyes, the Brain, the
Nerves, and the Heart, that is, by Obstructions, Stupidity and Debility we are
deprived of Light, so that a fitting disposition of the Organs to receive
impressions from without is likewise a necessary part of the Cause of Light.
Again, of all the Accidents inhaerent in the Object, there is none that can
conduce to the effecting of Light, but only Action, (or a certain Motion,)
which cannot be conceived to be wanting, whenever the Effect is present; for,
that any thing may shine, it is not requisite that it be of such or such
^agnitude or Figure, or that the whole Body of it be moved out of the place it
is in, (unless it may perhaps be said, that in the Sun or other Body, that
which causes Light is the light it has in it self; which yet is but a
trifling exception, seeing nothing is meant thereby but the Cause of Light; as
if any man should say that the Cause of Light is that in the Sun which
produces it;) it remains therefore that the Action by which Light is
generated, is Motion only in the parts of the Object. Which being understood,
we may easily conceive what it is the Medium contributes, namely, the
continuation of that Motion to the Eye; and lastly what the Eye and the rest of
the Organs of the Sentient contribute, namely, the continuation of the same
Motion to the last Organ of Sense, the Heart. And in this manner the Cause of
Light may be made up of Motion continued from the Original of the same Motion,
to the Original of Vital Motion, Light being nothing but the alteration of
Vital Motion, made by the impression upon it of Motion continued from the
Object. But I give this only for an example, for I shall speak more at large
of Light, and the generation of it in its proper place. In the mean time it is
manifest, that in the searching out of Causes, there is need partly of the
Analyticall, and partly of the Syntheticall Method; of the Analyticall, to
conceive how circumstances conduce severally to the production of Effects; and
of the Syntheticall, for the adding together and compounding of what they can
effect singly by themselves. And thus much may serve for the Method of
Invention. It remains that I speak of the Method of Teaching, that is, of
Demonstration, and of the Means by which we demonstrate.

11 In the Method of Invention the use of words consists in this, that they may
serve for Marks, by which, whatsoever we have found out may be recalled to
memory; for without this all our Inventions perish, nor will it be possible for
us to go on from Principles beyond a Syllogism or two, by reason of the
weakness of Memory. For example, if any man by considering a Triangle set
before him, should find that all its angles together taken are equal to two
right angles, and that by thinking of the same tacitly, without any use of
words either understood or expressed; and it should happen afterward that
another Triangle unlike the former, or the same in different situation should
be offered to his consideration, he would not know readily whether the same
property were in this last or no; but would be forced as often as a different
Triangle were brought before him (and the difference of Triangles is infinite)
to begin his contemplation anew; which he would have no need to do if he had
the use of Names; for every Universal Name denotes the conceptions we have of
infinite Singular things.. Nevertheless as I said above, they serve as Marks
for the help of our Memory, whereby we register to our selves our own
Inventions; but not as Signs by which we declare the same to others; so that a
man may be a Philosopher alone by himself without any Master; Adam had this
capacity; But to Teach, that is to Demonstrate, supposes two at the least, and
Syllogisticall Speech.

12 And seeing Teaching is nothing but leading the Mind of him we teach, to the
knowledge of our Inventions, in that Track by which we attained the same with
our own Mind; therefore the same Method that served for our Invention, will
serve also for Demonstration to others, saving that we omit the first part of
Method which proceeded from the Sense of Things to Universal Principles; which
because they are Principles, cannot be demonstrated; and seeing they are known
by Nature (as was said above in the 5th. Article) they need no Demonstration,
though they need Explication. The whole Method therefore of Demonstration is
Syntheticall, consisting of that order of Speech, which begins from Primary or
most Universal Propositions, which are manifest of themselves, and proceeds by
a perpetual composition of Propositions into Syllogismes, till at last the
Learner understand the truth of the Conclusion sought after.

13 Now such Principles are nothing but Definitions; whereof there are two
sorts; one, of Names that signify such things as have some conceiveable Cause,
and another of such Names as signify things of which we can conceive no Cause
at all. Names of the former kind are, Body or Matter, Quantity or Extension,
Motion, and whatsoever is common to all Matter. Of the second kind are, such a
Body, such and so great Motion, so great Magnitude, such Figure, and whatsoever
we can distinguish one Body from another by. And Names of the former kind are
well enough defined, when by Speech as short as may be, we raise in the Mind of
the Hearer perfect and clear Ideas or Conceptions of the Things named, as when
we Define Motion to be the leaving of one place, and the acquiring of another
continually; for though no Thing Moved, nor any Cause of Motion be in that
Definition, yet at the hearing of that Speech, there will come into the Mind of
the Hearer an Idea of Motion cl^er enough. But Definitions of things which may
be understood to have some Cause, must consist of such Names as express the
Cause or Manner of their Generation, as when we Define a Circle to be a Figure
made by the circumduction of a straight line in a plain, etc. Besides
Definitions, there is no other Proposition that ought to be called Primary, or
(according to severe truth) be received into the number of Principles. For
those Axioms of Euclide, seeing they may be demonstrated are no Principles of
Demonstration, though they have by the consent of all Men gotten the authority
of Principles, because they need not be Demonstrated. Also those Petitious or
Postulata (as they call them) though they be Principles yet they are not
Principles of Demonstration, but of Construction only; that is, not of
Science, but of Power; or (which is all one) not of Theoremes, which are
Speculations, but of Problemes, which belong to Practice, or the doing of
something. But as for those common received Opinions, Nature abhorres Vanity,
Nature does nothing in Vain, and the like, which are neither evident in
themselves, nor at all to be demonstrated, and which are oftener false then
true, they are much less to be ackowledged for Principles.

To return therefore to Definitions, The reason why I say that the Cause and
Generation of such things as have any Cause or Generation, ought to enter into
their Definitions, is this. The End of Science, is the Demonstration of the
Causes and Generations of Things; which if they be not in the Definitions, they
cannot be found in the Conclusion of the first Syllogism that is made from
those Definitions; and if they be not in the first Conclusion, they will not be
found in any further Conclusion deduced from that; and therefore by proceeding
in this manner we shall never come to Science; which is against the scope and
intention of Demonstration.

14 Now seeing Definitions (as I have said) are Principles or Primary
Propositions, they are therefore Speeches; and seeing they are used for the
raising of an Idea of some Thing in the mind of the Learner, whenever that
Thing has a Name, the Definition of it can be nothing but the Explication of
that Name by Speech; and if that Name be given it for some compounded
Conception, the Definition is nothing but a Resolution of that Name into its
most Universal parts. As when we define Man, saying, Man is a Body Animated,
Sentient, Rational, those Names Body Animated, etc. are parts of that whole
Name Man; so that Definitions of this kind always consist of Genus and
Difference; the former Names being all till the last, General; and the last of
all, Difference. But if any Name be the most Universal in its kind, then the
Definition of it cannot consist of Genus and Difference, but is to be made by
such circumlocution as best explicateth the force of that Name. Again, it is
possible, and happens often that the Genus and Difference are put together, and
yet make no Definition; as these Words a Straight Line contain both the Genus
and Difference; but are not a Definition, unless we should think a Straight
Line may be thus defined, A Straight Line is a Straight Line; and yet if there
were added another Name consisting of different Words, but signifying the same
thing which these signify, then these might be the Definition of that Name.
From what has been said it may be understood how a Definition ought to be
defined, namely, That it is a Proposition, whose Praedicate Resolves the
Subject, when it may, and when it may not, it exemplifies the same.

15 The Properties of a Definition are,

First, that it takes away Aequivocation, as also all that multitude of
Distinctions, which are used by such as think they may learn Philosophy by
Disputation. For the Nature of a Definition is to define, that is, to determine
the signification of the defined Name, and to pare from it all other
Signification besides what is contained in the Definition it self; and
therefore one Definition does as much, as all the Distinctions (how many
soever) that can be used about the Name defined.

Secondly, That it gives an Universal Notion of the thing defined,
representing a certain Universal Picture thereof, not to the Eye, but to the
Mind. For as when one paints a Man, he paints the image of some Man; so he that
defines the Name Man, makes a Representation of some Man to the mind.

Thirdly, That it is not necessary to dispute whether Definitions are to be
admitted or no. For when a Master is instructing his Scholar, if the Scholar
understand all the parts of the thing defined, which are Resolved in the
Definition, and yet will not admit of the Definition, there needs no further
Controversy betwixt them, it being all one as if he refused to be taught. But
if he understand nothing, then certainly the Definition is faulty; for the
nature of a Definition consists in this, that it exhibit a clear Idea of the
thing defined; and Principles are either known by themselves, or else they are
not Principles.

Fourthly, That in Philosophy, Definitions are before defined Names. For in
teaching Philosophy, the first beginning is from Definitions, and all
progression in the same till we come to the Knowledge of the thing compounded,
is Compositive. Seeing therefore Definition is the explication of a Compounded
Name by Resolution, and the progression is from the parts to the compound,
Definitions must be understood before Compounded Names; nay when the Names of
the parts of any Speech be explicated, is it not necessary that the Definition
should be a Name Compounded of them. For example, when these Names,
Aequilaterall, Quadrilaterall, Right-angled, are sufficiently understood, it is
not necessary in Geometry that there should be at all such a Name as Square;
for defined Names are received in Philosophy for brevities sake only.

Fifthly, That Compounded Names which are defined one way in some one part of
Philosophy, may in another part of the same be otherwise defined; as a Parabola
and an Hyperbole have one Definition in Geometry, and another in Rhetorique;
for Definitions are instituted and serve for the understanding of the Doctrine
which is treated of. And therefore as in one part of Philosophy, a Definition
may have in it some one fit Name for the more brief explanation of some
proposition in Geometry; so it may have the same liberty in other parts of
Philosophy; for the use of Names is particular (even where many agree to the
settling of them) and arbitrary.

Sixthly, That no Name can be defined by any one Word; because no one Word is
sufficient for the Resolving of one or more words.

Seventhly, That a defined Name ought not to be repeated in the Definition. For
a defined Name, is the whole Compound, and a Definition is the Resolution of
that Compound into parts; but no Total can be part of it self.

16 Any two Definitions that may be compounded into a Syllogism, produce a
Conclusion; which because it is derived from Principles, that is, from
Definitions, is said to be Demonstrated; and the Derivation or Composition it
self is called a Demonstration. In like manner, if a Syllogism be made of two
Propositions, whereof one is a Definition, the other a Demonstrated Conclusion,
or neither of them is a Definition, but both formerly demonstrated, that
Syllogism is also called a Demonstration, and so successively. The Definition
therefore of a Demonstration is this, A DEMONSTRATION is a Syllogism or Series
of Syllogisms derived and continued from the Definitions of Names, to the last
Conclusion. And from hence it may be understood, that all true Ratiocination,
which takes its beginning from true Principles, produces Science, and is true
Demonstration. For as for the Original of the Name, although that which the
Greeks called (...), and the Latins Demonstratio was understood by them for
that sort only of Ratiocination, in which by the describing of certain Lines
and Figures, they placed the thing they were to prove, as it were before men's
Eyes, which is properly (...), or to show by the Figure; yet they seem to have
done it for this reason, that unless it were in Geometry (in which only there
is place for such Figures) there was no Ratiocination certain, and ending in
Science, their Doctrines concerning all other things being nothing but
Controversy and Clamor; which nevertheless happened not because the Truth to
which they pretended could not be made evident without Figures, but because
they wanted true Principles, from which they might derive their Ratiocination;
and therefore there is no reason but that if true Definitions were praemised in
all sorts of Doctrines, the Demonstrations also would be true.

17 It is proper to Methodical Demonstration,

First, That there be a true Succession of one Reason to another, according to
the Rules of Syllogizing delivered above.

Secondly, That the Praemisses of all Syllogismes be demonstrated from the
first Definitions.

Thirdly, That after Definitions, he that Teaches or Demonstrates any thing,
proceed in the same Method by which he found it out; namely, that in the first
place those things be demonstrated which immediately succeed to Universal
Definitions (in which is contained that part of Philosophy which is called
Philosophia Prima.) Next, those things which may be demonstrated by Simple
Motion (in which Geometry consists.) After Geome try, such things as may be
taught or showed by manifest Action, that is, by Thrusting from, or Pulling
toward. And after these, the Motion or Mutation of the invisible parts of
Things, and the Doctrine of Sense and Imagination and of the internal Passions,
especially those of Men, in which are comprehended the Grounds of Civil Duties,
or Civil Philosophy; which takes up the last place. And that this Method ought
to be kept in all sorts of Philosophy, is evident from hence, that such things
as I have said are to be taught last cannot be demonstrated, till such as are
propounded to be first treated of, be fully understood. Of which Method no
other Example can be given, but that Treatise of the Elements of Philosophy,
which I shall begin in the next Chapter, and continue to the end of the work.

18 Besides those Paralogismes, whose fault lies either in the Falsity of the
Praemisses, or the want of true Composition, of which I have spoken in the
praecedent Chapter, there are two more which are frequent in Demonstration; one
whereof is commonly called Petitio Principii; the other is the supposing of a
False Cause; and these do not only deceive Unskilful Learners but sometimes
Masters themselves, by making them take that for well demonstrated which is not
demonstrated at all. Petitio Principii, is when the Conclusion to be proved, is
disguised in other Words, and put for the Definition or Principle from whence
it is to be demonstrated; and thus by putting for the Cause of the Thing
sought, either the Thing it self or some Effect of it, they make a Circle in
their Demonstration. As for example, He that would Demonstrate that the Earth
stands still in the Center of the World, and should suppose the Earths Gravity
to be the Cause thereof, and define Gravity to be a quality by which every
heavy Body tends toward the Center of the World, would lose his labor; for
the question is, What is the Cause of that quality in the Earth; and therefore
he that supposes Gravity to be the Cause, puts the Thing it self for its own
Cause.

Of a False Cause I find this example in a certain Treatise where the thing to
be demonstrated is the Motion of the Earth. He begins therefore with this, that
seeing the Earth and the Sun are not always in the same situation, it must
needs be that one of them be locally moved; which is true; next he affirms that
the Vapors which the Sun raises from the Earth and Sea are by reason of this
Motion necessarily moved; which also is true; from whence he infers the Winds
are made, and this may pass for granted; and by these Winds he says the
Waters of the Sea are moved, and by their Motion the bottom of the Sea, as if
it were beaten forwards, moves round; and let this also be granted; wherefore
he concludes, the Earth is moved; which is nevertheless is a Paralogisme. For
if that wind were the Cause why the Earth was from the beginning moved round,
and the Motion either of the Sun or the Earth were the Cause of that Wind,
then the Motion of the Sun or the Earth was before the Wind it self; and if
the Earth were Moved before the Wind was made, then the Wind could not be the
cause of the Earths revolution; but if the Sun were Moved, and the Earth
stand still, then it is manifest the Earth might remain Unmoved notwithstanding
that Wind; and therefore that motion was not made by the Cause which he
alleges. But Parallogismes of this kind are very frequent among the Writers
of Physiques, though none can be more elaborate then this in the Example given.

19 It may to some men seem pertinent to treat in this place of that Art of the
Geometricians, which they call Logistica, that is, the Art, by which, from
supposing the thing in question to be true, they proceed by Ratiocination, till
either they come to something known, by which they may demonstrate the truth
of the thing sought for; or to something which is impossible, from whence they
collect that to be false which they supposed true. But this Art cannot be
explicated here, for this reason, that the Method of it can neither be
practiced, nor understood unless by such as are well versed in Geometry; and
among Geometricians themselves, they that have most Theoremes in readiness, are
the most ready in the use of this Logistica; so that indeed it is not a
distinct thing from Geometry it self; for there are in the Method of it three
parts; the first whereof consists in the finding out of Equality betwixt known
and unknown things, which they call Equation; and this Equation cannot be found
out but by such as know perfectly the Nature, Properties and Transpositions of
Proportion, as also the Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and Division of
Lines and Superficies, and the Extraction of Roots; which are the parts of no
mean Geometrician. The Second is, when an Equation is found, to be able to
judge whether the Truth or Falsity of the Question may be deduced from it or
no; which yet requires greater Knowledge. And the third is, when such an
Equation is found, as is fit for the solution of the Question, to know how to
Resolve the same in such manner, that the Truth or Falsity may thereby
manifestly appear, which in hard questions cannot be done without the
Knowledge of the Nature of Crooked-lined Figures; but he that understands
readily the Nature and Properties of these, is a Complete Geometrician. It
happens besides, that for the finding out of Equations there is no certain
Method, but he is best able to do it, that has the best Natural Wit.

THE FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. VII. Of Place and Time.
1 Things that have no existence, may nevertheless be under stood and
computed. 2 What is space. 3 Time. 4 Part. 5 Division. 6 One 7 Number. 8
Composition. 9 The Whole. 10 Spaces and Times Contiguous, and Continual. 11
Beginning, End, Way, Finite, Infinite. 12 What is Infinite in Power. Nothing
Infinite can be truly said to be either Whole, or One; Nor Infinite Spaces or
Times, Many. 13 Division proceeds not to the Least.
1 IN the Teaching of Natural Philosophy, I cannot begin better (as I have
already shown) then from Privation; that is, from feigning the World to be
annihilated. But if such annihilation of all things be supposed, it may perhaps
be asked, what would remain for any Man (whom only I except from this
Universal annihilation of things) to consider as the Subject of Philosophy, or
at all to reason upon; or what to give Names unto for Ratiocinations sake.

I say therefore there would remain to that Man Ideas of the World, and of all
such Bodies as he had, before their annihilation, seen with his eyes, or
perceived by any other Sense; that is to say, the Memory and Imagination of
Magnitudes, Motions, Sounds, Colors, etc. as also of their order and parts.
All which things though they be nothing but Ideas and Phantasms* happening
internally to him that imagines; yet they will appear as if they were
external, and not at all depending upon any power of the Mind. And these are
the things to which he would give Names, and substract them from, and compound
them with one another. For seeing that after the destruction of all other
things, I suppose Man still remaining, and namely that he thinks, imagines,
and remembers, there can be nothing for him to think of but what is Past; Nay,
if we do but observe diligently what it is we do when we consider and reason,
we shall find, that though all things be still remaining in the world, yet we
compute nothing but our own Phantasmes. For when we calculate the magnitude and
motions of Heaven or Earth, we do not ascend into Heaven that we may divide it
into parts, or measure the motions thereof, but we do it sitting still in our
Closets or in the Dark. Now things may be considered, that is, be brought into
Account, either as internal Accidents of our Mind, in which manner we consider
them when the question is about some Faculty of the Mind; or as Species of
external things, not as really existing, but appearing only to exist, or to
have a Being without Us. And in this manner we are now to consider them.

2 If therefore we remember, or have a Phantasme of any thing that was in the
world before the supposed annihilation of the same; and consider, not that the
thing was such or such, but only that it had a Being without the Mind, we have
presently a Conception of that we call Space: an Imaginary Space indeed,
because a mere Phantasme, yet that very thing which all men call so. For no
man calls it Space for being already filled, but because it may be filled; nor
does any man think Bodies carry their Places away with them, but that the same
Space contains sometimes one, sometimes another Body; which could not be if
Space should always accompany the Body which is once in it. And this is of it
self so manifest, that I should not think it needed any explaining at all,
but that I find Space to be falsely defined by certain Philosophers, who
infer from thence, One, that the world is Infinite; for taking Space to be
the Extension of Bodies, and thinking Extension may increase continually, he
inferres that Bodies may be infinitely Extended; and Another from the same
Definition concludes rashly, that it is impossible even to God himself to
create more Worlds then one; for if another World were to be created, he says,
that seeing there is nothing without this world, and therefore (according to
his Definition) no Space, that new world must be placed in nothing; but in
nothing nothing can be placed; which he affirms only, without showing any
reason for the same; whereas the contrary is the truth: for more cannot be put
into a Place already filled, so much is Empty Space fitter then that which is
Full for the receiving of new Bodies. Having therefore spoken thus much for
these men's sakes, and for theirs that assent to them, I return to my purpose,
and define Space thus, SPACE is the Phantasme of a Thing existing without the
Mind simply; that is to say, that Phantasme, in which we consider no other
Accident, but only that it appears without us.

3 As a Body leaves a Phantasme of its Magnitude in the mind, so also a Moved
Body leaves a Phantasme of its Motion, namely an Idea of that Body passing out
of one Space into another by continual succession. And this Idea or Phantasme,
is that which (without receding much from the common opinion, or from
Aristotle's Definition) I call Time. For seeing all men confess a Year to be
Time, and yet do not think a Year to be the Accident or Affection of any Body,
they must needs confess it to be, not in the things without Us, but only in
the Thought of the Mind. So when they speak of the Times of their
Predecessors, they do not think after their Predecessors are gone, that their
Times can be any where else then in the Memory of those that remember them. And
as for those that say, Days, Years and Months are the Motions of the Sun
and Moon, seeing it is all one to say, Motion Past and Motion Destroyed, and
that Future Motion is the same with Motion which Is not yet begun, they say,
that which they do not mean, that there neither is, nor has been, nor shall be
any Time: for of whatsoever it may be said, It has been or It shall be, of the
same also it might have been said heretofore, or may be said hereafter, It is.
What then can Days, Months and Years be, but the Names of such Computations
made in our Mind? Time therefore is a Phantasme, but a Phantasme of Motion, for
if we would know by what Moments Time passes away, we make use of some Motion
or other, as of the Sun, of a Clock, of the sand in an Hourglasse, or we mark
some Line upon which we imagine something to be Moved, there being no other
means by which we can take notice of any Time at all. And yet when I say Time
is a Phantasme of Motion, I do not say this is sufficient to define it by; for
this word Time comprehends the notion of Former and Later, or of Succession in
the motion of a Body, in as much as it is first Here then There. Wherefore a
complete Definition of Time is such as this, TIME is the Phantasme of Before
and After in Motion; which agrees with this Definition of Aristotle, Time is
the Number of Motion according to Former and Later; for that Numbering is an act
of the Mind; and therefore it is all one to say, Time is the Number of Motion
according to Former and Later; and Time is a Phantasme of Motion Numbered. But
that other Definition, Time is the Measure of Motion, is not so exact; for we
measure Time by Motion and not Motion by Time.

4 One Space is called Part of another Space, and one Time Part of another
Time, when this contains that and something besides. From whence it may be
collected, that nothing can rightly be called a PART, but that which is
compared with something that contains it.

5 And therefore to make parts, or to Part or DIVIDE Space or Time, is nothing
else but to consider One and Another within the same; so that if any Man Divide
Space or Time, the diverse Conceptions he has are more by one, then the Parts
he makes; for his first Conception is of that which is to be divided, then of
some Part of it, and again of some other Part of it, and so forwards as long as
he goes on in Dividing.

But it is to be noted, that here by Division, I do not mean the severing or
pulling asunder of one Space or Time from another (for does any man think that
one Hemisphere may be separated from the other Hemisphere, or the first Hour
from the second?) but Diversity of Consideration; so that Division is not made
by the operation of the Hands but of the Mind.

6 When Space or Time is considered among other Spaces or Times, it is said to
be ONE, namely One of them; for except One Space might be added to another, and
subtracted from another Space, and so of Time, it would be sufficient to say
Space or Time simply, and superfluous to say One Space or One Time, if it could
not be conceived that there were another. The common Definition of One, namely,
that One is that which is Undivided, is obnoxious to an absurd Consequence; for
it may thence be inferred, that whatsoever is Divided, is many things, that is,
that every Divided thing, is Divided Things, which is Insignificant.

7 NUMBER is. One and One, or One One and One, and so forwards; namely One and
One make the Number Two, and One One and One, the Number Three; and so are all
other Numbers made; which is all one as if we should say, Number is Unities.

8 To COMPOUND Space of Spaces, or Time of Times, is first to Consider them one
after another, and then altogether as One; as if one should reckon first the
Head, the Feet, the Arms and the Body severally, and then for the account of
them all together put Man. And that which is so put for all the severalls of
which it consists, is called the WHOLE; and those severalls, when by the
Division of the Whole, they come again to be considered singly, are parts
thereof; and therefore the Whole, and all the Parts taken together, are the
same thing. And as I noted above, that in Division it is not necessary to pull
the Parts asunder; so in Composition it is to be understood, that for the
making up of a whole there is no need of putting the Parts together, so as to
make them touch one another, but only of collecting them into one sum in the
Mind. For thus all Men being considered together, make up the Whole of Mankind,
though never so much dispersed by Time and Place; and twelve Hours, though the
hours of several days, may be Compounded into one Number of Twelve.

9 This being well understood, it is manifest, that nothing can rightly be
called a Whole, that is not conceived to be compounded of Parts, and that it
may be divided into parts; so that if we deny that a thing has parts, we deny
the same to be a Whole. For example, if we say the soul can have no Parts, we
affirm that no soul can be a Whole soul. Also it is manifest, that Nothing has
Parts till it be Divided; and when a Thing is Divided, the Parts are only so
many as the Division makes them. Again, that a Part of a Part is a Part of the
Whole; and thus any Part of the Number Four, as Two, is a Part of the Number
Eight; for Four is made of Two and Two; but Eight is compounded of Two, Two and
Four; and therefore Two which is a Part of the Part Four, is also a Part of the
whole Eight.

10 Two Spaces are said to be CONTIGUOUS, when there is no other Space betwixt
them. But two Times, betwixt which there is no other Time, are called
IMMEDIATE, A -- B -- C as AB, BC. And any two Spaces as well as Times are said
to be CONTINUAL, when they have one common part, A -- B -- C -- D as AC, BD,
where the part BC is common; and more Spaces and Times are Continual, when
every two which are next one another are Continual.

11 That Part which is between two other Parts, is called a MEAN; and that
which is not between two other parts, an EXTREME. And of Extremes, that which
is first reckoned is the BEGINNING, and that which last, the END; and all the
Means together taken, are the WAY. Also Extreme Parts and Limits are the same
thing. And from hence it is manifest, that Beginning and End depend upon the
order in which we number them; and that to Terminate or Limit Space and Time,
is the same thing with imagining their Beginning and End; as also that every
thing is FINITE or INFINITE, acording as we imagine or not imagine it Limited
or Terminated every way; and that the Limits of any Number are Unities, and of
these, that which is the first in our Numbering is the Beginning, and that
which we number last, is the End. When we say Number is Infinite, we mean only
that no Number is expressed; for when we speak of the Numbers Two, Three, a
Thousand, etc. they are always Finite. But when no more is said but this,
Number is Infinite, it is to be understood as if it were said, this Name Number
is an Indefinite Name.

12 Space or Time is said to be Finite in Power, or Terminable, when there may
be assigned a Number of finite Spaces or Times, as of Paces or Hours, than
which there can be no greater Number of the same measure, in that Space or
Time; and Infinite in Power is that Space or Time, in which a greater Number of
the said Paces or Hours may be assigned, than any Number that can be given. But
we must note, that although in that Space or Time which is Infinite in Power,
there may be numbered more Paces or Hours then any number that can be assigned,
yet their number will always be Finite; for every Number is Finite. And
therefore his Ratiocination was not good, that undertaking to prove the World
to be Finite, reasoned thus; If the world be Infinite, then there may be taken
in it some Part which is distant from us an Infinite number of Paces: But no
such Part can be taken; wherefore the world is not infinite; because that
Consequence of the Major Proposition is false; for in an Infinite space,
whatsoever we take, or design in our Mind, the distance of the same from us is
a Finite space; for in the very designing of the place thereof, we put an End
to that space, of whch we our selves are the Beginning, and whatsoever any man
with his Mind cuts off both ways from Infinite, he determines the same, that
is, he makes it Finite.

Of Infinite Space or Time, it cannot be said that it is a Whole, or One; not a
Whole, because not compounded of Parts; for seeing Parts, how many soever they
be, are severally Finite, they will also when they are all put together make a
whole Finite; Nor One, because nothing can be said to be One, except there be
Another to compare it with; but it cannot be conceived that there are two
Spaces, or two Times Infinite. Lastly, when we make question whether the World
be Finite or Infinite, we have nothing in our Mind answering to the Name
World; for whatsoever we Imagine, is therefore Finite, though our Computation
reach the fixed Stars, or the ninth or tenth, nay, the thousanth Sphere. The
meaning of the Question is this only, whether God has actually made so great
an Addition of Body to Body, as we are able to make of Space to Space.

13 And therefore that which is commonly said, that Space and Time may be
divided Infinitely, is not to be so understood, as if there might be any
Infinite or Eternal Division; but rather to be taken in this sense, Whatsover
is Divided, is divided into such Parts as may again be Divided; or thus, The
Least Divisible thing is not to be given; or as Geometricians have it, No
Quantity is so small, but a Less may be taken; which may easily be demonstrated
in this manner. Let any Space or Time (that which was thought to be the Least
Divisible) be divided into two equal Parts A and B. I say either of them, as A,
may be divided again. For suppose the Part A to be contiguous to the Part B of
one side, and of the other side to some other Space equal to B. This whole
Space therefore (being greater then the Space given) is divisible. Wherefore if
it be divided into two equal Parts, the Part in the middle, which is A, will be
also divided into two equal Parts; and therefore A was Divisible.

CHAP. VIII. Of Body and Accident.
1 Body defined. 2 Accident defined. 3 How an Accident may be understood to be
in its subject. 4 Magnitude, what it is. 5 Place what it is, and that it is
Immovable. 6 What is Full and Empty. 7 Here, There, Somewhere, what they
signify. 8 Many Bodies cannot be in One place, nor One Body in Many places. 9
Contiguous and Continual what they are. 10 The definition of Motion. No Motion
intelligible but with Time. 11 What it is to be at Rest, to have been Moved,
and to be Moved. No Motion to be conceived, without the conception of Past and
Future. 12 A Point, a Line, Superficies and Solid, what they are. 13 Equal,
Greater and Less in Bodies and Magnitudes, what they are. 14 One and the same
Body has always one and the the same Magnitude. 15 Velocity what it is. 16
Equal, Greater and Less in Times what they are. 17 Equal, Greater and Less in
Velocity, what. 18 Equal, Greater and Less in Motion, what. 19 That which is
at Rest will always be at Rest except it be Moved by some external thing; and
that which is Moved will always be Moved, unless it be hindered by some
external thing. 20 Accidents are Generated and Destroyed, but Bodies not so. 21
An Accident cannot depart from its Subject. 22 Nor be Moved. 23 Essence, Form,
and Matter, what they are. 24 First Matter, what. 25 That the whole is greater
then any Part thereof, why demonstrated.
1 HAving understood what Imaginary Space is, in which we supposed nothing
remaining without us, but all those things to be destroyed that by existing
heretofore left Images of themselves in our Minds; let us now suppose some one
of those things to be placed again in the World, or created anew. It is
necessary therefore that this new created or replaced thing do not only fill
some part of the Space abovementioned, or be coincident and coextended with
it, but also, that it have no dependence upon our thought. And this is that
which for the Extension of it we commonly call Body; and because it depends not
upon our Thought, we say is a thing subsisting of itself; as also existing,
because without Us; and lastly, it is called the Subject, because it is so
placed in and subjected to Imaginary Space, that it may be understood by
Reason, as well as perceived by Sense. The Definition therefore of Body may be
this, A BODY is that which having no dependence upon our Thought is coincident
or coextended with some part of Space.

2 But what an Accident is, cannot so easily be explained by any Definition, as
by Examples. Let us imagine therefore that a Body fills any Space, or is
coextended with it, that Coextention is not the coextended Body; And in like
manner, let us imagine that the same Body is removed out of its place, that
Removing is not the removed Body; Or let us think the same not removed, that
notremoving or Rest, is not the resting Body. What then are these things? They
are Accidents of that Body. But the thing in question is What is an Accident;
which is an Enquiry after that which we know already, and not that which we
should enquire after. For who does not always and in the same manner
understand him that says any thing is Extended, or Moved, or not Moved? But
most men will have it be said that an Accident is something, namely some part
of a natural thing, when indeed it is no part of the same. To satisfy these
men, as well as may be, they answer best that define an Accident to be the
Manner by which any Body is conceived; which is all one as if they should say,
An Accident is that faculty of any Body by which it works in us a Conception of
itself. Which Definition though it be not an Answer to the Question propounded,
yet it is an Answer to that Question which should have been propounded, namely,
whence does it happen that one part of any Body appears here, another part
there? For this is well answered thus, It happens from the Extension of that
Body. Or, How comes it to pass that the whole Body by succession is seen now
here now there? and the answer will be, By reason of its Motion. Or lastly,
Whence is it that any Body possesses the same space for sometime? And the
answer will be, because it is not moved. For if concerning the Name of a Body,
that is, concerning a Concrete Name, it be asked, what is it? the answer must
be made by Definition; for the Question is concerning the signification of the
Name. But if it be asked concerning an Abstract Name, what is it? the Cause is
demanded why a thing appears so or so. As if it be asked, what is Hard? The
Answer will be, Hard is that, whereof no Part gives place, but when the Whole
gives place. But if it be demanded, what is Hardness? A Cause must be shown why
a Part does not give place except the Whole give place. Wherefore I define an
ACCIDENT to be the Manner of our conception of Body.

3 When an Accident is said to be in a Body, it is not so to be understood, as
if any thing were contained in that Body; as if, for example, Redness were in
Blood, in the same manner, as Blood is in a bloody cloth, that is, as a Part in
the Whole; for so an Accident would be a Body also. But as Magnitude, or Rest,
or Motion, is in that which is Great, or which Rests, or which is Moved
(which how it is to be understood, every man understands) so also it is to be
understood that every other Accident is in its Subject. And this also is
explicated by Aristotle no otherwise then negatively, namely, that An Accident
is in its Subject, not as any part thereof, but so as that it may be away, the
Subject still remaining; which is right, saving that there are certain
Accidents which can never perish except the Body perish also; for no Body can
be conceived to be without Extension, or without Figure. All other Accidents,
which are not common to all Bodies, but peculiar to some only, as To be at
Rest, to be Moved, Color, Hardness, and the like, do perish continually, and
are succeeded by others; yet so, as that the Body never perishes. And as for
the opinion that some may have, that all other Accidents are not in their
Bodies in the same manner that Extension, Motion, Rest, or Figure are in the
same; for example, that Color, Heat, Odor, Virtue, Vice and the like, are
otherwise in them, and (as they say) inherent; I desire they would suspend
their judgment for the present, and expect a little, till it be found out by
Ratiocination, whether these very Accidents are not also certain Motions,
either of the Mind of the perceiver; or of the Bodies themselves which are
perceived; for in the search of this, a great part of Natural Philosophy
consists.

4 The Extension of a Body, is the same thing with the MAGNITUDE of it, or that
which some call Real Space. But this Magnitude does not depend upon our
Cogitation, as Imaginary Space does; for this is an Effect of our Imagination,
but Magnitude is the Cause of it; this is an Accident of the Mind, that of a
Body existing out of the Mind.

5 That Space (by which word I here understand Imaginary Space) which is
coincident with the Magnitude of any Body, is called the PLACE of that Body;
and the Body it self is that which we call the Thing Placed. Now Place, and the
Magnitude of the Thing Placed differ: First in this, that a Body keeps always
the same Magnitude both when it is at Rest, and when it is Moved; but when it
is Moved, it does not keep the same Place. Secondly, in this, that Place is a
Phantasme of any Body of such and such Quantity and Figure; but Magnitude is
the peculiar Accident of every Body; for one Body may at several times have
several Places, but has always one and the same Magnitude. Thirdly, in this,
that Place is nothing out of the Mind, nor Magnitude any thing within it. And
lastly, Place is feigned Extension but Magnitude true Extension, and a Placed
Body is not Extension, but a Thing Extended. Besides, Place is Immovable; for
seeing that which is Moved, is understood to be carried from Place to Place, if
Place were Moved, it would also be carried from Place to Place, so that one
Place must have another Place, and that Place another Place, and so on
infinitely, which is ridiculous. And as for those, that by making Place to be
of the same Nature with Real Space, would from thence maintain it to be
Immovable, they also make Place (though they do not perceive they make it so)
to be a mere Phantasme. For whilst One affirms that Place is therefore said to
be Immovable, because Space in general is considered there; if he had
remembered that nothing is General or Universal besides Names or Signs, he
would easily have seen that that Space which he says is considered in general,
is nothing but a Phantasme in the Mind or the Memory, of a Body of such
Magnitude and such Figure. And whilst another says, Real Space is made
Immovable by the Understanding; as when under the Superficies of running
water, we imagine other and other water to come by continual succession, that
Superficies fixed there by the Understanding is the Immovable Place of the
River, what else does he make it to be but a Phantasm, though he do it
obscurely, and in perplexed words? Lastly, the nature of Place does not consist
in the Superficies of the Ambient, but in Solid Space; for the whole Placed
Body is coextended with its whole Place, and every part of it with every
answering part of the same Place; but seeing every Placed Body is a Solid
thing, it cannot be understood to be coextended with Superficies. Besides, how
can any whole Body be Moved, unless all its parts be moved together with it? Or
how can the internal Parts of it be Moved, but by leaving their Place? But the
internal Parts of a body cannot leave the Superficies of an external part
contiguous to it; and therefore it follows, that if Place be the Superficies
of the Ambient, then the parts of a Body Moved, that is Bodies moved, are not
Moved.

6 Space (or Place) that is possessed by a Body, is called FULL, and that which
is not so possessed is called EMPTY.

7 Here, There, In the Country, In the City, and other the like Names by which
answer is made to the question Where is it, are not properly Names of Place,
nor do they of themselves bring into the mind the Place that is sought; for
Here and There signify nothing, unless the thing be shown at the same time
with the finger or something else, but when the Eye of him that seeks, is by
pointing, or some other sign directed to the thing sought, the Place of it is
not hereby defined by him that answers, but found out by him that asks the
question. Now such Shewings as are made by words only, as when we say, In the
Country, or In the City, are some of greater latitude then others, as when we
say In the Country, In the City, In such a Street, In a House, In the Chamber,
In Bed, etc. For these do by little and little direct the Seeker nearer to the
proper Place; and yet they do not determine the same, but only restrain it to
a lesser Space, and signify no more then that the Place of the Thing is within
a certain Space designed by those Words, as a Part is in the Whole. And all
such Names (by which answer is made to the question Where) have for their
highest Genus the Name Somewhere. From whence it may be understood, that
whatsoever is Somewhere, is in some Place properly so called, which Place is
part of that greater Space that is signified by some of these Names, In the
Country, In the City, or the like.

8 A Body, and the Magnitude, and the Place thereof, are divided by one and the
same act of the Mind; for, to divide an Extended Body, and the Extension
thereof, and the Idea of that Extension, which is Place, is the same with
dividing any one of them; because they are coincident, and it cannot be done
but by the Mind, that is by the Division of Space. From whence it is manifest,
that neither Two Bodies can be together in the same Place, nor One Body be in
Two Places at the same Time. Not Two Bodies in the same Place; because when a
Body that fills its whole Place is divided into Two, the Place it self is
divided into Two also, so that there will be Two Places, Nor One Body in Two
Places; for, the Place that a Body fills being divided into Two, the Placed
Body will be also divided into Two, (for, as I said, a Place and the Body that
fills that Place are divided both together) and so there will be two Bodies.

9 Two Bodies are said to be Contiguous to one another, and Continual, in the
same manner as Spaces are; namely, those are Contiguous, between which there is
no Space. Now by Space I understand here as formerly an Idea or Phantasme of a
Body. Wherefore, though between two Bodies there be put no other Body, and
consequently no Magnitude, or (as they call it) Real Space, yet if another Body
may be put between them, that is, if there intercede any imagined Space which
may receive another Body, then those Bodies are not Contiguous. And this is so
easy to be understood, that I should wonder at some men, who being otherwise
skilful enough in Philosophy, are of a different opinion, but that I find that
most of those that affect Metaphysical subtilties, wander from Truth, as if
they were led out of their way by an Ignis Fatuus. For can any man that has his
natural Senses, think that two Bodies must therefore necessarily Touch one
another, because no other Body is between them? Or that there can be no Vacuum,
because Vacuum is nothing, or as they call it, Non Ens? Which is as childish,
as if one should reason thus; No Man can Fast, because to Fast is to eat
Nothing; but Nothing cannot be eaten. Continual, are any two Bodies that have a
common part; and more then two are Continual, when every two that are next to
one another, are continual.

10 MOTION, is a continual reliaquishing of one Place, and acquiring of
another; and that Place which is relinquished is commonly called the Terminus a
quo, as that which is acquired is called the Terminus ad^quem; I say a
continual Relinquishing, because no Body, how little soever, can totally and at
once go out of its former Place into on other, so, but that some part of it
will be in a part of Place which is common to both, namely, to the relinquished
and the acquired Places. For example, let any Body be in the Place ACBD; the
same Body cannot come into the Place BDEF, but it must first be in GHIK, whose
part GHBD is common to both the Places ACBD, and GHIK; and whose part BDIK is
common to both the Places GHIK, and BDEF. Now it cannot be conceived that any
thing can be Moved without Time; for Time, is by the Definition of it, a
Phantasme, that is a Conception of Motion; and therefore to conceive that any
thing may be Moved without Time, were to conceive Motion without Motion, which
is impossible.

11 That is said to be at Rest, which during anytime is in one place; and that.
to be Moved, or to have been Moved, which whether it be now at Rest, or Moved,
was formerly in another Place then that which it is now in. From which
Definitions it may be inferred, First, that Whatsoever is Moved, has been
Moved; for if it be still in the same Place in which it was formerly, it is at
Rest, that is, it is not Moved, by the Definition of Rest; but if it be in
another Place, it has been Moved, by the Definition of Moved. Secondly, that
what is Moved, will yet be Moved; for that which is Moved, leaves the Place
where it is, and therefore will be in another Place, and consequently will be
moved still. Thirdly, that whatsoever is Moved, is not in One place during any
time, how little soever that time be; for by the Definition of Rest, that which
is in one Place during any time, is at Rest.

There is a certain Sophisme against Motion, which seems to spring from the not
understanding of this last Proposition. For they say, that, If any Body be
Moved, it is Moved either in the Place where it is, or in the Place where it is
not; both which are false; and therefore nothing is Moved. But the falsity lies
in the Major Proposition; for that which is Moved, is neither Moved in the
Place where it is, nor in the Place where it is not; but from the Place where
it is, to the Place where it is not. Indeed it cannot be denied but that
whatsoever is Moved, is Moved somewhere, that is, within some Space; but then
the Place of that Body is not that whole Space, but a part of it, as is said
above in the seventh Article. From what is above demonstrated, namely, that
whatsoever is Moved, has also been Moved, and will be Moved, this also may be
collected, that there can be no conception of Motion, without conceiving Past
and Future time.

12 Though there be no Body which has not some Magnitude, yet if when any Body
is moved, the Magnitude of it be not at all considered, the way it makes it
called a LINE, or one single Dimension; and the Space through which it passes,
is called LENGTH; and the Body it self, a POINT; in which sense the Earth is
called a Point, and the Way of its yearly Revolution, the Ecliptic Line. But
if a Body which is Moved, be considered as long, and be supposed to be so
Moved, as that all the several parts of it be understood to make several Lines,
then the Way of every part of that Body is called BREADTH, and the Space which
is made is called SUPERFICIES, consisting of two Dimensions, one whereof to
every several part of the other is applied whole. Again, if a Body be
considered as having Superficies, and be understood to be so Moved, that all
the several parts of it describe several Lines, then the Way of every part of
that Body is called THICKNESS, or DEPTH, and the Space which is Made is called
SOLID, consisting of three Dimensions, any two whereof are applied whole to
every several part of the third.

But if a Body be considered as Solid, then it is not possible that all the
several parts of it should describe several lines; for what way soever it be
Moved, the way of the following part will fall into the way of the part before
it, so that the same Solid will still be made which the foremost Superficies
would have made by it self. And therefore there can be no other Dimension in
any Body, as it is a Body, then the three which I have now described; though as
it shall be showed hereafter, Velocity, which is Motion according to Length,
may be being applied to all the parts of a Solid, make a Magnitude of Motion
consisting of four Dimensions; as the goodness of Gold computed in all the
parts of it makes the Price and Value thereof.

13 Bodies (how many soever they be) that can fill every one the place of every
one, are said to be EQUAL every one to every other. Now one Body may fill the
same Place which another Body fills, though it be not of the same Figure with
that other Body, if so be that it may be understood to be reducible to the same
Figure, either by Flexion or Transposition of the parts. And One Body is
GREATER then another Body, when a part of that is equal to all this; and LESS,
when all that is equal to a part of this. Also Magnitudes are Equal, or
Greater, or Lesser then one another for the same consideration, namely, when
the Bodies of which they are the Magnitudes, are either Equal or Greater or
Less, etc.

14 One and the same Body, is always of one and the same Magnitude. For seeing
a Body and the Magnitude and Place thereof cannot be comprehended in the Mind,
otherwise then as they are Coincident, if any Body be understood to be at Rest,
that is, to remain in the same Place during some time, and the Magnitude
thereof be in one part of that time Greater, and in another part Less, that
Bodies Place, which is one and the same, will be coincident sometimes with
Greater, sometimes with Less Magnitude, that is, the same Place will be
greater and less then it self, which is impossible. But there would be no need
at all of Demonstrating a thing that is in it self so manifest, if there were
not some, whose opinion concerning Bodies and their Magnitudes is, that a Body
may exist separated from its Magnitude, and have greater or less Magnitude
bestowed upon it, making use of this Principle for the explication of the
nature of Rarum and Densum.

15 Motion, in as much as a certain Length may in a certain Time be transmitted
by it, is called VELOCITY or Swiftness: etc. For though Swift be very often
understood with relation to Slower or less Swift, as Great is in respect of
Less, yet nevertheless, as Magnitude is by Philosophers taken absolutely for
Extension, so also Velocity or Swiftness may be put absolutely for Motion
accord ing to Length.

16 Many Motions are said to be made in Equal Times, when every one of them
begins and ends together with some other Motion, or if it had begun together,
would also have ended together with the same. For Time which is a Phantasme of
Mo tion, cannot be reckoned but by some exposed Motion; as in Dials by the
Motion of the Sun or of the Hand; and if two or more Motions begin and end with
this Motion, they are said to be made in equal times; from whence also it is
easy to understand what it is to be moved in Greater or Longer time, and in
less time or not so long; namely, that that is longer Moved, which beginning
with another, ends later; or ending together, began sooner.

17 Motions are said to be Equally Swift, when Equal lengths are transmitted in
Equal times; and Greater Swiftness is that, wherein Greater length is passed in
Equal time, or Equal length in less time. Also that Swiftness by which Equal
lengths are passed in Equal parts of time, is called Uniform Swiftness or
Motion; and of Motions not Uniform, such as become Swifter or Slower by equal
Increasings or Decreasings in equal parts of time, are said to be Accelerated
or Retarded Uniformly.

18 But Motion is said to be Greater, Less, and Equal, not only in regard of
the Length which is transmitted in a certain time, that is, in regard of
Swiftness only, but of Swiftness applied to every smallest particle of
Magnitude; For when any Body is Moved, every part of it is also Moved; and
supposing the parts to be halves, the Motions of those halves have their
Swiftness equal to one another, and severally equal to that of the Whole; but
the Motion of the Whole is equal to those two Motions, either of which is of
equal Swiftness with it; and therefore it is one thing for two Motions to be
Equal to one another, and another thing for them to be Equally Swift. And this
is manifest in two Horses that draw abreast, where the Motion of both the
Horses together is of Equal Swiftness with the Motion of either of them singly;
but the Motion of both is Greater then the Motion of one of them, namely
Double. Wherefore Motions are said to be simply Equal to one another when the
Swiftness of one computed in every part of its Magnitude, is Equal to the
Swiftness of the other co^puted also in every part of its Magnitude: and
Greater then one another, when the Swiftness of one computed as above, is
Greater then the Swiftness of the other so computed; and Less, when Less.
Besides, the Magnitude of Motion computed in this manner is that which is
commonly called FORCE.

19 Whatsoever is at Rest, will always be at Rest, unless there be some other
Body besides it, which by endeavoring to get into its Place by motion, suffers
it no longer to remain at Rest. For suppose that some Finite Body exist, and be
at Rest, and that all Space besides be Empty; if now this Body begin to be
Moved, it will certainly be Moved some way; Seeing therefore there was nothing
in that Body which did not dispose it to Rest, the reason why it is Moved this
way is in something out of it; and in like manner, if it had been Moved any
other way, the reason of Motion that way had also been in something out of it;
but seeing it was supposed that Nothing is out of it, the reason of its Motion
one way would be the same with the reason of its Motion every other way;
wherefore it would be Moved alike all wa^es at once; which is impossible.

In like manner, Whatsoever is Moved, will always be Moved, except there be
some other Body besides it, which causes it to Rest. For if we suppose Nothing
to be without it, there will be no reason why it should Rest now, rather then
at another time; wherefore its Motion would cease in every particle of time
alike; which is not intelligible.

When we say a Living Creature, a Tree, or any other specified Body is
Generated, or Destroyed, it is not to be so understood as if there were made a
Body of that which is not-Body, or not a Body of a Body, but of a Living
Creature not a Living Creature, of a Tree not a Tree, etc. that is, that those
Accidents for which we call one thing a Living Creature, another thing a Tree,
and another by some other Name, are Generated and Destroyed; and that therefore
the same Names are not to be given to them now, which were given them before.
But that Magnitude for which we give to any thing the Name of Body is neither
Generated nor Destroyed. For though we may feign in our Mind that a Point may
swell to a huge bulk, and that this may again contract it self to a Point;
that is, though we may imagine something to arise where before was Nothing, and
Nothing to be there where before was something, yet we cannot comprehend in our
Mind how this may possibly be done in Nature. And therefore Philosophers, who
tie themselves to Natural Reason, Suppose that a Body can neither be Generated
nor Destroyed, but only that it may appear otherwise then it did to Us, that
is under different Species, and consequently be called by other and other
Names; so that that which is now called Man, may at another time have the Name
of Not-Man; but that which is once called Body, can never be called Not-Body.
But it is manifest, that all other Accidents besides Magnitude or Extension may
be Generated and Destroyed; as when a White thing is made Black, the Whiteness
that was in it Perishes, and the Blackness that was not in it is now
Generated; and therefore Bodies, and the Accidents under which they appear
diversely, have this difference, that Bodies are Things, and not Generated;
Accidents are Generated, and not Things.

21 And therefore when any thing appears otherwise then it did, by reason of
other and other Accidents, it is not to be thought that an Accident goes out of
one Subject into another (for they are not, as I said above, in their Subjects
as a Part in the Whole, or as a Contained thing in that which Conteins it, or
as a Master of a Family in his House,) but that one Accident Perishes, and
another is Generated. For example, when the Hand being Moved, Moves the Pen,
Motion does not go out of the Hand into the Pen, for so the Writing might be
continued though the Hand stood still, but a new Motion is Generated in the
Pen, and is the Pens Motion.

22 And therefore also it is improper to say an Accident is Moved; as when in
stead of saying, Figure is an Accident of a Body carried away, we say, A Body
carries away its Figure.

23 Now that Accident for which we give a certain Name to any Body, or the
Accident which denominates its Subject, is commonly called the ESSENCE thereof;
as Rationality is the Essence of a Man, Whiteness; of any White Thing and
Extension the Essence of a Body. And the same Essence in as much as it is
Generated, is called the FORM. Again, a Body, in respect of any accident is
called the SUBJECT, and in respect of the Form it is called the MATTER.

Also, the Production or Perishing of any Accident, makes its Subject be said
to be Changed; only the Production or Perishing of Form, make it be said it is
Generated or Destroyed; but in all Generation and Mutation, the name of Matter
still remains. For a Table made of Wood, is not only Wooden, but Wood; and a
Statue of Brass is Brass as well as Brazen; though Aristotle in his
Metaphysiques say, that whatsoever is made of any thing ought not to be called
(...), but (...), as that which is made of Wood not (...), but (...), that is,
not Wood, but Wooden.

24 And as for that Matter which is common to all things, and which
Philosophers following Aristotle, usually call Materia Prima, that is, First
Matter, it is not any Body distinct from all other Bodies, nor is it one of
them. What then is it? A mere Name; yet a Name which is not of vain Use; for it
signifies a conception of Body without the consideration of any Form or other
Accident except only Magnitude or Extension, and aptness to receive Form and
other Accidents; so that whenever we have use of the Name Body in general, if
we use that of Materia Prima, we do well. For as, when a Man not knowing which
was first, Water or Ice, would find out which of the two were the Matter of
both, he would be fain to suppose some third Matter which were neither of these
two; so he that would find out what is the Matter of all things, ought to
suppose such as is not the Matter of any thing that exists. Wherefore Materia
Prima is no Thing; and therefore they do not attribute to it either Form or any
other Accident besides Quantity; whereas all singular things have their Forms
and Accidents certain.

Materia Prima therefore is Body in general, that is Body considered
Universally, not as having neither Form nor any Accident, but in which no Form
nor any other Accident but Quantity are at all considered, that is, they are
not drawn into Argumentation.

25 From what has been said, those Axioms may be demonstrated which are
assumed by Euclide in the beginning of his first Element about the Equality and
Inequality of Magnitudes; of (which omitting the rest) I will here demonstrate
only this one, The Whole is greater then any Part thereof; to the end that the
Reader may know that those Axioms are not indemonstrable, and therefore not
Principles of Demonstration; and from hence learn to be wary how he admits any
thing for a Principle, which is not at least as evident as these are. Greater
is defined to be that, whose Part is Equal to the Whole of another. Now if we
suppose any Whole to be A, and a Part of it to be B; seeing the Whole B is
Equal to it self, and the same B is a Part of A; therefore a Part of A will be
Equal to the Whole B. Wherefore by the Definition above, A is Greater then B,
which was to be proved.

CHAP. IX. Of Cause and Effect.
1 Action and Passion what they are. 2 Action and Passion Mediate and
Immediate. 3 Cause simply taken. Cause without which no Effect follows, or
Cause Necessary by Supposition. 4 Cause Efficient and Material. 5 An Entire
Cause is always sufficient to produce its Effect. At the same instant that the
Cause is Entire, the Effect is produced. Every Effect has a Necessary Cause. 6
The Generation of Effects is Continual. What is the Beginning in Causation. 7
No Cause of Motion but in a Body Contiguous and Moved. 8 The same Agents and
Patients if alike disposed, produce like Effects, though at different times. 9
All Mutation is Motion. 10 Contingent Accidents what they are.
1 A Body is said to Work upon or Act, that is to say, Do some thing to another
Body, when it either generates or destroys some Accident in it; and the Body in
which an Accident is generated or destroyed is said to Suffer, that is, to have
something Done to it by another Body, As when one Body by putting forwards
another Body generates Motion in it, it is called the AGENT; and the Body in
which Motion is so generated, is called the PATIENT; so Fire that warms the
Hand is the Agent, and the Hand which is warmed is the Patient. That Accident
which is generated in the Patient is called the EFFECT.

2 When an Agent and Patient are Contiguous to one another, their Action and
Reason are then said to be Immediate, otherwise Mediate; and when another Body
lying betwixt the Agent and Patient is Contiguous to them both, it is then it
self both an Agent and a Patient, an Agent in respect of the Body next after
it, upon which it Works, and a Patient in respect of the Body next before it,
from which it suffers. Also if many Bodies be so ordered that every two which
are next to one another be contiguous, then all those that are betwixt the
first and the last are both Agents and Patients, and the first is an Agent
only, and the last a Patient only.

3 An Agent is understood to produce its determined or certain Effect in the
Patient, according to some certain Accident, or Accidents, with which both it
and the Patient are affected; that is to say, the Agent has its Effect
precisely such, not because it is a Body, but because such a Body, or so Moved;
For otherwise all Agents, seeing they are all Bodies alike, would produce like
Effects in all Patients; and therefore the Fire (for example) does not warm,
because it is a Body, but because it is Hot; nor does one Body put forward
another Body because it is a Body, but because it is moved into the place of
that other Body. The Cause therefore of all Effects consists in certain
Accidents both in the Agents and in the Patient; which when they are all
present, the Effect is produced; but if any one of them be wanting it is not
produced; and that Accident either of the Agent or Patient, without which the
Effect cannot be produced, is called Causa sine qua non, or Cause Necessary by
Supposition, as also the Cause Requisite for the Production of the Effect. But
a CAUSE. simply, or An Entire Cause, is the Aggregate of all the Accidents both
of the Agents how many soever they be, and of the Patient, put together; which
when they are all supposed to be present, it cannot be understood but that the
Effect is produced at the same instant; and if any one of them be wanting, it
cannot be understood but that the Effect is not produced.

4 The Aggregate of Accidents in the Agent or Agents, requisite for the
production of the Effect, the Effect being produced, is called the Efficient
Cause thereof; and the Aggregate of Accidents in the Patient, the Effect being
produced, is usually called the Material Cause; I say the Effect being
produced; for where there is no Effect, there can be no Cause; for nothing can
be called a Cause where there is nothing that can be called an Effect. But the
Efficient and Material Causes, are both but Partial Causes, or Parts of that
Cause which in the next precedent article I called an Entire Cause. And from
hence it is manifest, that the Effect we expect, though the Agents be not
defective on their part, may nevertheless be frustrated by a defect in the
Patient; and when the Patient is sufficient, by a defect in the Agents.

5 An Entire Cause is always sufficient for the production of its Effect, if
the Effect be at all possible. For let any Effect whatsoever be propounded to
be produced; if the same be produced, it is manifest that the Cause which
produced it was a sufficient Cause; but if it be not produced, and yet be
possible, it is evident that something was wanting either in some Agent, or in
the Patient, without which it could not be produced; that is, that some
Accident was wanting which was requisite for its Production; and therefore that
Cause was not Entire, which is contrary to what was supposed.

It follows also from hence, that in whatsoever instant the Cause is Entire, in
the same instant the Effect is produced. For if it be not produced, something
is still wanting, which is requisite for the production of it; and therefore
the Cause was not Entire, as was supposed.

And seeing a Necessary Cause is defined to be that, which being supposed, the
Effect cannot but follow; this also may be collected, that whatsoever Effect is
produced at any time, the same is produced by a Necessary Cause. For whatsoever
is produced, in as much as it is produced, had an Entire Cause, that is, had
all those things, which being supposed, it cannot be understood but that the
Effect follows; that is, it had a Necessary Cause. And in the same manner it
may be shown, that whatsoever Effects are hereafter to be produced, shall have
a Necessary Cause; so that all the Effects, that have been or shall be
produced, have their Ne cessity in things antecedent.

6 And from this, that whenever the Cause is Entire, the Effect is produced
in the same instant, it is manifest, that Causation and the Production of
Effects consist in a certain continual Progress; so that as there is a
continual Mutation in the Agent or Agents by the working of other Agents upon
them, so also the Patient upon which they work is continually altered and
changed. For example, as the Heat of the Fire increases more and more, so also
the Effects thereof, namely the Heat of such Bodies as are next to it, and
again of such other Bodies as are next to them, increases more and more
accordingly; which is already no little argument that all Mutation consists in
Motion only; the truth whereof shall be further demonstrated in the ninth
Article. But in this Progress of Causation, that is, of Action and Passion, if
any man comprehend in his imagination a part thereof, and divide the same into
parts, the first part or Beginning of it cannot be considered otherwise then as
Action or Cause; for if it should be considered as Effect or Passion, then it
would be necessary to consider something before it for its Cause or Action;
which cannot be; for nothing can be before the Beginning. And in like manner,
the last part is considered only as Effect; for it cannot be called Cause if
nothing follow it; but after the last nothing follows. And from hence it is,
that in all Action the Beginning and Cause are taken for the same thing. But
every one of the intermediate parts are both Action and Passion, and Cause and
Effect, according as they are compared with the antecedent or subsequent part.

7 There can be no Cause of Motion, except in a Body Contiguous, and Moved. For
let there be any two Bodies which are not contiguous, and betwixt which the
intermediate Space is empty, or if filled, filled with another Body which is at
Rest; and let one of the propounded Bodies be supposed to be at Rest, I say it
shall always be at Rest. For if it shall be Moved, the Cause of that Motion (by
the 8th. Chapter 19th. Article) will be in some external Body; and therefore if
between it and that external Body there be nothing but empty Space, then
whatsoever the disposition be of that external Body, or of the Patient it self,
yet if it be supposed to be now at Rest, we may conceive it will continue so til
it be touched by some other Body; but seeing Cause (by the Definition) is the
Aggregate of all such Accidents, which being supposed to be present it cannot
be conceived but that the Effect will follow, those Accidents which are either
in external Bodies, or in the Patient it self, cannot be the Cause of future
Motion; and in like manner, seeing we may conceive, that whatsoever is at Rest,
will still be at Rest, though it be touched by some other Body, except that
other Body be moved, therefore in a contiguous Body which is at Rest, there can
be no Cause of Motion. Wherefore there is no Cause of Motion in any Body,
except it be Contiguous and Moved.

The same reason may serve to prove, that whatsoever is Moved, will always be
Moved on in the same way and with the same Velocity, except it be hindered by
some other Contiguous and Moved Body; and consequently that no Bodies either
when they are at Rest, or when there is an interposition of Vacuum, can
generate or ^^tinguish or lesson Motion in other Bodies. There is one that has
written, that things Moved are more resisted by things at Rest, then by things
contrarily Moved, for this reason, that he conceived Motion not to be so
contrary to Motion as Rest. That which deceived him was, that the words Rest
and Motion are but contradictory Names; whereas Motion indeed is not resisted
by Rest, but by contrary Motion.

8 But if a Body work upon another Body at one time, and afterward the same
Body work upon the same Body at another time so, that both the Agent and
Patient, and all their parts, be in all things as they were; and there be no
difference except only in time, that is, that one Action be former the other
later in time; it is manifest of it self, that the Effects will be Equal and
Like; as not differing in any thing besides time. And as Effects themselves
proceed from their Causes; so the diversity of them depends upon the diversity
of their Causes also.

9 This being true, it is necessary that Mutation can be nothing else, but
Motion of the Parts of that Body which is Changed. For First, we do not say any
thing is Changed, but that which appears to our Senses otherwise then it
appeared formerly. Secondly, both those Appearances are Effects produced in the
Sentient; and therefore if they be different, it is necessary (by the preceding
article) that either some part of the Agent which was formerly at Rest, is now
Moved, and so the Mutation consists in this Motion; or some part which was
formerly Moved, is now otherwise Moved, and so also the Mutation consists in
this new Motion; or which being formerly Moved, is now at Rest, which (as I
have shown above) cannot come to pass without Motion, and so again Mutation is
Motion; or, lastly, it happens in some of these manners to the Patient or some
of its parts; so that Mutation, howsoever it be made, will consist in the
Motion of the parts either of the Body which is perceived, or of the Sentient
Body, or of both. Mutation therefore is Motion, (namely of the parts either of
the Agent or of the Patient;) which was to be demonstrated. And to this it is
consequent, that Rest cannot be the Cause of any thing; nor can any Action
proceed from it, seeing neither Motion nor Mutation can be caused by it.

10 Accidents, in respect of other Accidents which precede them, or are before
them in time, and upon which they do not depend as upon their Causes, are
called Contingent Accidents; I say in respect of those Accidents by which they
are not generated; for in respect of their Causes all things come to pass with
equal necessity, for otherwise, they would have no Causes at all; which of
things generated is not intelligible.

CHAP. X. Of Power and Act.
1 Power and Cause are the same thing. 2 An Act is produced at the same instant
in which the Power is Plenary. 3 Active and Passive Power are parts only of
Plenary Power. 4 An Act when said to be Possible. 5 An Act Necessary and
Contingent, what. 6 Active Power consists in Motion. 7 Cause Formal and Final,
what they are.
1COrrespondent to Cause and Effect are POWER and ACT; Nay, those and these are
the same things, though for diverse considerations they have diverse names.
Forwhensoever any Agent has all those Accidents which are necessarily requisite
for the production of some Effect in the Patient, then we say that Agent has
Power to produce that Effect, if it be applied to a Patient. But (as I have
shown in the precedent Chapter,) those Accidents constitute the Efficient
Cause; and therefore the same Accidents which constitute the Efficient Cause,
constitute also the Power of the Agent. Wherefore the Power of the Agent, and
the Efficient Cause are the same thing. But they are considered with this
difference, that Cause is so called in respect of the Effect already produced,
and Power in respect of the same Effect to be produced hereafter, so that Cause
respects the Past, Power the Future time. Also the Power of the Agent, is that
which is commonly called Active Power.

In like manner, whenever any Patient has all those Accidents which it is
requisite it should have for the production of some Effect in it, we say it is
in the Power of that Patient to produce that Effect, if it be applied to a
fitting Agent. But those Accidents (as is defined in the precedent Chapter)
constitute the Material Cause; and therefore the Power of the Patient,
(commonly called Passive Power) and Material Cause are the same thing; but with
this different consideration, that in Cause the Past time, and in Power the
Future is respected. Wherefore the Power of the Agent and Patient together,
which may be called Entire or Plenary Power, is the same thing with Entire
Cause; for they both consist in the Sum or Aggregate of all the Accidents as
well in the Agent as in the Patient, which are requisite for the production of
the Effect. Lastly, as the Accident produced is in respect of the Cause called
an Effect; so in respect of the Power it is called an Act.

2 As therefore the Effect is produced in the same instant in which the Cause
is Entire; so also every Act that may be produced, is produced in the same
instant, in which the Power is Plenary. And as there can be no Effect, but from
a Sufficient and Necessary Cause; so also no Act can be produced, but by
Sufficient Power, or that Power by which it could not but be produced.

3 And as it is manifest, (as I have shown) that the Efficient and Material
Causes are severally and by themselves parts only of an Entire Cause, and
cannot produce any Effect but by being joined together; so also Power Active
and Passive, are parts only of Plenary and Entire Power; nor, except they be
joined, can any Act proceed from them; and therefore these Powers (as I said in
the first Article) are but conditional, namely, the Agent has Power, if it be
applied to a Patient; and the Patient has Power, if it be applied to an Agent;
otherwise neither of them have Power, nor can the Accidents which are in them
severally be properly called Powers; nor any Action be said to be Possible, for
the Power of the Agent alone, or of the Patient alone.

4 For that is an Impossible Act, for the production of which there is no Power
Plenary. For seeing Plenary Power is that in which all things concur which
are requisite for the production of an Act, if the Power shall never be
Plenary, there will always be wanting some of those things, without which the
Act cannot be produced; wherefore that Act shall never be produced, that is,
that Act is IMPOSSIBLE: And every Act which is not Impossible, is POSSIBLE.
Every Act therefore which is Possible shall at some time be produced; for if it
shall never be produced, then those things shall never concur which are
requisite for the production of it; wherefore that Act is Impossible by the
Definition; which is contrary to what was supposed.

5 A Necessary Act is that, the production whereof it is Impossible to hinder;
and therefore every Act that shall be produced; shall necessarily be produced;
for that it shall not be produced is Impossible, because (as is already
demonstrated) every Possible Act shall at some time be produced; Nay, this
Proposition, What shall be, shall be, is as necessary a Proposition, as this, A
Man is a Man.

But here perhaps some man may ask, whether those Future things, which are
commonly called Contingents, are Necessary. I say therefore that generally all
Contingents, have their Necessary Causes, (as is shown in the preceding
Chapter,) but are called Contingents in respect of other Events upon which they
do not depend; as the Rain which shall be to morrow, shall be Necessarily,
(that is from necessary Causes;) but we think and say it happens by chance,
because we do not yet perceive the Causes thereof, though they exist now; for
men commonly call that Casual or Contingent, whereof they do not perceive the
necessary Cause; and in the same manner they use to speak of things past, when
not knowing whether a thing be done or no, they say it is possible it never was
done.

Wherefore all Propositions concerning Future things contingent or not
contingent, as this, It will rain to morrow, or this, To morrow the Sun will
rise, are either necessarily true, or necessarily false; but we call them
Contingent because we do not yet know whether they be true or false; whereas
their Verity depends not upon our Knowledge, but upon the foregoing of their
Causes. But there are some who though they confess this whole Proposition, To
morrow it will either rain or not rain, to be true, yet they will not
acknowledge the parts of it, as To morrow it will rain, or To morrow it will
not rain, to be either of them true by it self, because they say neither this
nor that is true determinately. But what is this determinately true, but true
upon our knowledge, or evidently true? and therefore they say no more but that
it is not yet known whether it be true or no; but they say it more obscurely,
and darken the Evidence of the truth with the same words with which they
endeavor to hide their own ignorance.

6 In the 9th. Article of the precedent Chapter I have shown, that the
Efficient Cause of all Motion and Mutation consists in the Motion of the Agent
or Agents; And in the first Article of this Chapter, that the Power of the
Agent is the same thing with the Efficient Cause. From whence it may be
understood, that all Active Power consists in Motion also; and that Power is
not a certain Accident which differs from all Acts, but is indeed an Act,
namely Motion, which is therefore called Power, because another Act shall be
produced by it afterward. For example, if of three Bodies the first put
forwards the second, and this the third, the Motion of the second in respect of
the first which produces it, is the Act of the second Body, but in respect of
the third it is the Active Power of the same second Body.

7 The Writers of Metaphysiques reckon up two other Causes besides the
Efficient and Material, namely the ESSENCE, which some call the Formal Cause;
and the End, or Final Cause; both which are nevertheless Efficient Causes. For
when it is said, the Essence of a thing is the Cause thereof, as to be
Rational, is the Cause of Man, it is not intelligible; for it is all one as if
it were said, To be a Man is the Cause of Man, which is not well said. And yet
the knowledge of the Essence of any thing, is the Cause of the knowledge of the
thing it self; for if I first know that a thing is Rational, I know from
thence that the same is Man; but this is no other then an Efficient Cause. A
Final Cause has no place but in such things as have Sense and Will; and this
also I shall prove hereafter to be an Efficient Cause.

CHAP. XI. Of Identity and Difference.
1 What it is for one thing to Differ from another. 2 To Differ in Number,
Magnitude, Species and Genus, what. 3 What is Relation, Proportion, and
Relatives. 4 Proportionals what. 5 The Proportion of Magnitudes to one another,
wherein it consists. 6 Relation is no new Accident, but one of those that were
in the Relative before the Relation or Comparison was made. Also the Causes of
Accidents in the Correlatives are the Cause of Relation. 7 Of the Beginning of
Individuation.
1HItherto I have spoken of Body simply, and of Accidents common to all Bodies
as Magnitude, Motion, Rest, Action, Passion, Power, Possible, etc. And I should
now descend to those Accidents by which one Body is distinguished from ano^^er,
but that it is first to be declared what it is to be Distinct, and not
Distinct, namely what are the SAME and DIFFERENT; for this also is common to
all Bodies, that they may be distinguished and differenced from one another.
Now two Bodies are said to Differ from one another, when something may be said
of one of them, which cannot be said of the other at the same time.

2 And first of all, it is manifest that no Two Bodies are the Same; for seeing
they are Two, they are in two places at the same time; as that which is the
Same, is at the same time in one and the same place. All Bodies therefore
differ from one another in Number, namely, as One and Another; so that the Same
and different in Number are Names opposed to one another by Contradiction.

In Magnitude Bodies differ when One is greater then Another, as a Cubit long,
and two Cubits long, of two pound weight, and of three pound weight. And to
these, Equals are opposed.

Bodies which differ more then in Magnitude are called Unlike, and those which
differ only in Magnitude, Like. Also of Unlike Bodies some are said to differ
in the Species, other in the Genus; in the Species when their difference is
perceived by one and the same Sense, as White and Black; and in the Genus, when
their difference is not perceived but by diverse Senses, as White and Hot.

3 And the Likeness, or Unlikeness, Equality or Inequality of one Body to
another, is called their RELATION; and the Bodies themselves Relatives or
Correlatives; Aristotle calls them (...); the first whereof is usually named
the Antecedent, and the second the Consequent; and the Relation of the
Antecedent to the Consequent according to Magnitude, namely, the Equality, the
Excess or Defect thereof, is called the PROPORTION of the Antecedent to the
Consequent, so that Proportion is nothing but the Equality or Inequality of the
Magnitude of the Antecedent compared to the Magnitude of the Consequent by
their difference only, or compared also with their difference. For Example, the
Proportion of Three to Two consists only in this, that Three exceeds Two by
Unity; and the Proportion of Two to Five in this, that Two compared with Five
is deficient of it by Three, either simply, or compared with the numbers
different; and therefore in the Proportion of Unequals, the Proportion of the
Less to the Greater is called DEFECT, and that of the Greater to the Less
EXCESS.

4 Besides, of Unequals, some are more, some less, and some equally unequal;
so that there is Proportion of Proportions, as well as of Magnitudes, namely,
where two Unequals have relation to two other Unequals; as when the Inequality
which is between 2 and 3 is compared with the Inequality which is between 4 and
5. In which Comparison there are always four Magnitudes, or (which is all one)
if there be but three, the midlemost is twice numbered; and if the Proportion of
the first to the second be equal to the Proportion of the third to the fourth,
then the four are said to be Proportionals; otherwise they are not
Proportionals.

5 The Proportion of the Antecedent to the Consequent, consists in their
Difference, not only simply taken, but also as compared with one of the
Relatives; that is, either in that part of the greater by which it exceeds the
less, or in the Remainder after the less is taken out of the greater; as the
Proportion of Two to Five, consists in the Three by which Five exceeds Two, not
in Three, simply only, but also as compared with Five or Two. For though there
be the same difference between Two and Five, which is between Nine and Twelve,
namely Three, yet there is not the same Inequality; and therefore the
Proportion of Two to Five, is not in all Relation the same with that of Nine to
Twelve, but only in that which is called Arithmetical.

6 But we must not so think of Relation, as if it were an Accident differing
from all the other Accidents of the Relative; but one of them; namely that, by
which the Comparison is made. For example, the likeness of one White to another
White, or its Unlikeness to Black, is the same Accident with its Whiteness; and
Equality and Inequality, the same Accident with the Magnitude of the thing
compared, though under another Name; for that which is called White or Great,
when it is not compared with something else, the same when it is compared is
called Like or Unlike, Equal or Unequal. And from this it follows, that the
Causes of the Accidents which are in Relatives, are the Causes also of
Likeness, Unlikeness, Equality and Inequality; namely, that he that makes two
Unequal Bodies, makes also their Inequality; and he that makes a Rule and an
Action, makes also, if the Action be congruous to the Rule, their Congruity; if
Incongruous, their Incongruity. And thus much concerning Comparison of one Body
with another.

7 But the same Body may at different times be Compared with it self. And from
hence springs a great controversy among Philosophers about the Beginning of
Individuation; namely, in what sense it may be conceived that a Body is at one
time the same, at another time not the same it was formerly. For example,
whether a Man grown old be the same Man he was whilst he was young, or another
Man; or whether a City be in different Ages the same, or another City. Some
place Individuity in the Unity of Matter; others in the Unity of Form; and one
says it consists in the Unity of the Aggregate of all the Accidents together.
For Matter, it is pleaded, that a lump of Wax, whether it be Spherical or
Cubical, is the same Wax, because the same Matter. For Form, that when a Man is
grown from an Infant to be an Old Man, though his Matter be changed, yet he is
still the same Numerical Man; for that Identity which cannot be attributed to
the Matter, ought probably to be ascribed to the Form. For the Aggregate of
Accidents no Instance can be made; but because when any new Accident is
generated, a new Name is commonly imposed on the Thing, therefore he that
assigned this cause of Individuity, thought the thing it self also was become
another thing. According to the first Opinion, He that sins, and he that is
punished should not be the same Man, by reason of the perpetual flux and change
of Man's Body; nor should the City which makes Laws in one Age, and abrogates
them in another, be the same City; which were to confound all Civil Rights.
According to the second Opinion, two Bodies existing both at once, would be one
and the same Numerical Body; for if (for example) that Ship of Theseus
(concerning the Difference whereof, made by continual reparation, in taking out
the old Planks, and putting in new, the Sophisters of Athens were wont to
dispute) were, after all the Planks were changed, the same Numerical Ship it
was at the beginning; and if some Man had kept the Old Planks as they were
taken out, and by putting them afterward together in the same order, had again
made a Ship of them, this without doubt had also been the same Numerical Ship
with that which was at the beginning; and so there would have been two Ships
Numerically the same, which is absurd. But according to the third Opinion,
Nothing would be the same it was; so that a Man standing, would not be the same
he was sitting; nor the Water which is in the Vessel, the same with that which
is poured out of it. Wherefore the beginning of Individuation is not always to
be taken either from Matter alone, or from Form alone.

But we must consider by what name any thing is called, when we enquire
concerning the Identity of it; for it is one thing to ask concerning Socrates
whether he be the same Man, and another to ask whether he be the same Body; for
his Body when he is Old, cannot be the same it was when he was an Infant, by
reason of the difference of Magnitude; for One Body has always One and the
same Magnitude; yet nevertheless he may be the same Man. And therefore
whenever the Name by which it is asked whether a thing be the same it was, is
given it for the Matter only, then if the Matter be the same, the thing also
is Individually the same; as the Wat^r which was in the Sea, is the same which
is afterward in the Cloud; and any Body is the same, whether the parts of it
be put together, or dispersed, or whether it be congealed or dissolved. Also if
the Name be given for such Form as is the beginning of Motion, then as long as
that Motion remains it will be the same Individual thing; as that Man will be
always the same, whose Actions and Thoughts proceed all from the same
beginning of Motion, namely, that which was in his generation; and that will be
the same River, which flows from one and the same Fountain, whether the same
Water, or other Water, or something else then Water flow from thence; and that
the same City, whose Acts proceed continually from the same Institution,
whether the Men be the same or no. Lastly, if the Name be given for some
Accident, then the Identity of the thing will depend upon the Matter; for by
the taking away and supplying of Matter, the Accidents that were are destroyed,
and other new ones are generated, which cannot be the same Numerically; so that
a Ship, which signifies Matter so figured, will be the same, as long as the
Matter remains the same; but if no part of the Matter be the same, then it is
Numerically another Ship; and if part of the Matter remain, and part be
changed, then the Ship will be partly the same, and partly not the same.

CHAP. XII. Of Quantity.
1 The Definition of Quantity. 2 The Exposition of Quantity what it is. 3 How
Line, Superficies and Solid are exposed. 4 How Time is exposed. 5 How Number is
exposed. 6 How Velocity is exposed. 7 How Weight is exposed. 8 How the
Proportion of Magnitudes is exposed. 9 How the Proportion of Times and
Velocities is exposed.
1 WHat, and how manifold Dimension is, has been said in the 8th. Chapter,
namely, that there are three Dimensions, Line (or Length) Superficies and
Solid; Every one of which, if it be determined, that is, if the limits of it be
made known is commonly called Quantity; For by Quantity all men understand that
which is signified by that word, by which answer is made to the question How
much is it. Whenever therefore it is asked (for example) How long is the
Journey, it is not answered indefinitely Length; nor when it is asked, How big
is the Field is it answered indefinitely Superficies; nor if a man ask How
great is the bulk, indefinitely Solid; but it is answered determinately, The
Journey is a hundred Miles; the Field is a hundred Acres; the Bulk is a hundred
Cubical Feet; or at least in some such manner, that the Magnitude of the thing
enquired after may by certain Limits be comprehended in the Mind. QUANTITY
therefore cannot otherwise be defined, then to be a Dimension determined or a
Dimension, whose Limits are set out, either by their Place, or by some
Comparison.

2 And Quantity is determined two ways; One, by the Sense, when some sensible
Object is set before it; as when a Line, a Superficies or Solid, of a Foot or
Cubit, marked out in some Matter, is objected to the Eyes; which way of
Determining is called Exposition, and the Quantity so known is called Exposed
Quantity; The Other, by Memory, that is, by Comparison with some Exposed
Quantity. In the first manner, when it is asked of what Quantity a thing is, it
is answered, of such Quantity as you see Exposed. In the second manner, answer
cannot be made but by Comparison with some ^xposed Quantity; for if it be
asked, How long is the Way, the answer is, so many thousand Paces; that is, by
Comparing the Way with a Pace, or some other Measure determined and known by
Exposition; or the Quantity of it is to some other Quantity known by
Exposition, as the Diameter of a Square is to the Side of the same, or by some
other the like means. But it is to be understood that the Quantity Exposed must
be some standing or permanent thing, such as is marked out in consistent or
durable matter; or at least something which is revocable to sense; for
otherwise no Comparison can be made by it. Seeing therefore (by what has been
said in the next preceding Chapter) Comparison of one Magnitude with another,
is the same thing with Proportion; it is manifest, that Quantity determined in
the second manner, is nothing else but the Proportion of a Dimension not
Exposed to another which is Exposed; that is, the Comparison of the Equality or
Inequality thereof with an Exposed Quantity.

3 Lines, Superficies and Solids are Exposed, First, by Motion, in such manner,
as (in the 8th Chapter) I have said they are generated; but so, as that the
Marks of such Motion be permanent; as when they are designed upon some Matter,
as a Line upon Paper; or graven in some durable Matter. Secondly, by
Apposition; as when one Line or Length is applied to another Line or Length,
one Breadth to another Breadth, and one Thickness to another Thickness; which
is as much as to describe a Line by Points, a Superficies by Lines, and a Solid
by Superficies, saving that by Points in this place are to be understood very
short Lines, and by Superficies very Thin Solids. Thirdly, Lines and
Superficies may be Exposed by Section; namely a Line may be made by Cutting an
Exposed Superficies, and a Superficies by the Cutting of an Exposed Solid.

4 Time is Exposed not only by the Exposition of a Line, but also of some
Moveable thing, which is moved Uniformly upon that Line, or at least is
supposed so to be Moved. For seeing Time is an Idea of Motion in which we
consider Former and Later, that is, Succession, it is not sufficient for the
Exposition of Time that a Line be described, but we must also have in our Mind
an Imagination* of some Moveable thing passing over that Line, and the Motion
of it must be Uniform, that Time may be divided and compounded as often as
there shall be need. And therefore when Philosophers in their Demonstrations
draw a Line, and say, Let that Line be Time, it is to be understood as if they
said, Let the Conception of Uniform Motion upon that Line, be Time. For though
the Circles in Dials be Lines, yet they are not of themselves sufficient to
note Time by, except also there be, or be supposed to be a Motion of the Shadow
or the Hand.

5 Number is Exposed either by the Exposition of Points, or of the Names of
Number One, Two, Three, etc. and those Points must not be contiguous, so as
that they cannot be distinguished by Notes, but they must be so placed that
they may be discerned one from another; for from this it is that Number is
called Discrete Quantity, whereas all Quantity which is designed by Motion, is
called Continual Quantity. But that Number may be Exposed by the Names of
Number, it is necessary that they be recited by heart and in order, as One,
Two, Three, etc. for by saying One, One, One and so forward, we know not what
Number we are at beyond Two or Three, which also appear to Us in this manner
not as Number, but as Figure.

6 For the Exposition of Velocity (which by the Definition thereof is a Motion
which in a certain Time passes over a certain Space) it is requisite not only
that Time be Exposed, but that there be also Exposed that Space which is
transmitted by the Body whose Velocity we would determine, and that a Body be
understood to be Moved in that Space also; so that there must be Exposed two
Lines, upon One of which Uniform Motion must be understood to be made, that the
Time may be determined, and upon the other the Velocity is to be computed. As
if we would Expose the Velocity of the Body A, we draw two lines AB and CD, and
place a Body in C also, which done, we say, the Velocity of the Body A is so
great, that it passes over the Line AB in the same Time, in which the Body C
passes over the Line CD with Uniform Motion.

7 Weight is Exposed by any Heavy Body, of what Matter soever, so it be always
alike Heavy.

8 The Proportion of two Magnitudes is then Exposed when the Magnitudes
themselves are Exposed; namely, the Proportion of Equality, when the Magnitudes
are Equal; and of Inequality, when they are Unequal. For seeing (by the 5th*
Article of the precedent Chapter) the Proportion of two Unequal Magnitudes
consists in their Difference compared with either of them; and when two Unequal
Magnitudes are Exposed, their Difference is also Exposed; it follows, that when
Magnitudes which have Proportion to one another are Exposed, their Proportion
also is Exposed with them; and in like manner, the Proportion of Equals (which
consists in this, that there is no Difference of Magnitude betwixt them) is
Exposed at the same time when the Equal Magnitudes themselves are Exposed. For
Example, if the Exposed Lines AB and CD be Equal, the Proportion of Equality is
Exposed in them; and if the Exposed Lines OF and EG be Unequal, the Proportion
which OF has to EG, and that which EG has to OF are also Exposed in them; for
not only the Lines themselves, but also their Difference GF is Exposed. The
Proportion of Unequals is Quantity; for the Difference GF, in which it
consists, is Quantity. But the Proportion of Equality is not Quantity, because
between Equals there is no Difference; nor is one Equality greater then
another, as one Inequality is greater then another Inequality.

9 The Proportion of two Times, or of two Uniform Velocities, is then Exposed,
when two lines are exposed, by which two Bodies are understood to be Moved
Uniformly; and therefore the same two Lines serve to exhibit both their own
Proportion, and that of the Times and Velocities, according as they are
considered to be Exposed for the Magnitudes themselves, or for the Times or
Velocities. For let the two Lines A and B be Exposed; their Proportion
therefore (by the last foregoing Article) is Exposed; and if they be considered
as drawn with equal and Uniform Velocity, then seeing their Times are greater,
or equal, or less, according as the same Spaces are transmitted in greater, or
equal, or less Time, the Lines A and B will exhibit the Equality or
Inequality, that is, the Proportion of the Times. To conclude, If the same
Lines A and B be considered as drawn in the same Time, then seeing their
Velocities are greater, or equal, or less, according as they pass over in the
same time longer, or equal, or shorter Lines, the same Lines A and B will
exhibit the Equality or Inequality, that is, the Proportion of their Velocities.

CHAP. XIII. Of Analogisme or the Same Proportion.
1, 2, 3, 4. The Nature and Definition of Proportion Arithmetical and
Geometrical. 5 The Definition and some properties of the Same Arithmetical
Proportion. 6, 7. The Definition and Transmutations of Analogisme, or The Same
Geometrical Proportion. 8, 9. The Definitions of Hyperlogisme and Hypologisme,
that is, of Greater and Less Proportion, and their Transmutations. 10, 11, 12.
Comparison of Analogical quantities according to Magnitude. 13, 14, 15.
Composition of Proportions. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. The
Definition and Properties of Continual Proportion. 26, 27, 28, 29. Comparison
of Arithmetical and Geometrical Proportions.
Note that in this Chapter, the sign +, signifies that the quantities betwixt
which it is put, are added together; and this sign -, the Remainder, after the
later quantity is taken out of the former. So that A+B is equal to both A and B
together; and where you see A-B, there A is the Whole, B the part taken out of
it, and A-B the Remainder. Also two letters set together without any sign,
signifies (unless they belong to a Figure) that one of the quantities is
multiplied by the other; as A B signifies the Product of A multiplied by B.

1 GReat and Little are not intelligible but by Comparison. Now that to which
they are compared is something Exposed, that is, some Magnitude either
perceived by Sense, or so defined by Words, that it may be comprehended by the
Mind. Also that to which any Magnitude is compared, is either Greater, or Less,
or Equal to it. And therefore Proportion (which as I have shown, is the
Estimation, or Comprehension of Magnitudes by Comparison) is threefold; namely
Proportion of Equality, that is, of Equal to Equal; or of Excess, which is of
the Greater to the Less; or of Defect, which is the Proportion of the Less to
the Greater.

Again, every one of these Proportions is twofold; For if it be asked
concerning any Magnitude given, how Great it is, the answer may be made by
Comparing it two ways; First, by saying it is greater or less then another
Magnitude by so much; as Seven is less then Ten by three Unities; and this is
called Arithmetical Proportion. Secondly, by saying it is greater or less then
another Magnitude by such a part or parts thereof; as Seven is less then Ten by
three tenth parts of the same Ten. And though this Proportion be not always
explicable by Number, yet it is a determinate Proportion, and of a different
kind from the former, and called Geometrical Proportion, and most commonly
Proportion simply.

2 Proportion, whether it be Arithmetical or Geometrical, cannot be Exposed but
in two Magnitudes (of which the former is commonly called the Antecedent, and
the later the Consequent of the Proportion) as I have shown in the 8th. Article
of the precedent Chapter. And therefore if two Proportions be to be compared,
there must be four Magnitudes Exposed, namely two Antecedents and two
Consequents; for though it happen sometimes, that the Consequent of the former
Proportion be the same with the Antecedent of the later, yet in that double
Comparison it must of necessity be twice numbered; so that there will be always
four Terms.

3 Of two Proportions, whether they be Arithmetical or Geometrical, when the
Magnitudes compared in both (which Euclide in the fifth Definition of his sixth
Book calls the Quantities of Proportions) are equal, then one of the
Proportions cannot be either greater or less then the other; For one Equality
is neither greater nor less then another Equality. But of two Proportions of
Inequality, whether they be Proportions of Excess or of Defect, one of them
may be either greater or less then the other, or they may both be equal; for
though there be propounded two Magnitudes that are unequal to one another, yet
there may be other two more unequal, and other two equally unequal, and other
two less unequal then the two which were propounded. And from hence it may be
understood that the Proportions of Excess and Defect are Quantity, being
capable of More and Less; but the Proportion of Equality is not Quantity,
because not capable, neither of More nor of Less. And therefore Proportions of
Inequality may be added together or subtracted from one another, or be
multiplied or divided by one another, or by Number; but Proportions of Equality
not so.

4 Two Equal Proportions are commonly called The Same Proportion; and it is
said, that the Proportion of the first Antecedent to the first Consequent is
the same with that of the second Antecedent to the second Consequent. And when
four Magnitudes are thus to one another in Geometrical Proportion, they are
called Proportionals, and by some more briefly Analogisme. And Greater
Proportion, is the Proportion of a Greater Antecedent to the same Consequent,
or of the same Antec^dent to a Less Consequent; and when the Proportion of the
first Antecedent to the first Consequent, is greater then that of the second
Antecedent to the second Consequent, the four Magnitudes which are so to one
another may be called Hyperlogisme.

Less Proportion is the Proportion of a Less Antecedent to the same Consequent,
or of the same Antecedent to a Greater Consequent; and when the Proportion of
the first Antecedent to the first Consequent, is less then that of the second
to the second, the four Magnitudes may be called Hypologisme.

5 One Arithmetical Proportion is the Same with another Arithmetical
Proportion, when one of the Antecedents exceeds its Consequent, or is exceeded
by it, as much as the other Antecedent exceeds its Consequent, or is exceeded
by it. And therefore in four Magnitudes Arithmetically Proportional, the sum of
the Extremes is equal to the sum of the Means. For if A. B:: C. D be
Arithmetically Proportional, and the Difference on both sides be the same
Excess or the same Defect E; then B+C (if A be greater then B) will be equal to
A-E+C; and A+D will be equal to A+C-E; But A-E+C and A+C-E are equal. Or if A
be less then B, then B+C will be equal to A+E+C; and A+D will be equal to
A+C+E; But A+E+C, and A+C+E are equal.

Also if there be never so many Magnitudes Arithmetically Proportional, the Sum
of them all will be equal to the Product of half the number of the Terms
multiplied by the Sum of the Extremes. For if A. B:: C. D:: E. F be
Arithmetically Proportional, the Couples A+F, B+E, C+D will be equal to one
another; and their Sum will be equal to A+F multiplied by the number of their
Combinations, that is, by half the number of the Terms.

If of four Unequal Magnitudes, any two together taken be equal to the other
two together taken, then the greatest and the least of them will be in the same
Combination. Let the Unequal Magnitudes be A, B, C, D; and let A+B be equal to
C+D; and let A be the greatest of them all; I say B will be the least. For if
it may be, let any of the rest, as D, be the least. Seeing therefore A is
greater then C, and B then D, A+B will be greater then C+D; which is contrary
to what was supposed.

If there be any four Magnitudes, the Sum of the greatest and least, the Sum of
the Means, the difference of the two greatest, and the difference of the two
least will be Arithmetically Proportional. For let there be four Magnitudes,
whereof A is the greatest, D the least, and B and C the Means; I say A+D. B+C::
A-B. C-D are Arithmetically Proportional. For the difference between the first
Antecedent and its Consequent is this, A+D-B-C; and the difference between the
second Antecedent and its Consequent this, A-B-C+D; but these two Differences
are equal, and therefore (by this 5th. Article) A+D. B+C:: A-B. C-D are
Arithmetically Proportional.

If of four Magnitudes, two be equal to the other two, they will be in
reciprocal Arithmetical Proportion. For let A+B be equal to C+D; I say A. C::
D. B are Arithmetically Proportional. For if they be not, let A. C:: D. E
(supposing E to be greater or less then B) be Arithmetically Proportional, and
then A+E will be equal to C+D; wherefore A+B and C+D are not equal; which is
contrary to what was supposed.

6 One Geometrical Proportion is the same with another Geometrical Proportion,
when the same Cause producing equal Effects in equal Times, determines both the
Proportions.

If a Point Uniformly moved, describe two Lines either with the same, or
different Velocity, all the parts of them which are contemporary, that is,
which are described in the same time, will be Two to Two in Geometrical
Proportion, whether the Antecedents be taken in the same Line, or not. For,
from the point A (in the 10 Figure at the end of the 14 Chapter) let the two
Lines A D, A G, be described with Uniform Motion; and let there be taken in
them two parts AB, AE, and again two other parts AC, AF; in such manner, that
AB, AE, be contemporary, and likewise AC, AF contemporary. I say first (taking
the Antecedents AB, AC in the Line AD, and the Consequents AE, AF in the Line
AG) that AB. AC:: AE* AF are Proportionals. For seeing (by the 8th. Chapter and
the 15 Article) Velocity is Motion considered as determined by a certain Length
or Line, in a certain Time transmitted by it, the quantity of the Line AB will
be determined by the Velocity and Time by which the same AB is described; and
for the same reason, the quantity of the Line AC will be determined by the
Velocity and Time, by which the same AC is described; and therefore the
proportion of AB to AC, whether it be Proportion of Equality, or of Excess or
Defect, is determined by the Velocities and Times by which AB, AC are
described; But seeing the Motion of the Point A upon AB and AC is Uniform* they
are both desribed with equal Velocity; and therefore whether one of them have
to the other the Proportion of Majority or of Minority, the sole cause of that
Proportion is the difference of their Times; and by the same reason it is
evident, that the proportion of AE to AF is determined by the difference of
their Times only. Seeing therefore AB, AE, as also AC, AF are contemporary,
the difference of the Times in which AB and AC are described, is the same with
that in which AE and AF are described. Wherefore the proportion of AB to AC, and
the proportion of AE to AF are both determined by the same Cause. But the Cause
which so determines the proportion of both, works equally in equal Times, for
it is Uniform Motion; and therefore (by the last precedent Definition) the
proportion of AB to AC is the same with that of AE to AF; and consequently AB.
AC:: AF. AF are Proportionals; which is the first.

Secondly (taking the Antecedents in different Lines,) I say, AB. AE:: AC. AF
are Proportionals; For seeing AB, AE are described in the same Time, the
difference of the Velocities in which they are described are the sole Cause of
the proportion they have to one another. And the same may be said of the
proportion of AC to AF. But seeing both the Lines AD and AG are passed over by
Uniform Motion, the difference of the Velocities in which AB, AE are described,
will be the same with the difference of the Velocities, in which AC, AF are
described. Wherefore the Cause which determines the proportion of AB to AE, is
the same with that which determines the proportion of AC to AF; and therefore
AB. AE:: AC. AF, are Proportionals; which remained to be proved.

1 Corollary. If four Magnitudes be in Geometrical Proportion, they will also
be Proportionals by Permutation, (that is, by transposing the Middle Terms.)
For I have shown, that not only AB. AC:: AE. AF, but also that (by
Permutation) AB. AE:: AC. AF are Proportionals. 2 Coroll. If there be four
Proportionals, they will also be Proportionals by Inversion or Conversion, that
is, by turning the Antecedents into Consequents. For if in the last Analogisme,
I had for AB, AC, put by Inversion AC, AB, and in like manner converted AE, AF
into AF, AE, yet the same Demonstration had served. For as well AC, AB, as AB,
AC are of equal Velocity; and AC, AF, as well as AF, AC are Contemporary. 3
Coroll. If Proportionals be added to Proportionals, or taken from them, the
Aggregates, or Remainders will be Proportionals. For Contemporaries whether
they be added to Contemporaries, or taken from them; make the Aggregates or
Remainders Contemporary, though the Addition or Substraction be of all the
Terms, or of the Antecedents alone, or of the Consequents alone. 4 Coroll. If
both the Antecedents of four Proportionals, or both the Consequents, or all the
Terms, be multiplied or divided by the same Number or Quantity, the Products or
Quotients will be Proportionals. For the Multiplication and Division of
Proportionals, is the same with the Addition and Substraction of them. 5
Coroll. If there be four Proportionals, they will also be Proportionals by
Composition (that is, by compounding an Antecedent of the Antecedent and
Consequent put together, and by taking for Consequent either the Consequent
singly, or the Antecedent singly). For this Composition is nothing but Addition
of Proportionals, namely, of Consequents to their own Antecedents, which by
Supposition are Proportionals. 6 Coroll. In like manner, if the Antecedent
singly, or Consequent singly be put for Antecedent, and the Consequent be made
of both put together, these also will be Proportionals. For it is the Inversion
of Porportion by Composition. 7 Coroll. If there be four Proportionals, they
will also be Proportionals by Division (that is, by taking the Remainder after
the Consequent is subtracted from the Antecedent, or the Difference between
the Antecedent and Consequent for Antecedent, and either the Whole or the
Remainder for Consequent;) As if A. B:: C. D be Proportionals, they will by
Division be A-B. B:: C-D. D, and A-B. A:: C-D. C; and when the Consequent is
greater then the Antecedent, B-A. A:: D-C. C, and B-AB:: D-C. D. For in all
these Divisions, Proportionals are (by the very supposition of the Analogisme
A. B:: C. D) taken from A and B, and from C and D. 8 Coroll. If there be four
Proportionals, they will also be Proportionals by the Conversion of Proportion,
(that is, by In^erting the Divided Proportion, or by taking the Whole for
Antecedent, and the Difference or Remainder for Consequent.) As, if A. B:: C. D
be Proportionals, then A. A-B:: C. C-D, as also B. A-B:: D. C-D will be
Proportionals. For seeing these Inverted be Proportionals, they are also
themselves Proportionals. 9 Coroll. If there be two Analogismes which have
their quantities equal, the second to the second, and the fourth to the fourth,
then either the Sum or Difference of the first quantities will be to the
second, as the Sum or Difference of the third quantities is to the fourth. Let
A. B:: C. D and E. B:: F. D be Analogismes; I say C+E. B:: F. D are
Proportionals. For the said Analogismes will by Permutation be A. C:: B. D, and
E. F:: B. D; and therefore A. C:: E. F will be Proportionals (for they have
both the proportion of B to D common.) Wherefore if in the Permutation of the
first Analogisme, there be added E and F to A and C, which E and F are
proportional to A and C, then (by the 3d Coroll.) A+E. B:: C+F. D will be
Proportionals; which was to be proved.
Also in the same manner it may be shown, that A-E. B:: C+F. D are
Proportionals.

7 If there be two Analogismes, where four Antecedents make an Analogisme,
their Consequents also shall make an Analogisme; as also the Sums of their
Antecedents will be proportional to the Sums of their Consequents. For if A.
B:: C. D and E. F:: G. H be two Analogismes; and A. E:: C. G be Proportionals,
then by Permutation A. C:: E. G, and E. G:: F. H, and A. C:: B. D will be
Proportionals; Wherefore B. D:: E. G, that is, B. D:: F. H, and by Permutation
B. F:: D. H are Proportionals; which is the first. Secondly, I say A+E. B+F::
C+G. D+H will be Proportionalls. For seeing A. E:: C. G are Proportionals, A+E.
E:: C+G. G will also by Composition be Proportionals, and by Permutation A+E.
C+G:: E. G will be Proportionals; Wherefore also A+E. C+G:: F. H will be
Proportionals. Again, seeing (as is shown above) P. F:: D. H are Proportionals,
B+F. F:: D+H. H will also by Composition be Proportionals; and by Permutation
B+F. D+H:: F. H will also be Proportionals; Wherefore A+E. C+G:: B+F. D+H are
Proportionals; which remained to be proved.

Coroll. By the same reason, if there be never so many Analogismes, and the
Antecedents be proportional to the Antecedents, it may be demonstrated also
that the Consequents will be proportional to the Consequents, as also the Sum
of the Antecedents to the Sum of the Consequents.

8 In an Hyperlogisme, that is, where the Proportion of the first Antecedent to
its Consequent, is greater then the proportion of the second Antecedent to its
Consequent, the Permutation of the Proportionals, and the Addition of
Proportionals to Proportionals, and Substraction of them from one another; as
also their Composition and Division, and their Multiplication and Division by
the same Number, produce always an Hyperlogisme. For suppose A. B:: C. D and A.
C:: E. F be Analogismes, A+E. B:: C+F. D will be also an Analogisme; But A+E.
B:: C. D will be an Hyperlogisme; Wherefore by Permutation, A+E. C:: B. D is an
Hyperlogisme, because A. B:: C. D is an Analogisme. Secondly, if to the
Hyperlogisme A+E. B:: C. D the Proportionals G and H be added, A+E+G. B::, C+H.
D will be an Hyperlogisme, by reason A+E+G. B:: C+F+H. D is an Analogisme. Also
if G and H be taken away, A+E * G. B:: C-H. D will he an Hyperlogisme; for
A+E-G. B:: C+F-H. D are an Analogisme. Thirdly, by Composition A+E+B. B:: C+D.
D will be an Hyperlogisme, because A+E+B. B:: C+F+D. D is an Analogisme, and so
it will be in all the varieties of Composition. Fourthly, by Division A+E-B.
B:: C-D. D will be an Hyperlogisme, by reason A+E-B. B:: C+F-D. D is an
Analogisme. Also A+E-B. A+E:: C-D. C is an Hyperlogisme; for A+E-B. A+E::
C+F-D. C is an Analogisme. Fifthly, by Multiplication 4 A+E. B:: 4 C. D is an
Hyperlogisme, because 4 A. B:: 4 C. D is an Analogisme; and by Division A+E.
B:: C. D is an Hyperlogisme, because A. B:: C. D is an Analogisme.

9 But if A+E. B:: C. D be an Hyperlogisme, then by Inversion B. A+E:: D. C
will be an Hypologisme, because B. A:: D. C being an Analogisme, the first
Consequent will be too great. Also by Conversion of Proportion A+E. A+E-B:: C.
C-D is an Hypologisme, because the Inversion of it, namely A+E-B. A+E:: C-D. C
is an Hyperlogisme (as I have shown but now). So also B. A+E-B:: D. C-D is an
Hypologisme, because (as I have newly shown) the Inversion of it, namely A+E-B.
B:: C-D. D is an Hyperlogisme. Note that this Hypologisme A+E. A+E-B:: C. C-D
is commonly thus expressed; If the proportion of the Whole (A+E) to that which
is taken out of it (B), be greater then the proportion of the Whole (C) to that
which is taken out of it (D,) then the proportion of the whole (A+E) to the
Remainder (A+E-B) will be less then the proportion of the whole (C) to the
Remainder (C-D.)

10 If there be four Proportionals, the Difference of the two first, to the
Difference of the two last will be as the first Antecedent is to the second
Antecedent, or as the first Consequent to the second Consequent. For if A. B::
C. D be Proportionals, then by Division A-B. B:: C-D. D will be Proportionals;
and by Permutation A-B. C-D:: B. D; that is, the Differences are proportional
to the Consequents, and therefore they are so also to the Antecedents.

11 Of four Proportionals, if the first be greater then the second, the third
also shall be greater then the fourth. For seeing the first is greater then the
second, the proportion of the first to the second is the proportion of Excess;
But the proportion of the third to the fourth is the same with that of the
first to the second; and therefore also the proportion of the third to the
fourth is the Proportion of Excess; Wherefore the third is greater then the
fourth. In the same manner it may be proved, that whenever the first is less
then the second, the third also is less then the fourth; and when those are
equal, that these also are equal.

12 If there be four Proportionals whatsoever A. B:: C. D, and the first and
third be multiplied by any one number, as by 2; and again the second and fourth
be multiplied by any one number, as by 3; and the product of the first 2 A, be
greater then the product of the second 3 B; the product also of the third 2 C,
will be greater then the product of the fourth 3 D. But if the product of the
first be less then the product of the second, then the product of the third
will be less then that of the fourth. And lastly, if the products of the first
and second be equal, the products of the third and fourth shall also be equal.
Now this Theoreme is all one with Euclides Definition of The Same Proportion;
and it may be demonstrated thus. Seeing A. B:: C. D are Proportionals, by
Permutation also (Art. 6. Corol. 1.) A. C:: B. D will be Proportionals;
Wherefore (by the 4 Corol. of the same 6 Article) 2 A. 2 C:: 3 B. 3 D will be
Proportionals; and again by Permutation 2 A. 3 B:: 2 C. 3 D will be
Proportionals; and therefore (by the last Article) If 2 A be greater then 3 B,
then 2 C will be greater then 3 D; if less, less; and if equal, equal; which
was to be demonstrated.

13 If any three Magnitudes be propounded, or three things whatsoever that have
any proportion one to another, as three Numbers, three Times, three Degrees,
etc; the proportions of the first to the second, and of the second to the third
together taken; are equal to the proportion of the first to the third. Let
there be three Lines (for any proportion may be reduced to the proportion of
Lines) AB, AC, AD; And in the first place, let the proportion as well of the
first AB to the second AC, as of the second AC to the third AD be the
proportion of Defect, or of Less to Greater; I say the proportions together
taken of AB to AC, and of AC to AD, are equal to the proportion of AB to AD.
Suppose the Point A to be moved over the whole Line AD with Uniform Motion;
then the proportions as well of AB to AC, as of AC to AD are determined by the
difference of the Times in which they are described; that is, AB has to AC such
proportion as is determined by the different Times of their description; and AC
to AD such proportion as is determined by their Times. But the proporrion of AB
to AD is such as is determined by the difference of the Times in which AB and
AD are described; and the difference of the Times in which AB and AC are
described, together with the difference of the Times in which AC and AD are
described, is the same with the difference of the Times in which AB and AD are
described. And therefore the same Cause which determines the two proportions of
AB to AC and of AC to AD, determines also the proportion of AB to AD. Wherefore
(by the Definition of the Same Proportion delivered above in the 6 Art.) the
proportion of AB to AC together with the proportion of AC to AD, is the same
with the proportion of AB to AD.

In the second place, let AD be the first, AC the second, and AB the third, and
let their proportion be the Porportion of Excess, or of Greater to Less; then,
as before, the proportions of AD to AC, and of AC to AB, and of AD to AB will
be determined by the difference of their Times; which in the description of AD
and AC, and of AC and AB* together taken, is the same with the difference of
the Times in the description of AD and AB. Wherefore the proportion of AD to AB
is equal to the two proportions of AD to AC and of AC to AB.

In the last place. If one of the proportions, namely of AD to AB be the
Proportion of Excess; and another of them, as of AB to AC be the Proportion of
Defect, thus also the proportion of AD to AC will be equal to the two
proportions together taken of AD to AB, and of AB to AC. For the difference of
the Times in which AD and AB are described is Excess of Time; for there goes
more time to the description of AD then of AB; and the difference of the Times
in which AB and AC are described is Defect of Time, for less Time goes to the
description of AB then of AC; but this Excess, and Defect being ad^ed together
make DB-BC, which is equal to DC, by which the first AD exceeds the third AC;
and therefore the proportions of the first AD to the second AB, and of the
second AB to the third AC, are determined by the same Cause which determines
the Proportion of the first AD to the third AC. Wherefore, If any three
Magnitudes, etc.

1 Coroll. If there be never so many Magnitudes having proportion to one
another, the proportion of the first to the last is compounded of the
proportions of the first to the second, of the second to the third, and so on
till you come to the last; or, the proportion of the first to the last, is the
same with the Sum of all the intermediate proportions. For any Number of
Magnitudes having proportion to one another, as A, B, C, D, E being propounded,
the proportion of A to E (as is newly shown) is compounded of the Proportions
of A to D and of D to E; and again the proportion of A to D, of the proportions
of A to C, and of C to D; and lastly, the proportion of A to C, of the
proportions of A to B, and of B to C. 2 Coroll. From hence it may be understood
how any two proportions may be compounded. For if the proportions of A to B,
and of C to D be propounded to be added together, let B have to something else,
as to E, the same proportion which C has to D, and let them be set in this
order A, B, E; for so the proportion of A to E will evidently be the Sum of the
two Proportions of A to B, and of B to E, that is, of C to D. Or let it be as D
to C, so A to something else, as to E, and let them be ordered thus E, A, B;
for the proportion of E to B will be compounded of the proportions of E to A
(that is, of C to D), and of A to B. Also it may be understood how one
Proportion may be taken out of another. For if the proportion of C to D be to
be subtracted out of the proportion of A to B, let it be as C to D, so A to
something else, as E, and setting them in this order, A, E, B, and taking away
the proportion of A to E, that is, of C to D, there will remain the proportion
of E to B. 3 Coroll. If there be two Orders of Magnitudes which have proportion
to one another beginning and ending with the same Magnitudes, and the several
proportions of the first Order be the same and equal in number with the
proportions of the second Order; then, whether the proportions in both Orders
be successively answerable to one another, which is called Ordinate Proportion,
or not successively answerable, which is called Perturbed Proportion, the first
and the last in both will be Proportionals. For the Proportion of the first to
the last is equal to all the intermediate proporons; which being in both Orders
the same, and equal in number, the Aggregates of those proportions will also be
equal to one another; but to their Aggregates the proportions of the first to
the last are Equal; and therefore the proportion of the first to the last in
one Order, is the same with the proportion of the first to the last in the
other Order. Wherefore the first and the last in both are Proportionals.
14 If any two quantities be made of the mutual Multiplication of many
quantities which have proportion to one another, and the Efficient quantities
on both sides be equal in number, the proportion of the Products will be
compounded of the several proportions which the Efficient quantities have to
one another.

First, let the two Products be A B, and C D, whereof one is made of the
Multiplication of A into B, and the other of the Multiplication of C into D. I
say the proportion of A B to C D is compounded of the proportions of the
Efficient A to the Efficient C, and of the Efficient B to the Efficient D. For
let A B, C B and C D be set in Order; and as B is to D, so let C be to another
quantity as E; and let A, C, E, be set also in Order. Then by (the 4 Coroll. of
the 6 Art.) it will be as A B the first quantity, to C B the second quantity in
the first Order, so A to C in the second Order; and again, as C B to C D in the
first Order, so B to D, that is, (by Construction) so C to E in the second
Order; and therefore (by the last Corollary) A B. C D:: A. E will be
Proportionals. But the proportion of A to E is compounded of the Proportions of
A to C, and of B to D; Wherefore also the proportion of A B to C D is
compounded of the same.

Secondly, let the two Products be A B F, and C D G, each of them made of three
Efficients, the first of A, B and F, and the second of C, D and G; I say, the
proportion of A B F to C D G is compounded of the proportions of A to C, of B
to D and of F to G. For let them be set in Order as before; and as B is to D,
so let C be to another quantity E; and again, as F is to G, so let E be to
another, H; and let the first Order stand thus, A B F, C B F, C D F and C D G;
and the second Order thus, A, C, E, H, Then the proportion of A B F to C B F in
the first Order, will be as A to C in the second; and the Proportion of C B F
to C D F in the first Order, as B to D, that is, as C to E (by Construction) in
the second Order; and the Proportion of C D F to C D G in the first, as F to G,
that is, as E to H (by Construction) in the second Order; and therefore A B F.
C D G:: A. H will be Proportionals. But the Proportion of A to H is compounded
of the Proportions of A to C, B to D, and F to G. Wherefore the Proportion of
the Product A B F to C D G is also compounded of the same. And this operation
serves, how many soever the Efficients be that make the Quantities given.

From hence arises another way of Compounding many Proportions into One,
namely, that which is supposed in the 5 Definition of the 6 Book of Euclide;
which is, by multiplying all the Antecedents of the Proportions into one
another, and in like manner all the Consequents into one another. And from
hence also it is evident, in the first place, That the Cause why
Parallelograms, which are made by the Duction of two straight Lines into one
anther, and all Solids which are equal to Figures so made, have their
proportions compounded of the proportions of the Efficients; And in the second
place, why the Multiplication of two or more Fractions into one another, is the
same thing with the Composition of the proportions of their several Numerators
to their several Denominators. For examp^^, if these Fractions,, be to be
multiplied into one another, the Numerators 1, 2, 3 are first to be multiplied
into one another, which make 6; and next the Denominators 2, 3, 4, which make
24; and these two Products make the Fraction 6/24. In like manner, if the
proportions of 1 to 2, of 2 to 3, and of 3 to 4 be to be compounded, by working
as I have shown above, the same proportion, of 6 to 24 will be produced.

15 If any Proportion be compounded with it self inverted, the Compound will be
the Proportion of Equality. For let any Proportion be given, as of A to B, and
let the Inverse of it be that of C to D; and as C to D, so let B be to another
quantity; for thus they will be compounded (by the 2 Coroll. of the 12 Art.)
Now seeing the proportion of C to D is the Inverse of the proportion of A to B,
it will be as C to D, so B to A; and therefore if they be placed in Order A, B,
A, the proportion compounded of the proportions of A to B, and of C to D will
be the proportion of A to A, that is, the proportion of Equality. And from
hence the cause is evident, why two equal products have their Efficients
reciprocally proportional. For, for the making of two products equal, the
proportions of their Efficients must be such, as being compounded may make the
proportion of Equality, which cannot be, except one be the Inverse of the
other; for if betwixt A and A any other quantity as C be interposed, their
order will be A, C, A, and the later proportion of C to A will be the Inverse
of the former proportion of A to C.

16 A Proportion is said to be multiplied by a Number when it is so often taken
as there be Unities in that Number; and if the Proportion be of the Greater to
the Less, then shall also the quantity of the Proportion be increased by the
Multiplication; but when the Proportion is of the Less to the Greater, then as
the Number increases, the quantity of the Proportion diminishes; as in these
three Numbers 4, 2, 1, the Proportion of 4 to 1, is not only the Duplicate of
4 to 2, but also twice as great; but inverting the order of those Numbers thus
1, 2, 4, the Proportion of 1 to 2 is greater then that of 1 to 4; and therefore
though the proportion of 1 to 4 be the Duplicate of 1 to 2, yet it is not twice
so great as that of 1 to 2, but contrarily the half of it. In like manner, a
Proportion is said to be Divided, when between two quantities are interposed
one or more Means in continual Proportion, and then the Proportion of the first
to the second is said to be Subduplicate of that of the first to the third, and
Subtriplicate of that of the first to the fourth, etc.

This mixture of Proportions, where some are Proportions of Excess, others of
Defect (as in a Merchants account of Debtor and Creditor) is not so easily
reckoned as some think; but makes the Composition of Proportions sometimes to
be Addition, sometimes Substraction; which sounds absurdly to such as have
always by Composition understood Addition, and by Diminution Substraction.
Therefore to make this account a little clearer, we are to consider (that which
is commonly assumed, and truly) that if there be never so many Quantities, the
Proportion of the first to the last is compounded of the Proportions of the
first to the second, and of the second to the third, and so on to the last,
without regarding their Equality, Excess or Defect; So that if two Proportions,
one of Inequality, the other of Equality be added together, the Proportion is
not thereby made Greater nor Less; as for example, if the Proportions of A to B
and of B to B be compounded, the Proportion of the first to the second is as
much as the Sum of both, because Proportion of Equality (being not quantity)
neither augmenteth quantity nor lesseneth it. But if there be three quantities
A, B, C, unequal, and the first be greatest, the last least, then the
Proportion of B to C is an addition to that of A to B, and makes it greater;
and on the contrary, if A be the least, and C the greatest quantity, then does
the addition of the Proportion of B to C make the co^pounded Proportion of A to
C less then the Proportion of A to B, that is, the Whole less then the Part.
The Compositiont herefore of Proportions is not in this case the Augmentation
of them, but the Diminution; for the same quantity ( Euclide the 5, 8.)
compared with two other quantities has a greater Proportion to the lesser of
them then to the greater. Likewise, when the Proportions compounded are one of
Excess, the other of Defect, if the first be of Excess, as in these numbers 8,
6, 9, the Proportion compounded, namely, of 8 to 9, is less then the Proportion
of one of the parts of it, namely of 8 to 6; but if the Proportion of the first
to the second be of Defect, and that of the second to the third be of Excess,
as in these Numbers 6, 8, ^, then shall the Proportion of the first to the
third be greater then that of the first to the second, as 6 has a greater
Proportion to 4 then to 8; the reason whereof is manifestly this, that the less
any quantity is deficient of another, or the more one exceeds another, the
proportion of it to that other is the greater.

Suppose now three quantities in continual Proportion A B 4, A C 6, A D 9.
Because therefore A D is greater then A C, but not greater then A D, the
proportion of A D to A C will be (by Euclide 5, 8.) greater then that of A D to
A D; and likewise, because the Proportions of A D to A C, and of A C to A B are
the same, the proportions of A D to A C and of A C to A B (being both
Proportions of Excess) make the whole Proportion of A D to A B (or of 9 to 4)
not only the Duplicate of A D to A C (that is, of 9 to 6) but also the Double,
or twice so great. On the other side, because the proportion of A D to A D (or
9 to 9) being Proportion of Equality, is no quantity, and yet greater then that
of A C to A D (or 6 to 9) it will be as 0-9 to 0-6, so A C to A D, and again,
as 0-9 to 0-6, so 0-6 to 0-4; but 0-4, 0-6, 0-9 are in continual proportion;
and because 0-4 is greater then 0-6, the protion of 0-4 to 0-6 will be Double
to the proportion of 0-4 to 0-9, Double I say, and yet not Duplicate, but
Subduplicate.

If any be unsatisfied with this ratiocination, let him first consider that (by
Euclide 5, 8) the proportion of A B to A C is greater then that of A B to A D
wheresoever D be placed in the line A C prolonged; and the further off the
point D is from C, so much the greater is the proportion of A B to A C then
that of A B to A D. There is therefore some point (which suppose be E) in such
distance from C, as that the proportion of A B to A C will be twice as great as
that of A B to A E. That considered, let him determine the length of the line A
E, and demonstrate (if he can) that A E is greater or less then A D.

By the same method, if there be more quantities then three, as A, B, C, D in
continual Proportion, and A be the least, it may be made appear, that the
Proportion of A to B is Triple Magnitude (though Subtriple in Multitude) to the
Proportion of A to D.

17 If there be never so many quantities, the number whereof is odd, and their
Order such, that from the middlemost quantity both ways they proceed in
continual Proportion, the proportion of the two which are next on either side
to the middlemost, is Subduplicate to the proportion of the two which are next
to these on both sides, and Subtriplicate of the proportion of the two which
are yet one place more remote, etc. For let the Magnitudes be C, B, A, D, E,
and let A, B, C, as also A, D, E be in Continual Proportion; I say the
proportion of D to B is Subduplicate of the proportion of E to C. For the
proportion of D to B is compounded of the proportions of D to A, and of A to B
once taken; But the proportion of E to C is compounded of the same twice taken;
and therefore the proportion of D to B is Subduplicate of the proportion of E
to C- And in the same manner, if there were three Terms on either side, it
might be demonstrated that the proportion of D to B would be Subtriplicate of
that of the Extremes, etc.

18 If there be never so many continual Proportionals, as the first, second,
third, etc. their Differences will be Proportional to them. For the second,
third, etc. are severally Consequents of the preceding, and Antecedents of the
following Proportion. But (by the 10 Art.) the Difference of the first
Antecedent and Consequent, to Difference of the second Antecedent and
Consequent, is as the first Antecedent to the second Antecedent, that is, as
the first Term to the second, or as the second to the third, etc. in continual
Proportionals.

19 If there be three Continual Proportionals, The Sum of the Extremes,
together with the Mean twice taken; The Sum of the Mean and either of the
Extremes; and the same Extreme, are Continual Proportionals. For let A. B. C be
Continual Proportionals. Seeing therefore A. B:: B. C are Proportionals; by
Composition also A+B. B:: B+C. C will be Proportionals; and by Permutation A+B.
B+C:: B. C will also be Proportionals; and again by Composition A+2 B+C. B+C::
B+C. C; which was to be proved.

20 In four Continual Proportionals, the greatest and the least put together,
is a greater quantity then the other two put together. Let A. B:: C. D be
Continual Proportionals; whereof let the greatest be A, and the least be D; I
say A+D is greater then B+C. For (by the 10 Art.) A-B. C-D:: A. C are
Proportionals; and therefore A-B is (by the 11 Art.) greater then C-D. Add B on
both sides, and A will be greater then C+B-D. And again, add D on both sides,
and A+D will be greater then B+C; which was to be proved.

21 If there be four Proportionals, the Extremes multiplied into one another,
and the Means multiplied into one another will make equal Products. Let A. B::
C. D be Proportionals; I say A D is equal to B C. For the Proportion of A D to
B C is compounded (by the 13 Art.) of the Proportions of A to B, and D to C,
that is, its Inverse B to A; and therefore (by the 14 Art) this Compounded
Proportion is the Proportion of Equality; and therefore also the Proportion of
A D to B C is the Proportion of Equality. Wherefore they are equal.

22 If there be four quantities, and the Proportion of the first to the second
be Duplicate of the Proportion of the third to the fourth, the Product of the
Extremes to the Product of the Means will be as the third to the fourth. Let
the four Quantities be A, B C and D; and let the Proportion of A to B be
Duplicate of the Proportion of C to D, I say A D, that is, the Product of A
into D, is to BC, that is, to the Product of the Means, as C to D. For seeing
the Proportion of A to B is Duplicate of the proportion of C to D, if it be as
C to D, so D to another E, then A. B:: C. E will be Proportionals; for the
proportion of A to B is by supposition duplicate of the Proportion of C to D;
and C to E duplicate also of that of C to D by the Definition (15 Art.)
Wherefore (by the last Article) A E or A into E, is equal to B C or B into C;
But (by the 4 Coroll. of the 6 Art.) A D is to A E as D to E, that is, as C to
D; and therefore A D is to B C (which as I have shown, is equal to A E) as C to
D; which was to be proved.

Moreover, If the proportion of the first A, to the second B be triplicate of
the proportion of the third C to the fourth D, the Product of the Extremes to
the product of the Means will be duplicate of the Proportion of the third to
the fourth. For if it be as C to D so D to E, and again, as D to E so E to
another F, then the proportion of C to F will be triplicate of the proportion
of C to D; and consequently A. B:: C. F will be proportionals, and A F equal to
B C. But as A D to A F, so is D to F; and therefore also as A D to B C, so D to
F, that is, so C to E; But the proportion of C to E is duplicate of the
proportion of C to D; Wherefore also the proportion of A D to B C is duplicate
of that of C to D, as was propounded.

23 If there be four Proportionals, and a Mean be interposed betwixt the first
and second, and another betwixt the third and fourth, the first of these Means
will be to the second, as the first of the Proportionals is to the third, or as
the second of them is to the fourth. For let A. B:: C. D be Proportionals, and
let E be a Mean betwixt A and B, and F a Mean betwixt C and D; I say A. C:: E.
F are Proportionals. For the proportion of A to E is Subduplicate of the
proportion of A to B, or of C to D. Also the proportion of C to F is
Subduplicate of that of C to D; and therefore A. E:: C. F are Proportionals;
and by Permutation A. C:: E. F are also Proportionals; which was to be proved.

24 Any thing is said to be divided into Extreme and Mean Proportion, when the
Whole and the Parts are in Continual Proportion. As (for example) when A + B.
A. B are Continual Proportionals; or when the straight line A C is so divided
in B, that A C. A B. B C are in Continual Proportion. And if the same Line A C
be again divided in D, so as that A C. C D. A D be continual Proportionals;
then also A C. A B. A D will be continual Proportionals; and in like manner,
though in contrary order, CA. CD. CB:: will be continual Proportionals; which
cannot happen in any Line otherwise divided.

25 If there be three continual Proportionals, and again, three other continual
Proportionals which have the same Middle Term, their Extremes will be in
reciprocal Proportion. For let A. B. C:: and D. B. E:: be continual
Proportionals, I say A. D:: E. C shall be Proportionals. For the Proportion of
A to D is compounded of the Proportions of A to B, and of B to D; and the
Proportion of E to C is compounded of those of E to B, that is, of B to A, and
of B to C, that is, of A to B. Wherefore (by Equality) A. D:: E. C. are
Proportionals.

26 If any two unequal quantities be made Extremes, and there be interposed
betwixt them any Number of Means in Geometrical Proportion, and the same Number
of Means in Arithmetical Proportion, the several Means in Geometrical
Proportion will be less then the several Means in Arithmetical proportion. For
betwixt A the lesser, and E the greater Extreme, let there be interposed three
Means B, A, D in Geometrical Proportion, and as many more F, G, H in
Arithmetical Proportion; I say B will be less then F, A then G, and D then H.
For first, the difference between A and F is the same with that between F and
G, and with that between G and H (by the Definition of Arithmetical
Proportion;) and therefore the difference of the pro portionals which stand
next to one another, to the difference of the Extremes, is, when there is but
one Mean, half their difference; when two, a 3d part of it; when three, a
quarter, etc. so that in this example it is a quarter. But the difference
between D and E (by the 17. Art.) is more then a quarter of the difference
between the Extremes, because the Proportion is Geometrical; and therefore the
difference between A and D is less then 3 quarters of the same difference of
the Extremes. In like manner, if the difference between A and D be understood
to be divided into three equal parts, it may be proved, that the difference
between A and C is less then two quarters of the difference of the Extremes A
and E. And lastly, if the difference between A and C be divided into two equal
parts, that the difference between A and B is less then a quarter of the
difference of the Extremes A and E.

From the consideration hereof it is manifest, that B, that is, A together with
something else which is less then a fourth part of the difference of the
Extremes A and E, is less then F, that is, then the same A with something else
which is equal to the said fourth part. Also, that C, that is A with something
else which is less then two fourth parts of the said difference, is less then
G, that is, then A together with the said two fourths. And lastly, that D which
exceeds A by less then three fourths of the said difference, is less then H,
which exceeds the same A by three entire fourths of the said difference. And in
the same manner it would be if there were four Means, saving that in stead of
fourths of the difference of the Extremes, we are to take fifth parts; and so
on.

27 Lemma. If a quantity being given, first one quantity be both added to it
and subtracted from it, and then another greater or less, the proportion of
the Remainder to the Aggregate, is greater where the less quantity is added and
subtracted, then where the greater quantity is added and subtracted. Let B be
added to, and subtracted from the quantity A; so that A-B be the Remainder,
and A+B the Aggregate; And again let C, a greater quantitity then B be added
to, and subtracted from the same A, so that A-C be the Remainder and A+C the
Aggregate; I say A-B. A+B:: A-C. A+C will be an Hyperlogisme. For A-B. A:: A-C.
A is an Hyperlogisme of a less Antecedent to the same Consequent; and therefore
A-B. A+B:: A-C. A+C is a much greater Hyperlogisme, being made of a less
Antecedent to a greater Consequent.

28 If unequal parts be taken from two equal quantities, and betwixt the whole
and the part of each there be interposed two Means, One in Geometrical, the
other in Arithmetical proportion; The Difference betwixt the two Means will be
greatest, where the Difference betwixt the Whole and its part is greatest. For
let AB and AB be two equal quantities; from which let two unequal parts be
taken, namely, AE the less, and AF the greater; and betwixt AB and AE let AG be
a Mean in Geometrical Proportion, and AH, a Mean in Arithmetical Proportion.
Also betwixt AB and AF let AI be a Mean in Geometrical Porportion, and AK a
Mean in Arithmetical Proportion; I say HG is greater then KI. For in the first
place we have this Analogisme AB. AG:: BG. GE (by the 18 Art.)

Then by Composition we have this AB+AG. AB:: BG+GE (that is BE). BG. And by
taking the halves of the Antecedents this third AB+AG. AB:: BG+GE (that is BH).
BG. And by Conversion a fourth AB. AB+AG:: BG. BH And by Division this fifth
AB-AG. AB+AG:: HG. BH. And by doubling the first Antecedent and the first
Consequent AB-AG. AB+AG:: HG. BH. Also by the same method may be found out this
Analogisme AB-AI. AB+AI:: KI. BK.
Now seeing the proportion of AB to AE is greater then that of AB to AF, the
proportion of AB to AG, which is half the greater proportion, is greater then
the proportion of AB to AI the half of the less Proportion; and therefore AI is
greater then AG. Wherefore the proportion of AB-AG to AB+AG (by the precedent
Lemma) will be greater then the proportion of AB-AI to AB+AI; and therefore
also the proportion of HG to BH will be greater then that of KI to BK, and much
greater then the proportion of KI to BH, which is greater then BK, (for BH is
the half of BE, as BK is the half of BF, which (by supposition) is less less
then BE). Wherefore HG is greater then KI; which was to be proved.

Coroll. It is manifest from hence, that if any quantity be supposed to be
divided into equal parts infinite in number, the difference between the
Arithmetical and Geometrical Means will be infinitely little, that is, none at
all. And upon this foundation chiefly, the Art of making those Numbers which
are called Logarithmes seems to have been built.

29 If any number of quantities be propounded, whether they be unequal, or
equal to one another; and there be another quantity which multiplied by the
number of the propounded quantities is equal to them all; that other Quantity
is a mean in Arithmeticall Proportion to all those propounded quantities.

CHAP. XIV. Of Straight and Crooked, Angle and Figure.
1 The Definition and Properties of a Straight Line 2 The Definition and
Properties of a Plain Superficies. 3 Several sorts of Crooked Lines. 4 The
Definition and Properties of a Circular Line. 5 The Properties of a Straight
Line taken in a Plain. 6 The Definition of Tangent Lines. 7 The Definition of
an Angle, and the kinds thereof. 8 In Concentrick Circles, Arches of the same
Angle are to one another as the whole Circumferences are. 9 The Quantity of an
Angle in what it consists. 10 The Distinction of Angles simply so called. 11 Of
Straight Lines from the Center of a Circle to a Tangent of the same. 12 The
general Definition of Parallels; and the Properties of Straight Parallels. 13
The Circumferences of Circles are to one another as their Diameters are. 14 In
Triangles, Straight Lines parallel to the Bases, are to one another, as the
parts of the Sides which they cut off from the Vertex. 15 By what Fraction of a
Straight Line the Circumference of a Circle is made. 16 That an Angle of
Contingence is Quantity, but of a Different kind from that of an Angle simply
so called; and that it can neither add nor take away any thing from the same.
17 That the Inclination of Plains is Angle simply so called. 18 A Solid Angle
what it is. 19 What is the Nature of Asymptotes. 20 Situation, by what it is
determined. 21 What is like Situation; What is Figure; and what are like
Figures.
1 BEtween two points given, the shortest Line is that, whose extreme points
cannot be drawn further asunder, withour altering the quantity, that is,
without altering the proportion of that line to any other line given. For the
Magnitude of a Line is computed by the greatest distance which may be between
its extreme points; So that any one Line, whether it be extended, or bowed, has
always one and the same Length, because it can have but one greatest distance
between its extreme points.

And seeing the action by which a Straight Line is made Crooked, or contrarily
a Crooked Line is made Straight, is nothing but the bringing of its extreme
points nearer to one another, or the setting of them further asunder, a CROOKED
Line may rightly be defined to be That, whose extreme points may be understood
to be drawn further asunder; and a STRAIGHT Line to be That, whose extreme
points cannot be drawn further asunder; and comparatively, A more Crooked, to
be That line whose extreme points are nearer to one another then those of the
other, (supposing both the Lines to be of equal Length.) Now howsoever a Line
be bowed, it makes always a Sinus or Cavity, sometimes on one side, sometimes
on another; So that the same Crooked Line may either have its whole Cavity on
one Side only, or it may have it part on one side and part on other sides.
Which being well understood, it will be easy to understand the following
Comparisons of Straight and Crooked Lines.

First, If a Straight and a Crooked Line have their Extreme points common, the
Crooked Line is longer then the Straight Line. For if the extreme points of the
Crooked Line be drawn out to their greatest distance, it will be made a straight
line, of which that which was a Straight Line from the beginning will be but a
part; and therefore the Straight Line was shorter then the Crooked Line which
had the same extreme points. And for the same reason, if two Crooked Lines have
their extreme points common, and both of them have all their cavity on one and
the same side, the outermost of the two will be the longest Line.

Secondly, A Straight Line and a perpetually Crooked Line cannot be coincident,
no not in the least part. For if they should, then not only some Straight Line
would have its extreme points common with some Crooked Line, but also they
would by reason of their coincidence, be equal to one another; which, as I have
newly shown, cannot be.

Thirdly, Between two points given there can be understood but one straight
Line; because there cannot be more then one least Interval or Length between
the same points. For if there may be two, they will either be coincident, and
so both of them will be one Straight Line; or if they be not coincident, then
the application of one to the other by extension, will make the extended Line
have its extreme points at greater distance then the other; and consequently it
was Crooked from the beginning.

Fourthly, From this last it follows, that two Straight Lines cannot include a
Superficies. For if they have both their extreme points common, they are
coincident; and if they have but one, or neither of them common, then at one,
or both ends, the extreme points will be disjoined, and include no Superficies,
but leave all open and undetermined.

Fifthly, Every part of a Straight Line is a Straight Line. For seeing every
part of a Straight Line is the least that can be drawn between its own extreme
points, if all the parts should not constitute a Straight Line, they would all
together be longer then the whole Line.

2 APLAIN, or a Plain Superficies, is that which is described by a Straight
Line so moved that all the several points thereof describe several Straight
Lines. A straight line therefore is necessarily all of it in the same Plain
which it describes. Also the Straight Lines which are made by the points that
describe a Plain, are all of them in the Same Plain. Moreover, if any Line
whatsoever be moved in a Plain, the Lines which are described by it are all of
them in the same Plain.

All other Superficies which are not Plain, are Crooked, that is, are either
Concave or Unequal. And the same Comparisons which were made of Straight and
Crooked Lines: may also be made of Plain and Crooked Superficies. For

First, If a Plain and a Crooked Superficies be terminated with the same Lines,
the Crooked Superficies is greater then the Plain Superficies. For if the Lines
of which the Crooked Superficies consists be extended, they will be found to be
longer then those of which the Plain Superficies consists, which cannot be
extended because they are Straight.

Secondly, Two Superficies, whereof the one is Plain, and the other continually
Crooked, cannot be coincident, no not in the least part. For if they were
coincident they would be equal; nay, the same Superficies would be both Plain
and Crooked, which is impossible.

Thirdly, Within the same terminating Lines, there can be no more then one
Plain Superficies; because there can be but one least Superficies within the
same.

Fourthly, No number of Plain Superficies can include a Solid, unless more then
two of them end in a Common Vertex. For if two Plains have both the same
terminating Lines, they are coincident, that is, they are but one Superficies;
and if their terminating Lines be not the same, they leave one or more sides
open.

Fifthly, Every part of a Plain Superficies is a Plain Superficies. For seeing
the whole Plain Superficies is the least of all those that have the same
terminating Lines; and also every part of the same Superficies is the least of
all those that are terminated with the same Lines; if every part should not
constitute a Plain Superficies, all the parts put together would not be equal
to the whole.

3 Of Straightness, whether it be in Lines, or in Superficies there is but one
kind; but of Crookedness there are many kinds; for of Crooked Magnitudes,
some are Congruous, that is, are coincident when they are applied to one
another; others are Incongruous. Again, some are (...) or Uniform, that is,
have their parts howsoever taken, congruous to one another; others are (...) or
of several Forms. Moreover, of such as are Crooked, some are Continually
Crooked, others have parts which are not Crooked.

4 If a Straight Line be moved in a Plain, in such manner, that while one end
of it stands still, the whole Line be carried round about, til it come again
into the same place from whence it was first moved, it will describe a plain
Superficies, which will be terminated every way by that Crooked Line which is
made by that end of the Straight Line which was carried round. Now this
Superficies is called a CIRCLE; and of this Circle, the Unmoved Point, is the
the Center; the Crooked Line which terminates it, the Perimeter; and every part
of that Crooked Line, a Circumference or Arch; the straight Line which
generated the Circle, is the Semidiameter or Radius; and any straight Line
which passes through the Center, and is terminated on both sides in the
Circumference is called the Diameter. Moreover, every point of the Radius which
describes the Circle, describes in the same time its own Perimeter, terminating
its own Circle, which is said to be Concentrick to all the other Circles,
because this and all those have one common Center.

Wherefore in every Circle, all Straight Lines from the Center to the
Circumference are equal. For they are all coincident with the Radius which
generates the Circle.

Also the Diameter divides both the Perimeter and the Circle it self into two
equal parts. For if those two parts be applied to one another, and the
Semiperimeters be coincident, then seeing they have one common Diameter, they
will be equal; and the Semicircles will be equal also; for these also will be
coincident. But if the Semiperimeters be not coincident, then some one straight
Line which passes through the Center (which Center is in the Diameter) will be
cut by them in two points. Wherefore, seeing all the straight Lines from the
Center to the Circumference are equal, a part of the same straight Line will be
equal to the whole; which is impossible.

For the same reason the Perimeter of a Circle will be Uniform, that is, any
one part of it will be coincident with any other equal part of the same.

5 From hence may be collected this property of a Straight Line, namely, that
it is all contained in that Plain which conteins both its extreme points. For
seeing both its extreme points are in the Plain, that Straight Line which
describes the Plain will pass through them both; and if one of them be made a
Center, and at the distance between both, a Circumference be described, whose
Radius is the Straight Line which describes the Plain, that Circumference will
pass through the other point. Wherefore between the two propounded points,
there is one straight line (by the Definition of a Circle) contained wholly in
the propounded Plain; and therefore if another straight Line might be drawn
between the same points, and yet not be contained in the same Plain, it would
follow, that between two points two straight lines may be drawn; which has been
demonstrated to be impossible.

It may also be collected, That if two Plains cut one another, their common
section will be a straight Line. For the two extreme points of the intersection
are in both the intersecting Plains; and between those points a straight Line
may be drawn; but a straight Line between any two points is in the same Plain
in which the Points are; and seeing these are in both the Plains, the straight
line which connects them will also be in both the same Plains, and therefore it
is the common section of both. And every other Line that can be drawn between
those points will be either coincident with that Line, that is, it will be the
Same Line; or it will not be coincident; and then it will be in neither, or but
in one of those Plains.

As a straight Line may be understood to be moved round about whilst one end
thereof remains fixed, as the Center; so in like manner it is easy to
understand, that a Plain may be circumduced about a straight line, whilst the
straight line remains still in one and the same place, as the Axis of that
motion. Now from hence it is manifest, that any three Points are in some one
Plain. For as any two Points, if they be connected by a straight Line, are
understood to be in the same Plain in which the straight Line is; so, if that
Plain be circumduced about the same straight Line, it will in its revolution
take in any third Point, howsoever it be situate; and then the three Points
will be all in that Plain; and consequently the three straight Lines which
connect those Points, will also be in the same Plain.

6 Two Lines are said to Touch one another, which being both drawn to one and
the same point, will not cut one another, though they be produced, produced I
say in the same manner in which they were generated. And therefore if two
straight Lines touch one another in any one point, they will be contiguous
through their whole length. Also two Lines continually crooked will do the same,
if they be congruous, and be applied to one another according to their
congruity; otherwise, if they be incongruously applied, they will, as all other
crooked Lines, touch one another (where they touch) but in one point only.
Which is manifest from this, that there can be no congruity between a straight
line and a line that is continually crooked; for otherwise the same line might
be both straight and crooked. Besides when a straight line touches a crooked
line, if the straight line be never so little moved about upon the point of
contact, it will cut the crooked line; for seeing it touches it but in one
point, if it incline any way, it will do more then touch it; that is, it will
either be congruous to it, or it will cut it; but it cannot be congruous to it;
and therefore it will cut it.

7 An Angle, according to the most general acception of the word, may be thus
defined; When two Lines, or many Superficies concur in one sole point, and
diverge every where else, the quantity of that divergence is an ANGLE. And an
Angle is of two ^orts; for first it may be made by the concurrence of Lines,
and then it is a Superficial Angle; or by the concurrence of Superficies, and
then it is called a Solid Angle.

Again, from the two ways by which two lines may diverge from one another,
Superficial Angles are divided into two kinds. For two straight lines which
are applied to one another, and are contiguous in their whole length, may be
separated or pulied open in such manner, that their concurrence in one point
will still remain; And this Separation or Opening may be either by Circular
Motion, the Center whereof is their point of concurrence, and the Lines will
still ret^in their straightness, the quantity of which Separation, or
Divergence is an Angle simply so called; Or they may be separated by continual
Flexion or Curvation in every imaginable point; and the quantity of this
Separation is that which is called an Angle of Contingence.

Besides of Superficial Angles simply so called, those which are in a plain
Superficies are Plain; and those which are not plain, are denominated from the
Superficies in which they are*

Lastly, those are Straight-lined Angles which are made by straight lines; as
those which are made by crooked lines are Crooked-lined; and those which are
made both of straight and crooked lines, are Mixed Angles.

8 Two Arches inter cepted between two Radii of Concentrick Circles, have the
same proportion to one another, which their whole Perimeters have to one
another. For let the point A (in the first Figure) be the Center of the two
Circles B C D and E F G; in which the Radii A E B and A F C intercept the
Arches B C and E F; I say the proportion of the Arch B C to the Arch E F, is
the same with that of the Perimet B C D to the Perimerer er E F G. For if the
Radius A F C be understood to be moved about the Center A with Circular and
Uniform Motion, that is, with equal Swiftness every where, the point C will in
a certain time describe the Perimeter B C D, and in a part of that time the
Arch B C; and because the Velocities are equal by which both the Arch and the
whole Perimeter are described, the proportion of the magnitude of the Perimeter
B C D to the magnitude of the Arch B C, is determined by nothing but the
difference of the times in which the Perimeter and the Arch are described. But
both the Perimeters are described in one and the same time, and both the Arches
in one and the same time; and therefore the proportions of the Perimeter B C D
to the Arch B C, and of the Perimeter E F G to the Arch E F, are both
determined by the same cause. Wherefore B C D, B C:: E F G. E F are
Proportionals (by the 6 Art. of the last Chapter), and by Permutation B C D. E
F G:: B C. E F will also be Proportionals, which was to be demonstrated.

9 Nothing is contributed toward the Quantity of an Angle, neither by the
Length, nor by the Equality, nor by the Inequality of the lines which
comprehend it. For the lines A B and A C comprehend the same Angle which is
comprehended by the lines A E and A F, or A B and A F. Nor is an Angle either
increased or diminished by the absolute quantity of the Arch which subtends the
same; for both the greater Arch B C, and the lesser Arch E F are subtended to
the same Angle. But the quantity of an Angle is estimated by the quantity of
the subtending Arch compared with the quantity of the whole Perimeter. And
therefore the Quantity of an Angle simply so called may be thus defined.

The Quantity of an Angle, is an Arch or Circumference of a Circle, determined
by its proportion to the whole Perimeter. So that when an Arch is intercepted
between two straight lines drawn from the Center, look how great a portion that
Arch is of the whole Perimeter, so great is the Angle. From whence it may be
understood, that when the lines which contein an Angle are straight lines, the
quantity of that Angle may be taken at any distance from the Center. But if
one, or both of the containing lines be crooked, then the quantity of the Angle
is to be taken in the least distance from the Center, or from their
concurrence; for the least distance is to be considered as a straight line,
seeing no crooked line can be imagined so little, but that there may he a less
straight line. And although the least straight line cannot be given, because
the least given line may still be divided, yet we may come to a part so small,
as is not at all considerable; which we call a Point. And this point may be
understood to be in a straight line which touches a crooked line; for an Angle
is generated by separating by circular motion one straight line from another
which touches it, (as has been said above in the 7th Article). Wherefore an
Angle which two crooked lines make is the same with that which is made by two
straight lines which touch them.

10 From hence it follows, that Vertical Angles, such as are ABC, D B F (in the
second Figure) are equal to one another. For if from the two Semiperimeters D A
C, F D A which are equal to one another, the common Arch D A be taken away, the
remaining Arches A C, D F will be equal to one another.

Another distinction of Angles is, into Right and Oblique. A Right Angle is
that, whose quantity is the fourth part of the Perimeter. And the lines which
make a Right Angle are said to be Perpendicular to one another. Also of Oblique
Angles, that which is greater then a Right, is called an Obtuse Angle; and that
which is less, an Acute Angle. From whence it follows, that all the Angles that
can possibly be made at one and the same Point, together taken, are equal to
four Right Angles; because the quantities of them all put together make the
whole Perimeter. Also, that all the Angles which are made on one side of a
straight line from any one point taken in the same, are equal to two Right
Angles; for if that point be made the Center, that straight line will be the
Diameter of a Circle, by whose Circumference the quantity of an Angle is
determined; and that Diameter will divide the Perimeter into two equal parts.

11 If a Tangent be made the Diameter of a Circle whose Center is the point of
Contact, a straight line drawn from the Center of the former Circle to the
Center of the later Circle, will make two Angles with the Tangent (that is,
with the Diameter of the later Circle) equal to two Right Angles (by the last
Article). And because (by the 6th Article) the Tangent has on both sides equal
inclination to the Circle, each of them will be a Right Angle; as also the
Semidiameter will be perpendicular to the same Tangent. Moreover, the
Semidiameter, in as much as it is the Semidiameter, is the least straight line
which can be drawn from the Center to the Tangent; and every other straight
line that reaches the Tangent will pass out of the Circle, and will therefore
be greater then the Semidiameter. In like manner, of all the straight lines
which may be drawn from the Center to the Tangent, that is the greatest which
makes the greatest Angle with the Perpenpicular; which will be manifest, if
about the same Center another Circle be described, whose Semidiameter is a
straight line taken nearer to the Perpendicular, and there be drawn a
Perpendicular (that is, a Tangent) to the same.

From whence it is also manifest, that if two straight lines which make equal
Angles on either side of the Perpendicular, be produced to the Tangent, they
will be equal.

12 There is in Euclide a Definition of Straight-lined Parallels; but I do not
find that Parallels in general, are any where defined; and therefore for an
Universal definition of them, I say, that Any two lines whatsoever (Straight or
Crooked) as also any two Superficies, are PARALLEL, when two equal straight
lines wheresoever they fall upon them, make always equal Angles with each of
them. From which Definition it follows.

First, that any two straight lines not inclined opposite ways, falling upon
two other straight lines which are Parallel, and intercepting equal parts in
both of them, are themselves also equal and Parallel. As if AB and CD (in the
third Figure) inclined both the same way (fall upon the Parallels AC and BD,
and AC and BD be equal, AB and CD will also be equal and Parallel. For the
Perpendiculars BE and DF being drawn, the Right Angles EBD and FDH will be
equal. Wherefore seeing OF and BD are parallel, the angles EBA and FDC will be
equal. Now if DC be not equal to BA, let any other straight line equal to BA be
drawn from the point D; which seeing it cannot fall upon the point C, let it
fall upon G. Whereore AG will be either greater or less then BD; and therefore
the angles EBA and FDG are not equal, as was supposed. Wherefore AB and CD are
equal; which is the first.

Again, because they make equal Angles with the Perpendiculars BE and DF;
therefore the Angle CDH will be equal to the Angle ABD, and (by the Definition
of Parallels) AB and CD will be parallel; which is the second.

That Plain which is included both ways within parallel lines is called a
PARALLELOGRAM.

1 Corollary. From this last it follows, That the Angles ABD and CDH are equal;
that is, that a straight line (as BH) falling upon two Parallels (as AB and CD)
makes the internal Angle ABD equal to the external and opposite Angle CDH. 2
Coroll. And from hence again it follows, that a straight line falling upon two
Parallels, makes the alternate Angles equal; that is, the Angle AGF (in the
fourth figure) equal to the Angle GFD. For seeing GFD is equal to the external
opposite Angle EGB, it will be also equal to its vertical Angle AGF, which is
alternate to GFD. 3 Coroll. That the internal Angles on the same side of the
line FG are equal to two Right Angles. For the Angles at F, namely GFC and GFD
are equal to two Right Angles. But GFD is equal to its alternate Angle AGF.
Wherefore both the Angles GFC and AGF which are internal on the same side of
the line FG, are equal to two Right Angles. 4 Coroll. That the three Angles of
a straight-lined plain Triangle are equal to two Right Angles; and any side
being produced, the external Angle will be equal to the two opposite internal
Angles. For if there be drawn by the Vertex of the plain Triangle ABC (figure
5.) a Parallel to any of the sides, as to AB, the Angles A and B will be equal
to their alternate Angles E and F, and the Angle C is common. But (by the 10th
Article) the three Angles E, C and F are equal to two Right Angles; and
therefore the three Angles of the Triangle are equal to the same; which is the
first. Again, the two Angles B and D are equal to two Right Angles (by the 10th
Article). Wherefore taking away B, there will remain the Angles A and C equal
to the Angle D; which is the second. 5 Coroll. If the Angles A and B be equal,
the sides AC and CB will also be equal, because AB and OF are parallel; And on
the contrary, if the sides AC and CB be equal, the Angles A and B will also be
equal. For if they be not equal, let the Angles B and G be equal. Wherefore
seeing GB and OF are parallels, and the Angles G and B equal, the sides GC and
CB will also be equal; and because CB and AC are equal by supposition, CG and
CA will also be equal; which cannot be (by the 11th Article.) 6 Coroll. From
hence it is manifest, that if two Radii of a Circle be connected by a straight
Line, the Angles they make with that connecting Line will be equal to one
another; and if there be added that segment of the Circle which is subtended by
the same line which connects the Radii, then the Angles which those Radii make
with the circumference will also be equal to one another. For a straight line
which subtends any Arch, makes equal Angles with the same, because if the Arch
and the Subtense be divided in the middle, the two halves of the segment will be
congruous to one another, by reason of the Uniformity both of the Circumference
of the Circle and of the straight Line.
13 Perimeters of Circles are to one another as their Semidiameters are. For
let there be any two Circles, as (in the first figure) BCD the greater, and EFG
the lesser, having their common Center at A; and let their Semidiameters be AC
and AE. I say AC has the same proportion to AE which the Perimeter BCD has to
the Perimeter EFG. For the magnitude of the Semidiameters AC and AE is
determined by the distances of the points C and E from the Center A; and the
same distances are acquired by the uniform motion of a point from A to C in
such manner that in equal times the distances acquired be equal. But the
Perimeters BCD and EFG are also determined by the same distances of the points
C and E from the Center A; and therefore the Perimeters BCD and EFG, as well as
the Semidiameters AC and AE have their magnitudes determined by the same cause,
which cause makes in equal times equal spaces. Wherefore (by the 13 Chapter and
6th Article) the Perimeters of Circles and their Semidiameters are
Proportionals; which was to be proved.

14 If two straight Lines which co^stitute an Angle, be cut by straightlined
Parallels, the intercepted Parallels will be to one another, as the parts which
they cut off from the Vertex. Let the straight lines AB and AC (in the 6
figure) make an Angle at A, and be cut by the two straight-lined Parallels BC
and DE, so that the parts cut off from the Vertex in either of those Lines (as
in AB) may be AB and AD. I say the Parallels BC and DE are to one another as
the parts AB and AD. For let AB be divided into any number of equal parts, as
into AF, FD, DB; and by the points F and D, let FG and DE be drawn Parallel to
the base BC, and cut AC in G and E; and again by the points G and E let other
straight lines be drawn Parallel to AB, and cut BC in H and I. If now the point
A be understood to be moved uniformly over AB, and in the same time B be moved
to C, and all the points F, D and B be moved uniformly and with equal Swiftness
over FG, DE, and BC; then shall B pass over BH (equal to FG) in the same time
that A passes over AF; and AF and FG will be to one another as their Velocities
are; and when A is in F, D will be in K; when A is in D, D will be in E; and in
what manner the point A passes by the points F, D and B, in the same manner the
point B will pass by the points H, I and C; and the straight lines FG, DK, KE,
BH, HI and IC are equal by reason of their Parallelisme; and therefore, as the
velocitie in AB is to the velocity (...) BC, so is AD to DE; but as the
velocity in AB is to the velocity in BC, so is AB to BC; that is to say, all
the Parallels will be severally to all the parts cut off from the Vertex, as AF
is to FG. Wherefore, AF. GF:: AD. DE:: AB. BC are Proportionals.

The Subtenses of equal Angles in different Circles (as the straight lines BC
and FE (in the 1 figure) are to one another as the Arches which they subtend.
For (by the 8th Article) the Arches of equal Angles are to one another as their
Perimeters are; and (by the 13th Art.) the Perimeters as their Semidiameters;
But the the Subtenses BC and FE are parallel to one another by reason of the
equality of the Angles which they make with the Semidiameters; and therefore
the same Subtenses (by the last precedent Article) will be proportional to the
Semidiameters, that is, to the Perimeters, that is, to the Arches which they
subtend.

15 If in a Circle any number of equal Subtenses be placed immediately after one
another, and straight lines be drawn from the extreme point of the first
Subtense to the extreme points of all the rest, The first Subtense being
produced will make with the second Subtense an external Angle double to that
which is made by the same first Subtense and a Tangent to the Circle touching
it in the extreme point thereof; and if a straight line which subtends two of
those Arches be produced, it will make an external Angle with the third
Subtense, triple to the Angle which is made by the Tangent with the first
Subtense; and so continually. For with the Radius AB (in the 7th figure) let a
circle be described, and in it let any number of equal Subtenses BC, CD and DE
be placed; also let BD and BE be drawn; and by producing BC, BD and BE to any
distance in G, H and I, let them make Angles with the Subtenses which succeed
one another, namely the external Angles GCD, and HDE. Lastly, let the Tangent
KB be drawn, making with the first Subtense the Angle KBC. I say the Angle GCD
is double to the Angle KBC, and the Angle HDE triple to the same Angle KBC. For
if AC be drawn cutting BD in M, and from the point C there be drawn LC
perpendicular to the same AC, then CL and MD will be parallel by reason of the
right Angles at C and M; and therefore the alterne Angles LCD and BDC will be
equal; as also the Angles BDC and CBD will be equal because of the equality of
the straight lines BC and CD. Wherefore the Angle GCD is double to either of
the A^gles CBD or CDB; and therefore also the Angle GCD is double to the Angle
LCD, that is, to the Angle KBC. Again, CD is parallel to BE by reason of the
equality of the Angles CBE and DEB, and of the straight lines CB and DE; and
therefore the Angles GCD and GBE are equal; and consequently GBE, as also DEB
is double to the Angle KBC. But the external Angle HDE is equal to the two
internal DEB and DBE; and therefore the Angle HDE is triple to the Angle KBC,
etc. which was to be proved.

1 Corollary. From hence it is manifest, that the Angles KBC and CBD, as also,
that all the Angles that are comprehended by two straight lines meeting in the
circumference of a Circle and insisting upon equal Arches, are equal to one
another. 2 Coroll. If the Tangent BK be moved in the Circumference with Uniform
motion about the Center B, it will in equal times cut off equal Arches; and
will pass over the whole Perimeter in the same time in which it self describes
a semiperimeter about the Center B. 3 Coroll. From hence also we may understand
what it is that determines the bending or Curvation of a straight line into the
circumference of a Circle; namely, that it is Fraction continually increasing
in the same manner as Numbers from One upwards increase by the continual
addition of Unity. For the indefinite straight Line KB being broken in B
according to any Angle, as that of KBC, and again in C according to a double
Angle, and in D according to an Angle which is triple, and in E according to an
Angle which is quadruple ^o the first Angle, and so continually, there will be
described a figure which will indeed be rectilineal if the broken parts be
considered as ha^ing magnitude; but if they be understood to be the least t^a^
can (...), ^^at is, as so many Points; then the figure described will ^ot be
rectilineal, but a Circle, whose Circumference w^ broken line. 4 (...) been
said in this present Article it may (...) Angle in the center is double to an
Angle in the Circumference of the same Circle, if the intercepted Arches be
equal. For seeing that straight Line by whose motion an Angle is determined,
passes over equal Arches in equal times, as well from the Center as from the
Circumference; and while that which is from the Circumference is passing over
half its own Perimeter, it passes in the same time over the whole Perimeter of
that which is from the Center, the Arches which it cuts off in the Perimeter
whose Center is A, will be double to those which it makes in its own
Semiperimeter whose Center is B. But in equal Circles, as Arches are to one
another, so also are Angles.
It may also be demonstrated that the external Angle made by a Subtense
produced and the next equal Subtense, is equal to an Angle from the Center
insisting upon the same Arch; As in the last Diagram, the Angle GCD is equal to
the Angle CAD; For the external Angle GCD is double to the Angle CBD; and the
Angle CAD insisting upon the same Arch CD, is also double to the same Angle CBD
or KBC.

16 An Angle of Contingence, if it be compared with an Angle simply so called
how little soever, has such proportion to it as a Point has to a Line; that is,
no proportion at all, nor any quantity. For first, an Angle of co^tingence is
made by continual flexion, so that in the generation of it there is no circular
motion at all, in which consists the nature of an Angle simply so called; and
therefore it cannot be compared with it according to Quantity. Secondly, seeing
the external Angle made by a Subtense produced and the next Subtense, is equal
to an Angle from the Center insisting upon the same Arch (as in the last figure
the Angle GCD is equal to the Angle CAD) the Angle of Contingence will be equal
to that Angle from the Center which is made by AB and the same AB; for no part
of a Tangent can subtend any Arch; but as the point of Contact is to be taken
for the Subtense, so the Angle of Contingence is to be accounted for the
external Angle, and equal to that Angle whose Arch is the same point B.

Now seeing an Angle in general is defined to be the Opening o^ Divergence of
two lines which concur in one sole point; and seeing one Opening is greater
then another, it cannot be denied but that by the very generation of it an
Angle of Contingence is Quantity; for wheresoever there is Greater and Less,
there is also Quantity; but this quantity consists in greater and less Flexion;
for how much the greater a Circle is, so much the nearer comes the
Circumference of it to the nature of a straight Line; for the Circumference of
a Circle being made by the curvation of a straight line, the less that straight
line is, the greater is the curvation; and therefore when one straight line is a
Tangent to many Circles, the Angle of Contingence which it makes with a less
Circle is greater then that which it makes with a greater Circle.

Nothing therefore is added to, or taken from an Angle simply so called, by the
addition to it or taking from it of never so many Angles of Contingence. And as
an Angle of one sort can never be equal to an Angle of the other sort, so they
cannot be either greater or less then one another.

From whence it follows, that an Angle of a Segment, that is, the Angle which
any straight line makes with any Arch, is equal to the Angle which is made by
the same straight line, and another which touches the Circle in the point of
their Concurrence; as in the last figure, the Angle which is made between GB
and BK is equal to that which is made between GB and the Arch BC.

17 An Angle which is made by two Plains, is commonly called the Inclination of
those Plains; And because Plains have equal Inclination in all their parts,
instead of their Inclination an Angle is taken which is made by two straight
lines, one of which is in one, the other in the other of those Plains, but both
perpendicular to the common Section.

18 A Solid Angle may be conceived two ways. First, for the aggregate of all
the Angles which are made by the motion of a straight line, while one extreme
point thereof remaining fixed, it is carried about any plain figure in which
the fixed point of the straight line is not contained. And in this sense it
seems to be understood by Euclide. Now it is manifest that the quantity of a
Solid Angle so conceived is no other then the aggregate of all the Angles in a
Superficies so described, that is, in the Superficies of a Pyramidal Solid.
Secondly, when a Py^amis or Cone has its Vertex in the Center of a Sphere, a
Solid Angle may be understood to be the proportion of a Spherical Superficies
subtending that Vertex, to the whole Superficies of the Sphere. In which sense
solid Angles are to one another as the Spherical Bases of Solids which have
their Vertex in the Center of the same Sphere.

19 All the waye^ by which two lines respect one another, or all the variety of
their position may be comprehended under four kinds; For any two lines
whatsoever are either Parallels or being produced (if need be) or moved one of
them to the other parallelly to it self, they make an Angle; or else (by the
like production and motion) they Touch one another; or lastly, they are
Asymptotes. The nature of Parallels, Angles and Tangents has been already
declared. It remains that I speak briefly of the nature of Asymptotes.

Asymptosy depends upon this, that Quantity is infinitely divisible. And from
hence it follows, that any line being given, and a Body supposed to be moved
from one extreme thereof toward the other, it is possible (by taking degrees
of Velocity always less and less in such proportion as the parts of the Line
are made less by continual division) that the same Body may be always moved
forwards in that Line, and yet never reach the end of it. For it is manifest
that if any straight Line, as AF (in the 8th figure) be cut any where in B, and
again BF be cut in C, and CF in D, and DF in E, and so eternally, and there be
drawn from the point F the straight Line FF at any Angle AFF; and lastly, if
the straight Lines AF, BF, CF, DF, OF, etc. having the same proportion to one
another with the Segments of the Line AF, be set in order and parallel to the
same AF, the crooked Line ABCDE and the straight Line FF will be Asymptotes,
that is, they will always come nearer and nearer together, but never touch one
another. Now because any Line may be cut eternally according to the proportions
which the Segments have to one another, therefore the diverse kinds of
Asymptotes are infinite in number, and not necessary to be further spoken of in
this place. In the nature of Asymptotes in general there is no more, then that
they come still nearer and nearer but never touch. But in special in the
Asymptosie of Hyperbolique Lines, it is understood they should approach to a
distance less then any given quantity.

20 SITUATION is the relation of one place to another; and where there are many
places, their Situation is determined by four things; By their Distances from
one another; By several Distances from a place assigned; By the order of
straight lines drawn from a place assigned to the places of them all; and by
the Angles which are made by the lines so drawn. For if their Distances, Order,
and Angles be given, that is, be certainly known, their several places will
also be so certainly known, as that they can be no other.

21 Points, how many soever they be, have Like Situation with an equal number
of other Points, when all the straight lines that are drawn from some one point
to all these, have severally the same proportion to those that are drawn in the
same order and at equal Angles from some one point to all those. For let there
be any number of Points as A, B and C, (in the 9 figure), to which from some
one point D let the straight Lines DA, DB and DC be drawn; and let there be an
equal number of other Points as E, F and G, and from some point H let the
straight Lines HE, HF and HG be drawn, so that the Angles ADB and BDC be
severally and in the same order equal to the Angles EHF and FHG, and the
straight Lines DA, DB and DC proportional to the straight Lines HE, HF and HG;
I say the three points A, B and C, have Like Situation with the three points E,
F and G, or are placed Alike. For if HE be understood to be laid upon DA, so
that the point H be in D, the point F will be in the straight Line DB by reason
of the equality of the Angles ADB and EHF; and the point G will be in the
straight Line DC by reason of the equality of the Angles BDC and FHG; and the
strright Lines AB and OF, as also BC and FG will be parallel, because AD. ED::
BH. FH:: CD. GH are Proportionals by construction; and therefore the distances
between the points A and B, and the points B and C, will be proportional to the
distances between the points E and F, and the points F and G. Wherefore in the
situation of the points A, B and C, and the situation of the points E, F and G
the Angles in the same order are equal, so that their situations differ in
nothing but the inequality of their distances from one another, and of their
distances from the points D and H. Now in both the orders of Points those
inequalities are equal; for AB. BC:: OF. FG, which are their distances from one
another, as also DA. DB. DC:: HE. HF. HG which are their distances from the
assumed points D and H, are Proportionals. Their difference therefore consists
solely in the magnitude of their distances. But by the definition of Like (
Chap. 11. Art, 2) those things which differ only in Magnitude are Like.
Wherefore the points A, B and C have to one another Like Situation with the
points E, F and G, or are placed Alike; which was to be proved.

FIGURE, is quantity determined by the Situation, or placing of all its extreme
Points. Now I call those points Extreme which are contiguous to the place which
is without the figure. In Lines therefore and Superficies all Points may be
called Extreme, but in Solids only those which are in the Superficies that
includes them.

Like Figures, are those, whose extreme points in one of them, are all placed
like all the extreme points in the other; for such Figures differ in nothing
but Magnitude.

And like Figures are alike placed, when in both of them the homologal straight
lines, that is, the straight lines which connect the points which answer one
another are parallel, and have their proportional sides inclined the same way.

And seeing every Straight Line is like every other Straight Line, and every
Plain like every other Plain when nothing but Plainness is considered; if the
Lines which include Plains, or the Superficies which include Solids have their
proportions known, it will not be hard to know whether any Figure be like or
unlike to another propounded Figure.

And thus much concerning the First Grounds of Philosophy. The next place
belongs to Geometry; in which the Quantities of Figures are sought out from the
Proportions of Lines and Angles. Wherefore it is necessary for him that would
study Geometry to know first what is the nature of Quantity, Proportion, Angle
and Figure. Having therefore explained these in the three last Chapters, I
thought ^it to add them to this Part; and so pass to the next.

OF THE PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS AND MAGNITVDES.
CHAP. XV. Of the Nature, Properties, and diverse Considerations of Motion and
Endeavor.
1 Repetition of some Principles of the doctrine of Motion formerly set down. 2
Other Principles added to them. 3 Certain Theoremes concerning the nature of
Motion. 4 Diverse Considerations of Motion* 5 The way by which the first
Endeavor of Bodies Moved ^endoth. 6 In Motion which is made by Concourse, one
of the Movents ceasing, the Endeavor is made by the way by which the rest
tend. 7 The Endeavor of any Moved Body, which having its Motion in the
Circumference of a Circle, parts from the same, proceeds afterward in a
straight line which touches the Circle. 8 How much greater, the Velocity or
Magnitude is of a Movent, so much greater is the Efficacy thereof upon any
other Body in its way.
1 THe next things in order to be treated of are MOTION and MAGNITUDE, which
are the most common Accidents of all Bodies. This place therefore most properly
belongs to the Elements of Geometry. But because this part of Philosophy having
been improved by the best Wits of all Ages has afforded greater plenty of
matter then can well be thrust together within the narrow limits of this
discourse; I thought fit to admonish the Reader, that before he proceed
further, he take into his hands the Works of Euclide, Archimedes, Apollonius
and other as well Ancient as Modern Writers. For to what end is it to do over
again that which is already done? The little therefore that I shall say
concerning Geometry in some of the following Chapters, shall be such only as
is new, and conducing to Natural Philosophy.

I have already delivered some of the Principles of this doctrine in the 8 and
9 Chapters, which I shall briefly put together here, that the Reader in going
on may have their light nearer at hand.

First therefore in the 8th Chap. and 10 Article, Motion is defined to be the
continual privation of one place, and acquisition of another.

Secondly, it is there shown, that Whatsoever is Moved is Moved in Time.

Thirdly, in the same Chap. 11. Article, I have defined Rest to be when a Body
remains for some time in one place.

Fourthly, it is there shown, that Whatsoever is Moved is not in any determined
place; as also that the same has been Moved, is still Moved, and will yet be
Moved; So that in every part of that Space in which Motion is made, we may
consider three Times, namely the Past, the Present, and the Future Time.

Fifthly, in the 15 Article of the same Chapter, I have defined Velocity or
Swiftness to be Motion considered as Power, namely, that Power by which a Body
Moved may in a certain Time transmit a certain Length; which also may more
briefly be enunciated thus, Velocity is the quantity of Motion determined by
Time and Line.

Sixthly, in the same Chap. 16. Article, I have shown that Motion is the
Measure of Time.

Seventhly, in the same Chap. 17th Art. I have defined Motions to be Equally
Swift, when in Equal Times Equal Lengths are transmitted by them.

Eighthly, in the 18 Article of the same Chapter, Motions are defined to be
Equal, when the Swiftness of one Moved Body computed in every part of its
magnitude, is equal to the Swiftness of another computed also in every part of
its magnitude. From whence it is to be noted, that Motions Equal to one
another, and Motions Equally Swift, do not signify the same thing; for when
two horses draw abrest, the Motion of both is greater then the Motion of either
of them singly; but the Swiftness of both together is but Equal to that of
either.

Ninthly, in the 19 Article of the same Chapter, I have shown, that Whatsoever
is at Rest will always be at Rest, unless there be some other Body besides it,
which by getting into its place, suffers it no longer to remain at Rest. And
that Whatsoever is Moved, will always be Moved, unless there be some other
Body besides it, which hinders its Motion.

Tenthly, In the 9 Chapter and 7 Article, I have demonstrated, that When any
Body is moved which was formerly at Rest, the immediate efficient cause of that
Motion is in some other Moved and Contiguou^ Body.

Eleventhly, I have shown in the same place, that Whatsoever is Moved, will
always be Moved in the same way, and with the same Swiftness, if it be not
hindered by some other Moved and Contiguou^ Body.

2 To which Principles I shall here add these that follow. First, I define
ENDEAVOR to be Motion made in less Space and Time then can be given; that is,
less then can be determined or assigned by Exposition or Number; that is,
Motion made through the length of a Point, and in an Instant or Point of Time.
For the explayning of which Definition it must be remembered, that by a Point is
not to be understood that which has no quantity, or which cannot by any means
be divided (for there is no such thing in Nature); but that whose quantity is
not at all considered, that is, whereof neither quantity nor any part is
computed in demonstration; so that a Point is not to be taken for an
Indivisible, but for an Undivided thing; as also an Instant is to be taken for
an Undivided, and not for an Indivisible Time.

In like manner Endeavor is to be conceived as Motion; but so, as that neither
the quantity of the Time in which, nor of the Line in which it is made may in
demonstration be at all brought into comparison with the quantity of that Time,
or of that Line of which it is a part. And yet, as a Point may be compared with
a Point, so one Endeavor may be compared with another Endeavor, and one may
be found to be greater or less then another. For if the Vertical points of two
Angles be compared, they will be equal or unequal in the same proportion which
the Angles themselves have to one another. Or if a straight Line cut many
Circumferences of Concentrick Circles, the inequality of the points of
intersection will be in the same proportion which the Perimeters have to one
another. And in the same manner, if two Motions begin and end both together,
their Endeavors will be Equal or Unequal according to the proportion of their
Velocities; as we see a bullet of Lead descend with greater Endeavor then a
ball of Wool,

Secondly, I define IMPETUS or Quickness of Motion, to be the Swiftness or
Velocity of the Body moved, but considered in the several points of that time
in which it is moved; In which sense Impetus is nothing else but the quantity
or velocity of Endeavor. But considered with the whole time, it is the whole
velocity of the Body moved, taken together throughout all the time, and equal
to the Product of a Line representing the time multiplied into a Line
representing the arithmetically mean Impetus or Quickness. Which Arithmetical
Mean what it is, is defined in the 29th Article of the 13th Chapter.

And because in equal times the ways that are passed are as the Velocities,
and the Impetus is the Velocity they go withal reckoned in all the several
points of the times, it follows that during any time whatsoever, howsoever
the Impetus be increased or decreased, the length of the way passed over shall
be increased or decreased in the same proportion; and the same Line shall
represent both the way of the Body moved, and the several Impetus or degrees of
Swiftness wherewith the way is passed over.

And if the Body moved be not a point, but a straight line moved so as that
every point thereof make a several straight line, the Plain described by its
motion, whether Uniform, Accelerated or Retarded, shall be greater or less (the
time being the same) in the same proportion with that of the Impetus reckoned
in one motion to the Impetus reckoned in the other. For the reason is the same
in Parallelograms and their Sides,

For the same cause also if the Body moved be a Plain, the Solid described
shall be still greater or less in the proportions of the several Impetus or
Quicknesses reckoned through one Line, to the several Impetus reckoned through
another.

This understood, let ABCD (in the first figure of the 17th Chapter) be a
Parallelogram; in which suppose the side AB to be moved parallelly to the
opposite side CD, decreasing all the way till it vanish in the point C, and so
describing the figure ABEFC; the point B as AB decreaseth, will therefore
describe the Line BEFC; and suppose the time of this motion designed by the
line CD; and in the same time CD suppose the side AC to be moved parallelly and
uniformly to BD. From the point O taken at adventure in the Line CD, draw OR
parallel to BD, cutting the Line BEFC in E, and the side AB in R. And again
from the point Q taken also at adventure in the Line CD, draw QS parallel to
BD, cutting the Line BEFC in F, and the side AB in S; and draw EG and FH
parallel to CD, cutting AC in G and H. Lastly, suppose the same construction
done in all the points possible of the Line BEFC. I sa^, that as the
proportions of the Swiftnesses wherewith QF, OE, DB, and all the rest supopsed
to be drawn parallel to DB, and terminated in the Line BEFC, are to the
proportions of their several Times designed by the several parallels HF, GE, AB
and all the rest supposed to be drawn parallel to the Line of time CD, and
terminated in the Line BEFC (the aggregate to the aggregate) so is the Area or
Plain DBEFC to the Area or Plain ACFEB. For as AB decreasing continually by the
line BEFC vanishes in the time CD into the point C, so in the same time the
line DC continually decreasing vanishes by the same line CFEB into the point
B; and the point D describes in that decreasing motion the line DB equal to
the line AC described by the point A in the decreasing motion of A and B; and
their swiftnesses are therefore equal. Again, because in the time GE the point
O describes the line OE, and in the same time the point R describes the line
RE, the line OE shall be to the line RE, as the swiftness wherewith OE is
described to the swiftness wherewith RE is described. In like manner, because in
the same time HF the point Q describes the Line QF, and the point S the Line
SF, it shall be as the swiftness by which QF is described to the swiftness by
which SF is described, so the Line it self QF to the Line it self SF; and so in
all the Lines that can possibly be drawn parallel to BD in the points where
they cut the Line BEFC. But all the parallels to BD, as RE, SF, AC and the rest
that can possibly be drawn from the Line AB to the Line BEFC make the Area of
the Plain ABEFC; and all the parallels to the same BD, as QF, OE, DB and the
rest drawn to the points where they cut the same Line BEFC make the Area of the
Plain BEFCD. As therefore the aggregate of the Swiftnesses wherewith the Plain
BEFCD is described is to the aggregate of the Swiftnesses wherewith the Plain
ACFEB is described, so is the Plain it self BEFCD to the Plain it self ACFEB.
But the aggregate of the Times represented by the parallels AB, GE, HF and the
rest, makes also the Area ACFEB. And therefore as the aggregate of all the
Lines QF, OE, DB and all the rest of the Lines parallel to BD and terminated in
the Line BEFC is to the aggregate of all the Lines HF, GE, AB and all the rest
of the Lines parallel to CD and terminated in the same Line BEFC; that is, as
the aggregate of the Lines of Swiftness to the aggregate of the lines of Time,
or as the whole Swiftness in the parallels to DB to the whole Time in the
parallels to CD, so is the Plain BEFCD to the Plain ACFEB. And the proportions
of QF to FH, and of OE to EG, and of DB to BA, and so of all the rest taken
together, are the proportion of the Plain DBEFC to the Plain ABEFC. But the
Lines QF, OE, DB and the rest are the Lines that design the Swifness; and the
Lines HF, GE, AB and the rest are the Lines that design the Times of the
motions; and therefore the proportion of the Plain DBEFC to the Plain ABEFC is
the proportions of all the Velocities taken together, to all the Times taken
together. Wherefore as the proportions of the Swiftnesses, etc. which was to be
demonstrated.

The same holds also in the diminution of the Circles whereof the lines of Time
are the Semidiameters, as may easily be conceived by imagining the whole Plain
ABCD turned round upon the Axis BD; for the Line BEFC will be every where in
the Superficies so made, and the Lines HG, GE, AB which here are Parallelograms
will be there Cylinders, the Diameters of whose bases are the lines HF, GE, AB,
etc. and the Altitude a point, that is to say, a quantity less then any
quantity that can possibly be named; and the Lines QF, OE, DB, etc. small
solids whose lengths and breadths are less then any quantity that can be named.

But this is to be noted, that unless the proportion of the sum of the
Swiftnesses to the proportion of the sum of the Times be determined, the
proportion of the Figure DBEFC to the Figure ABEFC cannot be determined.

Thirdly, I define RESISTANCE to be the endeavor of one moved Body, either
wholly or in part contrary to the endeavor of another moved Body, which
touches the same. I say wholly contrary, when the endeavor of two Bodies
proceeds in the same straight Line from the opposite extremes, and contrary in
part, when two Bodies have their endeavor in two Lines, which proceeding from
the extreme points of a straight Line, meet without the same.

Fourthly, that I may define what it is to PRESS, I say that Of two moved
Bodies one Presses the other, when with its Endeavor it makes either all or
part of the other Body to go out of its place.

Fifthly, A Body which is pressed and not wholly removed is said to RESTORE it
self, when (the pressing Body being taken away) the parts which were moved, do
by reason of the internal constitution of the pressed Body, return every one
into its own place. And this we may observe in Springs, in blown Bladders, and
in many other Bodies, whose parts yield more or less to the Endeavor which the
pressing Body makes at the first arrival; but afterward (when the pressing
Body is removed) they do by some force within them Restore themselves, and give
their whole Body the same figure it had before.

Sixthly, I define FORCE to be the Impetus or Quickness of Motion multiplied
either into it self, or into the Magnitude of the Movent, by means whereof the
said Movent works more or less upon the Body that resists it.

3 Having premised thus much, I shall now demonstrate, First, That if a point
moved come to touch another point which is at rest, how little soever the
Impetus or quickness of its motion be, it shall move that other point. For if
by that Impetus it do not at all move it out of its place, neither shall it
move it, with double the same Impetus; for nothing doubled is still nothing;
and for the same reason it shall never move it with that Impetus how many times
soever it be multiplied, because nothing how soever it be multiplied will for
ever be nothing. Wherefore when a point is at rest, if it do not yield to the
least Impetus, it will yield to none, and consequently it will be impossible
that that which is at rest should ever be moved.

Secondly, that when a point moved, how little soever the Impetus thereof be,
falls upon a point of any Body at rest, how hard soever that Body be, it will
at the first touch make it yield a little. For if it do not yield to the
Impetus which is in that point, neither will it yield to the Impetus of never
so many points, which have all their Impetus severally equal to the Impetus of
that point. For seeing all those points together work equally, if any one of
them have no effect, the aggregate of them all together shall have no effect as
many times told as there are points in the whole Body, that is, still no effect
at all; and by consequent there would be some Bodies so hard that it would be
impossible to break them; that is, a finite hardness, or a finite force would
not yield to that which is infinite; which is absurd.

Corollary. It is therefore manifest, that Rest does nothing at all, nor is of
any efficacy; and that nothing but Motion gives Motion to such things as be at
Rest, and takes it from things moved,

Thirdly, that Cessation in the Movent does not cause Cessation in that which
was moved by it. For (by the 11th Number of the 1 Article of this Chapter)
whatsoever is moved, persevers in the same way, and with the same Swiftness, as
long as it is not hindered by some thing that is moved against it. Now it is
manifest, that Cessation is not contrary Motion; and therefore it follows, that
the standing still of the Movent, does not make it necessary that the thing
moved should also stand still.

Corollary. They are therefore deceived, that reckon the taking away of the
impediment or resistance, for one of the causes of Motion.

4 Motion is brought into account for diverse respects; First, as in a Body
Undivided, (that is, considered as a point); or, as in a Divided Body. In an
Undivided Body, when we suppose the way by which the Motion is made, to be a
Line; and in a Divided Body, when we compute the Motion of the several parts of
that Body, as of Parts.

Secondly, From the diversity of the regulation of Motion, it is in a Body
considered as Undivided, sometimes Uniform, and sometimes Multiform. Uniform is
that by which equal Lines are always transmitted in equal times; and
Multiform, when in one time more, in another time less space is transmitted.
Again, of Multiform Motions, there are some in which the degrees of
Acceleration and Retardation proceed in the same proportions which the Spaces
transmitted have, whether duplicate, or triplicate, or by whatsoever number
multiplied; and others in which it is otherwise.

Thirdly, from the number of the Movents; that is, one Motion is made by one
Movent only, and another by the concourse of many Movents.

Fourthly, from the position of that Line in which a Body is moved, in respect
of some other Line; and from hence one Motion is called Perpendicular, another
Oblique, another Parallel.

Fifthly, from the position of the Movent in respect of the Moved Body; from
whence one Motion is Pulsion or Driving; another Traction or Drawing. PULSION,
when the Movent makes the Moved Body go before it; and TRACTION, when it makes
it follow. Again, there are two sorts of Pulsion; one, when the motions of the
Movent and Moved Body begin both together, which may be called TRUSION or
Thrusting and VECTION; the other, when the Movent is first moved, and
afterward the Moved Body, which Motion is called PERCUSSION or Stroke.

Sixthly, Motion is considered sometimes from the Effect only which the Movent
works in the Moved Body, which is usually called Moment. Now MOMENT is the
Excess of Motion which the Movent has, above the Motion or Endeavor of the
Resisting Body.

Seventhly, it may be considered from the diversity of the Medium; as one
Motion may be made in Vacuity or empty Place; another in a fluid; another in a
consistent Medium, that is, a Medium whose parts are by some power so
consistent and cohering, that no part of the same will yield to the Movent,
unless the whole yield also.

Eighthly, when a Moved Body is considered as having parts, there arises
another distinction of Motion into Simple and Compounded. Simple, when all the
several parts describe several equal lines; Compounded, when the lines
described are Unequal.

5 All Endeavor tends toward that part, that is to say, in that way which is
determined by the Motion of the Movent, if the Movent be but one; or, if there
be many Movents, in that way which their concourse determines. For example, if
a Moved Body have direct Motion, its first Endeavor will be in a Straight
line; if it have Circular Motion, its first Endeavor will be in the
Circumference of a Circle; and whatsoever the line be in which a Body has its
Motion from the concourse of two Movents, as soon as in any point thereof the
force of one of the Movents ceases, there immediately the former Endeavor of
that Body will be changed into an Endeavor in the line of the other Movent.

6 Wherefore, when any Body is carried on by the concourse of two Winds, one of
those Winds ceasing, the Endeavor and Motion of that Body will be in that
line, in which it would have been carried by that Wind alone which blows still.
And in the describing of a Circle, where that which is moved has its Motion
determined by a Movent in a Tangent, and by the Radius which keeps it in a
certain distance from the Center, if the retention of the Radius cease, that
Endeavor which was in the Circumference of the Circle, will now be in the
Tangent, that is, in a Straight line. For seeing Endeavor is computed in a
less part of the Circumference then can be given, that is, in a point, the way
by which a Body is moved in the Circumference is compounded of innumerable
Straight lines; of which every one is less then can be given, which are
therefore called Points. Wherefore when any Body which is moved in the
Circumference of a Circle, is freed from the retention of the Radius, it will
proceed in one of those Straight lines, that is, in a Tangent.

7 All Endeavor, whether strong or weak, is propagated to infinite distance;
for it is Motion. If therefore the first Endeavor of a Body be made in Space
which is empty, it will always proceed with the same Velocity; for it cannot
be supposed that it can receive any resistance at all from empty Space; and
therefore (by the 7 Article of the 9 Chapter) it will always proceed in the
same way and with the same Swiftness. And if its Endeavor be in Space which is
filled, yet seeing Endeavor is Motion, that which stands next in its way shall
be removed, and endeavor further, and again remove that which stands next, and
so infinitely. Wherefore the propagation of Endeavor from one part of full
Space to another, proceeds infinitely. Besides, it reaches in any instant to
any distance, how great soever; For in the same instant in which the first part
of the full Medium removes that which is next it, the second also removes that
part which is next to it; and therefore all Endeavor, whether it be in empty
or in full Space, proceeds not only to any distance how great soever, but also
in any time how little soever, that is, in an instant. Nor makes it any matter,
that Endeavor by proceeding grows weaker and weaker, till at last it can no
longer be perceived by Sense; for Motion may be insensible; and I do not here
examine things by Sense and Experience, but by Reason.

8 When two Movents are of equal Magnitude, the swifter of them works with
greater force then the slower upon a Body that resists their Motion. Also if
two Movents have equal Velocity, the greater of them works with more force then
the less. For where the Magnitude is equal, the Movent of greater Velocity
makes the greater impression upon that Body upon which it falls; and where the
Velocity is equal, the Movent of greater Magnitude falling upon the same point,
or an equal part of another Body, loses less of its Velocity, because the
resisting Body works only upon that part of the Movent which it touches, and
therefore abates the Impetus of that part only, whereas in the mean time the
parts which are not touched proceed, and retein their whole force till they
also come to be touched, and their force has some effect. Wherefore (for
example) in Batteries, a longer then a shorter piece of Timber of the same
thickness and velocity, and a thicker then a slenderer piece of the same length
and velocity, works a greater effect upon the Wall.

CHAP. XVI. Of Motion Accelerated and Uniform, and of Motion by Concourse.
1 The Velocity of any Body, in what Time soever it be computed, is that which
is made of the multiplication of the Impetus, or Quickness of its Motion into
the Time. 2, etc. In all Motion, the Lengths which are passed through, are to
one another, as the Products made by the Impetus multipyed into the Time. 6 If
two Bodies be moved with Uniform Motion through two Lengths, the proportion of
those Lengths to one another will be compounded of the proportions of Time to
Time, and Impetus to Impetus, directly taken. 7 If two Bodies pass through two
Lengths with Uniform Motion, the proportion of their Times to one another will
be compounded of the proportions of Length to Length and Impetus to Impetus,
reciprocally taken; also the proportion of their Impetus to one another will be
compounded of the proportions of Length to Length and Time to Time,
reciprocally taken. 8 If a Body be carried on with Uniform Motion by two
Movents together, which meet in an Angle, the line by which it passes will be a
straight line subtending the complement of that Angle to two right Angles. 9,
etc. If a Body be carried by two Movents together, one of them being moved with
Uniform, the other with Accelerated Motion, and the proportion of their Lengths
to their Times being explicable in numbers, How to find out what line that Body
describes.
1 THe Velocity of any Body, in whatsoever Time it be moved, has its quantity
determined by the sum of all the several Quicknesses or Impetus which it has
in the several points of the Time of the Bodies Motion. For seeing Velocity (by
the Definition of it Chap. 8. Art. 15.) is that Power by which a Body can in a
certain time pass through a certain length; and Quickness of Motion, or Impetus
(by the 15 Chap. Artic. 2. Numb. 2.) is Velocity taken in one point of time
only, all the Impetus together taken in all the points of time, will be the
same thing with the Mean Impetus multiplied into the whole Time, or which is
all one, will be the Velocity of the whole Motion.

Corollary. If the Impetus be the same in every point, any straight line
representing it may be taken for the measure of Time; and the Quicknesses or
Impetus applied ordinately to any straight line making an Angle with it, and
representing the way of the Bodies motion, will design a parallelogram which
shall represent the Velocity of the whole Motion. But if the Impetus or
Quickness of Motion begin from Rest, and increase Uniformly, that is, in the
same proportion continually with the times which are passed, the whole.
Velocity of the Motion shall be represented by a Triangle, one side whereof is
the whole time, and the other the greatest Impetus acquired in that time; or
else by a parallelogram, one of whose sides is the whole time of Motion, and
the other, half the greatest Impetus; or lastly by a parallelogram having for
one side a mean proportional between the whole time and the half of that time,
and for the other side the half of the greatest Impetus. For both these
parallelograms are equal to one another, and severally equal to the triangle
which is made of the whole line of time, and the greatest acquired Impetus; as
is demonstrated in the Elements of Geometry.

2 In all Uniform Motions the Lengths which are transmitted are to one another,
as the product of the mean Impetus multiplied into its time, to the product of
the mean Impetus multiplied also into its time.

For let AB (in the first Figure) be the Time, and AC the Impetus by which any
Body passes with Uniform Motion through the Length DE; and in any part of the
time AB, as in the time AF, let another Body be moved with Uniform Motion,
first, with the same Impetus AC. This Body therefore in the time AB with the
Impetus AC will pass through the length AF. Seeing therefore, when Bodies are
moved in the same Time, and with the same Velocity and Impetus in every part of
their motion, the proportion of one Length transmitted to another Length
tra^smitted, is the same with that of Time to Time, it follows, that the
Length transmitted in the time AB with the Impetus AC will be to the Length
transmitted in the time AF with the same Impetus AC, as AB it self is to AF,
that is, as the parallelogram AI is to the parallelogram AH, that is, as the
product of the time AB into the mean Impetus AC is to the product of the time
AF into the same Impetus AC. Again, let it be supposed that a Body be moved in
the time AF, not with the same but with some other Uniform Impetus, as A L.
Seeing therefore one of the Bodies has in all the parts of its motion the
Impetus A C, and the other in like manner the Impetus A L, the Length
tra^smitted by the Body moved with the Impetus A C will be to the Length
transmitted by the Body moved with the Impetus A L, as A C it self is to A L,
that is, as the parallelogram A H is to the parallelogram F L. Wherefore, by
ordinate proportion it will be, as the parallelogram A I to the parallelogram F
L, that is, as the product of the mean Impetus into the Time is to the product
of the mean Impetus into the Time, so the Length transmitted in the time A B
with the Impetus A C, to the length transmitted in the time A F with the
Impetus, A L; which was to be demonstrated.

Corollary. Seeing therefore in Uniform Motion (as has been shown) the Lengths
transmitted are to one another as the parallelograms which are made by the
multiplication of the mean Impetus into the Times, that is, (by reason of the
equality of the Impetus all the way) as the Times themselves, it will also be
by permutation, as to Time to Length, so Time to Length; and in general, to
this place are applicable all the properties and transmutations of Analogismes
which I have set down and demonstrated in the 13 Chapter.

3 In Motion begun from Rest, and Uniformly Accelerated (that is, where the
Impetus increases continually according to the proportion of the Times) it
will also be, as one product made by the Mean Impetus multiplied into the Time,
to another product made likewise by the Mean Impetus multiplied into the Time,
so the Length transmitted in the one Time, to the Length transmitted in the
other Time.

For let A B (in the same 1 figure) represent a Time; in the beginning of which
Time A, let the Impetus be as the point A; but as the Time goes on, so let the
Impetus increase Uniformly till in the last point of that Time A B, namely in
B, the Impetus acquired be B I. Again, let A F represent another Time, in whose
beginning A, let the Impetus be as the point it self A; but as the Time
proceeds, so let the Impetus increase Uniformly till in the last point F of the
Time A F the Impetus acquired be F K; and let D E be the Length passed through
in the Time A B with Impetus Uniformly increased. I say the Length D E, is to
the Length transmitted in the Time A F, as the Time A B multiplied into the
Mean of the Impetus increasing through the time A B, is to the Time A F
multiplied into the Mean of the Impetus increasing through the time A F.

For seeing the Triangle A B I is the whole Velocity of the Body moved in the
Time A B till the Impetus acquired be B I; and the Triangle A F K the whole
Velocity of the Body moved in the Time A F with Impetus increasing till there
be acquired the Impetus F K; the Length D E to the Length acquired in the Time
A F with Impetus increasing from Rest in A till there be acquired the Impetus F
K, will be as the Triangle A B I to the Triangle A F K, that is, if the
Triangles A B I and A F K be like, in duplicate proportion of the Time A B to
the Time A F; but if unlike, in the proportion compounded of the proportions of
A B to B I, and of A K to A F. Wherefore, as A B I is to A F K, so let D E be
to D P; for so, the Length transmitted in the Time A B with Impetus increasing
to B I, will be to the Length transmitted in the Time A F with Impetus
increasing to F K, as the triangle A B I is to the triangle A F K; But the
triangle A B I is made by the multiplication of the Time A B into the Mean of
the Impetus increasing to B I, and the triangle A F K is made by the
multiplication of the Time A F into the Mean of the Impetus increasing to F K;
and therefore the Length D E which is transmitted in the Time A B with Impetus
increasing to B I, to the Length D P which is transmitted in the Time A F with
Impetus increasing to F K, is as the product which is made of the Time A B
multiplied into its mean Impetus, to the product of the Time A F multiplied
also into its mean Impetus; which was to be proved.

Corol. 1 In Motion Uniformly accelerated, the proportion of the Lengths
transmitted, to that of their Times, is compounded of the proportions of their
Times to their Times and Impetus to Impetus. Corol. 2 In Motion Uniformly
accelerated, the Lengths transmitted in equal times taken in continual
succession from the beginning of Motion, are as the differences of square
numbers beginning from Unity, namely, as 3, 5, 7, etc. For if in the first time
the Length transmitted be as 1, in the first and second times the Length
transmitted will be as 4, which is the Square of 2, and in the three first
times, it will be as 9, which is the Square of 3, and in the four first times
as 16, and so on. Now the differences of these Squares are 3, 5, 7, etc. Corol.
3 In Motion Uniformly accelerated from Rest, the Length transmitted, is to
another Length transmitted uniformly in the same Time, but with such Impetus as
was acquired by the accelerated Motion in the last point of that Time, as a
triangle to a parallelogram which have their altitude and base common. For
seeing the Length D E (in the same 1 figure) is passed through with Velocity as
the triangle A B I, it is necessary that for the passing through of a Length
which is double to D E, the Velocity be as the parallelogram A I; for the
parallelogram A I is double to the triangle A B I.
4 In Motion which beginning from Rest, is so accelerated, that the Impetus
thereof increase continually in proportion duplicate to the proportion of the
times in which it is made, a Length transmitted in one time will be to a Length
transmitted in another time, as the product made by the Mean Impetus multiplied
into the time of one of those Motions, to the product of the Mean Impetus
multiplied into the time of the other Motion.

For let A B (in the 2d. figure) represent a Time, in whose first instant A let
the Impetus be as the point A; but as the time proceeds, so let the Impetus
increase continually in duplicate proportion to that of the times, till in the
last point of time B the Impetus acquired be B I; then taking the point F any
where in the time A B, let the Impetus F K acquired in the time A F be
ordinately applied to that point F. Seeing therefore the proportion of F K to B
I is supposed to be duplicate to that of A F to A B, the proportion of A F to A
B will be subduplicate to that of F K to B I; and that of A B to A F will be
(by Chap. 13. Article 16) duplicate to that of B I to F K, and consequently the
point K will be in a parabolical line whose diameter is A B and base B I; and
for the same reason, to what point soever of the time A B the Impetus acquired
in that time be ordinately applied, the straight line designing that Impetus
will be in the same parabolical line A K I. Wherefore the mean Impetus
multiplied into the whole time A B will be the Parabola A K I B, equal to the
parallelogram A M, which parallelogram has for one side the line of time A B
and for the other the line of the Impetus A L, which is two thirds of the
Impetus B I; for every Parabola is equal to two thirds of that parallelogram
with which it has its altitude and base common. Wherefore the whole Velocity in
A B will be the parallelogram A M, as being made by the multiplication of the
Impetus A L into the time A B. And in like manner, if F N be taken, which is
two thirds of the Impetus F K, and the parallelogram F O be completed, F O will
be the whole Velocity in the time A F, as being made by the Uniform Impetus A O
or F N multiplied into the time A F. Let now the length transmitted in the time
A B and with the Velocity A M be the straight line D E; and lastly, let the
Length transmitted in the time A F with the Velocity A N, be D P; I say that as
A M is to A N, or as the Parabola A K I B to the Parabola A F K, so is D E to D
P. For as A M is to F L (that is, as A B is to A F) so let D E be to D G. Now
the proportion of A M to A N is compounded of the proportions of A M to F L,
and of F L to A N. But as A M to F L, so (by construction) is D E to D G; and
as F L is to A N (seeing the time in both is the same, namely, A F), so is the
Length D G to the Length D P; for Lengths transmitted in the same time are to
one another as their Velocities are. Wherefore by ordinate proportion, as A M
is to A N, that is, as the mean Impetus A L multiplied into its time A B, is to
the mean Impetus A O multiplied into A F, so is D E to D P; which was to be
proved.

Corol. 1 Lengths transmitted with Motion so accelerated that the Impetus
increase continually in duplicate proportion to that of their times, if the
base represent the Impetus, are in triplicate proportion of their Impetus
acquired in the last point of their times. For as the Length D E is to the
Length D P, so is the parallelogram A M to the parallelogram A N, and so the
Parabola A B I K to the Parabola A F K; But the proportion of the Parabola A B
I K to the Parabola A F K is triplicate to the proportion which the base B I
has to the base F K. Wherefore also the proportion of D E to D P, is triplicate
to that of B I to F K. Corol. 2 Lengths transmitted in equal Times succeeding
one another from the beginning, by Motion so accelerated, that the proportion
of the Impetus be duplicate to the proportion of the times, are to one another
as the differences of Cubique Numbers beginning at Unity, that is, as 7, 19,
37, etc. For if in the first time the Length transmitted be as 1, the Length at
the end of the second time will be as 8, at the end of the third time as 27,
and at the end of the fourth time as 64, etc. which are Cubique Numbers, whose
differences are 7, 19, 37, etc. Corol. 3 In Motion so accelerated, as that the
Length transmitted be always to the Length transmitted in duplicate proportion
to their Times, the Length Uniformly transmitted in the whole time and with
Impetus all the way equal to that which is last acquired, is as a Parabola to a
parallelogram of the same altitude and base, that is, as 2 to 3. For the
Parabola A B I K is the Impetus increasing in the time A B; and the
parallelogram A I is the greatest Uniform Impetus multiplied into the same time
A B. Wherefore the Lengths transmitted will be as a Parabola to a parallelogram
etc. that is, as 2 to 3.
5 If I should proceed to the explication of such Motions as are made by
Impetus increasing in proportion triplicate, quadruplicate, quintuplicate, etc.
to that of their times, it would be a labor infinite and unnecessary. For by
the same method by which I have computed such Lengths as are transmitted with
Impetus increasing in single and duplicate proportion, any man may compute such
as are transmitted with Impetus increasing in triplicate, quadruplicate or what
other proportion he pleases.

In making which computation he shall find, that where the Impetus increase in
proportion triplicate to that of the times, there the whole Velocity will be
designed by the first Parabolaster (of which see the next Chapter); and the
Lengths transmitted will be in proportion quadruplicate to that of the times.
And in like manner, where the Impetus increase in quadruplicate proportion to
that of the times, that there the whole Velocity will be designed by the second
Parabolaster, and the Lengths transmitted will be in quintuplicate proportion
to that of the times; and so on continually.

6 If two Bodies with Uniform Motion transmit two Lengths, each with its own
Impetus and Time, the proportion of the Lengths transmitted will be compounded
of the proportions of Time to Time, and Impetus to Impetus, directly taken.

Let two Bodies be moved Uniformly (as in the 3d figure) One in the time A B
with the Impetus A C, the other in the time A D with the Impetus A E. I say the
Lengths transmitted have their proportion to one another compounded of the
proportions of A B to A D, and of A C to A E. For let any Length whatsoever, as
Z, be transmitted by one of the Bodies in the time A B with the Impetus A C;
and any other Length, as X, be transmitted by the other Body in the time A D
with the Impetus A E; and let the parallelograms A F and A G be completed.
Seeing now Z is to X (by the 2d Article) as the Impetus A C multiplied into the
time A B is to the Impetus A E multiplied into the time A D, that is, as A F to
A G; the proportion of Z to X will be compounded of the same proportions, of
which the proportion of A F to A G is compounded; But the proportion of A F to
A G is compounded of the proportions of the side A B to the side A D, and of
the side A C to the side A E (as is evident by the Elements of Euclide), that
is, of the proportions of the time A B to the time A D, and of the Impetus A C
to the Impetus A E. Wherefore also the proportion of Z to X is compounded of
the same proportions of the time A B to the time A D, and of the Impetus A C to
the Impetus A E; which was to be demonstrated.

Corol. 1 When two Bodies are moved with Uniform Motion, if the Times and
Impetus be in reciprocal proportion, the Lengths transmitted shall be equal.
For if it were as A B to A D (in the same 3d figure) so reciprocally A E to A
C, the proportion of A F to A G would be compounded of the proportions of A B
to A D and of A C to A E, that is, of the proportions of A B to A D and of A D
to A B. Wherefore, A F would be to A G as A B to A B, that is equal; and so the
two products made by the multiplication of Impetus into Time would be equal;
and by consequent, Z would be equal to X. Corol. 2 If two Bodies be moved in
the same Time, but with different Impetus, the Lengths transmitted will be as
Impetus to Impetus. For if the Time of both of them be A D, and their different
Impetus be A E and A C, the proportion of A G to D C will be compounded of the
proportions of A E to A C and of A D to A D, that is, of the proportions of A E
to A C and of A C to A C; and so the proportion of A G to D C, that is, the
proportion of Length to Length will be as A E to A C, that is, as that of
Impetus to Impetus. In like manner, if two Bodies be moved Uniformly, and both
of them with the same Impetus, but in different times, the proportion of the
Lengths transmitted by them will be as that of their times. For if they have
both the same Impetus A C, and their different times be A B and A D, the
proportion ^f A F to D C will be compounded of the proportions of A B to A D
and of A C to A C; that is, of the proportions of A B to A D and of A D, to A
D; and therefore the proportion of A F to D C, that is, of Length to Length,
will be the same with that of A B to A D, which is the proportion of Time to
Time.
7 If two Bodies pass through two Lengths with Uniform Motion, the proportion
of the Times in which they are moved will be compounded of the proportions of
Length to Length and Impetus to Impetus reciprocally taken.

For let any two Lengths be given, as (in the same 3d figure) Z and X, and let
one of them be transmitted with the Impetus A C, the other with the Impetus A
E. I say the proportion of the Times in which they are transmitted, will be
compounded of the proportions of Z to X, and of A E (which is the Impetus with
which X is transmitted) to A C (the Impetus with which Z is transmitted.) For
seeing A F is the product of the Impetus A C multiplied into the Time A B, the
time of Motion through Z will be a line which is made by the application of the
parallelogram A F to the straight line A C, which line is A B; and therefore A
B is the time of motion through Z. In like manner, seeing A G is the product of
the Impetus A E multiplied into the Time A D, the time of motion through X will
be a line which is made by the application of A G to the straight line A D; but
A D is the time of motion through X. Now the proportion of A B to A D is
co^pounded of the proportions of the parallelogram A F to the parallelogram A
G, and of the Impetus A E to the Impetus A C; which may be demonstrated thus.
Put the parallelograms in order A F, A G, D C; and it will be manifest that the
proportion of A F to D C is compounded of the proportions of A F to A G and of
A G to D C; but A F is to D C as A B to A D; wherefore also the proportion of A
B to A D is compounded of the propotrions of A F to A G and of A G to D C. And
because the Length Z is to the Length X as A F is to A G, and the Impetus A E
to the Impetus A C as A G to D C, therefore the proportion of A B to A D will
be compounded of the proportions of the Length Z to the Length X, and of the
Impetus A E to the Impetus A C; which was to be demonstrated.

In the same manner it may be proved, that in two Uniform Motions the
proportion of the Impetus is compounded of the proportions, of Length to
Length, and of Time to Time reciprocally taken.

For if we suppose A C (in the same 3d figure) to be the Time, and A B the
Impetus with which the Length Z is passed through; and A E to be the Time, and
A D the Impetus with which the Length X is passed through, the demonstration
will proceed as in the last Article.

8 If a Body be carried by two Movents together which move with straight and
Uniform Motion, and concur in any given angle, the line by which that Body
passes will be a straight line.

Let the Movent A B (in the 4th figure) have straight and Uniform Motion, and
be moved till it come into the place C D; and let another Movent A C, having
likewise straight and Uniform Motion, and making with the Movent A B any given
angle C A B, be understood to be moved in the same time to D B; and let the
Body be placed in the point of their concourse A. I say the line which that
Body describes with its Motion is a straight line. For let the parallelogram A
B D C be completed, and its diagonal A D be drawn; and in the straight line A B
let any point E be taken; and from it let E F be drawn parallel to the straight
lines A C and B D, cutting A D in G; and through the point G let H I be drawn
parallel to the straight lines A B and C D; and lastly, let the measure of the
time be A C. Seeing therefore both the Motions are made in the same time, when
A B is in C D, the Body also will be in C D; and in like manner, when A C is in
B D, the Body will be in B D. But A B is in C D at the same time when A C is in
B D; and therefore the Body will be in C D and B D at the same time; Wherefore
it will be in the common point D. Again, seeing the Motion from A C to B D is
Uniform, that is, the Spaces transmitted by it are in proportion to one another
as the Times in which they are transmitted, when A C is in E F, the proportion
of A B to A E will be same with that of E F to E G, that is, of the Time A C to
the Time A H. Wherefore A B will be in H I in the same time in which A C is in
E F, so that the Body will at the same time be in E F and in H I, and therefore
in their common point G. And in the same manner it will, be wheresoever the
point E be taken between A and B. Wherefore the Body will always be in the
Diagonal A D; which was to be demonstrated.

Corollary. From hence it is manifest, that the Body will be carried through
the same straight line A D, though the Motion be not Uniform, provided it have
like acceleration; for the proportion of A B to A E will always be the same
with that of A C to A H.

9 If a Body be carried by two Movents together, which meet in any given angle,
and are moved, the one Uniformly, the other with Motion Uniformly accelerated
from Rest (that is, that the proportion of their Impetus be as that of their
Times) that is, that the proportion of their Le^gths be duplicate to that of
the lines of their Times, till the line of greatest Impetus acquired by
acceleration be equal to that of the line of Time of the Uniform Motion; the
line in which the Body is carried will be the crooked line of a Semiparabola,
whose base is the Impetus last acquired, and Vertex the point of Rest.

Let the straight line A B (in the 5th Figure) be understood to be moved with
Uniform Motion to C D; and let another Movent in the straight line A C be
supposed to be moved in the same time to B D, but with motion Uniformly
accelerted, that is, with such motion, that the proportion of the spaces which
are transmitted be always duplicate to that of the Times, till the Impetus
acquired be B D equal to the straight line A C; and let the Semiparabola A G D
B be described. I say that by the concourse of those two Movents, the Body will
be carried through the Semipabolical crooked line A G D. For let the
parallelelogram A B D C be completed; and from the point E taken any where in
the straight line A B let E F be drawn parallel to A C, and cutting the crooked
line in G, and lastly, through the point G let A I be drawn parallel to the
straight lines A B and C D. Seeing therefore the proportion of A B to A E is by
supposition duplicate to the proportion of E F to E G, that is, of the time A C
to the time A H, at the same time when A C is in E F, A B will be in H I; and
therefore the moved Body will be in the common point G. And so it will always
be in what part soever of A B the point E be taken. Wherefore the moved Body
will always be found in the parabolical line A G D; which was to be
demonstr^ted.

10 If a Body be carried by two Movents together, which meet in any given
angle, and are moved, the one Uniformly, the other with Impetus increasing from
Rest till it be equal to that of the Uniform Motion, and with such
acceleration, that the proportion of the Lengths transmitted be every where
triplicate to that of the Times in which they are transmitted, The line in
which that Body is moved, will be the crooked line of the first
Semiparabolaster of two Means, whose ba^e is the Impetus last acquired.

Let the straight line A B (in the 6th. Figure) be moved Uniformly to C D; and
let another Movent A C be moved at the same time to B D with motion so
accelerated, that the proportion of the Lengths transmitted by every where
triplicate to the proportion of their Times; and let the Impetus acquired in
the end of that motion be B D, equal to the straight line A C; and lastly, let
A D be the crooked line of the first Semiparabolaster of two Means. I say that
by the concourse of the two Movents together, the Body will be always in that
crooked line A D. For let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and from the
point E taken any where in the straight line A B let E F be drawn parallel to A
C and cutting the crooked line in G; and through the point G let H I be drawn
parallel to the straight lines A B and C D. Seeing therefore the proportion of
A B to A E is (by supposition) triplicate to the proportion of E F to E G, that
is, of the time A C to the time A H, at the same time when A C is in E F, A B
will be in H I; and therefore the moved Body will be in the common point G. And
so it will always be in what part soever of A B the point E be taken; and by
consequent the Body will always be in the crooked line A G D; which was to be
demonstrated.

11 By the same method it may be shown what line it is that it made by the
motion of a Body carried by the concourse of any two Movents, which are moved,
one of them Uniformly, the other with acceleration, but in such proportions of
Spaces and Times as are explicable by Numbers, as duplicate, triplicate etc. or
such as may be designed by any broken number whatsoever. For which this is the
Rule.

Let the two numbers of the Length and Time be added together; and let their
Sum be the Denominator of a Fraction, whose Numerator must be the number of the
Length. Seek this Fraction in the Table of the third Article of the 17th
Chapter, and the line sought will be that which denominates the three-sided
Figure noted on the left hand, and the kind of it will be that which is numbered
above over the Fraction. For example, Let there be a concourse of two
Movements, whereof one is moved Uniformly, the other with motion so accelerated
that the Spaces are to the Times as 5 to 3. Let a Fraction be made whose
Denominator is the Sum of 5 and 3, and the Numerator 5, namely the Fraction.
Seek in the Table, and you will find to be the third in that row which belongs
to the three-sided Figure of four Means. Wherefore the line of Motion made by
the concourse of two such Movents as are last of all described, will be the
crooked line of the third Parabolaster of four Means.

12 If Motion be made by the concourse of two Movents whereof one is moved
Uniformly, the other beginning from Rest in the Angle of concourse with any
acceleration whatsoever; the Movent which is Moved Uniformly shall put forward
the moved Body in the several parallel Spaces, less, then if both the Movents
had Uniform motion; and still less and less, as the Motion of the other
Movent is more and more accelerated.

Let the Body be placed in A (in the 7th figure) and be moved by two Movents,
by one with Uniform Motion from the straight line A B to the straight line C D
parallel to it; and by the other with any acceleration from the straight line A
C to the straight line B D parallel to it; and in the parallelogram A B D C let
a Space be taken between any two parallels E F and G H. I say, that whilst the
Movent A C passes through the latitude which is between E F and G H, the Body
is less moved forwards from A B toward C D, then it would have been, if the
Motion from A C to B D had been Uniform.

For suppose that whilst the Body is made to descend to the parallel E F by
the power of the Movent from A C toward B D, the same Body in the same time is
moved forwards to any point F in the line E F by the power of the Movent from A
B toward C D; and let the straight line A F be drawn and produced
indeterminately, cutting G H in H. Seeing therefore it is as A E to A G, so E F
to G H; if A C should descend toward B D with uniform Motion, the Body in the
time G H (for I make A C and its parallels the measure of time) would be found
in the point H. But because A C is supposed to be moved toward B D which
motion continually accelerated, that is, in greater proportion of Space to
Space then of Time to Time, in the time G H the Body will be in some parallel
beyond it, as between G H and B D. Suppose now that in the end of the time G H
it be in the parallel I K, and in I K let I L be taken equal to G H. When
therefore the Body is in the parallel I K, it will be in the point L. Wherefore
when it was in the parallel G H, it was in some point between G and H, as in
the point M; but if both the Motions had been Uniform it had been in the point
H; and therefore whilst the Movent A C passes over the latitude which is
between E F and G A, the Body is less moved forwards from A B toward C D, then
it would have been if both the Motions had been Uniform; which was to be
demonstrated.

13 Any Length being given whch is passed through in a given time with uniform
motion, To find out what Length shall be passed through in the same time with
Motion uniformly accelerated, that is, with such Motion, that the proportion of
the Lengths passed through be continually duplicate to that of their Times, and
that the line of the Impetus last acquired, be equal to the line of the whole
time of the Motion.

Let A B (in the 8th. figure) be a Length transmitted with Uniform Motion in
the time A C; and let it be required to find another Length which shall be
transmitted in the same time with Motion Uniformly accelerated, so, that the
line of the Impetus last acquired be equal to the straight line A C.

Let the parallelogram A B D C be completed; and let B D be divided in the
middle at E; and between B E and B D let B F be a mean proportional; and let A
F be drawn and produced till it meet with C D produced in G; and lastly, let
the parallelogram A C G H be completed. I say A H is the Length required.

For as duplicate proportion is to single proportion, so let A H be to A I,
that is, let A I be the half of A H; and let I K be drawn parallel to the
straight line A C, and cutting the Diagonal A D in K, and the straight line A G
in L. Seeing therefore A I is the half of A H, I L will also be the half of B
D, that is, equal to B E, and I K equal to B F; for B D, (that is, G H), B F,
and B E (that is, I L) being continual proportionals, A H, A B, and A I will
also be continual proportionals. But as A B is to A I, that is, as A H is to A
B, so is B D to I K, and so also is G H, that is, B D to B F; and therefore B F
and I K are equal. Now the proportion of A H to A I is duplicate to the
proportion of A B to A I, that is, to that of BD to IK, or of GH to IK.
Wherefore the point K will be in a Parabola, whose diameter is AH and ba^e GH,
which GH is equal to AC. The Body therefore proceeding from Rest in A with
motion Uniformly accelerated in the time AC, when it has passed through the
Length AH, will acquire the Impetus GH equal to the time AC; that is, such
Impetus, as that with it the Body will pass through the Length AC in the time
AC. Wherefore any Length being given, etc. which was propounded to be done.

14 Any Length being given which in a given Time is transmitted with Uniform
Motion, To find out what Length shall be transmitted in the same Time with
Motion so accelerated, that the Lengths transmitted be continually in
triplicate proportion to that of their Times, and the line of the Impetus last
of all acquired be equal to the Line of Time given.

Let the given Length AB (in the 9th figure) be transmitted with Uniform motion
in the Time AC; and let it be required to find what Length shall be transmitted
in the same time with motion so accelerated, that the Lengths transmitted be
continually in triplicate proportion to that of their Times, and the Impetus
last acquired be equal to the Time given.

Let the parallelogram ABDC be completed; and let BD be so divided in E, that
BE be a third part of the whole BD; and let BF be a mean proportional between
BD and BE; and let AF be drawn and produced till it meet the straight line CD
in G; and lastly, let the parallelogram ACGH be completed. I say AH is the
Length required.

For as triplicate proportion is to single proportion, so let AH be to another
line AI, that is, make AI a third part of the whole AH; and let IK be drawn
parallel to the straight line AC, cutting the Diagonal AD in K, and the
straight line AG in L; then, as AB is to AI, so let AI be to another AN; and
from the point N let NQ be drawn parallel to AC, cutting AG, AD, and FK
produced, in P, M and O; and last of all let FO and LM be drawn, which will be
equal and parallel to the straight lines BN and IN. By this construction, the
Lengths transmitted AH, AB, AI and AN will be continual proportionals; and in
like manner, the Times GH, BF, IL and NP, that is, NQ, NO, NM and NP will be
continual proportionals, and in the same proportion with AH, AB, AI, and AN.
Wherefore the proportion of AH to AN is the same with that of BD, that is, of
NQ to NP; and the proportion of NQ to NP triplicate to that of NQ to NO, that
is, triplicate to that of BD to IK; Wherefore also the Length AH is to the
Length AN in triplicate proportion to that of the Time BD to the Time IK; and
therefore the crooked line of the first three sided figure of two means, whose
Diameter is AH, and base GH equal to AC, shall pass through the point O; and
consequently AH shall be transmitted in the time AC, and shall have its last
acquired Impetus GH equal to AC, and the proportions of the Lengths acquired in
any of the times triplicate to the proportions of the times themselves.
Wherefore AH is the Length required to be found out,

By the same method, if a Length be given which is transmitted with Uniform
Motion in any given Time, another Length may be found out, which shall be
transmitted in the same Time with motion so accelerated, that the Lengths
transmitted shall be to the Times in which they are transmitted, in proportion
quadruplicate, quintuplicate, and so on infinitely. For if BD be divided in E,
so, that BD be to BE as 4 to 1; and there be taken between BD and BE a mean
proportional FB; and as AH is to AB, so AB be made to a third, and again so
that third to a fourth, and that fourth to a fifth AN, so that the proportion
of AH to AN be quadruplicate to that of AH to AB, and the parallelogram NBFO be
completed; the crooked line of the first three-sided Figure of three Means will
pass through the point O* and consequently the Body moved will acquire the
Impetus GH equal to AC in the time AC. And so of the rest.

15 Also, if the proportion of the Lengths transmitted, be to that of their
Times, as any number to any number, the same method serves for the finding out
of the Length transmitted with such Impetus, and in such Time.

For let AC (in the 10 figure) be the time, in which a Body is transmitted with
Uniform Motion from A to B; and the parallelogram ABDC being completed, let it
be required to find out a Length in which that Body may be moved in the same
time AC, from A with motion so accelerated, that the proportion of the Lengths
transmitted, to that of the Times be continually as 3 to 2.

Let BD be so divided in E, that BD be to BE as 3 to 2; and between BD and BE
let BF be a mean proportional; and let AF be drawn and produced till it meet
with CD produced in G; and making AM a mean proportional between AH and AB, let
it be as AM to AB, so AB to AI; and so the proportion of AH to AI will be to
that of AH to AB, as 3 to 2. (for of the proportions of which that of AH to AM
is one, that of AH to AB is two, and that of AH to AI is three;) and
consequently as 3 to 2 to that of GH to BF, and (FK being drawn parallel to BY,
and cutting AD in K) so likewise to that of GH or BD to IK; Wherefore the
proportion of the Length AH to AI is to the proportion of the Time BD to IK, as
3 to 2; and therefore, if in the time AC, the Body be moved with accelerated
motion, as was propounded, till it acquire the Impetus HG equal to AC, the
Length transmitted in the same Time will be AH.

16 But if the proportion of the Lengths to that of the Times had been as 4 to
3, there should then have been taken two mean proportionals between AH and AB,
and their proportion should have been continued one term further, so that AH to
AB might have three of the same proportions, of which AH to AI has four; and
all things else should have been done as is already shown. Now the way how to
interpose any number of Means between two Lines given, is not yet found out.
Nevertheless, this may stand for a general Rule; If there be a Time given, and
a Length be transmitted in that Time with Uniform Motion; as for example, if
the Time be AC, and the Length AB; the straight line AG, which determines the
Length CG or AH transmitted in the same Time AC with any accelerated motion,
shall so cut BD in F, that BF shall be a mean proportional between BD and BE,
BE being so taken in BD, that the proportion of Length to Length be every where
to the proportion of Time to Time, as the whole BD is to its part BE.

17 If in a given Time, two Lengths be transmitted, One with uniform motion,
the other with motion accelerated in any proportion of the Lengths to the
Times; and again in part of the same Time, parts of the same Lengths be
transmitted with the same motions, the whole Length will exceed the other
Length in the same proportion in which one part exceeds the other part.

For example, let AB (in the 8th. figure) be a Length transmitted in the time
AC with uniform Motion; and let AH be another Length transmitted in the same
time with Motion uniformly accelerated, so that the Impetus last acquired be GH
equal to AC; and in AH let any part AI be taken, and transmitted in part of the
time AC with uniform Motion; and let another part AB be taken, and transmitted
in the same part of the time AC with Motion uniformly accelerated. I say, that
as AH is to AB, so will AB be to AI.

Let BD be drawn parallel and equal to HG, and divided in the midst at E, and
between BD and BE, let a mean proportional be taken as BF; and the straight
line AG (by the demonstration of the 13th Art.) shall pass through F. And
dividing AH in the midst at I, AB shall be a mean proportional between AH and
AI. Again (because AI and AB are described by the same Motions) if IK be drawn
parallel and equal to BF or AM, and divided in the midst at N, and between IK
and IN be taken the mean proportional IL, the straight line AF will (by the
demonstration of the same 13th Ar^.) pass through L. And dividing AB in the
midst at O, the line AI will be a mean proportional between AB and AO. Where*
AB is divided in I and O in like manner as AH is divided in B and I; and as AH
to AB so is AB to AI. Which was to be proved.

Coroll. Also as AH to AB, so is HB to BY; and so also BY to IO.

And as this (where one of the Motions is uniformly accelerated) is proved out
of the demonstration of the 13th Article; so (when the accelerations are in
double proportion to the times) the same may be proved by the demonstration of
the 14th Art. and by the same method in all other accelerations, whose
proportions to the times are explicable in numbers.

18 If two sides which contain an Angle in any Parallelogram, be moved in the
same time to the sides opposite to them, one of them with Uniform Motion, the
other with Motion Uniformly accelerated; that side which is moved Uniformly
will effect as much with its concourse through the whole Length transmitted, as
it would do if the other Motion were also Uniform, and the Length transmitted
by it in the same time were a mean proportional between the whole and the half.

Let the side AB of the Parallelogram ABDC (in the 11th Figure) be understood
to be moved with Uniform Motion till it be coincident with CD; and let the time
of that Motion be AC or BD. Also in the same time let the side AC be understood
to be moved with Motion uniformly accelerated, till it be coincident with BD;
then dividing AB in the middle in E, let AF be made a mean proportional between
AB and AE; and drawing FG parallel to AC, let the side AC be understood to be
moved in the same time AC with uniform Motion till it be coincident with FG. I
say the whole AB confers as much to the velocity of the Body placed in A when
the Motion of AC is uniformly accelerated till it come to BD, as the part AF
confers to the same when the side AC is moved Uniformly and in the same time to
FG.

For seeing AF is a mean proportional between the whole AB and it is half AE,
BD will (by the 13th Art.) be the last Impetus acquired by AC with motion
uniformly accelerated till it come to the same BD; and consequently the
straight line FB will be the excess by which the Length transmitted by AC with
motion uniformly accelerated, will exceed the Length transmitted by the same AC
in the same time with Uniform Motion, and with Impetus every where equal to BD.
Wherefore if the whole AB be moved Uniformly to CD in the same time in which AC
is moved Uniformly to FG, the part FB (seeing it concurs not at all with the
Motion of the side AC which is supposed to be moved only to FG) will co^fer
nothing to its motion. Again, supposing the side AC to be moved to BD with
Motion Uniformly accelerated, the side AB with its uniform Motion to CD will
less put forwards the Body when it* is accelerated in all the parallels, then
when it is not at all accelerated; and by how much the greater the acceleration
is, by so much the less it will put it forwards (as is shown in the 12th
Artic.) When therefore AC is in FG with accelerated Motion, the Body will not
be in the side CD at the point G, but at the point D; so that GD will be the
excess by which the Length transmitted with accelerated Motion to BD, exceeds
the Length transmitted with Uniform Motion to FG; so that the Body by its
acceleration avoids the action of the part AF, and comes to the side CD in the
time AC, and makes the Length CD, which is equal to the Length AB. Wherefore
Uniform Motion from AB to CD in the time AC works no more in the whole Length
AB upon the Body uniformly accelerated from AC to BD, then if AC were moved in
the same time with uniform Motion to FG; the difference consisting only in
this, that when AB works upon the Body uniformly moved from AC to FG, that by
which the accelerated Motion exceeds the Uniform Motion, is altogether in FB,
or GD; but when the same AB works upon the Body acclerated, that by which the
accelerated Motion exceeds the Uniform Motion, is dispersed through the whole
Length AB or CD, yet so that if it were collected and put together, it would be
equal to the same FB or GD. Wherefore, If two sides which contain an angle etc;
which was to be demonstrated.

19 If two transmitted Lengths have to their Times any other proportion
explicable by number, and the side AB be so divided in E, that AB be to AE in
the same proportion which the Lengths transmitted have to the Times in which
they are transmitted, and between AB and AE there be taken a mean proportional
AF, it may be shown by the same method, that the side which is moved with
Uniform Motion, works as much with its concourse through the whole Length AB,
as it would do if the other Motion were also Uniform, and the Length
transmitted in the same Time AC were that mean proportional AF.

And thus much concerning Motion by concourse.

CHAP. XVII. Of Figures Deficient.
1 Definitions of a Deficient Figure; of a Complete Figure; of the Complement
of a Deficient Figure; and of Pro^o^tions which are Proportional and
Commensurable to one another. 2 The proportion of a Deficient Figure to its
Complement. 3 The proportions of Deficient Figures to the Parallelograms in
which they are described, set forth in a Table. 4 The Description and
Production of the same Figures. 5 The drawing of Tangents to them. 6 In what
proportion the same Figures exceed a straight lined Triangle of the same
Altitude and Base. 7 A Table of Solid Deficient Figures described in a
Cylinder. 8 In what proportion the same Figures exceed a Cone of the same
Altitude and Base. 9 How a plain Deficient Figure may be described in a
Parallelogram, so, that it be to a Triangle of the same Base and Altitude, as
another Deficient Figure (plain or solid) twice taken, is to the same Deficient
Figure together with the Complete Figure in which it is described. 10 The
transferring of certain properties of Deficient Figures described in a
Parallelogram to the proportions of the Spaces transmitted with several degrees
of Velocity. 11 Of Deficient Figures described in a Circle. 12 The proposition
demonstrated in the 2d. Article, confirmed from the Elements of Philosophy. 13
An unusual way of reasoning concerning the Equality between the superficies of
a portion of a Sphere, and a Circle. 14 How from the description of Deficient
Figures in a Parallelogram, any number of mean Proportionals may be found out
between two given straight lines.
1 I Call those Deficient Figures, which may be understood to be generated by
the Uniform Motion of some quantity, which decreases continually, till at last
it have no magnitude at all.

And I call that a Complete Figure, answering to a Deficient Figure, which is
generated with the same motion, and in the same time, by a Quantity which
retains always its whole magnitude.

The Complement of a Deficient Figure is that, which being added to the
Deficient Figure, makes it Complete.

Four Proportions are said to be Proportional, when the first of them is to
the second, as the third is to the fourth. For example, if the first proportion
be duplicate to the second; and again the third be duplicate to the fourth,
those Proportions are said to be Proportional.

And Commensurable Proportions are those, which are to one another as number to
number. As when to a proportion given, one proportion is duplicate, another
triplicate, the duplicate proportion will be to the triplicate proportion as 2
to 3; but to the given proportion it will be as 2 to ^; and therefore I call
those three proportions Commensurable.

2 A Deficient Figure, which is made by a Quantity continually decreasing to
nothing by proportions every where proportional and commensurable, is to its
Complement, as the proportion of the whole altitude, to an altitude diminished
in any time, is to the proportion of the whole Quantity which describes the
Figure, to the same Quantity diminished in the same time.

Let the quantity AB (in the 1 figure) by its motion through the altitude AC,
describe the Complete Figure AD; and again, let the same quantity, by
decreasing continually to nothing in C, describe the Deficient Figure ABEFC,
whose Complement will be the Figure BDCFE. Now let AB be supposed to be moved
till it lie in GK, so that the altitude diminished be GC, and AB diminished be
GE; and let the proportion of the whole altitude AC to the diminished altitude
GC, be (for example) triplicate to the proportion of the whole quantity AB or
GK, to the diminished quantity GE. And in like manner, let HI be taken equal to
GE, and let it be diminished to HF; and let the proportion of GC to HC be
triplicate to that of HI to HF; and let the same be done in as many parts of
the straight line AC as is possible; and a line be drawn through the points B,
E, F and C. I say the Deficient Figure ABEFC, is to its Complement BDCEF as 3
to ^, or as the proportion of AC to GC is to the proportion of AB, that is, of
GK to GE.

For (by the second Article of the 15. Chap.) the proportion of the complement
BEFCD to the deficient figure ABEFC, is all the proportions of DB to OE, and of
DB to QF, and of all the lines parallel to DB terminated in the line BEFC, to
all the parallels to AB terminated in the same points of the line BEFC. And
seeing the proportions of DB to OE, and of DB to QF etc are every where
triplicate of the proportions of AB to GE, and of AB to HF etc. the proportions
of HF to AB, and of GE to AB etc. (by the 16 Article of the 13 Chap.) are
triplicate of the proportions of QF to DB, and of OE to DB etc. and therefore
the deficient figure ABEFC which is the aggregate of all the lines HF, GE, AB,
etc. is triple to the complement BEFCD made of all the lines QF, OE, DB, etc.
which was to be proved.

It follows from hence, That the same complement BEFCD is of the whole
Parallelogram. And by the same method may be calculated in all other Deficient
Figures generated as above declared, the proportion of the Parallelogram to
either of its parts; as that when the parallels increase fom a point in the
same proportion, the Parallelogram will be divided into two equal Triangles;
when one increase is double to the other, it will be divided into a
Semiparabola and its Complement, or into 2 and 1.

The same construction standing, the same conclusion may otherwise be
demonstrated, thus.

Let the straight line CB be drawn cutting GK in L, and through L let MN be
drawn parallel to the straight line AC; wherefore the Parallelograms GM and LD
will be equal. Then let LK be divided into three equal parts, so that it may be
to one of those parts in the same proportion which the proportion of AC to GC
or of GK to GL has to the proportion of GK to GE. Therefore LK will be to one
of those three parts as the Arithmetical proportion between GK and GL is to the
Arithmetical proportion between GK and the same GK want the third part of LK;
and KE will be somewhat greater then a third of LK. Seeing now the altitude AG
or ML is by reason of the continual decrease, to be supposed less then any
quantity that can be given; LK (which is intercepted between the Diagonal BC
and the side BD) will be also less then any quantity that can be given; and
consequently, if G be put so near to A in g, as that the difference between Cg
and CA be less then any quantity that can be assigned, the difference also
between Cl (removing L to l) and CB, will be less then any quantity that can be
assigned; and the line gl being drawn and produced to the line BD in k cutting
the crooked line in e, the proportion of Gk to Gl will still be triplicate to
the proportion of Gk to Ge, and the difference between k and e the third part
of kl will be less then any quantity that can be given; and therefore the
Parallelogram eD will differ from a third part of the Parallelogram Ae by a
less difference then any quantity that can be assigned. Again, let HI be drawn
parallel and equal to ge, cutting CB in P, the crooked line in F, and BD in I,
and the proportion of Cg, to CH will be triplicate to the proportion of HF to
HP, and IF will be greater then the third part of PI. But again, setting H in h
so near to g, as that the difference between Ch and Cg may be but as a point,
the point P will also in p be so near to l, as that the difference between Cp
and Cl will be but as a point; and drawing hp till it meet with gk in i,
cutting the crooked line in f, and having drawn eo parallel to BD, cutting DC
in o, the Parallelogram fo will differ less from the third part of the
Parallelogram gf, then by any quantity that can be given. And so it will be in
all other Spaces generated in the same manner. Wherefore the differences of the
Arithmetical and Geometrical Means, which are but as so many points B, e, f,
etc. (seeing the whole Figure is made up of so many indivisible Spaces) will
constitute a certain line, such as is the line BEFC, which will divide the
complete Figure AD into two parts; whereof one, namely ABEFC, which I call a
Deficient Figure, is triple to the other, namely BDCEF, which I call the
Complement thereof. And whereas the proportion of the altitudes to one another,
is in this case everywhere triplicate to that of the decreasing quantities to
one another; in the same manner if the proportion of the altitudes had been
every where quadruplicate to that of the decreasing quantities it might have
been demonstrated, that the Deficient Figure had been quadruple to its
Complement; and so in any other proportion, Wherefore, a Deficient Figure,
which is made, etc. Which was to be demonstrated.

The same rule ^oldeth also in the diminution of the Bases of Cylinders, as is
demonstrated Chap. 15. Art. 2.

^ By this Proposition, the magnitudes of all Deficient Figures (when the
proportions by which their bases decrease continually, are proportional to
those by which their altitudes decrease) may be compared with the magnitudes of
their Complements; and consequently, with the magnitudes of their Complete
Figures. And they will be found to be as I have set them down in the following
Tables; in which I compare a Parallelogram with threesided Figures; and first
with a straight lined triangle, made by the base of the Parallelogram
continually decreasing in such manner; that the altitudes be always in
proportion to one another as the bases are, and so the triangle will be equal
to its Complement; or the proportions of the altitudes and bases will be as 1 to
1, and then the triangle will be half the Parallelogram. Secondly, with that
three-sided Figure which is made by the continual decreasing of the bases in
subduplicate proportion to that of the altitudes; and so the Deficient Figure
will be double to its Complement, and to the Parallelogram as 2 to 3. Then,
with that, where the proportion of the altitudes is triplicate to that of the
bases; and then the Deficient Figure will be triple to its Complement, and to
the Parallelogram as 3 to 4. Also the proportion of the altitudes to that of
the bases may be as 3 to 2; and then the Deficient Figure will be to its
Complement as 3 to 2, and to the Parallelogram as 3 to 5; and so forwards
according as more mean proportionals are taken, or as the proportions are more
multiplied, as may be seen in the following Table. For example, if the bases
decrease so, that the proportion of the altitudes to that of the bases be
always as 5 to 2, and it be demanded what proportion the Figure made has to
the Parallelogram, which is supposed to be Unity; then, seeing that where the
proportion is taken five times, there must be four Means; look in the Table
amongst the three-sided figures of four Means, and seeing the proportion was as
5 to 2, look in the uppermost row for the number 2, and descending in the 2d
Column till you meet with that three-sided Figure, you will find 5/7; which
shows that the Deficient Figure is to the Parallelogram as 5/^ to 1, or as 5 to
7.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Parallelogram:.......... 1 Straight-sided Triangle.....
Three-sided figure of 1 Mean Three-sided figure of 2 Means Three-sided figure
of 3 Means 4/6 4/7 Three-sided figure of 4 Means 5/7 5 9 Three-sided figure of
5 Means 6/7 6/8 6/9 6/10 6/11 Three-sided figure of 6 Means 7/9 7/10 7/11 7/12
7/13 Three-sided figure of 7 Means 8/9 8/10 8/11 8/12 8/13 8/14 8/15

4 Now for the better understanding of the nature of these three-sided figures,
I will show how they may be described by points; and first, those which are in
the first column of the Table. Any Parallelogram being described, as ABCD (in
the 2d. figure,) let the Diagonal BD be drawn; and the straight-lined triangle
BCD will be half the Parallelogram; Then let any number of lines, as OF, be
drawn parallel to the Side BC, and cutting the Diagonal BD in G; and let it be
every where, as OF to EG, so EG to another EH; and through all the points H let
the line BHHD be drawn; and the Figure BHHDC will be that which I call a
Three-sided Figure of one Mean, because in three proportionals, as OF, EG and
EH, there is but one Mean, namely, EG; and this three-sided figure will be of
the Parallelogram, and is called a Parabola. Again, let it be as EG to EH, so
EH to another EI, and let the line BIID be drawn, making the three-sided figure
BIIDC; and this will be of the Parallelogram, and is by many called a Cubique
Parabola. In like manner, if the proportions be further continued in OF, there
will be made the rest of the threesided figures of the first Column; which I
thus demonstrate. Let there be drawn straight lines, as HK and GL parallel to
the base DC. Seeing therefore the proportion of OF to EH is duplicate of that
of OF to EG, or of BC to BL, that is, of CD to LG, or of KM (producing KH to AD
in M) to KH, the proportion of BC to BK will be duplicate to that of KM to KH;
but as BC is to BK, so is DC, or KM to KN; and therefore the proportion of KM
to KN is duplicate to that of KM to KH; and so it will be wheresoever the
parallel KM be placed. Wherefore the Figure BHHDC is double to its Complement
BHHDA, and consequently of the whole Parallelogram. In the same manner if
through I, be drawn OPIQ parallel and equal to CD, it may be demonstrated that
the proportion of OQ to OP, that is, of BC to BO, is triplicate to that of OQ
to OI, and therefore that the Figure BIIDC is triple to its Complement BIIDA,
and consequently of the whole Parallelogram, etc.

Secondly, such three-sided figures as are in any of the transverse rows, may
be thus described. Let ABCD (in the 3d. Figure) be a Parallelogram, whose
Diagonal is BD. I would describe in it such figures, as in the preceding Table
I call Three-sided Figures of three Means. Parallel to DC, I draw OF as often
as is necessary, cutting BD in G; and between OF and EG I take three
proportionals EH, EI and EK. If now there be drawn lines through all the points
H, I and K; that through all the points H will make the figure BHDC, which is
the first of those three-sided figures; and that through all the points I, will
make the figure BIDC, which is the second; and that which is drawn through all
the points K, will make the figure BKDC the third of those three-sided figures.
The first of these (seeing the proportion of OF to EC is quadruplicate of that
of OF to EH) will be to its Complement as 4 to 1, and to the Parallelogram as 4
to 5. The second (seeing the proportion of OF to EG is to that of OF to EI as 4
to 2) will be double to its Complement, and 4/6 or of the Parallelogram. The
third (seeing the proportion of OF to EG is to that of OF to EK as 4 to 3) will
be to its Complement as 4 to 3, and to the Parallelogram as 4 to 7.

Any of these, figures being described, may be produced at pleasure, thus; Let
ABCD (in the 4th figure) be a Parallelogram, and in it let the figure BKDC be
described, namely, the third three-sided figure of three Means. Let BD be
produced indefinitely to E, and let OF be made parallel to the base DC, cutting
AD produced in G, and BC produced in F; and in GE let the point H be so taken,
that the proportion of FE to FG may be quadruplicate to that of FE to FH (which
may be done by making FH the greatest of three proportionals between FE and
FG); the crooked line BKD produced, will pass through the point H. For if the
straight line BH be drawn, cutting CD in I, and HL be drawn parallel to GD, and
meeting CD produced in L; it will be as FE to FG, so CL to CI; that is, in
quadruplicate proportion to that of FE to FH, or of CD to CI. Wherefore if the
line BKD be produced according to its generation, it will fall upon the point H.

5 A straight line may be drawn so, as to touch the crooked line of the said
figure in any point, in this manner. Let it be required to draw a Tangent to
the line BKDH (in the 4th figure) in the point D. Let the points B and D be
connected, and drawing DA equal and parallel to BC, let B and A be connected;
and because this figure is by construction the third of three Means, let there
be taken in AB three points, so, that by them the same AB be divided into four
equal parts; of which take three, namely, AM, so that AB may be to AM, as the
figure BKDC is to its Complement. I say the straight line MD, will touch the
figure in the point given D. For let there be drawn any where between AB and DC
a parallel, as RQ, cutting the straight line BD, the crooked line BD, the
straight line MD, and the straight line AD in the points P, K, O and Q. RK will
therefore (by construction) be the least of three Means in Geometrical
proportion between RQ and RP. Wherefore (by the Coroll. of the 28th Article of
the 13th Chapter) RK will be less then TO; and therefore MD will fall without
the figure. Now if MD be produced to N, FN will be the least of three Means in
Arithmetical proportion between FE and FG; and FH will be the greatest of three
Means in Geometrical proportion between the same FE and FG. Wherefore (by the
same Coroll. of the 28 Artic. of the 13th Chap.) FH will be less then FN; and
therefore DN will fall without the figure, and the straight line MN will touch
the same figure only in the point D.

6 The proportion of a Deficient Figure to its Complement being known, it may
also be known what proportion a straightlined triangle has to the excess of the
Deficient Figure above the same triangle; and these proportions I have set down
in the following Table; where if you seek (for example) how much the fourth
three-sided figure of five Means exceeds a triangle of the same altitude and
base, you will find in the concourse of the fourth column with the three-sided
figures of five Means, 2/10; by which is signified, that that three-sided
figure exceeds the triangle by two tenths, or by one fifth part of the same
triangle.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 The Triangle............ 1 The Excess of a Three-sided figure of
one Mean The Excess of a Three-sided figure of 2 Means 2/4 The Excess of a
Three-sided figure of 3 Means 2/6 1/7 The Excess of a Three-sided figure of 4
Means 4/6 3/7 2/8 1/9 The Excess of a Three-sided figure of 5 Means 5/7 4/8 3/9
2/10 1/11 The Excess of a Three-sided figure of 6 Means 6/8 5/9 4/10 3/11 2/12
1/13 The Excess of a Three-sided figure of 7 Means 7/9 6/10 5/11 4/12 3/13 2/14
1/15

7 In the next Table are set down the proportion of a Cone, and the Solids of
the said three-sided figures, namely, the proportions between them and a
Cylinder. As for example, in the concourse of the second Column with the
three-sided figures of four Means, you have ^/9; which gives you to understand,
that the Solid of the second three-sided figure of four Means is to the
Cylinder as ^/9 to 1, or as 5 to 9,

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 The Cylinder 1 A Cone The Solids of a Three-sided figure of one
Mean 2/4 The Solids of a Three-sided figure of 2 Means 3/7 The Solids of a
Three-sided figure of 3 Means 4/6 4/8 4/10 The Solids of a Three-sided figure
of 4 Means 5/7 5/9 5/11 5/13 The Solids of a Three-sided figure of 5 Means 6/8
6/10 6/12 6/14 6/16 The Solids of a Three-sided figure of 6 Means 7/9 7/11 7/13
7/15 7/17 7/19 The Solids of a Three-sided figure of 7 Means 8/10 8/12 8/14
8/16 8/18 8/20 8/22

8 Lastly, the Excess of the Solids of the said three-sided figures, above a
Cone of the same altitude and base, are set down in the Table which follows

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 The Cone 1 The Excesses of the Solids of these threesided
figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of a three-sided figure of one Mean 6/12 The
Excesses of the Solids of these threesided figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of
a three-sided figure of 2 Means 12/15 6/21 The Excesses of the Solids of these
threesided figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of a three-sided figure of 3 Means
18/18 12/24 6/30 The Excesses of the Solids of these threesided figures above a
C n^ Of the Solid of a three-sided figure of 4 Means 24/21 18/27 12/33 6/39 The
Excesses of the Solids of these threesided figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of
a three-sided figure of 5 Means 30/24 24/30 18/36 12/42 6/48 The Excesses of
the Solids of these threesided figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of a
three-sided figure of 6 Means 36/27 30/33 24/39 18/45 12/51 6/57 The Excesses
of the Solids of these threesided figures above a C n^ Of the Solid of a
three-sided figure of ^ Means 42/30 36/36 20/42 24/48 18/54 12/60 6/66

9 If any of these Deficient Figures, of which I have now spoken, as A B C D
(in the 5th figure) be inscribed within the Complete figure B E, having A D C E
for its Complement; and there be made upon C B produced, the triangle A B I;
and the Parallelogram A B I K be completed; and there be drawn parallel to the
straight line C I, any number of lines as M F, cutting every one of them the
crooked line of the Deficient Figure in D, and the straight lines A C, A B and
A I in H, G and L; and as G F is to G D, so G L be made to another G N; and
through all the points N there be drawn the line A N I, there will be a
Deficient Figure A N I B, whose Complement will be A N I K. I say the figure A
N I B is to the triangle A B I, as the Deficient Figure A B C D twice taken, is
to the same Deficient Figure together with the Complete figure B E.

For as the proportion of A B to A G, that is, of G M to G L, is to the
proportion of G M to G N; so is the magnitude of the figure A N I B, to that of
its Complement A N I K (by the 2d. Art. of this Chapter.)

But (by the same Article), As the proportion of A B to A G, that is, of G M to
G L, is to the proportion of G F to G D, that is, (by construction) of G L to G
N; so is the figure A B C D to its Complement A D C E.

And by Composition, As the proportion of G M to G L, together with that of G L
to G N, is to the proportion of G M to G L; so is the complete figure B E, to
the Deficient Figure A B C D.

And by Conversion, As the proportion of G M to G L, is to both the proportions
of G M to G L and of G L to G N, that is, to the proportion of G M to G N
(which is the proportion compounded of both); so is the Deficient Figure A B C
D, to the complete Figure B E.

But it was, As the proportion of G M to G L, to that of G M to G N; so the
figure A N I B to its Complement A N I K. And therefore, A B C D. B E:: A N I
B. A N I K are proportionals. And by Composition, A B C D+B E. A B C D:: B K. A
N I B are proportionals.

And by doubling the Consequents A B C D+B E. 2 A B C D:: B K. 2 A N I B are
proportionals.

And by taking the halfes of the third and the fourth A B C D+B E. 2 A B C D::
A B I. A N I B are also proportionals; which was to be proved.

10 From what has been said of Deficient Figures described in a Parallelogram,
may be found out what proportions Spaces transmitted with accelerated Motion in
determined times, have to the times themselves, according as the moved Body is
accelerated in the several times with one or more degrees of Velocity.

For, let the Parallelogram A B C D (in the 6th figure) and in it the
three-sided figure D E B C be described; and let F G be drawn any where
parallel to the base, cutting the Diagonal B D in H, and the crooked line B E D
in E; and let the proportion of B C to B F be (for example) triplicate to that
of F G to F E; whereupon the figure D E B C will be triple to its Complement B
E D A; and in like manner, I F being drawn parallel to B C, the three-sided
figure E K B F will be triple to its Complement B K E I. Wherefore, the parts
of the Deficient Figure cut off from the Vertex by straight lines parallel to
the base, namely D E B C and E K B F, will be to one another as the
Parallelograms A C and I F; that is, in proportion compounded of the
proportions of the altitudes and bases. Seeing therefore the proportion of the
altitude B C to the altitude B F is triplicate to the proportion of the base D
C to the base F E, the figure D E B C to the figure E K B F will be
quadruplicate to the proportion of the same D C to F E. And by the same method,
may be found out, what proportion any of the said three-sided figures, has to
any part of the same cut off from the Vertex by a straight line parallel to the
base.

Now as the said figures are understood to be described by the continual
decreasing of the base, as of C D (for example) till it end in a point, as in
B; so also they may be understood to be described by the continual increasing
of a point, as of B, till it acquire any magnitude, as that of C D.

Suppose now the figure B E D C to be described by the increasing of the point
B to the magnitude C D. Seeing therefore the propor ion of B C to B F is
triplicate to that of C D to F E, the proportion of F E to C D will by
Conversion (as I shall presently demonstrate) be triplicate to that B F to B C.
Wherefore, if the straight line B C be taken for the measure of the time in
which the point B is moved, the Figure E K B F will represent the Sum of all
the increasing Velocities in the time B F; and the figure D E B C will in like
manner represent the Sum of all the increasing Velocities in the time B C.
Seeing therefore the proportion of the figure E K B F to the figure D E B C, is
compounded of the proportions of altitude to altitude, and base to base; and
seeing the proportion of F E to C D is triplicate to that of B F to B C; the
proportion of the figure E K B F to the figure D E B C, will be quadruplicate
to that of B F to B C; that is, the proportion of the Sum of the Velocities in
the time B F, to the Sum of the Velocities in the time B C will be quadruplicate
to the proportion of B F to B C. Wherefore if a Body be moved from B with
Velocity so increasing, that the Velocity acquired in the time B F, be to the
Velocity acquired in the time B C in triplicate proportion to that of the times
themselves B F to B C, and the Body be carried to F in the time B F; the same
Body in the time B C will be carried through a line equal to the fifth
proportional from B F in the continual proportion of B F to B C. And by the
same manner of working, we may determine, what Spaces are transmitted by
Velocities increasing according to any other proportions.

It remains, that I demonstrate the proportion of F E to C D, to be triplicate
to that of B F to B C. Seeing therefore the proportion of C D, that is of F G
to F E is subtriplicate to that of B C to B F; the proportion of F G to F E
will also be subtriplicate to that of F G to F H. Wherefore the proportion of F
G to F H is triplicate to that of F G, that is, of C D to F E. But in four
continual proportionals, of which the least is the first, the proportion of the
first to the fourth (by the 16 Art. of the 13 Chap.) is subtriplicate to the
proportion of the third to the same fourh. Wherefore the proportion of F H to G
F is subtriplicate to that of F E to C D; and therefore the proportion of F E
to C D is triplicate to that of F H to F G, that is, of B F to B C, which was
to be proved.

It may from hence be collected, that when the Velocity of a Body, is increased
in the same proportion with that of the times, the degrees of Velocity above
one another proceed as numbers do in immediate succession from Unity, namely,
as 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. And when the Velocity is increased in proportion duplicate
to that of the times, the degrees proceed as numbers from Unity skipping One,
as 1, 3, 5, 7, etc. Lastly, when the proportions of the Velocities are
triplicate to those of the times, the progression of the degrees is as that of
numbers from Unity skipping Two in every place, as 1, 4, 7, 10, etc. and so of
other proportions. For Geometrical proportionals, when they are taken in every
point, are the same with Arithmetical proportionals.

11 Moreover, it is to be noted, that as in quantities which are made by any
magnitudes decreasing, the proportions of the figures to one another, are as
the proportions of the altitudes to those of the bases; so also it is in those
which are made with motion decreasing, which motion is nothing else but that
power by which the described figures are greater or less. And therefore in the
description of Archimedes his Spiral, which is done by the continual diminution
of the Semidiameter of a Circle in the same proportion in which the
Circumference is diminished, the Space which is contained within the
Semidiameter and the Spiral Line, is a third part of the whole Circle. For the
Semidiameters of Circles, in as much as Circles are understood to be made up of
the aggregate of them, are so many Sectors; and therefore in the description of
a Spiral, the Sector which describes it, is diminished in duplicate proportions
to the diminutions of the Circumference of the Circle in which it is inscribed;
so that the Complement of the Spiral (that is, that space in the Circle which
is without the Spiral Line,) is double to the space within the Spiral Line. In
the same manner, if there be taken a mean proportional every where between the
Semidiameter of the Circle which contains the Spiral, and that part of the
Semidiameter which is within the same, there will be made another figure, which
will be half the Circle. And to conclude, this Rule serves for all such Spaces
as may be described by a Line or Superficies decreasing either in magnitude or
power; so that if the proportions in which they decrease, be commensurable to
the proportions of the times in which they decrease, the magnitudes of the
figures they describe will be known.

12 The truth of that proposition which I demonstrated in the second Article
(which is the foundation of all that has been said concerning Deficient
Figures) may be derived from the Elements of Philosophy, as having i^^ original
in this; That all equality and inequality between two effects, (that is, all
Proportion) proceeds from, and is determined by the equal and unequal causes of
those effects, or from the proportion which the causes concurring to one
effect, have to the causes which concur to the producing of the other effect;
and that therefore the proportions of Quantities are the same with the
proportions of their causes. Seeing therefore two Deficient Figures (of which
one is the Complement of the other) are made, one by motion decreasing in a
certain time and proportion, the other by the loss of Motion in the same time,
the causes which make and determine the quantities of both the figures, so,
that they can be no other then they are, differ only in this, that the
proportions by which the quantity which generates the figure proceeds in
describing of the same, (that is, the proportions of the remainders of all the
times and altitudes) may be other proportions then those by which the same
generating quantity decreases in making the Complement of that Figure, (that
is, the proportions of the quantity which generates the Figure continually
diminished.) Wherefore, as the proportions of the quantity in which Motion is
lost, is to that of the decreasing quantities by which the Deficient Figure is
generated, so will the Defect or Complement be to the Figure it self which is
generated.

13 There are also other quantities which are determinable from the knowledge
of their causes, namely, from the comparison of the Motions by which they are
made, and that more easily then from the common Elements of Geometry. For
example, That the Superficies of any portion of a Sphere, is equal to that
Circle, whose Radius is a straight Line drawn from the Pole of the portion to
the Circumference of its base, I may demonstrate in this manner. Let B A C (in
the 7 Figure) be a portion of a Sphere, whose Axis is A E, and whose base is B
C; and let A B be the straight line drawn from the Pole A to the base in B; and
let A D, equal to A B, touch the great Circle B A C in the Pole A. It is to be
proved that the Circle made by the Radius A D, is equal to the Superficies of
the portion B A C. Let the plain A E B D be understood to make a revolution
about the Axis A E; and it is manifest that by the straight line A D a Circle
will be described; and by the arch A B the Superficies of a portion of a
Sphere, and lastly, by the Subtense A B the Superficies of a right Cone. Now
seeing both the straight line A B, and the arch A B make one and the same
revolution, and both of them have the same extreme points A and B, the cause
why the the Spherical Superficies which is made by the arch, is greater then
the Conical Superficies which is made by the Subtense, is, that A B the arch,
is greater then A B the Subtense; and the cause why it is greater consists in
this, that although they be both drawn from A to B, yet the Subtense is drawn
straight, but the arch angularly, namely according to that angle which the arch
makes with the Subtense, which angle is equal to the angle D A B (for an angle
of contingence adds nothing to an angle of a Segment, as has been shown in the
14 Chapter at the 16th Article.) Wherefore the magnitude of the angle D A B is
the cause why the Superficies of the portion described by the arch A B, is
greater then the Superficies of the right Cone described by the Subtense A B.

Again, the cause why the Circle described by the Tangent A D is greater then
the Superficies of the right Cone described by the Subtense A B (notwitstanding
that the Tangent and the Subtense are equal, and both moved round in the same
time) is this, that A D stands at right angles to the Axis, but A B obliquely;
which obliquity consists in the same angle D A B. Seeing therefore the quantity
of the angle D A B is that which makes the excess both of the Superficies of
the Portion, and of the Circle made by the Radius A D, above the superficies of
the Right Cone described by the subtense A B; it follows, that both the
Superficies of the Portion, and that of the Circle, do equally exceed the
Superficies of the Cone. Wherefore, the Circle made by A D, or A B, and the
Spherical Superficies made by the arch A B, are equal to one another; which was
to be proved.

^4 If these Deficient Figures which I have described in a (...), were capable
of exact description, then any number of mean proportionals might be found out
between two straight lines given. For example, in the Parallelogram A B C D,
(in the 8th. Figure) let the three-sided figure of two Means be described,
(which many call a Cubical Parabola); and let R and S be two given straight
lines; between which, if it be required to find two mean proportionals, it may
be done thus. Let it be as R to S, so B C to B F; and let F E be drawn parallel
to B A, and cut the crooked line in E; then through E let G H be drawn parallel
and equal to the straight line A D, and cut the Diagonal B D in I; for thus we
have G I the greatest of two Means between G H and G E, as appears by the
description of the figure in the 4th Article. Wherefore if it be as G H to G I,
so R to another line T, that T will be the greatest of two Means between R and
S. And therefore if it be again as R to T, so T to another line X, that will be
done which was required.

In the same manner, four mean proportionals may be found out, by the
description of a three-sided figure of four Means; and so, any other number of
Means, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Equation of Straight Lines with the Crooked Lines of
Parabolas and other Figures made in imitation of Parabolas.
1 To find a straight Line equal to the crooked Line of a Semiparabola. 2 To
find a straight Line equal to the Crooked Line of the first Semiparabolaster,
or to the Crooked Line of any other of the Deficient Figures of the Table of
the 3d. Article of the pr^^edent Chapter.
1 AParabola being given, to find a Straight Line equal to the Crooked Line of
the Semiparabola.

Let the Parabolical Line given be ABC (in the first Figure), and the Diameter
found be AD, and the base drawn DC, and the Parallelogram ADCE being completed,
draw the straight Line AC. Then dividing AD into two equal parts in F, draw FH
equal and parallel to DC, cutting AC in K, and the parabolical line in O; and
between FH and FO take a mean proportional FP, and draw AO, AP and PC. I say
that the two Lines AP and PC taken together as one Line, is equal to the
parabolical line ABOC.

For the line ABOC being a parabolical line, is generated by the concourse of
two Motions, one Uniform from A to E, the other in the same time uniformly
accelerated from rest in A to D. And because the motion from A to E is uniform,
AE may represent the times of both those motions from the beginning to the end.
Let therefore AE be the time; and consequently the lines ordinately applied in
the Semiparabola, will design the parts of time wherein the Body that
describes the line ABOC is in every point of the same; so that as at the end
of the time AE or DC it is in C, so at the end of the time FO it will be in O.
And because the Velocity in AD is increased uniformly, that is, in the same
proportion with the time, the same lines ordinately applied in the Semiparabola
will design also the continual augmentations of the Impetus, till it be at the
greatest, designed by the base DC. Therefore supposing Uniform motion in the
line AF, in the time FK the Body in A by the concourse of the two uniform
motions in AF and FK will be moved uniformly in the line AK; and KO will be the
increase of the Impetus or Swiftness gained in the time FK; and the line AO
will be uniformly described by the concourse of the two uniform motions in AF
and FO in the time FO. From O draw OL parallel to EC, cutting AC in L; and draw
LN parallel to DC, cutting EC in N, and the parabolical line in M; and produce
it on the other side to AD in I; and IN, IM and IL will be (by the construction
of a Parabola) in continual proportion, and equal to the three lines FH, FP and
FO; and a straight line parallel to EC passing through M will fall on P; and
therefore OP will be the increase of Impetus gained in the time FO or IL.
Lastly, produce PM to CD in Q; and QC, or MN, or PH will be the increase of
Impetus proportional to the time FP, or IM, or DQ. Suppose now uniform motion
from H to C in the time PH. Seeing therefore in the time FP with uniform motion
and the Impetus increased in proportion to the times, is described the straight
line AP; and in the rest of the time and Impetus, namely PH, is described the
line CP uniformly; it follows that the whole line APC is described with the
whole Impetus, and in the same time wherewith is described the parabolicall
line ABC; and therefore the line APC, made of the two straight lines AP and PC,
is equal to the parabolical line ABC; which was to be proved.

2 To find a Straight line equal to the Crooked line of the first
Semiparabolaster.

Let ABC be the Crooked line of the first Semiparabolaster; AD the Diameter; DC
the Base; and let the Parallelogram completed be ADCE, whose Diagonal is AC.
Divide the Diameter into two equal parts in F, and draw FH equal and parallel
to DC, ^utting AC in K, the Crooked line in O, and EC in H. Then draw OL
parallel to EC, cutting AC in L; and draw LN parallel to the base DC, cutting
the Crooked line in M, and the straight line EC in N; and produce it on the
other side to AD in I. Lastly, through the point M draw PMQ parallel and equal
to HC, cutting FH in P; and join CP, AP and AO. I say the two Straight lines AP
and PC are equal to the Crooked line ABOC.

For the line ABOC being the Crooked line of the first Semiparabolaster, is
generated by the concourse of two Motions, one uniform from A to E, the other
in the same time accelerated from rest in A to D, so as that the Impetus
increases in proportion perpetually triplicate to that of the increase of the
time, or (which is all one) the lengths transmitted are in proportion
triplicate to that of the times of their transmission; for as the Impetus or
Quicknesses increase, so the Lengths transmitted increase also. And because the
motion from A to E is uniform, the line AE may serve to represent the time, and
consequently the lines ordinately drawn in the Semiparabolaster, will design
the parts of time wherein the Body beginning from rest in A, describes by its
motion the Crooked line ABOC. And because DC which represents the greatest
acquired Impetus is equal to AE, the same ordinate lines will represent the
several augmentations of the Impetus increasing from rest in A. Therefore
supposing uniform Motion from A to F in the time FK, there will be described by
the concourse of the two uniform Motions AF and FK the line AK uniformly, and
KO will be the increase of Impetus in the time FK; And by the concourse of the
two uniform Motions in AF and FO, will be described the line AO uniformly.
Through the point L draw the straight line LMN parallel to DC, cutting the
straight line AD in I, the crooked line ABC in M, and the straight line EC in
N; and through the point M the straight line PMQ parallel and equal to HC,
cutting DC in Q, and FH in P. By the concourse therefore of the two uniform
Motions in AF and FP in the time FP will be uniformly described the straight
line AP; and LM or OP will be the increase of Impetus to be added for the time
FO. And because the proportion if IN to I L is triplicate to the proportion of
I N to I M, the proportion of F H to F O will also be triplicate to the
proportion of F H to F P; and the proportional Impetus gained in the time F P
is P H. So that F H being equal to P C which designed the whole Impetus
acquired by the acceleration, there is no more increase of Impetus to be
computed. Now in the time P H suppose an uniform motion from H to C; and by the
two uniform motions in C H and H P will be described uniformly the Straight
line P C. Seeing therefore the two Straight lines A P and P C are described in
the time A E with the same increase of Impetus wherewith the Crooked line A B C
is described in the same time A E, that is, seeing the Line A P C and the Line
A B C are transmitted by the same Body in the same Time, and with equal
Velocities, the Lines themselves are equal; which was to be demonstrated.

By the same method, if any of the Semiparabolasters in the Table of the 3d
Article of the precedent Chapter be exhibited, may be found a Straight line
equal to the Crooked line thereof, namely, by dividing the Diameter into two
equal parts, and proceeding as before. Yet no man hitherto has compared any
Crooked with any Straight Line, though many Geometricians of every Age have
endeavored it. But the cause why they have not done it may be this, that there
being in Euclide no Definition of Equality, nor any mark by which to judge of
it besides Congruity (which is the 8th. Axiom of the first Book of his
Elements) a thing of no use at all in the comparing of Straight and Crooked;
and others after Euclide (except Archimedes and Apollonius, and in our time
Bo^a^entura) thinking the industry of the Ancients had reached to all that was
to be done in Geometry, thought also, that all that could be propounded, was
either to be deduced from what they had written, or else that it was not at all
to be done. It was therefore disputed by some of those Ancients themselves,
whether there might be any Equality at all between Crooked and Straight Lines;
Which question Archimedes (who assumed that some Straight line^ was equal to
the Circumference of a Circle) seems to have despised, as he had reason. And
there is a late Writer that grants that between a Straight and a Crooked Line
there is Equality; but now, now says he, since the fall of Adam, without the
special assistance of Divine Grace, it is not to be found*

CHAP. XIX. Of Angles of Incidence and Reflection, equal by supposition.
1 If two straight lines falling upon another straight line be parallel, the
lines reflected from them shall also be parallel. 2 If two straight lines drawn
from one point, fall upon another straight line, the lines reflected from them,
if they be drawn out the other way, will me^t in an angle equal to the angle
made by the lines of Incidence. 3 If two straight parallel lines drawn (not
oppositely but) from the same parts, fall upon the Circumference of a Circle,
the lines reflected from them, if produced they meet within the Circle, will
make an angle double, to that which is made by two straight lines drawn from
the Center to the points of Incidence. 4 If two straight lines drawn from the
same point without a Circle fall upon the Circumference, and the lines
reflected from them, being produced meet within the Circle, they will make an
angle equal to twice that angle which is made by two straight lines drawn from
the Center to the points of Incidence, together with the angle which the
incident lines themselves make. 5 If two straight lines drawn from one point
fall upon the concave Circumference of a Circle, and the angle they make be
less then twice the angle at the Center, the lines reflected from them, and
meeting within the Circle, will make an angle which being added to the angle of
the incident lines, will be equal to twice the angle at the Center. 6 If
through any one point two unequal Chords be drawn cutting one another, and the
Center of the Circle be not placed between them, and the lines reflected from
them concur wheresoever, there cannot through the point through which the two
former lines were drawn, be drawn any other straight line, whose reflected line
shall pass through the common point of the two former lines reflected. 7 In
equal Chords the same is not true. 8 Two points being given in the
Circumference of a Circle, to draw two straight lines to them, so as that their
reflected lines may contain any angle given. 9 If a straight line falling upon
the Circumference of a Circle be produced till it reach the Semidiameter, and
that part of it which is intercepted between the Circumference and the
Semidiameter, be equal to that part of the Semidiameter which is between the
point of concourse and the center, the reflected line will be parallel to the
Semidiameter. 10 If from a point within a Circle, two straight lines be drawn
to the Circumference, and their reflected lines meet in the Circumference of
the same Circle, the angle made by the reflected lines, will be a third part of
the angle made by the incident lines.
WHether a Body, falling upon the superficies of another Body and being
reflected from it, do make equal angles at that superficies, it belongs not to
this place to dispute, being a knowledge which depends upon the natural causes
of Reflection; of which hitherto nothing has been said, but shall be spoken of
hereafter.

In this place therefore let it be supposed, that the angle of Incidence is
equal to the angle of Reflection, that our present search may be applied not to
the finding out of the causes, but some consequences of the same.

I call an Angle of Incidence, that which is made between a straight line and
another line (straight or crooked) upon which it falls, and which I call the
Line Reflecting; and an Angle of Reflection equal to it, that which is made at
the same point between the straight line which is reflected, and the line
reflecting.

1 If two straight lines which fall upon another straight line be be parallel,
their reflected lines shall be also parallel.

Let the two straight lines AB and CD (in the 1 figure) which fall upon the
straight line OF, at the points B and D, be parallel; and let the lines
reflected from them be BG and DH. I say BG and DH are also parallel.

For the angles ABE and CDE are equal by reason of the parallellelisme of AB
and CD; and the angles GBF and HDF are equal to them by supposition; for the
lines BG and DH are reflected from the lines AB and CD. Wherefore BG and DH are
parallel.

2 If two straight lines drawn from the same point, fall upon another straight
line, the lines reflected from them, if they be drawn out the other way, will
meet in an angle equal to the angle of the Incident lines.

From the point AC (in the 2d. figure) let the two straight lines AB and AD be
drawn; and let them fall upon the straight line EK at the points B and D; and
let the lines BY and DG be reflected from them. I say, IB and GD do converge,
and that if they be produced on the other side of the line EK they shall meet,
as in F; and that the angle BFD shall be equal to the angle BAD.

For the angle of Reflection IBK is equal to the angle of Incidence ABE; and to
the angle IBK, its vertical angle EBF is equal; and therefore the angle ABE is
equal to the angle EBF. Again the angle ADE is equal to the angle of Reflection
GDK, that is, to its vertical angle EDF; and therefore the two angles ABD and
ADB of the triangle ABD, are one by one equal to the two angles FBD and FDB of
the triangle FBD; Wherefore also the third angle BAD is equal to the third angle
BFD, which was to be proved.

Corollary 1. If the straight line AF be drawn, it will be perpendicular to the
straight line EK. For both the angles at E will be equal, by reason of the
equality of the two angles ABE and FBE, and of the two sides AB and FB.
Corollary 2. If upon any point between B and D there fall a straight line, as
AC, whose reflected line is CH, this also produced beyond C, will fall upon F;
which is evident by the demonstration above.
3 If from two points taken without a Circle, two straight parallel lines drawn
(not oppositely but) from the same parts, fall upon the Circumference; the
lines reflected from them, if produced they meet within the Circle, will make
an angle double to that which is made by two straight lines drawn from the
Center to the points of Incidence.

Let the two straight parallels AB and DC (in the 3d figure) fall upon the
Circumference BC at the points B and C; and let the Center of the Circle be E;
and let AB reflected be BF, and DC reflected be CG; and let the lines FB and GC
produced meet within the Circle in H; and let EB and EC be connected. I say the
angle FHG is double to the angle BEC.

For seeing AB and DC are parallels, and EB cuts AB in B, the same EB produced
will cut DC somewhere; let it cut it in D, and let DC be produced howsoever to
I, and let the intersection of DC and BF be at K. The angle therefore ICH
(being external to the triangle CKH,) will be equal to the two opposite angles
CKH and CHK. Again, ICE (being external to the triangle CDE) is equal to the
two angles at D and E. Wherefore the angle ICH, being double to the angle ICE,
is equal to the angles at D and E twice taken; and therefore the two angles CKH
and CHK are equal to the two angles at D and E twice taken. But the angle CKH
is equal to the angles D and ABD, that is, D twice taken, (for AB and DC being
parallels, the altern angles D, and ABD are equal). Wherefore CHK, that is the
angle, FHG is also equal to the angle at E twice taken; which was to be proved.

Corollary. If from two points taken within a circle, two straight parallels
fall upon the circumference, the lines reflected from them shall meet in an
angle, double to that which is made by two straight lines drawn from the center
to the points of Incidence. For the parallels LB and IC falling upon the points
B and C, are reflected in the lines BH and CH, and make the angle at H double
to the angle at E, as was but now demonstrated-

4 If two straight lines drawn from the same point without a circle, fall upon
the circumference, and the lines reflected from them being produced meet within
the circle, they will make an angle equal to twice that angle which is made by
two straight lines drawn from the center to the points of Incidence together
with the angle which the incident lines themselves make.

Let the two straight lines AB and AC (in the 4th figure) be drawn from the
point A to the circumference of the circle, whose center is D; and let the
lines reflected from them be BE and CG, and being produced make within the
circle the angle H; also let the two straight lines DB and DC be drawn from the
center D to the points of Incidence B and C. I say the angle H is equal to
twice the angle at D together with the angle at A.

For let AC be produced howsoever to I. Therefore the angle CH (which is
external to the triangle CKH) will be equal to the two angles GKH and CHK.
Again, the angle ICD (which is external to the triangle CLD) will be equal to
the two angles CLD and CDL. But the angle ICH is double to the angle ICD, and
is therefore equal to the angles CLD and CDL twice taken. Wherefore the angles
CKH and CHK are equal to the angles CLD and CDL twice taken. But the angle CLD
(being external to the triangle ALB) is equal to the two angles LAB and LBA;
and consequently CLD twice taken is equal to LAB and LAB twice taken. Wherefore
CKH and CHK are equal to the angle CDL together with LAB and LBA twice taken.
Also the angle CKH is equal to the angle LAB once, and ABK, that is, LBA twice
taken. Wherefore the Angle CHK is equal to the remaining angle CDL (that is, to
the angle at D) twice taken, and the angle LAB (that is, the angle at A) once
taken; which was to be proved.

Corollary. If two straight converging lines, as IC and MB fall upon the
concave circumference of a circle, their reflected lines, as CH and BH, will
meet in the angle H, equal to twice the angle D, together with the angle at A
made by the ^ncident lines produced. Or, if the Incident lines be HB and IC,
whose reflected lines CH and BM meet in the point N, the angle CNB will be
equal to twice the angle D, together with the angle CKH made by the lines of
Incidence. For the angle CNB is equal to the angle H (that is, to twice the
angle D) together with the two angles A and NBH (that is KBA). But the angles
KBA and A are equal to the angle CKH. Wherefore the angle CNB is equal to twice
the angle D, together with the angle CKH made by the lines of Incidence IC and
HB produced to K.

5 If two straight lines drawn from one point, fall upon the concave
circumference of a circle, and the angle they make be less then twice the
angle at the center; the lines reflected from them, and meeting within the
circle, will make an angle, which being added to the angle of the incident
lines, will be equal to twice the angle at the center.

Let the two Lines AB and AC (in the 5th figure) drawn from the point A, fall
upon the concave circumference of the circle whose center is D; and let their
reflected Lines BE and CE meet in the point E; also let the angle A be less
then twice the angle D. I say the angles A and E together taken are equal to
twice the angle D.

For let the straight Lines AB and EC cut the straight Lines DC and DB in the
points G and H; and the angle BHC will be equal to the two angles EBH and E;
also the same angle BHC will be equal to the two angles D and DCH; and in like
manner the angle BGC will be equal to the two angles ACD and A, and the same
angle BGC will be also equal to the two angles DBG and D. Wherefore the four
angles EBH, E, ACD and A are equal to the four angles D, DCH, DBG and D. If
therefore equals be taken away on both sides, namely, on one side ACD and EBH,
and on the other side DCH and DBG (for the angle EBH is equal to the angle DBG,
and the angle ACD equal to the angle DCH) the remainders on both sides will be
equal, namely, on one side the angles A and E, and on the other the angle D
twice taken. Wherefore the angles A and E are equal to twice the angle D.

Corollary. If the angle A be greater then twice the angle D, their reflected
^^ines will diverge. For, by the Corollary of the third Proposition, if the
angle A be equal to twice the angle D, the reflected Lines BE and CE will be
parallel; and if it be less, they will concur, as has now been demonstrated;
and therefore if it be greater, the reflected Lines BE and CE will diverge, and
consequently, if they be produced the other way, they will concur, and make
an angle equal to the excess of the angle A above twice the angle D; as is
evident by the fourth Article.

6 If through any one point, two unequal chords be drawn, cutting one another,
either within the circle, or (if they be produced) without it, and the center
of the circle be not placed between them, and the Lines reflected from them
concur wheresoever; there cannot through the point through which the former
Lines were drawn, be drawn another straight Line, whose reflected Line shall
pass through the point where the two former reflected Lines concur.

Let any two unequal chords, as BK and CH (in the 6th Figure) be drawn through
the point A in the circle BC; and let their reflected Lines BD and CE meet in
F; and let the center not be between AB and AC; and from the point A let any
other straight Line as AG be drawn to the circumference between B and C. I say
GN, which passes through the point F, where the reflected Lines BD and CE meet,
will not be the reflected Line of AG.

For let the arch BL be taken equal to the arch BG, and the straight Line BM
equal to the straight Line BA; and LM being drawn, let it be produced to the
circu^mference in O. Seeing therefore BA and BM are equal, and the arch BL
equal to the arch BG, and the angle MBL equal to the angle ABG, AG and ML will
also be equal, and (producing GA to the circumference in I) the whole lines LO
and GI will in like manner be equal. But LO is greater then GFN (as shall
presently be demonstrated) and therefore also GI is greater then GN. Wherefore
the angles NGC and IGB are not equal. Wherefore the Line GFN is not reflected
from the Line of Incidence AG, and consequently no other straight Line (besides
AB and AC) which is drawn through the point A, and fa^ls upon the circumference
BC, can be reflected to the point F, which was to be demonstrated.

It remains that I prove LO to be greater then GN; which I shall do in this
manner. LO and GN cut one another in P; and PL is greater then PG. Seeing now
LP. PG:: PN. PO are proportionals, therefore the two Extremes LP and PO
together taken, (that is LO), are greater then PG and PN together taken, (that
is, GN,) which remained to be proved.

7 But if two equal chords be drawn through one point within a circle, and the
Lines reflected from them meet in another point, then another straight Line may
be drawn between them through the former point, whose reflected Line shall pass
through the later point.

Let the two equal chords BC and ED (in the 7th figure) cut one another in the
point A within the circle BCD; and let their reflected Lines CH and DI meet in
the point F. Then dividing the arch CD equally in G, let the two chords GK and
GL be drawn through the points A and F. I say GL will be the Line reflected
from the chord KG. For the four chords BC, CH, ED and DI, are by supposition
all equal to one another; and therefore the arch BCH is equal to the arch EDI;
as also the angle BCH to the angle EDI; and the angle AMC to its vertical angle
FMD; and the straight Line DM to the straight Line CM; and in like manner, the
straight Line AC to the straight Line FD; and the chords CG and GD being drawn,
will also be equal; as also the angles FDG and ACG, in the equal Segments GDI
and GCB. Wherefore the straight Lines FG and AG are equal; and therefore the
angle FGD is equal to the angle AGC, that is, the angle of Incidence equal to
the angle of Reflection. Wherefore the line GL is reflected from the incident
Line KG; which was to be proved.

Corollary. By the very sight of the figure, it is manifest, that if G be not
the middle point between C and D, the reflected Line GL will not pass through
the point F.

8 Two points in the circumference of a circle being given, to draw two
straight Lines to them, so as that their reflected Lines may be parallel, or
contain any angle given.

In the circumference of the circle whose center is A (in the 8th. figure) let
the two points B and C be given; and let it be required to draw to them from
two points taken without the circle, two incident Lines, so, that their
reflected Lines may (first) be parallel.

Let AB and AC be drawn; as also any incident Line DC, with its reflected Line
CF; and let the angle ECD be made double to the angle A; and let HB be drawn
parallel to EC, and produced till it meet with DC produced in I. Lastly,
producing AB indefinitely to K, let GB be drawn, so, that the angle GBK may be
equal to the angle HBK, and then GB will be the reflected Line of the incident
Line HB. I say DC and HB are two incident Lines, whose reflected Lines CF and
BG are parallel.

For seeing the angle ECD is double to the angle BAC, the angle HIC is also (by
reason of the parallels EC and HI) double to the same BAC; Therefore also FC
and GB (namely the lines reflected from the incident lines DC and HB are
parallel. Wherefore the first thing required, is done.

Secondly, let it be required to draw to the points B and C two straight lines
of Incidence, so, that the lines reflected from them may contain the given
angle Z.

To the angle ECD made at the point C, let there be added on one side the angle
DCL equal to half Z, and on the other side the angle ECM equal to the angle
DCL; and let the straight Line BN be drawn parallel to the straight line CM;
and let the angle KBO be made equal to the angle NBK; which being done, BO will
be the Line of Reflection from the Line of Incidence NB. Lastly, from the
incident Line LC, let the reflected Line CO be drawn, cutting BO at O, and
making the angle COB. I say the angle COB is equal to the angle Z.

Let NB be produced till it meet with the straight line LC produced in P.
Seeing therefore the angle LCM is by construction equal to twice the angle BAC
together with the angle Z; the angle NPL (which is equal to LCM by reason of
the parallels NP and MC) will also be equal to twice the same angle BAC
together with the angle Z. And seeing the two straight lines OC and OB fall
from the point O upon the points C and B; and their reflected lines LC and NB
meet in the point P; the angle NPL will be equal to twice the angle BAC
together with the angle COP. But I have already proved the angle NPL to be
equal to twice the angle BAC together with the angle Z. Therefore the angle COP
is equal to the angle Z; Wherefore, Two points in the circumference of a Circle
being given, I have drawn, etc. which was to be done.

But if it be required to draw the incident Lines from a point within the
circle, so, that the Lines reflected from them may contain an angle equal to
the angle Z, the same method is to be used, saving that in this case the angle
Z is not to be added to twice the angle BAC, but to be taken from it.

9 If a straight line falling upon the circumference of a circle, be produced
till it reach the Semidiameter, and that part of it which is intercepted
between the circumference and the Semidiameter, be equal to that part of the
Semidiameter which is between the point of concourse and the center, the
reflected Line will be parallel to the Semidiameter.

Let any Line AB (in the 9th figure) be the Semidiameter of the circle whose
center is A; and upon the circumference BD let the straight Line CD fall, and
be produced till it cut AB in E, so, that ED and EA may be equal; and from the
incident Line CD let the Line DF be reflected. I say AB and DF will be parallel.

Let AG be drawn through the point D. Seeing therefore ED and EA are equal, the
angles EDA and EAD will also be equal. But the angles FDG and EDA are equal
(for each of them is half the angle EDH or FDC.) Wherefore the angles FDG and
EAD are equal; and consequently DF and AB are parallel; which was to be proved.

Corollahy. If EA be greater then ED, then DF and AB being produced will
concur; but if EA be less then ED, then BA and DH being produced will
concur.

10 If from a point within a circle, two straight Lines be drawn to the
Circumference, and their reflected Lines meet in the Circumference of the same
circle, the angle made by the Lines of Reflection, will be a third part of the
angle made by the Lines of Incidence.

From the point B (in the 10th figure) taken within the circle whose center is
A, let the two straight lines BC and BD be drawn to the circumference; and let
their reflected Lines CE and DE meet in the circumference of the same circle at
the point E. I say the angle CED will be a third part of the angle CBD.

Let AC and AD be drawn. Seeing therefore the angles CED and CBD together
taken, are equal to twice the angle CAD (as has been demonstrated in the 5th
article); and the angle CAD twice taken is quadruple to the angle CED; the
angles CED and CBD together taken, will also be equal to the angle CED four
times taken; and therefore if the angle CED be taken away on both sides, there
will remain the angle CBD on one side, equal to the angle CED thrice taken on
the other side; which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. Therefore a point being given within a Circle, there may be drawn two
Lines from it to the Circumference, so as their reflected Lines may meet in the
Circumference. For it is but trisecting the Angle CBD; which how it may be
done, shall be shown in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XX. Of the Dimension of a Circle, and the Division of Angles or Arches.
1 The Dimension of a Circle near determined in Numbers by Archimedes and
others. 2 The first attempt for the finding out of the Dimension of a Circle by
Lines. 3 The second attempt for the finding out of the Dimension of a Circle
from the consideration of the nature of Crookedness. 4 The third attempt; and
some things propounded to be further searched into. 5 The Equation of the
Spiral of Archimedes with a straight Line. 6 Of the Analysis of Geometricians
by the Powers of Lines.
1 IN the comparing of an Arch of a Circle with a Straight Line, many and great
Geometricians, even from the most ancient times, have exercised their wits; and
more had done the same, if they had not seen their pains, though undertaken for
the common good, if not brought to perfection, vilified by those that envy the
praises of other men. Amongst those Ancient Writers whose Works are come to our
hands, Archimedes was the first that brought the Length of the Perimeter of a
Circle within the limits of Numbers very little differing from the truth;
demonstrating the same to be less then three Diameters and a seventh part, but
greater then three Diameters and ten seventy one parts of the Diameter. So that
supposing the Radius to consist of 10000000 equal parts, the Arch of a Quadrant
will be between 15714285 and 15 04225 of the same parts. In our times Ludovicus
Van Cullen and Willebrordus Snellius with joint endeavor have come yet nearer
to the truth; and pronounced from true Principles, that the Arch of a Quadrant
(putting, as before 10000000 for Radius) differs not one whole Unity from the
number 15707963; which, if they had exhibited their arithmetical operations
(and no man had discovered any error in that long work of theirs) had been
demonstrated by them. This is the furthest progress that has been made by the
way of Numbers; and they that have proceeded thus far deserve the praise of
Industry. Nevertheless, if we consider the benefit (which is the scope at which
all Speculation should aim) the improvement they have made has been little, or
none. For any ordinary man may much sooner, and more accurately find a Straight
Line equal to the Perimeter of a Circle, and consequently square the Circle, by
winding a small thread about a given Cylinder, then any Geometrician shall do
the same by dividing the Radius into 10000000 equal parts. But though the
length of the Circumference were exactly set out, either by Numbers, or
mechanically, or only by chance, yet this would contribute no help at all
toward the Section of Angles, unless happily these two Problemes, To divide a
given Angle according to any proportion assigned, and To find a Straight Line
equal to the Arch of a Circle, were reciprocal, and followed one another.
Seeing therefore the benefit proceeding from the knowledge of the Length of the
Arch of a Quadrant, consists in this, that we may there by divide an Angle
according to any proportion, either accurately, or at least accurately enough
for common use; and seeing this cannot be done by Arithmetic, I thought fit to
attempt the same by Geometry; and in this Chapter to make trial whether it
might not be performed by the drawing of Straight and Circular Lines.

2 Let the Square A B C D (in the first figure) be described; and with the
Radii A B, B C and D C the three Arches B D, C A and A C; of which let the two
B D and C A cut one another in E, and the two B D and A C in F. The Diagonals
therefore B D and A C being drawn will cut one another in the center of the
Square G, and the two Arches B D and C A into two equal parts in H and Y; and
the Arch B H D will be trisected in F and E. Through the Center G let the two
Straight Lines K G L and M G N be drawn parallel and equal to the sides of the
Square A B and A D, cutting the four sides of the same Square in the points K,
L, M and N; which being done, K L will pass through F, and M N through E. Then
let O P be drawn parallel and equal to the side B C, cutting the Arch B F D in
F, and the sides A B and D C in O and P. Therefore O F will be the Sine of the
arch B F, which is an arch of 30 degrees; and the same O F will be equal to
half the Radius. Lastly, dividing the arch B F in the middle in Q, let R Q the
Sine of the arch B Q be drawn and produced to S* so that Q S be equal to R Q,
and consequently R S be equal to the chord of the arch B F; and let F S be
drawn and produced to T in the side B C. I say, the Straight Line B T is equal
to the Arch B F; and consequently that B V the triple of B T is equal to the
Arch of the Quadrant B F E D.

Let T F be produced till it meet the side B A produced in X; and dividing O F
in the middle in Z, let. Q Z be drawn and produced till it meet with the side B
A produced. Seeing therefore the Straight Lines R S and O F are parallel, and
divided in the midst in Q and Z, Q Z produced will fall upon X, and X Z Q
produced to the side B C will cut B T in the midst in a.

Upon the Straight line F Z the fourth part of the Radius A B let the
equilateral triangle a Z F be constituted; and upon the center a, with the
Radius a Z let the arch Z F be drawn; which arch Z F will therefore be equal to
the arch Q F the half of the arch B F. Again, let the straight line Z O be cut
in the midst in b, and the straight line b O in the midst in c; and let the
bisection be continued in this manner till the last part O c be the least that
can possibly be taken; and upon it, and all the rest of the parts equal to it
into which the straight line O F may be cut, let so many equilateral triangles
be understood to be constituted; of which let the last be d O c. If therefore
upon the center d, with the Radius d O be drawn the arch O c, and upon the rest
of the equal parts of the straight line O F be drawn in like manner so many
equal arches, all those arches together taken will be equal to the whole arch B
F; and the half of them, namely, those that are comprehended between O and Z,
or between Z and F will be equal to the arch B Q or Q F and in sum, what part
soever the straight line O c be of the straight line O F, the same part will
the arch O c be of the arch O F, though both the arch and the chord be
infinitely bisected. Now seeing the arch O c is more crooked then that part of
the arch B F which is equal to it; and seeing also that the more the straight
line X c is produced the more it diverges from the straight line X O, if the
points O and c be understood to be moved forwards with straight motion in X O
and X c, the arch O ^ will thereby be extended by little and little, till at
the last it come some-where ^o have the same crookedness with that part of the
arch B F which is equal to it. In like manner, if the straight line X b be
drawn, and the point b be understood to be moved forwards at the same time, the
arch c b will also by little and little be extended, till its crookedness come
to be equal to the crookedness of that part of the arch B F which is equal to
it. And the same will happen in all those small equal arches which are described
upon so many equal parts of the straight line O F. It is also manifest, that by
straight motion in X O and X Z all those small arches will lie in the arch B F
in the points B, Q and F. And though the same small equal arches should not be
coincident with the equal parts of the arch B F in all the other points
thereof, yet certainly they will constitute two crooked lines, not only equal
to the two arches B Q and Q F and equally crooked, but also having their cavity
toward the same parts; which how it should be, unless all those small arches
should be coincident with the arch B F in all its points, is not imaginable.
They are therefore coincident, and all the straight lines drawn from X and
passing through the points of division of the straight line O F, will also
divide the arch B F into the same proportions into which O F is divided.

Now seeing X b cuts off from the point B the fourth part of the arch B F, let
that fourth part be B e; and let the Sine thereof f e be produced to F T in g,
for so f e will be the fourth part of the straight line f g, because as O b is
to O F, so is f e to f g. But B T is greater then f g; and therefore the same B
T is greater then four Sines of the fourth part of the arch B F. And in like
m^nner, if the arch B F be subdivided into any number of equal par^^
whatsoever, it may be proved that the straight line B T is greater then the
Sine of one of those small arches so many times (...) as ^here be parts made of
the whole arch B F. Wherefore the ^traight line B T is not less then the Arch
B F. But neither can it be greater, because if any straight line whatsoever,
less then B T, be draw^ below B T parallel to it and terminated in the
straight line^ X B and X T, it would cut the arch B F; and so the Sine of some
one of the parts of the arch B F taken so often as that small arch is found in
the whole arch B F, would be greater then so many of the same arches; which is
absurd. Wherefore the Straight line B T is equal to the Arch B F; and the
Straight line B V equal to the Arch of the Quadrant B F D; and B V four times
taken, equal to the Perimeter of the Circle described with the Radius A B. Also
the Arch B F and the Straight line B T are every where divided into the same
proportions; and consequently any given Angle, whether greater or less then B A
F may be divided into any proportion given.

But the straight line B V (though its magnitude fall within the terms assigned
by Archimedes) is found, if computed by the Canon of Sines, to be somewhat
greater then that which is exhibited by the Ludolphine numbers. Nevertheless, if
in the place of B T, another straight line, though never so little less, be
substituted, the division of Angles is immediately lost, as may by any man be
demonstrated by this very Scheme.

Howsoever, if any man think this my Straight line B V to be too great, yet,
seeing the Arch and all the Parallels are every where so exactly divided, and B
V comes so near to the truth, I desire he would seach out the reason, Why
(granting B V to be precisely true) the Arches cut off should not be equal.

But some man may yet ask the reason why the straight lines drawn from X
through the equal parts of the arch B F should cut off in the Tangent B V so
many straight lines equal to them, seeing the connected straight line X V
passes not through the point D, but cuts the straight line A D produced in l;
and consequently require some determination of this Problem. Concerning which,
I will say what I think to be the reason, namely, that whilst the magnitude of
the Arch does not exceed the magnitude of the Radius, that is, the magnitude of
the Tangent B C, both the Arch and the Tangent are cut alike by the straight
lines drawn from X; otherwise not. For A V being connected, cutting the arch B
H D in I, if X C being drawn should cut the same arch in the same point I, it
would be as true that the Arch B I is equal to the Radius B C, as it is true
that the Arch B F is equal to the straight line B T, and drawing X K it would
cut the arch B I in the midst in i; Also drawing A i and producing it to the
Tangent B C in k, the straight line B k will be the Tangent of the arch B i,
(which arch is equal to half the Radius) and the same straight line B k will be
equal to the straight line k I. I say all this is true, if the preceding
demonstration be true; and consequently the proportional section of the Arch
and its Tangent proceeds hitherto. But it is manifest by the Golden Rule, that
taking B h double to B T, the line X h shall not cut off the arch B E which is
double to the arch B F, but a much greater. For the magnitude of the straight
lines X M, X B and M E being known (in numbers) the magnitude of the straight
line cut off in the Tangent by the straight line X E produced to the Tangent
may also be known; and it will be found to be less then B h; Wherefore the
straight line Xh being drawn will cut off a part of the arch of the Quadrant
greater then the arch B E. But I shall speak more fully in the next Article
concerning the magnitude of the arch B I.

And let this be the first attempt for the finding out of the dimension of a
Circle by the Section of the arch B F.

3 I shall now attempt the same by arguments drawn from the nature of the
Crookedness of the Circle it self; but I shall first set down some Premises
necessary for this speculation; and

First, If a Straight line be bowed into an Arch of a Circle equal to it, as
when a stretched thread which touches a Right Cylinder, is so bowed in every
point, that it be every where coincident with the Perimeter of the base of the
Cylinder, the Flexion of that line will be equal, in all its points; and
consequently the Crookedness of the Arch of a Circle is every where Uniform;
which needs no other demonstration then this, That the Perimeter of a Circle is
an Uniform line.

Secondly, and consequently, If two unequal Arches of the same Circle be made
by the bowing of two straight lines equal to them, the Flexion of the longer
line (whilst it is bowed into the greater Arch) is greater then the Flexion of
the shorter line (whilst it is bowed into the lesser Arch) according to the
proportion of the Arches themselves; and consequently, the Crookedness of the
greater Arch is to the Crookedness of the lesser Arch; as the greater Arch is
to the lesser Arch.

Thirdly, If two unequal Circles and a straight line touch one another in the
same point, the Crookedness of any Arch taken in the lesser Circle, will be
greater then the Crookedness of an Arch equal to it taken in the greater
Circle, in reciprocal proportion to that of the Radii with which the Circles
are described; or, which is all one, any straight line being drawn from the
point of Contact till it cut both the circumferences, as the part of that
straight line cut off by the circumference of the greater Circle to that part
which is cut off by the circumference of the lesser Circle.

For let A B and A C (in the second figure) be two Circles, touching one
another and the straight line A D in the point A; and let their Centers be E
and F; and let it be supposed, that as A E is to A F, so is the Arch A B to the
Arch A H. I say the Crookedness of the Arch A C is to the Crookedness of the
Arch A H, as A E is to A F. For let the straight line A D be supposed to be
equal to the Arch A B, and the straight line A G to the Arch A C; and let A D
(for example) be double to A G. Therefore by reason of the likeness of the
Arches A B and A C, the straight line A B will be double to the straight line A
C, and the Radius A E double to the Radius A F, and the Arch A B double to the
Arch A H. And because the straight line A D is so bowed to be coincident with
the Arch A B equal to it, as the straight line A G is bowed to be coincident
with the Arch A C equal also to it, the Flexion of the straight line A G into
the Crooked line A C will be equal to the Flexion of the straight Line A D into
the Crooked line A B. But the Flexion of the straight line A D into the Crooked
line A B is double to the the Flexion of the straight line A G into the Crooked
line A H; and therefore the Flexion of the straight line A G into the Crooked
line A C is double to the Flexion of the same straight line A G into the
Crooked line A H. Wherefore, as the Arch A B is to the Arch A C or A H; or as
the Radius A E is to the Radius A F; or as the Chord A B is to the Chord A C;
so reciprocally is the Flexion or Uniform Crookedness of the Arch A C, to the
Flexion or Uniform Crookedness of the Arch A H, namely, here double. And this
may by the same method be demonstrated in Circles whose Perimeters are to one
another triple, quadruple, or in whatsoever given proportion. The Crookedness
therefore of two equal Arches taken in several Circles are in proportion
reciprocal to that of their Radii, or like Arches, or like Chords; which was
to be demonstrated.

Let the Square A B C D be again described (in the third Figure,) and in it the
Quadrants A B D, B C A and D A C; and dividing each side of the Square A B C D
in the midst in E, F, G and H, let E G and F H be connected, which will cut one
another in the center of the Square at I, and divide the arch of the Quadrant A
B D into three equal parts in K and L. Also the Diagonals A C and B D being
drawn will cut one another in I, and divide the arches B K D and C L A into two
equal parts in M and N. Then with the Radius B F let the arch F E be drawn,
cutting the Diagonal B D in O; and dividing the arch B M in the midst in P, let
the straight line E a equal to the chord B P be set off from the point E in the
arch E F, and let the arch a b be taken equal to the arch O a, and let B a and
B b be drawn and produced to the arch A N in c and d; and lastly, let the
straight line A d be drawn. I say the Straight line A d is equal to the Arch A
N or B M.

I have proved in the preceding article, that the arch E O is twice as crooked
as the arch B P, that is to say, that the arch E O is so much more crooked then
the arch B P, as the arch B P is more crooked then the straight line E a. The
crookedness therefore of the chord E a, of the arch B P, and of the arch E O
are as 0, 1, 2. Also the difference between the arches E O and E O, the
difference between the arches E O and E a, and the difference between the
arches E O and E b are as 0, 1, 2. So also the difference between the arches A
N and A N, the difference between the arches A N and A c, and the difference
between the arches A N and A d are as 0, 1, 2; and the straight line A c is
double to the chord B P or E a, and the straight line A d double to the chord E
b.

Again, let the straight line B F be divided in the midst in Q, and the arch B
P in the midst in R; and describing the Quadrant B Q S (whose arch Q S is a
fourth part of the arch of the Quadrant B M D, as the arch B R is a fourth part
of the arch B M which is the arch of the Semiquadrant A B M) let the chord S e
equal to the chord B R be set off from the point S in the arch S Q; and let B e
be drawn and produced to the arch A N in f; which being done, the straight line
A f will be quadruple to the chord B R or S e. And seeing the crookedness of
the arch S e or of the arch A c is double to the crookedness of the arch B R,
the excess of the crookedness of the arch A f above the crookedness of the arch
A c will be subduple to the excess of the crookedness of the arch A c above the
crookedness of the arch A N; and therefore the arch N c will be double to the
arch c f. Wherefore the arch c d is divided in the midst in f, and the arch N f
is of the arch N d. And in like manner if the arch B R be bisected in V, and
the straight Line B Q in X, and the quadrant B X Y be described, and the
straight Line Y g equal to the chord B V be set off from the point Y in the
arch Y X, it may be demonstrated that the straight Line B g being drawn and
produced to the arch A N will cut the arch f d into two equal parts, and that a
straight Line drawn from A to the point of that Section, will be equal to eight
chords of the arch B V, and so on perpetually; and consequently, that the
straight Line A d is equal to so many equal chords of equal parts of the arch B
M, as may be made by infinite bisections. Wherefore the Straight Line A d is
equal to the Arch B M or A N, that is, to half the Arch of the Quadrant A B D
or B C A.

Corollary. An Arch being given not greater then the arch of a Quadrant (for
being made greater it comes again toward the Radius B A produced, from which
it receded before) if a straight Line double to the chord of half the given
arch be adapted from the beginning of the arch, and by how much the arch that
is subtended by it is greater then the given arch, by so much a greater arch be
subtended by another straight Line, this Straight Line shall be equal to the
first given Arch.

Supposing the Straight Line B V (in the first Figure) be equal to the arch of
the Quadrant B H D, and A V be connected cutting the arch B H D in I, it may be
asked what proportion the arch B I has to the arch I D. Let therefore the arch
A Y be divided in the midst in o, and in the straight line A D let A p be taken
equal, and A q double to the drawn chord A o. Then upon the center A, with the
Radius A q let an arch of a circle be drawn cutting the arch A Y in r, and let
the arch Y r be doubled at t; which being done, the drawn straight line A t
(by what has been last demonstrated) will be equal to the arch A Y. Again,
upon the Center A with the Radius A t let the arch tu be drawn cutting AD in
u; and the straight line A u will be equal to the arch AY. From the point u
let the straight line us be drawn equal and parallel to the straight line AB,
cutting MN in x, and bisected by MN in the same point x. Therefore the straight
line A x being drawn and produced till it meet with BC produced in V, it will
cut off BV double to B s, that is, equal to the arch BHD. Now let the point
where the straight line AV cuts the arch BHD, be I; and let the arch DI be
divided in the midst in y; and in the straight line DC, let D z be taken equal,
and D d double to the drawn chord D y; and upon the center D with the Radius D
d let an arch of a circle be drawn cutting the arch BHD in the point n; and let
the arch nm be taken equal to the arch I n; which being done, the straight line
D m will (by the last foregoing Corollary) be equal to the arch DI. If now the
straight lines D m and CV be equal, the arch BY will be equal to the Radius AB
or BC; and consequently XC being drawn will pass through the point I. Moreover,
if the semicircle BHD b being completed, the straight lines b I and BY be drawn
making a right angle (in the Semicircle) at I, and the arch BY be divided in
the midst at i, it will follow that A i being connected will be parallel to the
straight line b I, and being produced to BC in k, will cut off the straight
line B k equal to the straight line k I, and equal also to the straight line Ag
cut off in AD by the straight line b I. All which is manifest, supposing the
arch BY and the Radius BC to be equal.

But that the arch BY and the Radius BC are precisely equal, cannot (how true
soever it he) be demonstrated, unless that be first proved which is contained in
the first article, namely, that the straight lines drawn from X through the
equal parts of OF (produced to a certain length) cut off so many parts also in
the Tangent BC severally equal to the several arches cut off; which they do
most exactly as far as BC in the Tangent, and BY in the arch BE; in so much
that no inequality between the arch BY and the Radius BC can be discovered
either by the hand or by ratiocination. It is therefore to be further enquired,
whether the straight line AV cut the arch of the Quadrant in I in the same
proportion as the point C divides the straight line BV which is equal to the
arch of the Quadrant. But however this be, it has been demonstrated that the
straight line BV is equal to the arch BHD.

4 I shall now attempt the same dimension of a Circle another way, assuming the
two following Lemma's.

Lemma 1. If to the Arch of a Quadrant, and the Radius, there be taken in
continual proportion a third Line Z; then the Arch of the Semiquadrant, Half
the chord of the Quadrant, and Z will also be in continual proportion.

For seeing the Radius is a mean proportional between the Chord of a Quadrant
and its Semichord, and the same Radius a mean proportional between the Arch of
the Quadrant and Z, the Square of the Radius will be equal as well to the
Rectangle made of the Chord and Semichord of the Quadrant, as to the Rectangle
made of the Arch of the Quadrant and Z; and these two Rectangles will be equal
to one another. Wherefore, as the Arch of a Quadrant is to its Chord, so
reciprocally is half the Chord of the Quadrant to Z. But as the Arch of the
Quadrant is to its Chord, so is half the Arch of the Quadrant to half the Chord
of the Quadrant. Wherefore, as half the arch of the Quadrant is to half the
Chord of the Quadrant (or to the Sine of 45 degrees) so is half the Chord of
the Quadrant to Z; which was to be proved.

Lemma 2. The Radius, the Arch of the Semiquadrant, the Sine of 45 degrees, and
the Semiradius are proportional.

For seeing the Sine of 45 degrees is a mean proportional between the Radius
and the Semiradius; and the same Sine of 45 degrees is also a mean proportional
(by the precedent Lemma) between the Arch of 45 degrees and Z; the Square of
the Sine of 45 degrees will be equal as well to the Rectangle made of the
Radius and Semiradius, as to the Rectangle made of the Arch of 45 degrees and
Z. Wherefore, as the Radius is to the Arch of 45 degrees, so reciprocally is Z
to the Semiradius; which was to be demonstrated.

Let now ABCD (in the fourth Figure) be a Square; and with the Radii AB, BC and
DA let the three Quadrants ABD, BCA and DAC be described; and let the straight
lines OF and GH drawn parallel to the Sides BC and AB, divide the Square ABCD
into four equal Squares. They will therefore cut the arch of the Quadrant ABD
into three equal parts in I and K, and the arch of the Quadrant BCA into three
equal parts in K and L. Also let the Diagonals AC and BD be drawn, cutting the
arches BID and ALC in M and N. Then upon the center H with the Radius HF equal
to half the Chord of the arch BMD, or to the Sine of 45 degrees, let the arch
FO be drawn cutting the arc^ CK in O; and let AO be drawn and produced till it
meet with BC produced in P; also let it cut the arch BMD in Q, and the straight
line DC in R. If now the straight line H Q be equal to the straight line DR,
and being produced to DC in S cut off DS equal to half the straight line BP; I
say then the Straight Line BP will be equal to the Arch BMD.

For seeing PBA and ADR are like triangles, it will be as PB to the Radius BA
or AD, so AD to DR; and therefore as well PB, AD and DR, as PB, AD (or A Q) and
Q H are in continual proportion; and producing HO to DC in T, DT will be equal
to the Sine of 45 degrees, as shall by and by be demonstrated. Now DS, DT and
DR are in continual porportion by the first Lemma; and by the second Lemma DC.
DS:: DR. DF are proportionals. And thus it will be, whether BP be equal or not
equal to the arch of the Quadrant BMD. But if they be equal, it will then be,
as that part of the arch BMD which is equal to the Radius, is to the remainder
of the same arch BMD; so A Q to H Q, or so BC to CP. And then will BP and the
arch BMD be equal. But it is not demonstrated that the Straight Lines H Q and
DR are equal; though if from the point B there be drawn (by the construction of
the first figure) a Straight Line equal to the arch BMD, then DR to H Q, and
also the half of the Straight Line BP to DS, will always be so equal, that no
inequality can be discovered between them. I will therefore leave this to be
further searched into. For though it be almost out of doubt, that the Straight
Line BP and the arch BMD are equal, yet that may not be received without
demonstration; and means of Demonstration the Circular Line admits none that
is not grounded upon the nature of Flexion, or of Angles. But by that way I
have already exhibited a Straight Line equal to the Arch of a Quadrant in the
First and Second aggression.

It remains that I prove DT to be equal to the Sine of 45 degrees.

In BA produced let AV he taken equal to the Sine of 45 degrees; and drawing
and producing VH, it will cut the arch of the Quadrant CNA in the midst in N,
and the same arch again in O, and the Straight line DC in T, so, that DT will
be equal to the Sine of 45 degrees, or to the straight line AV; also the
Straight line VH will be equal to the straight line HI or the Sine of 60
degrees.

For the square of AV is equal to two squares of the Semiradius; and
consequently the square of VH is equal to three Squares of the Semiradius. But
HI is a mean proportional between the Semiradius and three Semiradii; and
therefore the square of HI is equal to three Squares of the Semiradius.
Wherefore HI is eqval to HV. But because AD is cut in the midst in H, therefore
VH and HT are equal; and therefore also DT is equal to the Sine of 45 degrees.
In the Radius BA let BX be taken equal to the Sine of 45 degrees; for so VX
will be equal to the Radius; and it will be as VA to AH the Semiradius, so VX
the Radius to XN the Sine of 45 degrees. Wherefore VH produced passes through
N. Lastly, upon the center V with the Radius VA let the arch of a circle be
drawn cutting VH in Y; which being done, VY will be equal to HO (for HO is by
construction equal to the Sine of 45 degrees) and YH will be equal to OT; and
therefore VT passes through O. All which was to be demonstrated.

I will here add certain Problemes, of which if any Analyst can make the
construction, he will thereby be able to judge clearly of what I have now said
concerning the dimension of a Circle. Now these Problems are nothing else (at
least to sense) but certain symptoms accompanying the construction of the
first and third figure of this Chapter.

Describing therefore again the Square ABCD (in the fifth figure) and the three
Quadrants ABD, BCA and DAC, let the Diagonals AC and BD be drawn, cutting the
arches BHD and CIA in the middle in H and I; and the straight lines OF and GL,
dividing the square ABCD into four equal squares, and trisecting the arches BHD
and CIA, namely, BHD in K and M, and CIA in M and O. Then dividing the arch BK
in the midst in P, let QP the Sine of the arch BP be drawn and produced to R,
so that QR be double to QP; and connecting KR, let it be produced one way to BC
in S, and the other way to BA produced in T. Also let BV be made triple to BS,
and consequently (by the second article of this Chapter) equal to the arch BD.
This construction is the same with that of the first figure, which I thought
fit to renew discharged of all lines but such as are necessary for my present
purpose.

In the first place therefore, if AV be drawn, cutting the arch BHD in X, and
the side DC in Z, I desire some Analyst would (if he can) give a reason, Why
the straight lines TE and TC should cut the arch BD the one in Y, the other in
X, so as to make the arch BY equal to the arch YX; or if they be not equal,
that he would determine their difference.

Secondly, if in the side DA, the straight line Da be taken equal to DZ, and Va
be drawn; Why Va and VB should be equal; or if they be not equal, What is the
difference.

Thirdly, drawing Zb parallel and equal to the side CB, cutting the arch BHD in
c, and drawing the straight line Ac, and producing it to BV in d; Why Ad should
be equal and parallel to the straight line aV, and consequently equal also to
the arch BD.

Fourthly, drawing eK the Sine of the arch BK, and taking (in eA produced) of
equal to the Diagonal AC, and connecting fC; Why fC should pass through a
(which point being given, the length of the arch BHD is also given) and c; and
why fe and fc should be equal; or if not, why unequal.

Fifthly, drawing fZ, I desire he would show, Why it is equal to BV, or to the
arch BD; or if they be not equal, What is their difference.

Sixthly, granting fZ to be equal to the arch BD, I desire he would determine
whether it fall all without the arch BCA, or cut the same; or touch it, and in
what point.

Seventhly, the Semicircle BDg being completed; Why gI being drawn and
produced, should pass through X (by which point X the length of the arch BD is
determined). And the same gI being yet further produced to DC in h; Why Ad
(which is equal to the arch BD) should pass through that point h.

Eighthly, upon the Center of the square ABCD, which let be k, the arch of the
quadrant EiL being drawn, cutting eK produced in i; Why the drawn straight line
iX should be parallel to the side CD.

Ninthly, in the sides BA and BC taking Bl and Bm severally equal to half BV,
or to the arch BH, and drawing mn parallel and equal to the side BA, cutting
the arch BD in o; Why the straight line which connects Vl should pass through
the point o,

Tenthly, I would know of him, Why the straight line which connects aH should
be equal to Bm; or if not, how much it differs from it.

The Analyst that can solve these Problemes without knowing first the length of
the arch BD, or using any other known Method then that which proceeds by
perpetual bisection of an angle, or is drawn from the consideration of the
nature of Flexion, shall do more then ordinary Geometry is able to perform. But
if the Dimension of a Circle cannot be found by any other Method; then I have
either found it, or it is not at all to be found.

From the known Length of the Arch of a Quadrant, and from the proportional
Division of the Arch and of the Tangent BC, may be deduced the Section of an
Angle into any given proportion; as also the Squaring of the Circle, the
Squaring of a given Sector, and many the like propositions, which it is not
necessary here to demonstrate. I will therefore only exhibit a Straight line
equal to the Spiral of Archimedes, and so dismiss this speculation.

5 The length of the Perimeter of a Circle being found, that Straight line is
also found, which touches a Spiral at the end of its first conversion. For upon
the center A (in the sixth figure) let the circle BCDE be described; and in it
let Archimedes his Spiral AFGHB be drawn, beginning at A and ending at B.
Through the center A let the straight line CE be drawn, cutting the Diameter BD
at right angles; and let it be produced to I, so, that AI be equal to the
Perimeter BCDEB. Therefore IB being drawn will touch the Spiral AFGHB in B;
which is demonstrated by Archimedes in his book de Spiralibus.

And for a Straight Line equal to the given Spiral AFGHB, it may be found thus.

Let the straight line AI (which is equal to the Perimeter BCDE) be bisected in
K; and taking KL equal to the Radius AB, let the rectangle IL be completed. Let
ML be understood to be the axis, and KL the base of a Parabola, and let MK be
the crooked line thereof. Now if the point M be conceived to be so moved by the
concourse of two movents, the one from IM to KL with velocity increasing
continually in the same proportion with the Times, the other from ML to IK
uniformly, that both those motions begin together in M and end in K; Galilaeus
has demonstrated that by such motion of the point M, the crooked line of a
Parabola will be described. Again, if the point A be conceived to be moved
uniformly in the straight line AB, and in the same time to be carried round
upon the center A by the circular motion of all the points between A and B;
Archimedes has demonstrated that by such motion will be described a Spiral
line. And seeing the circles of all these motions are concentrick in A; and the
interior circle is always less then the exterior in the proportion of the
times in which AB is passed over with uniform motion; the velocity also of the
circular motion of the point A, will continually increase proportionally to the
times. And thus far the generations of the Parabolical line MK, and of the
Spiral line AFGHB, are like. But the Uniform motion in AB concurring with
circular motion in the Perimeters of all the concentrick circles, describes
that circle, whose center is A, and Perimeter BCDE; and therefore that circle
is (by the Coroll. of the first article of the 16 Chapter) the aggregate of all
the Velocities together taken of the point A whilst it describes the Spiral
AFGHB. Also the rectangle IKLM is the aggregate of all the Velocities together
taken of the point M, whilst it describes the crooked line MK. And therefore
the whole velocity, by which the Parabolicall line MK is described* is to the
whole velocity with which the Spiral line AFGHB is described in the same time,
as the rectangle IKLM, is to the Circle BCDE, that is to the triangle AIB. But
because AI is bisected in K and the straight lines IM and AB are equal,
therefore the rectangle IKLM and the triangle AIB are also equal. Wherefore the
Spiral line AFGHB, and the Parabolical line MK, being described with equal
velocity and in equal times, are equal to one another. Now in the first article
of the 18 Chapter a straight line is found out equal to any Parabolical line.
Wherefore also a Straight line is found out, equal to a given Spiral line of
the first revolution described by Archimedes; which was to be done.

6 In the sixth Chapter, which is of Method, that which I should there have
spoken of the Analyticks of Geometricians, I thought fit to defer, because I
could not there have been understood, as not having then so much as named
Lines, Superficies, Solids, Equal and Unequal etc. Wherefore I will in this
place set down my thoughts concerning it.

Analysis, is continual Reasoning from the Definitions of the terms of a
proposition we suppose true, and again from the Definitions of the terms of
those Definitions, and so on, till we come to some things known, the
Composition whereof is the demonstration of the truth or falsity of the first
supposition; and this Composition or Demonstration is that we call Synthesis.
Analytica therefore is that art, by which our reason proceeds from something
supposed, to Principles, that is, to prime Propositions, or to such as are
known by these, till we have so many known Propositions as are sufficient for
the demonstration of the truth or falsity of the thing supposed. Synthetica is
the art it self of Demonstration. Synthesis therefore and Analysis differ in
nothing, but in proceeding forwards or backwards; and Logistica comprehends
both. So that in the Analysis or Synthesis of any question, that is to say, of
any Problem, the Terms of all the Propositions ought to be convertible; or if
they be enunciated Hypothetically, the truth of the Consequent ought not only
to follow out of the truth of its Antecedent, but contrarily also the truth of
the Antecedent must necessarily be inferred from the truth of the Consequent.
For otherwise, when by Resolution we are arrived at Principles, we cannot by
Composition return directly back to the thing sought for. For those Terms which
are the first in Analysis, will be the last in Synthesis; as for example, when
in Resol^ing, we say, these two Rectangles are equal and therefore their sides
are reciprocally proportional, we must necessarily in Compounding say, the
sides of these Rectangles are reciprocally proportional and therefore the
Rectangles themselves are equal; Which we could not say, ^ss Rectangles have
their sides reciprocally proportional, and Rectangles are equal, were Terms
convertible.

Now in every Analysis, that which is sought, is the Proportion of two
quantities; by which proportion (a figure being described) the quantity sought
for may be exposed to Sense. And this Exposition is the end and Solution of the
question, or the construction of the Problem.

And seeing Analysis is reasoning from something supposed, till we come to
Principles, that is, to Definitions, or to Theoremes formerly known; and seeing
the same reasoning tends in the last place to some Equation; we can therefore
make no end of Resolving, till we come at last to the causes themselves of
Equality and Inequality, or to Theoremes formerly demonstrated from those
causes; and so have a sufficient number of those Theoremes for the
demonstration of the thing sought for.

And seeing also, that the end of the Analyticks, is either the construction of
such a Problem as is possible, or the detection of the impossibility thereof;
whenever the Problem may be solved, the Analyst must not stay, till he come
to those things which contain the efficient cause of that whereof he is to make
construction. But he must of necessity stay when he comes to prime
Propositions; and these are Definitions. These Definitions therefore must
contain the efficient cause of his Construction; I say of his Construction, not
of the Conclusion which he demonstrates; for the cause of the Conclusion is
contained in the premised propositions; that is to say, the truth of the
proposition he proves, is drawn from the propositions which prove the same. But
the cause of his construction is in the things themselves, and consists in
motion, or in the concourse of motions. Wherefore those propositions in which
Analysis ends, are Definitions, but such, as signify in what manner the
construction, or generation of the thing proceeds. For otherwise, when he goes
back by Synthesis to the proof of his Problem, he will come to no
Demonstration at all; there being no true Demonstration but such as is
scientificall; and no Demonstration is scientifical but that which proceeds
from the knowledge of the causes from which the construction of the Problem is
drawn. To collect therefore what has been said into few words; ANALYSIS is
Ratiocination from the supposed construction or generation of a thing to the
efficient cause, or coefficient causes of that which is constructed or
generated. And SYNTHESIS is Ratiocination from the first causes of the
Construction, continued through all the middle causes till we come to the thing
it self which is constructed or generated.

But because there are many means by which the same thing may be generated, or
the same Problem be constructed, therefore neither do all Geometricians, nor
does the same Geometrician always use one and the same Method. For if to a
certain quantity given, it be required to construct another quantity equal,
there may be some that will enquire whether this may not be done by means of
some motion. For there are quantities, whose equality and inequality may be
argued from Motion and Time, as well as from Congruence; and there is motion,
by which two quantities, whether Lines or Superficies, though one of them be
crooked, the other straight, may be made congruous or coincident. And this
method Archimedes made use of in his Book de Spiralibus. Also the equality or
inequality of two quantities may be found out and demonstrated from the
consideration of Weight, as the same Archimedes did in his Quadrature of the
Parabola. Besides, equality and equality are found out often by the division of
the two quantityes into parts which are considered as undivisible; as
Cavallerius Bonaventura has done in our time, and Archimedes often. Lastly, the
same is performed by the consideration of the Powers of lines, or the roots of
those Powers, and by the multiplication, division, addition and substraction,
as also by the extraction of the roots of those Powers, or by finding where
straight lines of the same proportion terminate. For example, when any number
of straight lines, how many soever, are drawn from a straight line, and pass
all through the same point, look what proportion they have, and if their parts
continued from the point retain every where the same proportion, they shall
all terminate in a straight line. And the same happens if the point be taken
between two Circles. So that the places of all their points of termination make
either straight lines, or circumferences of Circles, and are called Plain
Places. So also when straight parallel lines are applied to one straight line,
if the parts of the straight line to which they are applied be to one another
in proportion duplicate to that of the contiguous applied lines, they will all
terminate in a Conical Section; which Section being the place of their
termination, is called a Solid Place, because it serves for the finding out of
the quantity of any Equation which consists of three dimensions. There are
therefore three ways of finding out the cause of Equality or Inequality between
two given quantities; namely, First by the Computation of Motions (for by equal
Motion, and equal Time equal Spaces are described,) and Ponderation is motion.
Secondly By Indivisibles; because all the parts together taken are equal to the
whole. And thirdly by the Powers; for when they are equal, their roots also
are equal; and contrarily, the Powers are equal, when their roots are equal.
But if the question be much complicated, there cannot by any of these ways be
constituted a certain Rule, from the supposition of which of the unknown
quantities the Analysis may best begin; nor out of the variety of Equations
that at first appear, which we were best to choose; but the success will
depend upon dexterity, upon formerly acquired Science, and many times upon
fortune.

For no man can ever be a good Analyst without being first a good Geometrician;
nor do the rules of Analysis make a Geometrician, as Synthesis does; which
begins at the very Elements, and proceeds by a Logical Use of the same. For the
true teaching of Geometry is by Synthesis, according to Euclides method; and he
that has Euclide for his Master, may be a Geometrician without Vieta (though
Vieta was a most admirable Geometrician); but he that has Vieta for his master,
not so, without Euclide.

And as for that part of Analysis which works by the Powers, though it be
esteemed by some Geometricians (not the chiefest) to be the best way of solving
all Problemes, yet it is a thing of no great extent; it being all contained in
the doctrine of rectangles, and rectangled Solids. So that although they come
to an Equation which determines the quantity sought, yet they cannot sometimes
by art exhibit that quantity in a Plain, but in some Conique Section; that is,
as Geometricians say, not Geometrically, but mechanically. Now such Problemes
as these, they call Solid; and when they cannot exhibit the quantity sought for
with the help of a conique Section, they call it a Lineary Problem. And
therefore in the quantities of angles, and of the arches of Circles, there is
no use at all of the Analyticks which proceed by the Powers; so that the
Ancients pronounced it impossible, to exhibit in a plain the Division of
Angles, except bisection, and the bisection of the bisected parts, otherwise
then mechanically. For Pappus, (before the 31 proposition of his fourth Book)
distinguishing and defining the several kinds of Problemes, says that some are
Plain, others Solid, and others Lineary. Those therefore which may be solved by
straight lines and the circumferences of Circles (that is, which may be
described with the Rule and Compass, without any other Instrument) are fitly
called Plain; for the lines by which such Problemes are found out, have their
generation in a Plain. But those which are solved by the using of some one or
more Conique Sections in their construction, are called Solid, because their
construction cannot be made without using the superficies of solid figures,
namely of Cones. There remains the third kind, which is called Lineary,
because other lines besides those already mentioned are made use of in their
construction, etc. And a little after he says, Of this kind are the Spiral
lines, the Quadratrices, the Conchoeides, and the Cissoeides. And Geometricians
think it no small fault, when for the finding out of a Plain Problem any man
makes use of Coniques, or new Lines. Now he ranks the Trisection of an angle
among Solid Problemes, and the Quinquesection among Lineary. But what! are the
ancient Geometricians to be blamed, who made use of the Quadratrix for the
finding out of a straight line equal to the arch of a Circle? and Pappus
himself, was he faulty when he found out the trisection of an Angle by the help
of an Hyperbole? Or am I in the wrong, who think I have found out the
construction of both these Problemes by the Rule and Compass only? Neither
they, nor I. For the Ancients made use of this Analysis which proceeds by the
Powers; and with them it was a fault to do that by a more remote Power, which
might be done by a nearer; as being an argument that they did not sufficiently
understand the nature of the thing. The virtue of this kind of Analysis
consists in the changing and turning and tossing of Rectangles and Analogismes;
and the skill of Analysts is mere Logic, by which they are able methodically
to find out whatsoever lies hid either in the Subject or Predicate of the
Conclusion sought for. But this does not properly belong to Algebra, or the
Analyticks Specious, Symbolical or Cossick; which are, as I may say, the
Brachygraphy of the Analyticks, and an art, neither of teaching nor learning
Geometry, but of registring with brevity and celerity, the inventions of
Geometricians. For though it be easy to discourse by Symbols of very remote
propositions; yet whether such discourse deserve to be thought very profitable,
when it is made without any Ideas of the things themselves, I know not.

CHAP. XXI. Of Circular Motion.
1 In Simple Motion, every Straight Line taken in the Body moved, is so
carried, that it is always parallel to the places in which it formerly was. 2
If Circular Motion be made about a resting Center, and in that Circle there be
an Epicyle, whose revolution is made the contrary way, in such manner, that in
equal times it make equal angles, every Straight Line taken in that Epicycle
will be so carried, that it will always be parallel to the places in which it
formerly was. 3 The properties of Simple Motion. 4 If a fluid Body be moved
with simple Circular Motion, all the points taken in it will describe their
Circles in times proportional to the distances from the Center. 5 Simple Motion
dissipates Heterogeneous and congregates Homogeneous Bodies. 6 If a Circle made
by a Movent moved with Simple Motion, be commensurable to another Circle made
by a point which is carried about by the same Movent, all the points of both
the Circles will at some time return to the same situation. 7 If a Sphere have
Simple Motion, its Motion will more dissipate Heterogeneous Bodies by how much
it is more remote from the Poles. 8 If the Simple Circular Motion of a fluid
Body, be hindered by a Body which is not fluid, the fluid Body will spread it
self upon the Superficies of that Body. 9 Circular Motion about a fixed Center,
casts off by the Tangent such things as lie upon the Circumference and stick
not to it. 10 Such things as are moved with Simple Circular Motition, beget
Simple Circular Motion. 11 If that which is so moved have one side hard, and
the other side fluid, its Motion will not be perfectly Circular.
1 I Have already defined Simple Motion to be that, in which the several points
taken in a moved Body, do in several equal times describe several equal arches.
And therefore in Simple Circular Motion it is necessary that every Straight
Line taken in the Moved Body be always carried parallel to itself; which I
thus demonstrate.

First, let A B (in the first figure) be any Straight Line taken in any Solid
Body; and let AD be any arch drawn upon any Center C and Radius CA. Let the
point B be understood to describe toward the same parts the arch BE, like and
equal to the arch AD. Now in the same time in which the point A transmits the
arch AD, the point B (which by reason of its simple motion is supposed to be
carried with velocity equal to that of A) will transmit the arch BE; and at
the end of the same time the whole AB will be in DE; and therefore AB and DE
are equal. And seeing the arches AD and BE are like and equal, their
subtending straight lines AD and BE will also be equal; and therefore the four
sided figure ABDE will be a parallelogram. Wherefore AB is carried parallel to
it self. And the same may be proved by the same method, if any other straight
line be taken in the same moved Body in which the straight line AB was taken.
So that all straight lines taken in a Body moved with Simple Ci^cular Motion
will be carried parallel to themselves.

Coroll. 1 It is manifest that the same will also happen in any Body which has
Simple Motion, though not Circular. For all the points of any straight line
whatsoever, will describe lines though not Circular, yet equal; so that though
the crooked lines AD and BE were not arches of Circles, but of Parabolas,
Ellipses, or of any other figures; yet both they, and their Subtenses, and the
straight lines which join them, would be equal and parallel. Coroll. 2 It is
also manifest, that the Radii of the equal circles AD and BE, or the Axis of a
Sphere, will be so carried, as to be always parallel to the places in which
they formerly were. For the straight line BF drawn to the center of the arch BE
being equal to the Radius AC, will also be equal to the straight line FE or
CD; and the angle BFE will be equal to the angle ACD. Now the intersection of
the straight lines CA and BE, being at G, the angle CGE (seeing BE and AD are
parallel) will be equal to the angle DAC. But the angle EBF is equal to the
same angle DAC; and therefore the angles CGE and EBF are also equal. Wherefore
AC and BF are parallel; which was to be demonstrated.
2 Let there be a Circle given (in the second figure), whose center is A, and
Radius AB; and upon the center B and any Radius BC let the Epicycle CDE be
described. Let the center B be understood to be carried about the center A, and
the whole Epicycle with it till it be coincident with the Circle FGH, whose
center is I; and let BAI be any angle given. But in the time that the center B
is moved to I, let the Epicycle CDE have a contrary revolution upon its own
center, namely from E by D to C according to the same proportions; that is, in
such manner, that in both the Circles, equal angles be made in equal times. I
say EC the Axis of the Epicycle will be always carried parallel to it self.
Let the angle FIG be made equal to the angle BAI; IF and AB will therefore be
parallel; and how much the Axis AG has departed from its former place AC (the
measure of which progression is the angle CAG, or CBD which I suppose equal to
it), so much in the same time has the Axis IG (the same with BC) departed from
its own former situation. Wherefore, in what time BC comes to IG by the motion
from B to I upon the center A, in the same time G will come to F by the
contrary motion of the Epicycle; that is, it will be turned backwards to F, and
IG will lie in IF. But the angles FIG and GAC are equal; and therefore AC, that
is, BC), and IG, (that is the Axis, though in different places) will be
parallel. Wherefore, the Axis of the Epicycle EDC will be carried always
parallel to it self; which was to be proved.

Coroll. From hence it is manifest, that those two annual Motions which
Copernicus ascribes to the Earth, are reducible to this one Circular Simple
Motion, by which all the points of the moved Body are carried always with equal
velocity, that is, in equal times they make equal revolutions uniformly.

This, as it is the most simple, so it is the most frequent of all Circular
Motions; being the same which is used by all men when they turn any thing round
with their arms, as they do in grinding or sifting. For all the points of the
thing moved, describe lines which are like and equal to one another. So that if
a man had a Ruler, in which many Pens points of equal length were fastened, he
might with this one Motion write many lines at once.

3 Having showed what Simple Motion is, I will here also set down some
properties of the same.

First, when a Body is moved with Simple Motion in a fluid Medium which has no
vacuity, it changes the situation of all the parts of the fluid ambient which
resist its motion; I say there are no parts so small of the fluid ambient, how
far soever it be continued, but do change their situation, in such manner, as
that they leave their places continually to other small parts that come into
the same.

For (in the same second figure) let any Body, as KLMN, be understood to be
moved with Simple Circular Motion; and let the Circle which every point thereof
describes have any determined quantity, suppose that of the same KLMN.
Wherefore the Center A, and every other point, and consequently the moved Body
it self, will be carried sometimes toward the side where is K, and sometimes
toward the other side where is M. When therefore it is carried to K, the parts
of the fluid Medium on that side will go back; and (supposing all space to be
full) others on the other side will succeed. And so it will be when the Body is
carried to the side M, and to N, and every way. Now when the nearest parts of
the fluid Medium go back, it is necessary that the parts next to those nearest
parts go back also; and (supposing still all space to be full) other parts will
come into their places with succession perpetual and infinite. Wherefore all,
even the least parts of the fluid Medium change their places, etc. which was to
be proved.

It is evident from hence, that Simple Motion, whether Circular, or not
Circular, of Bodies which make perpetual returns to their former places, has
greater or less force to dissipate the parts of resisting Bodies, as it is more
or less swift, and as the lines described have greater or less magnitude. Now
the greatest Velocity that can be, may be understood to be in the least
circuit, and the least in the greatest; and may be so supposed when there is
need.

4 Secondly, supposing the same Simple Motion in the Air, Water, or other
fluid Medium; the parts of the Medium which adhere to the Moved Body will be
carried about with the same Motion and Velocity, so that in what time soever
any point of the Movent finishes its Circle, in the same time every part of the
Medium which adheres to the Movent, shall also describe such a part of its
Circle, as is equal to the whole Circle of the Movent; I say it shall describe
a part, and not the whole Circle, because all its parts receive their motion
from an interior concentrique Movent, and of Concentrique Circles the
exterior are always greater then the interior; nor can the motion imprinted
by any Movent be of greater Velocity then that of the Movent it self. From
whence it follows, that the more remote parts of the fluid ambient, shall
finish their Circles in times which have to one another the same proportion
with their distances from the Movent. For every point of the fluid ambient, as
long as it touches the Body which carries it about, is carried about with it,
and would make the same Circle, but that it is left behind so much as the
exterior Circle exceeds the interior. So that if we suppose some thing which
is not fluid to float in that part of the fluid ambient which is nearest to the
Movent, it will together with the Movent be carried about. Now that part of the
fluid ambient which is not the nearest but almost the nearest, receiving its
degree of velocity from the nearest, (which degree cannot be greater then it
was in the giver) does therefore in the same time make a Circular Line, not a
whole Circle, yet equal to the whole Circle of the nearest. Therefore in the
same time that the Movent describes its Circle, that which does not touch it
shall not describe its Circle; yet it shall describe such a part of it, as is
equal to the whole Circle of the Movent. And after the same manner, the more
remote parts of the ambient will describe in the same time such parts of their
Circles as shall be severally equal to the whole Circle of the Movent; and by
consequent they shall finish their whole Circles in times proportional to their
distances from the Movent; which was to be proved.

5 Thirdly, The same Simple Motion of a Body placed in a fluid Medium,
congregates, or gathers into one place such things as naturally float in that
Medium, if they be Homogeneous; and if they be Heterogeneous, it separates and
dissipates them. But if such things as be Heterogeneous do not float, but
settle, then the same Motion stirs and mingles them disorderly together. For
seeing Bodies which are unlike to one another, that is, Heterogeneous Bodies,
are not unlike in that they are Bodies (for Bodies, as Bodies, have no
difference) but only from some special Cause, that is, from some internal
Motion, or Motions of their smallest parts (for I have shown in the 9th Chapter
and 9th Article, that all Mutation is such Motion), it remains that
Heterogeneous Bodies have their unlikeness or difference from one another from
their internal or specifical Motions. Now Bodies which have such difference,
receive unlike and different Motions from the same external common Movent; and
therefore they will not be moved together, that is to say, they will be
dissipated. And being dissipated they will necessarily at some time or other
meet with Bodies like themselves, and be moved alike and together with them;
and afterward meeting with more Bodies like themselves, they will unite and
become greater Bodies. Wherefore Homogeneous Bodies are congregated, and
Heterogenous dissipated by Simple Motion in a Medium where they naturally
float. Again, such as being in a fluid Medium, do not float, but sink, if the
Motion of the fluid Medium be strong enough, will be stirred up and carried
away by that Motion, and consequently they will be hindered from returning to
that place to which they sink naturally, and in which only they would unite,
and out of which they are promiscuously carried; that is, they are disorderly
mingled.

Now this Motion by which Homogeneous Bodies are congregated, and Heterogeneous
are scattered, is that which is commonly called Fermentation, from the Latin
Fervere; as the Greeks have their (...) (which signifies the same) from (...)
Ferveo. For Seething makes all the parts of the Water change their places; and
the parts of any thing that is thrown into it, will go several ways according
to their several natures. And yet all Fervor or Seething is not caused by Fire;
for New Wine and many other things have also their Fermentation and Fervor, to
which Fire contributes little, and some times nothing. But when in Fermentation
we find Heat, it is made by the Fermentation.

6 Fourthly, in what time soever the Movent whose Center is A (in the 2d
figure) moved in KLN shall by any number of revolutions (that is, when the
Perimeters BY and KLN be commensurable) have described a Line equal to the
Circle which passes through the points B and I; in the same time all the points
of the floating Body whose Center is B, shall return to have the same situation
in respect of the Movent, from which they departed. For seeing it is as the
distance BA, that is, as the Radius of the Circle which passes through BY, is
to the Perimeter it self BY, so the Radius of the Circle KLN is to the
Perimeter KLN; and seeing the velocities of the points B and K are equal, the
time also of the revolution in IB to the time of one revolution in KLN, will be
as the Perimeter BY to the Perimeter KLN; and therefore so many revolutions in
KLN as together taken are equal to the Perimeter BY, will be finished in the
same time in which the whole Perimeter BY is finished; and therefore also the
points L, N, F and H, or any of the rest, will in the same time return to the
same situation from which they departed; and this may be demonstrated
whatsoever be the points considered. Wherefore all the points shall in that
time return to the same situation; which was to be proved.

From hence it follows, that if the Perimeters BY and LKN be not commensurable,
then all the points will never return to have the same situation or
configuration in respect of one another.

7 In Simple Motion, if the Body moved be of a Spherical figure, it has less
force toward its Poles then toward its middle, to dissipate Heterogeneous, or
to congregate Homogeneous Bodies.

Let there be a Sphere (as in the third figure) whose Center is A and Diameter
BC; and let it be conceived to be moved with Simple Circular Motion; of which
Motion let the Axis be the Straight Line DE, cutting the Diameter BC at right
angles in A. Let now the Circle which is described by any point B of the
Sphere, have BF for its Diameter; and taking FG equal to BC, and dividing it in
the middle in H, the Center of the Sphere A, will when half a revolution is
finished, lie in H. And seeing HF and AB are equal, a Circle described upon the
Center H with the Radius HF or HG, will be equal to the Circle whose Center is
A and Radius AB. And if the same Motion be continued, the point B will at the
end of another half revolution return to the place from whence it began to be
moved; and therefore at the end of half a revolution, the point B will be
carried to F, and the whole Hemisphere DBE into that Hemisphere in which are
the points L, K and F. Wherefore that part of the fluid Medium which is
co^tiguous to the point F, will in the same time go back the length of the
Straight Line BF; and in the return of the point F to B, that is, of G to C,
the fluid Medium will go back as much in a Straight Line from the point C. And
this is the effect of Simple Motion in the middle of the Sphere, where the
distance from the Poles is greatest. Let now the point I be taken in the same
Sphere nearer to the Pole E, and through it let the Straight Line IK be drawn
parallel to the Straight Line BF, cutting the arch FL in K, and the Axis HL in
M; then connecting HK, upon HF let the perpendicular KN be drawn. In the same
time therefore that B comes to F, the point I will come to K, BF and IK being
equal, and described with the same velocity. Now the Motion in IK to the fluid
Medium upon which it works, namely to that part of the Medium which is
contiguous to the point K, is oblique, whereas if it proceeded in the Straight
Line HK, it would be perpendicular; and therefore the Motion which proceeds in
IK has less power, then that which proceeds in HK with the same velocity. But
the Motions in HK and HF do equally thrust back the Medium; and therefore the
part of the Sphere at K, moves the Medium less, then the part at F; namely so
much less, as KN is less then HF. Wherefore also the same Motion has less
power to disperse Heterogeneous, and to congregate Homogeneous Bodies, when it
is nearer, then when it is more remote from the Poles; which was to be proved.

Corollary. It is also necessary, that in Plains which are perpendicular to the
Axis, and more remote then the Pole it self from the middle of the Sphere, this
Simple Motion have no effect. For the Axis DE with Simple Motion describes the
Superficies of a Cylinder; and toward the Bases of the Cylinder there is in
this Motion no endeavor at all.

8 If in a fluid Medium, moved about (as has been said) with Simple Motion,
there be conceived to float some other Spherical Body which is not fluid, the
parts of the Medium which are stopped by that Body, will endeavor to spread
themselves every way upon the Superficies of it. And this is manifest enough by
experience, namely by the spreading of water poured out upon a pavement. But
the reason of it may be this. Seeing the Sphere A (in the 3d figure) is moved
toward B, the Medium also in which it is moved, will have the same Motion. But
because in this Motion it falls upon a Body not liquid, as G, so that it cannot
go on; and seeing the small parts of the Medium can not go forwards, nor can
they go directly backwards; against the force of the Movent; it remayns
therefore that they diffuse themselves upon the Superficies of that Body, as
toward O and P, Which was to be proved.

9 Compounded Circular Motion (in which all the parts of the moved Body do at
once describe Circumferences, some greater, others less, according to the
proportion of their several distances from the common Center) carries about
with it such Bodies, as being not fluid, adhere to the Body so moved; and such
as do not adhere, it casts forwards in a Straight Line which is a Tangent to
the point from which they are cast off.

For let there be a Circle whose Radius is AB (in the fourth figure); and let a
Body be placed in the Circumference in B, which if it be fixed there, will
necessarily be carried about with it, as is manifest of it self. But whilst
the motion proceeds, let us suppose that Body to be unfixed in B. I say the
Body will continue its motion in the Tangent BC. For let both the Radius AB, and
the Sphere B, be conceived to consist of hard matter; and let us suppose the
Radius AB to be stricken in the point B by some other Body which falls upon it
in the Tangent DB. Now therefore there will be a motion made by the concourse
of two things, the one, Endeavor toward C in the Straight Line DB produced,
(in which the Body B would proceed, if it were not retained by the Radius AB);
the other, the Retention it self. But the Retention alone causes no endeavor
toward the Center; and therefore the Retention being taken away, (which is
done by the unfixing of B) there will remain but one Endeavor in B, namely,
that in the Tangent BC. Wherefore the Motion of the Body B unfixed, will
proceed in the Tangent BC; which was to be proved.

By this demonstration it is manifest, that Circular Motion about an unmoved
Axis, shakes off, and puts further from the Center of its motion such things as
touch, but do not stick fast to its Superficies; and the more, by how much the
distance is greater from the Poles of the Circular Motion; and so much the more
also, by how much the things that are shaken off, are less driven toward the
Center by the fluid ambient, for other Causes.

10 If in a fluid Medium a Spherical Body be moved with simple Circular Motion;
and in the same Medium there float another Sphere whose matter is not fluid;
this Sphere also shall be moved with simple Circular Motion.

Let BCD (in the 5th figure) be a Circle, whose Center is A, and in whose
Circumference there is a Sphere so moved that it describes with Simple Motion
the Perimeter BCD. Let also EFG be another Sphere of Consistent matter, whose
Semidiameter is EH, and Center H; and with the Radius AH let the Circle HI be
described. I say the Sphere EFG will (by the Motion of the Body in BCD) be
moved in the Circumference HI with Simple Motion.

For seeing the Motion in BCD (by the 4th Article of this Chapter) makes all
the points of the fluid Medium describe in the same time Circular Lines equal
to one another, the points E, H and G of the Straight Line EHG will in the same
time describe with equal Radii equal Circles. Let EB be drawn equal and
parallel to the Straight Line AH; and let AB be connected, which will therefore
be equal and parallel to EH; and therefore also, if upon the Center B and
Radius BE the arch EK be drawn equal to the arch HI, and the straight Lines AI,
BK and IK be drawn, BK and AI will be equal; and they will also be parallel,
because the two arches EK and HI, that is, the two angles KBE and IAH are
equal; and consequently the Straight Lines AB and KI which connect them will
also be equal and parallel. Wherefore KI and EH are parallel. Seeing therefore
E and H are carried in the same time to K and I, the whole Straight Line IK
will be parallel to EH, from whence it departed. And therefore, (seeing the
Sphere EFG is supposed to be of consistent matter, so as all its points keep
always the same situation) it is necessary that every other Straight Line
taken in the same Sphere, be carried always parallel to the places in which it
formerly was. Wherefore the Sphere EFG is moved with simple Circular Motion;
which was to be demonstrated.

11 If in a fluid Medium, whose parts are stirred by a Body moved with Simple
Motion, there float annother Body, which has its Superficies either wholly
hard, or wholly fluid; the parts of this Body shall approach the Center equally
on all sides, that is to say, the motion of the Body shall be Circular, and
Concentrique with the motion of the Movent. But if it have one side hard, and
the other side fluid, then both those Motions shall not have the same center,
nor shall the floating Body be moved in the Circumference of a perfect Circle.

Let a Body be moved in the Circumference of the Circle KL MN (in the 2d
figure) whose center is A. And let there be another Body at I, whose
Superficies is either all hard, or all fluid. Also let the Medium in which both
the Bodies are placed, be fluid. I say the Body at I will be moved in the
Circle IB about the Center A. For this has been demonstrated in the last
Article.

Wherefore let the Superficies of the Body at I, be fluid on one side, and hard
on the other. And first, let the fluid side be toward the Center. Seeing
therefore the Motion of the Medium is such, as that its parts do continually
change their places, (as has been shown in the 5th Article); if this change of
place be considered in those parts of the Medium which are contiguous to the
fluid Superficies, it must needs be, that the small parts of that Superficies
enter into the places of the small parts of the Medium which are contiguous to
them; And the like change of place will be made with the next contiguous parts
toward A. And if the fluid parts of the Body at I, have any degree at all of
tenacity (for there are degrees of tenacity, as in the Air and Water) the
whole fluid side will be lifted up a little; but so much the less, as its parts
have less tenacity; whereas the hard part of the Superficies which is
contiguous to the fluid part, has no cause at all of elevation, that is to say,
no endeavor toward A.

Secondly, let the hard Superficies of the Body at I, be toward A. By reason
therefore of the said change of place of the parts which are contiguous to it,
the hard Superficies must of necessity (seeing by Supposition there is no empty
Space) either come nearer to A, or else its smallest parts must supply the
contiguous places of the Medium, which otherwise would be empty. But this
cannot be by reason of the supposed hardness; and therefore the other must
needs be, namely, that the Body come nearer to A. Wherefore the Body at I, has
greater endeavor toward the center A, when its hard side is next it, then
when it is averted from it. But the Body in I, while it is moving in the
circumference of the Circle IB, has sometimes one side, sometimes another
turned toward the center; and therefore it is sometimes nearer, sometimes
further off from the center A. Wherefore the Body at I, is not carried in the
circumference of a perfect Circle; which was to be demonstrated.

CHAP. XXII. Of other Variety of Motion.
1 Endeavor and Pressure how they differ. 2 Two kinds of Mediums in which
Bodies are moved. 3 Propagation of Motion what it is 4 What motion Bodies have
when they press one another. 5 Fluid Bodies, when they are pressed together,
penetrate one another. 6 When one Body presses another, and does not penetrate
it, the action of the pressing Body is perpendicular to the Superficies of the
Body pressed. 7 When a hard Body, pressing another Body, penetrates the same,
it does not penetrate it perpendicularly, unless it fall perpendicularly upon
it. 8 Motion sometimes opposite to that of the Movent. 9 In a full Medium,
Motion is propagated to any distance. 10 Dilatation and Contraction what they
are. 11 Dilatation and Contraction suppose Mutation of the smallest parts in
respect of their situation. 12 All Traction is Pulsion. 13 Such things as being
pressed, or bent, restore themselves, have motion in their internal parts. 14
Though that which carries another be stopped, the Body carried will proceed.
15, 16 The effects of Percussion not to be compared with those of Weight. 17,
18 Motion cannot begin first in the internal parts of a Body. 19 Action and
Reaction proceed in the same Line. 20 Habit what it is.
1 I Have already (in the 15th Chap. at the 2d Article) defined Endeavor to be
Motion through some Length, though not considered as Length, but as a Point.
Whether therefore there be resistance or no resistance, the Endeavor will
still be the same. For simply to Endeavor, is to Go. But when two Bodies
having opposite Endeavors press one another, then the Endeavor of either of
them is that which we call Pressure, and is mutual when their pressures are
opposite.

2. Bodies moved, and also the Mediums in which they are moved, are of two
kinds. For either they have their parts coherent in such manner, as no part of
the Moved Body will easily yield to the Mouent, except the whole Body yield
also, and such are the things we call Hard; Or else their parts, while the
whole remains unmoved, will easily yield to the Movent; and these we call Fluid
or Soft Bodies. For the words Fluid, Soft, Tough and Hard (in the same manner
as Great and Little) are used only comparatively; and are not different kinds,
but different degrees of Quality.

3 To Do, and to Suffer is to Move and to be moved; and nothing is moved, but
by that which touches it, and is also moved, (as has been formerly shown). And
how great sover the distance be, we say the first Movent moves the last moved
Body; but mediately; namely so, as that the first moves the second, the second
the third, and so on, till the last of all be touched. When therefore one Body
having opposite Endeavor to another Body, moves the same, and that moves a
third, and so on, I call that action Propagation of Motion.

4 When two fluid Bodies which are in a free and open Space, press one another,
their parts will endeavor, or be moved toward the sides, not only those
parts which are there where the mutual contact is, but all the other parts. For
in the first contact, the parts which are pressed by both the endeavoring
Bodies, have no place either forwards or backwards in which they can be moved;
and therefore they are pressed out toward the sides. And this expressure, when
the forces are equal, is in a line perpendicular to the Bodies pressing. But
whenever the foremost parts of both the Bodies are pressed, the hindermost
also must be pressed at the same time; for the motion of the hindermost parts
cannot in an instant be stopped by the resistance of the foremost parts, but
proceeds for some time; and therefore seeing they must have some place in which
they may be moved, and that there is no place at all for them forwards, it is
necessary that they be moved into the places which are toward the sides every
way. And this effect follows of necessity, not only in Fluid, but in
Consistent and Hard Bodies, though it be not always manifest to sense. For
though from the compression of two stones we cannot with our eyes discern any
swelling outward toward the sides, (as we perceive in two Bodies of wax;) yet
we know well enough by reason, that some tumor must needs be there, though it
be but little.

5 But when the Space is enclosed, and both the Bodies be fluid, they will (if
they be pressed together) penetrate one anoteer, though differently according
to their different endeavors. For suppose a hollow Cylinder of hard matter,
well stopped at both ends, but filled first, below with some heavy fluid Body,
as Quicksilver; and above with Water or Air. If now the bottom of the
Cylinder be turned upwards, the heaviest fluid Body which is now at the top,
having the greatest endeavor downwards, and being by the hard sides of the
vessel hindered from extending it self sidewayes, must of necessity either be
received by the lighter Body, that it may sink through it, or else it must open
a passage through it self, by which the lighter Body may ascend. For of the
two Bodies, that whose parts are most easily separated, will the first be
divided; which being done, it is not necessary that the parts of the other,
suffer any separation at all. And therefore when two Liquours which are
enclosed in the same vessel, change their places, there is no need that their
smallest parts should be mingled with one another; for a way being opened
through one of them, the parts of the other need not be separated.

Now if a fluid Body which is not enclosed press a hard Body, its endeavor
will indeed be toward the internal parts of that hard Body; but (being
excluded by the resistance of it) the parts of the fluid Body will be moved
every way according to the Superficies of the hard Body, and that equally, if
the pressure be perpendicular; for when all the parts of the Cause are equal,
the Effects will be equal also. But if the pressure be not perpendicular, then
the angles of Incidence being unequal, the expansion also will be unequal,
namely, greater on that side where the angle is greater, because that motion is
most direct which proceeds by the directest Line.

6 If a Body, pressing another Body do not penetrate it, it will nevertheless
give to the part it presses, an endeavor to yield and recede in a straight
line perpendicular to its Superficies in that point in which it is pressed.

Let ABCD (in the first figure) be a hard Body; and let another Body, falling
upon it in the straight line EA, with any inclination, or without inclination,
press it in the point A. I say the Body so pressing, and not penetrating it,
will give to the part A an endeavor to yield or recede in a straight Line
perpendicular to the line AD.

For let AB be perpendicular to AD; and let BA be produced to F. If therefore
AF be coincident with AE, it is of it self manifest that the motion in EA will
make A to endeavor in the line AB. Let now EA be oblique to AD; and from the
point E let the straight line EC be drawn, cutting AD at right angles in D; and
let the rectangles ABCD and ADEF be completed. I have shown (in the 8th Article
of the 16th Chapter) that the Body will be carried from E to A by the concourse
of two Uniform Motions, the one in OF and its parallels, the other in ED and
its parallels. But the motion in OF and its parallels (whereof DA is one)
contributes nothing to the Body in A, to make it endeavor or press toward B;
and therefore the whole endeavor which the Body has in the inclined line EA,
to pass, or press the Straight line AD, it has it all from the perpendicular
motion or endeavor in FA. Wherefore the Body E after it is in A, will have
only that perpendicular endeavor which proceeds from the motion in FA, that
is, in AB; which was to be proved.

7 If a hard Body falling upon, or pressing another Body, penetrate the same,
its endeavor after its first penetration will be neither in the inclined line
produced, nor in the perpendicular, but sometimes betwixt both, sometimes
without them.

Let EAG (in the same ^ figure) be the inclined line produced; and First, let
the passage through the Medium in which EA is, be easier then the passage
through the Medium in which AG is. As soon therefore as the Body is within the
Medium in which is AG, it will find greater resistance to its motion in DA and
its parallels, then it did whilst it was above AD; and therefore below AD it
will proceed with slower motion in the parallels of DA, then above it.
Wherefore the motion which is compounded of the two motions in OF and ED will
be slower below AD, then above it; and therefore also, the Body will not
proceed from A in EA produced, but below it. Seeing therefore the endeavor in
AB is generated by the endeavor in FA; if to the endeavor in FA there be
added the endeavor in DA, (which is not all taken away by the immersion of the
point A into the lower Medium) the Body will not proceed from A in the
perpendicular AB, but beyond it, namely, in some straight line between AB and
AG, as in the line AH.

Secondly, let the passage through the Medium EA, be less easy then that
through AG. The motion therefore which is made by the concourse of the motions
in OF and FB, is slower above AD then below it; and consequently, the endeavor
will not proceed from A in EA produced, but beyond it, as in AI. Wherefore, If
a hard Body falling, etc; which was to be proved.

This Divergency of the Straight line AH from the straight line AG, is that
which the Writers of Optics commonly call Refraction; which, when the passage
is ea^ier in the first then in the second Medium, is made by diverging from the
line of Inclination toward the perpendicular; and contrarily, when the passage
is not so easy in the first Medium, by departing farther from the
perpendicular.

8 By the 6th Theoreme it is manifest, that the force of the Movent may be so
placed, as that the Body moved by it, may proceed in a way almost directly
contrary to that of the Movent; as we see in the motion of Ships.

For let AB (in the 2d figure) represent a Ship, whose length from the prow to
the poop is AB; and let the wind lie upon it in the straight parallel lines
CB, DE and FG; and let DE and FG be cut in E and G by a straight Line drawn
from B perpendicular to AB; also let BE and EG be equal, and the angle ABC any
angle how small soever. Then between BC and BA let the straight line BY be
drawn; and let the Sail be conceived to be spread in the same line BY, and the
wind to fall upon it in the points L, M and B; from which points,
perpendicular to BY, let BK, MQ and LP be drawn. Lastly, let EN and GO be drawn
perpendicular to BG, and cutting BK in H and K; and let HN and KO be made equal
to one another, and severally equal to BA. I say the Ship BA by the wind
falling upon it in CB, DE, FG, and other lines parallel to them, will be
carried forwards almost opposite to the wind, that is to say, in a way almost
contrary to the way of the Movent.

For the Wind that blows in the Line CB, will (as has been shown in the 6th
Article) give to the point B an endeavor to proceed in a straight line
perpendicular to the straight line BY, that is, in the straight line BK; and to
the points M and L an endeavor to proceed in the straight lines MQ and LP,
which are parallel to BK. Let now the measure of the time be BG, which is
divided in the middle in E; and let the point B be carried to H in the time BE.
In the same time therefore by the wind blowing in DM and FL (and as many other
lines as may be drawn parallel to them) the whole Ship will be applied to the
straight line HN. Also at the end of the second time EG, it will be applied to
the straight line KO. Wherefore the Ship will always go forwards; and the angle
it makes with the wind will be equal to the angle ABC, how small soever that
angle be; and the way it makes will in every time be equal to the straight line
EH. I say thus it would be, if the Ship might be moved with as great celerity
sidewayes from BA toward KO, as it may be moved forwards in the line BA. But
this is impossible, by reason of the resistance made by the great quantity of
water which presses the side, much exceeding the resistance made by the much
smaller quantity which presses the prow of the Ship; so that the way the Ship
makes sidewayes is scarce sensible; and therefore the point B will proceed
almost in the very line BA, making with the wind the angle ABC, how acute
soever, that is to say, it will proceed almost in the straight line BC, that
is, in a way almost contrary to the way of the Movent; which was to be
demonstrated.

But the Sail in BY must be so stretched, as that there be left in it no bo^ome
at all; for otherwise the straight lines LP, MQ and BK will not be
perpendicular to the plain of the Sail, but falling below P, Q and K will drive
the Ship backwards. But by making use of a small Board for a Sail, a little
Wagon with wheels for the Ship, and of a smooth Pavement for the Sea, I have
by experience found this to be so true, that I could scarce oppose the board to
the wind in any obliquity though never so small, but the Wagon was carried
forwards by it.

By the same 6th. Theoreme, it may be found, how much a stroke which falls
obliquely, is weaker then a stroke falling perpendicularly, they being like and
equal in all other respects.

Let a stroke fall upon the Wall AB obliquely, as (for example) in the straight
line CA (in the 3d figure). Let CE be drawn parallel to AB, and DA
perpendicular to the same AB and equal to CA; and let both the velocity and
time of the motion in CA be equal to the velocity and time of the motion in DA.
I say the stroke in CA will be weaker then that in DA in the proportion of EA
to DA. For producing DA howsoever to F, the endeavor of both the strokes will
(by the 6th Art.) proceed from A in the perpendicular AF. But the stroke in CA
is made by the concourse of two motions in CE and EA; of which that in CE
contributes nothing to the stroke in A, because CE and BA are parallels; and
therefore the stroke in CA is made by the motion which is in EA only. But the
velocity or force of the perpendicular stroke in EA, to the velocity or force
of the stroke in DA, is as EA to DA. Wherefore the oblique stroke in CA is
weaker then the perpendicular stroke in DA, in the proportion of EA to DA or
CA; Which was to be proved.

9 In a full Medium, all Endeavor proceeds as far as the Medium it self
reaches; that is to say, if the Medium be infinite, the Endeavor will proceed
infinitely.

For whatsoever Endeavors, is Moved, and therefore whatsoever stands in
its way, it makes it yield, at least a little, namely so far as the Movent it
self is moved forwards. But that which yeildeth is also moved, and consequently
makes that to yield which is in its way, and so on successively as long as the
Medium is full; that is to say, infinitely, if the full Medium be infinite,
which was to be proved.

Now although Endeavor thus perpetually propagated, do not always appear to
the Senses as Motion; yet it appears as Action, or as the efficient cause of
some Mutation. For if there be placed before our Eyes some very little object,
as (for example) a small grain of sand, which at a certain distance is visible;
it is manifest that it may be removed to such a distance as not to be any
longer seen, though by its action it still work upon the organs of sight, as is
manifest from that (which was last proved) that all Endeavor proceeds
infinitely. Let it be conceived therefore to be removed from our Eyes to any
distance how great soever, and a sufficient number of other grains of sand of
the same bigness added to it; it is evident that the aggregate of all those
sands will be visible; and though none of them can be seen when it is single
and severed from the rest, yet the whole heap or hill which they make will
manifestly appear to the sight; which would be impossible if some action did
not proceed from each several part of the whole heap.

10 Between the degrees of Hard and Soft, are those things which we call Tough,
Tough being that, which may be bended without being altered from what it was;
and the Bending of a Line, is either the adduction or diduction of the extreme
parts, that is, a morion from Straightness to Crookedness, or contrarily,
whilst the line remains still the same it was; for by drawing out the extreme
points of a line to their greatest distance, the line is made straight, which
otherwise is Crooked. So also the Bending of a Superficies, is the diduction or
adduction of its extreme lines, that is, their Dilatation and Contraction.

11 Dilatation and Contraction, as also all Flexion supposes necessarily that
the internal parts of the Body bowed do either come nearer to the external
parts, or go further from them. For though Flexion be considered only in the
length of a Body, yet when that Body is bowed, the line which is made on one
side will be unequal, and the line on the other side will be concave; of which
the concave being the interior line, will (unless something be taken from it
and added to the unequal line) be the more crooked, that is, the greater of the
two. But they are equal; and therefore in Flexion there is an accession made
from the interior to the exterior parts; and on the contrary, in Tension,
from the exterior to the interior parts. And as for those things which do not
easily suffer such transposition of their parts, they are called Brittle; and
the great force they require to make them yield, makes them also with sudden
motion to leap asunder, and break in pieces.

12 Also Motion is distinguished into Pulsion and Traction. And Pulsion, as I
have already defined it, is when that which is moved, goes before that which
moves it. But contrarily, in Traction the Movent goes before that which is
moved. Nevertheless, considering it with greater attention, it seems to be
the same with Pulsion. For of two parts of a hard Body, when that which is
foremost drives before it the Medium in which the motion is made, at the same
time that which is thrust forwards, thrusts the next, and this again the
next, and so on successively. In which action, if we suppose that there is no
place void, it must needs be, that by continual Pulsion, namely, when that
action has gone round, the Movent will be behind that part which at the first
seemed not to be thrust forwards, but to be drawn; so that now the Body which
was drawn, goes before the Body which gives it motion; and its motion is no
longer Traction, but Pulsion.

13 Such things as are removed from their places by forcible Compression or
Extension, and as soon as the force is taken away, do presently return and
restore themselves to their former situation, have the beginning of their
restitution within themselves, namely, a certain motion in their internal
parts, which was there, when, before the taking away of the force, they were
compressed, or extended. For that Restitution is motion, and that which is at
rest cannot be moved, but by a moved and a Contiguous Movent. Nor does the
cause of their Restitution proceed from the taking away of the force by which
they were compressed or extended; for the removing of impediments has not the
efficacy of a cause (as has been shown at the end of the 3d Article of the 15th
Chapter). The Cause therefore of their Restitution, is some motion either of
the parts of the Ambient; or of the parts of the Body compressed or extended.
But the parts of the Ambient have no endeavor which contributes to their
Compression or Extension, nor to the setting of them at liberty, or
Restitution. It remayns therefore that from the time of their Compression or
Extension there be left some endeavor (or motion) by which, the impediment
being removed, every part resumes its former place; that is to say, the whole
Restores it self.

14 In the Carriage of Bodies if that Body which carries another, hit upon any
obstacle, or be by any means suddenly stopped, and that which is carried be not
stopped, it will go on, till its motion be by some external impediment taken
away.

For I have demonstrated in the 8th Chapter at the 19th Article, that Motion,
unless it be hindered by some external resistance, will be continued eternally
with the same celerity; and in the 7th Article of the 9th Chap. that the action
of an external Agent is of no effect without contact. When therefore that which
carries another thing, is stopped, that stop does not presently take away the
motion of that which is carried. It will therefore proceed, till its motion be
by little and little extinguished by some external resistance; Which was to be
proved; Though experience alone had been sufficient to prove this.

In like manner, if that Body which carries another be put from rest into
sudden motion; that which is carried will not be moved forwards together with
it, but will be left behind. For the contiguous part of the Body carried, has
almost the same motion with the Body which carries it; and the remote parts
will receive different Velocities according to their different distances from
the Body that carries them; namely, the more remote the parts are, the less
will be their degrees of Velocity. It is necessary therefore that the Body
which is carried, be left accordingly more or less behind. And this also is
manifest by experience, when at the starting forward of the Horse, the Rider
falls backwards.

15 In Percussion therefore, when one hard Body is in some small ^art of it
stricken by another with great force, it is not necessary that the whole Body
should yield to the stroke with the same celerity with which the stricken part
yields. For the rest of the parts receive their motion from the motion of the
part stricken and yiedling, which motion is less propagated every way toward
the sides then it is directly forwards. And hence it is, that sometimes very
hard Bodies, which being erected can hardly be made to stand, are more easily
broken, then thrown down by a violent stroke; when nevertheless, if all their
parts together were by any weak motion thrust forwards they would easily be
cast down.

16 Though the difference between Trusion and Percussion consist only in this,
that in Trusion the motion both of the Movent and Moved Body begin both
together in their very contact; and in Percussion the striking Body is first
moved, and afterward the Body stricken; Yet their Effects are so different,
that it seems scarce possible to compare their forces with one another. I say,
any effect of Percussion being propounded, as for example the stroke of a
Beetle of any weight assigned, by which a Pile of any given length, is to be
driven into earth of any tenacity given, it seems to me very hard if not
impossible to define, with what weight, or with what stroke, and in what time,
the same pile may be driven (...) a depth assigned into the same earth. The
cause of which difficulty is this, that the velocity of the Percutient is to be
compared with the magnitude of the Ponderant. Now Velocity, seeing it is
computed by the length of space transmitted, is to be accounted but as one
Dimension; but Weight, is as a solid thing, being measured by the dimension of
the whole Body. And there is no comparison to be made of a Solid Body with a
Length, that is, with a Line.

17 If the internal parts of a Body be at rest, or retain the same situation
with one another for any time how little soever, there cannot in those parts be
generated any new motion, or endeavor, whereof the efficient cause is not
without the Body of which they are parts. For if any small part which is
comprehended within the Superficies of the whole Body, be supposed to be now at
rest, and by and by to be moved, that part must of necessity receive its motion
from some moved and contiguous Body. But (by supposition) there is no such
moved and contiguous part within the Body. Wherefore, if there be any Endeavor
or Motion, or change of situation, in the internal parts of that Body, it must
needs arise from some efficient cause that is without the Body which contains
them; Which was to be proved.

18 In hard Bodies therefore which are compressed or extended, if that which
compresseth or extends them being taken away, they restore themselves to
their former place or situation, it must needs be, that that Endeavor (or
Motion) of their internal parts, by which they were able to recover their
former places or situations, was not extinguished when the force by which they
were compressed or extended was taken away. Therefore when the Lath of a
Cross-bow bent, does, as soon as it is at liberty, restore it self, though to
him that judges by Sense, both it and all its parts seem to be at rest; yet he
that judging by Reason, does not account the taking away of impediment for an
efficient cause, nor conceives that without an efficient cause any thing can
pass from Rest to Motion, will conclude, that the parts were already in motion
before they began to restore themselves.

19 Action and Reaction proceed in the same Line, but from opposite Terms. For
seeing Reaction is nothing but Endeavor in the Patient to restore it self to
that situation from which it was forced by the Agent; the endeavor or motion
both of the Agent and Patient (or Reagent) will be propagated between the same
terms, (yet so, as that in Action the Term from which, is in Reaction the Term
to which). And seeing all Action proceeds in this manner, not only between the
opposite Terms of the whole line in which it is propagated, but also in all the
parts of that line, the Terms from which and to which, both of the Action and
Reaction, will be in the same line. Wherefore Action and Reaction proceed in
the same line, etc.

20 To what has been said of Motion, I will add what I have to say concerning
Habit. Habit therefore is a generation of Motion, not of Motion simply, but an
easy conducting of the moved Body in a certain and designed way. And seeing it
is attained by the weakening of such endeavors as divert its motion, therefore
such endeavors are to be weakened by little and little. But this cannot be done
but by the long continuance of action, or by actions often repeated; and
therefore Custom begets that Facicility, which is commonly and rightly called
Habit; and it may be defined thus; HABIT is Motion made more easy and ready by
Custom; that is to say, by perpetual endeavor, or by iterated endeavors in a
way differing from that in which the Motion proceeded from the beginning, and
opposing such endeavors as resist. And to make this more perspicuous by
example, We may observe, that when one that has no skill in Music, first,
puts his hand to an Instrument, he cannot after the first stroke carry to his
hand to the place where he would make the second stroke, without taking it back
by a new endeavor, and as it were beginning again, pass from the first to the
second. Nor will he be able to go on to the third place without another new
endeavor, but he will be forced to draw back his hand again, and so
successively, by renewing his endeavor at every stroke, till at the last by
doing this often, and by compounding many interrupted motions or endeavors
into one equal endeavor, he be able to make his hand go readily on from stroke
to stroke in that order and way which was at the first designed. Nor are Habits
to be observed in living creatures only, but also in Bodies inanimate. For we
find, that when the Lath of a Crossbow is strongly bent, and would if the
impediment were removed return again with great force, if it remain a long time
bent, it will get such a Habit, that when it is loosed and left to its own
freedom, it will not only not restore it self, but will require as much force
for the bringing of it back to its first posture, as it did for the bending of
it at the first.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Center of Equiponderation of Bodies pressing do^^ards in
straight Parallel Lines.
1 Definitions and Suppositions. 2 Two Plains of Equiponderation are n^^
parallel. 3 The Center of Equiponderation is in every Plain of Equiponderation.
4 The Moments of equal Ponderants are to one another as their distances from
the center of the Scale. 5,6. The Moments of unequal Ponderants have their
proportion to one another compounded of the proportions of their Waights and
distances from the center of the Scale reciprocally taken. 7. If two Ponderants
have their Moments and Distances from the Center of the Scale in reciprocal
proportion; they are equally poised; and contrarily. 8 If the parts of any
Ponderant press the Beam of the Scale every where equally, all the parts cut
out off reckoned from the Center of the Scale* will have their Moments in the
same proportion with that of the parts of a Triangle cut off from the Vertex by
straight Lines parallel to the base. 9 The Diameter of Equiponderation of
Figures which are deficient* according to commensurable proportions of their
altitudes and bases, divides the Axis, so, that the part taken next the vertex
is to the other part as the complete figure to the deficient figure. 10 The
diameter of Equiponderation of the Complement of the half of any of the said
deficient figures, divides that line which is drawn* through the vertex
parallel to the base, so, that the part next the vertex is to the other part as
the complete figure to the Complement. 11 The Center of Equiponderation of the
half of any of the desicient figures in the first row of the Table of the 3d.
Article of the 17th Chapter, may be found out by the numbers of the second row.
12 The center of Equiponderation of the half of any of the figures in the
second row of the same Table, may be found out by the numbers of the fourth
row. 13 The Center of Equiponderation of the half of any of the figures in the
same Table, being known, the Center of the Excess of the same figure above a
Triangle of the same altitude and base is also known. 14 The Center of
Equiponderation of a solid Sector, is in the Axis, so divided, that the part
next the Vertex be to the whole Axis want half the Axis of the portion of the
Sphere, as 3 to 4.
1

Definitions.
1 A Scale, is a straight line, whose middle point is immovable, all the rest
of its points being at liberty; and that part of the Scale which reaches from
the center to either of the waights, is called the Beam. 2 Equiponderation is,
when the endeavor of one Body which presses one of the Beams, resists the
endeavor of another Body pressing the other Beam, so, that neither of them is
moved; and the Bodies when neither of them is moved, are said to be Equally
poised. 3 Weight, is the aggregate of all the Endeavors, by which all the
points of that Body which presses the Beam, tend downwards in lines parallel to
one another; and the Body which presses, is called the Ponderant. 4 Moment, is
the Power which the Ponderant has to move the Beam, by reason of a determined
situation. 5 The plain of Equiponderation, is that, by which the Ponderant is
so divided, that the Moments on both sides remain equal. 6 The Diameter of
Equiponderation, is the common Section of the two Plains of Equiponderation;
and is in the straight line by which the weight is hanged. 7 The Center of
Equiponderation, is the common point of the two Diameters of Equiponderation.
Suppositions
1 When two Bodies are equally poised, if weight be added to one of them, and
not to the other, their Equiponderation ceases. 2 When two Ponderants of equal
magnitude, and of the same Species or matter, press the Beam on both sides at
equal distances from the center of the Scale, their Moments are equal. Also
when two Bodies endeavor at equal distances from the center of the Scale, if
they be of equal magnitude and of the same Species, their Moments are equal.
2 No two Plains of Equiponderation are parallel.

Let A B C D (in the first figure) be any Ponderant whatsoever; and in it let E
F be a Plain of Equiponderation; parallel to which, let any other Plain be
drawn, as G H. I say G H is not a Plain of Equiponderation. For seeing the
parts A E F D and E B C F of the Ponderant A B C D, are equally poised; and the
weight E G H F is added to the part A E F D, and nothing is added to the part E
B C F, but the weight E G H F is taken from it; therefore (by the first
Supposition) the parts A G H D and G B C H will not be equally poised; and
consequently G H is not a Plain of Equiponderation. Wherefore, No two Plains of
Equiponderation, etc. Which was to be proved.

3 The Center of Equiponderation is in every Plain of Equiponderation.

For if another Plain of Equiponderation be taken, it will not (by the last
Article) be parallel to the former Plain; and therefore both those Plains will
cut one another. Now that Section (by the 6th Definition) is the Diameter of
Equiponderation. Again, if another Diameter of Equiponderation be taken, it
will cut that former Diameter; and in that Section (by the 7th Definition) is
the Center of Equiponderation. Wherefore the Center of Equiponderation is in
that Diameter which lies in the said Plain of Equiponderation.

4 The Moment of any Ponderant applied to one point of the Beam, to the Moment
of the same, or an equal Ponderant applied to any other point of the Beam, is
as the distance of the former point from the Center of the Scale, to the
distance of the later point from the same Center. Or thus, Those Moments are to
one another, as the Arches of Circles which are made upon the Center of the
Scale through those points, in the same time. Or lastly thus; They are, as the
parallel bases of two Triangles, which have a common angle at the Center of the
Scale.

Let A (in the 2d figure) be the Center of the Scale; and let the equal
Poderants D and E press the Beam A B in the points B and C; also let the
straight lines B D and C E be Diameters of Equiponderation; and the points D
and E in the Ponderants D and E be their Centers of Equiponderation. Let A G F
be drawn howsoever, cutting D B produced in F, and E C in G; and lastly, upon
the common Center A, let the two arches B H and C I be described, cutting A G F
in H and I. I say the Moment of the Ponderant D to the Moment of the Ponderant
E, is as A B to A C, or as B H to C I, or as B F to C G. For the effect of the
Ponderant D in the point B, is circular motion in the arch B H; and the effect
of the Ponderant E in the point C, circular motion in the arch C I; and by
reason of the equality of the Ponderants D and E, these motions are to one
another as the Quicknesses or Velocities with which the points B and C describe
the arches B H and C I, that is, as the arches themselves B H and C I, or as
the straight parallels B F and C G, or as the parts of the Beam A B and A C;
for A B. A C:: B F. C G:: B H. C I. are proportionals; and therefore the
effects, that is, (by the 4th Definition) the Moments of the equal Ponderants
applied to several points of the Beam, are to one another, as A B and A C; or
as the distances of those points from the center of the Scale; or as the
parallel bases of the Triangles which have a common angle at A; or as the
concentrick arches B H and C I; which was to be demonstrated.

5 Unequal Ponderants, when they are applied to several points of the Beam, and
hang at liberty (that is, so as the line by which they hang be the Diameter of
Equiponderation, whatsoever be the figure of the Ponderant), have their Moments
to one another in proportion compounded of the proportions of their distances
from the center of the Scale, and of their Waights.

Let A (in the 3d figure) be the center of the Scale, and A B the Beam; to
which let the two Ponderants C and D be applied at the points B and E. I say
the proportion of the Moment of the Ponderant C, to the Moment of the Ponderant
D, is compounded of the proportions of A B to A E and of the Weight C to the
Weight D; or (if C and D be of the same species) of the magnitude C to the
magnitude D.

Let either of them, as C, be supposed to be bigger then the other D. If
therefore by the addition of F, F and D together be as one Body equal to C, the
Moment of C to the Moment of F + D will be (by the last article) as B G is to E
H. Now as F + D is to D, so let E H be to another E I; and the moment of F + D,
that is of C, to the moment of D, will be as B G to E I. But the proportion of
B G to E I is compounded of the proportions (of B G to E H that is) of A B to A
E, and (of E H to E I, that is) of the weight C to the weight D. Wherefore
unequal Ponderants, when they are applied, etc. which was to be proved.

6 The same figure remaining, if I K be drawn parallel to the Beam A B, and
cutting A G in K; and K L be drawn parallel to to B G, cutting A B in L, the
distances A B and A L from the center, will be proportional to the moments of C
and D. For the moment of C is B G, and the moment of D is E I, to which K L is
equal. But as the distance A B from the center, is to the distance A L from the
center, so is B G the moment of the Ponderant C, to L K, or E I the moment of
the Ponderant D.

7 If two Ponderants have their waights and distances from the center in
reciprocal proportion, and the center of the Scale be between the points to
which the Ponderants are applied, they will be equally poised. And contrarily,
if they be equally poised, their waights and distances from the center of the
Scale will be in reciprocal proportion.

Let the center of the Scale (in the same 3d figure) be A, the Beam A B; and
let any Ponderant C, having B G for its moment, be applied to the point B; also
let any other Ponderant D, whose moment is E I, be applied to the point E.
Through the point I, let I K be drawn parallel to the Beam A B, cutting A G in
K; also let K L be drawn parallel to B G. K L will then be the Moment of the
Ponderant D; and (by the last Article) it will be as B G the Moment of the
Ponderant C in the point B, to L K the Moment of the Ponderant D in the point
E* so A B to A L. On the other side of the center of the Scale, let A N be
taken equal to A L; and to the point N let there be applied the Ponderant O,
having to the Ponderant C the proportion of A B to A N. I say the Ponderants in
B and N will be equally poised. For the proportion of the Moment of the
Ponderant O in the point N, to the Moment of the Ponderant C in the point B, is
(by the 5th Article) co^pounded of the proportions of the weight O to the
weight B, and of the distance (from the center of the Scale) A N or A L to the
distance (from the center of the Scale) A B. But seeing we have supposed, that
the distance A B to the distance A N, is in reciprocal proportion of the Weight
O to the weight C, the proportion of the Moment of the Ponderant O in the point
N, to the Moment of the Ponderant C in the point B, will be compounded of the
proportions of A B to A N, and of A N to A B. Wherefore, setting in order A B,
A N, A B, the Moment of O to the Moment of C will be as the first to the last,
that is, as A B to A B. Their Moments therefore are equal; and consequently the
Plain which passes through A, will (by the fifth Definition) be a Plain of
Equiponderation. Wherefore they will be equally poised; as was to be proved.

Now the converse of this is manifest. For if there be Equiponderation, and the
proportion of the Waights and Distances be not reciprocal, then both the
Waights will always have the same Moments, although one of them have more
weight added to it, or its distance changed.

Corollary. When Ponderants are of the same Species, and their Moments be
equal; their Magnitudes and Distances from the center of the Scale will be
reciprocally proportional. For in Homogeneous Bodies, it is as Weight to
Weight, so Magnitude to Magaltude.

8 If to the whole length of the Beam there be applied a Parallelogram, or a
Parallelopipedum, or a Prisma, or a Cylinder, or the Superficies of a Cylinder,
ot of a Sphere, or of any portion of a Sphere or Prisma; the parts of any of
them cut off with plains parallel to the base, will have their Moments in the
same proportion with the parts of a Triangle which has its Vertex in the center
of the Scale, and for one of its sides the Beam it self, which parts are cut
off by Plains parallel to the base.

First, let the rectangled Parallelogram A B C D (in the 4th figure) be applied
to the whole length of the Beam A B; and producing C B howsoever to E, let the
Triangle A B E be described. Let now any part of the Parallelogram, as A F, be
cut off by the plain F G, parallel to the base C B; and let F G be produced to
A E in the point H. I say the Moment of the whole A B C D to the Moment of its
part A F, is as the Triangle A B E to the Triangle A G H, that is, in
proportion duplicate to that of the distances from the center of the Scale.

For, the Parallelogram A B C D being divided into equal parts infinite in
number, by straight lines drawn parallel to the base; and supposing the Moment
of the straight line C B to be B E; the Moment of the straight line F G, will
(by the 7th Article) be G H; and the Moments of all the straight lines of that
Parallelogram, will be so many straight lines in the Triangle A B E drawn
parallel to the base B E; all which parallels together taken are the Moment of
the whole Parallelogram A B C D; and the same parallels do also constitute the
superficies of the Triangle A B E. Wherefore the Moment of the Parallelogram A
B C D, is the Triangle A B E; and for the same reason, the Moment of the
Parallelogram A F, is the Triangle A G H; and therefore the Moment of the whole
Parallelogram, to the Moment of a Parallelogram which is part of the same, is
as the Triangle A B E, to the Triangle A G H, or in proportion duplicate to
that of the Beams to which they are applied. And what is here demonstrated in
the case of a Parallelogram, may be understood to serve for that of a Cylinder,
and of a Prisma, and their Superficies; as also for the Superficies of a
Sphere, of an Hemisphere, or any portion of a Sphere, (for the parts of the
Superficies of a Sphere, have the same proportion with that of the parts of the
Axis cut off by the same parallels by which the parts of the Superficies are
cut off, as Archimedes has demonstrated); and therefore when the parts of any
of these figures are equal and at equal distances from the Center of the Scale,
their Moments also are equal, in the same manner as they are in Parallelograms.

Secondly, let the Parallelogram A K I B not be rectangled; the straight line I
B will nevertheless press the point B perpendicularly in the straight line B E;
and the straight line L G will press the point G perpendicularly in the straight
line G H; and all the rest of the straight lines which are parallel to I B will
do the like. Whatsoever therefore the Moment be which is assigned to the
straight line I B, as here (for example) it is supposed to be B E, if A E be
drawn, the Moment of the whole Parallelogram A I will be the Triangle A B E;
and the Moment of the part A L will be the Triangle A G H. Wherefore the Moment
of any Ponderant, which has its sides equally applied to the Beam, (whether
they be applied perpendicularly or obliquely) will be always to the Moment of a
part of the same, in such proportion, as the whole Triangle has to a part of
the same cut off by a plain which is parallel to the base.

9 The Center of Equiponderation of any figure which is deficient according to
commensurable proportions of the altitude and base diminished, and whose
complete figure is either a Parallelogram, or a Cylinder, or a
Parallelopipedum, divides the Axis, so, that the part next the Vertex, to the
other part, is as the complete figure to the deficient figure.

For let C I A P E (in the 5th figure) be a deficient figure, whose Axis is A
B, and whose complete figure is C D F E; and let the Axis A B be so divided in
Z, that A Z be to Z B as C D F E is to C I A P E. I say the center of
Equiponderation of the figure C I A P E will be in the point Z.

First, that the Center of Equiponderation of the figure C I AP E is somewhere
in the Axis A B, is manifest of it self; and therefore A B is a Diameter of
Equiponderation. Let A E be drawn, and let B E be put for the Moment of the
straight line C E; the Triangle A B E will therefore (by the 3d Article) be the
Moment of the complete figure C D F E. Let the Axis A B be equally divided in
L, and let G L H be drawn parallel and equal to the straight line C E, cutting
the crooked line C I A P E in I and P, and the straight lines A C and A E in K
and M. Moreover, let Z O be drawn parallel to the same C E; and let it be, as L
G to L I, so L M to another L N; and let the same be done in all the rest of
the straight lines possible, parallel to the base; and through all the points
N, let the line A N E be drawn; the three-sided figure A N E B will therefore
be the Moment of the figure C I A P E. Now the Triangle A B E is (by the 9th
Article of the 17th Chapter) to the three-sided figure A N E B, as A B C D + A
I C B is to A I C B twice taken, that is, as C D F E + C I A P E is to C I A P
E twice taken. But as C I A P E is to C D F E, that is, as the weight of the
deficient figure, is to the weight of the complete figure, so is C I A P E
twice taken, to C D F E twice taken. Wherefore, setting in order C D F E + C I
A P E. 2 C I A P E. 2 C D F E; the proportion of C D F E + C I A P E to C D F E
twice taken, will be compounded of the proportion of C D F E + C I A P E to C I
A P E twice taken, that is, of the proportion of the Triangle A B E to the
threesided figure A N E B, that is, of the Moment of the complete figure to the
Moment of the deficient figure, and of the proportion of C I A P E twice taken,
to C D F E twice taken, that is, to the proportion reciprocally taken of the
weight of the deficient figure to the weight of the complete figure.

Again, seeing by supposition A Z. Z B:: C D F E. C I A P E are proportionals;
A B. A Z:: C D F E + C I A P E. C D F E will also (by co^pounding) be
proportionals. And seeing A L is the half of A B, A L. A Z:: C D F E + C I A P
E. 2 C D F E will also be proportionals. But the proportion of C D F E + C I A
P E to 2 C D F E is compounded (as was but now shown) of the proportions of
Moment to Moment etc. and therefore the proportion of A L to A Z is compounded
of the proportion of the Moment of the complete figure C D F E to the Moment of
the deficient figure C I A P E, and of the proportion of the weight of the
deficient figure C I AP E, to the weight of the complete figure C D F E; But
the proportion of A L to A Z is compounded of the proportions of A L to B Z and
of B Z to A Z. Now the proportion of B Z to A Z is the proportion of the
Waights reciprocally taken, that is to say, of the weight C I A P F to the
weight C D F E. Therefore the remaining proportion of A L to B Z, that is, of L
B to B Z is the proportion of the Moment of the weight C D F E to the Moment of
the weight C I A P E. But the proportion of A L to B Z is compounded of the
proportions of A L to A Z and of A Z to Z B; of which proportions that of A Z
to Z B is the proportion of the weight C D F E to the weight C I A P E.
Wherefore (by the 5th Article of this Chapter) the remaining proportion of A L
to A Z is the proportion of the distances of the points Z and L from the center
of the Scale, which is A. And therefore (by the 6th Article) the weight C I A P
E shall hang from O in the straight line O Z. So that O Z is one Diameter of
Equiponderation of the weight C I A P E. But the straight line A B is the other
Diameter of Equiponderation of the same weight C I A P E. Wherefore (by the 7th
Definition) the point Z is the center of the same Equiponderation; which point
(by construction) divides the axis so, that the part A Z which is the part next
the vertex, is to the other part Z B, as the complete figure C D F E is to the
deficient figure C I A P E; which is that which was to be demonstrated.

Corollary. The Center of Equiponderation of any of those plain three-sided
figures, which are compared with their complete figures in the Table of the
third Article of the 17th Chapter, is to be found in the same Table, by taking
the Denominator of the fraction for the part of the axis cut off next the
vertex, and the Numerator for the other part next the base. For example, if it
be required to find the Center of Equiponderation of the second threesided
figure of four Means, there is in the concourse of the second column with
the row of three-sided figures of four Means this fraction ^/7, which
signifies that that figure is to its parallelogra^ or complete figure as 5/7 to
Unity, that is, as 5/7 to 7/7, or as 5 to 7; and therefore the Center of
Equiponderation of that figure, divides the axis, so, that the part next the
vertex is to the other part as 7 to 5. 2 Corallary. The Center of
Equiponderation of any of the Solids of those figures which are contained in
the Table of the 8th Article of the same 17th Chapter, is exhibited in the same
Table. For example, if the Center of Equiponderation of a Cone be sought for;
the Cone will be found to be of its Cylinder; and therefore the Center of its
Equiponderation will so divide the axis, that the part next the vertex, to the
other part, will be as 3 to 1. Also the Solid of a three-sided figure of one
Mean, that is, a parabolical Solid, seeing it is 2/4, that is of its Cylinder,
will have its Center of Equiponderation in that point, which divides the axis,
so, that the part toward the vertex be double to the part toward the base.
10 The Diameter of Equiponderation of the Complement of the half of any of
those figu^es which are contained in the Table of the 3d article of the 17th
Chapter, divides that line which is drawn through the Vertex parallel and
equal to the base, so, that the part next the Vertex, will be to the other
part, as the Complete figure to the Complement.

For let A I C B (in the same 5 fig.) be the half of a Parabola, or of any
other of those three-sided figures which are in the Table of the 3d article of
the 17th Chap whose Axis is A B, and base B C; having A D drawn from the
Vertex, equal and parallel to the base B C; and whose complete figure is the
parallelogramme A B C D. Let I Q be drawn, at any distance from the side C D,
but parallel to it; and let A D be the altitude of the Complement A I C D, and
Q I a line ordinately applied in it. Wherefore the altitude A L in the
deficient figure A I C B, is equal to Q I the line ordinately applied in its
Complement; and contrarily, L I the line ordinately applied in the figure A I C
B, is equal to the altitude A Q in its Complement; and so in all the rest of
the ordinate lines and altitudes, the mutation is such, that that line which is
ordinately applied in the figure, is the altitude of its Complement. And
therefore the proportion of the altitudes decreasing, to that of the ordinate
lines decreasing, being multiplicate according to any number in the deficient
figure, is submultiplicate according to the same number in its Complement. For
example, if A I C B be a Parabola, seeing the proportion of A B to A L is
duplicate to that of B C to L I, the proportion of A D to A Q in the Complement
A I C D (which is the same with that of B C to L I) will be subduplicate to
that of C D to Q I (which is the same with that of A B to A L); and
consequently, in a Parabola, the Complement will be to the Parallelogramme as 1
to 3; in a three-sided figure of two Means, as 1 to 4; in a three-sided figure
of three Means, as 1 to 5, etc. But all the ordinate lines together in A I C D
are its moment; and all the ordinate lines in A I C B are its moment. Wherefore
the moments of the Complements of the halves of Deficient figures in the Table
of the 3d article of the 17th Chap. being compared, are as the Deficient
figures themselves; and therefore the Diameter of Equiponderation will divide
the straight line A D in such proportion, that the part next the Vertex be to
the other part, as the complete figure A B C D is to the Complement A I C D.

Coroll. The diameter of Equiponderation of these halves, may be found by the
Table of the ^d article of the 17th Chapter in this manner. Let there be
propounded any deficient figure, namely the second three-sided figure of two
Means. This figure is to the complete figure as to 1, that is as 3 to 5.
Wherefore the Complement to the same complete figure is as 2 to 5; and
therefore the diameter of Equiponderation of this Complement will cut the
straight line drawn from the Vertex parallel to the base, so, that the part
next the Vertex will be to the other part as 5 to 2. And in like manner, any
other of the said three-sided figures being propounded, if the numerator of its
fraction (found out in the Table) be taken from the denominator, the straight
line drawn from the Vertex is to be divided, so, that the part next the Vertex
be to the other part, as the denominator is to the remainder which that
substraction leaves.

11 The center of Equiponderation of the half of any of those crooked-lined
figures which are in the first row of the Table of the 3d article of the 17th
chapter, is in that straight line, which being parallel to the Axis, divides
the base according to the numbers of the fraction next below it in the second
row, so, that the Numerator be answerable to that part which is toward the
Axis.

For example, let the first figure of three Means be taken, whose half is A B C
D (in the 6th figure), and let the rectangle A B E D be completed. The
Complement therefore will be B C D E. And seeing A B E D is to the figure A B C
D (by the Table) as 5 to 4, the same A B E D will be to the Complement B C D E
as 5 to 1. Wherefore if F G be drawn parallel to the base D A, cutting the
axis, so, that A G be to G B as 4 to 5, the center of Equiponderation of the
figure A B C D, will (by the precedent article) be somewhere in the same F G.
Again, seeing (by the same article) the complete figure A B E D, is to the
Complement B C D E as 5 to 1, therefore if B E and A D be divided in H and I as
5 to 1, the center of Equiponderation of the Complement B C D E will be
somewhere in the straight line which connects H and I. Let now the straight
line L K be drawn through M the center of the complete figure, parallel to the
base; and the straight line N O, through the same center M, perpendicular to
it; and let the straight lines L K and F G cut the straight line H I in P and
Q. Let P R be taken quadruple to P Q; and let R M be drawn and produced to F G
in S. R M therefore will be to M S as 4 to 1, that is, as the figure A B C D to
its Complement B C D E. Wherefore seeing M is the center of the Complete figure
A B E D, and the distances of R and S from the center M be in proportion
reciprocal to that of the weight of the Complement B C D E to the weight of
the figure A B C D, R and S will either be the centers of Equiponderation of
their own figures, or those centers will be in some other points of the
diameters of Equiponderation H I and F G. But this last is impossible. For no
other straight line can be drawn through the point M terminating in the
straight lines H I and F G, and retaining the proportion of M R to M S, that
is, of the figure A B C D to its complement B C D E. The center therefore of
Equiponderation of the figure A B C D is in the point S. Now seeing P M has
the same proportion to Q S which R P has to R Q, Q S will be 5 of those parts
of which P M is 4, that is, of which I N is 4. But I N or P M is 2 of those
parts of which E B or F G is 6; and therefore if it be, as 4 to 5, so 2 to a
fourth, that fourth will be 2. Wherefore Q S is 2 of those parts of which F G
is 6. But F Q is 1; and therefore F S is 3. Wherefore the remaining part G S is
2. So that F G is so divided in S, that the part toward the Axis, is in
proportion to the other part as 2 to 3, that is, as 5 to 7; which answers to
the fraction 5/7 in the second row, next under the fraction in the first row.
Wherefore drawing S T parallel to the Axis, the base will be divided in like
manner.

By this Method it is manifest, that the base of a Semiparabola will be divided
into 3 and 5; and the base of the first three-sided figure of two Means, into 4
and 6; and of the first three-sided figure of four Means, into 6 and 8. The
fractions therefore of the second row denote the proportions into which the
bases of the figures of the first row are divided by the diameters of
Equiponderation. But the first row begins one place higher then the second row.

12 The center of Equiponderation of the half of any of the figures in the
second row of the same Table of the 3d article of the 17th Chapter, is in a
straight line parallel to the Axis, and dividing the base according to the
numbers of the fraction in the fourth row, two places lower, so, as that the
Numerator be answerable to that part which is next the Axis.

Let the half of the second three-sided figure of two Means be taken; and let
it be A B C D (in the 7th Figure); whose complement is B C D E, and the
rectangle completed A B E D. Let this rectangle be divided by the two straight
lines L K and N O, cutting one another in the center M at right angles; and
because A B E D is to A B C D as 5 to 3, let A B be divided in G, so, that A G
to B G be as 3 to 5; and let F G be drawn parallel to the base. Also because A
B E D is (by the 9th article) to B C D E as 5 to 2, let B E be divided in the
point I, so, that B I be to I E as 5 to 2; and let I H be drawn parallel to the
Axis, cutting L K and F G in P and Q. Let now P R be so taken, that it be to P
Q as 3 to 2, and let R M be drawn and produced to F G in S. Seeing therefore R
P is to R Q, that is, R M to M S, as A B C D is to its complement B C D E, and
the centers of Equiponderation of A B C D and B C D E are in the straight lines
F G and H I, and the center of Equiponderation of them both together in the
point M; R will be the center of the Complement B C D E, and S the center of
the Figure A B C D. And seeing P M, that is I N, is to Q S, as R P is to R Q;
and I N, or P M is 3 of those parts, of which B E, that is, F G is 14;
therefore Q S is 5 of the same parts; and E I, that is F Q, 4; and F S, 9; and
G S, 5. Wherefore the straight line S T being drawn parallel to the Axis, will
divide the base A D into 5 and 9. But the fraction 5/9 is found in the fourth
row of the Table, two places below the fraction 9/5 in the second row.

By the same method, if in the same second row, there be taken the second
three-sided Figure of three Means, the center of Equiponderation of the half
of it, will be found to be in a straight line parallel to the Axis, dividing
the base according to the numbers of the fraction 6/10, two places below in the
fourth row. And the same way serves for all the rest of the Figures in the
second row. In like manner, the center of Equiponderation of the third
three-sided Figure of three Means, will be found to be in a straight line
parallel to the Axis, dividing the base, so, that the part next the Axis, be to
the other part, as 7 to 13, etc.

Coroll. The Centers of Equiponderation of the halves of the said Figures are
known, seeing they are in the intersection of the straight lines S T and F G,
which are both known.

13 The center of Equiponderation of the half of any of the Figures, which (in
the Table of the 3d Article of the 17th Chap.) are compared with their
Parallelograms, being known; the center of Equiponderation of the excess of the
same Figure above its triangle, is also known.

For example, let the Semiparabola A B C D (in the 8th Fig.) be taken; whose
Axis is A B; whose complete Figure is A B E D; and whose excess above its
triangle is B C D B. Its center of Equiponderation may be found out in this
manner. Let F G be drawn parallel to the base, so, that A F be a third part of
the Axis; and let H I be drawn parallel to the Axis, so, that A H be a third
part of the base. This being done, the center of Equiponderation of the
triangle A B D, will be I. Again, let K L be drawn parallel to the base, so,
that A K be to A B as 2 to 5; and M N parallel to the Axis, so, that A M be to
A D as 3 to 8; and let M N terminate in the straight line K L. The center
therefore of Equiponderation of the Parabola A B C D is N; and therefore we
have the centers of Equiponderation of the Semiparabola A B C D, and of its
part the triangle A B D. That we may now find the Center of Equiponderation of
the remaining part B C D B, let I N be drawn and produced to O, so, that N O be
triple to I N; and O will be the center sought for. For seeing the weight of A
B D, to the weight of B C D B is in proportion reciprocal to that of the
straight line N O to the straight line I N; and N is the center of the whole,
and I the center of the triangle A B D; O will be the center of the remaining
part, namely, of the figure B D C B; which was to be found.

Coroll. The Center of Equiponderation of the figure B D C B, is in the
concourse of two straight lines, whereof one is parallel to the base, and
divides the Axis, so, that the part next the base be or 6/15 of the whole Axis;
the other is parallel to the Axis, and so divides the base, that the part
toward the Axis be or 12/24 of the whole base. For drawing O P parallel to the
base, it will be as I N to N O, so F K to K P, that is, so 1 to 3, or 5 to 15.
But A F is 5/15 or of the whole A B; and A K is 6/15 or; and F K ^/15; and K P
3/15; and therefore A P is 9/15 of the Axis A B. Also A H is or 8/24; and A M
or 9/24 of the whole base; and therefore O Q being drawn parallel to the Axis,
M Q (which is triple to H M) will be 3/24. Wherefore A Q is 12/24 or of the
base A D.

The excesses of the rest of the three-sided figures in the first row of the
Table of the 3d article of the 17th Chapter, have their centers of
Equiponderation in two straight lines which divide the Axis and base according
to those fractions, which add 4 to the numerators of the fractions of a
Parabola 9/15 and 12/24; and 6 to the denominators, in this manner,

In a Parabola, The Axis 9/15, The Base 12/24 In the first three-sided figure,
The Axis 13/21, The Base 16/30 In the second three-sided figure, The Axis
17/27, The Base 20/36 etc.
And by the same method, any man (if it be worth the pains) may find out the
centers of Equiponderation of the excesses above their triangles of the rest of
the figures in the second and third row, etc.

14 The center of Equiponderation of the Sector of a Sphere (that is, of a
figure compounded of a right Cone whose Vertex is the center of the Sphere, and
the portion of the Sphere whose base is the same with that of the Cone),
divides the straight line which is made of the Axis of the Cone and half the
Axis of the portion together taken, so, that the part next the Vertex be triple
to the other part, or to the whole straight line, as 3 to 4.

For let A B C (in the 9th fig.) be the Sector of a Sphere, whose Vertex is the
ce^ter of the Sphere A; whose Axis is A D; and the circle upon B C is the
common base of the portion of the Sphere and of the Cone whose Vertex is A; the
Axis of which portion is E D, and the half thereof F D; and the Axis of the
Cone, A E. Lastly let A G be of the straight line A F. I say G is the center of
Equiponderation of the Sector A B C.

Let the straight line F H be drawn of any length, making right angles with A
F at F; and drawing the straight line A H, let the triangle A F H be made. Then
upon the same center A let any arch I K be drawn, cutting A D in L; and its
chord, cutting A D in M; and dividing M L equally in N, let N O be drawn
parallel to the straight line F H, and meeting with the straight line A H in O.

Seeing now B D C is the Spherical Superficies of the portion cut off with a
plain passing through B C, and cutting the Axis at right angles; and seeing F H
divides E D the Axis of the portion into two equal parts in F; the center of
Equiponderation of the Superficies B D C will be in F (by the 8th article); and
for the same reason the center of Equiponderation of the Superficies I L K (K
being in the straight line A C) will be in N. And in like manner, if there were
drawn between the center of the Sphere A and the outermost Spherical
Superficies of the Sector, arches infinite in number, the centers of
Equiponderation of the Sphericall Superficies in which those arches are,, would
be found to be in that part of the Axis, which is intercepted between the
Superficies it self and a plain passing along by the chord of the arch, and
cutting the Axis in the middle at right angles.

Let it now be supposed that the moment of the outermost sphericall Superficies
B D C is F H. Seeing therefore the Superficies B D C is to the Superficies I L
K in proportion duplicate to that of the arch B D C to the arch I L K, that is,
of B E to I M, that is, of F H to N O; let it be as F H to N O, so N O to
another N P; and again, as N O to N P, so N P to another N Q; and let this be
done in all the straight lines parallel to the base F H that can possibly be
drawn between the base and the vertex of the triangle A F H. If then through
all the points Q there be drawn the crooked line A Q H, the figure A F H Q A
will be the complement of the first three-si^ed figure of two Means; and the
same will also be the moment of all the Sphericall Superficies of which the
Solid Sector A B C D is compounded; and by consequent, the moment of the Sector
it self. Let now F H be understood to be the semidiameter of the base of a
right Cone, whose side is A H, and Axis A F. Wherefore seeing the bases of the
Cones which pass through F and N and the rest of the points of the Axis, are
in proportion duplicate to that of the straight lines F H and N O, etc. the
moment of all the bases together, that is, of the whole Cone, will be the
figure it self A F H Q A; and therefore the center of Equiponderation of the
Cone A F H is the same with that of the solid Sector. Wherefore seeing A G is
of the Axis A F, the center of Equiponderation of the Cone A F H is in G; and
therefore the center of the solid Sector is in G also, and divides the part A F
of the Axis, so, that A G is triple to G F; that is, A G is to A F as 3 to 4;
which was to be demonstrated.

Note, that when the Sector is a Hemisphere, the Axis of the Cone vanishes
into that point which is the center of the Sphere; and therefore it adds
nothing to half the Axis of the portion. Wherefore, if in the Axis of the
Hemisphere, there be taken from the center, of half the Axis, that is, 3/^ of
the Semidiameter of the Sphere, there will be the center of Equiponderation of
the Hemisphere.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Refraction and Reflection.
1 Definitions. 2 In perpendicular Motion there is no Refraction. 3 Things
thrown out of a thinner into a thicker Medium, are so refracted, that the Angle
Refracted is greater then the Angle of Inclination. 4 Endeavor which from one
point tends every way, will be so Refracted, at that the sine of the Angle
Refracted, will be to the sine of the Angle of Inclination, as the Density of
the first Medium is to the Density of the second Medium, reciprocally taken. 5
The sine of the Refracted Angle in one Inclination is to the sine of the
Refracted Angle in another Inclination, as the sine of the Angle of that
Inclination is to the sine of the Angle of this Inclination. 6 If two lines of
Incidence, having equal Inclination, be the one in a thinner, the other in a
thicker Medium, the sine of the angle of Inclination will be a Mean
proportional between the two sines of the Refracted angles. 7 If the angle of
Inclination be semirect, and the line of Inclination be in the thicker Medium,
and the proportion of their Densities be the same with that of the Diagonal to
the side of a Square, and the separating Superficies be plain, the Refracted
line will be in the separating Superficies. 8 If a Body be carried in a
straight line upon another Body, and do not penetrate the same, but be
reflected from it, the angle of Reflection will be equal to the Angle of
Incidence. 9 The same happens in the generation of Motion in the line of
Incidence.
1

Definitions.
1 REFRACTION, is the breaking of that straight Line, in which a Body is moved,
or its Action would proceed in one and the same Medium, into two straight
lines, by reason of the different natures of the two Mediums. 2 The former of
these is called the Line of Incidence; the later the Refracted Line. 3 The
Point of Refraction, is the common point of the Line of Incidence and of the
Refracted Line. 4 The Refracting Superficies, which also is the Separating
Superficies of the two Mediums, is that in which is the point of Refraction. 5
The Angle Refracted, is that which the Refracted Line makes in the point of
Refraction, with that Line which from the same point is drawn perpendicular to
the separating Superficies in a different Medium. 6 The Angle of Refraction, is
that which the Refracted line makes with the Line of Incidence produced. 7 The
Angle of Inclination, is that which the Line of Incidence makes with that Line
which from the point of Refraction is drawn perpendicular to the separating
Superficies. 8 The Angle of Incidence, is the Complement to a right Angle of
the Angle of Inclination.

And so, (in the first Figure) the Refraction is made in A B F. The Refracted
Line is B F. The Line of Incidence is A B. The Point of Incidence, and of
Refraction is B. The Refracting or Separating Superficies is D B E. The Line of
Incidence produced directly is A B C The Perpendicular to the separating
Superficies is B H. The Angle of Refraction is C B F. The Angle Refracted is H
B F. The Angle of Inclination is A B G or H B C. The Angle of Incidence is A B
D.

9 Moreover the Thinner Medium, is understood to be that in which there is less
resistance to Motion or to the generation of Motion; and the Thicker, that
wherein there is greater resistance. 10 And that Medium in which there is equal
resistance every where, is a Homogeneous Medium. All other Mediums are
Heterogeneous.
2 If a Body pass, or there be generation of Motion, from one Medium to another
of different Density, in a line perpendicular to the Separating Superficies;
there will be no Refraction.

For seeing on every side of the perdendicular all things in the Mediums are
supposed to be like and equal; if the Motion it self be supposed to be
perpendicular, the Inclinations also will be equal, or rather none at all; and
therefore there can be no cause, from which Refraction may be inferred to be on
one side of the perpendicular, which will not conclude the same Refraction to be
on the other side. Which being so, Refraction on one side will destroy
Refraction on the other side; and consequently, either the Refracted line will
be every where, (which is absurd), or there will be no Refracted line at all;
which was to be demonstrated.

Corol. It is manifest from hence, that the cause of Refraction consists
only in the obliquity of the line of Incidence, whether the Incident Body
penetrate both the Mediums, or without penetrating, propagate motion by
Pressure only.

3 If a Body, without any change of situation of its internal parts, as a
stone, be moved obliquely out of the thinner Medium, and proceed penetrating
the thicker Medium; and the thicker Medium be such, as that its internal parts
being moved, restore themselves to their former situation; the angle Refracted
will be greater then the angle of Inclination.

For let D B E (in the same first figure) be the separating Superficies of two
Mediums; and let a Body, as a stone thrown, be understood to be moved as is
supposed in the straight line A B C; and let A B be in the thinner Medium, as
in the Air; and B C in the thicker, as in the Water. I say the stone, which
being thrown, is moved in the line A B, will not proceed in the line B C, but
in some other line, namely that, with which the perpendicular B H makes the
Refracted angle H B F greater then the angle of Inclination H B C.

For seeing the stone coming from A, and falling upon B, makes that which is at
B proceed toward H, and that the like is done in all the straight lines which
are parallel to B H; and seeing the parts moved restore themselves by contrary
motion in the same line; there will be contrary motion generated in H B, and in
all the straight lines which are parallel to it. Wherefore the motion of the
stone will be made by the concourse of the motions in A G, that is, in D B, and
in G B, that is, in B H, and lastly, in H B, that is, by the concourse of three
motions. But by the concourse of the motions in A G and B H, the stone will be
carried to C; and therefore by adding the motion in H B, it will be carried
higher in some other line, as in B F, and make the angle H B F greater then the
angle H B C.

And from hence may be derived the cause, why Bodies which are thrown in a very
oblique line, if either they be any thing flat, or be thrown with great force,
will when they fall upon the water, be cast up again from the water into the
air.

For let A B (in the 2d figure) be the superficies of the water; into which
from the point C, let a stone be thrown in the straight line C A, making with
the line B A produced a very little angle C A D; and producing B A indefinitely
to D, let C D be drawn perpendicular to it, and A E parallel to C D. The stone
therefore will be moved in C A by the concourse of two motions in C D and D A,
whose velocities are as the lines themselves C D and D A. And from the motion
in C D and all its parallels downwards, as soon as the stone falls upon A,
there will be Reaction upwards, because the water restores it self to its
former situation. If now the stone be thrown with sufficient obliquity, that
is, if the straight line C D be short enough, that is, if the endeavor of the
stone downwards be less then the Reaction of the water upwards, that is, less
then the endeavor it has from its own gravity, (for that may be), the stone
will (by reason of the excess of the endeavor which the water has to restore
it self, above that which the stone has downwards) be raised again above the
Superficies A B, and be carried higher, being reflected in a line which goes
higher, as the line A G.

4 If from a point, whatsoever the Medium be, Endeavor be propagated every way
into all the parts of that Medium; and to the same Endeavor there be obliquely
opposed another Medium of a different nature, that is, either thinner or
thicker; that Endeavor will be so refracted, that the sine of the angle
Refracted, to the sine of the angle of Inclination, will be as the density of
the first Medium to the density of the second Medium, reciprocally taken.

First, let a Body be in the thinner Medium in A (Figure 3d.); and let it be
understood to have endeavor every way, and consequently that its endeavor
proceed in the lines A B and A b; to which let B b the superficies of the
thicker Medium be obliquely opposed in B and b, so that A B and A b be equal;
and let the straight line B b be produced both ways. From the points B and b
let the perpendiculars B C and b c be drawn; and upon the centers B and b, and
at the equal distances B A and b A, let the Circles A C and A c be described,
cutting B C and b c in C and c, and the same C B and c b produced in D and d,
as also A B and A b produced in E and e. Then from the point A to the straight
lines B C and b c let the perpendiculars A F and A f be drawn. A F therefore
will be the sine of the angle of Inclination of the straight line A B, and A f
the sine of the angle of Inclination of the straight line A h, which two
Inclinations are by construction made equal. I say, as the density of the
Medium in which are B C and b c, is to the density of the Medium in which are B
D and b d, so is the sine of the angle Refracted, to the sine of the angle of
Inclination.

Let the straight line F G be drawn parallel to the straight line A B, meeting
with the straight line b B produced in G.

Seeing therefore A F and B G are also parallels, they will be equal; and
consequently, the endeavor in A F is propagated in the same time, in which the
endeavor in B G would be propagated if the Medium were of the same density.
But because B G is in a thicker Medium, that is, in a Medium which resists the
endeavor more then the Medium in which A F is, the endeavor will be
propagated less in B G then in A F, according to the proportion which the
density of the Medium in which A F is, has to the density of the Medium in
which B G is. Let therefore the density of the Medium in which B G is, be to
the density of the Medium in which A F is, as B G is to B H; and let the
measure of the time be the Radius of the Circle. Let H I be drawn parallel to B
D, meeting with the circumference in I; and from the point I let I K be drawn
perpendicular to B D; which being done, B H and I K will be equal; and I K will
be to A F, as the density of the Medium in which is A F, is to the density of
the Medium in which is I K. Seeing therefore in the time A B (which is the
Radius of the Circle) the endeavor is propagated in A F in the thinner Medium,
it will be propagated in the same time, that is, in the time B I in the thicker
Medium from K to I. Therefore B I is the Refracted line of the line of
Incidence A B; and I K is the sine of the angle Refracted; and A F, the sine of
the angle of Inclination. Wherefore seeing I K is to A F, as the density of the
Medium in which is A F to the density of the Medium in which is I K; it will be
as the density of the Medium in which is A F, (or B C) to the density of the
Medium in which is I K (or B D), so the sine of the angle Refracted to the sine
of the angle of Inclination. And by the same reason it may be shown, that as
the density of the thinner Medium is to the density of the thicker Medium, so
will K I the sine of the angle Refracted be to A F the sine of the Angle of
Inclination.

Secondly, let the Body which endeavors every way, be in the thicker Medium
at I. If therefore both the Mediums were of the same density, the endeavor of
the Body in I B would tend directly to L; and the sine of the angle of
Inclination L M would be equal to I K or B H. But because the density of the
Medium in which is IK, to the density of the Medium in which is L M, is as BH
to B G, that is, to A F, the endeavor will be propagated further in the Medium
in which L M is, then in the Medium in which I K is, in the proportion of
density to density, that is, of M L to A F. Wherefore B A being drawn, the
angle Refracted will be C B A, and its sine A F. But L M is the sine of the
angle of Inclination; and therefore again, as the density of one Medium is to
the density of the different Medium, so reciprocally is the sine of the angle
Refracted to the sine of the angle of Inclination, which was to be demonstrated.

In this Demonstration, I have made the separating Superficies B b plain by
construction. But though it were concave or unequal, the Theoreme would
nevertheless be true. For the Refraction being made in the point B of the plain
separating Superficies, if a crooked line, as P Q be drawn, touching the
separating line in the point B; neither the Refracted line B I, nor the
perpendicular B D will be altered; and the Refracted angle K B I, as also its
sine K I will be still the same they were.

5 The sine of the angle Refracted in one Inclination, is to the sine of the
angle Refracted in another Inclination, as the sine of the angle of that
Inclination to the sine of the angle of this Inclination.

For seeing the sine of the Refracted angle is to the sine of the angle of
Inclination, (whatsoever that Inclination be) as the density of one Medium, to
the density of the other Medium; the proportion of the sine of the Refracted
angle, to the sine of the angle of Inclination, will be compounded of the
proportions of density to density, and of the sine of the angle of one
Inclination to the sine of the angle of the other Inclination. But the
proportions of the densities in the same Homogeneous Body, are supposed to be
the same. Wherefore Refracted angles in different Inclinations, are as the
sines of the angles of those Inclinations; which was to be demonstrated.

6 If two lines of Incidence having equal inclination, be the one in a thinner,
the other in a thicker Medium; the sine of the angle of their Inclination, will
be a mean proportional between the two sines of their angles Refracted.

For let the straight line AB (in the same 3d figure) have its Inclination in
the thinner Medium, and be refracted in the thicker Medium in B I; and let E B
have as much Inclination in the thicker Medium, and be refracted in the thinner
Medium in B S; and let R S the sine of the angle Refracted be drawn. I say the
straight lines R S, A F and I K are in continual proportion. For it is, as the
density of the thicker Medium to the density of the thinner Medium, so R S to A
F. But it is also, as the density of the same thicker Medium, to that of the
same thinner Medium, so AF to IK. Wherefore R S. A F:: A F. I K are
propoortionals; that is, R S, A F and I K are in continual proportion, and A F
is the Mean proportional; which was to be proved.

7 If the angle of Inclination be semirect, and the line of Inclination be in
the thicker Medium, and the proportion of the Densities be as that of a
Diagonal to the side of its Square, and the separating Superficies be plain,
the Refracted line will be in that separating Superficies.

For in the Circle A C (in the 4th figure) let the angle of Inclination A B C
be an angle of 45 degrees. Let C B be produced to the Circumference in D; and
let C E (the sine of the angle ^ B C) be drawn* to which, let B F be taken
equal in the separating line B G. B C E F will therefore be a Parallelogram,
and F E and B C, that is, F E and B G equal. Let AG be drawn, namely, the
Diagonal of the Square whose side is B G; and it will be, as A G to E F, so B G
to B F; and so (by supposition) the density of the Medium in which C is, to the
density of the Medium in which D is; and so also the sine of the angle
Refracted to the sine of the angle of Inclination. Drawing therefore F D, and
from D the line D H perpendicular to A B produced, DH will be the sine of the
angle of Inclination. And seeing the sine of the angle Refracted is to the sine
of the angle of Inclination, as the density of the Medium in which is C, is to
the density of the Medium in which is D, that is, (by supposition) as A G is to
F E, that is, as D H is to B G; and seeing D H is the sine of the angle of
Inclination, B G will therefore be the sine of the angle Refracted. Wherefore B
G will be the Refracted line, and lie in the plain separating Superficies;
which was to be demonstrated.

Coroll. It is therefore manifest, that when the Inclination is greater then 45
degrees, as also when it is less, provided the density be greater, it may
happen that the Refraction will not enter the thinner Medium at all.

8 If a Body fall in a straight line upon another Body, and do not penetrate
it, but be reflected from it, the angle of Reflection will be equal to the angle
of Incidence.

Let there be a Body at A (in the 5th figure), which falling with straight
motion in the line A C upon another Body at C, passes no further, but is
reflected; and let the angle of Incidence be any angle, as A C D. Let the
straight line C E be drawn, making with D C produced the angle E C F equal to
the angle A C D; and let A D be drawn perpendicular to the straight line D F.
Also in the same straight line D F let C G be taken equal to C D; and let the
perpendicular G E be raised, cutting C E in E. This being done, the triangles A
C D and E C G will be equal and like. Let C H be drawn equal and parallel to
the straight line A D; and let H C be produced indefinitely to I. Lastly let E
A be drawn, which will pass through H, and be parallel and equal to G D. I
say the motion from A to C in the straight line of Incidence AC, will be
reflected in the straight line C E.

For the motion from A to C is made by two coefficient or concurrent motions,
the one in A H parallel to D G, the other in A D perpendicular to the same D G;
of which two motions, that in A H works nothing upon the Body A after it has
been moved as far as C, because (by supposition) it does not pass the
straight line D G; whereas the endeavor in A D, that is in H C, works
further toward I. But seeing it does only press and not penetrate, there
will be reaction in H, which causes motion from C toward H; and in the mean
time the motion in H E remains the same it was in A H; and therefore the Body
will now be moved by the concourse of two motions in C H and H E, which are
equal to the two motions it had formerly in A H and H C. Wherefore it will be
carried on in C E. The angle therefore of Reflection will be E C G, equal (by
construction) to the angle A C D; which was to be demonstrated.

Now when the Body is considered but as a point, it is all one, whether the
Superficies or line in which the Reflection is made, be straight or crooked;
for the point of Incidence and Reflection C, is as well in the crooked line
which touches D G in C, as in D G it self.

9 But if we suppose that not a Body be moved, but some Endeavor only be
propagated from A to C, the Demonstration will nevertheless be the same. For
all Endeavor is motion; and when it has reached the Solid Body in C, it
presses it, and endeavors further in C I. Wherefore the reaction will
proceed in C H; and the endeavor in C H concurring with the endeavor in H E,
will generate the endeavor in C E, in the same manner as in the repercussion
of Bodies moved.

If therefore Endeavor be propagated from any point to the concave Superficies
of a Spherical Body, the Reflected line with the circumference of a great
circle in the same Sphere, will make an angle equal to the angle of Incidence.

For if Endeavor be propagated from A (in the 6 fig.) to the circumference in
B, and the center of the Sphere be C, and the line C B be drawn, as also the
Tangent D B E; and lastly if the angle F B D be made equal to the angle A B E,
the Reflection will be made in the line B F, as has been newly shown. Wherefore
the angles which the straight lines A B and F B make with the circumference,
will also be equal. But it is here to be noted that if C B be produced
howsoever to G, the endeavor in the line G B C will proceed only from the
perpendicular reaction in G B; and that therefore there will be no other
endeavor in the point B toward the parts which are within the Sphere, besides
that which tends toward the center.

And here I put an end to the third part of this Discourse; in which I have
considered Motion and Magnitude by themselves in the abstract. The fourth and
last part, concerning the Phenomenon of Nature, that is to say, concerning the
Motions and Magnitudes of the Bodies which are parts of the World, real and
existent, is that which follows.

PHYSIQVES* or the PHENOMENON of NATVRE.
CHAP. XXV. Of Sense and Animal Motion.
1 The connection of what has been said with that which follows. 2 The
investigation of the nature of Sense, and the Definition of Sense. 3 The
Subject and Object of Sense. 4 The Organ of Sense. 5 All Bodies are not endued
with Sense. 6 But one Phantasme at one and the same time. 7 Imagination, the
Remayns of past Sense, (which also is Memory). Of Sleep. 8 How Phantasmes
succeed one another. 9 Dreams, whence they proceed. 10 Of the Senses, their
kinds, their Organs, and Phantasmes proper and common. 11 The Magnitude of
Images, how and by what it is determined. 12 Pleasure, Pain, Appetite, and
Aversion, what they are. 13 Deliberation and Will, what.
1 I Have (in the first Chapter) defined Philosophy to be Knowledge of Effects
acquired by true Ratiocination, from knowledge first had of their Causes and
Generation; and of such Causes or Generations as may be, from former knowledge
of their Effects or Appearances. There are therefore two Methods of Philosophy,
One from the Generation of things to their possible Effects, and the other from
their Effects or Appearances to some possible Generation of the same. In the
former of these, the Truth of the first Principles of our ratiocination (namely
Definitions) is made and constituted by our selves, whilst we consent and
agree about the Appellations of things. And this part I have finished in the
foregoing Chapters; in which (if I am not deceived) I have affirmed nothing
(saving the Definitions themselves) which has not good coherence with the
Definitions I have given; that is to say, which is not sufficiently
demonstrated to all those that agree with me in the use of Words and
Appellations; for whose sake only I have written the same. I now enter upon
the other part; which is the finding out by the Appearances or Effects of
Nature which we know by Sense, some ways and means by which they may be (I do
not say, they are) generated. The Principles therefore, upon which the
following discourse depends, are not such as we our selves make and pronounce
in general terms, as Definitions; but such, as being placed in the things
themselves by the Author of Nature, are by us observed in them; and we make
use of them in single and particular, not universal propositions. Nor do they
impose upon us any necessity of constituting Theoremes; their use being only
(though not without such general Propositions as have been already
demonstrated) to show us the possibility of some production or generation.
Seeing therefore the Science which is here taught, has its Principles in the
Appearances of Nature, and ends in the attayning of some knowledge of Natural
causes, I have given to this Part, the title of PHYSIQUES, or the PHENOMENON of
NATURE. Now such things as appear, or are shown to us by Nature, we call
Phenomenon or Appearances.

Of all the Phenomenon, or Appearances which are near us, the most admirable is
Apparition it self, (...); namely, that some Natural Bodies have in themselves
the patterns almost of all things, and others of none at all. So that if the
Appearances be the Principles by which we know all other things, we must needs
acknowledge Sense to be the Principle by which we know those Principles; and
that all the knowledge we have is derived from it. And as for the causes of
Sense, we cannot begin our search of them from any other Phenomenon then that
of Sense it self. But you will say, by what Sense shall we take notice of
Sense? I answer, by Sense it self, namely, by the Memory which for some time
remains in us of things sensible, though they themselves pass away. For he that
perceiues that he has perceived, remembers.

In the first place therefore the causes of our Perception, that is, the causes
of those Ideas and Phantasmes which are perpetually generated within us whilst
we make use of our Senses, are to be enquired into; and in what manner their
generation proceeds. To help which Inquisition, we may observe first of all,
that our Phantasmes or Ideas are not always the same; but that new ones appear
to us, and old ones vanish, according as we apply our Organs of Sense, now to
one Object, now to another. Wherefore they are generated, and perish. And from
hence it is manifest, that they are some change or mutation in the Sentient.

2 Now that all Mutation or Alteration is Motion, or Endeavor (and Endeavor
also is Motion) in the internal parts of the thing that is altered, has been
proved (in the 9th Article of the 8th Chapter) from this, that whilst even the
least parts of any Body remain in the same situation in respect of one another,
it cannot be said that any alteration (unless perhaps that the whole Body
together has been moved) has happened to it; but that it both appears and is
the same it appeared and was before. Sense therefore in the Sentient, can be
nothing else but motion in some of the internal parts of the Sentient; and the
parts so moved, are parts of the Organs of Sense. For the parts of our Body by
which we perceive any thing, are those we commonly call the Organs of Sense.
And so we find what is the Subject of our Sense, namely, that in which are the
Phantasmes; and partly also we have discovered the nature of Sense, namely,
that it is some internal Motion in the Sentient.

I have shown besides (in the 8th Chap. at the 7th Article) that no Motion is
generated but by a Body contiguous and Moved. From whence it is manifest, that
the immediate cause of Sense or Perception consists in this, that the first
Organ of Sense is touched and pressed. For when the uttermost part of the Organ
is pressed, it no sooner yields, but the part next within it, is pressed also;
and in this manner, the pressure or Motion is propagated through all the parts
of the Organ to the innermost. And thus also the pressure of the uttermost part
proceeds from the pressure of some more remote Body, and so continually, till
we come to that from which, as from its fountain we derive the Phantasme or
Idea that is made in us by our Sense. And this, whatsoever it be, is that we
commonly call the Object. Sense therefore is some internal Motion in the
Sentient, generated by some internal Motion of the parts of the Object, and
propagated through all the Media to the innermost part of the Organ. By which
words I have almost defined what Sense is.

Moreover, I have shown (in the 2d Article of the 15 Chapter) that all
Resistance is Endeavor opposite to another Endeavor, that is to say,
Reaction. Seeing therefore there is in the whole Organ by reason of its own
internal natural Motion; some Resistance or Reaction against the Motion which
is propagated from the Object to the innermost part of the Organ, there is also
in the same Organ an Endeavor opposite to the Endeavor which proceeds from
the Object; so that when that Endeavor inwards is the last action in the act
of Sense, then from the Reaction, how little soever the duration of it be, a
Phantasme or Idea has its being; which by reason the Endeavor is now
outward, does always appear as something situate without the Organ. So that
now I shall give you the whole Definition of Sense, as it is drawn from the
explication of the causes thereof, and the order of its generation, thus; SENSE
is a Phantasme, made by the Reaction and endeavor outward in the Organ of
Sense, caused by an Endeavor inwards from the Object, remaining for some time
more or less.

3 The Subject of Sense, is the Sentient it self, namely, some living Creature;
and we speak more correctly, when we say a Living Creature sees, then when we
say the Eye sees. The Object, is the thing Perceived; and it is more
accurately said, that we see the Sun, then that we see the Light. For Light and
Color and Heat and Sound, and other qualities which are commonly called
Sensible, are not Objects, but Phantasms in the Sentients. For a Phantasm is
the act of Sense, and differs no otherwise from Sense then fieri (that is,
Being a doing) differs from Factum esse, (that is, Being done;) which
difference, in things that are done in an Instant, is none at all; and a
Phantasme is made in an Instant. For in all Motion which proceeds by perpetual
propagation, the first part being moved moves the second, the second the third,
and so on to the last, and that to any distance how great soever. And in what
point of time the first or foremost part proceeded to the place of the second,
which is thrust on; in the same point of time the last save one proceeded into
the place of the last yiedling part; which by reaction, in the same instant, if
the reaction be strong enough, makes a Phantasme; and a Phantasme being made,
Perception is made together with it,

4 The Organs of Sense, which are in the Sentient, are such parts thereof, that
if they be hurt, the very generation of Phantasmes is thereby destroyed, though
all the rest of the parts remain entire. Now these parts in the most of Living
Creatures are found to be certain Spirits and Membranes, which proceeding from
the Pia Matter, involve the Brain and all the Nerves; also the Brain it self,
and the Arteries which are in the Brain; and such other parts, as being
stirred, the Heart also, which is the fountain of all Sense is stirred together
with them. For whenever the action of the Object reaches the Body of the
Sentient, that action is by some Nerve propagated to the Brain; and if the
Nerve leading thither be so hurt or obstructed, that the Motion can be
propagated no further, no Sense follows. Also* if the motion be intercepted
between the Brain and the Heart by the defect of the Organ by which the action
is propagated, there will be no perception of the Object.

5 But though all Sense, as I have said, be made by Reaction, nevertheless it
is not necessary that every thing that Reacteth should have Sense. I know there
have been Philosophers, and those learned men, who have maintained that all
Bodies are endued with Sense. Nor do I see how they can be refuted, if the
nature of Sense be placed in Reaction only. And, though by the Reaction of
Bodies inanimate a Phantasme might be made, it would nevertheless cease, as
soon as ever the Object were removed. For unless those Bodies had Organs, (as
living Creatures have) fit for the retaining of such Motion as is made in them,
their Sense would be such, as that they should never remember the same. And
therefore this has nothing to do with that Sense which is the subject of my
discourse. For by Sense we commonly understand the judgment we make of Objects
by their Phantasmes; namely, by comparing and distinguishing those Phantasmes;
which we could never do, if that motion in the Organ, by which the Phantasme is
made, did not remain there for some time, and make the same Phantasme return.
Wherefore Sense, as I here understand it, and which is commonly so called, has
necessarily some memory adhering to it, by which former and later Phantasmes
may be compared together, and distinguished from one another.

Sense therefore properly so called, must necessarily have in it a perpetual
variety of Phantasmes, that they may be discerned one from another. For if we
should suppose a man to be made with clear Eyes, and all the rest of his Organs
of Sight well disposed, but endued with no other Sense; and that he should look
only upon one thing, which is always of the same color and figure without
the least appearance of variety, he would seem to me, whatsoever others may
say, to see, no more then I seem to my self to feel the Bones of my own Limbs
by my Organs of Feeling; and yet those Bones are always, and on all sides
touched by a most sensible Membrane. I might perhaps say he were astonished,
and looked upon it; but I should not say he saw it; it being almost all one for
a man to be always sensible of one and the same thing, and not to be sensible
at all of any thing.

6 And yet such is the nature of Sense, that it does not permit a man to
discern many things at once. For seeing the nature of Sense consists in Motion;
as long as the Organs are employed about one Object, they cannot be so Moved by
another at the same time, as to make by both their Motions one sincere
Phantasme of each of them at once. And therefore two several Phantasmes will
not be made by two Objects working together, but only one Phantasme compounded
from the action of both.

Besides, as when we divide a Body, we divide its place; and when we reckon
many Bodies, we must necessarily reckon as many places; and contrarily, as I
have shown in the first Article of the 7th Chapter; so what number soever we
say there be of Times, we must understand the same number of Motions also; and
as often as we count many Motions, so often we reckon many times. For though the
object we look upon be of diverse colors, yet with those diverse colors it
is but one varied Object, and not variety of Objects.

Moreover, whilst those Organs which are common to all the Senses (such as are
those parts of every Organ which proceed (in Men) from the root of the Nerves,
to the Heart) are vehemently stirred by a strong action from some one Object,
they are (by reaof the contumacy which the motion they have already gives them
against the reception of all other motion) made the less fit to receive any
other impression from whatsoever other Objects, to what sense soever those
Objects belong. And hence it is, that an earnest studying of one Object, takes
away the Sense of all other Objects for the present. For Study is nothing else
but a possession of the mind, that is to say, a vehement motion made by some
one Object in the Organs of Sense, which are stupid to all other motions as
long as this lasts; according to what was said by Terence, Populus studio
stupidus in funambulo animum occuparat. For what is Stupor but that which the
Greeks call (...), that is, a cessation from the Sense of other things?
Wherefore at one and the same time, we cannot by Sense perceive more then one
single Object; as in reading, we see the letters successively one by one, and
not all together, though the whole Page be presented to our eye; and though
every several letter be distinctly written there, yet when we look upon the
whole page at once, we read nothing.

From hence it is manifest, that every endeavor of the Organ ^utwards, is not
to be called Sense, but that only which at several times is by Vehemence made
stronger and more praedominant than the rest; which deprives us of the Sense of
other Phantasmes, no otherwise then the Sun deprives the rest of the stars of
light, not by hindering their action, but by obscuring and hiding them with his
excess of brightness.

7. But the motion of the Organ, by which a Phantasme is made, is not commonly
called Sense, except the Object be present. And the Phantasme remaining after
the Object is removed or past by, is called Fancy, and in latin Imaginatio;
which word (because all Phantasmes are not Images) does not fully answer the
signification of the word Fancy in its general acceptance. Nevertheless I
may use it safely enough, by understanding it for the Greek (...).

IMAGINATION therefore is nothing else but Sense decaying, or weakened, by the
absence of the Object. But what may be the cause of this decay or weakening? Is
the Motion the weaker because the Object is taken away? If it were, then
Phantasmes would always and necessarily be less clear in the Imagination,
then they are in Sense; which is not true. For in Dreams (which are the
Imaginations of those that sleep) they are no less clear then in Sense it self.
But the reason why in men Waking the Phantasms of things past are more obscure
then those of things present, is this, that their Organs being at the same time
moved by other present Objects, those Phantasmes are the less praedominant.
Whereas in Sleep, the passages being shut up, external action does not at all
disturb or hinder internal motion.

If this be true, the next thing to be considered, will be, whether any cause
may be found out, from the supposition whereof it will follow, that the passage
is shut up from the external Objects of Sense to the internal Organ. I
suppose therefore, that by the continual action of Objects, (to which a
Reaction of the Organ, and more esqecially of the Spirits, is necessarily
consequent) the Organ is wearied, that is, its parts are no longer moved by the
Spirits without some pain; and consequently the Nerves being abandoned and
grown slack, they retire to their fountain which is the cavity either of the
Brain or of the Heart; by which means the action which proceeded by the Nerves
is necessarily intercepted* For Action, upon a Patient that retires from it,
makes but little Impression at the first; and at last, when the Nerves are by
little and little slack^ed, none at all. And therefore there is no more
Reaction, that is, no more Sense, till the Organ being refreshed by Rest, and
by a supply of new Spirits recovering strength and motion, the Sentient
awaketh. And thus it seems to be always, unless some other praeternatural
cause intervene; as Heat in the internal parts from lassitude, or from some
disease stirring the Spirits and other parts of the Organ in some extraordinary
manner.

8 Now it is not without cause, nor so casual a thing as many perhaps think it,
that Phantasmes in this their great variety, proceed from one another; and that
the same Phantasmes sometimes bring into the mind other Phantasmes like
themselves, and at other times extremely unlike. For in the motion of any
continued Body, one part follows another by cohaesion; and therefore, whilst
we turn our Eyes and other Organs successively to many Objects, the motion
which was made by every one of them remaining, the Phantasmes are renewed as
often as any of those motions comes to be praedominant above the rest; and they
become praedominant in the same order, in which at any time formerly they were
generated by Sense. So that when by length of time very many Phantasmes have
been generated within us by Sense, then almost any thought may arise from any
other thought; in so much that it may seem to be a thing indifferent and
casual, which thought shall follow which. But for the most part this is not so
uncertain a thing to waking as to sleeping men. For the thought or Phantasme of
the desired End, brings in all the Phantasmes that are means conducing to that
end, and that in order backewards from the last to the first, and again
forwards from the beginning to the End: But this supposes both Appetite, and
Judgment to discern what means conduce to the end; which is gotten by
Experience; and Experience is store of Phantasmes, arising from the sense of
very many things. For (...)* and Meminisse, Fancy and Memory differ only in
this, that Memory supposes the time past, which Fancy does not. In Memory, the
Phantasmes we consider are as if they were worn out with time; but in our
Fancy we consider them as they are; which distinction is not of the things
themselves, but of the considerations of the Sentient. For there is in Memory,
something like that which happens in looking upon things at a great distance;
in which, as the small parts of the Object are not discerned by reason of their
remoteness; so in Memory, many accidents and places and parts of things, which
were formerly perceived by Sense, are by length of time decayed and lost.

The perpetual arising of Phantasmes, both in Sense and Imagination, is that
which we commonly call Discourse of the Mind, and is common to men with other
living Creatures. For he thta thinks, compares the Phantasmes that pass,
that is, takes notice of their likeness or unlikenesse to one another. And as
he that observes readily the likenesses of things of different natures, or that
are very remote from one another, is said to have a good Fancy; so he is said
to have a good Judgment, that finds out the unlikenesses or differences of
things that are like one another. Now this observation of differences, is not
perception made by a common Organ of Sense, distinct from Sense or Perception
properly so called; but is Memory of the differences of particular Phantasmes
remaining for some time; as the distinction between Hot and Lucid, is nothing
else but the Memory both of a Heating, and of an Enlightening Object.

9 The Phantasmes of men that sleep, are DREAMS. Concerning which we are taught
by experience these five things. First, that for the most part there is neither
order nor coherence in them. Secondly, that we dream of nothing but what is
compounded and made up of the Phantasmes of Sense past. Thirdly, that sometimes
they proceed (as in those that are drowsy) from the interruption of their
Phantasmes by little and little broken and altered through sleepiness; and
sometimes also they begin in the midst of sleep. Fourthly, that they are
clearer then the Imaginations of waking men, except such as are made by Sense
itself, to which they are equal in clearness. Fifthly, that when we dream, we
admire neither the places nor the looks of the things that appear to us. Now
from what has been said, it is not hard to show what may be the causes of
these Phenomenon. For as for the first, seeing all Order and Coherence proceeds
from frequent looking back to the End, that is, from Consultation; it must
needs be, that seeing in sleep we lose all thought of the End, our Phantasmes
succeed one another, not in that order which tends to any End, but as it
happens, and in such manner, as Objects present themselves to our Eyes when we
look indifferently upon all things before us, and see them, not because we
would see them, but because we do not shut our Eyes; for then they appear to us
without any order at all. The second proceeds from this, that in the silence of
Sense, there is no new motion from the Objects, and therefore no new Phantasme,
unless we call that new, which is compounded of old ones, as a Chimaera, a
golden Mountain, and the like. As for the third, why a Dream is sometimes as it
were the continuation of Sense, made up of broken Phantasmes, as in men
distempered with sickness, the reason is manifestly this, that in some of the
Organs Sense remains, and in others it fails. But how some Phantasmes may be
revived, when all the exterior Organs are benumbed with sleep, is not so
easily shown. Nevertheless, that which has already been said, contains the
reason of this also. For whatsoever strikes the Pia Matter, reviveth some of
those Phantasmes that are still in motion in the Brain; and when any internal
motion of the Heart reaches that Membrane, then the praedominant motion in the
Brain makes the Phantasme. Now the Motions of the Heart are Appetites and
Aversions, of which I shall presently speak further. And as Appetites and
Aversions are generated by Phantasmes, so reciprocally Phantasmes are generated
by Appetites and Aversions. For example, Heat in the Heart proceeds from Anger
and Fighting; and again from Heat in the Heart, (whatsoever be the cause of it)
is generated Anger, and the Image of an Enemy in Sleep. And as Love and Beauty
stir up heat in certain Organs; so Heat in the same Organs, from whatsoever
it proceeds, often causes Desire, and the Image of an unresisting Beauty.
Lastly, Cold does in the same manner generate Fear in those that sleep, and
causes them to dream of Ghosts, and to have Phantasmes of horror and danger;
as Fear also causes Cold in those that wake; so reciprocal are the motions of
the Heart and Brain. The fourth, namely, that the things we seem to see and
feel in sleep, are as clear as in sense it self, proceeds from two causes; one,
that having then no sense of things without us, that internal motion which
makes the Phantasme, in the absence of all other impressions, is praedominant;
and the other, that the parts of our Phantasms which are decayed and worn out
by time, are made up with other fictitious parts. To conclude, when we dream,
we do not wonder at strange places, and the appearances of things unknown to
us, because Admiration requires that the things appearing be new and unusual,
which can happen to none but those that remember former appearances; whereas in
sleep, all things appear as present.

But it is here to be observed, that certain Dreams, especially such as some
men have when they are between sleeping and waking, and such as happen to those
that have no knowledge of the nature of Dreams, and are with all superstitious,
were not heretofore, nor are now accounted Dreams. For the Apparitions men
thought they saw, and the Voices they thought they heard in sleep, were not
believed to be Phantasmes, but things subsisting of themselves, and Objects
without those that dreamed. For to some men, as well sleeping as waking, but
especially to guilty men, and in the night, and in hallowed places, Fear
alone, helped a little with the stories of such Apparitions, has raised in
their minds terrible Phantasmes, which have been, and are still deceiptfully
received for things really true, under the names of Ghosts and Incorporeal
Substances.

10 In most living Creatures there are observed five kinds of Senses, which are
distinguished by their Organs, and by their different kinds of Phantasmes;
namely, Sight, Hearing, Smell, Taste and Touch; and these have their Organs
partly peculiar to each of them severally, and partly common to them all. The
Organ of Sight is partly animate, and partly inanimate. The inanimate parts,
are the three Humors; namely, the Watery Humor, which by the interposition of
the Membrane called U^ea, (the perforation whereof is called the Apple of the
Eye) is contained on one side by the first concave superficies of the Eye, and
on the other side by the Ciliary processes and the Coat of the Cristalline
humor; the Cristalline, which (hanging in the midst between the Ciliary
processes, and being almost of Spherical figure, and of a thick consistence) is
enclosed on all sides with its own transparent Coat; and the Vitreous or
Glassie Humor, which fills all the rest of the Cavity of the Eye, and is
somewhat thicker then the Watery Humor, but thinner then the Cristalline. The
animate part of the Organ is, first, the Membrane Choroeides, which is a part
of the Pia Matter, saving that it is covered with a Coat derived from the marrow
of the Optique Nerve, which is called the Retina; and this Choroeides, seeing
it is part of the Pia Matter, is continued to the beginning of the Medulla
Spinalis within the Scull, in which all the Nerves which are within the Head
have their roots. Wherefore all the Animal Spirits that the Nerves receive,
enter into them there, for it is not imaginable that they can enter into them
any where else. Seeing therefore Sense is nothing else but the action of
Objects propagated to the furthest part of the Organ; and seeing also that
Animal Spirits are nothing but Vital Spirits purified by the Heart and carried
from it by the Arteries; it follows necessarily, that the action is derived
from the Heart by some of the Arteries to the roots of the Nerves which are in
the Head, whether those Arteries be the Plexus Retiformis, or whether they be
other Arteries which are inserted into the substance of the Brain. And
therefore those Arteries are the Complement, or the remaying part of the whole
Organ of Sight. And this last part is a common Organ to all the Senses; whereas
that which reaches from the Eye to the roots of the Nerves is proper only to
Sight. The proper Organ of Hearing is the Tympanum of the Ear, and its own
Nerve; from which to the Heart the Organ is Common. So the proper Organs of
Smell and Taste are Nervous Membranes, in the Palate and Tongue for the Taste,
and in the Nostrils for the Smell; and from the roots of those Nerves to the
Heart all is common. Lastly, ^he proper Organ of Touch are Nerves and Membranes
dispersed through the whole Body; which Membranes are derived from the root of
the Nerves. And all things else belonging alike to all the Senses seem to be
administered by the Arteries, and not by the Nerves.

The proper Phantasme of Sight is Light; and under this name of Light, Color
also (which is nothing but perturbed Light) is comprehended. Wherefore the
Phantasme of a Lucid Body, is Light; and of a colored Body, Color. But the
Object of Sight, properly so called is neither Light nor Color, but the Body
itself which is lucid, or enlightened, or colored. For Light and Color being
Phantasmes of the Sentient, cannot be Accidents of the Object. Which is
manifest enough from this, that Visible things appear oftentimes in places, in
which we know assuredly they are not, and that in different places they are of
different colors, and may at one and the same time appear in diverse places.
Motion, Rest, Magnitude and Figure are common both to the Sight and Touch; and
the whole appearance together of Figure, and Light or Color, is by the Greeks
commonly called (...) and by the Latins, Species and Imago; all which names
signify no more but Appearance.

The phantasme which is made by Hearing, is Sound; by Smell, Odor; by Taste,
Savor; and by Touch, Hardness and Softness, Heat and Cold, Wetness, Oiliness,
and many more, which are easier to be distinguished by sense then words.
Smoothness, Roughness, Rarity and Density refer to Figure, and are therefore
common both to Touch and Sight. And as for the Objects of Hearing, Smell, Taste,
and Touch, they are not Sound, Odor, Savor, Hardness, etc. but the Bodies
themselves from which Sound, Odor, Savor, Hardness, etc. proceed; Of the
causes of which, and of the manner how they are produced, I shall speak
hereafter.

But these Phantasmes, though they be effects in the Sentient, (as Subject)
produced by Objects working upon the Organs; yet there are also other effects
besides these, produced by the same Objects, in the same Organs; namely,
certain Motions proceeding from Sense, which are called Animal Motions. For
seeing in all Sense of external things, there is mutual Action and Reaction,
that is, two Endeavors opposing one another, it is manifest, that the motion
of both of them together will be continued every way, especially to the
confines of both the Bodies. And when this happens in the internal Organ, the
Endeavor outward will proceed in a solid Angle, which will be greater, and
consequently the Idea greater, then it would have been if the impression had
been weaker.

11 From hence the Natural cause is manifest, First, why those things seem to
be greater, which ( caeteris paribus) are seen in a greater Angle. Secondly,
why in a serene cold night when the Moon does not shine, more of the fixed
Stars appear, then at another time. For their action is less hindered by the
serenity of the Air, and not obscured by the greater Light of the Moon, which
is then absent; and the Cold making the Air more pressing, helps or
strengthens the action of the Stars upon our Eyes, in so much as Stars may
then be seen which are seen at no other time. And this may suffice to be said
in general concerning Sense made by the Reaction of the Organ. For, as for the
place of the Image, the deceptions of Sight, and other things of which we have
experience in our selves by Sense, being they depend for the most part upon the
Fabric it self of the Eye of Man, I shall speak of them then when I come to
speak of Man.

12 But, there is another kind of Sense, of which I will say something in this
place, namely, the Sense of Pleasure and Pain, proceeding, not from the
Reaction of the Heart outward, but from continual action from the outermost
part of the Organ toward the Heart. For the original of Life being in the
Heart, that motion in the Sentient which is propagated to the Heart, must
necessarily make some alteration or diversion of Vital Motion, namely, by
quickening or slackening, helping or hindering the same. Now when it helps, it
is Pleasure, and when it hinders, it is Pain, Trouble, Grief, etc. And as
Phantasmes seem to be without, by reason of the Endeavor outward; so Pleasure
and Pain by reason of the Endeavor of the Organ inwards seem to be within,
namely, there where the first Cause of the Pleasure or Pain is; as when the
Pain proceeds from a Wound, we think the Pain and the Wound are both in the
same place.

Now Vital Motion, is the Motion of the Blood, perpetually circulating (as has
been shown from many infallible signs and marks by Doctor Harvey, the first
Observer of it) in the Veins and Arteries. Which Motion, when it is hindered by
some other Motion made by the action of sensible Objects, may be restored again
either by bending or setting straight the parts of the Body; which is done when
the Spirits are carried now into these, now into other Nerves, till the Pain
(as far as is possible) be quite taken away. But if Vital Motion be helped by
Motion made by Sense, then the parts of the Organ will be disposed to guide the
Spirits in such manner, as conduces most to the preservation and augmentation
of that motion by the help of the Nerves. And in animal motion this is the very
first Endeavor, and found even in the Embrio; which while it is in the womb,
moves its limbs with voluntary motion, for the avoiding of whatsoever
troubles it, or for the pursuing of what pleases it. And this first
Endeavor, when it tends toward such things as are known by experience to be
pleasant, is called APPETITE, (that is, an Approaching;) and when it shuns what
is troublesome, AVERSION, or Flying from it. And little Infants, at the
beginning, and as soon as they are born, have appetite to very few things, as
also they avoid very few, by reason of their want of Experience and Memory; and
therefore they have not so great a variety of animal Motion as we see in those
that are more grown. For it is not possible, without such knowledge as is
derived from Sense, that is, without Experience and Memory, to know what will
prove pleasant, or hurtful; only there is some place for conjecture from the
looks or aspects of things. And hence it is, that though they do not know what
may do them good or harm, yet sometimes they approach, and sometimes retire
from the same thing as their doubt prompts them. But afterward by accustoming
themselves by little and little, they come to know readily what is to be
pursued, and what to be avoided; and also to have a ready use of their Nerves
and other Organs in the pursuing and avoiding of good and bad. Wherefore
Appetite and Aversion are the first Endeavors of Animal Motion.

Consequent to this first Endeavor, is the Impulsion into the Nerves, and
Retraction again of Animal Spirits, of which it is necessary there be some
Receptacle on place near the original of the Nerves; and this Motion or
Endeavor is followed by a swelling and Relaxation of the Muscles; and lastly,
these are followed by Contraction and Extension of the limbs, which is Animal
Motion.

13 The Considerations of Appetites and Aversions are diverse. For seeing Living
Creatures have sometimes Appetite, and sometimes Aversion to the same thing, as
they think it will either be for their good or their hurt, while that
vicissitude of Appetites and Aversions remains in them* they have that series
of Thoughts which is called DELIBERATION; which lasts as long as they have it
in their power to obtain that which pleases, or to avoid that which
displeases them. Appetite therefore and Aversion are simply so called as long
as they follow not Deliberation. But if Deliberation have gone before, then the
last act of it, if it be Appetite, is called WILL; if Aversion, UNWILLINGNESSE;
so that the same thing is called both Will and Appetite; but the consideration
of them (namely, before and after Deliberation) is diverse. Nor is that which is
done within a Man whilst he Wills any thing, different from that which is
done in other living Creatures, whilst (Deliberation having preceded) they
have Appetite.

Neither is the freedom of Willing, or not willing, greater in Man, then in
other living Creatures. For where there is Appetite, the entire cause of
Appetite has preceded; and consequently the act of Appetite could not choose
but follow, that is, has of necessity followed, (as is shown Chapt. 9th
Article 5.) And therefore such a Liberty as is free from Necessity, is not to
be found in the Will either of Men or Beasts. But if by Liberty we understand
the faculty or power, not of Willing, but of Doing what they Will, then
certainly that Liberty is to be allowed to both; and both may equally have it,
whensover it is to be had.

Again, when Appetite and Aversion do with celerity succeed one another, the
whole series made by them, has its name sometimes from one, sometimes from the
other. For the same Deliberation (whilst it inclines sometimes to one,
sometimes to the other) is from Appetite called HOPE, and from Aversion FEAR.
For where there is no Hope, it is not to be called Fear, but HATE; and where no
Fear, not Hope, but DESIRE. To conclude, all the Passions, called Passions of
the Mind, consist of Appetite and Aversion (except pure Pleasure and Pain,
which are a certain Fruition of good or Evil;) as Anger, is Aversion from some
imminent evil, but such as is joined with Appetite of avoiding that evil by
force. But because the Passions and Perturbations of the Mind are innumerable;
and many of them not to be discerned in any Creatures besides Men; I will speak
of them more at large in that Section which is concerning Man. As for those
Objects (if there be any such) which do not at all stir the Mind, we are said
to Contemn them.

And thus much of Sense in general. In the next place I shall speak of Sensible
Objects.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the World, and of the Stars.
1 The Magnitude and Duration of the World, inscrutable. 2 No place in the
World Empty. 3 The arguments of Lucretius for Vacuum, invalid. 4 Other
arguments for the establishing of Vacuum, invalid. 5 Six suppositions for the
salving of the Phenomenon of Nature. 6 Possible causes of the Motions Annual
and Diurnal; and of the apparent Direction, Station and Retrogradation of the
Planets. 7 The supposition of Simple Motion, why likely. 8 The cause of the
Excentricity of the annual motion of the Earth. 9 The cause why the Moon has
always one and the same face turned toward the Earth. 10 The cause of the
Tides of the Ocean. 11 The cause of the Praecession of the Equinoxes.
1 COnsequent to the Contemplation of Sense is the contemplation of Bodies,
which are the efficient causes or Objects of Sense. Now every Object is either
a part of the whole World, or an Aggregate of parts. The greatest of all
Bodies, or sensible Objects, is the World it self, which we behold when we look
round about us from this point of the same which we call the Earth. Concerning
the World, as it is one Aggregate of many parts, the things that fall under
inquiry are but few; and those we can determine, none. Of the whole World we
may inquire what is its Magnitude, what its Duration, and how many there be;
but nothing else. For as for Place and Time, that is to say, Magnitude and
Duration, they are only our own fancies of a Body simply so called, that is to
say of a Body indefinitely taken, as I have shown before in the 7 chapter. All
other Phantasmes, are of Bodies or Objects as they are distinguished from one
another; as Color, the Phantasme of colored Bodies; Sound, of Bodies that
move the Sense of Hearing, etc. The questions concerning the Magnitude of the
World, are, whether it be Finite or Infinite, Full or not Full; Concerning its
Duration, whether it had a Beginning, or be Eternal; and concerning the
number, whether there be One or Many (though as concerning the Number, if it
were of infinite Magnitude, there could be no controversy at all.) Also if it
had a beginning, then by what Cause and of what Matter it was made; and again,
from whence that Cause and that Matter had their being, will be new questions;
till at last we come to one or many eternal Cause or Causes. And the
determination of all these things belongs to him that professes the
universal doctrine of Philosophy, in case as much could be known as can be
sought. But the knowledge of what is Infinite can never be attained by a finite
Inquirer. Whatsoever we know that are Men, we learn it from our Phantasmes; and
of Infinite (whether Magnitude or Time) there is no Phantasme at all; so that
it is impossible either for a man, or any other creature to have any conception
of Infinite. And though a man may from some Effect proceed to the immediate
Cause thereof, and from that to a more remote Cause, and so ascend continually
by right ratiocination from Cause to Cause; yet he will not be able to proceed
eternally; but wearied, will at last give over, without knowing whether it were
possible for him to proceed to an end, or not. But whether we suppose the World
to be Finite, or Infinite, no absurdity will follow. For the same things which
now appear, might appear, whether the Creator had pleased it should be Finite
or Infinite. Besides, though from this, that nothing can move it self, it may
rightly be inferred that there was some first eternal Movent; yet it can never
be inferred (though some use to make such inference) that that Movent was
eternally Immovable, but rather eternally Moved. For as it is true, that
nothing is moved by it self; so it is true also that nothing is moved but by
that which is already moved. The questions therefore about the Magnitude and
Beginning of the World, are not to be determined by Philosophers, but by those
that are lawfully authorized to order the Worship of God. For as Almighty God,
when he had brought his People into Judaea, allowed the Priests the first
fruits reserved to himself; so when he had delivered up the World to the
disputations of Men, it was his pleasure, that all Opinions concerning the
nature of Infinite and Eternal, known only to himself, should (as the
first fruits of Wisdom) be judged by those whose Ministry he meant to use in
the ordering of Religion. I cannot therefore commend those that boast they have
demonstrated by reasons drawn from natural things, that the World had a
Beginning. They are contemned by Idiots, because they understand them not; and
by the Learned, because they understand them; by both deservedly. For who can
commend him that demonstrates thus? If the World be Eternal, then an infinite
number of days (or other measures of Time) preceded the birth of Abraham. But
the birth of Abraham preceded the birth of Isaac; and therefore one Infinite is
greater then another Infinite, or one Eternal then another Eternal; which (he
says) is absurd. This Demonstration is like his, who from this, that the
number of even Numbers is infinite, would conclude, that there are as many even
Numbers, as there are Numbers simply, that is to say, the even Numbers are as
many, as all the even and od together. They which in this manner take away
Eternity from the World, do they not by the same means take away Eternity from
the Creator of the Wo^ld? From this absurdity therefore they run into another,
being forced to call Eternity Nunc stans, a standing still of the present Time,
or an abiding Now; and (which is much more absurd) to give to the infinite
number of Numbers, the name of Unity. But why should Eternity be called an
Abiding Now, rather then an Abiding Then? Wherefore there must either be many
Eternities, or Now and Then must signify the same. With such Demonstrators as
these, that speak in another language, it is impossible to enter into
disputation. And the men that reason thus absurdly, are not Idiots, but (which
makes the absurdity unpardonable) Geometricians, and such as take upon them to
be Judges (impertinent, but severe Judges) of other men's Demonstrations. The
reason is this, that as soon as they are entangled in the Words Infinite and
Eternal, (of which we have in our mind no Idea, but that of our own
insufficiency to comprehend them) they are forced either to speak something
absurd, or (which they love worse) to hold their peace. For Geometry has in it
somewhat like Wine; which when new, is windy; but afterward though less
pleasant, yet more wholesome. Whatsoever therefore is true, young Geometricians
think Demonstrable; but elder not. Wherefore I purposely pass over the
Questions of Infinite and Eternal; contenting my self with that Doctrine
concerning the Beginning and Magnitude of the World, which I have been
persuaded to by the holy Scriptures, and fame of the Miracles which confirm
them; and by the Custom of my Country, and reverence due to the Laws. And so I
pass on to such things as it is not unlawful to dispute of.

2 Concerning the World it is further questioned, whether the parts thereof be
contiguous to one another, in such manner, as not to admit of the least empty
space between; and the disputation both for and against it, is carried on with
probability enough. For the taking away of Vacuum, I will instance in only one
experiment, a common one, but (I think) unanswerable.

Let AB (in the first fig.) represent a vessel (such as Gardiners use to water
their Gardens withal;) whose bottom B is full of little holes; and whose mouth A
may be stopped with ones finger when there shall be need. If now this vessel be
filled with water, the hole at the top A being stopped, the water will not flow
out at any of the holes in the bottom B. But if the finger be removed to let in
the air above, it will run out at them all; and as soon as the finger is
applied to it again, the water will suddenly and totally be stayed again from
running out. The cause whereof seems to be no other but this, that the Water
cannot by its natural endeavor to descend, drive down the air below it,
because there is no place for it to go into, unless either by thrusting away
the next contiguous air it proceed by continual endeavor to the hole A, where
it may enter and succeed into the place of the water that flows out; or else
by resisting the endeavor of the water Downwards, penetrate the same, and pass
up through it. By the first of these ways (while the hole at A remains
stopped) there is no possible passage; nor by the second, unless the holes be
so great, that the water flowing out at them, can by its own weight force the
Air at the same time to ascend into the vessel by the same holes; as we see it
does in a vessel whose mouth is wide enough, when we turn suddenly the bottom
upwards to pour out the water; for then the Air being forced by the weight of
the water, enters (as is evident by the sobbing and resistance of the water) at
the sides or circumference of the orifice. And this I take for a sign that all
Space is full; for without this the natural motion of the water (which is a
heavy Body) downwards, would not be hindered.

3 On the contrary, for the establishing of Vacuum, many and specious arguments
and experiments have been brought. Nevertheless there seems to be something
wanting in all of them to conclude it firmly. These arguments for Vacuum are
partly made by the followers of the doctrine of Epicurus; who taught that the
World consists of very small Spaces not filled by any Body, and of very small
Bodies that have within them no empty Space, (which by reason of their
hardness he calls Atoms); and that these small Bodies and Spaces are every
where intermingled. Their arguments are thus delivered by Lucretius.

And first he says that unless it were so, there could be no motion; For the
office and property of Bodies is to withstand and hinder motion. If therefore
the Universe were filled with Body, motion would every where be hindered, so,
as to have no beginning any where; and consequently there would be no motion at
all. It is true that in whatsoever is full, and at rest in all its parts, it is
not possible motion should have beginning. But nothing is drawn from hence for
the proving of Vacuum. For though it should be granted that there is Vacuum;
yet if the Bodies which are intermingled with it, should all at once and
together be at rest, they would never be moved again. For it has been
demonstrated above (in the 9th Chapter 7th Article) that nothing can be moved
but by that which is contiguous and already moved. But supposing that all
things are at rest together, there can be nothing contiguous and moved; and
therefore no beginning of motion. Now the denying of the beginning of motion,
does not take away present motion, unless beginning be taken away from Body
also. For motion may be either coeternal, or concreated with Body. Nor does it
seem more necessary that Bodies were first at rest, and afterward moved, then
that they were first moved, and rested (if ever they rested at all) afterward.
Neither does there appear any cause, why the matter of the World should for the
admission of motion, be intermingled with empty spaces, rather then full; I say
full, but withal fluid. Nor lastly, is there any reason why those hard Atoms
may not also by the motion of intermingled fluid matter be congregated and
brought together into compounded Bodies of such bigness as we see. Wherefore
nothing can by this argument be concluded, but that motion was either
coeternal, or of the same duration with that which is moved; neither of which
conclusions consists with the doctrine of Epicurus, who allows neither to the
World nor to Motion any Beginning at all. The necessity therefore of Vacuum is
not hitherto demonstrated. And the cause (as far as I understand from them that
have discoursed with me of Vacuum) is this, that whilst they contemplate the
nature of Fluid, they conceive it to consist as it were of small grains of hard
matter, in such manner as meal is fluid, made so by grinding of the Corn; when
nevertheless it is possible to conceive Fluid to be of its own nature as
homogeneous, as either an Atome, or as Vacuum, it self.

The second of their arguments is taken from weight, and is contained in these
Verses of Lucretius,

Corporis officium est quoniam premere omnia deorsum;
Contra autem natura manet sine Pondere Inanis;
Ergo quod magnum est aeque, Leviusque videtur,
Nimirum plus esse sibi declarat Inanis.
That is to say, Seeing the office and property of Body is to press all things
downwards; and on the contrary, seeing the nature of Vacuum is to have no
weight at all; Therefore when of two Bodies of equal magnitude, one is lighter
then the other, it is manifest that the lighter Body has in it more Vacuum
then the other.

To say nothing of the Assumption concerning the endeavor of Bodies downwards,
which is not rightly assumed, because the World has nothing to do with
Downwards, which is a mere fiction of ours; Nor of this, that if al things
tended to the same lowest part of the World, either there would be no
coalescence at all of Bodies, or they would all be gathered together into the
same place. This only is sufficient to take away the force of the argument,
that Air intermingled with those his Atoms, had served as well for his
purpose, as his intermingled Vacuum.

The third argument is drawn from this, That Lightning, Sound, Heat and Cold do
penetrate all Bodies (except Atoms) how solid soever they be. But this reason,
except it be first demonstrated that the same things cannot happen (without
Vacuum) by perpetual generation of Motion, is altogether invalid. But that all
the same things may so happen, shall in due place be demonstrated.

Lastly, the fourth argument is set down by the same Lucretius in these Verses.

Duo de concursu corpora lata
Si cito dissiliant, nempe aer omne necesse est
Inter corpora quod fuerat, possidat Inane.
Is porro quamvis circum celerantibus auris
Confluat, haud poterit tamen uno tempore totum
Compleri spatium; nam primum quemque necesse est
Occupet ille locum, deinde omnia possideantur.
That is, If two flat Bodies be suddenly pulled asunder, of necessity the Air
must come between them to fill all the space they left empty. But with what
celerity soever the Air flow in, yet it cannot in one instant of time fill the
whole space, but first one part of it, then successively all.

Which nevertheless is more repugnant to the opinion of Epicurus, then of those
that deny Vacuum. For though it be true, that if two Bodies were of infinite
hardness, and were joined together by their Superficies which were most exactly
plain, it would be impossible to pull them asunder, in regard it could not be
done but by Motion in an instant; yet, if as the greatest of all Magnitudes
cannot be given, nor the swiftest of all Motions, so neither the hardest of all
hard Bodies; it might be, that by the application of very great force, there
might be place made for a successive flowing in of the Air, namely by
separating the parts of the joined Bodies by succession, beginning at the
outermost and ending at the innermost part. He ought therefore first to have
proved, that there are some Bodies extremely hard, not relatively, as compared
with softer Bodies, but absolutely, that is to say, infinitely hard; which is
not true. But if we suppose (as Epicurus does) that Atoms are indivisible, and
yet have small superficies of their own; then if two Bodies should be joined
together by many, or but one only small superficies of either of them, then I
say this argument of Lucretius would be a firm demonstration, that no two
Bodies made up of Atoms (as he supposes) could ever possibly be pulled asunder
by any force whatsoever. But this is repugnant to daily experience.

And thus much of the arguments of Lucretius. Let us now consider the arguments
which are drawn from the experiments of later Writers.

4 The first experiment is this, That if a hollow vessel be thrust into water
with the bottom upwards, the water will ascend into it; which they say it could
not do, unless the Air within were thrust together into a narrower place; and
that this were also impossible except there were little empty places in the
Air. Also that when the Air is compressed to a certain degree, it can receive
no further compression, its small particles not suffering themselves to be pent
into less room. This reason, if the Air could not pass through the Water as it
ascends within the vessel, might seem valid. But it is sufficiently known, that
Air will penetrate Water by the application of a force equal to the gravity of
the Water. If therefore the force by which the Vessel is thrust down, be
greater, or equal to the endeavor by which the water naturally tends
downwards, the Air will go out that way where the resistance is made, namely,
toward the edges of the Vessel. For, by how much the deeper is the water which
is to be penetrated, so much greater must be the depressing force. But after
the Vessel is quite under water, the force by which it is depressed, that is to
say, the force by which the water rises up, is no longer increased. There is
therefore such an equilibration between them, as that the natural endeavor of
the water downwards, is equal to the endeavor by which the same water is to be
penetrated to the increased depth.

The second experiment is, That if a concave Cylinder of sufficient length
(made of Glass, that the experiment may be the better seen) having one end
open, and the other close shut, be filled with Quicksilver, and the open end
being stopped with ones finger, be together with the finger dipped into a dish
or other vessel in which also there is Quicksilver, and the Cylinder be set
upright, we shall, the finger being taken away (to make way for the descent of
the Quicksilver) see it descend into the Vessel under it, till there be only
so much remaining within the Cylinder as may fill about 26 Inches of the same;
and thus it will always happen whatsoever be the Cylinder, provided that the
length be not less then 26 Inches. From whence they conclude that the cavity of
the Cylinder above the Quicksilver remayns empty of all Body. But in this
experiment I find no necessity at all of Vacuum. For when the Quicksilver
which is in the Cylinder descends, the Vessel under it must needs be filled to
a greater height, and consequently so much of the contiguous Air must be thrust
away as may make place for the Quicksilver which is descended. Now if it be
asked whether that Air goes, what can be answered but this, that it thrusts
away the next Air, and that the next, and so successively, till there be a
return to the place where the propulsion first began? and there, the last Air
thus thrust on will press the Quicksilver in the Vessel with the same force
with which the first Air was thrust away; and if the force with which the
Quicksilver descends be great enough (which is greater or less, as it descends
from a place of greater or less height) it will make the Air penetrate the
Quicksilver in the vessel, and go up into the Cylinder to fill the place which
they thought was left empty. But because the Quicksilver has not in every
degree of height force enough to cause such penetration, therefore in
descending it must of necessity stay somewhere, namely there, where its
endeavor downwards, and the resistance of the same to the penetration of the
Air come to an aequilibrium. And by this experiment it is manifest, that this
aequilibrium will be at the height of 26 Inches, or thereabouts.

The third experiment is, That when a Vessel has as much Air in it as it can
naturally contain, there may nevertheless be forced into it as much water as
will fill three quarters of the same Vessel. And the experiment is made in this
manner. Into the glass bottle, represented (in the 2d figure) by the Sphere F
G, whose center is A, let the pipe B A C be so fitted, that it may precisely
fill the mouth of the bottle; and let the end B, be so near the bottom, that
there may be only space enough left for the free passage of the water which is
thrust in above. Let the upper end of this pipe have a Cover at D, with a spout
at E, by which the water (when it ascends in the pipe) may run out. Also let H
C be a Cock, for the opening or shutting of the passage of the water between B
and D, as there shall be occasion. Let the Cover D E be taken off; and the Cock
H C being opened, let a Syringe fall of water be forced in; and before the
Syringe be taken away, let the Cock be turned to hinder the going out of the
Air. And in this manner let the injection of water be repeated as often as it
shall be requisite, till the water rise within the bottle, for example, to G F.
Lastly, the Cover being fastened on again, and the Cock H C opened, the water
will run swiftly out at E, and sink by little and little from G F to the bottom
of the pipe B.

From this Phenomenon they argue for the necessity of Vacuum in this manner.
The Bottle from the beginning was full of Air; which Air could neither go out
by penetrating so great a length of water as was injected by the pipe, nor by
any other way. Of necessity therefore all the water as high as F G, as also all
the Air that was in the bottle before the water was forced in, must now be in
the same place, which at first was filled by the Air alone; which were
impossible, if all the space within the bottle were formerly filled with Air
precisely, that is, without any Vacuum. Besides, though some man perhaps may
think the Air, being a thin Body, may pass through the Body of the water
contained in the pipe, yet from that other Phenomenon, (namely, that all the
water which is in the space B F G, is cast out again by the spout at E, for
which it seems impossible that any other reason can be given besides the force
by which the Air frees it self from compression) it follows, that either there
was in the bottle some space empty, or that many Bodies may be together in the
same place. But this last is absurd; and therefore the former is true, namely,
that there was Vacuum.

This argument is infirm in two places. For first that is assumed which is not
to be granted; and in the second place an experiment is brought, which I think
is repugnant to Vacuum. That which is assumed is, that the Air can have no
passage out through the pipe. Nevertheless we see daily that Air easily
ascends from the bottom to the Superficies of a River (as is manifest by the
bubbles that rise); nor does it need any other cause to give it this motion,
then the natural endeavor downwards of the Water. Why therefore may not the
endeavor upwards of the same Water acquired by the injection (which endeavor
upwards is greater then the natural endeavor of the water downwards) cause the
air in the bottle to penetrate in like manner the water that presses it
downwards; especially seeing the water as it rises in the bottle, does so
press the Air that is above it, as that it generateth in every part thereof an
endeavor toward the external superficies of the pipe, and consequently makes
all the parts of the enclosed air to tend directly toward the passage at B? I
say this is no less manifest, then that he air which rises up from the bottom
of a River should penetrate the water, how deep soever it be. Werefore I do not
yet see any cause why the force by which the water is injected, should not at
the same time eject the air.

And as for their arguing the necessity of Vacuum from the rejection of the
water; In the first place, supposing there is Vacuum, I demand by what
principle of motion that ejection is made. Certainly, seeing this motion is
from within outward, it must needs be caused by some Agent within the bottle;
that is to say, by the air it self. Now the motion of that air, being caused
by the rising of the water, begins at the bottom, and tends upwards; whereas
the motion by which it ejecteth the water ought to begin above, and tend
downwards. From whence therefore has the enclosed air this endeavor toward
the bottom. To this question I know not what answer can be given, unless it be
said, that the air descends of its own accord to expel the water. Which
because it is absurd, and that the air after the water is forced in, has as
much room as its magnitude requires, there will remain no cause at all why the
water should be forced out. Wherefore the assertion of Vacuum is repugnant to
the very experiment which is here brought to establish it,

Many other Phenomenon are usually brought for Vacuum, as those of
Weather-glasses, Aeolipiles, Wind-guns, etc. Which would all be very hard to be
salved, unless water be penetrable by air, without the intermixture of empty
space. But now, seeing air may with no great endeavor pass through, not only
water, but any other fluid Body, though never so stubborn, as Quicksilver,
these Phenomenon prove nothing. Nevertheless, it might in reason be expected,
that he that would take away Vacuum, should without Vacuum show us such causes
of these Phenomenon, as should be at least of equal, if not greater
probability. This therefore shall be done in the following discourse, when I
come to speak of these Phenomenon in their proper places. But first the most
general Hypotheses of natural Philosophy are to be premised.

And seeing that Suppositions are put for the true Causes of apparent Effects,
every Supposition, except such as be absurd, must of necessity consist of some
supposed possible Motion (for Rest can never be the Essicient Cause of any
thing), and Motion supposes Bodies Moveable; of which there are three kinds,
Fluid, Consistent, and mixed of both. Fluid are those, whose parts may by very
weak endeavonr be separated from one another; and Consistent those, for the
separation of whose parts greater force is to be applied. There are therefore
degrees of Consistency; which degrees, by comparison with more or less
Consistent, have the names of Hardness, or Softness. Wherefore a Fluid Body is
always divisible into Bodies equally Fluid, as Quantity into Quantities; and
Soft Bodies, of whatsoever degree of Softness, into Soft Bodies of the same
degree. And though many men seem to conceive no other difference of Fluidity,
but such as arises from the different magnitudes of the parts (in which Sense,
Dust, though of Diamonds, may be called Fluid); Yet I understand by Fluidity,
that which is made such by Nature equally in every part of the Fluid Body; not
as Dust is Fluid, for so a House which is falling in pieces may be called
Fluid; but in such manner as Water seems Fluid, and to divide it self into
parts perpetually Fluid. And this being well understood, I come to my
Suppositions.

5 First, therefore I suppose, That the Immense Space which we call the World,
is the Aggregate of all Bodies; which are either Consistent and Visible, as the
Earth and the Stars; or Invisible, as the small Atoms which are disseminated
through the whole space between the Earth and the Stars; and lastly, that most
Fluid Ether, which so fills all the rest of the Universe, as that it leaves in
it no empty place at all.

Secondly, I suppose with Copernicus, That the greater Bodies of the World,
which are both consistent and permanent, have such order amongst themselves, as
that the Sun has the first place, Mercury the second, Venus the third, The
Earth (with the Moon going about it) the fourth, Mars the fifth, Jupiter (with
his Attendants) the sixth, Saturn the seventh, and after these the Fixed
Stars have their several distances from the Sun.

Thirdly, I suppose, That in the Sun and the rest of the Planets, there is
and always has been a Simple Circular Motion.

Fourthly, I suppose, That in the Body of the Air there are certain other
Bodies intermingled, which are not Fluid; but withal that they are so small,
that they are not preceptible by Sense, and that these also have their proper
Simple Motion; and are some of them more, some less hard or consistent.

Fifthly, I suppose with Kepler, That as the distance between the Sun and the
Earth, is to the distance between the Moon and the Earth; so the distance
between the Moon and the Earth, is to the Semidiameter of the Earth.

As for the Magnitude of the Circles, and the Times in which they are described
by the Bodies which are in them, I will suppose them to be such as shall seem
most agreeable to the Phenomenon in question,

6 The causes of the different Seasons of the Year, and of the several
variations of Days and Nights in all the parts of the superficies of the
Earth, have been demonstrated first by Copernicus, and since by Kepler,
Galilaeus and others, from the supposition of the Earths diurnal revolution
about its own Axis, together with its Annual motion about the Sun, in the
Ecliptic according to the order of the Signs; and thirdly, by the annual
revolution of the same Earth about its own center contrary to the order of the
Signs. I suppose with Copernicus, That the diurnal revolution is from the
motion of the Earth, by which the Aequinoctial Circle is described about it.
And as for the other two annual motions, they are the efficient cause of the
Earths being carried about in the Ecliptic in such manner, as that its Axis is
always kept parallel to it self. Which parallelisme was for this reason
introduced, lest by the Earths annual revolution, its Poles should seem to be
necessarily carried about the Sun, contrary to experience. I have (in the
10th Artic. of the ^^th Chap.) demonstrated from the supposition of Simple
Circular Motion in the Sun, that the Earth is so carried about the Sun, as
that its Axis is thereby kept always parallel to it self. Wherefore, from these
two supposed motions in the Sun, the one Simple Circular Motion; the other
Circular Motion about its owns Center, it may be demonstrated, that the Year
has both the same variations of Days and Nights, as have been demonstrated by
Copernicus.

For if the Circle abcd (in the 3d Figure) be the Ecliptic, whose Center is e,
and Diameter aec; and the Earth be placed in a, and the Sun be moved in the
little Circle fghi, namely, according to the order f, g, h and i, it has been
demonstrated, that a Body placed in a, will be moved in the same order through
the points of the Ecliptic a, b, c and d, and will always keep its Axis
parallel to its self.

But if (as I have supposed) the Earth also be moved with Simple Circular
Motion in a plain that passes through a, cutting the plain of the Ecliptic
so, as that the common section of both the plains be in ac, thus also the Axis
of the Earth will be kept always parallel to it self. For let the Center of
the Earth be moved about in the Circumference of the Epicycle whose Diameter is
lak, which is a part of the straight line lac. Therefore lak the Diameter of
the Epicycle, passing through the Center of the Earth, will be in the plain of
the Ecliptic. Wherefore seeing that by reason of the Earths Simple Motion both
in the Ecliptic and in its Epicycle, the straight line lak is kept always
parallel to it self, every other straight line also taken in the Body of the
Earth, and consequently its Axis, will in like manner be kept always parallel
to it self; so that in what part soever of the Ecliptic the Center of the
Epicycle be found, and in what part soever of the Epicycle the Center of the
Earth be found at the same time, the Axis of the Earth will be parallel to the
place where the same Axis would have been, if the Center of the Earth had never
gone out of the Ecliptic.

Now as I have demonstrated the simple annual motion of the Earth from the
supposition of Simple Motion in the Sun; so from the supposition of Simple
Motion in the Earth may be demonstrated the monthly Simple Motion of the Moon.
For if the names be but changed the Demonstration will be the same, and
therefore need not be repeated.

7 That which makes this supposition of the Suns Simple Motion in the
Epicycle fghi probable, is First, that the Periods of all the Planets are not
only described about the Sun, but so described, as that they are al
contained within the Zodiac, that is to say, within the latitude of about 16
degrees; for the cause of this seems to depend upon some power in the Sun,
especially in that part of the Sun which respects the Zodiac. Secondly, that
in the whole compass of the heavens there appears no other Body, from which
the cause of this Phenomenon can in probability be derived. Besides, I could
not imagine, that so many and such various motions of the Planets should have
no dependence at all upon one another. But by supposing motive power in the
Sun, we suppose motion also; for power to move, without motion, is no power
at all. I have therefore supposed that there is in the Sun for the governing
of the primary Planets, and in the Earth for the governing of the Moon, such
motion, as being received by the primary Planets and by the Moon, makes them
necessarily appear to us in such manner as we see them; Whereas, that circular
motion (which is commonly attributed to them) about a fixed Axis, (which is
called Conversion) being a motion of their parts only, and not of their whole
Bodies, is insufficient to salve their Appearances. For seeing whatsoever is so
moved, has no endeavor at all toward those parts which are without the
circle, they have no power to propagate any endeavor to such Bodies as are
placed without it. And as for them that suppose this may be done by Magnetical
Virtue, or by incorporeall and immateriall Species, they suppose no natural
cause; nay no cause at all. For there is no such thing as an Incorporeal
Movent; and Magnetical Virtue is a thing altogether unknown; and whenever it
shall be known, it will be found to be a motion of Body. It remains therefore,
that if the primary Planets be carried about by the Sun, and the Moon by the
Earth, they have the simple circular motions of the Sun and the Earth for the
causes of their circulations. Otherwise, if they be not carried about by the
Sun and the Earth, but that every Planet has been moved as it is now moved
ever since it was made, there will be of their motions no cause natural. For
either these motions were concreated with their Bodies, and their cause is
supernatural; or they are coeternal with them, and so they have no cause at
all. For whatsoever is Eternal was never generated.

I may add besides, to confirm the probability of this simple motion, that
almost all learned men are now of the same opinion with Copernicus concerning
the parallelisme of the Axis of the Earth, it seemed to me to be more agreeable
to truth, or at least more handsome, that it should be caused by simple
Circular Motion alone, than by two motions, one in the Ecliptic, and the other
about the Earths own Axis the contrary way, neither of them Simple, nor either
of them such as might be produced by any motion of the Sun. I thought best
therefore to retain this Hypothesis of Simple Motion; and from it to derive the
causes of as many of the Phenomenon as I could, and to let such alone as I
could not deduce frm thence.

It will perhaps be objected, that although by this supposition the reason may
be given of the Parallelisme of the Axis of the Earth, and of many other
Appearances; nevertheless, seeing it is done by placing the Body of the Sun
in the Center of that Orb which the Earth describes with its annual motion,
the supposition it self is false, because this annual Orb is excentrique to
the Sun. In the first place therefore let us examine what that Excentricity
is, and whence it proceeds.

8 Let the annual Circle of the Earth abcd (in the same 3d figure) be divided
into four equal parts by the straight lines ac and bd, cutting one another in
the Center e; and let a be the beginning of Libra, b of Capricorn, c of Aries,
and d of Cancer; and let the whole Orb abcd be understood (according to
Copernicus) to have every way so great distance from the Zodiac of the fixed
Stars, that it be in comparison with it but as a point. Let the Earth be now
supposed to be in the beginning of Libra at a. The Sun therefore will appear
in the beginning of Aries at c. Wherefore if the Earth be moved from a to b,
the apparent motion of the Sun will be from c to the beginning of Cancer in
d; and the Earth being moved forwards from b to c, the Sun also will appear
to be moved forwards to the beginning of Libra in a; Wherefore cda will be the
Summer Arch, and the Winter Arch will be abc. Now in the time of the Suns
apparent motion in the Summer Arch, there are numbered 186 days; and
consequently the Earth makes in the same time the same number of diurnal
conversions in the Arch abc; and therefore the Earth in its motion through the
Arch cda will make only 178 diurnal conversions, Wherefore the Arch a b c
ought to be greater then the Arch c d a by 8 days, that is to say, by almost
so many degrees. Let the Arch a r, as also c s, be each of them an Arch of two
degrees and 1/16. Wherefore the Arch r b s will be greater then the Semicircle
a b c by 4 degrees and, and greater then the Arch s d r by 8 degrees and. The
Equinoxes therefore will be in the points r and s; and therefore also when the
Earth is in r, the Sun will appear in s. Wherefore the true place of the
Sun will be in t, that is to say, without the Center of the Earths annual
motion by the quantity of the Sine of the Arch a r, or the Sine of two degrees
and 16 minutes. Now this Sine, putting 100000 for the Radius, will be near 3580
parts thereof. And so munh is the Excentricity of the Earths annual motion,
provided that that motion be in a perfect circle; and s and r are the
Equinoctial points; and the straight lines s r and c a produced both ways till
they reach the Zodiac of the fixed Stars, will fall still upon the same fixed
Stars, because the whole Orb a b c d is supposed to have no magnitude at all
in respect of the great distance of the fixed Stars.

Supposing now the Sun to be in c, it remains that I show the cause why the
Earth is nearer to the Sun, when in its annual motion it is found to be in d,
then when it is in b. And I take the cause to be this. When the Earth is in the
beginning of Capricorn at b, the Sun appears in the beginning of Cancer at d;
and then is the midst of Summer. But in the midst of Summer, the Northern parts
of the Earth are toward the Sun, which is almost all dry land, containing
all Europe, and much the greatest part of Asia and America. But when the Earth
is in the beginning of Cancer at d, it is the midst of Winter, and that part of
the Earth is toward the Sun, which contains those great Seas called the
South Sea and the Indian Sea, which are of far greater extent then all the
dry Land in that Hemisphere. Wherefore (by the last Article of the 21 Chapter)
when the Earth is in d, it will come nearer to its first Movent, that is, to
the Sun which is in t; that is to say, the Earth is nearer to the Sun in
the midst of Winter when it is in d, then in the midst of Summer when it is b;
and therefore during the Winter the Sun is in its Perigaeum, and in its
Apogaeum during the Summer. And thus I have shown a possible cause of the
Excentricity of the Earth; which was to be done.

I am therefore of Keplers opinion, in this, that he attributes the
Excentricity of the Earth to the difference of the parts thereof, and supposes
one part to be affected, and another disaffected to the Sun. And I dissent
from him in this, that he thinks it to be by Magnetic virtue, and that this
Magnetic virtue, or attraction and thrusting back of the Earth is wrought by
immateriate Species; which cannot be; because nothing can give motion, but a
Body moved and contiguous. For if those Bodies be not moved which are
contiguous to a Body unmoved, how this Body should begin to be moved is not
imaginable; as has been demonstrated in the 7th Article of the 9th Chapter, and
often inculcated in other places, to the end that Philosophers might at last
abstain from the use of such unconceiveable connexions of words. I dissent also
from him in this, that he says the similitude of Bodies is the cause of their
mutual attraction, For if it were so, I see no reason why one Egg should not be
attracted by another. If therefore one part of the Earth be more affected by
the Sun, then another part, it proceeds from this, that one part has more
water, the other more dry land. And from hence it is, (as I showed above) that
the Earth comes nearer to the Sun when it shines upon that part where there
is more water, then when it shines upon that where there is more dry Land.

9 This Excentricity of the Earth is the cause why the way of its annual motion
is not a perfect Circle, but either an Elliptical, or almost an Elliptical
line; as also why the Axis of the Earth is not kept exactly parallel to it self
in all places, but only in the Equinoctial points.

Now seeing I have said that the Moon is carried about by the Earth, in the
same manner that the Earth is by the Sun; and that the Earth goes about the
Sun in such manner as that it shows sometimes one Hemisphere, sometimes the
other to the Sun; it remains to be enquired, why the Moon has always one and
the same face turned toward the Earth.

Suppose therefore the Sun to be moved with Simple Motion in the little
Circle f g h i, (in the fourth figure) whose Center is t; and let be the
annual Circle of the Earth; and a the beginning, of Libra. About the point a
let the little Circle l k be described; and in it let the Center of the Earth
be understood to be moved with Simple motion; and both the Sun and the Earth
to be moved according to the order of the Signs. Upon the Center a let the way
of the Moon m n o p be described; and let q r be the Diameter of a Circle
cutting the Globe of the Moon into two Hemispheres, whereof one is seen by us
when the Moon is at the full, and the other is turned from us.

The Diameter therefore of the Moon q o r will be perpendicular to the Straight
Line t a. Wherefore the Moon is carried by reason of the Motion of the Earth
from o toward p. But by reason of the motion of the Sun, if it were in p it
would at the same time be carried from p toward o; and by these two contrary
Movents the straight line q r will be turned about; and in a Quadrant of the
Circle m n o p it will be turned so much as makes the fourth part of its whole
conversion. Wherefore when the Moon is in p, q r will be parallel to the
straight line m o. Secondly, when the Moon is in m, the straight line q r will
by reason of the motion of the Earth be in m o. But by the working of the Suns
motion upon it in the quadrant p m, to^ same q r will be turned so much as
makes another quarter of its whole conversion. When therefore the Moon is in m,
q r will be perpendicular to the straight line o m. By the same reason, when
the Moon is in n, q r will be parallel to the straight line m o; and the Moon
returning to o, the same q r will return to its first place; and the Body of
the Moon will in one entire period make also one entire conversion upon her own
Axis. In the making of which, it is manifest, that one and the same face of the
Moon is always turned toward the Earth. And if any Diameter were taken in that
little Circle, in which the Moon were supposed to be carried about with simple
motion, the same effect would follow; for if there were no action from the Sun,
every Diameter of the Moon would be carried about always parallel to it self.
Wherefore I have given a possible cause, why one and the same face of the Moon
is always turned toward the Earth.

But it is to be noted, that when the Moon is without the Ecliptic, we do not
always see the same face precisely. For we see only that part which is
illuminated. But when the Moon is without the Ecliptic, that part which is
toward us, is not exactly the same with that which is illuminated.

10 To these three simple motions, one of the Sun, another of the Moon, and
the third of the Earth, in their own little Circles f g h i, l k, and q r,
together with the Diurnal conversion of the Earth (by which conversion all
things that adhere to its superficies are necessarily carried about with it)
may be referred the three Phenomenon concerning the Tides of the Ocean. Whereof
the first, is the alternate elevation and depression of the Water at the
Shores, twice in the space of 24 hours and near upon 52 minutes; for so it has
constantly continued in all ages. The second, that at the New and Full Moons
the elevations of the Water are greater, then at other times between. And the
third, that when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, they are yet greater then at
any other time. For the salving of which Phenomenon, we have already the four
abovementioned Motions; to which I assume also this, that the part of the Earth
which is called America, being higher then the Water, and extended almost the
space of a whole Semicircle from North to South, gives a stop to the motion of
the Water. This being granted,

In the same 4th figure, where l b k c is supposed to be in the plain of the
Moons monthly motion, let the little Circle l d k e be described about the
same Center a in the plain of the Equinoctial. This Circle therefore will
decline from the Circle l b k c in an angle of almost 28 degrees and (for the
greatest declination of the Ecliptic is 23, to which adding 5 for the greatest
declination of the Moon from the Ecliptic, the sum will be 28 degrees and).
Seeing now the Waters which are under the Circle of the Moons course, are (by
reason of the Earths Simple Motion in the plain of the same Circle) moved
together with the Earth, (that is to say, together with their own bottoms)
neither out-going nor out-gone; if we add the Diurnal motion, by which the
other Waters which are under the Equinoctial are moved in the same order; and
consider withal that the Circles of the Moon and of the Equinoctial intersect
one another; it will be manifest, that both those Waters, which are under the
Circle of the Moon, and under the Equinoctial, will run together under the
Equinoctial; and consequently, that their Motion will not only be swifter then
the ground that carries them; but also that the waters themselves will have
greater elevation whenever the Earth is in the Equinoctial. Wherefore,
whatsoever the cause of the Tides may be, this may be the cause of their
augmentation at that time.

Again, seeing I have supposed the Moon to be carried about by the simple
motion of the Earth in the little circle lbkc; and demonstrated (at the 4
article of the 21 chapter) that whatsoever is moved by a Movent that has
simple motion, will be moved always with the same velocity; it follows, that
the center of the Earth will be carried in the circumference lbkc with the same
velocity, with which the Moon is carried in the circumference mnop. Wherefore
the time in which the Moon is carried about in mnop, is to the time in which
the Earth is carried about in lbkc, as one circumference to the other, that is,
as ao to ak. But ao is observed to be to the Semidiameter of the Earth as 59 to
1; and therefore the Earth (if ak be put for its Semidiameter) will make 59
revolutions in lbkc, in the time that the Moon makes one monthly circuit in
mnop. But the Moon makes her monthly circuit in little more then 29 days.
Wherefore the Earth shall make its circuit in the circumference lbkc in 12 hours
and a little more, namely about 26 minutes more; that is to say, it shall make
two circuits in 24 hours and almost 52 minutes; which is observed to be the
time between the high water of one day and the high water of the day following.
Now the course of the waters being hindered by the southern part of America,
their motion will be interrupted there; and consequently, they will be elevated
in those places, and sink down again by their own weight, twice in the space of
24 hours and 52 minutes. And thus I have given a possible cause of the diurnall
reciprocation of the Ocean.

Now from this swelling of the Ocean in those parts of the Earth, proceed the
Flowings and Ebbings in the Atlantic, Spanish, British and German Seas; which
though they have their set times, yet upon several Shores they happen at
several hours of the day; and they receive some augmentation from the North,
by reason that the shores of China and Tartaria, hindering the general course
of the waters, makes them swell there* and discharge themselves in part through
the straight of Anian into the Northern Ocean, and so into the German Sea.

As for the Spring Tides which happen at the time of the New and Full Moons,
they are caused by that simple motion which at the beginning I supposed to be
always in the Moon. For as, when I showed the cause of the Excentricity of
the Earth, I derived the elevation of the waters from the simple motion of the
Sun; so the same may here be derived from the simple motion of the Moon. For
though from the generation of Clouds, there appear in the Sun a more
manifest power of elevating the waters, then in the Moon; yet the power of
increasing moisture in Vegetables and living creatures appears more manifestly
in the Moon then in the Sun; which may perhaps proceed from this, that the
Sun raises up greater, and the Moon lesser drops of water. Nevertheless, it
is more likely, and more agreeable to common observation, that Rain is raised
not only by the Sun but also by the Moon; for almost all men expect change
of weather at the time of the Conjunctions of the Sun and Moon with one
another, and with the Earth, more then in the time of their Quarters.

In the last place, the cause why the Spring Tides are greater at the time of
the Aequinoxes, has been already sufficiently declared in this Article, where
I have demonstrated, that the two Motions of the Earth, namely, its Simple
Motion in the little Circle lbkc, and its Diurnal motion in ldke, cause
necessarily a greater elevation of Waters when the Sun is about the
Aequinoxes, then when he is in other places. I have therefore given possible
causes of the Phenomenon of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Ocean.

11 As for the explication of the yearly Praecession of the Aequinoctial
points, we must remember, that (as I have already shown) the annual motion of
the Earth is not in the Circumference of a Circle, but of an Ellipsis, or a
line not considerably different from that of an Ellipsis. In the first place
therefore this Elliptical line is to be described.

Let the Ecliptic (in the 5th figure) be divided into four equal parts by the
two straight lines ab and, cutting one another at right angles in the Center c;
and taking the Arch bd of 2 degrees and 16 minutes, let the straight line de be
drawn parallel to ab and cutting in f; which being done, the Excentricity of
the Earth will be cf. Seeing therefore the annual motion of the Earth is in the
Circumference of an Ellipsis, of which is the greater Axis, ab cannot be the
lesser Axis; for ab and are equal. Wherefore the Earth passing through a and b,
will either pass above, as through g, or passing through, will fall between c
and a; it is no matter which. Let it pass therefore through g; and let gl be
taken equal to the straight line; and dividing gl equally in i, gi will be
equal to, and il equal to f; and consequently the point i will cut the
Excentricity cf into two equal parts; and taking ih equal to if, hi will be the
whole Excentricity. If now a straight line (namely, the line i) be drawn
through i parallel to the straight lines ab and ed, the way of the Sun in
Summer (namely, the Arch g) will be greater then his way in Winter by 8 degrees
and. Wherefore the true Aequinoxes will be in the straight line i; and therefore
the Ellipsis of the Earths annual motion will not pass through a, g, b and l;
but through, g, and l. Wherefore the annual motion of the Earth is in the
Ellipsis g l, and cannot be (the Excentricity being salved) in any other line.
And this perhaps is the reason, why Kepler, against the opinion of all the
Astronomers of former time, thought fit to bisect the Excentricity of the
Earth, or (according to the Ancients) of the Sun, not by diminishing the
quantity of the same Excentricity, because the true measure of that quantity,
is the difference by which the Summer Arch exceeds the Winter Arch, but by
taking for the Center of the Ecliptic of the great Orb the point c nearer to
f, and so placing the whole great Orb as much nearer to the Ecliptic of the
fixed Stars toward, as is the distance between c and i. For seeing the whole
great Orb is but as a point in respect of the immense distance of the fixed
Stars, the two straight lines and ab being produced both ways to the
beginnings of Aries and Libra, will fall upon the same points of the Sphere of
the fixed Stars. Let therefore the Diameter of the Earth mn be in the plain of
the Earths annual motion. If now the Earth be moved by the Suns simple motion
in the Circumference of the Ecliptic about the Center i, this Diameter will
be kept always parallel to itself and to the straight line gl. But seeing the
Earth is moved in the Circumference of an Ellipsis without the Ecliptic, the
point n, whilst it passes through will go in a lesser Circumference then the
point m; and consequently as soon as ever it begins to be moved, it will lose
its parallelisme with the straight line * so that mn produced will at last cut
the straight line gl produced. And contrarily, as soon as mn is past, (the
Earth making its way in the internal Ellipticall line l) the same mn produced
toward m, will cut lg produced. And when the Earth has almost finished its
whole circumference, the same* mn shall again make a right angle with a line
drawn from the center i, a little short of the point from which the Earth began
its motion. And there the next year shall be one of the Aequinoctial points,
namely, near the end of; the other shall be opposite to it near the end of. And
thus the points in which the Days and Nights are made equal, do every year
fall back; but with so slow a motion, that in a whole year, it makes but 51
first minutes. And this relapse being contrary to the order of the Signs, is
commonly called the Praecession of the Aequinoxes. Of which I have from my
former Suppositions deduced a possible cause; which was to be done.

According to what I have said concerning the cause of the Excentricity of the
Earth; and according to Kepler, who for the cause thereof supposes one part of
the Earth to be affected to the Sun the other part to be disaffected, the
Apogaeum and Perigaeum of the Sun should be moved every year in the same
order, and with the same velocity, with which the Aequinoctiall points are
moved; and their distance from them should always be the quadrant of a
circle; which seems to be otherwise. For Astronomers say, that the Aequinoxes
are now, the one about 28 degrees gone back from the first Star of Aries, the
other as much from the beginning of Libra. So that the Apogaeum of the Sun,
or the Aphelium of the Earth ought to be about the 28th degree of Cancer; but
it is reckoned to be in the 7th degree. Seeing therefore we have not sufficient
evidence of the (...) ( that so it is), it is in vain to seek for the (...) (
why it is so). Wherefore, as long as the motion of the Apogaeum is not
observable by reason of the slownesse thereof; and as long as it remaiues
doubtful whether their distance from the Aequinoctiall points be more or less
then a quadrant precisely; so long it may be lawful for me to think they
proceed both of them with equal velocity.

Also, I do not at all meddle with the causes of the Excentricities of
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury. Nevertheless, seeing the Excentricity of
the Earth may (as I have shown) be caused by the unlike constitution of the
several parts of the Earth which are alternately turned toward the Sun, it
is credible also that like effects may be produced in these other Planets from
their having their Superficies of unlike parts.

And this is all I shall say concerning Sidereal Philosophy. And though the
causes I have here supposed be not the true causes of these Phenomenon, yet I
have demonstrated that they are sufficient to produce them, according to what I
at first propounded.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Light, Heat, and of Colors.
1 Of the immense Magnitude of some Bodies, and the unspeakable Littleness of
others. 2 Of the cause of the Light of the Sun. 3 How Light heateth. 4 The
generation of Fire from the Sun. 5 The generation of Fire from Collision. 6
The cause of Light in Glow-wormes, Rotten Wood, and the Bolonian Stone. 7 The
cause of Light in the concussion of Seawater. 8 The cause of Flame, Sparks,
and Colliquation. 9 The cause why wet Hay sometimes burns of its own accord.
Also the cause of Lightning. 10 The cause of the force of Gunpowder; and what
is to be ascribed to the Coals, what to the Brimstone, and what to the Nitre.
11 How Heat is caused by Attrition. 12 The distinction of Light into First,
Second, etc. 13 The causes of the Colors we see in looking through a Prisma of
Glass, namely, of Red, Yellow, Blue and Violet Color. 14 Why the Moon and the
Stars appear redder in the Horizon then in the midst of the Heaven. 15 The
cause of Whiteness. 16 The cause of Blackness.
1 BEsides the Stars (of which I have spoken in the last Chapt.), whatsoever
other Bodies there be in the World, they may be all comprehended under the name
of Intersidereal Bodies. And these I have already supposed to be either the
most fluid Ether, or such Bodies whose parts have some degree of cohaesion.
Now these differ from one another in their several Consistencies, Magnitudes,
Motions and Figures. In Consistency* I suppose some Bodies to be Harder, others
Softer through all the several degrees of Tenacity. In Magnitude, some to be
Greater, others Less, and many unspeakably Little. For we must remember that by
the Understanding, Quantity is divisible into divisibles perpetually. And
therefore if a man could do as much with his hands as he can with his
Understanding, he would be able to take from any given magnitude, a part which
should be less then any other magnitude given. But the Omnipotent Creator of
the World can actually from a part of any thing take another part, as far as
we by our Understanding can conceive the same to be divisible. Wherefore there
is no impossible Smalness of Bodies. And what hinders but that we may think
this likely? For we know there are some living Creatures so small* that we can
scarce see their whole Bodies. Yet even these have their young ones, their
little Veins, and other Vessels, and their Eyes so small, as that no Microscope
can make them visible. So that we cannot suppose any magnitude so little, but
that our very supposition is actually exceeded by Nature. Besides, there are
now such Microscopes commonly made, that the things we see with them appear a
hundred thousand times bigger, then they would do if we looked upon them with
our bare Eyes. Nor is there any doubt but that by augmenting the power of these
Microscopes (for it may be augmented as long as neither Matter nor the hands of
Workmen are wanting) every one of those hundred thousandth parts might yet
appear a hundred thousand times geater then they did before. Neither is the
Smalness of some Bodies to be more admired, then the vast Greatness of others.
For it belongs to the same infinite Power, as well to augment infinitely, as
infinitely to diminish; To make the great Orb, (namely, that whose Radius
reaches from the Earth to the Sun) but as a point in respect of the distance
between the Sun and the fixed Stars; and on the contrary, to make a Body so
little, as to be in the same proportion less then any other visible Body,
proceeds equally from one and the same Author of Nature. But this of the
immense distance of the fixed Stars (which for a long time was accounted an
incredible thing) is now believed by almost all the Learned. Why then should
not that other of the smalness of some Bodies, become credible at some time or
other? For the Majesty of God appears no less in small things then in great;
and as it exceeds humane sense in the immense greatness of the Universe; so
also it does in the smalness of the parts thereof. Nor are the first Elements
of Compositions, nor the first Beginnings of Actions, nor the first Moments of
Times more credible, then that which is now believed of the vast distance of
the fixed Stars.

Some things are acknowledged by mortal men to be very Great, though Finite, as
seeing them to be such. They acknowledge also, that some things which they do
not see, may be of infinite magnitude. But they are not presently, nor without
great study persuaded that there is any Mean between Infinite and the Greatest
of those things which either they see or imagine. Nevertheless, when after
meditation and contemplation, many things which we wondered at before are now
grown more familiar to us, we then believe them, and transfer our admiration
from the Creatures to the Creator. But how little soever some Bodies may be;
yet I will not suppose their quantity to be less, then is requisite for the
salving of the Phenomenon. And in like manner I shall suppose their motion,
namely, their Velocity and Slowness, and the Variety of their Figures, to be
only such as the explication of their natural causes requires. And lastly, I
suppose, that the parts of the pure Ether (as if it were the First Matter)
have no motion at all, but what they receive from Bodies which float in them,
and are not themselves fluid.

2 Having laid these Grounds, let us come to speak of Causes, and in the first
place let us inquire what may be the cause of the Light of the Sun. Seeing
therefore the Body of the Sun does by its simple circular motion thrust away
the ambient aethereall substance sometimes one way sometimes another, so that
those parts which are next the Sun being moved by it, do propagate that
motion to the next remote parts, and these to the next, and so on continually;
it must needs be, that notwithstanding any distance, the foremost part of the
Eye will at last be pressed; and by the pressure of that part, the motion will
be propagated to the innermost part of the Organ of Sight, namely to the Heart;
and from the reaction of the Heart, there will proceed an endeavor back by the
same way, ending in the endeavor outward of the Coat of the Eye called the
Retina. But this endeavor outward (as has been defined in the 25 chapter) is
the thing which is called Light, or the Phantasme of a Lucid Body. For it is by
reason of this Phantasme that an Object is called Lucid. Wherefore we have a
possible cause of the Light of the Sun; which I undertook to find.

3 The generation of the Light of the Sun is accompanied with the generation
of Heat. Now every man knows what Heat is in himself, by feeling it when he
grows Hot; but what it is in other things he knows only by ratiocination.
For it is one thing to grow Hot, and another thing to Heat, or make Hot. And
therefore though we perceive that the Fire or the Sun Heateth, yet we do not
perceive that it is it self Hot. That other living creatures whilst they make
other things Hot, are Hot themselves, we infer by reasoning from the like
sense in our selves. But this is not a necessary inference. For though it may
truly be said of living Creatures, that They Heat, therefore they are
themselves Hot; yet it cannot from hence be truly inferred, that Fire Heateth,
therefore it is it self Hot; no more then this, Fire causes Pain, therefore
it is it self in Pain. Wherefore that is only and properly called Hot, which
when we feel, we are necessarily Hot.

Now when we grow Hot, we find that our Spirits and Blood, and whatsoever is
fluid within us, is called out from the internal to the external parts of our
Bodies, more or less, according to the degree of the Heat; and that our Skin
swells. He therefore that can give a possible cause of this Evocation and
Swelling, and such as agrees with the rest of the Phenomenon of Heat; may be
thought to have given the cause of the Heat of the Sun.

It has been shown (in the 5 article of the 21 chapter) that the fluid Medium
which we call the Air, is so moved by the simple circular motion of the Sun,
as that all its parts, even the least, do perpetually change places with one
another; which change of places is that which there I called Fermentation. From
this Fermentation of the Air, I have (in the 8 article of the last chapter)
demonstrated, that the water may be drawn up into the clouds.

And I shall now show, that the fluid parts may in like manner by the same
Fermentation be drawn out from the internal to the external parts of our
Bodies. For seeing that wheresoever the fluid Medium is contiguous to the Body
of any living creature, there the parts of that Medium are by perpetual change
of place separated from one another; the contiguous parts of the living
creature must of necessity endeavor to enter into the spaces of the separated
parts. For otherwise those parts (supposing there is no Vacuum) would have no
place to go into. And therefore that which is most fluid and separable in the
parts of the living creature which are contiguous to the Medium, will go first
out; and into the place thereof will succeed such other parts as can most
easily transpire through the po^es of the skin. And from hence it is necessary,
that the rest of the parts which are not separated, must all together be moved
outward, for the keeping of all places full. But this motion outward of all
parts together must of necessity press those parts of the ambient Air which
are ready to leave their places; and therefore all the parts of the Body
endeavoring at once that way, makes the Body swell. Wherefore a possible cause
is given of Heat from the Sun; which was to be done.

4 We have now seen how Light and Heat are generated; Heat by the simple motion
of the Medium, making the parts perpetually change places with one another; and
Light by this, that by the same simple motion Action is propagated in a
straight line. But when a Body has its parts so moved, that it sensibly both
Heats and Shines at the same time, then it is, that we say Fire is generated.

Now by Fire I do not understand a Body distinct from matter combustible or
glowing, as Wood or Iron, but the matter it self, not simply and always, but
then only when it shines and heateth. He therefore that renders a cause
possible, and agreeable to the rest of the Phenomenon, namely, whence and from
what action both the Shining and Heating proceed, may be thought to have given
a possible cause of the generation of Fire.

Let therefore ABC (in the first Figure) be a Sphere, or the portion of a
Sphere, whose Center is D; and let it be transparent and homogeneous, as
Cristal, Glass, or Water, and objected to the Sun. Wherefore the foremost
part ABC, will by the simple motion of the Sun, by which it thrusts forwards
the Medium* be wrought upon by the Sunbeams in the straight lines EA, FB and
GC; which straight lines may in respect of the great distance of the Sun be
taken for parallels. And seeing the Medium within the Sphere is thicker then
the Medium without it, those Beams will be refracted toward their
perpendiculars. Let the straight lines EA and GC be produced till they cut the
Sphere in H and I; and drawing the perpendiculars AD and CD, the refracted
Beams EA and GC will of necessity fall, the one between AH and AD, the other
between CI and CD. Let those refracted Beams be AK and CL. And again, let the
lines DKM and DLN be drawn per^endicular to the Sphere; and let AK and CL be
produced till they meet with the straight line BD produced in O. Seeing
therefore the Medium within the Sphere is thicker then that without it, the
refracted line AK will recede further from the perpendicular KM, then KO will
recede from the same. Wherefore KO will fall between the refracted line and the
perpendicular. Let therefore the refracted line be KP, cutting FO in P, and for
the same reason the straight line LP will be the refracted line of the straight
line CL. Wherefore, seeing the Beams are nothing else but the Ways in which the
motion is propagated, the motion about P will be so much more vehement then the
motion about ABC, by how much the base of the portion ABC is greater then the
base of a like portion in the Sphere whose Center is P, and whose magnitude is
equal to that of the little Circle about P, which comprehends all the Beams
that are propagated from ABC; and this Sphere being much less then the Sphere
ABC, the parts of the Medium, that is, of the Air about P, will change places
with one another with much greater celerity, then those about ABC. If therefore
any matter Combustible, that is to say, such as may be easily dissipated, be
placed in P, the parts of that matter (if the proportion be great enough
between AC and a like portion of the little circle about P) will be freed from
their mutual cohaesion, and being separated will acquire simple motion. But
vehement simple motion generates in the beholder a Phantasm of Lucid and Hot,
as I have before de^onstrated of the simple motion of the Sun; and therefore
the combustible matter which is placed in P will be made Lucid and Hot, that is
to say, will be Fire. Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause of Fire; which
was to be done.

5 From the manner by which the Sun generateth Fire, it is easy to explain
the manner by which Fire may be generated by the collision of two Flints. For
by that Collision, some of those particles of which the stone is compacted, are
violently separated and thrown off; and being withal swiftly turned round, the
Eye is moved by them, as it is in the generation of Light by the Sun.
Wherefore they shine; and falling upon matter which is already half
dissipated, such as is Tinder, they thoroughly dissipate the parts thereof, and
make them turn round. From whence (as I have newly shown) Light and Heat, that
is to say, Fire is generated.

6 The shining of Glowworms, some kinds of Rotten Wood, and of a kind of
stone made at Bolognia, may have one common cause, namely the exposing of them
to the hot Sun. We find by experience that the Bolonian stone shines not
unless it be so exposed; and after it has been exposed it shines but for a
little time, namely, as long as it retains a certain degree of heat. And the
cause may be, that the parts of which it is made, may together with heat have
Simple Motion imprinted in them by the Sun. Which if it be so, it is
necessary, that it shine in the dark, as long as there is sufficient heat in
it; but this ceasing, it will shine no longer. Also we find by experience, that
in the Glowworm there is a certain thick humor, like the Cristalline humor
of the Eye; which if it be taken out, and held long enough in ones fingers, and
then be carried into the dark, it will shine by reason of the warmth it
received from the fingers; but as soon as it is cold, it will cease shining.
From whence therefore can these creatures have their Light, but from lying all
day in the Sunshine, in the hottest time of Summer? In the same manner, Rotten
Wood, except it grow rotten in the Sunshine, or be afterward long enough
exposed to the Sun, will not shine. That this does not happen in every Worm,
nor in all kinds of Rotten Wood, nor in all Calcined Stones, the cause may be,
that the parts of which those Bodies are made, are different both in motion and
figure from the parts of Bodies of other kinds.

7 Also the Seawater shines when it is either dashed with the strokes of
Oars, or when a Ship in its course breaks strongly through it; but more or
less according as the Wind blows from different points. The cause whereof may
be this, that the particles of salt (though they never shine in the Salt Pits,
where they are but slowly drawn up by the Sun) being here beaten up into the
air in greater quantities, and with more force, are withal made to turn
round, and consequently to shine, though weakly. I have therefore given a
possible cause of this Phenomenon.

8 If such matter as is compounded of hard little Bodies, be set on fire, it
must needs be, that as they fly out in greater or less quantities, the Flame
which is made by them, will be greater or less. And if the ethereal or fluid
part of that matter fly out together with them, their motion will be the
Swifter, as it is in Wood, and other things which flame with a manifest mixture
of Wind. When therefore these hard particles by their flying out, move the Eye
strongly, they shine bright; and a great quantity of them flying out together,
they make a great shining Body. For Flame being nothing but an aggregate of
shining particles, the greater the aggregate is, the greater and more manifest
will be the Flame. I have therefore shown a possible cause of Flame. And from
hence the cause appears evidently, why Glass is so easily and quickly melted by
the small Flame of a candle blown, which will not be melted without blowing,
but by a very strong Fire.

Now if from the same matter, there be a part broken off (namely such a part as
consists of many of the small particles), of this is made a Spark. For from
the breaking off, it has a violent turning round; and from hence it shines.
But though from this matter, there fly neither Flame nor Sparks; yet some of
the smallest parts of it may be carried out as far as to the Superficies, and
remain there, as Ashes; the parts whereof are so extremely small, that it
cannot any longer be doubted how far Nature may proceed in Dividing.

Lastly, though by the application of fire to this matter, there fly little or
nothing from it, yet there will be in the parts an endeavor to Simple motion;
by which the whole Body will either be Melted, or (which is a degree of
Melting) Softened. For all Motion has some effect upon all Matter whatsoever (as
has been shown at the 3d Article of the 16th Chapter). Now if it be softened to
such a degree, as that the stubborness of the parts be exceeded by their
gravity, then we say it is Melted; otherwise, Softened, and made Pliant and
Ductile.

Again, the matter having in it some particles hard, others ethereal or
watery, if by the application of fire these later be called out, the former
will thereby come to a more full contact with one another; and consequently
will not be so easily separated; that is to say, the whole Body will be made
Harder. And this may be the cause why the same Fire makes some things Soft,
others Hard.

9 It is known by experience, that if Hay be laid wet together in a heap, it
will after a time begin to smoke, and then burn as it were of it self. The
cause whereof seems to be this, that in the Air which is enclosed within the
Hay, there are those little Bodies, which (as I have supposed) are moved freely
with simple Motion. But this Motion being by degrees hindered more and more by
the descending moisture, which at the last fills and stops all the passages, the
thinner parts of the Air ascend by penetrating the water; and those hard
little Bod^^ being so thrust together that they touch and press one another,
acquire stronger motion, till at last by the increased strength of this motion
the watery parts are first driven outward, from whence appears Vapor; and by
the continued increase of this motion, the smallest particles of the dried Hay
are forced out, and recovering their natural simple Motion, they grow Hot and
Shine, that is to say, they are set on Fire.

The same also may be the cause of Lightning; which happens in the hottest time
of the year, when the water is raised up in greatest quantity, and carried
highest. For after the first Clouds are raised, others after others follow
them; and being congeled above, they happen (whilst some of them ascend and
others descend) to fall upon another in such manner, as that in some places all
their parts are joined together, in others they leave hollow Spaces between
them; and into these spaces (the aethereall parts being forced out by the
compressure of the Clouds) many of the harder little Bodies are so pent
together, as that they have not the liberty of such motion as is natural to
the Air. Wherefore their endeavor grows more vehement, till at last they
force their way through the Clouds, sometimes in one place, sometimes in
another; and breaking through with great noise, they move the air violently,
and striking our Eyes generate Light, that is to say, they Shine. And this
Shining is that we call Lightning.

10 The most common Phenomenon proceeding from Fire, and yet the most
admirable of all others, is the force of Gunpowder fired; which being
compounded of Niter, Brimstone and Coals beaten small, has from the Coals its
first taking fire; from the Brimstone its nourishment and flame, that is to
say, Light and motion; and from the Niter the vehemence of both. Now if a piece
of Niter, (before it is beaten) be laid upon a burning Cole, first it melts,
and like water quenches that part of the Cole it touches. Then Vapor or Air
flying out where the Cole and Niter join, blows the Cole with great
swiftness and vehemence on all sides. And from hence it comes to pass, that
by two contrary motions (the one, of the particles which go out of the burning
Cole, the other, of those of the aethereall and watery substance of the Niter)
is generated that vehement Motion and Inflammation. And lastly, when there is
no more action from the Niter (that is to say, when the volatile parts of the
Niter are flown out) there is found about the sides a certain white substance,
which being thrown again into the fire, will grow red hot again, but will not
be dissipated, at least, unless the fire be augmented. If now a possible cause
of this be found out, the same will also be a possible cause why a grain of
Gunpowder set on fire does expand it self with such vehement motion, and
Shine. And it may be caused in this manner.

Let the particles of which Niter consists, be supposed to be some of them
hard, others watery, and the rest aethereall. Also let the hard particles be
supposed to be spherically hollow, like small bubbles, so that many of them
growing together may constitute a Body whose little cavernes are filled with a
substance which is either watery, or ethereal, or both. As soon therefore as
the hard particles are dissipated, the watery and ethereal particles will
necessarily fly out; and as they fly, of necessity blow strongly the burning
Coals and Brimstone which are mingled together; whereupon there will follow a
great expansion of Light, with vehement flame, and a violent dissipation of the
particles of the Niter, the Brimstone and the Coals. Wherefore I have given a
possible cause of the force of fired Gunpowder.

It is manifest from hence, that for the rendering of the cause why a bullet of
lead or iron shot from a piece of Ordnance flies with so great velocity, there
is no necessity to introduce such Rarefaction, as (by the common definition of
it) makes the same Matter to have sometimes more, sometimes less Quantity;
which is unconceiveable. For every thing is said to be greater or less, as it
has more or less Quantity. The violence with which a bullet is thrust out of
a Gun, proceeds from the swiftness of the small particles of the fired Powder;
at least it may proceed from that cause* without the supposition of any Empty
Space.

11 Besides, by the attrition or rubbing of one Body against another, as of
Wood against Wood, we find that not only a certain degree of Heat, but Fire it
self is sometimes generated. For such motion, is the reciprocation of
pressure, sometimes one way sometimes the other; and by this reciprocation,
whatsoever is fluid in both the pieces of Wood, is forced hither and thither;
and consequently, to an endeavor of getting out; and at last by breaking out
makes Fire.

12 Now Light is distinguished into, First, Second, Third, and so on
infinitely. And we call that First Light, which is in the first Lucid Body; as
the Sun, Fire, etc. Second, that which is in such Bodies as being not
transparent are illuminated by the Sun; as the Moon, a Wall, etc. and Third,
that which is in Bodies not transparent but illuminated by Second Light, etc.

13 Color is Light, but troubled Light; namely, such as is generated by
perturbed motion; as shall be made manifest by the Red, Yellow, Blew and Purple
which are generated by the interposition of a Diaphanous Prisma (whose opposite
bases are triangular) between the Light and that which is enlightened.

For let there be a Prisma of Glass, or of any other transparent matter which
is of greater density then Air; and let the triangle ABC be the base of this
Prisma. Also let the straight line DE be the diameter of the Suns Body,
having oblique position to the straight line AB; and let the Sunne-beames pass
in the lines DA and EBC. And lastly let the straight lines DA and EC be
produced indefinitely to F and G. Seeing therefore the straight line DA, by
reason of the density of the Glass is refracted toward the perpendicular; let
the line refracted at the point A be the straight line AH. And again, seeing
the Medium below AC is thinner then that above it, the other refraction which
will be made there, will diverge from the perpendicular. Let therefore this
second refracted line be AI. Also let the same be done at the point C, by
making the first refracted line to be CK, and the second CL. Seeing therefore
the cause of the refraction in the point A of the straight line of AB, is the
excess of the resistance of the Medium in AB above the resistance of the Air,
there must of necessity be reaction from the point A toward the point B; and
consequently the Medium at A within the triangle ABC, will have its motion
troubled; that is to say, the straight motion in AF and AH, will be mixed with
the transverse motion between the same AF and AH, represented by the short
transverse lines in the triangle AFH. Again, seeing at the point A of the
straight line AC, there is a second refraction from AH in AI, the motion of the
Medium will again be perturbed by reason of the transverse reaction from A
toward C, represented likewise by the short transverse lines in the triangle
AHI. And in the same manner there is a double perturbation represented by the
transverse lines in the triangles CGK and CKL. But as for the light between AI
and CG, it will not be perturbed; because if there were in all the points of
the straight lines AB and AC, the same action which is in the points A and C,
then the plain of the triangle CGK would be every where coincident with the
plain of the triangle AFH; by which means all would appear alike between A
and C. Besides, it is to be observed, that all the reaction at A, tends toward
the illuminated parts which are between A and C, and consequently perturbeth
the First Light. And on the contrary, that all the reaction at C tends toward
the parts without the triangle, or without the Prisma ABC, where there is none
but Second Light; and that the triangle AFH shows that perturbation of Light
which is made in the Glass it self; as the triangle AHI shows that
perturbation of Light which is made below the Glass. In like manner, that CGK
shows the perturbation of Light within the Glass; and CKL that which is below
the Glass. From whence there are four diverse motions, or four different
illuminations or Colors; whose differences appear most manifestly to the Sense
in a Prisma (whose base is an equilaterall triangle) when the Sunne-beames that
pass through it are received upon a white paper. For the triangle AFH appears
Red to the Sense; the triangle AHI Yellow; the triangle CGK Green, and
approaching to Blew; and lastly the triangle CKL appears Purple. It is
therefore evident, that when weak but First Light passes through a more
resisting diaphanous Body, as Glass, the beams which fall upon it tranversly,
make Redness; and when the same First Light is stronger, as it is in the
thinner Medium below the straight line AC, the transverse beams make
Yellowness. Also when Second Light is strong, as it is in the triangle CGK
(which is nearest to the First Light) the transverse beams make Greenesse; and
when the same Second Light is weaker, as in the triangle CKL, they make a
Purple color.

14 From hence may be deduced a cause why the Moon and Stars appear bigger
and redder near the Horizon then in the Mid-heaven. For between the Eye and the
apparent Horizon, there is more impure air, such as is mingled with Watery and
Earthy little Bodies, then is between the same Eye and the more elevated part
of Heaven. But Vision is made by Beams which constitute a Cone, whose base, if
we look upon the Moon, is the Moons Face, and whose vertex is in the Eye; and
therefore many beams from the Moon must needs fall upon little Bodies that are
without the Visual Cone, and be by them reflected to the Eye. But these
reflected beams tend all in lines which are transverse to the Visual Cone, and
make at the Eye an angle which is greater then the angle of the Cone. Wherefore
the Moon appears greater in the Horizon, then when she is more elevated. And
because those reflected beams go transversely, there will be generated (by the
last article) Redness. A possible cause therefore is shown, why the Moon, as
also the Stars appear Greater and Redder in the Horizon, then in the midst of
heaven. The same also may be the cause why the Sun appears in the Horizon,
Greater, and of a color more degenerating to Yellow, then when he is higher
elevated. For the reflection from the little Bodies between, and the transverse
motion of the Medium are still the same. But the Light of the Sun is much
stronger then that of the Moon; and therefore (by the last article) his
Splendour must needs by this perturbation degenerate into Yellowness.

But for the generation of these four colors, it is not necessary that the
figure of the Glass be a Prisma; for if it were Spherical it would do the
same. For in a Sphere the Sunne-beames are twice refracted and twice reflected.
And this being observed by Des Carts; and with all that a Rainebow never
appears but when it rains; as also, that the drops of rain have their figures
almost Spherical; he has shown from thence the cause of the colors in the
Rainbow; which therefore need not be repeated.

15 Whiteness is Light; but Light perturbed by the reflections of many beams of
Light coming to the Eye together within a little space. For if Glass, or any
other Diaphanous Body be reduced to very small parts by contusion or
concussion; every one of those parts (if the Beams of a lucid Body be from any
one point of the same reflected to the Eye) will represent to the beholder an
Idea or Image of the whole lucid Body, that is to say, a Phantasme of White.
For the strongest Light is the most White; and therefore many such parts will
make many such Images. Wherefore if those parts lie thick and close together,
those many Images will appear confusedly, and will by reason of the confused
Light represent a White Color. So that from hence may be deduced a possible
cause, why Glass beaten, that is, reduced to powder, looks White. Also why
Water and Snow are White; they being nothing but a heap of very small
Diaphanous Bodies, namely, of little Bubbles, from whose several unequal
Superficies, there are by reflection made several confused Phantasmes of the
whole lucid Body; that is to say, Whiteness. For the same reason, Salt and
Nitre are White; as consisting of small Bubbles which contain within them Water
and Air; as is manifest in Nitre, from this, that being thrown into the fire,
it violently blows the same; which Salt also does, but with less violence. But
if a White Body be exposed, not to the Light of the Day, but to that of the
Fire, or of a Candle, it will not at the first sight be easily judged whether
it be White or Yellow; the cause whereof may be this, that the light of those
things which burn and flame, is almost of a middle Color between Whiteness and
Yellowness.

16 As Whiteness is Light, so Blackness is the privation of Light, or Darkness.
And from hence it is; First, that all Holes, from which no light can be
reflected to the Eye, appear Black. Secondly, that when a Body has little
eminent particles erected straight up from the Superficies (so that the Beams
of Light which fall upon them are reflected, not to the Eye, but to the Body it
self) that Superficies appears Black, in the same manner as the Sea appears
Black, when ruffled by the Wind. Thirdly, that any combustible matter is by the
fire made to look Black before it shines. For the endeavor of the fire being
to dissipate the smallest parts of such Bodies as are thrown into it, it must
first raise and erect those parts, before it can work their dissipation. If
therefore the fire be put out before the parts be totally dissipated, the Cole
will appear Black; for the parts being only erected, the Beams of Light
falling upon them will not be reflected to the Eye, but to the Cole it self.
Fourthly, that Burning Glasses do more easily burn Black things then White. For
in a White Superficies, the eminent parts are unequal, like little bubbles; and
therefore the Beams of Light which fall upon them are reflected every way from
the reflecting Body. But in a Black Superficies, where the eminent particles
are more erected, the Beams of Light falling upon them, are all necessarily
reflected toward the Body it self; and therefore Bodies that are Black are
more easily set on fire by the Sunbeams, then those that are White. Fifthly,
that all Colors that are made of the mixture of White and Black, proceed from
the different position of the particles that rise above the Superficies, and
their different forms of asperity. For according to these differences, more or
fewer Beams of Light are reflected from several Bodies to the Eye. But in
regard those differences are innumerable, and the Bodies themselves so small,
that we cannot perceive them, the explication and precise determination of the
Causes of all Colors is a thing of so great difficulty, that I dare not
undertake it.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cold, Wind, Hard, Ice, Restitution of Bodies bent,
Diaphanous, Lightning and Thunder; and of the Heads of Rivers.
1 Why Breath from the same mouth sometimes heats, and sometimes cools. 2 Wind,
and the Inconstancy of Winds, whence. 3 Why there is a constant, though not a
great Wind from East to West near the Equator. 4 What is the effect of Air
pent in between the Clouds. 5 No change from Soft to Hard, but by motion. 6
What is the cause of Cold near the Poles. 7 The cause of Ice; and why the Cold
is more remiss in rainy then in clear weather. Why water does not freeze in
deep Wells, as it does near the Superficies of the Earth. Why Ice is not so
heavy as Water; and why Wine is not so easily frozen as Water. 8 Another cause
of Hardness from the fuller contact of Atoms. Also how Hard things are broken.
9 A third cause of Hardness from Heat. 10 A fourth cause of Hardness from the
motion of Atoms enclosed in a narrow space. 11 How Hard things are Softened. 12
Whence proceeds the spontaneous Restitution of things Bent. 13 Diaphanous, and
Opacous, what they are, and whence. 14 The cause of Lightning and Thunder. 15
Whence it proceeds that Clouds can fall again, after they are once elevated and
frozen. 16 How it could be that the Moon was eclipsed, when she was not
diametrally opposite to the Sun. 17 By what means many Suns may appear at
once. 18 Of the Heads of Rivers.
1 AS, when the motion of the ambient ethereal substance makes the Spirits and
fluid parts of our Bodies tend outward, we acknowledge Heat; so, by the
endeavor inwards of the same spirits and humors, we feel Cold. So that to
Cool, is to make the exterior parts of the Body endeavor inwards, by a motion
contrary to that of Calefaction, by which the internal parts are called
outward. He therefore that would know the cause of Cold must find by what
motion or motions, the exterior parts of any Body endeavor to retire inwards.
To begin with those Phenomenon which are the most familiar; There is almost no
man but knows, that breath blown strongly, and which comes from the mouth with
violence, that is to say, the passage being straight, will Cool the hand; and
that the same breath blown gently, that is to say, through a greater aperture,
will warm the same The cause of which Phenomenon may be this. The breath going
out, has two motions; the one, of the whole and direct, by which the foremost
parts of the hand are driven inwards, the other, simple motion of the small
particles of the same breath, which (as I have shown in the 3d Article of the
last Chapter) causes Heat. According therefore as either of these Motions is
predominant, so there is the sense sometimes of Cold, sometimes of Heat.
Wherefore, when the breath is softly breathed out at a large passage, that
simple Motion which causes Heat prevails, and consequently Heat is felt; and
when by compressing the lips the breath is more strongly blown out, then is the
direct motion prevalent, which makes us feel Cold. For the direct motion of the
breath or air, is Wind; and all Wind Cools, or diminishes former heat.

2 And seeing not only great Wind, but almost any Ventilation and stirring of
the Air, does refrigerate; the reason of many experiments concerning Cold
cannot well be given, without finding first what are the causes of Wind. Now
Wind is nothing else but the direct motion of the Air thrust forwards; which
nevertheless, when many Winds concur may be circular, or otherwise indirect,
as it is in Whirle-winds. Wherefore in the first place we are to enquire into
the Causes of Winds. Wind is Air moved in a considerable quantity, and that
either in the manner of Waves, which is both forwards and also up and down; or
else forwards only.

Supposing therefore the Air both clear and calm, for any time how little
soever; yet the greater Bodies of the World, being so disposed and ordered as
has been said, it will be necessary that a Wind presently arise some where. For
seeing that motion of the parts of the Air which is made by the Simple Motion
of the Sun in his own Epicycle, causes an exhalation of the particles of
water from the Seas and all other moist Bodies, and those particles make
Clouds; it must needs follow, that whilst the particles of water pass upwards,
the particles of Air (for the keeping of all Spaces full) be justled out on
every side, and urge the next particles, and these the next, till having made
their circuit, there comes continually so much Air to the hinder parts of the
Earth, as there went water from before it. Wherefore the ascending Vapors move
the Air toward the sides every way; and all direct motion of the Air being
Wind, they make a Wind. And if this Wind meet often with other Vapors which
arise in other places, it is manifest that the force thereof will be augmented,
and the way or course of it changed. Besides, according as the Earth by its
diurnal motion turns sometimes the drier, sometimes the moister part toward
the Sun, so sometimes a greater, sometimes a less quantity of Vapors will be
raised, that is to say, sometimes there will be a less, sometimes a greater
Wind. Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause of such Winds, as are generated
by Vapors; and also of their Inconstancy.

From hence it follows, that these Winds cannot be made in any place which is
higher then that to which Vapors may ascend. Nor is that incredible which is
reported of the highest Mountains, as the Pique of Tenariffe and the Andes of
Peru, namely, that they are not at all troubled with these inconstant Winds.
And if it were certain, that neither Rain nor Snow were ever seen in the
highest tops of those Mountains, it could not be doubted but that they are
higher then any place to which Vapors use to ascend.

3 Nevertheless, there may be Wind there, though not that which is made by the
ascent of Vapors, yet a less and more constant Wind (like the continued blast
of a pair of bellows) blowing from the East. And this may have a double cause;
the one, the diurnal mo tion of the Earth; the other, its simple motion in its
own Epicycle. For these Mountains being (by reason of their height) more
eminent then all the rest of the parts of the Earth, do by both these Motions
drive the Air from the West Eastwards. To which though the diurnal Motion
contribute but little; yet seeing I have supposed that the simple Motion of the
Earth in its own Epicycle, makes two revolutions in the same time in which the
diurnal Motion makes but one; and that the Semidiameter of the Epicycle is
double to the Semidiameter of the diurnal Conversion, the Motion of every point
of the Earth in its own Epicycle will have its velocity quadruple to that of
the diurnal Motion; so that by both these Motions together, the tops of those
Hills will sensibly be moved against the Air; and consequently a Wind will be
felt. For whether the Air strike the Sentient, or the Sentient the Air, the
perception of Motion will be the same. But this Wind, seeing it is not caused
by the ascent of Vapors, must necessarily be very Constant.

4 When one Cloud is already ascended into the Air, if another Cloud ascend
toward it, that part of the Air which is intercepted between them both, must
of necessity be pressed out every way. Also when both of them, whilst the one
ascends, and the other either stays, or descends, come to be joined in such
manner as that the ethereal substance be shut within them on every side, it
will by this compression also go out by penetrating the Water. But in the mean
time, the hard particles which are mingled with the Air, and are agitated (as
I have supposed) with Simple Motion, will not pass through the water of the
clouds, but be more straightly compressed within their cavities. And this I
have demonstrated at the 4th and 5th Articles of the 22th Chapter. Besides,
seeing the Globe of the Earth floateth in the Air which is agitated by the
Suns Motion, the parts of the Air resisted by the Earth, will spread
themselves every way upon the Earths Superficies; as I have shown at the 8th
Article of the 21th Chapter.

5 We perceive a Body to be Hard, from this, that when touching it we would
thrust forwards that part of the same which we touch, we cannot do it otherwise
then by thrusting forwards the whole Body. We may indeed easily and sensibly
thrust forwards any particle of the Air or Water which we touch, whilst yet
the rest of its parts remain (to sense) unmoved. But we cannot do so to any
part of a stone. Wherefore I define a Hard Body to be that, whereof no part can
be sensibly moved, unless the whole be moved. Whatsoever therefore is Soft or
Fluid, the same can never be made Hard but by such motion, as makes many of the
parts together stop the motion of some one part, by resisting the same.

6 These things premised, I shall show a possible cause why there is greater
Cold near the Poles of the Earth, then further from them. The motion of the
Sun between the Tropicks, driving the Air toward that part of the Earths
Superficies which is perpendicularly under it, makes it spread it self every
way; and the velocity of this expansion of the Air grows greater and greater,
as the Superficies of the Earth comes to be more and more straightned, that is
to say, as the Circles which are parallel to the Equator come to be less and
less. Wherefore this expansive motion of the Air, drives before it the parts
of the Air which are in its way continually toward the Poles more and more
strongly, as its force comes to be more and more united, that is to say, as the
Circles which are parallel to the Equator are less and less; that is, so much
the more, by how much they are nearer to the Poles of the Earth. In those
places therefore which are nearer to the Poles, there is greater Cold, then in
those which are more remote from them. Now this expansion of the Air upon the
Superficies of the Earth from East to West, does by reason of the Suns
perpetual accession to the places which are successively under it, make it Cold
at the time of the Suns Rising and Setting; but as the Sun comes to be
continually more and more perpendicular to those cooled places, so by the Heat
which is generated by the supervening Simple Motion of the Sunn, that Cold is
again remitted; and can never be great, because the action by the which it was
generated, is not permanent. Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause of Cold
in those places that are near the Poles, or where the obliquity of the Sun is
great.

7 How Water may be congeled by Cold, may be explained in this manner. Let A
(in the first figure) represent the Sun, and B the Earth. A will therefore be
much greater then B. Let OF be in the plain of the Equinoctial; to which let
GH, IK and LC be parallel. Lastly, let C and D be the Poles of the Earth. The
Air therefore by its action in those parallels will rake the Superficies of
the Earth; and that with motion so much the stronger, by how much the parallel
Circles toward the Poles grow less and less. From whence must arise a Wind,
which will force together the uppermost parts of the water, and withal raise
them a little, weakening their endeavor toward the Center of the Earth. And
from their endeavor toward the center of the Earth, joined with the endeavor
of the said Wind, the uppermost parts of the water will be pressed together,
and coagulated, that is to say, the top of the water will be skinned over and
hardened. And so again the Water next the top will be hardened in the same
manner, till at length the Ice be thick. And this Ice being now compacted of
little hard Bodies, must also contain many particles of air received into it.

As Rivers and Seas, so also in the same manner may the Clouds be frozen. For
when by the ascending and descending of several Clouds at the same time, the
Air intercepted between them is by compression forced out, it rakes, and by
little and little hardens them. And though those small drops (which usually make
Clouds) be not yet united into greater Bodies, yet the same Wind will be made;
and by it, as water is congeled into Ice, so will Vapors in the same manner be
congeled into Snow. From the same cause it is that Ice may be made by art, and
that not far from the fire. For it is done by the mingling of Snow and Salt
together, and by burying in it a small vessel full of Water. Now while the
Snow and Salt (which have in them a great deal of air) are melting, the air
which is pressed out every way in Wind, rakes the sides of the Vessel; and as
the Wind by its motion rakes the Vessel, so the Vessel by the same motion and
action congeles the Water within it.

We find by experience, that Cold is always more Remiss in places where it
raynes, or where the weather is cloudy (things being alike in all other
respects) then where the air is clear. And this agrees very well with what I
have said before. For in clear weather, the course of the Wind which (as I
said even now) rakes the Superficies of the Earth, as it is free from all
interruption, so also it is very strong. But when small drops of water are
either rising or falling, that Wind is repelled, broken and dissipated by them;
and the less the Wind is, the less is the Cold.

We find also by experience, that in deep Wells the Water freezeth not so much,
as it does upon the Superficies of the Earth. For the Wind by which Ice is
made, entering into the Earth (by reason of the laxity of its parts) more or
less, loses some of its force, though not much. So that if the Well be not
deep, it will freeze; whereas if it be so deep, as that the Wind which causes
cold cannot reach it, it will not freeze.

We find moreover by experience, that Ice is lighter then Water. The cause
whereof is manifest from that which I have already shown, namely, that Air is
received in and mingled with the particles of the Water whilst it is in
congeling.

8 We have seen one way of making things Hard, namely, by Congelation. Another
way is thus. Having already supposed, that innumerable Atoms, some harder then
others, and that have several simple motions of their own, are intermingled
with the ethereal substance; it follows necessarily from hence, that by reason
of the fermentation of the whole Air (of which I have spoken in the 21 Chap.)
some of those Atoms meeting with others, will cleave together, by applying
themselves to one another in such manner as is agreeable to their motions and
mutual contacts; and (seeing there is no Vacuum) cannot be pulled asunder, but
by so much force as is sufficient to overcome their Hardness.

Now there are innumerable degrees of Hardness. As (for example) there is a
degree of it in Water, as is manifest from this, that upon a plain it may be
drawn any way at pleasure by ones finger. There is a greater degree of it in
clammy liquors; which when they are poured out, do in falling downwards
dispose themselves into one continued thread; which thread before it be broken
will by little and little diminish its thickness, till at last it be so small,
as that it seems to break only in a point; and in their separation the
external parts break first from one another, and then the more internal parts
successively one after another. In Wax there is yet a greater degree of
Hardness. For when we would pull one part of it from another, we first make the
whole mass slenderer, before we can pull it asunder. And how much the harder
anything is which we would break, so much the more force we must apply to it.
Wherefore, if we go on to harder things, as Ropes, Wood, Metals, Stones, etc.
reason prompteth us to believe that the same (though not always sensibly) will
necessarily happen; and that even the hardest things are broken asunder in the
same manner, namely, by Solution of their continuity, begun in the outermost
Superficies, and proceeding successively to the innermost parts. In like
manner, when the parts of Bodies are to be separated, not by pulling them
asunder, but by breaking them, the first separation will necessarily be in the
unequal Superficies of the bowed part of the Body, and afterward in the concave
Superficies. For in all bowing, there is in the unequal Superficies an endeavor
in the parts to go one from another, and in the concave Superficies to
penetrate one another.

This being well understood, a reason may be given, how two Bodies which are
contiguous in one common Superficies, may by force be separated without the
introduction of Vacuum; though Lucretius thought otherwise, believing that such
separation was a strong establishment of Vacuum. For a Marble Pillar being made
to hang by one of its bases, if it be long enough it will by its own weight be
broken asunder, and yet it will not necessarily follow that there should be
Vacuum, seeing the solution of its continuity may begin in the Circumference,
and proceed successively to the midst thereof.

Lastly, Wine is not so easily congeled as Water, because in Wine there are
particles which being not fluid, are moved very swiftly, and by their motion
congelation is retarded; but if the Cold prevail against this motion, then the
outermost parts of the Wine will be first frozen, and afterward the inner
parts; whereof this is a sign, that the Wine which remains unfrozen in the
midst will be very strong.

9 Another cause of Hardness in some things may be in this manner. If a soft
Body consist of many hard particles, which by the intermixture of many other
fluid particles cohaere but loosely together, those fluid parts (as has been
shown in the last Article of the 21 Chapter) will be exhaled; by which means
each hard particle will apply it self to the next to it according to a greater
Superficies; and consequently they will cohaere more closely to one another;
that is to say, the whole mass will be made Harder.

10 Again, in some things Hardness may be made to a certain degree, in this
manner. When any fluid substance has in it certain very small Bodies
intermingled, which being moved with simple motion of their own, contribute
like motion to the parts of the fluid substance, and this be done in a small
enclosed space (as in the hollow of a little Sphere, or a very slender Pipe) if
the motion be vehement, and there be a great number of these small enclosed
Bodies, two things will happen; the one, that the fluid substance will have an
endeavor of dilating it self at once every way; the other, that if those small
Bodies can no where get out, then from their reflection it will follow, that the
motion of the parts of the enclosed fluid substance, which was vehement before,
will now be much more vehement. Wherefore if any one particle of that fluid
substance should be touched and pressed by some external Movent, it could not
yield but by the application of very sensible force. Wherefore the fluid
substance which is enclosed, and so moved, has some degree of Hardness. Now
greater and less degree of Hardness depends upon the quantity and velocity of
those small Bodies and upon the narrowness of the place both together.

11 Such things as are made Hard by sudden heat, namely, such as are hardened by
fire, are commonly reduced to their former soft form by Maceration. For fire
hardens by Evaporation, and therefore if the evaporated moisture be restored
again, the former nature and form is restored together with it. And such things
as are frozen with Cold, if the Wind by which they were frozen change into the
opposite quarter, they will be unfrozen again (unless they have gotten a habit
of new motion or endeavor by long continuance in that hardness). Nor is it
enough to cause thawing, that there be a cessation of the freezing Wind (for
the taking away of the Cause does not destroy a produced effect); but the
thawing also must have its proper cause, namely, a contrary Wind, or at least a
Wind opposite in some degree. And this we find to be true by experience. For
if Ice be laid in a place so well enclosed that the motion of the Air cannot
get to it, that Ice will remain unchanged, though the place be not sensibly
cold.

12 Of Hard Bodies, some may manifestly be bowed; others not, but are broken in
the very first moment of their bending. And of such Bodies as may manifestly be
bended, some being bent, do as soon as ever they are set at liberty, Restore
themselves to their former posture, others remain still bent. Now if the cause
of this Restitution be asked, I say it may be in this manner; namely, that the
particles of the bended Body, whilst it is held bent, do nevertheless retain
their motion; and by this motion they restore it as soon as the force is
removed by which it was bent. For when any thing is bent (as a plate of steel),
and as soon as the force is removed restores it self again, it is evident that
the cause of its restitution cannot be referred to the ambient air; nor can it
be referred to the removal of the force by which it was bent; for in things
that are at rest, the taking away of impediments, is not a sufficient cause of
their future Motion; there being no other cause of Motion, but Motion. The
cause therefore of such Restitution is in the parts of the Steel it self.
Wherefore whilst it remains bent, there is in the parts of which it
consists, some motion, though invisible, that is to say, some endeavor at
least that way by which the restitution is to be made; and therefore this
endeavor of all the parts together is the first beginning of Restitution; so
that the impediment being removed, that is to say, the force by which it was
held bent, it will be restored again. Now the motion of the parts by which this
is done, is that which I called Simple Motion, or Motion returning into it
self. When therefore in the bending of a plate, the ends are drawn together,
there is on one side a mutual compression of the parts; which compression is
one endeavor opposite to another endeavor; and on the other side a divulsion
of the parts. The endeavor therefore of the parts on one side tends to the
restitution of the plate from the middle toward the ends; and on the other
side, from the ends toward the middle. Wherefore the impediment being taken
away, this endeavor (which is the beginning of restitution) will restore the
plate to its former posture. And thus I have given a possible cause why some
Bodies when they are bent Restore themselves again; which was to be done.

As for Stones, seeing they are made by the accretion of many very hard
particles within the Earth; which particles have no great coherence, that is to
say, touch one another in small latitude, and consequently admit many particles
of air, it must needs be that in bending of them, their internal parts will
not easily be compressed by reason of their hardness. And because their
coherence is not firm, as soon as the external hard particles are disjoined,
the ethereal parts will necessarily break out, and so the Body will suddenly
be broken.

13 Those Bodies are called Diaphanous, upon which whilst the Beams of a lucid
Body do work, the action of every one of those Beams is propagated in them in
such manner as that they still retain the same order amongst themselves, or the
inversion of that order; and therefore Bodies which are perfectly Diaphanous,
are also perfectly homogeneous. On the contrary, an Opacous Body is that, which
by reason of its heterogeneous nature, does by innumerable reflections and
refractions in particles of different figures and unequal hardness, weaken the
Beams that fall upon it before they reach the Eye. And of Diaphanous Bodies,
some are made such by Nature from the beginning; as the substance of the Air,
and of the Water, and perhaps also some parts of Stones, unless these also be
Water that has been long congeled. Others are made so by the power of Heat,
which congregates homogeneons Bodies. But such as are made Diaphanous in this
manner, consist of parts which were formerly Diaphanous.

14 In what manner Clouds are made by the motion of the Sun, elevating the
particles of Water from the Sea and other moist places, has been explained in
the 26th Chapter. Also how Clouds come to be frozen, has been shown above at
the 7th Article. Now from this, that Air may be enclosed, as it were in
Caverns, and pent together more and more by the meeting of ascending and
descending Clouds, may be deduced a possible Cause of Thunder and Lightening.
For seeing the Air consists of two parts, the one Ethereal, which has no
proper motion of its own, as being a thing divisible into the least parts; the
other Hard, namely, consisting of many hard Atoms which have every one of them
a very swift simple motion of its own; whilst the Clouds by their meeting do
more and more straighten such Cavities as they intercept, the Ethereal parts
will penetrate and pass through their watery substance; but the hard parts will
in the mean time be the more thrust together, and press one another; and
consequently (by reason of their vehement motions) they will have an endeavor
to rebound from each other. Whenever therefore the compression is great
enough, and the concave parts of the Clouds are (for the cause I have already
given) congeled into Ice, the Cloud will necessarily be broken; and this
breaking of the Cloud produces the first clap of Thunder. Afterward, the Air
which was pent in, having now broken through, makes a concussion of the Air
without; and from hence proceeds the roaring and murmur which follows; and both
the first Clap and the Murmur that follows it, make that noise which is called
Thunder. Also from the same Air breaking through the Clouds, and with
concussion falling upon the Eye, proceeds that action upon our Eye, which
causes in us a perception of that Light which we call Lightening. Wherefore I
have given a possible cause of Thunder and Lightening.

15 But if the Vapors which are raised into Clouds, do run together again into
Water, or be congeled into Ice, from whence is it (seeing both Ice and Water
are heavy) that they are sustained in the Air? Or rather, what may the cause
be, that being once elevated, they fall down again? For there is no doubt but
the same force which could carry up that Water, could also sustain it there.
Why therefore being once carried up, does it fall again? I say it proceeds from
the same Simple Motion of the Sun, both that Vapors are forced to ascend,
and that Water gathered into Clouds is forced to descend. For in the 21th
Chapter and 11th Article I have shown how Vapors are elevated; and in the same
Chapter and 5th Article I have also shown how by the same motion Homogeneous
Bodies are congregated, and Heterogeneous dissipated; that is to say, how such
things as have a like nature to that of the Earth, are driven toward the
Earth; that is to say, what is the cause of the descent of Heavy Bodies. Now if
the action of the Sun be hindered in the raising of vapors, and be not at all
hindered in the casting of them down, the Water will descend. But a Cloud
cannot hinder the action of the Sun in making things of an earthly nature
descend to the Earth, though it may hinder it in making Vapors ascend For the
lower part of a thick Cloud is so covered by its upper part, as that it cannot
receive that action of the Sun by which Vapors are carried up, because
Vapors are raised by the perpetual fermentation of the Air, or by the
separating of its smallest parts from one another, which is much weaker when a
thick Cloud is interposed, then when the Sky is clear. And therefore
whenever a Cloud is made thick enough, the water which would not descend
before, will then descend, unless it be kept up by the agitation of the Wind.
Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause, both why the Clouds may be sustained
in the Air, and also why they may fall down again to the Earth; which was
propounded to be done.

16 Granting that the Clouds may be frozen, it is no wonder if the Moon have
been seen eclipsed at such time as she has been almost two degrees above the
Horizon, the Sun at the same time appearing in the Horizon; for such an
Eclipse was observed by Mestline at Tubing in the year 1590. For it might
happen that a frozen Cloud was then interposed between the Sun and the Eye of
the Observer. And if it were so, the Sun which was then almost two Degrees
below the Horizon, might appear to be in it, by reason of the passing of his
Beams through the Ice. And it is to be noted, that those that attribute such
refractions to the Atmosphere, cannot attribute to it so great a refraction as
this. Wherefore not the Atmosphere, but either Water in a continued Body, or
else Ice must be the cause of that refraction.

17 Again, granting that there may be Ice in the Clouds, it will be no longer a
wonder that many Suns have sometimes appeared at once. For Looking-glasses
may be so placed, as by reflections to show the same object in many places. And
may not so many frozen Clouds serve for so many Looking-glasses? and may they
not be fitly disposed for that purpose? Besides, the number of Appearances may
be increased by refractions also; and therefore it would be a greater wonder to
me, if such Phenomenon as these should never happen.

And were it not for that one Phenomenon of the new Star which was seen in
Cassiopaea, I should think Comets were made in the same manner, namely, by
Vapors drawn not only from the Earth, but from the rest of the Planets also,
and congeled into one continued Body. For I could very well from hence give a
reason both of their Hair, and of their motions. But seeing that Star
remained sixteen whole months in the same place amongst the fixed Stars, I
cannot believe the matter of it was Ice. Wherefore I leave to others, the
disquisition of the cause of Comets; concerning which, nothing that has
hitherto been published, ((...) the bare Histories of them) is worth
considering.

18 The Heads of Rivers may be deduced from Rainwater, or from melted Snowes,
very easily; but from other causes, very hardly, or not at all. For both
Rainwater, and melted Snowes run down the descents of Mountains; and if they
descend only by the outward Superficies, the Showers or Snowes themselves may
be accounted the Springs or Fountains; but if they enter the Earth and descend
within it, then wheresoever they break out, there are their Springs. And as
these Spings make small streams, so, many small streams running together make
Rivers. Now there was never any Spring found, but where the Water which flowed to
it, was either further, or at least as far from the center of the Earth, as
the Spring it self. And whereas it has bin objected by a great Philosopher,
that in the top of Mount-Cenis (which parts Savoy from Piemont) there Springs a
River which runs down by Susa; it is not true. For there are above that River,
for two miles length, very high hills on both sides, which are almost
perpetually covered with Snow; from which, innumerable little streams running
down do manifestly supply that River with water sufficient for its magnitude.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Sound, Odor, Savor, and Touch
1 The definition of Sound, and the distinctions of Sounds. 2 The cause of the
degrees of Sounds. 3 The difference between Sounds Acute and Grave. 4 The
difference between Clear and Hoarse Sounds, whence. 5 The Sound of Thunder and
of a Gunne, whence it proceeds. 6 Whence it is, that Pipes by blowing into them
have a clear Sound. 7 Of Reflected Sound. 8 From whence it is that Sound is
Uniform and Lasting. 9 How Sound may be helped and hindered by the Wind. 10 Not
only Air, but other Bodies how hard soever they be, conveigh Sound. 11 The
causes of Grave and Acute Sounds, and of Concent. 12 Phenomenon for Smelling.
13 The first Organ and the generation of Smelling. 14 How it is helped by Heat
and by Wind. 15 Why such Bodies are least smelt, which have least intermixture
of Air in them. 16 Why Odorous things become more Odorous by being bruised. 17
The first Organ of Tasting; and why some Savours cause Nauseousness. 18 The
first Organ of Feeling; and how we come to the knowledge of such Objects as are
common to the Touch and other Senses.
SOUND is Sense generated by the action of the Medium, when its motion reaches
the Ear and the rest of the Organs of Sense. Now the motion of the Medium is
not the Sound it self, but the cause of it. For the Phantasme which is made in
us, that is to say, the Reaction of the Organ is properly that which we call
Sound.

The principal distinctions of Sounds are these; First, that one Sound is
stronger, another Weaker. Secondly, that one is more Grave, another more Acute.
Thirdly, that one is Clear, another Hoarse. Fourthly, that one is Primary,
another Derivative. Fifthly, that one is Uniform, another not. Sixthly, that
one is more Durable, another less Durable. Of all which distinctions the
members may be subdistinguished into parts distinguishable almost infinitely.
For the variety of Sounds seems to be not much less then that of Colors.

As Vision, so Hearing is generated by the motion of the Medium, but not in the
same manner. For Sight is from Pressure, that is, from an Endeavor; in which
there is no perceptible progression of any of the parts of the Medium; but one
part urging or thrusting on an other, propagateth that action successively to
any distance whatsoever; whereas the motion of the Medium by which Sound is
made, is a Stroke. For when we Hear, the Drum of the Ear (which is the first
Organ of Hearing) is stricken; and the Drum being stricken, the Pia Matter is
also shaken, and with it the Arteries which are inserted into it; by which the
action being propagated to the Heart it self, by the reaction of the Heart a
Phantasm is made which we call Sound; and (because the reaction tends
outward) we think it is without.

2 And seeing the effects produced by Motion, are greater or less, not only
when the Velocity is greater or less, but also when the Body has greater or
less Magnitude though the Velocity be the same; a Sound may be greater or less
both these ways. And because neither the greatest nor the least Magnitude or
Velocity can be given, it may happen, that either the motion may be of so small
velocity, or the Body it self of so small magnitude, as to produce no Sound at
all; or either of them may be so great, as to take away the Faculty of Sense by
hurting the Organ.

From hence may be deduced possible causes of the strength and weakness of
Sounds in the following Phenomenon.

The first whereof is this, That if a man speak through a Trunk which has on
end applied to the mouth of the Speaker, and the other to the ear of the
Hearer, the Sound will come stronger then it would do through the open Air.
And the cause (not onley the possible, but the certain and manifest cause) is
this, that the Air which is moved by the first breath, and carried forwards in
the Trunk, is not diffused, as it would be in the open Air, and is
consequently brought to the ear almost with the same velocity with which it
was first breathed out; Whereas in the open Air, the first motion diffuseth it
self every way into Circles, such as are made by the throwing of a Stone into a
standing water, where the velocity grows less and less as the Undulation
proceeds further and further from the beginning of its motion.

The second is this, That if the Trunk be short, and the end which is applied
to the mouth be wider then that which is applied to the ear, thus also the
Sound will be stronger then if it were made in the open air. And the cause is
the same, namely, that by how much the wider end of the Trunk is less distant
from the beginning of the Sound, by so much the less is the diffusion.

The third, That it is easier for one that is within a Chamber, to hear what
is spoken without, then for him that stands without, to hear what is spoken
within. For the Windows and other inlets of the moved Air, are as the wide end
of the Trunk. And for this reason some creatures seem to hear the better,
because Nature has bestowed upon them wide and capacious Ears.

The fourth is this, That though he which stands upon the Sea shore, cannot
hear the Collision of the two nearest waves, yet neverthess he hears the
roaring of the whole Sea. And the cause seems to be this, that though the
several collisions move the Organ, yet they are not severally great enough to
cause Sense; whereas nothing hinders but that all of them together may make
Sound.

3 That Bodies when they are stricken do yield some a more Grave, others a more
Acute Sound, the cause may consist in the difference of the times in which the
parts stricken and forced out of their places, return to the same places again.
For in some Bodies, the restitution of the moved parts is quick, in others
slow. And this also may be the cause why the parts of the Organ which are moved
by the Medium, return to their rest again, sometimes sooner, sometimes later.
Now by how much the Vibrations, or the reciprocal motions of the parts are more
frequent, by so much does the whole Sound made (at the same time) by one
stroke, consist of more, and consequently of smaller parts. For what is Acute
in Sound, the same is Subtle in Matter; and both of them, namely, Acute Sound,
and Subtle Matter consist of very small parts, that of Time, and this of the
Matter it self.

The third distinction of Sounds cannot be conceived clearly enough by the
names I have used of Clear and Hoarse, nor by any other that I know; and
therefore it is needful to explain them by examples. When I say Hoarse, I
understand Whispering and Hissing, and whatsoever is like to these, by what
appellation soever it be expressed. And Sounds of this kind seem to be made by
the force of some strong Wind, raking rather then striking such hard Bodies, as
it falls upon. On the contrary, when I use the word Clear, I do not understand
such a Sound as may be easily and distinctly heard, for so Whispers would be
Clear, but such as is made by somewhat that is Broken; and such as is Clamor,
Tinkling, the Sound of a Trumpet, etc. and (to express it significantly in one
word), Noise. And seeing no Sound is made but by the concourse of two Bodies at
the least, by which concourse it is necessary that there be as well Reaction as
Action, that is to say, one motion opposite to another; it follows, that
according as the proportion between those two opposite motions is diversified,
so the Sounds which are made will be different from one another. And whenever
the proportion between them is so great, as that the motion of one of the
Bodies be insensible if compared with the motion of the other, then the Sound
will not be of the same kind; as when the Wind falls very obliquely upon a hard
Body, or when a hard Body is carried swiftly through the Air; for then there
is made that Sound which I call a Hoarse Sound, in Greek (...). Therefore the
breath blown with violence from the mouth makes a Hissing, because in going out
it rakes the Superficies of the Lips, whose reaction against the force of the
breath is not Sensible. And this is the cause why the Winds have that Hoarse
Sound. Also if two Bodies how hard soever, be rubbed together with no great
pressure, they make a Hoarse Sound. And this Hoarse Sound when it is made (as I
have said) by the Air raking the Superficies of a hard Body, seems to be
nothing but the dividing of the Air into innumerable and very small Files. For
the asperity of the Superficies does by the eminencies of its innumerable parts
divide or cut in pieces the Air that slides upon it.

4 Noise, or that which I call Clear Sound, is made two ways; one, by two
Hoarse Sounds, made by opposite motions; the other, by Collision, or by the
sudden pulling asunder of two Bodies, whereby their small particles are put
into commotion, or being already in commotion, suddenly restore themselves
again; which motion making impression upon the Medium, is propagated to the
Organ of Hearing. And seeing there is in this Collision, or divulsion, an
endeavor in the particles of one Body, opposite to the endeavor of the
particles of the other Body, there will also be made in the Organ of Hearing a
like opposition of endeavors, that is to say, of motions; and consequently the
Sound arising from thence, will be made by two opposite motions, that is to
say, by two opposite Hoarse Sounds in one and the same part of the Organ. For
(as I have already said) a Hoarse Sound supposes the sensible motion of but
one of the Bodies. And this opposition of motions in the Organ is the cause why
two Bodies make a Noise, when they are either suddenly stricken against one
another, or suddenly broken asunder.

5 This being granted; and seeing withal, that Thunder is made by the vehement
eruption of the Air out of the cavities of congeled Clouds; the cause of the
great Noise or Clap, may be the sudden breaking asunder of the Ice. For in
this action it is necessary, that there be not only a great concussion of the
small particles of the broken parts, but also that this Concussion (by being
communicated to the Air) be carried to the Organ of Hearing, and make
impression upon it. And then, from the first reaction of the Organ proceeds
that first and greatest Sound, which is made by the collision of the parts
whilst they restore themselves. And seeing there is in all Concussion a
reciprocation of Motion forwards and backwards in the parts stricken, (for
opposite motions cannot extinguish one another in an instant, as I have shown
in the 11th Art. of the 8th Chap.) it follows necessarily, that the Sound will
both continue, and grow weaker and weaker, till at last the action of the
reciprocating air grow so weak, as to be unperceptible. Wherefore a possible
cause is given both of the first fierce Noise of the Thunder; and also of the
Murmur that follows it.

The cause of the great Sound from a discharged piece of Ordnance, is like that
of a Clap of Thunder. For the Gunpowder being fired, does in its endeavor to
go out, attempt every way the sides of the metal in such manner, as that it
enlarges the Circumference all along, and withal shortneth the axis; so that
whilst the piece of Ordnance is in discharging, it is made both wider and
shorter then it was before; and therefore also presently after it is discharged
its wideness will be diminished, and its length increased again by the
restitution of all the particles of the matter of which it consists to their
former position. And this is done with such motion of the parts, as are not
only very vehement, but also opposite to one another; which motions being
communicated to the Air, make impression upon the Organ, and by the reaction
of the Organ create a Sound; which lasts for some time, as I have already
shown in this Article.

I note by the way (as not belonging to this place) that the possible cause why
a Gun recoyles when it is shot off, may be this; That being first swollen by the
force of the fire, and afterward restoring it self; from this restitution
there proceeds an endeavor from all the sides toward the cavity; and
consequently this endeavor is in those parts which are next the breech; which
being not hollow, but solid, the effect of the restitution is by it hindered
and diverted into the length; and by this means both the breech and the whole
Gun is thrust backwards; and the more forcibly by how much the force is greater
by which the part next the breech is restored to its former posture; that is to
say, by how much the thiner is that part. The cause therefore why Gunnes
recoyle, some more, some less, is the difference of their thickness toward the
breech; and the greater that thickness is, the less they recoyl; and contrarily.

6 Also the cause why the Sound of a Pipe, which is made by blowing into it, is
nevertheless Clear, is the same with that of the Sound which is made by
collision. For if the breath when it is blown into a Pipe do only rake its
concave Superficies, or fall upon it with a very sharp angle of incidence, the
Sound will not be Clear, but Hoarse. But if the angle be great enough, the
percussion which is made against one of the hollow sides, will be reverberated
to the opposite side; and so successive repercussions will be made from side to
side, till at last the whole concave Superficies of the Pipe be put into
motion; which motion will be reciprocated, as it is in Collision; and this
reciprocation being propagated to the Organ, from the reaction of the Organ
will arise a Clear Sound, such as is made by Collision, or by breaking asunder
of hard Bodies.

In the same manner it is with the Sound of a Man's voice. For when the breath
passes out, without interruption, and does but lightly touch the cavities
through which it is sent, the Sound it makes is a Hoarse Sound. But if in
going out it strike strongly upon the Larinx, then a Clear Sound is made, as in
a Pipe. And the same breath, as it comes in diverse manners to the Palate, the
Tongue, the Lips, the Teeth, and other Organs of Speech, so the Sounds into
which it is articulated become different from one another.

7 I call that Primary Sound, which is generated by motion from the sounding
Body to the Organ in a straight line without reflection; and I call that
Reflected Sound, which is generated by one or more reflections; being the same
with that we call Echo; and is iterated as often as there are reflections made
from the Object to the Ear. And these reflections are made by Hills, Walls, and
other resisting Bodies, so placed, as that they make more or fewer reflections
of the motion, according as they are themselves more or fewer in number; and
they make them more or less frequently, according as they are more or less
distant from one another. Now the cause of both these things is to be sought
for in the situation of the reflecting Bodies, as is usually done in Sight. For
the Laws of Reflection are the same in both, namely, that the Angles of
Incidence and Reflection be equal to one another. If therefore in a hollow
Elliptique Body whose inside is well polished, or in two right Parabolical
Solids which are joined together by one common base, there be placed a Sounding
Body in one of the Burning Points, and the Ear in the other, there will be
heard a Sound by many degrees greater then in the open Air; and both this, and
the burning of such combustible things, as being put in the same places are set
on fire by the Sunbeams, are effects of one and the same cause. But as when
the visible Object is placed in one of the Burning Points, it is not distinctly
seen in the other, because every part of the Object being seen in every line
which is reflected from the Concave Superficies to the Eye, makes a confusion
in the Sight; so neither is Sound heard articulately and distinctly when it
comes to the Ear in all those reflected lines. And this may be the reason, why
in Churches which have arched rooffs, though they be neither Elliptical nor
Parabolical; yet because their figure is not much different from these, the
voice from the Pulpit will not be heard so articulately as it would be if there
were no vaulting at all.

8 Concerning the Uniformity and Duration of Sounds, both which have one common
cause, we may observe, that such Bodies as being stricken yield an unequal or
harsh Sound, are very heterogeous, that is to say, they consist of parts which
are very unlike both in figure and hardness, such as are Wood, Stones, and
others not a few. When these are stricken, there follows a concussion of their
internal particles, and a restitution of them again. But they are neither moved
alike, nor have they the same action upon one another; some of them recoyling
from the stroke whilst others which have already finished their recoylings are
now returning; by which means they hinder and stop on another. And from hence
it is that their motions are not only unequal and harsh, but also that their
reciprocations come to be quickly extinguished. Whenever therefore this motion
is propagated to the Ear, the Sound it makes is Unequal and of small Duration.
On the contrary, if a Body that is stricken, be not only sufficiently hard,
but have also the particles of which it consists like to one another both in
hardness and figure, (such as are the particles of Glass and Metals, which
being first melted do afterward settle and harden) the Sound it yeildeth, will
(because the motions of its parts and their reciprocations are like and
Uniform) be Uniform and pleasant, and be more or less Lasting according as the
Body stricken has gteater or less magnitude. The possible cause therefore of
Sounds Uniform, and Harsh, and of their longer or shorter Duration, may be one
and the same likeness and unlikeness of the internal parts of the Sounding
Body, in respect both of their figure and hardness.

Besides, if two plain Bodies of the same matter, and of equal thickness, do
both yield an Uniform Sound, the Sound of that Body which has the greatest
extent of length will be the longest heard. For the motion which in both of
them has its beginning from the point of percussion, is to be propagated in
the greater Body through a greater Space, and consequently that propagation
will require more time; and therefore also the parts which are moved will
require more time for their return. Wherefore all the reciprocations cannot be
finished but in longer time; and being carried to the Ear, will make the Sound
last the longer. And from hence it is manifest, that of hard Bodies which yield
an Uniform Sound, the Sound lasts longer which comes from those that are
round and hollow, then from those that are plain, if they be like in all other
respects. For in circular lines the action which begins at any point, has not
from the figure any end of its propagation, because the line in which it is
propagated returns again to its beginning; so that the figure hinders not but
that the motion may have infinite progression; whereas in a plain, every line
has its magnitude finite, beyond which the action cannot proceed. If therefore
the matter be the same, the motion of the parts of that Body whose figure is
round and hollow, will last longer, then of that which is plain.

Also, if a string which is stretched, be fastened at both ends to a hollow
Body, and be stricken, the Sound will last longer then if it were not so
fastened; because the trembling or reciprocation which it receives from the
stroke, is by reason of the connection communicated to the hollow Body; and this
trembling, if the hollow Body be great, will last the longer by reason of that
greatness. Wherefore also (for the reason above mentioned) the Sound will last
the longer.

9 In Hearing, it happens (otherwise then in Seeing) that the action of the
Medium is made stronger by the Wind when it blows the same way, and weaker when
it blows the contrary way. The cause whereof cannot proceed from any thing but
the different generation of Sound and Light. For in the generation of Light,
none of the parts of the Medium between the object and the Eye are moved from
their own places to other places sensibly distant; but the action is propagated
in spaces imperceptible; so that no contrary Wind can diminish, nor favorable
Wind increase the Light, unless it be so strong as to remove the Object
further off, or bring it nearer to the Eye. For the Wind, that is to say, the
air moved, does not by its interposition between the object and the eye, work
otherwise then it would do if it were still and calm. For where the pressure
is perpetual, one part of the air is no sooner carried away, but another by
succeeding it receives the same impression which the part carried away had
received before. But in the generation of Sound, the first collision or
breaking asunder, beats away and drives out of its place the nearest part of
the air, and that to a considerable distance, and with considerable velocity;
and as the circles grow (by their remoteness) wider and wider, so the air
being more and more dissipated, has also its motion more and more weakened.
Whenever therefore the air is so stricken as to cause Sound, if the Wind fall
upon it, it will move it all, nearer to the Ear if it blow that way, and
further from it if it blow the contrary way; so that according as it blows
from or toward the Object, so the Sound which is heard will seem to come from
a nearer or remoter place; and the action by reason of the unequal distances
be strengthened or debilitated.

From hence may be understood the reason, why the voice of such as are said to
speak in their bellies, though it be uttered near hand, is nevertheless heard
by those that suspect nothing, as if it were a great way off. For having no
former thought of any determined place from which the voice should proceed, and
judging according to the greatesse, if it be weak they think it a great way
off, if strong near. These Ventriloqui therefore by forming their voice, not
(as others) by the emission of their breath, but by drawing it inwards, do
make the same appear small and weak; which weakness of the voice deceives
those that neither suspect the artifice, nor observe the endeavor which they
use in speaking; and so instead of thinking it weak they think it far off.

10 As for the Medium which conveighs Sound, it is not Air only. For Water,
or any other Body how hard soever may be that Medium. For the Motion may be
propagated perpetually in any hard continuous Body; but by reason of the
difficulty with which the parts of hard Bodies are moved, the motion in going
out of hard matter makes but a weak impression upon the Air. Nevertheless if
one end of a very long and hard beam be stricken, and the ear be applied at
the same time to the other end, so that when the action goes out of the beam,
the air which it strikes may immediately be received by the ear, and be
carried to the Tympanum, the Sound will be considerably strong.

In like manner, if in the night (when all other noise, which may hinder Sound,
cease) a man lay his ear to the ground, he will hear the Sound of the steps
of Passengers, though at a great distance; because the motion which by their
treading they communicate to the earth, is propagated to the ear by the
uppermost parts of the earth which receives it from their feet.

11 I have shown above, that the difference between Grave and Acute Sounds
consists in this, that by how much the shorter the time is, in which the
reciprocations of the parts of a Body stricken are made, by so much the more
Acute will be the Sound. Now by how much a Body of the same bigness, is either
more heavy, or less stretched, by so much the longer will the reciprocations
last; and therefore heavier, and less stretched Bodies (if they be like in all
other respects) will yield a Graver Sound then such as be lighter and more
stretched.

As for the Concent of Sounds, it is to be considered, that the reciprocation
or Vibration of the Air (by which Sound is made) after it has reached the
Drum of the ear, imprinteth a like Vibration upon the air that is enclosed
within it; by which means the sides of the Drum within, are stricken
alternately. Now the Concent of two Sounds consists in this, that the Tympanum
receive its stroke from both the Sounding Bodies in equal, and equally frequent
spaces of time; So that when two strings make their Vibrations in the same
times, the Concent they produce, is the most exquisite of all other. For the
sides of the Tympanum, (that is to say, of the Organ of Hearing) will be
stricken by both those Vibrations together at once, on one side or other. For
example, if the two equal strings A B and C D be stricken together, and the
latitudes of their Vibrations E F and G H be also equal, and the points E, G, F
and H be in the concave superficies of the Tympanum, so that it receive strokes
from both the strings together in E and G, and again together in F and H, the
Sound which is made by the Vibrations of each string, will be so like, that it
may be taken for the same Sound, and is called Unison; which is the greatest
Concord. Again, the string A B retaining still its former Vibration E F, let
the string C D be stretched, till its Vibration have double the swiftness it
had before, and let E F be divided equally in I. In what time therefore the
string C D makes one part of its Vibration from G to H, in the same time the
string A B will make one part of its Vibration from E to I; and in what time
the string C D has made the other part of its Vibration back from H to G, in
the same time another part of the Vibration of the string A B will be made from
I to F. But the points F and G are both in the sides of the Organ, and
therefore they will strike the Organ both together, not at every stroke, but at
every other storke. And this is the nearest Concord to Unison, and makes that
Sound which is called an Eighth. Again, the Vibration of the string A B
remaining still the same it was, let C D be stretched till its Vibration be
swifter then that of the string A B, in the proportion of 3 to ^, and let E F
be divided into three equal parts in K and L. In what time therefore the string
C D makes one third part of its Vibration, which third part is from G to H, the
string A B will make one third part of its Vibration, that is to say, two
thirds of E F, namely, E L. And in what time the string C D makes another third
part of its Vibration, namely H G, the string A B will make another third part
of its Vibration, namely, from L to F, and back again from F to L. Lastly,
whilst the string C D makes the last third part of its Vibration, that is,
from G to H, the string A B will make the last third part of its Vibration from
L to E. But the points E and H are both in the sides of the Organ. Wherefore at
every third time the Organ will be stricken by the Vibration of both the
strings together, and make that Concord which is called a Fifth.

12 For the finding out of the cause of Smells, I shall make use of the evidence
of these following Phenomenon. First, that Smelling is hindered by Cold, and
helped by Heat. Secondly, that when the Wind blows from the Object, the Smell
is the stronger; and contrarily when it blows from the Sentient toward the
Object, the weaker; both which Phenomenon are by experience manifestly found to
be true in Dogs which follow the track of Beasts by the Sent. Thirdly, that
such Bodies as are less pervious to the fluid Medium, yield less Smell then
such as are more pervious; as may be seen in Stones and Metals, which compared
with Plants and Living Creatures, and their Parts, Fruits and Excretions, have
very little or no Smell at all. Fourthly, that such Bodies as are of their own
nature Odorous, become yet more Odorous when they are bruised. Fifthly, that
when the breath is stopped (at least in Men) nothing can be Smelt. Sixthly,
that the sense of Smelling is also taken away by the stopping of the Nostrils,
though the mouth be left open.

13 By the fourth and fifth Phenomenon it is manifest, that the first and
immediate Organ of Smelling is the innermost cuticle of the Nostrils, and that
part of it which is below the passage common to the Nostrils and the Palate.
For when we draw breath by the Nostrils, we draw it into the Lungs. That breath
therefore which conveighs Smells, is in the way which passes to the Lungs, that
is to say, in that part of the Nostrils which is below the passage through
which the breath goes. For nothing is Smelt, neither beyond the passage of the
breath within, nor at all without the Nostrils.

And seeing that from different Smells there must necessarily proceed some
mutation in the Organ, and all mutation is motion; it is therefore also
necessary that in Smelling, the parts of the Organ, that is to say, of that
internal cuticle, and the nerves that are inserted into it, must be diversely
moved by different Smells. And seeing also that it has been demonstrated, that
nothing can be moved but by a Body that is already moved and contiguous; and
that there is no other Body contiguous to the internal membrane of the
nostrils, but breath, that is to say, attracted air, and such little solid
invisible Bodies (if there be any such) as are intermingled with the air; it
follows necessarily, that the cause of Smelling is either the motion of that
pure air or ethereal Substance, or the motion of those small Bodies. But this
motion is an effect proceeding from the Object of Smell, and therefore either
the whole Object it self, or its several parts must necessarily be moved. Now
we know, that Odorous Bodies make Odor though their whole bulk be not moved.
Wherefore the cause of Odor is the motion of the invisible parts of the
Odorous Body. And these invisible parts do either go out of the Object, or else
retaining their former situation with the rest of the parts, are moved together
with them, that is to say, they have simple and invisible motion. They that say
there goes something out of the Odorous Body, call it an Effluvium; which
Effluvium is either of the ethereal substance, or of the small Bodies, that
are intermingled with it. But that all variety of Odours should proceed from
the Effluviums of those small Bodies that are intermingled with the ethereal
substance, is altogether incredible, for these considerations; First, that
certain Unguents, though very little in quantity, do nevertheless send forth
very strong Odours, not only to a great distance of place, but also to a great
continuance of time, and are to be Smelt in every point both of that place and
time; so that the parts issued out are sufficient to fill ten thousand times
more space, then the whole Odorous Body is able to fill; which is impossible.
Secondly, that whether that issuing out be with straight or with crooked
motion, if the same quantity should flow from any other Odorous Body with the
same motion, it would follow, that all Odorous Bodies would yield the same
Smell. Thirdly, that seeing those Effluviums have great Velocity of motion (as
is manifest from this, that noisome Odours proceeding from caverns are
presently Smelt at a great distance) it would follow, that by reason there is
nothing to hinder the passage of those Effluviums to the Organ, such motion
alone were sufficient to cause Smelling. Which is not so; for we cannot Smell
at all unless we draw in our breath through our Nostrils. Smelling therefore is
not caused by the Effluvium of Atoms; nor, for the same reason is it caused by
the Effluvium of ethereal substance; for so also we should Smell without the
drawing in of our breath. Besides the ethereal substance being the same in all
Odorous Bodies, they would always affect the Organ in the same manner, and
consequently the Odours of all things would be like.

It remains therefore, that the cause of Smelling must consist in the Simple
motion of the parts of Odorous Bodies, without any efflux or diminution of
their whole substance. And by this motion, there is propagated to the Organ by
the intermediate air, the like motion, but not strong enough to excite Sense
of it self without the attraction of air by respiration. And this is a
possible cause of Smelling.

14 The cause why Smelling is hindered by Cold, and helped by Heat, may be this,
that Heat (as has been shown in the 21 Chapter) generateth Simple motion; and
therefore also wheresoever it is already, there it will increase it; and the
cause of Smelling being increased the Smell it self will also be increased. As
for the cause why the Wind blowing from the Object makes the Smell the
stronger, it is all one with that for which the attraction of air in
respiration does the same. For he that draws in the air next to him, draws
with it by succession that air in which is the Object. Now this motion of the
air is Wind, and when another Wind blows from the Object, will be increased
by it.

15 That Bodies which co^tain the least quantity of air, as Stones and Metals,
yield less Smell then Plants and Living Creatures, the cause may be, that the
motion which causes Smelling, is a motion of the fluid parts only; which
parts, if they have any motion from the hard parts in which they are contained,
they communicate the same to the open air, by which it is propagated to the
Organ. Where therefore there are no fluid parts, as in Metals; or where the
fluid parts receive no motion from the hard parts, as in Stones, which are made
hard by accretion, there can be no Smell. And therefore also the Water, whose
parts have little or no motion, yeildeth no Smell. But if the same Water, by
Seeds, and the heat of the Sun, be together with particles of Earth raised
into a Plant, and be afterward pressed out again, it will be Odorous, as Wine
from the Vine. And as Water passing through plants is by the motion of the
parts of those plants made an Odorous liquour; so also of air passing through
the same plants whilst they are growing, are made Odorous aires. And thus also
it is with the Juices and Spirits which are bred in Living Creatures.

16 That Odorous Bodies may be made more Odorous by Contrition, proceeds from
this, that being broken into many parts which are all Odorous, the air which
by respiration is drawn from the Object toward the Organ, does in its passage
touch upon all those parts, and receives their motion. Now the air touches
the superficies only; and a Body having less superficies whilst it is whole,
then all its parts together have after it is reduced to powder, it follows that
the same Odorous Body yeildeth less Smell whilst it is whole, then it will do
after it is broken into smaller parts. And thus much of Smells.

17 The Taste follows; whose generation has this difference from that of the
Sight, Hearing and Smelling, that by these we have Sense of remote Objects;
whereas we Taste nothing but what is contiguous, and does immediately touch
either the Tongue or Palate, or both. From whence it is evident, that the
cuticles of the Tongue and Palate, and the Nerves inserted into them are the
first Organ of Taste; and (because from the concussion of the parts of these,
there follows necessarily a concussion of the Pia Matter) that the action
communicated to these, is propagated to the Brain, and from thence to the
farthest Organ, namely, the Heart; in whose reaction consists the nature of
Sense.

Now that Savours (as well as Odours) do not only move the Brain, but the
Stomach also, as is manifest by the loathings that are caused by them both,
they that consider the Organ of both these Senses will not wonder at all;
seeing the Tongue, the Palate and the Nostrils have one and the same continued
cuticle, derived from the Dura Matter.

And that Effluviums have nothing to do in the Sense of Tasting, is manifest
from this, that there is no Taste where the Organ and the Object are not
contiguous.

By what variety of motions the different kinds of Tastes (which are
innumerable) may be distinguished, I know not. I might (with others) derive
them from the diverse figures of those Atoms, of which whatsoever may be Tasted
consists; or from the diverse motions which I might (by way of Supposition)
attribute to those Atoms; conjecturing (not without some likelihood of truth)
that such things as taste Sweet, have their particles moved with slow circular
motion, and their figures Spherical, which makes them smooth and pleasing to
the Organ; that Bitter things have circular motion, but vehement, and their
figures full of Angles, by which they trouble the Organ; and that Sour things
have straight and reciprocal motion, and their figures long and small, so that
they cut and wound the Organ. And in like manner I might assign for the causes
of other Tastes such several motions and figures of Atoms as might in
probability seem to be the true causes. But this would be to revolt from
Philosophy to Divination.

18 By the Touch, we feel what Bodies are Cold or Hot, though they be distant
from us. Others, as Hard, Soft, Rough and Smooth, we cannot feel, unless they
be contiguous. The Organ of Touch, is every one of those membranes, which being
continued from the Pia Matter, are so diffused throughout the whole Body, as
that no part of it can be pressed, but the Pia Matter is pressed together with
it. Whatsoever therefore presses it, is felt as Hard or Soft, that is to say,
as more or less Hard. And as for the Sense of Rough, it is nothing else but
innumerable perceptions of Hard and Hard succeeding one another by short
intervals both of time and place. For we take notice of Rough and Smooth, as
also of Magnitude and Figure, not only by the Touch, but also by Memory. For
though some things are touched in one Point; yet Rough and Smooth, like
Quantity and Figure, are not perceived but by the Flux of a Point, that is to
say, we have no Sense of them without Time; and we can have no Sense of Time,
without Memory.

CHAP. XXX. Of Gravity.
1 A Thick Body does not contain more Matter (unless also more Place) then a
Thin. 2 That the Descent of Heavy Bodies proceeds not from their own
Appetite; but from some Power of the Earth. 3 The difference of Gravities
proceeds from the difference of the Impetus with which the Elements whereof
Heavy Bodies are made do fall upon the Earth. 4 The cause of the Descent of
Heavy Bodies. 5 In what proportion the Descent of Heavy Bodies is accelerated.
6 Why those that Dive do not when they are under Water, feel the weight of the
Water above them. 7 The Weight of a Body that floateth, is equal to the Weight
of so much Water as would fill the space which the immersed part of the Body
takes up within the Water. 8 If a Body be Lighter then Water, then how big
soever that Body be, it will float upon any quantity of Water, how little
soever. 9 How Water may be lifted up and forced out of a Vessel by Air. 10 Why
a Bladder is Heavier when blown full of air, then when it is empty. 11 The
cause of the ejection upwards of Heavy Bodies from a Wind-Gun. 12 The cause of
the ascent of Water in a Weather-glass. 13 The cause of motion upwards in
Living Creatures. 14 That there is in Nature a kind of Body Heavier then Air,
which nevertheless is not by Sense distinguishable from it. 15 Of the cause of
Magnetical virtue.
1 IN the 21 Chapter I have defined Thick and Thin (as that place required)
so, as that by Thick was signified a more Resisting Body, and by Thin a Body
less Resisting; following the custom of those that have before me discoursed
of Refraction. Now if we consider the true and vulgar signification of those
words, we shall find them to be Names Collective, that is to say, Names of
Multitude; as Thick to be that which takes up more parts of a space given, and
Thin that which contains fewer parts of the same magnitude, in the same
space, or in a space equal to it. Thick therefore is the same with Frequent, as
a Thick Troop; And Thin the same with Unfrequent, as a Thin Rank, Thin of
Houses; not that there is more matter in one place then in another equal place,
but a greater quantity of some named Body. For there is not less matter or Body
indefinitely taken, in a Desert, then there is in a City; but fewer Houses, or
fewer Men. Nor is there in a Thick Rank a greater quantity of Body, but a
greater number of Soldiers, then in a Thin. Wherefore the multitude and
paucity of the parts contained within the same space, do constitute Density and
Rarity, whether those parts be separated by Vacuum, or by Air. But the
consideration of this is not of any great moment in Philosophy; and therefore I
let it alone, and pass on to the search of the causes of Gravity.

2 Now we call those Bodies Heavy, which (unless they be hindered by some force)
are carried toward the center of the Earth, and that by their own accord, for
ought we can by Sense perceive to the contrary. Some Philosophers therefore
have been of opinion, that the Descent of Heavy Bodies proceeded from some
internal Appetite, by which when they were cast upwards, they descended again,
as moved by themselves, to such place as was agreeable to their nature. Others
thought they were attracted by the Earth. To the former I cannot assent,
because I think I have already clearly enough demonstrated, that there can be
no beginning of motion, but from an external and moved Body; and consequently,
that whatsoever has motion or endeavor toward any place, will always move
or endeavor toward that same place, unless it be hindered by the reaction of
some external Body. Heavy Bodies therefore being once cast upwards, cannot be
cast down again but by external motion. Besides, seeing inanimate Bodies have
no Appetite at all, it is ridiculous to think that by their own innate Appetite
they should to preserve themselves (not understanding what preserves them)
forsake the place they are in, and transfer themselves to another place;
whereas Man (who has both Appetite and understanding) cannot for the
preservation of his own life, raise himself by leaping above three or four
feet from the ground. Lastly, to attribute to created Bodies the power to move
themselves, what is it else then to say that there be creatures which have no
dependence upon the Creator? To the later, who attribute the Descent of Heavy
Bodies to the attraction of the Earth, I assent. But by what motion this is
done, has not as yet been explained by any man. I shall therefore in this
place say somewhat of the manner, and of the way by which the Earth by its
action attracteth Heavy Bodies.

3 That by the supposition of simple motion in the Sun, homogeneous Bodies
are congregated, and heterogeneous dissipated, has already been demonstrated in
the 5th Article of the 21 Chapter. I have also supposed, that there are
intermingled with the pure Air, certain little Bodies, or (as others call them)
Atoms, which by reason of their extreme smalness are invisible, and differing
from one another in Consistence, Figure, Motion and Magnitude; from whence it
comes to pass, that some of them are congregated to the Earth, others to other
Planets, and others are carried up and down in the spaces between. And seeing
those which are carried to the Earth, differ from one another in Figure, Motion
and Magnitude, they will fall upon the Earth, some with greater, others with
less Impetus. And seeing also that we compute the several degrees of Gravity no
otherwise then by this their falling upon the Earth with greater or less
Impetus; it follows, that we conclude those to be the more Heavy that have the
greater Impetus, and those to be less Heavy that have the less Impetus. Our
enquiry therefore must be, by what means it may come to pass, that of Bodies
which descend from above to the Earth, some are carried with greater, others
with less Impetus; that is to say, some are more Heavy then others. We must
also enquire, by what means such Bodies as settle upon the Earth, may by the
Earth it self be forced to ascend.

4 Let the Circle made upon the center C (in the 2d figure) be a great Circle
in the Superficies of the Earth, passing through the points A and B. Also let
any Heavy Body, as the stone A D be placed any where in the plain of the
Equator; and let it be conceived to be cast up from A D perpendicularly, or to
be carried in any other line to E, and supposed to rest there. Therefore how
much space soever the stone took up in A D, so much space it takes up now in E.
And because all place is supposed to be full, the space A D will be filled by
the air which flows into it first from the nearest places of the Earth, and
afterward successively from more remote places. Upon the center C let a Circle
be understood to be drawn through E; and let the plain space which is between
the Superficies of the Earth and that Circle, be divided into plain Orbs equal
and concentrique; of which, let that be the first which is contained by the two
perimeters that pass through A and D. Whilst therefore the air which is in the
first Orb, fills the place A D, the Orb it self is made so much less, and
consequently its latitude is less then the straight line A D. Wherefore there
will necessarily descend so much air from the Orb next abvoe. In like manner,
for the same cause, there will also be a descent of air from the Orb next
above that; and so by Succession from the Orb in which the Stone is at rest in
E. Either therefore the Stone it self, or so much air will descend. And seeing
air is by the diurnal revolution of the Earth more easily thrust away, then
the Stone, the air which is in the Orb that contains the Stone will be forced
further upwards then the Stone. But this, without the admission of Vacuum,
cannot be, unless so much air descend to E from the place next above; which
being done, the Stone will be thrust downwards. By this means therefore the
Stone now receives the beginning of its Descent, that is to say, of its
Gravity. Furthermore, whatsoever is once moved, will be moved continually (as
has been shown in the 19th Article of the 8th Chapter) in the same way, and
with the same celerity, except it be retarded or accelerated by some external
Movent. Now the air (which is the only Body that is interposed between the
Earth A and the stone above it E) will have the same action in every point of
the straight line E A, which it has in E. But it depressed the stone in E; and
therefore also it will depress it equally in every point of the straight line E
A. Wherefore the stone will descend from E to A with accelerated motion. The
possible cause therefore of the Descent of Heavy Bodies under the Equator, is
the Diurnal motion of the Earth. And the same demonstration will serve, if the
stone be placed in the plain of any other Circle parallel to the Equator. But
because this motion has by reason of its greater slowness, less force to
thrust off the air in the parallel Circles then in the Equator, and no force
at all at the Poles, it may well be thought (for it is a certain consequent)
that Heavy Bodies descend with less and less velocity, as they are more and
more remote from the Equator; and that at the Poles themselves they will either
not descend at all, or not descend by the Axis; which whether it be true or
false, Experience* must determine. But it is hard to make the experiment, both
because the times of their descents cannot be easily measured with sufficient
exactness, and also because the places near the Poles are inaccessible.
Nevertheless, this we know, that by how much the nearer we come to the Poles,
by so much the greater are the Flakes of the Snow that falls; and by how much
the more swiftly such Bodies descend as are fluid and dissipable, by so much
the smaller are the particles into which they are dissipated.

5 Supposing therefore this to be the cause of the Descent of Heavy Bodies; it
will follow, that their motion will be accelerated in such manner, as that the
spaces which are transmitted by them in the several times, will have to one
another the same proportion which the odd numbers have in succession from
Unity. For if the straight line EA be divided into any number of equal parts,
the Heavy Body descending, will (by reason of the perpetual action of the
Diurnal motion) receive from the air in every one of those times, in every
several point of the straight line EA, a several new and equal impulsion; and
therefore also in every one of those times it will acquire a several and equal
degree of celerity. And from hence it follows, by that which Galilaeus has in
his Dialogues of Motion demonstrated, that Heavy Bodies descend in the several
times with such differences of transmitted spaces as are equal to the
differences of the square numbers that succeed one another from Unity; which
square numbers being 1, 4, 9, 16, etc. their differences are 3, 5, 7, etc; that
is to say, the odd numbers which succeed another from Unity. Against this cause
of Gravity which I have given, it will perhaps be objected, that if a Heavy
Body be placed in the bottom of some hollow Cylinder of Iron or Adamant, and
the bottom be turned upwards, the Body will descend, though the air above
cannot depress it, much less accelerate its motion. But it is to be considered,
that there can be no Cylinder or Cavern, but such as is supported by the Earth,
and being so supported, is together with the Earth carried about by its diurnal
Motion. For by this means the bottom of the Cylinder will be as the Superficies
of the Earth; and by thrusting off the next and lowest air, will make the
uppermost air depress the Heavy Body which is at the top of the Cylinder, in
such manner as is above explicated.

6 The Gravity of Water being so great as by experience we find it is, the
reason is demanded by many, why those that Dive, how deep soever they go under
water, do not at all feel the weight of the water which lies upon them. And the
cause seems to be this, that all Bodies by how much the Heavier they are, by so
much the greater is the endeavor by which they tend downwards. But the Body of
a Man is Heavier then so much water as is equal to it in magnitude, and
therefore the endeavor downwards of a Man's Body is greater then that of water.
And seeing all endeavor is motion, the Body also of a Man will be carried
toward the bottom with greater Velocity then so much water. Wherefore there is
greater Reaction from the bottom; and the Endeavor upwards is equal to the
endeavor downwards, whether the water be pressed by water, or by another Body
which is Heavier then water. And therefore by these two opposite equal
endeavors, the endeavor both ways in the water is taken away; and
consequently, those that Dive are not at all pressed by it.

Coroll. From hence also it is manifest, that water in water has no Weight at
all, because all the parts of water (both the parts above, and the parts that
are directly under) tend toward the bottom with equal endeavor and in the
same straight lines.

7 If a Body float upon the water, the weight of that Body is equal to the
weight of so much water as would fill the place which the immersed part of the
Body takes up within the water.

Let OF (in the 3d figure) be a Body floating in the water ABCD; and let the
part E be above, and the other part F under the water. I say the weight of the
whole Body OF is equal to the weight of so much water as the Space F will
receive. For seeing the weight of the Body OF forces the water out of the
space F, and places it upon the Superficies AB, where it presses downwards;
it follows, that from the resistance of the bottom there will also be an
endeavor upwards. And seeing again that by this endeavor of the water
upwards, the Body OF is lifted up; it follows, that if the endeavor of the
Body downwards be not equal to the endeavor of the water upwards, either the
whole Body OF will (by reason of that inequality of their endeavors or
moments) be raised out of the water, or else it will descend to the bottom. But
it is supposed to stand so, as neither to ascend nor descend. Wherefore there
is an Aequilibrium between the two endeavors; that is to say, the weight of
the Body OF is equal to the weight of so much water as the Space F will
receive; Which was to be proved.

8 From hence it follows, that any Body of how great magnitude soever, provided
it consist of matter less Heavy then water, may nevertheless float upon any
quantity of water how little soever.

Let ABCD (in the 4th figure) be a vessel; and in it let EFGH be a Body
consisting of matter which is less Heavy then water; and let the space AGCF be
filled with water. I say the Body EFGH will not sink to the bottom DC. For
seeing the matter of the Body EFGH is less Heavy then Water, if the whole space
without ABCD were full of Water, yet some part of the Body EFGH, as EFIK would
be above the Water; and the weight of so much water as would fill the space
IGHK would be equal to the weight of the whole Body EFGH; and consequently GH
would not touch the bottom DC. As for the sides of the vessel, it is no matter
whether they be hard, or fluid; for they serve only to terminate the Water;
which may be done as well by water as by any other matter how hard soever; and
the water without the Vessel is terminated somewhere, so as that it can spread
no further. The part therefore EFIG will be extant above the water AGCF which
is contained in the vessel. Wherefore the Body EFGH will also float upon the
water AGCF, how little soever that water be; which was to be demonstrated.

9 In the 4th Article of the 26th Chapter, there is brought for the proving of
Vacuum, the experiment of water enclosed in a vessel; which water, the Orifice
above being opened, is ejected upwards by the impulsion of the air. It is
therefore demanded (seeing water is Heavier then air) how that can be done.
Let the 2d. figure of the same 26th Chap. be considered, where the water is
with great force injected by a Syringe into the space FGB. In that injection,
the air (but pure air) goes with the same force out of the vessel through
the injected water. But as for those small Bodies which formerly I supposed to
be intermingled with air, and to be moved with simple motion, they can not
together with the our air penetrate the water; but remaining behind are
necessarily thrust together into a narrower place, namely into the space which
is above the water FG. The motions therefore of those small Bodies will be less
and less free, by how much the quantity of the injected water is greater and
greater; so that by their motions falling upon one another the same small
Bodies will mutually compress each other, and have a perpetual endeavor of
regayning their liberty, and of depressing the water that hinders them.
Wherefore, as soon as the orifice above is opened, the water which is next it
will have an endeavor to ascend; and will therefore necessarily go out. But it
cannot go out, unless at the same time there enter in as much air; and
therefore both the water will go out, and the air enter in, till those small
Bodies which were left within the vessel have recovered their former liberty of
motion; that is to say, till the vessel be again filled with air, and no water
be left of sufficient height to stop the passage at B. Wherefore I have shown a
possible cause of this Phenomenon; namely, the same with that of Thunder. For
as in the generation of Thunder, the small Bodies enclosed within the Clouds by
being too closely pent together, do by their motion break the Clouds, and
restore themselves to their natural liberty; so here also the small Bodies
enclosed within the space which is above the straight line FG, do by their own
motion expel the water as soon as the passage is opened above. And if the
passage be kept stopped, and these small Bodies be more vehemently compressed
by the perpetual forcing in of more water, they will at last break the vessel
it self with great noise.

10 If Air be blown into a hollow Cylinder, or into a Bladder, it will
increase the weight of either of them a little, as many have found by
experience, who with great accurateness have tried the same. And it is no
wonder, seeing (as I have supposed) there are intermingled with the common air
a great number of small hard Bodies which are Heavier then the pure air. For
the ethereal substance, being on all sides equally agitated by the motion of
the Sun, has an equal endeavor toward all the parts of the Universe; and
therefore it has no Gravity at all.

11 We find also by experience, that by the force of air enclosed in a hollow
Canon, a bullet of lead may with considerable violence be shot out of a Gunne
of late invention, called the Wind-Gun. In the end of this Canon there are two
holes with their Valves on the inside, to shut them close; one of them serving
for the admission of air, and the other for the letting of it out. Also to
that end which serves for the receiving in of air, there is joined another
Canon of the same metal and bigness, in which there is fitted a Rammer, which
is perforated, and has also a Valve opening toward the former Canon. By the
help of this Valve the Rammer is easily drawn back, and lets in air from
without; and being often drawn back and returned again with violent strokes, it
forces some part of that air into the former Canon, so long, till at last the
resistance of the enclosed air is greater then the force of the stroke. And by
this means men think there is now a greater quantity of air in the Canon then
there was formerly, though it were full before. Also the air thus forced in,
how much soever it be, is hindered from getting out again by the foresaid
Valves, which the very endeavor of the air to get out does necessarily shut.
Lastly, that Valve being opened which was made for the letting out of the air,
it presently breaks out with violence, and drives the bullet before it with
great force and velocity.

As for the cause of this, I could easily attribute it (as most men do) to
Condensation, and think that the air, which had at the first but its ordinary
degree of Rarity, was afterward by the forcing in of more air condensed, and
last of all rarefied again by being let out and restored to its natural
liberty. But I cannot imagine how the same place can be always full, and
nevertheless contain sometimes a greater, sometimes a less quantity of matter;
that is to say, that it can be fuller then full. Nor can I conceive, how
Fullness can of it self be an efficient cause of motion. For both ^hese are
impossible. Wherefore we must seek out some other possible cause of this
Phenomenon. Whilst therefore the Valve which serves for the letting in of air
is opened by the first stroke of the Rammer, the air within does with equal
force resist the entering of the air from without; so that the endeavors
between the internal and external air are opposite, that is, there are two
opposite motions, whilst the one goes in and the other comes out; but no
augmentation at all of air within the Canon. For there is driven out by the
stroke as much pure air which passes between the Rammer and the sides of the
Canon, as there is forced in of air impure by the same stroke. And thus by
many forcible strokes the quantity of small hard Bodies will be increased
within the Canon, and their motions also will grow stronger and stronger as
long as the matter of the Canon is able to endure their force; by which if it
be not broken, it will at least be urged every way by their endeavor to free
themselves; and as soon as the Valve which serves to let them out is opened,
they will fly out with violent motion, and carry with them the bullet which is
in their way. Wherefore I have given a possible cause of this Phenomenon.

12 Water, contrary to the custom of Heavy Bodies, ascends in the
Weather-glasse; but it does it when the air is cold; for when it is warm it
descends again. And this Organ is called a Thermometer, or Thermoscope,
because the degrees of Heat and Cold are measured and marked by it. It is made
in this manner. Let A B C D (in the 5th figure) be a vessel full of water, and
E F G a hollow Cylinder of glass, closed at E, and open at G. Let it be
heated, and set upright within the water to F; and let the open end reach to G.
This being done* as the air by little and little grows colder, the water will
ascend slowly within the Cylinder from F toward E; till at last the external
and internal air coming to be both of the same temper, it will neither ascend
higher, nor descend lower, till the temper of the air be changed. Suppose it
therefore to be settled any where, as at H. If now the heat of the air be
augmented, the water will descend below H; and if the heat be diminished, it
will ascend above it. Which though it be certainly known to be true by
experience, the cause nevertheless has not as yet been discovered.

In the 6 and 7 articles of the 27th chapter (where I consider the cause of
Cold) I have shown, that fluid Bodies are made colder by the pressure of the
air, that is to say, by a constant Wind that presses them. For the same cause
it is, that the Superficies of the water is pressed at F; and having no place
to which it may retire from this pressure besides the cavity of the Cylinder
between H and E, it is therefore necessarily forced thither by the Cold, and
consequently it ascends more or less, according as the Cold is more or less
increased. And again, as the Heat is more intense, or the Cold more remiss,
the same water will be depressed more or less by its own Gravity, that is to
say, by the cause of Gravity above explicated.

13 Also Living creatures, though they be Heavy, can by Leaping, Swimming and
Flying raise themselves to a certain degree of height. But they cannot do this
except they be supported by some resisting Body, as the Earth, the Water and
the Air. For these motions have their beginning from the contraction (by the
help of the Muscles) of the Body animate. For to this contraction there
succeeds a distension of their whole Bodies; by which distension, the Earth,
the Water or the Air which supporteth them, is pressed; and from hence, by the
reaction of those pressed Bodies, Living Creatures acquire an endeavor
upwards, but such, as by reason of the Gravity of their Bodies is presently
lost again. By this endeavor therefore it is, that Living creatures raise
themselves up a little way by Leaping, but to no great purpose; but by Swimming
and Flying they raise themselves to a greater height; because before the effect
of their endeavor is quite extinguished by the Gravity of their bodies, they
can renew the same endeavor again.

That by the power of the Soul, without any antecedent contraction of the
Muscles, or the help of something to support him, any man can be able to raise
his Body upwards, is a childish conceit. For if it were true, a man might
raise himself to what height he pleased.

14 The diaphanous Medium which surrounds the Eye on all fides, is invisible;
Nor is Air to be seen in Air, nor Water in Water, nor any thing but that
which is more opacous. But in the confines of two diaphanous Bodies, one of
them may be distinguished from the other. It is not therefore a thing so very
ridiculous for ordinary people to think all that Space empty, in which we say
is Air; it being the work of Reason to make us conceive that the Air is any
thing. For by which of our Senses is it, that we take notice of the Air,
seeing we neither See, nor Hear, nor Taste, nor Smell, nor Feel it to be any
thing? When we feel Heat, we do not impute it to the Air, but to the Fire; nor
do we say the air is Cold, but we our selves are Cold; and when we feel the
Wind, we rather think something is coming, then that any thing is already
come. Also we do not at al feel the weight of water in water, much less of air
in air. That we come to know that to be a Body which we call Air, it is by
Reasoning; but it is from one Reason only, namely, because it is impossible
for remote Bodies to work upon our Organs of Sense but by the help of Bodies
intermediate, without which we could have no sense of them, till they came to
be contiguous. Wherefore, from the Senses alone, without reasoning from
effects, we cannot have sufficient evidence of the nature of Bodies.

For there is underground in some Mines of Coals, a certain matter of a middle
nature between Water and Air, which nevertheless cannot by Sense be
distinguished from air; for it is as Diaphanous as the purest air; and as
far as Sense can judge, equally penetrable. But if we look upon the effect,
it is like that of water. For when that matter breaks out of the Earth into one
of those Pits, it fills the same either totally, or to some degree; and if a
Man, or Fire be then let down into it, it extinguishes them in almost as little
time as water would do. But for the better understanding of this Phenomenon, I
shall describe the 6th figure. In which, let A B represent the pit of the Mine;
and let part thereof, namely, C B* be supposed to be filled with that matter.
If now a lighted Ca^dle be let down into it below C, it will as suddenly be
extinguished, as if it were thrust into water. Also if a grate filled with
coals thoroughly kindled and burning never so brightly, be let down; as soon as
ever it is below C, the fire will begin to grow pale, and shortly after (losing
its light) be extinguished, no otherwise then if it were quenched in water. But
if the grate be drawn up again presently, whilst the coals are still very hot,
the fire will by little and little be kindled again, and shine as before. There
is indeed between this matter and water this considerable difference, that it
neither wetteth, nor sticks to such things as are put down into it, as water
does; which by the moisture it leaves, hinders the kindling again of the
matter once extinguished. In like manner, if a Man be let down below C, he will
presently fall into a great difficulty of breathing, and immediately after into
a swoun, and die, unless he be suddenly drawn up again. They therefore that go
down into these pits, have this custom, that as soon as ever they feel
themselves sick, they shake the rope by which they were let down, to signify
they are not well, and to the end that they may speedily be pulled up again.
For if a man be drawn out too late, void of sense and motion, they digg up a
Turff, and put his face and mouth into the fresh earth; by which means (unless
he be quite dead) he comes to himself again by little and little, and recovers
life by the breathing out (as it were) of that suffocating matter which he had
sucked in whilst he was in the pit; almost in the same manner as they that are
drowned come to themselves again by vomiting up the water. But this does not
happen in all Mines, but in some only; and in those not always, but often. In
such Pits as are subject to it, they use this remedy. They dig another pit, as
DE, close by it, of equal depth; and joining them both together with one common
channel OF, they make a Fire in the bottom E, which carries out at D the air
contained in the pit DE; and this draws with it the air contained in the
channel OF; which in like manner is followed by the noxious matter contained in
CB; and by this means the pit is for that time made healthful. Out of this
History (which I write only to such as have had experience of the truth of it,
without any design to support my Philosophy with Stories of doubtful credit)
may be collected the following possible cause of this Phenomenon; namely, that
there is a certain matter, fluid, and most transparent, and not much lighter
then water; which breaking out of the Earth fills the Pit to C; and that in
this matter, as in water, both Fire and Living creatures are extinguished.

15 About the nature of Heavy Bodies, the greatest difficulty arises from the
contemplation of those things which make other Heavy Bodies ascend to them;
such are Jet, Amber, and the Loadstone. But that which troubles men most is the
Loadstone, which is also called Lapis Herculeus; a stone, though otherwise
despicable, yet of so great power, that it takes up Iron from the Earth, and
holds it suspended in the air, as Hercules did Antaeus. Nevertheless, we
wonder at it somewhat the less, because we see Jet draw up Straws, which are
Heavy Bodies, though not so Heavy as Iron. But as for Jet, it must first be
excited by rubbing, that is to say, by motion to and fro; whereas the Loadstone
has sufficient excitation from its own nature, that is to say, from some
internal principle of motion peculiar to it self. Now whatsoever is moved, is
moved by some contiguous and moved Body, as has been formerly demonstrated.
And from hence it follows evidently, that the first endeavor which Iron has
toward the Loadstone, is caused by the motion of that air which is contiguous
to the Iron. Also that this motion is generated by the motion of the next air,
and so on successively, till by this succession we find that the motion of all
the intermediate air takes its beginning from some motion which is in the
Loadstone it self; which motion (because the Loadstone seems to be at rest) is
invisible. It is therefore certain, that the attractive power of the Loadstone
is nothing else but some motion of the smallest particles thereof. Supposing
therefore that those small Bodies of which the Loadstone is (in the bowels of
the Earth) composed, have by nature such motion or endeavor as was above
attributed to Jet, namely a reciprocal motion in a line too short to be seen,
both those stones will have one and the same cause of attraction. Now in what
manner, and in what order of working this cause produces the effect of
attraction, is the thing to be enquired. And first we know, that when the
string of a Lute or Viol is stricken, the Vibration, that is, the reciprocal
motion of that string in the same straight Line, causes like Vibration in
another string which has like tension. We know also, that the dregs or small
sands which sink to the bottom of a Vessel, will be raised up from the bottom
by any strong and reciprocal agitation of the water stirred with the hand or
with a staff. Why therefore should not reciprocal motion of the parts of the
Loadstone contribute as much toward the moving of Iron? For if in the
Loadstone there be supposed such reciprocal motion, or motion of the parts
forwards and backwards, it will follow, that the like motion will be propagated
by the air to the Iron, and consequently that there will be in all the parts
of the Iron the same reciprocations or motions forwards and backwards. And from
hence also it will follow, that the intermediate air between the Stone and the
Iron will by little and little be thrust away; and the air being thrust away,
the Bodies of the Loadstone and the Iron will necessarily come together. The
possible cause therefore why the Loadstone and Jet draw to them, the one Iron,
the other Strawes, may be this, that those attracting Bodies have reciprocal
motion either in a straight line, or in an Elliptical line, when there is
nothing in the nature of the attracted Bodies which is repugnant to such a
motion.

But why the Loadstone (if with the help of Cork it float at liberty upon the
top of the water) should from any position whatsoever so place it self in the
plain of the Meridian, as that the same points which at one time of its being
at rest respect the Poles of the Earth, should at all other times respect the
same Poles, the cause may be this, That the reciprocal motion which I supposed
to be in the parts of the Stone, is made in a line parallel to the Axis of the
Earth, and has been in those parts ever since the Stone was generated. Seeing
therefore the Stone whilst it remains in the Mine, and is carried about
together with the Earth by its diurnal motion, does by length of time get a
habit of being moved in a line which is perpendicular to the line of its
reciprocal motion, it will afterward, though its axis be removed from the
parallel situation it had with the axis of the Earth, retain its endeavor of
returning to that situation again; and all endeavor being the beginning of
motion, and nothing intervening that may hinder the same, the Loadstone will
therefore return to its former situation. For any piece of Iron that has for a
long time rested in the plain of the Meridian, whenever it is forced from
that situation, and afterward left to its own liberty again, will of it self
return to lie in the Meridian again; which return is caused by the endeavor it
acquired from the diurnal motion of the Earth in the parallel circles which are
perpendicular to the Meridians.

If Iron be rubbed by the Loadstone drawn from one Pole to the other, two
things will happen; one, that the Iron will acquire the same direction with the
Loadstone, that is to say, that it will lie in the Meridian, and have its Axis
and Poles in the same position with those of the Stone; the other, that the
like Poles of the Stone and of the Iron will avoid one another, and the unlike
Poles approach one another. And the cause of the former may be this, that Iron
being touched by motion which is not reciprocal, but drawn the same way from
Pole to Pole, there will be imprinted in the Iron also an endeavor from the
same Pole to the same Pole. For seeing the Loadstone differs from Iron no
otherwise then as Ore from Metal, there will be no repugnance at all in the
Iron to receive the same motion which is in the Stone. From whence it follows,
that seeing they are both affected alike by the diurnal motion of the Earth,
they will both equally return to their situation in the Meridian whenever
they are put from the same* Also of the later this may be the cause, that as
the Loadstone in touching the Iro^ does by its action imprint in the Iron an
endeavor toward one of the Poles, suppose toward the North Pole; so
reciprocally, the Iron by its action upon the Loadstone does imprint in it an
endeavor toward the other Pole, namely toward the South Pole. It happens
therefore in these reciprocations or motions forwards and backwards of the
particles of the Stone and of the Iron betwixt the North and the South, that
whilst in one of them the motion is from North to South, and the return from
South to North, in the other the motion will be from South to North, and the
return from North to South; which motions being opposite to one another, and
communicated to the Air, the North Pole of the Iron (whilst the attraction is
working) will be depressed toward the South Pole of the Loadstone; or
contrarily the North Pole of the Loadstone will be depressed toward the South
Pole of the Iron; and the Axes both of the Loadstone and of the Iron will be
situate in the same straight line. The truth whereof is taught us by experience.

As for the propagation of this Magnetical virtue, not only through the Air,
but through any other Bodies how hard so ever, it is not to be wondered at,
seeing no motion can be so weak, but that it may be propagated infinitely
through a space filled with Body of any hardness whatsoever. For in a full
Medium, there can be no motion which does not make the next part yield, and
that the next, and so successively without end; so that there is no effect
whatsoever but to the production thereof something is necessarily contributed
by the several motions of all the several things that are in the World.

And thus much concerning the nature of Body in general; with which I conclude
this my first Section of the Elements of Philosophy. In the first, second and
third Parts, where the Principles of Ratiocination consist in our own
Understanding, that is to say, in the legitimate use of such Words as we our
selves constitute, all the Theoremes (if I be not deceived) are rightly
demonstrated. The fourth Part depends upon Hypotheses; which unless we know
them to be true, it is impossible for us to demonstrate that those Causes which
I have there explicated, are the true Causes of the things whose productions I
have derived from them.

Nevertheless, seeing I have assumed no Hypothesis, which is not both possible
and easy to be comprehended; and seeing also that I have reasoned aright from
those Assumptions, I have withal sufficiently demonstrated that they may be
the true Causes; which is the end of Physical Contemplation. If any other man
from other Hypotheses shall demonstrate the same, or greater things, there will
be greater praise and thanks due to him then I demand for my self, provided his
Hypotheses be such as are conceivable. For as for those that say any thing may
be moved or produced by it Self, by Species, by its own Power, by Substantial
Forms, by Incorporeal Substances, by Instinct, by Anteperistasis, by Antipathy,
Sympathy, Occult Quality, and other empty words of Schoolmen, their saying so
is to no purpose.

And now I proceed to the Phenomenon of Man's Body; Where I shall speak of the
Optics, and of the Dispositions, Affections, and Manners of Men (if it shall
please God to give me life), and show their Causes.

AD CAP. XIV
fig. 1.
fig. 2.
fig. 3.
fig. 4.
fig. 5.
fig: 6.
fig: 7.
fig: 8.
fig: 9.
fig: 10.


AD CAP. XVI
fig: 1
fig: 2
fig: 3
fig: 4
fig: 5
fig: 6
fig: 7
fig: 8
fig: 9
fig: 10
fig: 11


AD CAP. XVII
fig. 1.
fig. 2.
fig. 3.
fig. 4.
fig. 5.
fig. 6.
fig. 7.
fig. 8.


Cap: XVIII
fig. 1.
fig. 2.


AD CAP. XIX
fig: 1
fig: 2
fig: 3
fig: 4
fig* 5
fig: 6
fig: 7
fig: 8
fig: 9
fig: 10


Cap: XX.
Fig* 1
fig* 2
fig* 3
fig* 4
fig* 5


AD CAP XXI
Fig* 1
fig: 2
fig: 3
fig* 4
fig: 5


AD CAP* XXII
fig* 1
fig: 2
fig: 3


AD CAP* XXIII
fig: 1
fig* 2
fig: 3
fig: 4
fig: 5
fig: 6
fig: 7
fig: 8
fig: 9


AD CAP. XXIIII
fig: 1
fig: 2
fig: 3
fig: 4
fig: 5
fig: 6


AD Cap XXVI
fig* 1
Fig* 2
fig* 3
fig: 4.
fig: 5.


AD Cap XXVII
fig: 1.
fig* 2*


AD Cap XXVIII et XXX
fig* 1.
fig: 2.
fig* 3*
fig* 4*
fig* 5.
fig: 6.



