A History of the New PLOT: Or, A Prospect of Conspirators, their Designs
Damnable, Ends Miserable, Deaths Exemplary.


A brief Account of the late Treasonable Conspiracy,
AGainst His Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, By promoting Seditious
Libels, and other wicked Arts, to incite to a dislike and hatred of his Sacred
Person, the Heads of which Party having no other Design but the Destruction of
Himself and Government.

By misrepresenting His Just Resolutions, to the weaker, deceived sort of
People:

To that end showing themselves in Unlawful Tumults and Ryots, etc.

But it pleased GOD, by these ways of Violence, to open the eyes of many of
the Loyal Subjects, who foresaw what this method would produce; showing with
great Courage, Duty and Affection, readily to defend His Majesty's Royal Person
and Government.

By which means, these Factions lost ground: Hence being desperately resolved
to betake themselves to Arms, by force to overturn the Government.

Different Interests and Opinions join in this villainous Enterprise.

Contriving a general Insurection in this Kingdom, and also in Scotland, etc.

Conspiring to Assassinate His Sacred Majesty, and Royal Brother.

Also to Massacre the Magistrates of the City of London, etc.

But the Divine Providence has wonderfully showed it self, in a gracious
Preservation, from this damnable and horrid Conspiracy, etc.

About the Beginning of October last, the Principal Conspirators met to agree,
how to Master the Guards, and to Sieze His Majesty's Sacred Person, etc.

Some other Villains were likewise carrying on that horrid and Execrable Plot
of Assassinating His Sacred Majesty, and his Dearest Brother, at their return
from Newmarket; That being deferred, it was after agreed, at His Majestys next
going to Newmarket. The Place appointed was the House of one Richard Rumbold, a
Malster, called the Rye, near Hoddesdon, in the County of Hertford.

Forty Persons were in this Assassination to be Actors, etc.

This Blow was to be followed with a Massacre, of the Offic^^s of State, the
present Lord Mayor and Sherriffs, and the Magistrates most eminent for their
Loyalty, etc.

The late Earl of Shaftsbury, who had pressed first to a sudden Rising, sent to
know the Conspirators resolution, and finding they intended farther
preparation, conveyed himself secretly into Holland, to avoid the danger of his
bieng discoveaed.

Diverse of the Conspirators are fled from Justice.

Others have been Committed, Tried, Convicted, Attainted, and Executed
according to Law, viz. Thomas Walcot, William Hone, John Rouse, and the Lord
William Russell.

Arthur late Earl of Essex, being Committed to the Tower, for High Treason,
Killed himself.

Shaftsbury's cursed Design, how laid, is Explained by his Book of Worthy Men,
and Men Worthy, thus,

It Is an Alphabetical Digestion of all the Counties of England, just in Order
of a Parliament-Tax, in the Statute-Book; with a List of the WORTHY-MEN, on the
One Hand, and MEN-WORTHY on the Other, Denoting by the Former, the
True-Protestant Party, and by the Other the Kings Loyal Subjects, and the True
Sons of the Church. [ MENWORTHY] is to be read with a Sub-intelligitur; that is
to say, WORTHY to be Hanged. Into this Book were Entered the Names of the most
considerable Men in the Kingdom, and Ranged in their proper Counties under the
One, or the Other Head, accordingly as they stood Inclined: Insomuch that it
was, Effectually, a Compendious, and a Ready Estimate of the Strength and the
Interest of Both Parties.

Some affect to be Masters of new Heresies, by fair shows, though for base
Ends, that are the Churches Troublers: Such the Apostles Wish reaches, Would to
God they were even Cut Off, Gal. 5.12.

And to mark them that cause Divisions, Romans 16.17.

Those little Foxes that spoil the Vines, Cant. 2.15.

I would have old Babylon broken down, and all new Babels kept down; that we
may not be burdened with New Jesuitical Plots, of Faction and Schism; least
pleaders for Liberty turn Libertines, to begin and foment Confusions.

For not to dwell in Rome, but to have Rome dwell in us is as great a sin, and
the Highway to Destruction. In this Case English or Italian Babylonians are
all one.

The Twenty Seven Propositions Condemned and Executed by the Consent of the
University of Oxford, which are as follows.
THE First Proposition is, That the People are the Fountain of Power. 2ly,
There Is a mutual Compact, and the Power Forfeitable upon Breach of Trust. 3dly,
Power Forfeitable for Misgovernment. 4ly, The King one of the Three Estates. 5.
Birthright gives no Title. 6. Subjects may Covenant for Defense, without, and
Against the Supreme Magistrate. 7. Self-Preservation is the Sovereign Law. 8.
Resistance Lawful for Religion. 9. Against Passive Obedience. 10. Possession is
a good Title. 11. The State of Nature is a state of War, in which every man
has a Right to all things. 12. The Foundation of Civil Authority is this
Natural Right. 13. Every man retains a Right of Defending himself against
Force, though a Member of a Society. 14. An Oath Super-adds no Obligation to
Pact; and a Pact Obliges no further then it is Credited. 15. If a People
Sinfully Dispossess One Prince; and contrary to a Former Oath, Covenant with
Another, the Later Covenant stands. 16. All Oaths are Unlawful. 17. The Taker
Swears in his own Sense. 18. Dominion Founded in Grace. 19. Civil Powers Usurp
upon the Prerogative of Christ. 20. Kings Subject to the Presbytery. 21. No
Impositions Lawful in Gods Worship, unless antecedently Necessary. 22. The Duty
of Not Offending a weak Brother, is inconsistent with all humane Authority of
making Laws concerning Indifferent Things. 23. Judges and Inferior Magistrates
ought to put Wicked Kings, and Tyrants to Death; and if they fail, the Power
devolves to the People. 24. God's People are to expect New Revelations for a
Rule of their Actions, and upon an Inward Motion from God may destroy Tyrants.
25. The President of Phinehas is to us instead of a Command. 26. The Murderers
of Charles the First, were the Instruments of Gods Glory. 27. Charles the First
making War upon his Parliament; was Lawfully Resisted, and no longer King.

DAvid's Subjects Loyal, did estimate him better worth than Ten Thousand of his
Subjects, 2 Samuel 18.3.

By the only Wise God, this great King of Kings, Monarchy was first
established. Moses was a Monarch and King in Jeshurum, Deuteronomy. 33.5.

Joshua and the rest of the Judges or Dukes, were Virtually though not Formally
Kings.

The Habit of Saintship, or if Interest and a long Sword, and strong Arm will
not do: For Powers are Ordained of God, and not of men, (and this in the
New Testament days) Romans 12.4.6.

Note, God foretold Israel of their having a King, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. And this
King was not chosen by the People, but by Lot, 1 Samuel 10

And when Samuel showed the People him whom the Lord had chosen, etc. The
People shouted, and said, God Save the King: or as the Hebrew Margent, Let the
King Live.

Consult Scripture and you will find, that Judgments have Dogged at the heels
of all such Subjects as have either secretly or openly Risen up in Conspiracy
or Rebellion against their Lawful Kings. Had Zimri peace who Slew his Master? 2
Kings 9.31.

Hence let the Original of Kingly Power teach us, in Conscience toward God, to
stand in Defense of our King.

To Strengthen this, let us reflect back upon the Judgments that overtook the
Instruments of our late Kings Murder.

Gods Providence takes a special Care of the Safety of Princes, and that he is
immediately concerned to avenge their Blood; that seeing the Powers that be,
are ordained of God, it follows, That not only he that Rebels, but even he that
Resists the Power, resists Gods Ordinance; the Consideration of which will
prove the ancient Maxim true, That Christianitys Consistency is always
attended with Loyalty; which is the great Design of this Exemplar.

Absalom Conspires against his Father, 2 Samuel 15.

Chap. 18. Absalom in the wood of Ephraim, is hanged by the hair, in a great
Oak, and slain by Joab.

The Amalekite that stood upon Saul and slew him, he being not afraid to
destroy the Lords Anointed, is slain by the Command of David, 2 Samuel 1.14, 15.
for slaying the Lords Anointed, v. 16.

Baasha Conspired against Nadab, the King, and slew him at Gibethon, and
Reigned in his stead, 1 Kings 15.28, 29.

Ela the Son of Baasha, that slew Nadab, Zimri his Servant, Conspired against
him, and slew him after he had Reigned two years, 1 Kings 16.8, 9, 10.

Zimri Reigned but seven days, who slew Ela, and when the People Encamped,
heard say, Zimri has Conspired, and also slain the King, the Soldiers made
Omri, the Captain of the Host, King, Zimri desperately Burnt himself, at Tirza
in the Palace of the Kings House, 1 Kings 16.15, etc.

Ahab the Son of Omri is slain at Ramoth Gilead, the Dogs lick up his Blood, 1
Kings 22.34.38.

Jehoash is slain by his servants, that made a Conspiracy, 2 Kings 12.20.

Amaziah slew his servants that had slain the King his Father, 2 Kings 14.5.

2 Chronicles. 33.24, 25. King Amons Servants Conspire and slay him in his own
house, but the People of the Land slew all them that had Conspired.

The New Testament is not slack in foretelling the last Ages, Perilous Times,
and marked them out, Romans 16.

As servers of their own Bellies, deceiving the Hearts of the People. Satan's
Ministers are Transformed, Gal. 5.19, etc.

Windy Doctrines of men, cunning Craftiness, and lying in wait to deceive, Ephesians.
4.14.

But Timothy Exhorts especeially, Supplications, Praytrs, and Intercessions
especially for Kings. 1 Timothy 2.1.

And 2 Timothy 3. is express concerning these perilous Times, Traitors, Heady,
High-minded, Reprobates, Seducers, Itching Ears, turned into Fables, Chap. 4 3,
4.

Titus 1.10. etc. Vain Talkers and deceivers, subvert whole houses: Their mind
and Conscience being defiled, abominable and disobedient to every Good work.

2 Pet. 2.1.10. False Teachers, despisers of Government, Presumptuous,
Selt-willed, that speak Evil of Dignities, Scoffers, walkers after their own
lusts.

Jude v. 8.19. Renders such, Filthy Dreamers, Despisers of Dominion, Evil
speakers of Dignities, Sensual, Separatists, not having the Spirit.

LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor, 1683.


