DE Mirabilibus Pecci: BEING THE WONDERS OF THE PEAK IN DARBY-SHIRE, Commonly
called The Devil's Arse of Peak. In English and Latin.

The Latin Written by Thomas Hobbes of Malmsbury. The English by a Person of
Quality.

London, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, 1678.

LICENSED.

September. 3d. 1677. Rog L'estrange.

An Advertisement.
THis Latin Poem, writ by the famous Mr. Thomas Hobs of Malmsbury, has got
such reputation, that many English Readers had a great desire to be acquainted
with it, for whose sakes it is now translated into English, although without
the knowledge of Mr. Hobs; who it is hoped will not be displeased with this
attempt which is left to others Idg^ments, whether done well or ill. Reader
farewell, but do not forget to peruse that excellent Translation of Homer by Mr.
Hobs. I think the most exact and best Translation that ere I saw.

TO THE NOBLE LORD WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire Concerning the Wonder of the
Peak.
A POEM.
ON the English Alps, where Darbies Peak does rise,
High up in Hills, that Emulate the Skies,
And largely Waters all the Vales below,
With Rivers that still plentifully Flow,
Does Chatsworth. Wonder. 1,
Chatsworth by swift Derwins Channel stand,
Famed for it is Pile, and Lord, for both are grand.
Slowly the Derwin.
River by its Gates does pass,
Here silent, as in Wonder of the place,
But does from Rocky precipices move
In rapid streams below it, and above.
A losty Mountain guards the house behind,
From the assaults of the rough Eastern wind;
Which does from far it is rugged Cliffs display,
And Sleep prolongs, by shutting out the day.
Behind, a pleasant Garden does appear;
Where the rich earth, breaths odours every where.
Where in the midst of Groves of plumtrees.
Woods, the fruitful Tree
Fears without prune-hook, seeming now as free.
Where by the thick leaved roof the Walls are made
Spite of the Sun were all his beams displayed
More cool than the famed Virgil's Beechen shade.
Where Art (it self dissembling) rough hewn stone
And craggy flints worn out by dropping on
Together joining by the workmans tool)
Makes horrid Rocks made by art in imitation of the natural.
rocks, and watery caverns cool.
The Water that from native Cliffs had source
Once free and unconfined, throughout it is course,
By it is own Lead which in that County is dug out of the earth.
Country Metal is led on
Captive to Rocks of Artificial stone.
There buried deep, it is streams it doubly throws
Into two circling Channels as it goes,
Through thousand cranies, which by art it does.
Then girds the Rock with many a hollow With leaden pipes.
vain,
Frighting all under with surprising rain.
Thence turning it a Marble font does store,
Until it is lofty brims can hold no more.
And entering the house, obsequious is
To Cook and Butler, in their services.
And gushing up within the midst does spout
His Crystal waters every where about,
Fit for the hands, from the tall Cisterns out,
And though to this but four vents we assign,
A Fountain sacred amongst the Athenians flowing from nine pipes.
Calliroe's not so fair that spouts from nine.
The river turning off a little space,
Part of a garden's seen that fronts the place.
Two rows of Crystal Fish Ponds
ponds here shine and dance
Which trembling wave the Sun beams as they glance,
In which vast shoales of fishes wanton float,
Not conscious of the prison where they are shut.
How does it please when as the Nymphs fling in
The prey enticed, to the bright floods again,
TO observe the method that the wantons use,
First to inveigle men, and then refuse!
What can more grateful or Surprising be,
Than gardens pend'lous on high mounts to see?
Within the midst of all the waters stand,
Caesarian Piles built by a woman's hand.
Piles fit for Kings to build, and Monarchs rear,
In Cavendisian Lordships do appear;
The petty products of a Female care.
But of famed Shrewsoury's great Countess this
The least of thousand commendations is.
To whom vast Structures their foundations own;
Who got great wealth with great and good renown;
Who by her candor made all friends in power,
And with her bounty shined upon the lower;
Who left an The Earls of Devonshire, New Castle and Kingston, Nephews to the
Countess of Shrewsbury.
Offspring numerous and great
With which the joyful Nation's still repleat;
How Sweet it is upon the Sandy shore
Of Crystal Pooles, great Nature to explore!
Or to my Lord Small This Poem.
gifts of verse prefer,
Wherein those happy fields I may declare
Pressed by the Muses, which still urgent are.
A more commodious soil they never knew,
Nor a more friendly Lord had title to.
From hence, on rising ground, appears a neat,
And fair ascent, up to the Palace gate.
Royal, August, sublime without it is seen;
Large, neat, commodious, splendid, rich within.
What thou may find in Marble figured out
Of Poets fables, or old Hero's stout,
Dwell not upon it; nor cement hard as stone,
Nor count the faithful Servants, one by one.
But the great Master celebrate my Muse.
To whom descended from an ancient House,
Devon gives princely Titles, Derby The Lieutenantship of the County of Darby
Cares:
Who in a constant breast, discretion bears.
Magnificent, not lavish, still he spends
His riches freely, and amongst his Friends;
He of your Quire is the only grace,
He for the Muses finds a resting place,
And pleasant shades, and gratful leisure gives,
And he from them large Eloquence receives
With a discerning mind, 'twixt good, and ill.
Next view his Christiana Countess of Devonshire
Consort wistly, view her Still,
Descended from the Bruses ancient line,
Whose Kingly Stock does in her visage shine.
Then view their Noble Offspring; but above
The rest a The Lady Ann Cavendish
Nymph, whom Jove himself may love.
With two Sweet Youths, who Angels might be said,
The common pledges of the Marriage bed.
These with their Parents may be wondered at;
What else of Miracles thou may repeat,
Fall short of these, and are not nigh so great.
Of the high Peak, are Seven wonders writ.
Two Fonts, two Caves, one Palace, Mount* and Pit.
To wit that Stately Palace we have named
But now, is first among the seven famed.
Of The rest discoursing, Some who longed to know
The cause of things, to see them join to go;
And I ('it was worth the while) amongst them too,
'Twas at the time the earth did tribute pay,
William now Earl of Devonshire with his Brother Charles.
And the hot Sun the dew had wiped away
From off the stubble, when we first begun
Our journey, and to Guide us hired one:
Thus we set forwards from the gates, and make
Pilsly and Hassop in a rugged track.
From thence our horse with weary feet and slow
Toward a steep Hill's high top, do climbing go;
And after many a tug and weary Strain,
Half breathless, they the Summity do gain,
Turning about with wonder we espy
The birds now lazily to creep, not fly.
And that the Pico of the Mountains brow
Had pierced the body of the Clouds quite through
Derwin appears but as a crooked line,
And Chatsworth as a point it does entwine.
W'had gone but little further, when we found
The Hills soft back, cut deep with many a wound.
And did the earth in whitish They dig th. Mines orderly in a parallel line,
they call them the Rakes.
ranks epsy
Cast up in heaps, upon the surface lie.
It Is a high soil; but covered with a crust
Of brittle earth, soon crumbling into dust;
Which least by it is own weight it should fall down.
Nature has propt it with a roof of Stone.
But the dark Prince of wealth divides throughout,
In thousand channels, which himself had cut,
In ordered ranks the Stone; and each so drawn
From the Eastern point, unto the Western one
You Would think they felt not the effects alone
Of heat and warmth, but that they viewed the Sun.
The griping hand of Dis within these beds
Had stored of better metals the crude seeds:
To be hereafter to perfection brought
By the Sun beams, as they upon them wrought,
Till then for to be guarded by the Stone,
From all assaults sufficient Garrison.
But all in vain, for neither can the Sun
With oblique ray, bring to concoction
The rougher leaden lump; nor is the ground
Sufficient guardian, for it is treasure found.
For man (wealth's great invader wheresoever
It hidden lies) with For the stone wherein the veins of lead are contained is
sometimes of that hardness that it cannot be pierced but by fire.
fire and Steel does tear
The bowels of the earth; and rends in twain
The Stony cover of the leaden vein.
And boldly dares, if poverty compel,
To rob the Exchecquer, of the Prince of Hell.
Not always without danger, It happened as we past by, that of two that were
verwhelmed in the mines one was drawn up, the other searching for.
two were caught
As in their Mothers womb they deeply wrought
By death; who suddenly overwhelmed them there,
Where they themselves had dug a Sepulcher.
The Alias air-shafis.
inlets (which with narrow vents admit
But hardly down those who are forced to it
By want, whose bellies are by hunger fit) To keep the fides of the vents from
falling in.

With beams of wood the Natives still distend,
And prop their way, as to the veins they bend.
A people expert in experienced woe,
Whom want has forced or condemned to undergo that labor.
Damned to the Mines, for many years ago;
That all may see they fell not unawares,
But were long sought for, by infernal snares.
Which now the main supporters take away
That did the earths weak brittle surface stay,
And gather to the neighboring shades below
The souls, pressed forth from their crust bodies now.
Bodies by bodies in these deeps we sound,
Thus arrows lost, are still by arrows found.
Before our feet, a Corpse dug up we see,
Which minds us what we are, or ought to be.
Much like the body we about us bring.
The Other lies buried in the earth, but still
Hopes an To be found and drawn out,
extraction when it is Heavens will.
Upon the earth that from the mine was thrown,
A lazy people drawn from every Town,
To see the mournful spectacle came down.
Two women weeping in the crowd we spied;
One for the loss of joys that she had tried,
The Other for want of hopes are now denied.
Ones flame continual use had near expired,
The Other with itch of novelty was fired.
Both mourn, because that both their joys have lost,
But she who last had tasted them, the most.
Let them still mourn. We in our way go on,
And now four thousand paces we had gone,
By our horse feet we count, as often the Stone
In equal space each foot precedeing still
In equal space each foot proceeding still
Before its fellow, now has felt their heel. The shadows at the shortest and
cast before us, show the Sun to be come to the Meridian (a south Sun) and that
our faces are turned toward the north.

Our shadows go before, and shortest show
What course the Sun bear's, and what course we go,
Many small Villages on either side
We leave behind us, as we onward ride,
The last is Hope; the rest I Will not rehearse,
Their names are too too cumbersome for verse.
On hollow ground, repleat with mines below,
And filled with mortals, Over the heads of those that worked underneath in the
Mines.
high aloft we go.
The horse with hasty feet beats on the soil,
Redoubled eccho's from their hoofs recoil.
And in an hours space, or thereabout,
To a steep Mountains precipice we are brought,
It was great odds we did not headlong go
Into the neighboring village stood below.
But we with winding steps, and wary foot
Strive as we may with safety, come unto't.
First we the Sun upon our right hand place,
Then turning to the left, with a soft pace
We downwards going to our feet confide.
Then again mounting on the Hills left side
Into the Village we securely ride,
Which built on a high Rock commands the sight
Of all the Passengers that travel by it;
Called from the Castle near it, Castleton.
Not famous for the warlike Deeds there done,
Not great, nor built with Art, not ever could
Against the Canon-shot it self uphold,
Nor yet impregnable to those of old;
But ancient and built up of Stone it bears
The injuries of time, and weather dares.
Under the Lords, that kept the mines of yore
It might of Thieves repulse the sudden power.
Behind a ruined mountain does appear
Swelling into two parts, which turgent are
As when we bend our bodies to the ground,
The buttocks amply sticking out are found.
In The midst there is a Cave: and on each hand
A lofty Rock does as supporter stand
Of a vast weight of earth, which else would fall,
So to the midst with safety guards us all,
And now we are come (I blushing must rehearse)
As most does style it to the Devils Arse; The Devils Arse Mirac. 2.

Peaks Arse the Natives.
A noble Cave between two Rocks appears,
Unto the Where the Sun beams never come.
Sun unknown, but to the Stars
Fearing to be immerg'd, and both the Toward Mrsa Major and Minor Northern
constellations.
Bears
Turned, it its mouth with horror does present:
Just like a furnace, or as Hell they paint,
Swallowing with open Jaws the Damned crowd
After the sentence is pronounced aloud.
On horseback we our entrance make, and spy
Horses within, and haycocks mounted high.
But we with wonder and amaze admire
The tall prodigious Rocky The vast roof.
Hemisphere,
How without prop it is capable to bear
So vast a weight, how it the mountain stays,
And the eternal Geometrician praise,
Through the thick Arch, we see the water stained
To fall in drops, which on the earth retained,
Even then to their own Country the Sea,
Seek out returns with much perplexity;
In little Channels even then they search
For fellow streams, to fortify their march.
From whence they teaching, we these notions get,
Rivers proceed not from the earth's receipt
Of the salt billows by the sandy shoars,
Which still imbibe them at their hollow pores,
As if the straightened waters were forced up,
The Main being taller than the mountain's top;
But by the Suns hot rays the Sea on high
Mounts up in vapors, which do wandering fly
Drove by the winds, which cooling still as soon
As the heat fails them, or the Sun goes down,
In numerous tears descend unto the earth,
From which collected, Rivers have their birth.
To view the dark recesses of the Cave
We thought it not amiss good lights to have.
Dismounting, a she-Native of the place
Leads us on forwards, with a gentle pace,
Handsome enough, and Girl enough she was;
Who with her steady foot, and accent clear,
As guide emboldens us with many a The hem or joint voice of the Mariners when
they encourage one another, or salute a vessel.
cheer.
Making our entrance with a Compounded of the daylight and candlelight.
confused light,
Two Rocks with crooked backs drive from our sigh
The beams of day, and bending down below,
On all four force us through their Arch to go.
Sometimes erect, then groveling toward the ground,
In figures both of beasts, and men, we are found.
Until at length the slow and humble source
Of a dark River crossing, stopped our course.
A stream whose Channel ran tili now beneath
The earth, here under the low Arch does breath.
And winding in its Channel to and fro,
Not always does irrevocably go.
Sometimes it bosoms you within its bay,
Then jetting out, it drives you far away.
Thus far we go; beyond it none can have
The least admittance, who e're credit gave
To the old Woman's Fable of the Father, not being able to stand upright. The
ridiculou story of the old woman.

Who did forsooth well fraught with lights He swam over it with the more ease
because it was very shallow.
swim over
A little ford, but durst not further roame, He feared to meet night in a dark
den. Ridiculous. Mam-Tor Mirac.

Lest sunk in night, he never should backward come;
But we return, and with wet feet tread over
The Sand again, that we had trod before.
The night and shades we now behind us leave,
And the blessed daylight once again receive.
Got out, as is the pole a Mountain tall
Lifts up his head, like an old ruined Wall
Ready made weak by breaches now to fall.
It Is said eternally the Sand falls down,
Without the hills least diminution;
Strange this if true; and yet the Pyrami'd
Of falling sand, still gathering to a head,
Gives tacit Items that the Flux begun
By some great ruin, and will ever run
Until the mountains top and that be one.
And though the most called Mam Tor, nev'rtheless
Maimed for the cliff I rather should express.
Which does in English a torn Rock denote,
And the decrepit hill gives favor to it.
Turned to the left a thousand pace or so,
To the Peak-Forrest without Tree we go, Peak Forest. Elden hole.

Hemmed in with Stony fence the naked Deer
Cold Winter pinches, not a leaf does here
To shelter them upon these hills appear.
Summers fierce heat does scorch them, not a shade
From the Suns ray, to cover them is had.
Many the bloody wantonness of man
Destroy's with Dog his loved companion.
Many the changes when the Heavens frown,
Some Elden with wide jaws does swallow down.
Of the torn earth a dire hiatus it is
Which should I labor truly to express,
The Ancients I to council call in vain, Mirac. 4th.

For no such thing the Poets e're could feign,
How e're my Muse, we some essays must make.
And first the figure of its mouth let us take:
Let the apt fimily be but complete,
To small things, so, thou may compare what is great:
Tell me, tell't me alone, tell't in my ear.
Whisper't, that none but thou and I may hear;
She Is dumb, as conscious of the form The mouth of the hole is of a cunnoid
form or like the privities of a woman
obscene.
Upon the side of a fair hill that is green,
Its rim descending with the mountain's seen.
Driving off herds that graze around it far,
And sucking with dark lungs the pliant air.
While from the edge we prostrate view't, the sight
Of The vast abyss does each of us afright.
With fear and dread the bold spectator spies.
No bounds to stop the progress of his ey's.
And though the stony battlements assure.
Whos' ere leans on them, may have sight secure,
Yet still distrust our fearful minds invades,
And we retire from the dreadful shades.
But through the field we diligently search
For stones; thrown in, long is their silent march,
At lenght by strokes their Journies end they speak,
(If any end, they in their journies make.)
Cast in they sink, and in their sinking knock,
After long pauses, on a hidden Rock.
Thence tilting, ten times they the strokes repeat
In vain, not centered on a bottom yet.
And now so often deceived, we strive at length
Whole towers to throw in, had we but strength,
Whole buildings, roofs and all, vast mountains tall,
(Hid they been there, for 'twould have swallowed all)
But a vast weighty stone, such we could get,
We by main strength, force from its Native seat.
And rolling it along th'enclining land,
Upon the sacred brink, we let it stand.
Then this repeat. Thou God to shades below,
Prefect in chief of torments, see we go
Of our chance certain, and high seats of glee,
(if they say true are robbed in black like thee)
This torment add unto those many more
Thou have invented, for the damned in store.
In thy dominions if a soul thou have
Famed for rebellion, or for breach of trust,
Beneath this Chasme let it straight be put.
Say it be Simon; or Iscariot.
Or place the Giants in a trice you will see,
Bruised they the shadows, of a shade will be.
But O ye Soul's who shut up with them sweat
Known and beloved by us, make quick retrat,
And slight not our advice. This said the stone
We drop, whcih circled in thick mist is thrown
Against a Rock, the Cavern groans the while,
Loud sighs are vented from the shaken Pile.
From Rock to Rock, the sound goes downward still,
Less heard by us but the more heard by Hell,
The third and fourth percussion's nearer made,
With awful sound affright each listening shade.
In short against Avernus Rough with sharp and pointed Rocks,
craggy throat
At the eleventh stroke, it whispers out
Its journey only; what it is more you hear
After that blow, brought faintly to your ear,
Does but the Image of a sound appear.
Away the shades, swift as the winds do glide,
In vaults of Erebus strive to be hid,
In silence the mean while descends the Stone;
Through the infernal Spheres it post does run
And passes them in order one by one.
Into the confines of dread Dis it goes
And For the Limbus patrum has been empty long ago.
empty seats in Limbo overthrows.
From thence by intense Purgatory.
flames it moves in have,
And Souls red hot in Heaven to be placed
(Purge from their dross as are the Pipes by fire
Tobacco er'st had sullied) and the Limbo.
Sphere
Of Infants unregenerate it flies.
(Unconscious of its fault which tortured cries)
Thence sinking to the utmost Hell it goes
And center passes; where the wise suppose
Or Aristotle's Sect should top, and so
Ascending to the the other side does go.
Now the affrighted Ghosts turn back again
Freed from the object which had given them pain.
Amongst which number Sysiphus alone
Does the approach lament of such a Stone,
More busky and more weighty than his own
It Is said great Dudly to this Cave came down
In famed Eliza's Reigna a Peer well known.
He a poor Peasant, for a petty price
With Rope around his middle does entice,
And pole in hand, like to Sarissa tight,
And basket full of To try by the several strokes they made in their falling
down the depth of the hole.
Stones down to be let
And pendulous to hang in the midst of the Cave;
Thence casting stones intelligence to have
By listening, of the depth of this vast hole.
The trembling wretch descending with his pole
Puts by the Stones, that else might on him roll.
By their rebounds casts up a space immence,
Where every stroke does death to him dispense
Fearing the thread on which his life depends
Chance might cut off, e're Fate should give commands
After a hundred yards he had below
In The earth been drowned, far as the Rope would go
And long enough hung by it within the Cave;
To the Earl (who now impatient was to have
His answer) He Is drawn up, but whether fear
Immoderate distracted him, or 'twere
From the swift motion as the Rope might wreath,
Or Spectrums from his fear, or Hell beneath
Frighted the wretch, or the Souls citadel
Were stormed or taken by some Imp of Hell,
For certain 'twas he raved; this his wild eyes,
His paleness, trembling, all things verifies.
Where venting something none could understand,
Enthusiastic hints never to be scand,
He ceasing Dyed mad of a Frenzy.
dies after eight days were gone.
But the Earl informed, To wit to Hell.
how far the Cave went down
He trembling from it hasts, not willing now,
Nor yet this way, down to the shades to go.
From hence within a Vale that hidden lies;
A thousand paces off, a The ebbing and flowing well, Mirac.
Fount does rise.
From the low caverns of a grassie hill;
With double mouth it is waters gushing still.
Which since the admired flux of the greater Sea
Does by report in its small Channel play,
We thought it good (although the Sun made haste
And drove his Chariot quick into the West)
To stay a while, and happily so to see
When that the wonder of the Flux would be
With fame co-witnesses o'th rarity.
That which boils up with trembling waters bright
Of The two the bigger, chiefly worth our sight,
A font receives not equal unto those
Are made by art, but yet by much out goes
What Fountain head; ere from wild chance arose.
Thence flows, unless what does at bottom keep
Two Cubits broad, three long, one Cubit deep.
One when no more then is own it does contain,
But to it by the foreign flood does gain.
A mark is by the swelling waters made,
Which gives the stony brink a signal shade.
Which by its blackness to have ebbed of late
Discerning it uneasy seemed to wait
So long until the tide again came on.
So we our Horse heads turn for to be gone.
When we are called back by the gushing waters noise,
And see them plainly on the Stones to rise.
Now the full Fountains waters boil apace,
As when fierce fires we under Cauldrons place,
The water cannot rest that is above,
But shuns the mettle, and does volant prove.
When near the Font from the aforesaid head
A rivulet does suddenly proceed,
And pouring from above its streams deep in,
Helps the augmenting waters to attain
There wonted height, which got, decrease again
When straight the rivulet that with such force
Powered from above it is waters, stops its course.
And the dry Earth now thirsty grown for more
Drinks off the cups she had disgorg'd before.
Part of the Channel now dispersed does flow
Forth from the well, part under ground does go.
Small thefts of Moss from off the Stones were there,
Grass, Chaff, torn bits of paper, and such geer.
Or what it is else its shallow stream can bear,
That we fling in, returning it does come
Together with it, to earths hollow womb.
And now the humble Fount so low was grown
It scarce retained the waters were its own.
When as the tides return, again they swell,
Again to wonted Fevers trembling boil,
Increas't by foreign floods so far to gain
Their bounds, and The utmost high water point to which when they were come
they decreased again.
Tropic stations to attain,
Lading their shoars still with a fresh supply
So far, and then again they falling fly.
But the increasing The Sun going down.
shades forbid our stay
Which monstrous grown Gigantick forms betray.
Our journey we have on, but as we go,
We searching strive by every sign to know
From what hid cause, so great a strife should Spring.
For neither saltness, nor yet any thing.
That Is common to the Water of the Sea
Are in this Fountain ever found to be.
On the Moons influence it don't depend,
Nor does it at set times its floods extend,
(As does the Sea) unto these tides there is
No Rules from any Ephemerides.
What then should be the cause? in short it is this.
The water which from under ground does rise
And with its foreign stream fills up the Well,
Does not come thither brought by 'ts own Cannel,
And willingly another right invades.
But while the footsteps of the flood that leads
It follows, seeking through the womb of earth
For Fountains, whence its waters may have birth,
On subterraneous Caves its floods do fall,
With narrow vent, and entrances but small.
Hither as often as that the waters flow,
With swelling tides, and stop the vents below
With their swift currents, suddenly the air
Shut up within, does for the place prepare
Defense against the waters, and deny
Their entrance, having no where for to fly.
And as there is naught then air enclosed more strong,
It bears against the watery crowd that throng;
Then as thick troops through narrow portal strain.
The first stick at the threshold, the remain
In a condenced crowd before the gates
Make a full stand; part urges on their mates,
Part wandering seek out for some other way;
So the excluded waters at their stay
Impatient grown, and swelling, go astray;
Then roving, to this Font are slowly brought,
Hence it is with showers when the earth is fraught,
The fluxes happen ever and anon,
As now, three times they rise, three times go down;
With constant droughts but when the earth has been
Bu^nt monthly then the wonder scarce is seen.
Now out of sight days waggoner was gone,
And the Antipodes had shun upon.
The Sun burnt clouds but glimmer to the sight,
When at famed Buxton's hot bath we alight.
Unto St. Ann the Fountain sacred is:
With waters hot and cold its sources rise,
And in its Sulphur-veins there is medicine lies.
This cures the Palsied members of the Old.
And cherishes the Nerves grown stiff and cold.
Crutches the Lame unto its brink convey,
Returning the ungrates fling them away.
The Barren hither to be fruitful come,
And without help of Spouse, go pregnant home,
Into a Cistern square, the water flows;
And seldom higher than five foot it goes,
The prying gazer's view the Walls prevent,
To the R^in the Roof is an impediment.
One common Wall with open doors does join.
Baxten Well. Mirab. 6.
While therefore turfie fuel does prepare
Our supper, jointly we resolved are
Our wearied limbs in the warm bath to cheer.
Soon stripped, the clearer waters round us glide,
And our naked limbs, with Crystal covers hide,
Upon our face we swim, then backward try,
But fail. It Is known some others may outvy.
After an hours sport in the troubled flood,
Come out, dry sheets does our wet bodies shroud.
Then each again is clothed in's own array,
And the spread table speaks our suppers stay,
Night the mean time breaks forth from ery glade
And conqu'ress covers all with darksome shade,
Till in by Candlelight our meats conveyed.
Where a small bowl, but not whole baths of broth
At our request is placed to be supt off.
The Mutton taken from't apart is laid;
From the same Sheep a smoking loyn is had
Hot drawn from off the Spit, With a young fowl
From the demolished egg was lately stole.
And buttered Pease by Spoonfuls. But rich Wine
In vain we seek; Ale in black pots that shine,
Good nappy Ale we drink. Thus supt, afar
We with Tobacco drive off sleep and care.
Aurora's Chariot had not driven on
And by her march spoke the approaching Sun,
By the eclipse of Stars that now were gone,
When we arose from sleep, again repair
To the warm bath, and amply tinged are
Now double dip't in its all healing flood,
Then once again, we our wet bodies shroud
Now dewy grown within our beds, and so
After nine hours sleep arise and go.
One thing remained, but highly worth our view,
Pool's hole, a Care so called, and near us too.
Pool's hole. Mir^^. ^.
Pool was a famous thief, and as we are told
Equal to Cacus, and perchance as old.
Shrouded within this darksome hid retrieve
By spoils of those he robbed, he used to live,
And toward his den poor travelers deceive;
But murder he with thefts did introduce
Thus they, and thus the Author lay abstruce.
This to behold a skilful guide we take,
And Captain in our darksome journeys make.
To a green hill on foot then bend our way
From Buxton near a thousand paces lay,
At bottom of the Hill to the hollow ground
Stooping by a small vent a way is found;
More passable the further in you go.
At length we all with crablike gesture slow,
And light in hand, the passage do get through,
And with it gain an upright posture too,
A monstrous, horrid, shapeless den appears
Where the divided night, gives greater fears.
Now on the Court of the great Pool we look
Horrid, and rough with Rocks. The Ceiling struck
Shines with bright fiery sparks. We further yet
With mounted lights go on, and wary feet.
Vast, slippery, moist, and Stones to climb full hard
Loose, once to fall, now therefore to be feared,
Mountains and vallyes wild of the Stony Cave
We pass, with a blind River which each wave
With murmures flings, against the Rocks it meets
To th'top of a steep Mountain who does get
From the low River rising, may with sweat,
And wearied hands, and weari'd feet, mount on
(Bolder by far than we) the utmost Stone
Of this dark Cave; three stadiums distant from
The entrance, by which to it we did come.
This Cave by Gorgon with her snaky hair
You Would think was first possessed; so all things there
Turned into Stone for nothing does appear
That is not Rock. What from the ceiling high
Like hams of Bacon pendulous you spy,
Will scarce yield to the teeth; stone they are both
That is no Lion mounts his main so rough,
And sets as a fierce tenant of the dark den,
But a mere yellow Stone. That grave old Man
That leaning lies on his hard Rocky bed,
Himfelf may truly part of it be said.
Those Stars from the clear roof that shine so bright
Are naught but Stones which sparkle against the light.
The drop which hangs upon the pointed Stone
Is that so to? it is or will be one.
Took up between our fingers it is seen
To be nor Stone, nor Water, but between.
Of such a substance as a leavened Mass.
But on the Hasting from an aqueous substance to a stony one.
flying water as we gaze,
Our lights persuade us now grown toward decay,
To haste from the Caves labarinth away.
But turning first on the left hand, behold
The bedchamber of Pool the robber bold;
All of plain Stone, never watered with the dew,
Furnished with bed and chamber pot we view.
And thence returning, to the day get clear.
Laborious climbing and of falls the fear,
Our wearied joints had now bedewed with sweat,
Our creeping hands with the moist earth were wet.
When ready crowds at the Caves mouth attend
And waters mixed with flowers re-commend
Our hands to wash. Something indeed there is
Expected for these their civilties.
And justly too, were we washed never so clean,
Something of Dirtiness would still remain,
Unless by some rewards (although not great)
Their courtesies we should remunerate.
W'had seen now all the wonders of the Peak;
To Buxton we return, and dining quick,
Our horse are brought; and we through clouds conveyed
By Sheldon, (whilst two thousand pace are made)
And Ashford, with Shelmarton, petty towns,
To Chatsworth famed, where the swift Derwin runs.
THE END.
AD NOBILISSIMUM DOMINUM GULIELMUM Comitem Devoniae, etc. De Mirabilibus The
Peak.
Pecci.
CARMEN.
ALpibus Angliacis, ubi Pecci nomine, surgit,
Darbensis Regio, montes ad sidera tollens,
Foecundasque rigans, non uno flumine, valles,
Stat Chatsworth. Mirab. 1,
Chatsworth praeclara domus, tum mole superba,
Tum Domino, Magnis, celerem Derwin.
Deroentis ad undam.
Miranti similis portam praeterfluit Amnis,
Hic tacitus, saxis, infra supraque, sonorus.
At Mons terga domus rapidis defendit ab Euris,
Ostendens long exertis juga consita saxis,
Praesectoque die, producens tempora somni.
Summovet a tergo rupes gratissimus hortus,
Pinguis odoratis ubi tellus floribus halat;
Arbor ubi in mediis Prunetis in ipso horto, sylvas imitantibus.
silvis sibi libera visa,
Dat fructus injussa suos; ubi frondea tecta
Arboreis praebent invito frigorasole
Ambulationibus.
Porticibus, potioratuae ( Maro) tegmine fagi,
Ars ubi (dissimulans artem) simulavit (ineptos
Consocians ferro lapides guttaque peresos)
In forms Rupes art compositas.
scopulos, and frigida fontibus antra.
Libera nativis veniens a rupibus unda
Accedit positis, Plumbo quod in ea regione, terra effoditur.
patrio captiva met allo,
Et tellure latens, duplicem jaculatur in orbem,
Jussa, suum laticem per mill foramina caeca,
Et scopulum complexa tenacibus undique Tubulis plumbeis.
venis,
Jussa fugat misso subeuntes desuper imbre.
Hinc avecta creat sublimen marmore fontem,
Atque ingressa domum Promos conserva Cocosque
Ad juvat; in mediis surgitque penaltibus, alto
In fudens nitidam manibus de marmore lympham,
Et quamvis tubulis tantum effluat illa quaternis
Non tam Fons Athenis sacer, novem effluens fistulis.
Calliroe pulchre fluit Enneacrune.
Reject o paulum suvio, sese ingerit horti
Angulus Alterius, tecta alta a front videntis.
Disposita hic gemino collucent ordine Piscinae.
stagna,
Immersum tremulis undis quatientia solemn,
Queis magno numero salit and lascivus inerrat
Non intellecto conclusus carcere piscis.
Quam juvat hic, quoties piscatrix candida praedam
Abjicet illectam, morem observare puellis
Innatum, captare viros, and spernere captos!
Quam libet in mediis mirari fluctibus, alto
Aggere suspensos hortos! quae Caesare moles
Digna Cavendisia certe est in gente, pusillum
Foemineumque opus. At quota pars ea laudis Elizae
Salopicae? quae multa, and magna palatia struxit;
Magnas divitias; magnamque bonamque paravit
Famam; quae magnos sibi conciliavit amicos,
Ornavitque humiles; Multam, magnamque reliquit
Comites Devoniae, Novi-castri, Kingstonae, nepotes Comitissae Salopien^^s.
Prolem, qua regio late nunc usque beatur.
Quam dulce est, inter, circumque nitentia stagna
Insternete vias, aestiva semper, arena,
Discipulum memet naturae tradere rerum;
Aut Domino exiguum meditari carmine Hocipsum.
Munus,
Et multum Musis, describere rura, rogatis.
Commodiore loco non usquam habitare, nec usquam
Candidiore frui Musae censentur amico.
Hinc, ad tecta, solo surgente, ascendiur, Extra,
Augusta aspectu, sublimia, Regia; and intrae
Commoda, culta, capacia, splendida, ditia tecta.
At tu marmoreis quae sint descripta figuris
Ficta Poetarum, priscorum aut fact a virorum,
Ne cures, duro nec certans marmore Gypsum.
Ingenuos nec tu cupias numerare ministros,
Sed Dominum, mea Musa, colas, cui gente vetusta
Orto, dat titulos Devonia, Derbia Praefecturam militiae in agro Derbensi,
Curas.
Acrem judicio; constantem pectore; lautum,
Vtentemque opibus, luxu sine, and inter amicos.
Ille Chori vestri summum decus; ille benigna
Otia dat Musis; sed and illi Musa diserto
Ore loqui, atque animo secernere turpia honestis,
Tum Christianam Comitissam Devoniae.
Dominam spectes, alta de gente Brusorum
Magnanimo proavos spirantem pectore Reges.
Amborumque vide Sobolem, imprimisque Dominam Annam Cavendish,
Puellam
Dignam, qua caleant Superi, binosque Gulielmum nunc Comitem Devopiae cum Fatre
Carolo.
Puellos
Angelicos, casti communia pignora lecti.
Hos tu mireris, sobolemque and utrumque parentem;
Caetera quae referes miracula, sunto minoris.
Alti censenter septem miracula Pecci.
Aedes, Mons, Barathrum, binus Fons, Antraque bina.
Scilicet illae ipsae, quas jam memoravimus, Aedes
Ornatae, tot sunt inter miracula, primae,
Intra has, ne Reliquis orto sermon quibusdam
Est visum, promptis rerum perdiscere causas,
Et mihi (namque operae pretium est) ea visere mira.
Anni tempus erat quo tellus foenora solvit;
Et vitreum sectis absterserat altus aristis
Jam Phoebus rorem, cum tecto excedimus, Ipsi,
Duxque viae servusque (sed ille vicarius) unus.
Egressi auferimur portis, petimusque propinquam
Pilsley, dein Hassop salebroso tramite. Montem
Hinc celsum, acclivemque, gradu lento, and pede lasso
Scandit equus, summumque jugum mox calcat anhelus.
Conversi miramur aves jam repere segnes,
Atque humiles claro transfigi vertice nubes.
Chatsworth jam punctum, Deroen jam linea curva est.
Vix iter inceptum sequimur, cum levia montis
Aspicimus crebro lacerari vulnere terga
Lateque egesta Ordinatim, nam series fodinarum undo hauritur plumbum,
parallelae sunt, Anglice vocantur the Rakes.
liratim, albescere terra,
Est sublime solum, tenuique friabile gleba,
Quod ne quando sua possit subsidere mole,
Natura ingenito suffulcit provida saxo.
At saxum innumeris divisit in ordine rimis,
Ater opum Dominus. Cunct asque it a solis ab ortu,
Duxit in occasum, non ut sensisse calentem
Lampada Phoebaeam, sed and aspexisse putares.
Condidit his sulcis melioris cruda metalli
Semina, solari post perficienda calore,
Tutanda interera durae munimine rupis
Ditis avara manus frustra. Nam nec satis igne
Concoquit obliquo Sol Plumbi terrea frusta,
Nec custodit humus sibi credita. Viscera terrae
(Certus opum quacunque latent regione repostae,
Insidiator) homo, ferro pervadit and Nam saxum quo plumbi venae continentur,
ea est aliquando duritie quae non nisi igne vincitur.
igne,
Saxea plumbiferae rescindit tegmina venae
Exhauritque audax jam, paupertate jubente,
Tartarei praedo fiscum spoliare Tyranni.
Haud impune aliquando. Contigit pretereuntious nobis, e duobus, qui ruina
fove^ oppressi fuerant, unum extrahi, alterum quaeri.
Duos telluris in imo
Deprensos gremio, Mors occupat, atque profundo
Oppressos tegit, ipsi quod fodere, sepulcro.
Fovearum spiracula.
Spiramenta (tubis aegre admittentia Actis.
iniquis
Quos castigato detrudit inedia ventre)
Ligniculis intus Constringit, ut distineantur foveae latera,
vincit, venamque sequutas
Materie fossas sustentat, gnara pericli,
Atque experta, diu jam gens Quam ad opera damnaverat paupertas.
damnata metallis;
Vt non incautos scires periisse, sed Orco
Quaesitos. Terrae hic subducit fulcra caducae,
Expressasque animas, vicinis congregat umbris.
Corpora corporibus quaerunt. Sic credita saepe est
Emissa amissam monstrasse sagitta sagittam,
Ante pedes unum terra jacet ecce cadaver
Effossum; nostrique monet meminisse. Cadaver,
Marcida, iners, putris, nostrique simillima res est*
Alterum adhuc tectum tellure, Extrahi,
resurgere corpus
Expectat. Sedet egestae super aggere terrae
Turba supina, locis spectatum egressa propinquis;
Plorantesque duae mulieres. Altera sueta
Gaudia perdiderat; spem amiserat altera dulcem.
Alterius flammam, longus restrinxerat usus;
Alterius, spes effraenisque libido sciendi
Foverat ardentem. Plorant utraeque Maritum.
Illa quidem luget, luget magis altera sponsum.
Deploranto. Via qua coeptum est pergimus ire*
Jam pede mill quater passus numer amus equino.
Et toties socium spatiis pes quilibet aequis
Praeteriens, terram alterno percusserat ictu.
Anteit umbra pedes, monstratque brevissima, Umbra brevissima, ante pedes
projecta, arguit, and solemn meridianum, and nos ad Aquilonem conversos.
qua sta^
Titan part poli, and quam nos spectamus euntes.
Linquimus opidula hinc atque illinc plurima. Quorum
Postremum tantum Roman dicere Hope.
Spes est.
Caetera non referam impedientia nomina versum,
Per loca transversis long lateque sodinis
Plena, soloque cavo, and pleno mortalibus intus,
Ingredimur Supra capita agentium subtus in cuniculis.
superi; medio tonat ungula Campo
Festinantis equi; atque una, aut paulo amplius, hora,
Praecipitis ferimur subita ad declivia Montis.
Pronum erat hinc vicum subjectum intrare cadendo.
Sed nobis ambage viam and cauto pede tritam
Ire placet, primumque ad dextras Sole recepto,
Et mox conversis laevo descendere eodem,
Paulatim, and pedibus nosmet concredere nostris.
Conscensis hic rursus equis, sub Monte sinistro,
Intramus pagum qui summa in rupe locatum
Aspect are jubet, Castleton.
deducto nomine, Castrum.
Castrum non aliquo bellorum insigne labor;
Non magnum, non arcis opus spectabile; nostris
Impar tormentis, nec inexpugnabile priscis.
Antiquum tamen, and saxo super aedificatum,
Sustinet annorum, ventorum incommoda temnit.
Forsitan and Dominis sub plumbi-potentibus olim
Latronum potuit subitos arcere tumultus.
A Castro statim mons scissus, detumet ambas
In parts; velut inclinato Corpore nostro
In crura extantes deturgent utraque clunes.
In medio sinus est: atque erectissima utrinque
Rupes quae ingenti redituram pondere terram
Destinet, and tutis succedere ad intima praestat.
Jam ventum est (pudet effari) Orci cu'um, Ang. The Divils Arse. Mirab. 2.
Piutonis ad anum,
(Vt vocitant plerique) loci vocat incola, Peak's ars.
Nobile suspensis aperitur rupibus Antrum,
Q^^nu quam pertingunt radii solates.
Ignoto tibi Phoebe loco, sed segnibus Vrsis
Obverso, and reliquis mergi metuentibus astris.
In speciemque patet furni, vel qualiter Orci
Ora perhorrifico pinguntur hiantia rictu
Post Ite auditum, turbam sorbentis abactam.
Sublimes intramus equis. Tecta intus, and altos
Suspicimus cumulos detonsi manner a prati.
Sed Lacunar ingens.
coelum attoniti miramur saxeum, ut ingens
Sustineat montis nullo fulcimine pondus;
Laudamusque tuas aeterne Geometer arts.
Cernimus and denso colatam fornice lympham
Guttatim elabi, and solida tellure receptam,
Aequoream in patriam reditum jam nunc meditari;
Jam nunc exiguis properare canalibus, undas
Quaerentem soeias, and fortius ire parantem.
Jamque Amnes ipsis videor didicisse magistris,
Non fieri, salsum terra potante, liquorem
Littora adipsa maris, quasi celsis montibus ipse
Celsior Oceanus conclusam expelleret undam;
Sed mare Phoebaea tenuatum surgere flamma
In Caelum; actumque Eoliis err are ministris;
Mox Phoebo fallente algens, totaque recepta
Natura, in terras fletu descendere; and esse
Flumina collectas lachrymas. Placet ima cavernae
Vmbrosae, illata penetralia visere luce.
Descensos ab equis, antri virguncula civis
Praecedit, formosa satis, nimiumque puella;
Datque animos, gressusque regit jucunda Vox nautica hortatrix.
Celeustis.
Primumque ingressis Misto ex coelesti and lychnea.
confuso lumine sensim
Accedunt cantes utrinque diemque recurvis
Extinguunt sinubus, Tum demittentia sese
Arcto Nos, pene prostratos. Vetulae ridicula narratio.
quadrupedes admittunt fornice saxa.
Erecto rursum rursum mox corpore prono
Pergimus, alterna pecudes hominesque figura.
Donec transverso tandem prohibemur ab amne.
Amnem quem clausum fert sub tellure canalis
Hactenus, hic humili patitur spirare sub arcu;
Exitque inter dum non irrevocabilis unda.
Nunc speculatores propius, nunc longius arcens.
Huc nobis, ultra nulli licet ire, Nec est fas
Credere narranti vetulae de patre, quod olim
Lychnorum ingressus librali fasce, fluentum
Tunc Facilius tranavit quia minime altum, Ridiculum.
modicum tranavit, and ulteriora sequutus,
Tantum ivit, quantum licuit remeare Noctem timuit in spelunca tenebrosissima,
Ridiculum. Mam-Tor. Mirab. 3.
timenti
Incidere in noctem. Remeamus, and altius ante
Signatis, uda imprimimus vestigia arenis.
Exuimus noctem, diasque recepimus oras
Cum emersis, ante ora, poli mons aemulus alti
Tollitur, avulso praeceps ceu fragmine murus.
Defluere aeternum perhibent a vertice terram,
Nec tamen imminui montem. Mirabile dictu.
Constaret si certa fides. Sed acutus arena
Labente, agnoscens tumulus, tacito indicat auctu,
Continuum hunc fluxum primum caepisse ruina
Ingenii, aequatoque habiturum culmine finem.
Quemque vocant alii correpto nomine Mam-Tor
Rectius hunc Clivum videor mihi dicere Maim'd-Tor
Quod sonat Angligenis Clivus Mutilatus, and ipse
Mons, nomen magna Mutilatus part fatetur.
Progredimur, versi ad laevam, duo millia passum
Ad septam muris, dict amque, sine arbore, Sylvam,
Peccanam, Cervos nudis in montibus urit
Acris hyems, nulla tectos a frigore fronde;
Sicca aestas, nulla tectos a solibus umbra.
Saeva hominum, canibus sociis, lascivia multos,
Multos saeva necat varii inclementia coeli,
Et Fovea absorbet non magnam Eldenia partem,
Est ea terribilis scissae telluris hiatus,
Quem digne ut memorem veterum undique convoco frustra
Peak Forest. Elden Hole, Mirab. 4.
Concilium, nam tale nihil finxere Poetae
Tentandum tamen; and primum quam formam habet oris
Musa refer; formae simili componito. Magno
Nam potes exemplo parvis componere magna,
Dic tandem; dic summisso soli mihi, in aurem*
Obticet Est enim Foveaeos, forma cunnocides.
obscoenae sibi conscia virgo figurae.
In latere herbosi collis, pascentia circum
Distituens armenta solum, rimaque secundo
Monte patens, auras atro inbibit ore sequaces.
Quod procumbentes oculis de margin pronis
Cum inspicimus, vastum inspect antes terret inane,
Subjectumque horrens animus videt infinitum.
Et quamvis tutos jam securosque tueri
Continuo stantes hortentur marmore ripae,
Non animis eadem spondentibus, ora Barathro
Demimus, and diro regnatis Dite tenebris,
At lapides toto sparsos conquirimus agro,
Verbere qui tandem per longa silentia missi
Quis sit eis doceant (si quis sit) finis eundi.
Missisubsidunt lapides, feriuntque cadentes
Caecam (sed longo feriunt post tempore) rupem.
Inde docent decies repetitio verbere lapsi.
Deceptos decies necquicquam quaerere fundum.
Tum vero ardemus, si vis respondeat aequa.
Ingerere integras turres, and tect a (si adessent,
Et non angusto tellus nimis ore negaret)
Tota simul, totosque altos ibi perdere montes.
Quod licet, immani defixum pondere saxum,
Vi multa eruimus, prona and tellure volutum
Sistimus ad sacrum limen. Tum talia famur.
" Umbrarum praefecte Deus cruciatibus, Ecce,
" Securi nostrae sortis, certique supernae
" Jampridem sedis (ni nos tibi concolor author
" Fallat) tormentum jam inventis addimus unum.
" Pone sub hac rima, tibi siqua sit umbra rebellis,
" Insignilve fide violata. Subde Simonem,
" Aut Judam (Judam Iscarioten,) Subde Gigantes.
" Contriti fient Umbrarum protinus umbrae.
" At vos, O animae, quibus incaluere retentis
" Cognita amicorum, dilectaque corpora nobis,
" Ferte pedem retro monitae, and non temnite dicta.
Sic fati, lapidem demittimus. Ille per aur as
Stagnantes, densa mersus caligine fertur
In scopulum. Gemit horrendum percussa Caverna,
Collisaeque cient alte suspiria moles.
Excussum primo, scopulus mox excipit alter,
Audito sonitu nobis minus, at magis Orco,
Territat arrectis jam stantes auribus umbras
Tertius, atque minis quartus propioribus ictus.
Quid moror? undeno Exertis cautibus asperum.
dentatum guttur Averni
Verbere dum transit, se and tunc lapis ire susurrat.
Post id quicquid iners aer vix auribus adfert,
Non sonus est, sed imago soni. Vento ocyus umbrae
Diffugiunt, Erebique tegi sub fornice certant.
Interea infernas percurrit in ordinae Sphaeras,
Descendens tacit saxum. Confinia Ditis
Attingit, nam Limbus Patrum jamdudum vacuus.
vacuna evertitq, sedilia Patrum.
Inde per intensum festinans labitur Purgatorium.
ignem,
Candentesque animas (tubulorum more recoctas
Fictilium, quos, tramsmissa fuligine, pinguis
Infecit Peti fumus) coeloque locandas.
Infantumque ^on regeneratorum.
semelnatorum pervolat Limbum.
orbem.
(Inscius admissi poena luit poenas, non sensit at dam^i,
inscius, infans.)
Ultima tum subiens, infandaque Tartara, centrum
Transit (at haesurum promiserat Umbra Aristotelis.
Entelechia,
Credenda umbra tamen) fundumque ascendit adimum.
Et redeunt trepidi Manes residente favilla;
Quos inter timet, and fertunus Sysiphus aegre
Succesisse suo graviori pondere saxum.
Fertur ad hoc Antrum venisse Lecestrius heroes,
Dudleius, notus Comes is regnantis Elizae,
Ille inopem quendam parvo (sic eredimus) ae^e
Conductum and longo succinctum pectora fune,
Instructum conto, Pelleam imitante Sarissam,
quibus decidentibus exploraret foveae altitudinem.
Exploratores cophinoque ferente lapillos
Demitti, and media ussit pendere Caverna.
Inde jaci lapides, atque auribus era pronis
Captari, inde cavum propius scrutarier altum.
Descendens pavide miser, accedentia saxa
Nunc removet conto, nunc desiliente lapillo
Calculat immensum spatium, numer atque, quot ict us
Tot mortes; and fila timet pendentia vitae,
Ne quis lascivus secet, injussuque Sororum.
Postquam bis centum sub terram circiter ulnas
Mersus substiterat, funemq, tetenderat omnem,
Satque diu tenso de fune pependerat, Antro
Extrahitur, cupido Heroi responsa daturus.
Verum, sive metus mentem expugnaverat ingens;
Sive celer motus torti vertigine funis
Immodica, Solio Rationem excusserat alto;
Sive Erebi, sive ipsa sui jam spectra timoris
Pallida terruerant; sive arcem mentis abactae
Spiritus inferni possederat improbus Orci;
Haud dubie furit infoelix. Sic lumina torva,
Mutatusque color, pallor, tremor, omnia monstrant
Ergo ubi non cuiquam intellect a profuderat, and quae
Aequabat magnis quis ea loqui quorum nulla est sententia, commune est vatum,
insanientiumque,
sententia nulla Prophetis,
Conticuit, Manesque dies post octo Mortuus est a Phrenesi.
revisit.
At Comes audito quo Pertingit, scilicet ad Inferos.
pertinet usque Caverna,
Horruit, and (non hac, neque nunc subiturus) abivit.
Hinc centum passus decies numer amus, and ecce,
In valle occulta, radicibus exilit imis
Graminei Collis, gemino Fons aestuans, Mirab. 5.
Fons ore perennis.
Quem quoniam immensi mirandos aequoris aestus
Ludere in exigua fama affirmaverat unda,
Visum est (quantumvis Phoebo properante) morari
Paulisper, si forte aquulae miracula detur
Aspicere admotis, and famae testibus esse.
Quae vitreis ebullit aquis tremula unda, duarum
Major, splendidiorque and poscens sola videri,
Excipitur pu^eo, structis non aequiparando,
Sed qui fortuito quovis ornatior ortu est.
Inde soluta fluit, nisi quae fundo retinetur
Lata duos cubitos, tres longa, unumque profunda.
Vnum dico suo quando contenta liquore
Subsidet, at binos quando hospite tollitur undae.
Labra reclinatae signabat saxea ripae
Linea, quam latices ipsi fecere tumentes,
Subnigris saxis modo detumuisse reperti.
Ergo cessatos iterum expectare labores
Taedet, and improbius visum est. Discedere prorsu^
Admotis properamus equis. Jam jamque abeuntes
Concussis revocamur aquis. Liquidosque videmus
Attolli latices; sensimque irrepere saxis.
Jamque fere pleno saltabat fervida font
Lympha, velut rabidus cum subditur ignis ahen^,
Nescia stare loco, refugit saevum unda metallum*
Cum juxta fontem, condicto rivulus ortu
Erumpit subito, super infusoque liquore,
Praestat aquae solitos auctae contingere fines.
Quo perducta iterum decrescit, and illico rivi
De super immissirestinguitur impetus, and quae
Respuerat repetit sitiens sua pocula Tellus.
Distracti laticis pars effluit altera ripis
Fontis; pertuso infertur pars altera fundo.
Furtague muscosis erepta levissima saxis,
Graminaque and paleam and tenuis praesegmina chart^,
Sive aliud quicquam parva superabile lympha
Injicimus, rediens infert in viscera terrae,
Jamque humili fonti, proprius vix constitit humor,
Cum redeunt fluctus; Iterum ceu febre laborat
Vnde tremens; iterum aestuat; auctaque lymphis
Externis iterum quo provecta solebat decrescere.
tropicam contingere metam
Sufficit, accepto velans sua littora fluctu;
Atque iterum residet, Sed nos vetat Solis jam occidentis.
umbra morari,
Vmbra gigan^eas mentita Colossea formas,
Maturamus iter, sed quaerimus inter eundum,
Conamurque, omni collato discere signo,
Abdita quae tantum concivit causa tumultum.
Nam neque Salsedo, neque quid commune marinis,
His reperitur aquis; Phoebes nil imputat astro
Fons hic, temporibus nec tollitur (ut mare) certis,
Aestibus his nullam praefigit Ephemeris horam.
Ergo quid in causa est? Paucis sic accipe. Prodit
Quae tellure cava, fontique ill abitur unda
Advena, non istuc proprio delata canali
Pervenit, atque volens alienos occupat ortus,
Sed dum ductricis sequitur vestigia lymphae,
Longinquosque petit, per terrae viscera, fontes,
Intratin angustis subeunda meatibus antra.
Huc quoties humor tumefacta de fluit unda,
Praecipitique aditum comprendit flumine totum,
Protinus aura locum conclusatuetur, aquisque
Pernegat ingressum, nec habens quo cedere, pugnat,
Vtque est deprensa nihil obfirmatius aura,
Sustinet urgentes exili corpore lymphas,
Tum, conferta velut si portis irruat arctis
Turba, haerent, ipso defixi in limine, primi;
Quae sequitur stat pro foribus stipata caterva,
Parsque urget socios, alias dilabitur and pars
Quaesitura vias: Exclusus defluus humor
Intumet, impatiensque morae, expatiatur, and errans
Fertur in hunc fontem, lentarum impulsor aquarum.
Hinc fit post magnos guttis pluvialibus imbres
Transmissis, aestus fieri crebros, and in horas,
Fluctum (ut nunc) vicibus tolli, and subsidere ternis.
Sed post continuis tellurem ardoribus ustam,
Vix semel in toto cerni haec miracula mense.
Jam nostres fugiens visus, Auriga diei
Antipodas tota lustrabat Lampade; nobis
Languida succensae praebebant lumina nubes
Et simul ad celebrem tepidis deponimur undis
Buxtonam. Divae sacer est fons inclytus Annae:
Ambas miscet aquas calidae gelidaeque ministra
Tellus; sulphureisque effundit Pharmac a venis,
Haec resoluta senum confirmat membra trementum,
Et refovet nervos lotrix haec lympha gelatos.
Huc infirma regunt baculis vestigia claudi;
Ingrati referunt baculis vestigia spretis.
Huc, Matter fieri cupiens, accedit inanis,
Plenaque discedit, puto, nec veniente marito.
Excipitur, ferme quadrato font, serena
Nascens unda and quinque pedes vehit alta natantes.
Spectator muris, and tecto excluditur imber.
Hospitioque eadem gratissima balnea nostro
Buxton Well. Mirab. 6.
Conjungit foribus paries communis apertis.
Ergo placet, coquitur dum cespite coena cremato,
Defessos lymphis refovere tepentitbus artus.
Protinus exuti, nitidis illabimur undis,
Nudaque perspicuis velamus corpora lymphis.
Nunefacie prona namus; nunc nare supini
Tentamus. Indoctinare, aquam imbibimus.
Bibimus. Nec enim omnia possumus omnes.
Postquam vexatis per totam fluctibus horam
Lusimus; egressi siccis lodicibus udi
Induimur. Mox quisque suo vestimur amictu,
Vestitos stratis expect at coenula mensis.
Nox atra interea simul evolat omnibus antris.
Et victrix tenebris involverat omnia caecis,
Donec succensis infertur coena lucernis. Canal^.

Jam nobis lixae non integra balnea ovillae,
Sed modicum juris, Interrogatis, an apponi placeret.
consultis ponitur. Jus.
Ipsa
Tum caro ovilla cl^xa, jusculo e^tracta
conditis thermis educta, seorsim.
Atque ovis ejusdem fumans a cuspide ovillae assa^ae.
lumbus.
Et nuper rupto gallinae pullus. (...) hole. Mirab. 7.
filus ovo.
Pisaque quae nobis converrat cochlear uncta. Pisa

ditia cum frustra quaerantur pocula Bacchi,
Olla subridens bibitur cervisia nigra.
Coenati peto somnos arcessimus hausto.
Postera Phoebaeos ducens Aurora triumphos
Nondum vulgares Caelo dimoverat ignes,
Cum somno excusso tepidis immergimur undis
Rursus, and infieimur penitus medicante liquore
Jam dibaphi; atq iierum rorantia corpora lecti^
Reddimus, and nona de somno surgimus hora.
Vnica restabat, verum dignissima visu,
Haud procul hinc Spelunca Poli, sic dicta Caverna.
Insignis latro Polus, and, si credere famae
Debemus, furipar Caco, and forte coaevus.
Hac usus latebra consuevit vivere rapto;
Atque viatores spoliandos ducere in Antrum.
Verum and eisolenne fuit conjungere furtis
Caedem; Sic texit scelera authoremque Caverna.
Hanc inspecturi penitus, ductore perito
Caecarum assumpto ima sub tellure viarum,
Eximus, pedites collem petimusque virentem,
Distantem nostra vix passus, mill taberna.
Ipsas ad montis radices, concava tellus
Prostratis aditum pertusa foramine praebet
Exiguo, minus at praemissis invia pedibus.
plantis.
Omnes cancrino gressu, sumptaque lucerna
Quisque sua, tandem transmittimur, erigimurque
Antrum, horrendum, inform, ingens aperitur. Et atra
Divisa in parts nox dissilit atrior ambas.
Asperaque apparei Latronis, and horrida Saxis
Regia. Percussum rutilo micat igne lacunar.
Progredimur. Pedi busque admoto lumine cautis,
Saxa ingentia, roscida, lubrica, and ardua scansu,
Libera, corruitura semel, nunc ergo timenda,
Saxosaeque feros montes vallesque Cavernae
Transimus; fluviumque suas qui dissipat undas
Caecus in object as impingens murmr rupes.
Qui scandet rauco surgentem a flumine montem,
Ille licet sudetque, pedesque manusque fatiget,
Dissita ab introitu stadiis tribus, ultima opaci
Pertinget (multo nobis audacior) Antri.
Speluncam hanc credaes habitatam Gorgone primum
Anguicoma, and versa in rigidum sic omnia Saxum,
Nam lapis est, quodcunque vides. Laquearibus altis
Quae sicci tibi terga Suis pendere videntur,
Dentibus haud cedent. Durum sunt utraque saxum.
Non est ille Leo, Leo, quamvis erigat hirta
Colla juba, sedeatque Antri ferus incola caeci,
Sed fulvus lapis. Ille Senex qui rupibus aspris
Innisus recubat cubito, pars rupis and ipse est.
Quaeque lacunari scintillam Astra micante,
Sunt nitidi illata gemmantes luce lapilli:
Guttaque quae saxi mucro nunc pendet acuti,
Numquid and illa lapis? lapis illa vel est, vel erit mox
Admoti exceptam digito deprendimus esse
Nec lapidem, nec aquam, verum media inter utrumque
Natura, qualique tenax humore farina.
Detinet intentos dum transfugiens a natura aquea ad saxeam.
transfuga lympha, lucernae,
Curtae perplexa suadent exire Caverna.
Sed prius ad laevam remeantes, undiq, saxo
Obductum plano, Furis, nulloque madentem
Rore Poli thalamum, lecti, lasanique capacem,
Inspicimus. Superis tum demum reddimur oris.
Jam tepido fessos sudore rigaverat artus,
Scandendique gravis labor, and formido cadendi.
Reptantumque manus obleverat humida tellus.
Verum ante ora speeus turba officiosa, lavandis
Praebebat manibus permistam floribus undam.
Scilicet exigitur tacit pro munere nummus.
Recte. Namque haerent sordes ut cunque lavemur
Ni (quamquam levibus) referatur gratia donis.
Omnia jam Pecci Miracula vidimus Alti,
Buxtonamque iterum perlatis, and cito pransis
Adducuntur equi, nos qui inter nubila vectos,
Solliciteque december numerantes millia passum,
Per non insignes Chelmarton, Sheldon, and Ashford,
Ad Chatsworth referunt celerem Deroentis ad undam.
FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1. GReek Testament, Printed by Jo. Redmayn oct.

2. The complete Vineyard, or the most excellent way for the planting of Vines,
by William Hughes, in oct.

3. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Authore F. Clerk, oct.

4. A description of Candia in its Ancient and modern estate, with an account
of the siege and surrender to the Turks, oct. Price 1s.

5. The deaf and dumb man's discourse, being a discourse of such as are born
deaf and dumb, showing how they express the sentiments of their minds, together
with an account of the rationality of Beasts, particularly of the Elephant,
oct. Price 1s.

6. Des Carts the Philosopher's life, oct. Price 1s.

7. Gees, steps to the Temple, Twenty fours.

8. The Christian pattern or imitation of Christ. written by Thomas of Kempis,
Twenty fours.

9. An answer to Mr. Furguson's doctrine about Christ's Justification and
Sanctification, together with an account of the extent of Christ's death, by J.
Knowls, oct. Price 1s. 6d.

10. De Mirabilibus Pecci, Carmen, Autho. Tho. Hobs, quar.

11. Sir Henry Blunt's Voyage into the Levant, Twelves. Price 1s.

12. Complete measurer, or a new and exact way of Measuration by Tho. Hammond
oct. Price 1s.

13. Mr. Hobs. Rosetum Geometricum, quar. Pr 3s.

14. Carpenters Rule made easy by Mr. Darling, twelves.

15. The flower-Garden enlarged, showing how to order and increase all manner
of flowers, whether by layers, slips, off-sets, cuttings, seeds, etc. also how
to draw a Horizontal Dyal in a Garden, with a Treatise of all Roots, Plants,
Trees, Shrubs, Fruits, Herbs, etc in the Kings plantations, twelves, by William
Hughes.

16. The Elegant Poems of Dr. Richard Corbet, Dean of Christ Church in Oxford
after Bp. of Norwi^h, twelves.

17. Boccalin's advirtisements from Parnassus, Fol.

18. Ogilby's Virgil, English with Notes and Cuts, oct.

19. Brownlow's reports complete in 2 parts, quar.

20. The Court of Curiosity, being a very delightful and pleasant fortune-book,
an excellent and learned Treatise of Dreams, and an ingenious discourse of
Physiognomy: written in French, now Englished the second edition, improved,
twelves, Price 2s.

21. Lux mathematica, Author Tho. Hobs.

22. Principia and problemata aliquot Geometrica, ante desparata, etc. Author
Tho. Hobs. quar.

23. The American Physician treating of all the flowers, roots, Plants, and
Herbs that grow in his Majesty's American plantations by William Hughes,
twelves.

24. Lucius Florus translated into English, oct.

25. Caesar's commentaries Englished by Mr. Edmonds with notes, fol.

26. Wingates Clerk's tutor in writing and Arithmetic, oct.

27. The Judges Resolution concerning the several statutes of Bankrupts, oct.

28. Mary Magdalens tears wiped off.

29. Bishop Sparrow's Rationale on the Common Prayer, twelves.

30. Clerks Lives of the fathers, Schoolmen, Ancient and Modern Divines, fol.

31 Grotius's Catechism, Greek, Latin and English* with a praxis to the Greek,
oct.

32. The great Law of Nature about self-preservation vindicated against the
abuses of Mr. Hobs in his Leviathan, twelves.

33. Calliopes Cabbinet opened, wherein all Gentlemen may be informed how to
order themselves for all funerals, feasts, and Heroic meetings, to know all
degrees of Honor, and how all persons of all degrees are to take place, with a
dictionary of all the Terms in Heraldry.

34. A new collection of Songs and Poems, written by several Wits now living,
oct.

35. A discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, the Native Country of her Royal
Highness the Duchess of York, quar.

36. Br^vis Demonstratio, proving the truth and excellency of the Christian
Religion by Reason, recommended to all Rational men by several Eminent Divines
in London. twelves.

37. Walton's Lives, of four Eminent men, oct.

38. Nomenclatura, Greek, Latin, and English oct.

39. The Apopthegmes, or witty sentences of Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor
of England, twelves.

40. Parthenissa, a Romance written by the Earl of Orrorey, fol.

41. Cassandra, a Romance, fol.

42. The Primitive institution, or a seasonable discourse of Catechizing,
wherein is showed the antiquity, benefits and necessity thereof, together with
its suitableness to heal the present distempers of the Church by Lancellot
Addison* D. D.

43. The present State of the Jews, wherein is contained an exact account of
all their present customs, secular and religious, to which is annexed a
discourse of the Misna, Talmud, and Gemara, by Lancellot Addison, D. D. twelves.

44. Homer's works, translated out of Greek into English by Tho. Hobs, twelves.

45. The Golden Rule of Arithmetic made easy oct.

46. A supplement or third Volum of Mr. Hobs his works. quar.

47. Seventy eight Characters, oct.

48. The Grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness, quar.

49. Camera Regis, or a short view of London containing the antiquity, Frame,
Walls, River, Bridge Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Customs,
Franchises, etc. of the said City, oct.

50. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a man drowned in a pit, oct.

51. Mr. Howel's Visitation sermon, quar.

52. The Historians Guide in two parts, containing the most remarkable passages
done in England for seventy six years last past, oct.

53. The circumcision of the Great Turks son, and the Ceremony of the Marriage
of his Daughter.

54. Naked truth or the intrigues of amorous Fops, oct.

55. Kitchins Court Leet and Court Baron, showing the power, nature, practice
and jurisdiction of these and other Courts, oct.

56. Scarron's Comical Romance, or a facetious History of a Company of Stage
Players, interwoven with diverse choice Novels, rare adventrues, and amourous
intrigues, written in French by the famous and witty Monsieur Scarron now done
into English, by J B. Gent, fol.

57. A Letter about liberty and necessity, written by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury,
with observations upon it, by Dr. Benjamin Laney late Bishop of Ely, twelves.

58. A Modest Plea for the Clergy of the Church of England, wherein is briefly
considered the Original antiquity, necessity, together with the occasions they
are so slighted and contemned, oct.

59. Astrological Judgment, and practice of physic deduced from the position
of the Heavens, at the decumbiture of the sick person, being the thirty years
practice of Mr. Richard Saunders, oct.

60. A treatise of Wool and Cattle, showing how far they raise or abate value
of lands in England quar.

61. A discourse whether (...) may be lawful to take

Use for money; written by Sir Robert Filmer, and published by Sir Roger
Twisden, twelves, printed this year, 1678.

PLAYS.
1. The white Devil or Vittoria Corombona. 2. The old Troop or Monsieur Raggou.
3. Catalines conspiracy. 4. Amorous gallant or Love and fashion. 5. The mock
duellist or French Vallet. 6. Wrangling Lovers or the Invisible Mistress. 7. Tom
Essence or the Modish Wife, quar. 8. French Conjurer. 9. Wits led by the Nose.
10. The Rival Kings. 11. The constant Nymph or Rambling shepherd.
An Advertisement.
There is Printing an excellent Piece of Natural Philosophy in English, never
before Printed, written by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, who is yet living.

FINIS.

