Non est postestas Super terram quae Comparetur ei Job.41.24.

LEVIATHAN Or THE MATTER, FORM and POWER of a COMMONWEALTH ECCLESIASTICAL and
CIVIL.

By THOMAS HOBBES of MALMESBURY.

London Printed for Andrew Crook 1651



LEVIATHAN, OR The Matter, Form, and Power OF A COMMONWEALTH ECCLESIASTICAL
AND CIVIL.

By THOMAS HOBBES of Malmesbury.

LONDON, Printed for ANDREW CROOK, at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1651.

FIDE ET FORTITUDINE.
The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron
Capell of Hadham: 1701.



TO MY MOST HONORED FRIEND Mr FRANCIS GODOLPHIN of Godolphin.
Honored Sir,
YOur most worthy Brother Mr Sidney Godolphin, when he lived, was pleased to
think my studies something, and otherwise to oblige me, as you know, with real
testimonies of his good opinion, great in themselves, and the greater for the
worthiness of his person. For there is not any virtue that disposes a man,
either to the service of God, or to the service of his Country, to Civil
Society, or private Friendship, that did not manifestly appear in his
conversation, not as acquired by necessity, or affected upon occasion, but
inhaerent, and shining in a generous constitution of his nature. Therefore in
honor and gratitude to him, and with devotion to your self, I humbly Dedicate
unto you this my discourse of Commonwealth. I know not how the world will
receive it, nor how it may reflect on those that shall seem to favor it. For
in a way beset with those that contend, on one side for too great Liberty, and
on the other side for too much Authority, it is hard to pass between the points
of both unwounded. But yet, me thinks, the endeavor to advance the Civil
Power, should not be by the Civil Power condemned; nor private men, by
reprehending it, declare they think that Power too great. Besides, I speak not
of the men, but (in the Abstract) of the Seat of Power, (like to those simple
and unpartiall creatures in the Roman Capitol, that with their noise defended
those within it, not because they were they, but there,) offending none, I
think, but those without, or such within (if there be any such) as favor them.
That which perhaps may most offend, are certain Texts of Holy Scripture,
alleged by me to other purpose than ordinarily they use to be by others. But I
have done it with due submission, and also (in order to my Subject)
necessarily; for they are the Outworks of the Enemy, from whence they impugn
the Civil Power. If notwithstanding this, you find my labor generally
decryed, you may be pleased to excuse your self, and say I am a man that love
my own opinions, and think all true I say, that I honored your Brother, and
honor you, and have presumed on that, to assume the Title (without your
knowledge) of being, as I am,

SIR, Your most humble, and most obedient servant, THO. HOBBES,
Paris. April 15/25. 1651.
The Contents of the Chapters.
The first part, Of MAN.
Chap. Introduction. Page. 1 Chap. 1. Of Sense. Page. 3 Chap. 2. Of
Imagination. Page. 4 Chap. 3. Of the Consequence or Train of Imaginations.
Page. 8 Chap. 4. Of Speech. Page. 12 Chap. 5. Of Reason and Science. Page. 18
Chap. 6. Of the interior Beginnings of Voluntary Motions, commonly called the
Passions; And the Speeches by which they are expressed. Page. 23 Chap. 7. Of
the Ends or Resolutions of Discourse. Page. 30 Chap. 8. Of the Virtues,
commonly called Intellectual, and their contrary Defects. Page. 32 Chap. 9. Of
the several Subjects of Knowledge. Page. 40 Chap. 10. Of Power, Worth,
Dignity, Honor, and Worthiness. Page. 41 Chap. 11. Of the Difference of
Manners. Page. 47 Chap. 12. Of Religion. Page. 52 Chap. 13. Of the Natural
Condition of Mankind as concerning their Felicity and Misery. Page. 60 Chap.
14. Of the first and second Natural Laws, and of Contract. Page. 64 Chap. 15.
Of other Laws of Nature. Page. 71 Chap. 16. Of Persons, Authors, and things
Personated. Page. 80
The second Part, Of COMMONWEALTH.
Chap. 17. Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a Commonwealth. Page.
85 Chap. 18. Of the Rights of Sovereigns by Institution. Page. 88 Chap. 19. Of
several Kinds of Commonwealth by Institution; and of Succession to the
Sovereign Power. Page. 94 Chap. 20. Of Dominion Paternall, and Despoticall.
Page. 101 Chap. 21. Of the Liberty of Subjects. Page. 107 Chap. 22. Of Systemes
Subject, Political, and Private. Page. 115 Chap. 23. Of the Public Ministers
of Sovereign Power. Page. 123 Chap. 24. Of the Nutrition, and Procreation of a
Commonwealth. Page. 127 Chap. 25. Of Counsel. Page. 131 Chap. 26. Of Civil
Laws. Page. 136 Chap. 27. Of Crimes, Excuses, and Extenuations. Page. 151
Chap. 28. Of Punishments, and Rewards. Page. 161 Chap. 29. Of those things that
Weaken, or tend to the Dissolution of a Commonwealth. Page. 167 Chap. 30. Of
the Office of the Sovereign Representative. Page. 175 Chap. 31. Of the Kingdom
of God by Nature. Page. 186
The third Part. Of A CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH.
Chap. 32. Of the Principles of Christian Politiques. Page. 195 Chap. 33. Of
the Number, Antiquity, Scope, Authority, and Interpreters of the Books of Holy
Scripture. Page. 199 Chap. 34. Of the signification, of Spirit, Angel, and
Inspiration in the Books of Holy Scripture. Page. 207 Chap. 35. Of the
signification in Scripture of the Kingdom of God, of Holy, Sacred, and
Sacrament. Page. 216 Chap. 36. Of the Word of God, and of Prophets. Page. 222
Chap. 37. Of Miracles, and their use. Page. 233 Chap. 38. Of the signification
in Scripture of Eternal life, Hell, Salvation, the World to come, and
Redemption. Page. 238 Chap. 39. Of the Signification in Scripture of the word
Church. Page. 247 Chap. 40. Of the Rights of the Kingdom of God, in Abraham,
Moses, the High Priests, and the Kings of Judah. Page. 249 Chap. 41. Of the
Office of our Blessed Savior. Page. 261 Chap. 42. Of Power Ecclesiastical.
Page. 267 Chap. 43. Of what is Necessary for a man's Reception into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Page. 321
The fourth Part. Of THE KINGDOM OF DARKNESS.
Chap. 44. Of Spiritual Darkness from Misinterpretation of Scripture. Page.
333 Chap. 45. Of Daemonology, and other Relics of the Religion of the
Gentiles. Page. 352 Chap. 46. Of Darkness from Vain Philosophy, and Fabulous
Traditions. Page. 367 Chap. 47. Of the Benefit proceeding from such Darkness;
and to whom it accreweth. Page. 381 A Review and Conclusion. Page. 389
Errata.
PAge 48. In the Margin, for love Praise, r^d love of Praise. p. 75. l. 5. for
signied, r. signified. p. 88. l. 1. for perform, r. form. l. 35. for
Sovereign, r. the Sovereign. p. 94. l. 14. for lands, r. hands. p. 100. l. 28.
for in, r. in his. p. 102. l. 46. for in, r. is. p. 105. in the margin, for
ver. 10. r. ver. 19. etc. p. 116. l. 46. for are involved, r. are not involved.
p. 120. l. 42. for Those Bodies, r. These Bodies. p. 137. ^. a. for in
general. r. in general,. p. 139. l. 36. for were, r. where. p. 166. l. 18.
for benefit. r. benefits. p. 200. l. 48. dele also. l. 49. for delivered, r.
deliver. p. 203. l. 35. for other, r. higher. p. 204. l. 15. for and left, r.
if left. l. 39. for write, r. writ. p. 206. l. 19. for of the, r. over the. p.
234. l. 1. for but of, r. but by mediation of. l. 15. dele and. l. 38. for
putting, r. pulling. p. 262. l. 19. for tisme, r. Baptism. p. 268. l. 48. for
that the, r. that. p. 271. l. 1. for observe, r. obey. l. 4. for contrary the,
r. contrary to the. p. 272. l. 36. for our Saviors of life, r. of our Saviors
life. p. 275. l. 18. for if shall, r. if he shall. l. 30. for haven, r. heaven.
l. 45. for of Church, r. of the Church. p. 276. l. 38. dele inter. l. 46. dele
are. p. 285. l. 11. for he had, r. he has. p. 287. l. 10. dele of. p. 298. l.
36. for to ay, r. to Lay. p. 361. l. 36. for him, r. them.

THE INTRODUCTION.
NATURE (the Art whereby God has made and governes the World) is by the Art of
man, as in many other things, so in this also imitated, that it can make an
Artificial Animal. For seeing life is but a motion of Limbs, the beginning
whereof is in some principal part within; why may we not say, that all
Automata (Engines that move themselves by springs and wheels as does a watch)
have an artificial life? For what is the Heart, but a Spring; and the Nerves,
but so many Str^gs; and the ^oynts, but so many Wheels, giving motion to the
whole Body, such as was intended by the Artificer? Art goes yet further,
imitating that Rational and most excellent work of Nature, Man. For by Art is
created that great LEVIATHAN called a COMMONWEALTH, or STATE, (in latin
CIVITAS) which is but an Artificial Man; though of greater stature and
strength than the Natural, for whose protection and defense it was intended;
and in which, the Sovereignty is an Artificial Soul, as giving life and motion
to the whole body; The Magistrates, and other Officers of Judicature and
Execution, artificial Joints; Reward and Punishment (by which fastened to the
seat of the Sovereignty, every joint and member is moved to perform his duty)
are the Nerves, that do the same in the Body Natural; The Wealth and Riches of
all the particular members, are the Strength; Salus Populi (the peoples safety)
its Business; Counselors, by whom all things needful for it to know, are
suggested unto it, are the Memory; Equity and Laws, an artificial Reason and
Will; Concord, Health; Sedition, Sickness; and Civil war, Death. Lastly, the
Pa^ts and Covenants, by which the parts of this Body Politic were at first
made, set together, and united, resemble that Fiat, or the Let us make man,
pronounced by God in the Creation.

To describe the Nature of this Artificial man, I will consider

First, the Matter thereof, and the Artificer; both which is Man. Secondly,
How, and by what Covenants it is made; what are the Rights and just Power or
Authority of a Sovereign; and what it is that preserves and dissolveth it.
Thirdly, what is a Christian Commonwealth. Lastly, what is the Kingdom of
Darkness.
Concerning the first, there is a saying much usurped of late,. That Wisdom
is acquired, not by reading of Books, but of Men. Consequently whereunto, those
persons, that for the most part can give no other proof of being wise, take
great delight to show what they think they have read in men, by uncharitable
censures of one another behind their backs. But there is another saying not of
late understood, by which they might learn truly to read one another, if they
would take the pains; and that is, Nos^e teipsum, Read thy self: which was not
meant, as it is now used, to countenance, either the barbarous state of men in
power, toward their inferiors; or to encourage men of low degree, to a saucy
behavior toward their betters; But to teach us, that for the similitude of
the thoughts, and Passions of one man, to the thoughts, and Passions of
another, whosoever looks into himself, and considers what he does, when he
does think, opine, reason, hope, fear, etc, and upon what grounds; he shall
thereby read and know, what are the thoughts, and Passions of all other men,
upon the like occasions. I say the similitude of Passions, which are the same
in all men, desire, fear, hope, etc; not the similitude of the objects of the
Passions, which are the things desired, feared, hoped, etc: for these the
constitution individual, and particular education do so vary, and they are so
easy to be kept from our knowledge, that the characters of man's heart, blotted
and confounded as they are, with dissembling, lying, counterfeiting, and
erroneous doctrines, are legible only to (...) that (...) hearts. And though
by men's actions we do discover their design sometimes; yet to do it without
comparing them with our own, and distinguishing all circumstances, by which the
case may come to be altered, is to decypher without a key, and be for the most
pa^ deceived, by too much trust, or by too much diffidence; as he that reads,
is himself a good or evil man.

But let one man read another by his actions never so perfectly, it serves him
only with his acquaintance, which are but few. He that is to govern a whole
Nation, must read in himself, not this, or that particular man; but Mankind:
which though it be hard to do, harder than to learn any Language, or Science;
yet, when I shall have set down my own reading orderly, and perspicuously, the
pains left another, will be only to consider, if he also find not the same in
himself. For this kind of Doctrine, admits no other Demonstration.

OF MAN.
CHAP. I. Of SENSE.
COncerning the Thoughts of man, I will consider them first Singly, and
afterward in Train, or dependence upon one another. Singly, they are every
one a Representation or Appearance, of some quality, or other Accident of a body
without us; which is commonly called an Object. Which Object works on the
Eyes, Ears, and other parts of man's body; and by diversity of working,
produces diversity of Apparences.

The Original of them all, is that which we call SENSE; (For there is no
conception in a man's mind, which has not at first, totally, or by parts, been
begotten upon the organs of Sense.) The rest are derived from that original.

To know the natural cause of Sense, is not very necessary to the business now
in hand; and I have elsewhere written of the same at large. Nevertheless, to
fill each part of my present method, I will briefly deliver the same in this
place.

The cause of Sense, is the External Body, or Object, which presses the organ
proper to each Sense, either immediately, as in the Taste and Touch; or
mediately, as in Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling: which pressure, by the
mediation of Nerves, and other strings, and membranes of the body, continued
inwards to the Brain, and Heart, causes there a resistance, or
counter-pressure, or endeavor of the heart, to deliver it self: which
endeavor because Outward, seems to be some matter without. And this seeming,
or fancy, is that which men call Sense; and consists, as to the Eye, in a
Light, or Color figured; To the Ear, in a Sound; To the Nostrill, in an
Odor; To the Tongue and Palate, in a Savor; And to the rest of the body, in
Heat, Cold, Hardness, Softness, and such other qualities, as we discern by
Feeling. All which qualities called Sensible, are in the object that causes
them, but so many several motions of the matter, by which it presses our
organs diversely. Neither in us that are pressed, are they any thing else, but
diverse motions; (for motion, produces nothing but motion.) But their appearance
to us is Fancy, the same waking, that dreaming. And as pressing, rubbing, or
striking the Eye, makes us fancy a light; and pressing the Ear, produces a
dinne; so do the bodies also we see, or hear, produce the same by their strong,
though unobserved action. For if those Colors, and Sounds, were in the Bodies,
or Objects that cause them, they could not be severed from them, as by
glasses, and in Echoes by reflection, we see they are; where we know the
thing we see, is in one place; the appearance, in another. And though at some
certain distance, the real, and very object seem inv^sted with ^he fancy it
beg^ts i^ us; Yet still the object is one thing* the image or fancy is another.
So that Sense in all cases, is nothing else but original fancy, caused (as I
have said) by the pressure, that is, by the motion, of external things upon
our Eyes, Ears, and other organs thereunto ordained.

But the Philosophy-schooles, through all the Universities of Christendom,
grounded upon certain Texts of Aristotle, teach another doctrine; and say, For
the cause of Vision, that the thing seen, sends forth on every side a visible
species (in English) a vi^ble (...), apparition, or aspect, or a being seen;
the receiving whereof into the Eye, is Seeing. And for the cause of Hearing,
that the thing heard, sends forth an A^dible species, that is, (...) Audible
aspe^t, or Audible being seen; which entering at the Ear, makes Hearing. Nay
for the ca^se of Understanding also, they say the thing Understood sends
forth intelligible species, that is, an intelligible being seen; which coming
into the Understanding, makes us Understand. I say not this, as disapproving
the use of Universities: but because I am to speak hereafter of their office in
a Commonwealth, I must let you see on all occasions by the way, what things
would be amended in them; amongst which the frequency of insignificant Speech
is one.

CHAP. II. Of IMAGINATION.
THat when a thing lies still, unless somewhat else stir it, it will lie
still for ever, is a truth that no man doubts of. But that when a thing is in
motion, it will eternally be in motion, unless somewhat else stay it, though the
reason be the same, (namely, that nothing can change it self,) is not so
easily assented to. For men measure, not only other men, but all other things,
by themselves: and because they find themselves subject after motion to pain,
and lassitude, think every thing else grows weary of motion, and seeks repose
of its own accord; little considering, whether it be not some other motion,
wherein that desire of rest they find in themselves, consists. From hence it
is, that the Schools say, Heavy bodies fall downwards, out of an appetite to
rest, and to conserve their nature in that place which is most proper for them;
ascribing appetite, and Knowledge of what is good for their conservation,
(which is more than man has) to things inanimate, absurdly.

When a Body is once in motion, it moves (unless something else hinder it)
eternally; and whatsoever hinders it, cannot in an instant, but in time, and
by degrees quite extinguish it: And as we see in the water, though the wind
cease, the waves give not over rolling for a long time after; so also it
happens in that motion, which is made in the internal parts of a man, then,
when he Sees, Dreams, etc. For after the object is removed, or the eye shut,
we still retain an image of the thing seen, though more obscure than when we
see it. And this is it, the Latins call Imagination, from the image made in
seeing; and apply the same, though improperly, to all the other senses. But the
Greeks call it Fancy; which signifies appearance, and is as proper to one sense,
as to another. IMAGINATION therefore is nothing but decaying sense; and is
found in men, and many other living Creatures, as well sleeping, as waking.

The decay of Sense in men waking, is not the decay of the motion made in
sense; but an obscuring of it, in such manner, as the light of the Sun
obscureth the light of the Stars; which sta^s do no less exercise their
virtue by which they are visible, in the day, than in the night. But because
amongst many strokes, which our eyes, ears, and other organs receive from
external bodies, the predominant only is sensible; therefore the light of the
Sun being predominant, we are not affected with the action of the stars. And
any object being removed from our eyes, though the impression it made in us
remain; yet other objects more present succeeding, and working on us, the
Imagination of the past is obscured, and made weak; as the voice of a man is in
the noise of the day. From whence it follows, that the longer the time is,
after the sight, or Sense of any object, the weaker is the Imagination. For the
continual change of man's body, destroys in time the parts which in sense were
moved: So that distance of time, and of place, has one and the same effect in
us. For as at a great distance of place, that which we look at, appears dim,
and without distinction of the smaller parts; and as Voices grow weak, and
inarticulate: so also after great distance of time, our imagination of the Past
is weak; and we lose (for example) of Cities we have seen, many particular
Streets; and of Actions, many particular Circumstances. This decaying sense,
when we would express the thing it self, (I mean fancy it self,) we call
Imagination; as I said before: But when we would express the decay, and
signify that the Sense is fading, old, and past, it is called Memory. So that
Imagination and Memory, are but one Memory.
thing, which for diverse considerations ^ath diverse names.

Much memory, or memory of many things, is called Experience. Again,
Imagination being only of those things which have been formerly perceived by
Sense, either all at once, or by parts at several times; The former, (which is
the imagining the whole object, as it was presented to the sense) is simple
Imagination; as when one imagines a man, or horse, which he has seen before.
The other is Compounded; as when from the sight of a man at one time, and of a
horse at another, we conceive in our mind a Centaure. So when a man compoundeth
the image of his own person, with the image of the actions of an other man; as
when a man imagins himself a Her^s, or an Alexander, (which happens often to
them that are much taken with reading of Romants) it is a compound imagination,
and properly but a Fiction of the mind. There be also other Imaginations that
rise in men, (though waking) from the great impression made in sense: As from
gazing upon the Sun, the impression leaves an image of the Sun before our eyes
a long time after; and from being long and vehemently attent upon Geometrical
Figures, a man shall in the dark, (though awake) have the Images of Lines, and
Angles before his eyes: which kind of Fancy has no particular name; as being a
thing that does not commonly fall into men's discourse.

The imaginations of them that sleep, are those we call Dreams. Dreams.
And these also (as all other Imaginations) have been before, either totally,
or by parcells in the Sense. And because in sense, the Brain, and Nerves, which
are the necessary Organs of sense, are so benumbed in sleep, as not easily to
be moved by the action of External Objects, there can happen in sleep, no
Imagination; and therefore no Dream, but what proceeds from the agitation of
the inward parts of man's body; which inward parts, for the connection they have
with the Brayn, and other Organs, when they be distempered, do keep the same in
motion; whereby the Imaginations there formerly made, appear as if a man were
waking; saving that the Organs of Sense being now benumbed, so as there is no
new object, which can master and obseure them with a more vigorous impression,
a Dream must needs be more clear, in this silence of sense, than are our
waking thoughts. And hence it comes to pass, that it is a hard matter, and by
many thought impossible to distinguish exactly between Sense and Dreaming. For
my part, when I consider, that in Dreams, I do not often, nor constantly think
of the same Persons, Places, Objects, and Actions that I do waking; nor
remember so long a train of coherent thoughts, Dreaming, as at other times;
And because waking I often observe the absurdity of Dreams, but never dream of
the absurdities of my waking Thoughts; I am well satisfied, that being awake, I
know I dream not; though when I dream, I think my self awake.

And seeing dreams are caused by the distemper of some of the inward parts of
the Body; diverse distempers must needs cause different Dreams. And hence it is,
that lying cold breeds Dreams of Fear, and raises the thought and Image of
some fearful object (the motion from the brain to the inner parts, and from
the inner parts to the Brain being reciprocal:) And that as Anger causes heat
in some parts of the Body, when we are awake; so when we sleep, the over
heating of the same parts causes Anger, and raises up in the brain the
Imagination of an Enemy. In the same manner; as natural kindness, when we are
awake causes desire; and desire makes heat in certain other parts of the body;
so also, too much heat in those parts, while we sleep, raises in the brain an
imagination of some kindness s^ewn. In sum, our Dreams are the reverse of our
waking Imaginations; The motion when we are awake, beginning at one end; and
when we Dream, at another. Apparitions or Visions.


The most difficult discerning of a man's Dream, from his waking thoughts, is
then, when by some accident we observe not that we have slept: which is easy
to happen to a man full of fearful thoughts; and whose conscience is much
troubled; and that sleeps, without the circumstances, of going to bed, or
putting off his clothes, as one that noddeth in a chair. For he that takes
pains, and industriously lays himself to sleep, in case any uncouth and
exorbitant fancy come unto him, cannot easily think it other than a Dream. We
read of Marcus Brutus, (one that had his life given him by Julius Caesar, and
was also his favorite, and notwithstanding murdered him,) how at Philippi, the
night before he gave battle to Augustus C^sar, he saw a fearful apparition,
which is commonly related by Historians as a Vision: but considering the
circumstances, one may easily judge to have been but a short Dream. For sitting
in his tent, pensive and troubled with the horror of his rash act, it was not
hard for him, slumbering in the cold, to dream of that which most affrighted
him; which fear, as by degrees it made him wake; so also it must needs make
the Apparition by degrees to vanish: And having no assurance that he slept, he
could have no cause to think it a Dream, or any thing but a Vision. And this is
no very rare Accident: for even they that be perfectly awake, if they be
timorous, and supperstitious, possessed with fearful tales, and alone in the
dark, are subject to the like fancies; and believe they see spirits and dead
men's Ghosts walking in Churchyards; whereas it is either their Fancy only, or
else the knavery of such persons, as make use of such superstitious fear, to
pass disguised in the night, to places they would not be known to haunt.

From this ignorance of how to distinguish Dreams, and other strong Fancies,
from Vision and Sense, did arise the greatest part of the Religion of the
Gentiles in time past, that worshipped Satyrs, Fawnes, Nymphs, and the like;
and now adays the opinion that rude people have of Fayries, Ghosts, and
Goblins; and of the power of Witches. For as for Witches, I think not that
their witchcraft is any real power; but yet that they are justly punished, for
the false belief they have, that they can do such mischief, joined with their
purpose to do it if they can: their trade being nearer to a new Religion, than
to a Craft or Science. And for Fayries, and walking Ghosts, the opinion of them
has I think been on purpose, either taught, or not confuted, to keep in credit
the use of Exorcisme, of Crosses, of holy Water, and other such inventions of
Ghostly men. Nevertheless, there is no doubt, but God can make unnatural
Apparitions: But that he does it so often, as men need to fear such things,
more than they fear the stay, or change, of the course of Nature, which he
also can stay, and change, is no point of Christian faith. But evil men under
pretext that God can do any thing, are so bold as to say any thing when it
serves their turn, though they think it untrue; It is the part of a wise man,
to believe them no further, than right reason makes that which they say, appear
credible. If this superstitious fear of Spirits were taken away, and with it,
Prognostiques from Dreams, false Prophecies, and many other things depending
thereon, by which, crafty ambitious persons abuse the simple people, men would
be much more fitted than they are for civil Obedience.

And this ought to be the work of the Schools: but they rather nourish such
doctrine. For (not knowing what Imagination, or the Senses are), what they
receive, they reach: some saying, that Imaginations rise of themselves, and
have no cause: Others that they rise most commonly from the Will; and that Good
thoughts are blown (inspired) into a man, by God; and Evil thoughts by the
Devil: or that Good thoughts are powered (infused) into a man, by God, and
Evil ones by the Devil. Some say the Senses receive the Species of things,
and deliver them to the Common-sense; and the Common Sense delivers them over
to the Fancy, and the Fancy to the Memory, and the Memory to the Judgment,
like handing of things from one to another, with many words making nothing
understood.

The Imagination that is raised in man (or any other creature endued
Understanding.
with the faculty of imagining) by words, or other voluntary signs, is that we
generally call Understanding; and is common to Man and Beast. For a dog by
custom will understand the call, or the rating of his Master; and so will many
other Beasts. That Understanding which is peculiar to man, is the Understanding
not only his will; but his conceptions and thoughts, by the sequel and
contexture of the names of things into Affirmations, Negations, and other
forms of Speech: And of this kind of Understanding I shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. III. Of the Consequence or TRAIN of Imaginations.
BY Consequence, or TRAIN of Thoughts, I understand that succession of one
Thought to another, which is called (to distingui^h it from Discourse in words)
Mental Discourse.

When a man thinks on any thing whatsoever, His next Thought after, is not
altogether so casual as it seems to be. Not every Thought to every Thought
succeeds indifferently. But as we have no Imagination, whereof we have not
formerly had Sense, in whole, or in parts; so we have no Transition from one
Imagination to another, whereof we never had the like before in our Senses. The
reason whereof is this. All Fancies are Motions within us, relics of those
made in the Sense: And those motions that immediately succeeded one another in
the sense, continue also together after Sense: In so much as the former coming
again to take place, and be praedominant, the later follows, by coherence of
the matter moved, in such manner, as water upon a plain Table is drawn which
way any one part of it is guided by the finger. But because in sense, to one
and the same thing perceived, sometimes one thing, sometimes another
succeeds, it comes to pass in ^ime, that in the Imagining of any thing,
there is no certainty what we shall Imagine next; Only this is certain, it
shall be something that succeeded the same before, at one time or another.

This Train of Thoughts, or Mental Discourse, is of two sorts. Train of
Thoughts unguided.
The first is Unguided, without Design, and inconstant; Wherein there is no
Passionate Thought, to govern and direct those that follow, to it self, as the
end and scope of some desire, or other passion: In which case the thoughts are
said to wander, and seem impertinent one to another, as in a Dream. Such are
Commonly the thonghts of men, that are not only without company, but also
without care of any thing; though even then their Thoughts are as busy as at
other times, but without harmony; as the sound which a Lute out of tune would
yield to any man; or in tune, to one that could not play. And yet in this wild
ranging of the mind, a man may oft-times perceive the way of it, and the
dependence of one thought upon another. For in a Discourse of our present
civil war, what could seem more impertinent, than to ask (as one did) what
was the value of a Roman Penny? Yet the Cohaerence to me was manifest enough.
For the Thought of the war, introduced the Thought of the delivering up the
King to his Enemies; The Thought of that, brought in the Thought of the
delivering up of Christ; and that again the Thought of the 30 pence, which was
the price of that treason: and thence easily followed that malicious question;
and all this in a moment of time; for Thought is quick.

The second is more constant; as being regulated by some desire, Train of
Thoughts regulated.
and design. For the impression made by such things as we desire, or fear,
is strong, and permanent, or, (if it cease for a time,) of quick return: so
strong it is sometimes, as to hinder and break our sleep. From Desire, arises
the Thought of some means we have seen produce the like of that which we aim
at; and from the thought of that, the thought of means to that mean; and so
continually, till we come to some beginning within our own power. And because
the End, by the greatness of the impression, comes often to mind, in case our
thoughts begin to wander, they are quickly again reduced into the way: which
observed by one of the seven wise men, made him give men this praecept, which
is now worn out, Respice finem; that is to say, in all your actions, look
often upon what you would have, as the thing that directs all your thoughts in
the way to attain it.

The Trayn of regulated Thoughts is of two kinds; One, when of an effect
imagined, we seek the causes, or means that produce it: and this is common to
Man and Beast. The other is, when imagining any thing whatsoever, we seek all
the possible effects, that can by it be produced; that is to say, we imagine
what we can do with it, when we have it. Of which I have not at any time seen
any sign, but in man only; for this is a curiosity hardly incident to the
nature of any living creature that has no other Passion but sensual, such as
are hunger, thirst, lust, and anger. In sum, the Disconrse of the Mind, when
it is governed by design, is nothing but Seeking, or the faculty of Invention,
which the Latins call Sagacitas, and Solertia; a hunting out of the causes, of
some effect, present or past; or of the effects, of some present or past cause.
Sometimes a man seeks what he has lost; and from that place, and time, wherein
he misses it, his mind runs back, from place to place, and time to time, to
find where, and when he had it; that is to say, to find some certain, and
limited time and place, in which to begin a method of seeking. Again, from
thence, his thoughts run over the same places and times, to find what action,
or other occasion might make him lose it. This we call Remembrance, or Calling
to mind: the Latins call it Remembrance.
Reminiscentia, as it were a Re-conning of our former actions.

Sometimes a man knows a place determinate, within the compass whereof he is
to seek; and then his thoughts run over all the parts thereof, in the same
manner, as one would sweep a room, to find a jewel; or as a Spaniel ranges the
field, till he find a sent; or as a man should run over the Alphabet, to start
a rhyme.

Sometime a man desires to know the event of an action; and then Prudence.
he thinks of some like action past, and the events thereof one after
another; supposing like events will follow like actions. As he that foresees
what will become of a Criminal, re-cons what he has seen follow on the like
Crime before; having this order of thoughts, The Crime, the Officer, the
Prison, the Judge, and the Gallows. Which kind of thoughts, is called
Foresight, and Prudence, or Providence; and sometimes Wisdom; though such
conjecture, through the difficulty of observing all circumstances, be very
fallacious. But this is certain; by how much one man has more experience of
things past, than another; by so much also he is more Prudent, and his
expectations the seldomer fail him. The Present only has a being in Nature;
things Past have a being in the Memory only, but things to come have no being
at all; the Future being but a fiction of the mind, applying the sequels of
actions Past, to the actions that are Present; which with most certainty is
done by him that has most Experience; but not with certainty enough. And though
it be called Prudence, when the Event answers our Expectation; yet in its own
nature, it is but Presumption. For the foresight of things to come, which is
Providence, belongs only to him by whose will they are to come. From him
only, and supernaturally, proceeds Prophecy. The best Prophet naturally is the
best guesser; and the best guesser, he that is most versed and studied in the
matters he guesses at: for he has most Signs to guess by.

A Sign, is the Event Antecedent, of the Consequent; and contrarily, Signs.
the Consequent of the Antecedent, when the like Consequences have been
observed, before: And the oftener they have been observed, the less uncertain
is the Sign. And therefore he that has most experience in any kind of
business, has most Signs, whereby to guess at the Future time; and
consequently is the most prudent: And so much more prudent than he that is new
in that kind of business, as not to be equalled by any advantage of natural
and extemporary wit: though perhaps many young men think the contrary.

Nevertheless it is not Prudence that distinguishes man from beast. There be
beasts, that at a year old observe more, and pursue that which is for their
good, more prudently, than a child can do at ten.

As Prudence is a Praesumtion of the Future, contracted from the Con^ecture of
the time past.
Experience of time Past* So there is a Praesumtion of things Past taken from
other things (not future but) past also. For he that has seen by what courses
and degrees, a flourishing State has first come into civil war, and then to
ruin; upon the sight of the ^ines of any other State, will guess* the like
war, and the like courses have been there also. But this conjecture, has the
same incertainty almost with the conjecture of the Future; both being grounded
only upon Experience.

There is no other act of man's mind, that I can remember, naturally planted in
him, so, as to need no other thing, to the exercise of it, but to be born a
man, and live with the use of his five Senses. Those other Faculties, of which
I shall speak by and by, and which seem proper to man only, are acquired, and
increased by study and industry; and of most men learned by instruction, and
discipline; and proceed all from the invention of Words, and Speech. For
besides Sense, and Thoughts, and the Train of thoughts, the mind of man has no
other motion; though by the help of Speech, and Method, the same Facultyes may
be improved to such a height, as to distinguish men from all other living
Creatures.

Whatsoever we imagine, is Finite. Therefore there is no Idea, or conception of
any thing we call Infinite. No man can have in his mind an Image of infinite
magnitude; nor conceive infinite swiftness, infinite time, or infinite force,
or infinite power. When we say any thing is infinite, we signify only* that
we are not able to conceive the ends, and bounds of the thing named; having no
Conception of the thing, but of our own inability. And therefore the Name of
God is used, not to make us conceive him; (for he is Incomprehensible; and his
greatness, and power are unconceivable;) but that we may honor him. Also
because whatsoever (as I said before,) we conceive, has been perceived first by
sense, either all at once, or by parts; a man can have no thought, representing
any thing, not subject to sense. No man therefore can conceive any thing, but
he must conceive it in some place; and endued with some determinate magnitude;
and which may be divided into parts; nor that any thing is all in this place,
and all in another place at the same time; nor that two, or more things can be
in one, and the same place at once: For none of these things ever have, or can
be incident to Sense; but are absurd speeches, taken upon credit (without any
signification at all,) from deceived Philosophers, and deceived, or deceiving
Schoolmen.

CHAP. IV. Of SPEECH.
THe Invention of Printing, though ingenious, compared Original of Speech.
with the invention of Letters, is no great matter. But who was the first that
found the use of Letters, is not known. He that first brought them into Greece,
men say was Cadmus, the son of Agenor, King of Phaenicia. A profitable
Invention for continuing the memory of time past, and the conjunction of
mankind, dispersed into so many, and distant regions of the Earth; and with all
difficult, as proceeding from a watchful observation of the diverse motions of
the Tongue, Palate, Lips, and other organs of Speech; whereby to make as many
differences of characters, to remember them. But the most noble and profitable
invention of all other, was that of SPEECH, consisting of Names or
Appellations, and their Connection; whereby men register their Thoughts; recall
them when they are past; and also declare them one to another for mutual
utility and conversation; without which, there had been amongst men, neither
Commonwealth, nor Society, nor Contract, nor Peace, no more than amongst
Lions, Bears, and Wolves. The first author of Speech was God himself, that
instructed Adam how to name such creatures as he presented to his sight; For
the Scripture goes no further in this matter. But this was sufficient to
direct him to add more names, as the experience and use of the creatures
should give him occasion; and to join them in such manner by degrees, as to
make himself understood; and so by succession of time, so much language might
be gotten, as he had found use for; though not so copious, as an Orator or
Philosopher has need of. For I do not find any thing in the Scripture, out of
which, directly or by consequence can be gathered, that Adam was taught the
names of all Figures, Numbers, Measures, Colors, Sounds, Fancies, Relations;
much less the names of Words and Speech, as General, Special, Affirmative,
Negative, Interrogative, Optative, Infinitive, all which are useful; and least
of all, of Entity, Intentionality, Quiddity, and other insignificant words of
the School.

But all this language gotten, and augmented by Adam and his posterity, was
again lost at the tower of Babel, when by the hand of God, every man was
stricken for his rebellion, with an oblivion of his former language. And being
hereby forced to disperse themselves into several parts of the world, it must
needs be, that the diversity of Tongues that now is, proceeded by degrees from
them, in such manner, as need (the mother of all inventions) taught them; and
in tract of time grew every where more copious.

The general use of Speech, is to transfer our Mental Discourse, The use of
Speech.
into Verbal; or the Train of our Thoughts, into a Train of Words; and that
for two commodities; whereof one is, the Registring of the Consequences of our
Thoughts; which being apt to slip out of our memory, and put us to a new
labor, may again be recalled, by such words as they were marked by. So that
the first use of names, is to serve for Marks, or Notes of remembrance.
Another is, when many use the same words, to signify (by their connection and
order,) one to another, what they conceive, or think of each matter; and also
what they desire, fear, or have any other passion for. And for this use they
are called Signs. Special uses of Speech are these; First, to Register, what
by cogitation, we find to be the cause of any thing, present or past; and what
we find things present or past may produce, or effect: which in sum, is
acquiring of Arts. Secondly, to show to others that knowledge which we have
attained; which is, to Counsel, and Teach one another. Thirdly, to make known
to others our wills, and purposes, that we may have the mutual help of one
another. Fourthly, to please and delight our selves, and others, by playing
with our words, for pleasure or ornament, innocently.

To these Uses, there are also four correspondent Abuses. First, Abuses of
Speech.
when men register their thoughts wrong, by the inconstancy of the
signification of their words; by which they register for their conceptions,
that which they never conceived; and so deceive themselves. Secondly, when they
use words metaphorically; that is, in other sense than that they are ordained
for; and thereby deceive others. Thirdly, when by words they declare that to be
their will, which is not. Fourthly, when they use them to grieve one another:
for seeing nature has armed living creatures, some with teeth, some with
horns, and some with hands, to grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of Speech,
to grieve him with the tongue, unless it be one whom we are obliged to
govern; and then it is not to grieve, but to correct and amend.

The manner how Speech serves to the remembrance of the consequence of causes
and effects, consists in the imposing of Names, and the Connection of them.

Of Names, some are Proper, and singular to one only thing; as Peter, Names
Proper and Common.
John, This man, this Tree: and some are Common to many things; as Man, Horse,
Tree; every of which though but one Name, is nevertheless the name of diverse
particular things; in respect of all which together, it is called an
Universal; there being nothing in the Universal.
world Universal but Names; for the things named, are every one of them
Individual and Singular.

One Universal name is imposed on many things, for the^ similitude in some
quality, or other accident: And whereas a Proper Name brings to mind one thing
only; Universals recall any one of those many.

And of Names Universal, some are of more, and some of less extent; the
larger comprehending the less large: and some again of equal extent,
comprehending each other reciprocally. As for example, the Name Body is of
larger signification than the word Man, and comprehends it; and the names Man
and Rational, are of equal extent, comprehending mutually one another. But
here we must take notice, that by a Name is not always understood, as in
Grammar, one only Word; but sometimes by circumlocution many words together.
For all these words, He that in his actions observes the Laws of his
Country, make but one Name, equivalent to this one word, Just.

By this imposition of Names, some of larger, some of stricter signification,
we turn the reckoning of the consequences of things imagined in the mind, into
a reckoning of the consequences of Appellations. For example, a man that has
no use of Speech at all, (such, as is born and remains perfectly deaf and
dumb,) if he set before his eyes a triangle, and by it two right angles, (such
as are the corners of a square figure,) he may by meditation compare and find,
that the three angles of that triangle, are equal to those two right angles
that stand by it. But if another triangle be shown him different in shape from
the former, he cannot know without a new labor, whether the three angles of
that also be equal to the same. But he that has the use of words, when he
observes, that such equality was consequent, not to the length of the sides,
nor to any other particular thing in his triangle; but only to this, that the
sides were straight, and the angles three; and that that was all, for which he
named it a Triangle; will boldly conclude Universally, that such equality of
angles is in all triangles whatsoever; and register his invention in these
general terms, Every triangle has its three angles equal to two right
angles. And thus the consequence found in one particular, comes to be registered
and remembered, as an Universal rule; and discharges our mental reckoning, of
time and place; and delivers us from all labor of the mind, saving the first;
and makes that which was found true here, and now, to be true in all times and
places.

But the use of words in registring our thoughts, is in nothing so evident as
in Numbering. A natural fool that could never learn by heart the order of
numerall words, as one, two, and three, may observe every stroke of the Clock,
and nod to it, or say one, one, one; but can never know what hour it strikes.
And it seems, there was a time when those names of number were not in use; and
men were fayn to apply their fingers of one or both hands, to those things they
desired to keep account of; and that thence it proceeded, that now our numerall
words are but ten, in any Nation, and in some but five, and then they begin
again. And he that can tell ten, if he recite them out of order, will lose
himself, and not know when he has done: Much less will he be able to add,
and substract, and perform all other operations of Arithmetique. So that
without words, there is no possibility of reckoning of Numbers; much less of
Magnitudes, of Swiftness, of Force, and other things, the reckonings whereof
are necessary to the being, or well-being of mankind.

When two Names are joined together into a Consequence, or Affirmation; as
thus, A man is a living creature; or thus, if he be a man, he is a living
creature, If the later name Living creature, signify all that the former name
Man signifies, then the affirmation, or consequence is true; otherwise false.
For True and False are attributes of Speech, not of Things. And where Speech is
not, there is neither Truth nor Falsehood. Error there may be, as when we
expect that which shall not be; or suspect what has not been: but in neither
case can a man be charged with Untruth.

Seeing then that truth consists in the right ordering of names in Necessity
of D^ons.
our affirmations, a man that seeks precise truth, had need to remember what
every name he uses stands for; and to place it accordingly; or else he will
find himself entangled in words, as a bird in limetwiggs; the more he
struggles, the more belimed. And therefore in Geometry, (which is the only
Science that it has pleased God hitherto to bestow on mankind,) men begin at
settling the significations of their words; which settling of significations,
they call Definitions; and place them in the beginning of their reckoning.

By this it appears how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true
Knowledge, to examine the Definitions of former Authors; and either to corr^ct
them, where they are negl^gently set down; or to make the himself. For the
errors of Definitions multiply themselves, according as the reckoning
proceeds; and lead men into absurdities, which at last they see, but cannot
avoid, without reckoning anew from the beginning; in which lies the foundation
of their errors. From whence it happens, that they which trust to books, do as
they that cast up many little sums into a greater, without considering whether
those little sums were rightly cast up or not; and at last finding the error
visible, and not mistrusting their first grounds, know not which way to clear
themselves; but spend time in fluttering over their books; as birds that
entering by the chimney, and finding themselves enclosed in a chamber, flutter
at the false light of a glass window, for want of wit to consider which way
they came in. So that in the right Definition of Names, lies the first use of
Speech; which is the Acquisition of Science: And in wrong, or no Definitions,
lies the first abuse; from which proceed all false and senseless Tenets; which
make those men that take their instruction from the authority of books, and not
from their own meditation, to be as much below the condition of ignorant men,
as men endued with true Science are above it. For between true Science, and
erroneous ^octrines, Ignorance is in the middle. Natural sense and
imagination, are not subject to absurdity. Nature it self cannot err: and as
men abound in copiousnesse of language; so they become more wise, or more mad
than ordinary. Nor is it possible without Letters for any man to become either
excellently wise, or (unless his memory be hurt by disease, or ill constitution
of organs) excellently fool^h. For words are wise men's counters, they do but
reckon by them: but they are the money of fools, that value them by the
authority of an Aristotle, a Cicero, or a Thomas, or any other Doctor
whatsoever, if but a man.

Subject to Names, is whatsoever can enter into, or be considered in Subject to
Names*
an account; and be added one to another to make a sum; or subtracted one
from another, and leave a remainder. The Latins called Accounts of money
Rations, and accounting, Ratiocinatio: and that which we in bills or books of
account call Items, they called Nomina; that is, Names: and thence it seems to
proceed, that they extended the word Ratio, to the faculty of Reckoning in all
other things. The Greeks have but one word (...), for both Speech and Reason;
not that they thought there was no Speech without Reason; but no Reasoning
without Speech: And the act of reasoning they called Syllogism; which
signifies summing up of the consequences of one saying to another. And because
the same things may enter into account for diverse accidents; their names are
(to show that diversity) diversely wrested, and diversified. This diversity of
names may be reduced to four general heads.

First, a thing may enter into account for Matter, or Body; as living,
sensible, rational, hot, cold, moved, quiet; with all which names the word
Matter, or Body is understood; all such, being names of Matter.

Secondly, it may enter into account, or be considered, for some accident or
quality, which we conceive to be in it; as for being moved, for being so long,
for being hot, etc; and then, of the name of the thing it self, by a little
change or wresting, we make a name for that accident, which we consider; and
for living put into the account life; for moved, motion; for hot, heat; for
long, length, and the like: And all such Names, are the names of the accidents
and properties, by which one Matter, and Body is distinguished from another.
These are called names Abstract; because severed (not from Matter, but) from
the account of Matter.

Thirdly, we bring into account, the Properties of our own bodies, whereby we
make such distinction: as when any thing is Seen by us, we reckon not the thing
it self; but the sight, the Color, the Idea of it in the fancy: and when any
thing is heard, we reckon it not; but the hearing, or sound only, which is
our fancy or conception of it by the Ear: and such are names of fancies.

Fourthly, we bring into account, consider, and give names, to Names
themselves, and to Speeches: For, general, universal, special, aequivocall,
are names of Names. And Affirmation, Interrogation, Commandment, Narration,
Syllogism, Sermon, Oration, and many other such, are names of Speeches. And
this is all the variety of Use of Names Positive.
Names Positive; which are put to mark somewhat which is in Nature, or may be
feigned by the mind of man, as Bodies that are, or may be conceived to be; or
of bodies, the Properties that are, or may be feigned to be; or Words and
Speech.

There be also other Names, called Negative; which are notes to Negative Names
with their Uses.
signify that a word is not the name of the thing in question; as these words
Nothing, no man, infinite, indocible, three want four, and the like; which are
nevertheless of use in reckoning, or in correcting of reckoning; and call to
mind our past cogitations, though they be not names of any thing; because they
make us refuse to admit of Names not rightly used.

All other Names, are but insignificant sounds; and those of two Words
insignificant.
sorts. One, when they are new, and yet their meaning not explained by
Definition; whereof there have been abundance coined by Schoolmen, and
pusled Philosophers.

Another, when men make a name of two Names, whose significations are
contradictory and inconsistent; as this name, an incorporeall body, or (which
is all one) an incorporeall substance, and a great number more. For whenever
any affirmation is fal^e, the two names of which it is composed, put together
and made one, signify nothing at all. For example, if it be a false
affirmation to say a quadrangle is round, the word round quadrangle signifies
nothing; but is a mere sound. So likewise if it be false, to say that virtue
can be powered, or blown up and down; the words In-Po^red virtue, In-blown
virtue, are as absurd and insignificant, as a round quadrangle. And therefore
you shall hardly meet with a senseless and insignificant word, that is not made
up of some Latin or Greek names. A Frenchman seldom hears our Savior called
by the name of Parole, but by the name of Verb often; yet Verb and Parole
differ no more, but that one is Latin, the other French.

When a man upon the hearing of any Speech, has those thoughts Understanding.
which the words of that Speech, and their connection, were ordained and
constituted to signify; Then he is said to understand it: Understanding being
nothing else, but conception caused by Speech. And therefore if Speech be
peculiar to man (as for ought I know it is,) then is Understanding peculiar to
him also. And therefore of absurd and false affirmations, in case they be
universal, there can be no Understanding; though many think they understand,
then, when they do but repeat the words softly, or con them in their mind.

What kinds of Speeches signify the Appetites, Aversions, and Passions of man's
mind; and of their use and abuse, I shall speak when I have spoken of the
Passions.

The names of such things as affect us, that is, which please, and Inconstant
names.
displease us, because all men be not alike affected with the same thing, nor
the same man at all times, are in the common discourses of men, of inconstant
signification. For seeing all names are imposed to signify our conceptions;
and all our affections are but conceptions; when we conceive the same things
differently, we can hardly avoid different naming of them. For though the
nature of that we conceive, be the same; yet the diversity of our reception of
it, in respect of different constitutions of body, and prejudices of opinion,
gives every thing a tincture of our different passions. And therefore in
reasoning, a man must take heed of words; which besides the signification of
what we imagine of their nature, have a signification also of the nature,
disposition, and interest of the speaker; such as are the names of Virtues, and
Vices; For one man calls Wisdom, what another calls fear; and one
cruelty, what another justice; one prodigality, what another magnanimity; and
one gravity, what another stupidicy, etc. And therefore such names can never be
true grounds of any ratiocination. No more can Metaphors, and Tropes of speech:
but these are less dangerous, because they profess their inconstancy; which the
other do not.

CHAP. V. Of REASON, and SCIENCE.
WHen a man Reasons, he does nothing else but conceive Reason what it is.
a sum total, from Addition of parcels; or conceive a Remainder; from
Substraction of one sum from another: which (if it be done by Words,) is
conceiving of the consequence of the names of all the parts, to the name of the
whole; or from the names of the whole and one part, to the name of the other
part. And though in some things, (as in numbers,) besides Adding and
Substracting, men name other operations, as Multiplying and Dividing; yet they
are the same; for Multiplication, is but Adding together of things equal; and
Division, but Substracting of one thing, as often as we can. These operations
are not incident to Numbers only, but to all manner of things that can be
added together, and taken one out of another. For as Arithmeticians teach to
add and substract in numbers; so the Geometricians teach the same in lines,
figures (solid and superficial,) angles, proportions, times, degrees of
swiftness, force, power, and the like; The Logicians teach the same in
Consequences of words; adding together two Names, to make an Affirmation; and
two Affirmations, to make a Syllogism; and many Syllogismes to make a
Demonstration; and from the sum, or Conclusion of a Syllogism, they
substract one Proposition, to find the other. Writers of Politiques, add
together Pactions, to find men's duties; and Lawyers, Laws, and facts, to find
what is right and wrong in the actions of private men. In sum, in what matter
soever there is place for addition and substraction, there also is place for
Reason; and where these have no place, there Reason has nothing at all to do.

Out of all which we may define, (that is to say determine,) what Reason
defined.
that is, which is meant by this word Reason, when we reckon it amongst the
Faculties of the mind. For REASON, in this sense, is nothing but Reckoning
(that is, Adding and Substracting) of the Consequences of general names agreed
upon, for the marking and signifying of our thoughts; I say marking them, when
we reckon by our selves; and signifying, when we demonstrate, or approve our
reckonings to other men.

And as in Arithmetique, unpractised men must, and Professors Right Reason
where.
themselves may often err, and cast up false; so also in any other subject of
Reasoning, the ablest, most attentive, and most practiced men, may deceive
themselves, and infer false Conclusions; Not but that Reason it self is
always Right Reason, as well as Arithmetique is a certain and infallible Art:
But no one man's Reason, nor the Reason of any one number of men, makes the
certainty; no more than an account is therefore well cast up, because a great
many men have unanimously approved it. And therefore, as when there is a
controversy in an account, the parties must by their own accord, set up for
right Reason, the Reason of some Arbitrator, or Judge, to whose sentence they
will both stand, or their controversy must either come to blows, or be
undecided, for want of a right Reason constituted by Nature; so is it also in
all debates of what kind soever: And when men that think themselves wiser than
all others, clamor and demand right Reason for judge; yet seek no more, but
that things should be determined, by no other men's reason but their own, it is
as intolerable in the society of men, as it is in play after ttump is turned,
to use for trump on every occasion, that suite whereof they have most in their
hand. For they do nothing else, that will have every of their passions, as it
comes to bear sway in them, to be taken for right Reason, and that in their own
controversies: bewraying their want of right Reason, by the claym they lay to
it.

The Use and End of Reason, is not the finding of the sum, and The use of
Reason.
truth of one, or a few consequences, remote from the first definitions, and
settled significations of names; but to begin at these; and proceed from one
consequence to another. For there can be no certainty of the last Conclusion,
without a certainty of all those Affirmations and Negations, on which it was
grounded, and inferred. As when a master of a family, in taking an account,
casts up the sums of all the bills of expense, into one sum; and not
regarding how each bill is summed up, by those that give them in account; nor
what it is he pays for; he advantages himself no more, than if he allowed the
account in gross, trusting to every of the accountants skill and honesty: so
also in Reasoning of all other things, he that takes up conclusions on the
trust of Authors, and does not fetch them from the first Items in every
Reckoning, (which are the significations of names settled by definitions),
loses his labor; and does not know any thing; but only believes.

When a man reckons without the use of words, which may be done Of Error and
Absurdity.
in particular things, (as when upon the sight of any one thing, we conjecture
what was likely to have preceded, or is likely to follow upon it;) if that
which he thought likely to follow, follows not; or that which he thought
likely to have preceded it, has not preceded it, this is called ERROR; to
which even the most prudent men are subject. But when we Reason in Words of
general signification, and fall upon a general inference which is false;
though it be commonly called Error, it is indeed an ABSURDITY, or senseless
Speech. For Error is but a deception, in presuming that somewhat is past, or to
come; of which, though it were not past, or not to come; yet there was no
impossibility discoverable. But when we make a general assertion, unless it
be a true one, the possibility of it is unconceivable. And words whereby we
conceive nothing but the sound, are those we call Absurd, Insignificant, and
Nonsense. And therefore if a man should talk to me of a round Quadrangle; or
accidents of Bread in Cheese; or Immateriall Substances; or of A free Subject;
A free will; or any Free, but free from being hindered by opposition, I should
not say he were in an Error; but that his words were without meaning; that is
to say, Absurd.

I have said before, (in the second chapter,) that a Man did excel all other
Animals in this faculty, that when he conceived any thing whatsoever, he was
apt to enquire the consequences of it, and what effects he could do with it.
And now I add this other degree of the same excellence, that he can by words
reduce the consequences he finds to general Rules, called Theoremes, or
Aphorisms; that is, he can Reason, or reckon, not only in number; but in all
other things, whereof one may be added unto, or subtracted from another.

But this privedge, is allayed by another; and that is, by the privilege of
Absurdity; to which no living creature is subject, but man only. And of men,
those are of all most subject to it, that profess Philosophy. For it is most
true that Cicero says of them somewhere; that there can be nothing so absurd,
but may be found in the books of Philosophers. And the reason is manifest. For
there is not one of them that begins his ratiocination from the Definitions, or
Explications of the names they are to use; which is a method that has been
used only in Geometry; whose Conclusions have thereby been made indisputable.

The first cause of Absurd conclusions I ascribe to the want of Method; Causes
of absurdity.
in that they begin not their Ratiocination from Definitions; 1.
that is, from settled significations of their words: as if they could cast
account, without knowing the value of the numerall words, one, two, and three.

And whereas all bodies enter into account upon diverse considerations, (which I
have mentioned in the precedent chapter;) these considerations being diversely
named, diverse absurdities proceed from the confusion, and unfit connection of
their names into assertions. And therefore

The second cause of Absurd assertions, I ascribe to the giving of 2.
names of bodies, to accidents; or of accidents, to bodies; As they do, that
say, Faith is infused, or inspired; when nothing can be powered, or breathed
into any thing, but body; and that, extension is body; that phantasmes are
spirits, etc.

The third I ascribe to the giving of the names of the accidents of 3.
bodies without us, to the accidents of our own bodies; as they do that say,
the color is in the body; the sound is in the air, etc.

The fourth, to the giving of the names of bodies, to names, or 4.
speeches; as they do that say, that there be things universal; that a living
creature is Genus, or a general thing, etc.

The fifth, to the giving of the names of accidents, to names and 5.
speeches; as they do that say, the nature of a thing is its definition; a man's
command is his will; and the like.

The sixth, to the use of Metaphors, Tropes, and other Rhetorical 6.
figures, in stead of words proper. For though it be lawful to say, (for
example) in common speech, the way goes, or leads hither, or thither, The
Proverb says this or that (whereas ways cannot go, nor Proverbs speak;) yet
in reckoning, and seeking of truth, such speeches are not to be admitted.

The seventh, to names that signify nothing; but are taken up, and 7.
learned by rote from the Schools, as hypostatical, transubstantiate,
consubstantiate, eternal-Now, and the like canting of Schoolmen.

To him that can avoid these things, it is not easy to fall into any
absurdity, unless it be by the length of an account; wherein he may perhaps
forget what went before. For all men by nature reason alike, and well, when
they have good principles. For who is so stupid, as both to mistake in
Geometry, and also to persist in it, when another detects his error to him?

By this it appears that Reason is not as Sense, and Memory, borne Science.
with us; nor gotten by Experience only, as Prudence is; but attained by
Industry; first in apt imposing of Names; and secondly by getting a good and
orderly Method in proceeding from the Elements, which are Names, to Assertions
made by Connection of one of them to another; and so to Syllogismes, which are
the Connexions of one Assertion to another, till we come to a knowledge of all
the Consequences of names appertaining to the subject in hand; and that is it,
men call SCIENCE. And whereas Sense and Memory are but knowledge of Fact, which
is a thing past, and irrevocable; Science is the knowledge of Consequences, and
dependence of one fact upon another: by which, out of that we can presently do,
we know how to do something else when we will, or the like, another time:
Because when we see how any thing comes about, upon what causes, and by what
manner; when the like causes come into our power, we see how to make it
produce the like effects.

Children therefore are not endued with Reason at all, till they have attained
the use of Speech: but are called Reasonable Creatures, for the possibility
apparent of having the use of Reason in time to come. And the most part of men,
though they have the use of Reasoning a little way, as in numbering to some
degree; yet it serves them to little use in common life; in which they govern
themselves, some better, some worse, according to their differences of
experience, quickness of memory, and inclinations to several ends; but
specially according to good or evil fortune, and the errors of one another.
For as for Science, or certain rules of their actions, they are so far from
it, that they know not what it is. Geometry they have thought Conjuring: But
for other Sciences, they who have not been taught the beginnings, and some
progress in them, that they may see how they be acquired and generated, are in
this point like children, that having no thought of generation, are made
believe by the women, that their brothers and sisters are not born, but found
in the garden.

But yet they that have no Science, are in better, and nobler condition with
their natural Prudence; than men, that by mis-reasoning, or by trusting them
that reason wrong, fall upon false and absurd general rules. For ignorance of
causes, and of rules, does not set men so far out of their way, as relying on
false rules, and taking for causes of what they aspire to, those that are not
so, but rather causes of the contrary.

To conclude, The Light of humane minds is Perspicuous Words, but by exact
definitions first snuffed, and purged from ambiguity; Reason is the pace;
Increase of Science, the way; and the Benefit of mankind, the end. And on the
contrary, Metaphors, and senseless and ambiguous words, are like ignes f^i; and
reasoning upon them, is wandering amongst innumerable absurdities; and their
end, contentention, and sedition, or contempt.

As, much Experience, is Prudence; so, is much Science, Sapience. Prudence and
Sapience, with their difference.
For though we usually have one name of Wisdom for them both; yet the
Latins did always distinguish between Prudentia and Sapientia; ascribing the
former to Experience, the later to Science. But to make their difference
appear more clearly, let us suppose one man endued with an excellent natural
use, and dexterity in handling his arms; and another to have added to that
dexterity, an acquired Science, of where he can offend, or be offended by his
adversary, in every possible posture, or guard: The ability of the former,
would be to the ability of the later, as Prudence to Sapience; both useful*
but the later infallible. But they that trusting only to the authority of
books, follow the blind blindly, are like him that trusting to the false rules
of a master of Fence, ventures praesumptuously upon an adversary, that either
kills, or disgraces him.

The signs of Science, are some, certain and infallible; some, uncertain.
Signs of Science.
Certain, when he that pretends the Science of any thing, can teach the same;
that is to say, demonstrate the truth thereof perspicuously to another:
Uncertain, when only some particular events answer to his pretense, and upon
many occasions prove so as he says they must. Signs of prudence are all
uncertain; because to observe by experience, and remember all circumstances
that may alter the success, is impossible. But in any business, whereof a man
has not infallible Science to proceed by; to forsake his own natural
judgment, and be guided by general sentences read in Authors, and subject to
many exceptions, is a sign of folly, and generally scorned by the name of
Pedantry. And even of those men themselves, that in Counsels of the
Commonwealth, love to show their reading of Politiques and History, very few
do it in their domestique affairs, where their particular interest is
concerned; having Prudence enough for their private affairs: but in public
they study more the reputation of their own wit, than the success of another
business.

CHAP. VI. Of the Interior Beginnings of Voluntary Motions; commonly called
the PASSIONS. And the Speeches by which they are expressed.
THere be in Animals, two sorts of Motions peculiar to them: Motion Vital and
Animal.
One called Vital; begun in generation, and continued without interruption
through their whole life; such as are the course of the Blood, the Pulse, the
Breathing, the Conco^ion, Nutrition, Excretion, etc; to which Motions there
needs no help of Imagination: The other is Animal motion, otherwise called
Voluntary motion; as to go, to speak, to move any of our limbs, in such manner
as is first fancied in our minds. That Sense, is Motion in the organs and
interior parts of man's body, caused by the action of the things we See, Hear,
etc; And that Fancy is but the Relics of the same Motion, remaining after
Sense, has been already said in the first and second Chapters. And because
going, speaking, and the like Voluntary motions, depend always upon a
precedent thought of whither, which way, and what; it is evident, that the
Imagination is the first internal beginning of all Voluntary Motion. And
although unstudied men, do not conceive any motion at all to be there, where
the thing moved is invisible; or the space it is moved in, is (for the
shortness of it) insensible; yet that does not hinder, but that such Motions
are. For let a space be never so little, that which is moved over a greater
space, whereof that little one is part, must first be moved over that. These
small beginnings of Motion, within the body of Man, before they appear in
walking, speaking, striking, and other visible actions, are commonly called
ENDEAVOR. Endeavor.


This Endeavor, when it is toward something which causes it, is called
APPETITE, or DESIRE; the later, being the general name; Appetite.
and the other, oftentimes restrained to signify the Desire of Food, Desire.
namely Hunger and Thirst. And when the Endeavor is fromward Hunger.
something, it is generally called AVERSION. These words Appetite, Thirst.
and Aversion we have from the Latins; and they both of them signify Aversion.
the motions, one of approaching, the other of retiring. So also do the Greek
words for the same, which are (...), and (...). For Nature it self does often
press upon men those truths, which afterward, when they look for somewhat
beyond Nature, they stumble at. For the Schools find in mere Appetite to go,
or move, no actual Motion at all: but because some Motion they must
acknowledge, they call it Metaphorical Motion; which is but an absurd speech:
for though Words may be called metaphorical; Bodies, and Motions cannot.

That which men Desire, they are also said to LOVE: and to HATE Love.
those things, for which they have Aversion. So that Desire, and Hate.
Love, are the same thing; save that by Desire, we always signify the Absence
of the Object; by Love, most commonly the Presence of the same. So also by
Aversion, we signify the Absence; and by Hate, the Presence of the Object.

Of Appetites, and Aversions, some are born with men; as Appetite of food,
Appetite of excretion, and exoneration, (which may also and more properly be
called Aversions, from somewhat they feel in their Bodies;) and some other
Appetites, not many. The rest, which are Appetites of particular things,
proceed from Experience, and trial of their effects upon themselves, or other
men. For of things we know not at all, or believe not to be, we can have no
further Desire, than to taste and try. But Aversion we have for things, not
only which we know have hurt us; but also that we do not know whether they
will hurt us, or not.

Those things which we neither Desire, nor Hate, we are said to Contempt.
Contemn: CONTEMPT being nothing else but an immobility, or contumacy of the
Heart, in resisting the action of certain things; and proceeding from that the
Heart is already moved otherwise, by other more potent objects; or from want of
experience of them.

And because the constitution of a man's Body, is in continual mutation; it is
impossible that all the same things should always cause in him the same
Appetites, and Aversions: much less can all men consent, in the Desire of
almost any one and the same Object.

But whatsoever is the object of any man's Appetite or Desire; that Good.
is it, which he for his part calls Good: And the object of his Hate, Evil.
and Aversion, Evil; And of his Contempt, Vile* and Inconsiderable. For these
words of Good, Evil, and Contemptible, are ever used with relation to the
person that uses them: There being nothing simply and absolutely so; nor any
common Rule of Good and Evil, to be taken from the nature of the objects
themselves; but from the Person of the man (where there is no Commonwealth;)
or, (in a Commonwealth,) from the Person that represents it; or from an
Arbitrator or Judge, whom men disagreeing shall by consent set up, and make his
sentence the Rule thereof.

The Latin Tongue has two words, whose significations approach to those of
Good and Evil; but are not precisely the same; And those are pulchrum and
Turpe. Whereof the former signifies that, Pulchrum.
which by some apparent signs promises Good; and the later, that, Turpe.
which promises Evil. But in our Tongue we have not so general names to
express them by. But for Pulchrum, we say in some things, Fair; in others
Beautiful, or Handsome, or Gallant, or Honorable, or Comely, or Amiable; and
for Turpe, Foul, Deformed, Ugly, Base, Nauseous, and the like, as the subject
shall require; All which words, in their proper places signify nothing else,
but the Mine, or Countenance, that promises Good and Evil. So that of Good
there be three kinds; Good in the Promise, that is Pulchrum; Good in Effect, as
the end desired, which is called Jucundum, Delightful; and Good Delightful.
as the Means, which is called Vtile, Profitable; and as many of Evil:
Profitable.
For Evil, in Promise, is that they call Turpe; Evil in Effect, and End, is
Molestum, Unpleasant, Troublesome; and Evil in the Means, (...).
Inutile, Unprofitable, Hurtful. Unprofitable.


As, in Sense, that which is really within us, is (as I have said before) only
Motion, caused by the action of external objects, but in appearance; to the
Sight, Light and Color; to the Ear, Sound; to the Nostrill, Odor, etc: so,
when the action of the same object is continued from the Eyes, Ears, and other
organs to the Heart; the real effect there is nothing but Motion, or
Endeavor; which consists in Appetite, or Aversion, to, or from the object
moving. But the appearance, or sense of that motion, is that we either call
DELIGHT, Delight.
or TROUBLE OF MIND. Displeasure.


This Motion, which is called Appetite, and for the appearance of it Delight,
and Pleasure, seems to be, a corroboration of Vital Pleasure.
motion, and a help thereunto; and therefore such things as caused Delight,
were not improperly called Jucunda, (a Juvando,) from helping or fortifying;
and the contrary, Molesta, Offensive, from Offense.
hindering, and troubling the motion vital.

Pleasure therefore, (or Delight,) is the appearance, or sense of Good; and
Molestation or Displeasure, the appearance, or sense of Evil. And consequently
all Appetite, Desire, and Love, is accompanied with some Delight more or less;
and all Hatred, and Aversion, with more or less Displeasure and Offense.

Of Pleasures, or Delights, some arise from the sense of an object Present; And
those may be called Pleasures of Sense, (The word Pleasures of sense.
sensual, as it is used by those only that condemn them, having no place till
there be Laws.) Of this kind are all Onerations and Exonerations of the body;
as also all that is pleasant, in the Sight, Hearing, Smell, Taste, or Touch;
Others arise from the Expectation, that proceeds from foresight of the End, or
Consequence of things; whether those things in the Sense Please or Displease:
And these are Pleasures of the Mind
Pleasures of the Mind of him that draws those consequences; and are
generally called JOY. In the like manner, Displeasures, are some Joy.
in the Sense, and called PAIN; others, in the Expectation of consequences,
Pain.
and are called GRIEF. Grief.


These simple Passions called Appetite, Desire, Love, Aversion, Hate, Joy, and
Grief, have their names for diverse considerations diversified. As first, when
they one succeed another, they are diversely called from the opinion men have of
the likelihood of attaining what they desire. Secondly, from the object loved
or hated. Thirdly, from the consideration of many of them together. Fourthly,
from the Alteration or succession it self.

For Appetite with an opinion of attaining, is called HOPE. Hope.


The same, without such opinion, DESPAIR. Despair.


Aversion, with opinion of Hurt from the object, FEAR. Fear.


The same, with hope of avoiding that Hurt by resistance, COURAGE. Courage.


Sudden Courage, ANGER. Anger.


Constant Hope, CONFIDENCE of our selves. Confidence.


Constant Despair, DIFFIDENCE of our selves. Diffid^nce.


Anger for great hurt done to another, when we conceive the same to be done by
Injury, INDIGNATION. Indignation.


Desire of good to another, BENEVOLENCE, GOOD WILL, Benevolence.
CHARITY. If to man generally, GOOD NATURE. Good Nature.


Desire of Riches, COVETOUSNESS: a name used always in signification
Covetousness
of blame; because men contending for them, are displeased with one another
attaining them; though the desire in it self, be to be blamed, or allowed,
according to the means by which those Riches are sought.

Desire of Office; or precedence, AMBITION: a name used also Ambition.
in the worse sense, for the reason before mentioned.

Desire of things that conduce but a little to our ends; And fear of
Pusillanimity.
things that are but of little hindrance, PUSILLANIMITY.

Contempt of little helps, and hindrances, MAGNANIMITY. Magnanimity.


Magnanimity, in danger of Death, or Wounds, VALOR, FORTITUDE. Valor.


Magnanimity, in the use of Riches, LIBERALITY. Liberality.


Pusillanimity, in the same WRETCHEDNESS, MISERABLENESS; Miserableness.
or PARSIMONY; as it is liked, or disliked.

Love of Persons for society, KINDNESS. Kindness.


Love of Persons for Pleasing the sense only, NATURAL LUST. Natural Lust.


Love of the same, acquired from Rumination, that is, Imagination Luxury.
of Pleasure past, LUXURY.

Love of one singularly, with desire to be singularly beloved, The passion of
Love.
THE PASSION OF LOVE. The same, with fear that the love is not mutual,
JEALOUSY. Jealousy.


Desire, by doing hurt to another, to make him condemn some fact
Revengefulnesse.
of his own, REVENGEFULN^SSE.

Desire, to know why, and how, CURIOSITY; such as is in no living Curiosity.
creature but Man: so that Man is distinguished, not only by his Reason; but
also by this singular Passion from other Animals; in whom the appetite of food,
and other pleasures of Sense, by praedominance, take away the care of knowing
causes; which is a Lust of the mind, that by a perseverance of delight in the
continual and indefatigable generation of Knowledge, exceeds the short
vehemence of any carnal Pleasure.

Fear of power invisible, feigned by the mind, or imagined from tales
publicly allowed, RELIGION; not allowed, SUPERSTITION. Religion.
And when the power imagined, is truly such as we imagine, Superstition.
TRUE RELIGION. True Religion.


Fear, without the apprehension of why, or what, PANIQUE Panique Terror.
TERROR; called so from the Fables, that make Pan the author of them; whereas
in truth, there is always in him that so fears, first, some apprehension of
the cause, though the rest run away by Example; every one supposing his fellow
to know why. And therefore this Passion happens to none but in a throng, or
multitude of people.

Joy, from apprehension of novelty, ADMIRATION; proper to Admiration.
Man, because it excites the appetite of knowing the cause.

Joy, arising from imagination of a man's own power and ability, is that
exultation of the mind which is called (...): which if Glory.
grounded upon the experience of his own former actions, is the same with
Confidence: but if grounded on the flattery of others; or only supposed by
himself, for delight in the consequences of it, is called VAINGLORY: which
name is properly given; because a well Vainglory.
grounded Confidence begets Attempt; whereas the supposing of power does
not, and is therefore rightly called Va^ne.

Grief, from opinion of want of power, is called DEIECTION Dejection.
of mind.

The vainglory which consists in the feigning or supposing of abilities in
our selves, which we know are not, is most incident to young men, and nourished
by the Histories, or Fictions of Gallant Persons* and is corrected oftentimes
by Age, and Employment.

Sudden Glory, is the passion which makes those Gr^aces called Sudden Glory.
LAUGHTER; and is caused either by some sudden act of their own, Laughter.
that pleases them; or by the apprehension of some d^ed thing in another, by
comparison whereof they suddenly applaud themselves. And it is incident most to
them, that are conscious of the fewest abilities in themselves* who are forced
to keep themselves in their own favor, by observing the imperfections of other
men. And therefore much Laughter at the defects of others, is a sign of
Pusillanimity. For of great minds, one of the proper works (...), to help and
free others from scorn; and compare themselves only with the most able.

On the contrary, Sudden De^ction, is the passion that causes Sudden Dejection.
W^PING; and is caused by such accidents, as su^ly ^ake away Weeping.
some vehement hope, or some prop of their power: And they are most subject to
it, that rely principally on helps external, such as are* Women, and Children.
Therefore some Weep for the loss of Friends* Others for their unkindnesse;
others for the sudden sto^ made to their thoughts of revenge, by
Reconciliation. But in all cases, both Laughter, and Weeping, are sudden
motions; Custom taking them both away. For no man Laughs at old (...)* or
Weeps for an old calamity.

Grief, for the discovery of some defect of ability, is SHAME, or Shame.
Blushing.
the passion that discovers it self in BLUSHING; and consists in the
apprehension of some thing dishonorable; and in young men, is a sign of the
love of good reputation; and commendable: In old men it is a sign of the same*
but because it comes too l^e, not commendable.

The Contempt of good Reputation is called IMPUDENCE. Impudence.
Pity.


Grief, for the Calamity of another, is PITY; and arises from the
imagination that the like calamity may befall himself; and therefore is called
also COMPASSION, and in the phrase of this present time a FELLOW-^ING: And
therefore for Ca^y ^ving from great wickedness, the best men have the least
Pity; and for the same Calamity, those have least Pity, that think themselves
least obnoxious to the same.

Contempt, or little sense of the calamity of others, is that which men call
CRUELTY; proceeding from Security of their own fortune. Cruelty.
For, that any man should take pleasure in other men's great harms, without
other end of his own, I do not conceive it possible.

Grief, for the success of a Competitor in wealth, honor, or other good, if
it be joined with Endeavor to enforce our own abilities to equal or exceed
him, is called EMULATION: But joined with Endeavor Emulation.
to supplant, or hinder a Competitor, ENVY. Envy.


When in the mind of man, Appetites, and Aversions, Hopes, and Fears,
concerning one and the same thing, arise alternately; and diverse good and evil
consequences of the doing, or omitting the thing propounded, come successively
into our thoughts; so that sometimes we have an Appetite to it; sometimes an
Aversion from it; sometimes Hope to be able to do it; sometimes Despair, or
Fear to attempt it; the whole sum of Desires, Aversions, Hopes and Fears,
continued till the thing be either done, or thought impossible, is that we call
DELIBERATION. Deliberation.


Therefore of things past, there is no Deliberation; because manifestly
impossible to be changed: nor of things known to be impossible, or thought so;
because men know, or think such Deliberation vain. But of things impossible,
which we think possible, we may Deliberate; not knowing it is in vain. And it
is called Deliberation; because it is a putting an end to the Liberty we had of
doing, or omitting, according to our own Appetite, or Aversion.

This alternate Succession of Appetites, Aversions, Hopes and Fears, is no
less in other living Creatures then in Man: and therefore Beasts also
Deliberate.

Every Deliberation is then said to End, when that whereof they Deliberate, is
either done, or thought impossible; because till then we retain the liberty of
doing, or omitting, according to our Appetite, or Aversion.

In Deliberation, the last Appetite, or Aversion, immediately adhaering to the
action, or to the omission thereof, is that we call the WILL; the Act, (not
the faculty,) of Willing. And Beasts that The Will.
have Deliberation, must necessarily also have Will. The Definition of the
Will, given commonly by the Schools, that it is a Rational Appetite, is not
good. For if it were, then could there be no Voluntary Act against Reason. For
a Voluntary Act is that, which proceeds from the Will, and no other. But if
in stead of a Rational Appetite, we shall say an Appetite resulting from a
precedent Deliberation, then the Definition is the same that I have given here.
Will therefore is the last Appetite in Deliberating. And though we say in
common Discourse, a man had a Will once to do a thing, that nevertheless he
forbore to do; yet that is properly but an Inclination, which makes no Action
Voluntary; because the action depends not of it, but of the last Inclination,
or Appetite. For if the intervenient Appetites, make any action Voluntary; then
by the same Reason all intervenient Aversions, should make the same action
Involuntary; and so one and the same action, should be both Voluntary and
Involuntary.

By this it is manifest, that not only actions that have their beginning from
Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, or other Appetites to the thing propounded; but
also those that have their beginning from Aversion, or Fear of those
consequences that follow the omission, are voluntary actions.

The forms of Speech by which the Passions are expressed, are Forms of
Speech, in Passion.
partly the same, and partly different from those, by which we express our
Thoughts. And first, generally all Passions may be expressed Indicatively; as I
love, I fear, I joy, I deliberate, I will, I command: but some of them have
particular expressions by themselves, which nevertheless are not affirmations,
unless it be when they serve to make other inferences, besides that of the
Passion they proceed from. Deliberation is expressed Sub^tively; which is a
speech proper to signify suppositions, with their consequences; as, If this be
done, then this will follow; and differs not from the language of Reasoning,
save that Reasoning is in general words; but Deliberation for the most part is
of Particulars. The language of Desire, and Aversion, is Imperative; as Do
this, forbear that; which when the party is obliged to do, or forbear, is
Command; otherwise Prayer; or else Counsel. The language of Vainglory, of
Indignation, Pity and Revengefulness, Optative: But of the Desire to know,
there is a peculiar expression, called Interrogative; as, What is it, when
shall it, how is it done, and why so? other language of the Passions I find
none: For Cursing, Swearing, Reviling, and the like, do not signify as Speech;
but as the actions of a tongue accustomed.

These forms of Speech, I say, are expressions, or voluntary significations of
our Passions: but certain signs they be not; because they may be used
arbitrarily, whether they that use them, have such Passions or not. The best
signs of Passions present, are either in the countenance, motions of the body,
actions, and ends, or aims, which we otherwise know the man to have.

And because in Deliberation, the Appetites, and Aversions are raised by
foresight of the good and evil consequences, and sequels of the action whereof
we Deliberate; the good or evil effect thereof depends on the foresight of a
long chain of consequences, of which very seldom any man is able to see to the
end. But for so far Good and Evil apparent.
as a man sees, if the Good in those consequences, be greater than the Evil,
the whole chain is that which Writers call Apparent, or Seeming Good. And
contrarily, when the Evil exceeds the Good, the whole is Apparent, or
Seeming Evil: so that he who has by Experience, or Reason, the greatest and
surest prospect of Consequences, Deliberates best himself; and is able when he
will, to give the best counsel unto others,

Continual success in obtaining those things which a man from time to time
desires, that is to say, continual prospering, is that men Felicity.
call FELIC^TY; I mean the Felicity of this life. For there is no such thing as
perpetual^ Tranquillity of mind, while we live here; because Life it self is
but Motion, and can never be without De^re, nor without Fear, no more than
without Sense. What kind of Felicity God has ordained to them that devoutly
honor him, a man shall no sooner know, than enjoy; being joys, that now are
as incomprehensible, as the word of Schoolmen Beatificall Vision is
unintelligible.

The form of Speech whereby men signify their opinion of the Goodness of any
thing, is PRAISE. That whereby they signify the Praise.
power and greatness of any thing, is MAGNIFYING. And that Magnification.
whereby they signify the opinion they have of a man's Felicity, is by the
Greeks called (...), for which we have no name in our (...).
tongue. And thus much is sufficient for the present purpose, to have been said
of the PASSIONS.

CHAP. VII. Of the Ends, or Resolutions of DISCOURSE.
OF all Discourse, governed by desire of Knowledge, there is at last an End,
either by attaining, or by giving over. And in the chain of Discourse,
wheresoever it be interrupted, there is an End for that time.

If the Discourse be merely Mental, it consists of thoughts that the thing
will be, and will not be or that it has been, and has not been, alternately. So
that wheresoever you break off the chayn of a man's Discourse, you leave him in
a Praesumption of it will be, or, it will not be; or it has been, or, has not
been. All which is Opinion. And that which is alternate Appetite, in
Deliberating concerning Good and Evil; the same is alternate Opinion, in the
Enquiry of the truth of Past, and Futu^e. And as the last Appetite in
Deliberation, is called the Will; so the last Opinion in search of the truth of
Past, and Future, is called the JUDGMENT, or Resolute and Final Sentence of
him that Judgment, or Sentence ^inal.
discourses. And as the whole chain of Appetites alternate, in the question of
Good, or Bad, is called Deliberation; so the whole chain of Opinions alternate,
in the question of True, or False, is called DOUBT. Doubt.


No Discourse whatsoever, can End in absolute knowledge of Fact, past, or to
come. For, as for the knowledge of Fact, it is originally, Sense; and ever
after, Memory. And for the knowledge of Consequence, which I have said before
is called Science, it is not Absolute, but Conditional. No man can know by
Discourse, that this, or that, is, has been, or will be; which is to know
absolutely: but only, that if This be, That is; if This has been, That has
been; if This shall be, That shall be: which is to know conditionally; and that
not the consequence of one thing to another; but of one name of a thing, to
another name of the same thing.

And therefore, when the Discourse is put into Speech, and begins with the
Definitions of Words, and proceeds by Connection of the same into general
Affirmations, and of these again into Syllogismes; the End or last sum is
called the Conclusion; and the thought of the mind by it signified, is that
conditional Knowledge, or Knowledge of the consequence of words, which is
commonly called SCIENCE. Science.
But if the first ground of such Discourse, be not Definitions; or if the
Definitions be not rightly joined together into Syllogismes, then the End or
Conclusion, is again OPINION, namely of Opinion.
the truth of somewhat said, though sometimes in absurd and senseless words,
without possibility of being understood. When two, or more men, know of one and
the same fact, they are said to be CONSCIOUS Consci^ce.
of it one to another; which is as much as to know it together. And because
such are fittest witnesses of the facts of one another, or of a third; it was,
and ever will be reputed a very Evil act, for any man to speak against his
Conscience: or to corrupt or force another so to do: Insomuch that the plea of
Conscience, has been always hearkened unto very diligently in all times.
Afterward, men made use of the same word metaphorically, for the knowledge of
their own secret facts, and secret thoughts; and therefore it is Rhetorically
said, that the Conscience is a thousand witnesses. And last of all, men,
vehemently in love with their own new opinions, (though never so absurd,) and
obstinately bent to maintain them, gave those their opinions also that
reverenced name of Conscience, as if they would have it seem unlawful, to
change or speak against them; and so pretend to know they are true, when they
know at most, but that they think so.

When a man's Discourse begins not at Definitions, it begins either at
some other contemplation of his own, and then it is still called Opinion; Or it
begins at some saying of another, of whose ability to know the truth, and of
whose honesty in not deceiving, he doubts not; and then the Discourse is not
so much concerning the Thing, as the Person; And the Resolution is called
BELIEF, and Belief.
FAITH: Faith, in the man; Belief, both of the man, and of the Faith.
truth of what he says. So that in Belief are two opinions; one of the saying
of the man; the other of his virtue. To have faith in, or trust (...)* or
believe a man, signify the same thing; namely, an opinion of the veracity of
the man: But to believe what is said, signifies only an opinion of the truth
of the saying. But we are to observe that this Phrase, I believe in; as also
the Latin, Credo in; and the Greek, (...) are never used but in the writings
of Divines. In stead of them, in other writings are put, I believe him; I trust
him; I have faith in him; I rely on him: and in Latin, Credo illi; fido illi:
and in Greek, (...): and that this singularity of the Ecclesiastique use of the
word has raised many disputes about the right object of the Christian Faith.

But by Believing in, as it is in the Creed, is meant, not trust in the Person;
but Confession and acknowledgement of the Doctrine. For not only Christians,
but all manner of men do so believe in God, as to hold all for truth they hear
him say, whether they understand it, or not; which is all the Faith and trust
can possibly be had in any person whatsoever: But they do not all believe the
Doctrine of the Creed.

From whence we may infer, that when we believe any saying whatsoever it be,
to be true, from arguments taken, not from the thing it self, or from the
principles of natural Reason, but from the Authority, and good opinion we
have, of him that has said it; then is the speaker, or person we believe in,
or trust in, and whose word we take, the object of our Faith; and the Honor
done in Believing, is done to him only. And consequently, when we Believe
that the Scriptures are the word of God, having no immediate revelation from
God himself, our Belief, Faith, and Trust is in the Church; whose word we
take, and acquiesce therein. And they that believe that which a Prophet relates
unto them in the name of God, take the word of the Prophet, do honor to him,
and in him trust, and believe, touching the truth of what he relates, whether
he be a true, or a false Prophet. And so it is also with all other History. For
if I should not believe all that is written by Historians, of the glorious acts
of Alexander, or Caesar; I do not think the Ghost of Alexander, or Caesar, had
any just cause to be offended; or any body else, but the Historian. If Livy say
the Gods made once a Cow speak, and we believe it not; we distrust not God
therein, but Livy. So that it is evident, that whatsoever we believe, upon no
other reason, then what is drawn from authority of men only, and their
writings; whether they be sent from God or not, is Faith in men only.

CHAP. VIII. Of the VIRTUES commonly called INTELLECTUAL; and their contrary
DEFECTS.
VIRTUE generally, in all sorts of subjects, is somewhat that Intellectual
Virtue defined.
is valued for eminence; and consists in comparison. For if all things were
equally in all men, nothing would be prized. And by Virtues INTELLECTUAL, are
always understood such abilityes of the mind, as men praise, value, and desire
should be in themselves; and go commonly under the name of a good wit; though
the same word Wit, be used also, to distinguish one certain ability from the
rest.

These Virtues are of two sorts; Natural, and Acquired. By Natural, Wit,
Natural, or Acquired.
I mean not, that which a man has from his Birth: for that is nothing else but
Sense; wherein men differ so little one from another, and from brute Beasts, as
it is not to be reckoned amongst Virtues. But I mean, that Wit, which is
gotten by Use only, and Experience; without Method, Culture, or Instruction.
This NATURAL Natural Wit.
WIT, consists principally in two things; Celerity of Imagining, (that is,
swift succession of one thought to another;) and steady direction to some
approved end. On the Contrary a slow Imagination, makes that Defect, or fault
of the mind, which is commonly called DULLNESS, Stupidity, and sometimes by
other names that signify slownesse of motion, or difficulty to be moved.

And this difference of quickness, is caused by the difference of men's
passions; that love and dislike, some one thing, some another: and therefore
some men's thoughts run one way, some another; and are held to, and observe
differently the things that pass through their imagination. And whereas in
this succession of men's thoughts, there is nothing to observe in the things
they think on, but either in what they be like one another, or in what they be
unlike, or what they serve for, or how they serve to such a purpose; Those that
observe their similitudes, in case they be such as are but rarely observed by
others, are said to have a Good Wit; by which, in this occasion, is meant a
Good Good Wit, or Fancy.
Fancy. But they that observe their differences, and dissimilitudes; which is
called Distinguishing, and Discerning, and Judging between thing and thing; in
case, such discerning be not easy, are said to have a good Judgment: and
particularly in matter of conversation Good Judgment.
and business; wherein, times, places, and persons are to be discerned, this
Virtue is called DISCRETION. The former, that is, Fancy, Discretion.
without the help of Judgment, is not commended as a Virtue: but the later
which is Judgment, and Discretion, is commended for it self, without the help
of Fancy. Besides the Discretion of times, places, and persons, necessary to a
good Fancy, there is required also an often application of his thoughts to
their End; that is to say, to some use to be made of them. This done; he that
has this Virtue, will be easily fitted with similitudes, that will please, not
only by illustration of his discourse, and adorning it with new and apt
metaphors; but also, by the rarity of their invention. But without Steadiness,
and Direction to some End, a great Fancy is one kind of Madness; such as they
have, that entering into any discourse, are snatched from their purpose, by
every thing that comes in their thought, into so many, and so long digressions,
and Parentheses, that they utterly lose themselves: Which kind of folly, I know
no particular name for: but the cause of it is, sometimes want of experience;
whereby that seems to a man new and rare, which does not so to others:
sometimes Pusillanimity; by which that seems great to him, which other men
think a trifle: and whatsoever is new, or great, and therefore thought fit to
be told, withdrawes a man by degrees from the intended way of his discourse.

In a good Poem, whether it be Epique, or Dramatique; as also in Sonnets,
Epigrams, and other Pieces, both Judgment and Fancy are required: But the
Fancy must be more eminent; because they please for the Extravagancy; but ought
not to displease by Indiscretion.

In a good History, the Judgment must be eminent; because the goodness
consists, in the Method, in the Truth, and in the Choice of the actions that
are most profitable to be known. Fancy has no place, but only in adorning the
style.

In Orations of Praise, and in Invectives, the Fancy is praedominant; because
the design is not truth, but to Honor or Dishonor; which is done by noble,
or by vile comparisons. The Judgment does but suggest what circumstances make
an action laudable, or culpable.

In Hortatives, and Pleadings, as Truth, or Disguise serves best to the
Design in hand; so is the Judgment, or the Fancy most required.

In Demonstration, in Council, and all rigourous search of Truth, Judgment
does all; except sometimes the understanding have need to be opened by some apt
similitude; and then there is so much use of Fancy. But for Metaphors, they are
in this case utterly excluded. For ^eeing they openly profess deceit; to
admit them into Council, or Reasoning, were manifest folly.

And in any Discourse whatsoever, if the defect of Discretion be apparent, how
extravagant soever the Fancy be, the whole discourse will be taken for a sign
of want of wit* and so will it never when the Discretion is manifest, though
the Fancy be never so ordinary.

The secret thoughts of a man run over all things, holy, profane, clean,
obscene grave, and light, without shame, or blame; which verbal discourse
cannot do, farther than the Judgment shall approve of the Time, Place, and
Persons. An Anatomist, or a Physician may speak, or write his judgment of
unclean things; because it is not to please, but profit: but for another man to
write his extravagant, and pleasant fancies of the same, is as if a man, from
being tumbled into the dirt, should come and present himself before good
company. And it is the want of Discretion that makes the difference. Again, in
professed remissness of mind, and familiar company, a man may play with the
sounds, and aequivocall significations of words; and that many times with
encounters of extraordinary Fancy: but in a Sermon, or in public, or before
persons unknown, or whom we ought to reverence, there is no Gingling of words
that will not be accounted folly: and the difference is only in the want of
Discretion. So that where Wit is wanting, it is not Fancy that is wanting, but
Discretion. Judgment therefore without Fancy is Wit, but Fancy without
Judgment not.

When the thoughts of a man, that has a design in hand, ^unning over a
multitude of things, observes how they conduce to that design; or what design
they may conduce unto; if his observations be such as are not easy, or usual,
This wit of his is called PRUDENCE; Prudence.
and depends on much Experience, and Memory of the like things, and their
consequences heretofore. In which there is not so much difference of Men, as
there is in their Fancies and Judgments; Because the Experience of men equal
in age, is not much unequal, as to the quantity; but lies in different
occasions; every one having his private designs. To govern well a family, and
a kingdom, are not different degrees of Prudence; but different sorts of
business; no more then to draw a picture in little, or as great, or greater
then the life, are different degrees of Art. A plain husbandman is more
Prudent in affairs of his own house, then a Privy Counselor in the affairs
of another man.

To Prudence, if you add the use of unjust, or dishonest means, such as
usually are prompted to men by Fear, or Want; you have that Crooked Wisdom,
which is called CRAFT; which is a sign of Craft.
Pusillanimity. For Magnanimity is contempt of unjust, or dishonest helps. And
that which the Latins call Versutia, (translated into English, Shifting,) and
is a putting off of a present danger or incommodity, by engaging into a
greater; as when a man robbs one to pay another, is but a shorter sighted
Craft, called Versutia, from Vers^a, which signisies taking money at usurie, for
the present payment of interest.

As for acquired Wit, (I mean acquired by method and instruction,) Acquired Wit.
there is none but Reason; which is grounded on the right use of Speech; and
produces the Sciences. But of Reason and Science, I have already spoken in the
fifth and sixth Chapters.

The causes of this difference of Wits, are in the Passions: and the
difference of Passions, proceeds partly from the different Constitution of
the body, and partly from different Education. For if the difference proceeded
from the temper of the brain, and the organs of Sense, either exterior or
interior, there would be no less difference of men in their Sight, Hearing, or
other Senses, than in their Fancies, and Discretions. It proceeds therefore
from the Passions; which are different, not only from the difference of men's
complexions; but also from their difference of customs, and education.

The Passions that most of all cause the differences of Wit, are principally,
the more or less Desire of Power, of Riches, of Knowledge, and of Honor. All
which may be reduced to the first, that is Desire of Power. For Riches,
Knowledge and Honor are but several sorts of Power.

And therefore, a man who has no great Passion for any of these things; but is
as men term it indifferent; though he may be so far a good man, as to be
free from giving offense; yet he cannot possibly have either a great Fancy, or
much Judgment. For the Thoughts, are to the Desires, as Scouts, and Spies, to
range abroad, and find the way to the things De^ired: All Stedinesse of the
minds motion, and all quickness of the same, proceeding from thence. For as to
have no Desire, is to be Dead: so to have weak Passions, is Dullness; and to
have Passions indifferently for every thing, GIDDINESS, and Distraction* and
to have stronger, and more vehement Giddiness.
Passions for any thing, than is ordinarily seen in others, is that which men
call MADNESS. Madness.


Whereof there be almost as many kinds, as of the Passions themselves.
Sometimes the extraordinary and extravagant Passion, proceeds from the evil
constitution of the organs of the Body, or harm done them; and sometimes the
hurt, and indisposition of the Organs, is caused by the vehemence, or long
continuance of the Passion. But in both cases the Madness is of one and the
same nature.

The Passion, whose violence, or continuance makes Madness, is either great
Vainglory; which is commonly called Pride* and selfe-conceipt; or great
Dejection of mind.

Pride, subjecteth a man to Anger, the excess whereof, is the Madness called
RAGE, and FURY. And thus it comes to pass Rage.
that excessive desire of Revenge, when it becomes habitual, hurts the
organs, and becomes Rage: That excessive love, with jealousy, becomes also
Rage: Excessive opinion of a man's own self, for divine inspiration, for
wisdom, learning, form, and the like, becomes Distraction, and Giddiness:
The same, joined with Envy, Rage: Vehement opinion of the truth of any thing,
contradicted by others, Rage.

Dejection, subjects a man to causeless fears; which is a Madness commonly
called MELANCHOLY, apparent also in diverse manners; Melancholy.
as in haunting of solitudes, and graves; in superstitious behavior; and in
fearing some one, some another particular thing. In sum, all Passions that
produce strange and unusual behavior, are called by the general name of
Madness. But of the several kinds of Madness, he that would take the pains,
might enrowle a legion. And if the Excesses be madness, there is no doubt but
the Passions themselves, when they tend to Evil, are degrees of the same.

(For example,) Though the effect of folly, in them that are possessed of an
opinion of being inspired, be not visible always in one man, by any very
extravagant action, that proceeds from such Passion; yet when many of them
conspire together, the Rage of the whole multitude is visible enough. For what
argument of Madness can there be greater, than to clamor, strike, and throw
stones at our best friends? Yet this is somewhat less than such a multitude
will do. For they will clamor, fight against, and destroy those, by whom all
their lifetime before, they have been protected, and secured from injury. And
if this be Madness in the multitude, it is the same in every particular man.
For as in the midst of the sea, though a man perceive no sound of that part
of the water next him; yet he is well assured, that part contributes as much,
to the Roaring of the Sea, as any other part, of the same quantity: so also,
though we perceive no great unquietness, in one, or two men; yet we may be
well assured, that their singular Passions, are parts of the Seditious roaring
of a troubled Nation. And if there were nothing else that bewrayed their
madness; yet that very arrogating such inspiration to themselves, is argument
enough. If some man in Bedlam should entertain you with sober discourse; and
you desire in taking leave, to know what he were, that you might another time
requite his civility; and he should tell you, he were God the Father; I think
you need expect no extravagant action for argument of his Madness.

This opinion of Inspiration, called commonly, Private Spirit, begins very
often, from some lucky finding of an Error generally held by others; and not
knowing, or not remembering, by what conduct of reason, they came to so singular
a truth, (as they think it, though it be many times an untruth they light on,)
they presently admire themselves; as being in the special grace of God
Almighty, who has ^evealed the same to them supernaturally, by his Spirit.

Again, that Madness is nothing else, but too much appearing Passion, may be
gathered out of the effects of Wine, which are the same with those of the evil
disposition of the organs. For the variety of behavior in men that have drunk
too much, is the same with that of Madmen: some of them Raging, others Loving,
others Laughing, all extravagantly, but according to their several domineering
Passions: For the effect of the wine, does but remove Dissimulation; and take
from them the sight of the deformity of their Passions. For, (I believe) the
most sober men, when they walk alone without care and employment of the mind,
would be unwilling the vanity and Extravagance of their thoughts at that time
should be publicly seen: which is a confession, that Passions unguided, are
for the most part mere Madness.

The opinions of the world, both in ancient and later ages, concerning the
cause of madness, have been two. Some, deriving them from the Passions; some,
from Demons, or Spirits, either good, or bad, which they thought might enter
into a man, possess him, and move his organs in such strange, and uncouth
manner, as madmen use to do. The former sort therefore, called such men,
Madmen: but the Later, called them sometimes Daemoniacks, (that is, possessed
with spirits;) sometimes Energumeni, (that is, agitated, or moved with
spirits;) and now in Italy they are called not only Pazzi, Madmen; but also
Spiritati, men possessed.

There was once a great conflux of people in Abdera, a City of the Greeks, at
the acting of the Tragedy of Andromeda, upon an extreme hot day: whereupon, a
great many of the spectators falling into Fevers, had this accident from the
heat, and from the Tragedy together, that they did nothing but pronounce
Iambiques, with the names of Perseus and Andromeda; which together with the
Fever, was cured, by the coming on of Winter: And this madness was thought to
proceed from the Passion imprinted by the Tragedy. Likewise there reigned a fit
of madness in another Grecian City, which seized only the young Maidens; and
caused many of them to hang themselves. This was by most then thought an act of
the Devil. But one that suspected, that contempt of life in them, might proceed
from some Passion of the mind, and supposing they did not contemn also their
honor, gave counsel to the Magistrates, to strip such as so hanged
themselves, and let them hang out naked. This the story says cured that
madness. But on the other side, the same Graecians, did often ascribe
madness, to the operation of the Eumenides, or Furyes; and sometimes of Ceres,
Phoebus, and other Gods: so much did men attribute to Phantasmes, as to think
them aereal living bodies; and generally to call them Spirits. And as the
Romans in this, held the same opinion with the Greeks: so also did the Jews;
For they called madmen Prophets, or (according as they thought the spirits
good or bad) Daemoniacks; and some of them called both Prophets, and
Daemoniacks, madmen; and some called the same man both Daemoniack, and
madman. But for the Gentiles, it is no wonder; because Diseases, and Health;
Vices, and Virtues; and many natural accidents, were with them termed, and
worshipped as Demons. So that a man was to understand by Demon, as well
(sometimes) an Ague, as a Devil. But for the Jews to have such opinion, is
somewhat strange. For neither Moses, nor Abraham pretended to Prophecy by
possession of a Spirit; but from the voice of God; or by a Vision or Dream: Nor
is there any thing in his Law, Moral, or Ceremonial, by which they were
taught, there was any such Enthusiasme; or any Possession. When God is said,
Numb. 11. 25. to take from the Spirit that was in Moses, and give to the 70.
Elders, the Spirit of God (taking it for the substance of God) is not divided.
The Scriptures by the Spirit of God in man, mean a man's spirit, inclined to
Godliness. And where it is said Exodus 28. 3. Whom I have filled with the
spirit of wisdom to make garments for Aaron, is not meant a spirit put into
them, that can make garments; but the wisdom of their own spirits in that kind
of work. In the like sense, the spirit of man, when it produces unclean
actions, is ordinarily called an unclean spirit; and so other spirits, though
not always, yet as often as the virtue or vice so styled, is extraordinary,
and Eminent. Neither did the other Prophets of the old Testament pretend
Enthusiasme; or, that God spoke in them; but to them by Voice, Vision, or
Dream; and the Burden of the Lord was not Possession, but Command. How then
could the Jews fall into this opinion of possession? I can imagine no reason,
but that which is common to all men; namely, the want of curiosity to search
natural causes; and their placing Felicity, in the acquisition of the gross
pleasures of the Senses, and the things that most immediately conduce thereto.
For they that see any strange, and unusual ability, or defect in a man's mind;
unless they see withal, from what cause it may probably proceed, can hardly
think it natural; and if not natural, they must needs think it
supernatural; and then what can it be, but that either God, or the Devil is
in him? And hence it came to pass, when our Savior Mark 3. 21.) was compassed
about with the multitude, those of the house doubted he was mad, and went out
to hold him: but the Scribes said he had Beelzebub, and that was it, by which he
cast out devils; as if the greater madman had awed the lesser. And that ( John
10. 20.) some said, He has a Devil, and is mad; whereas others holding him
for a Prophet, said, These are not the words of one that has a Devil. So in
the old Testament he that came to anoint Jehu, 2 Kings 9. 11. was a Prophet;
but some of the company asked Jehu, What came that madman for? So that in
sum, it is manifest, that whosoever behaved himself in extraordinory manner,
was thought by the Jews to be possessed either with a good, or evil spirit;
except by the Sadduces, who erred so far on the other hand, as not to believe
there were at all any spirits, (which is very near to direct Atheism;) and
thereby perhaps the more provoked others, to term such men Daemoniacks, rather
than madmen.

But why then does our Savior proceed in the curing of them, as if they were
possessed; and not as if they were mad? To which I can give no other kind of
answer, but that which is given to those that urge the Scripture in like manner
against the opinion of the motion of the Earth. The Scripture was written to
show unto men the kingdom of God, and to prepare their minds to become his
obedient subjects; leaving the world, and the Philosophy thereof, to the
disputation of men, for the exercising of their natural Reason. Whether the
Earths, or Suns motion make the day, and night; or whether the Exorbitant
actions of men, proceed from Passion, or from the Devil, (so we worship him
not) it is all one, as to our obedience, and subjection to God Almighty; which
is the thing for which the Scripture was written. As for that our Savior
speaks to the disease, as to a person; it is the usual phrase of all that
cure by words only, as Christ did, (and Inchanters pretend to do, whether they
speak to a Devil or not.) For is not Christ also said ( Math. 8. 26.) to have
rebuked the winds? Is not he said also ( Luke 4. 39.) to rebuke a Fever? Yet
this does not argue that a Fever is a Devil. And whereas many of those Devils
are said to confess Christ; it is not necessary to interpret those places
otherwise, than that those madmen confessed him. And whereas our Savior (
Math. 12. 43.) speaks of an unclean Spirit, that having gone out of a man,
wandreth through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none; and returning into
the same man, with seven other spirits worse than himself; It is manifestly a
Parable, alluding to a man, that after a little endeavor to quit his lusts, is
vanquished by the strength of them; and becomes seven times worse than he was.
So that I see nothing at all in the Scripture, that requires a belief, that
Daemoniacks were any other thing but Madmen.

There is yet another fault in the Discourses of some men; which Insignificant
Speech.
may also be numbered amongst the sorts of Madness; namely, that abuse of
words, whereof I have spoken before in the fifth chapter, by the Name of
Absurdity. And that is, when men speak such words, as put together, have in
them no signification at all; but are fallen upon by some, through
misunderstanding of the words they have received, and repeat by rote; by
others, from intention to deceive by obscurity. And this is incident to none
but those, that converse in questions of matters incomprehensible, as the
Schoolmen; or in questions of abstruse Philosophy. The common sort of men
seldom speak Insignificantly, and are therefore, by those other Egregious
persons counted Idiots. But to be assured their words are without any thing
correspondent to them in the mind, there would need some Examples; which if any
man require, let him take a Schooleman into his hands, and see if he can
translate any one chapter concerning any difficult point; as the Trinity; the
Deity; the nature of Christ; Transubstantiation; Free Will, etc. into any of
the modern tongues, so as to make the same intelligible; or into any tolerable
Latin, such as they were acquainted withal, that lived when the Latin tongue
was Vulgar. What is the meaning of these words. The first cause does not
necessarily inflow any thing into the second, by force of the Essential
subordination of the second causes, by Which it may help it to work? They are
the Translation of the Title of the sixth chapter of Suarez first Book, Of the
Concourse, Motion, and Help of God. When men write whole volumes of such
stuff, are they not Mad, or intend to make others so? And particularly, in the
question of Transubstantiation; where after certain words spoken, they that
say, the White nesse, Round nesse, Magnitude, Quality, Corruptibility, all
which are incorporeall, etc. go out of the Wafer, into the Body of our blessed
Savior, do they not make those Nessles, Tudes, and Ties, to be so many spirits
possessing his body? For by Spirits, they mean always things, that being
incorporeall, are nevertheless moveable from one place to another. So that
this kind of Absurdity, may rightly be numbered amongst the many sorts of
Madness; and all the time that guided by clear Thoughts of their worldly lust,
they forbear disputing, or writing thus, but Lucide Intervals. And thus much of
the Virtues and Defects Intellectual.

CHAP. IX. Of the Several SUBJECTS of KNOWLEDGE.
THere are of KNOWLEDGE two kinds; whereof one is Knowledge of Fact: the other
Knowledge of the Consequence of one Affirmation to another. The former is
nothing else, but Sense and Memory, and is Absolute Knowledge; as when we see a
Fact doing, or remember it done: And this is the Knowledge required in a
Witness. The later is called Science; and is Conditional; as when we know,
that, If the figure shown be a Circle, then any straight line through the
Center shall divide it into two equal parts. And this is the Knowledge
required in a Philosopher; that is to say, of him that pretends to Reasoning.

The Register of Knowledge of Fact is called History. Whereof there be two
sorts: one called Natural History; which is the History of such Facts, or
Effects of Nature, as have no Dependence on Man's Will; Such as are the
Histories of Metalls, Plants, Animals, Regions, and the like. The other, is
Civil History; which is the History of the Voluntary Actions of men in
Commonwealths.

The Registers of Science, are such Books as contain the Demonstrations of
Consequences of one Affirmation, to another; and are commonly called Books of
Philosophy; whereof the sorts are many, according to the diversity of the
Matter; And may be divided in such manner as I have divided them in the
following Table.

SCIENCE, that is, Knowledge of Consequences; which is called also PHILOSOPHY.
Consequences from the Accidents of Bodies Natural; which is called NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY. Consequences from the Accidents common to all Bodies Natural;
which are Quantity, and Motion. Consequences from Quantity, and Motion
indeterminate; which being the Principles, or first foundation of Philosophy,
is called Philosophia Prima. PHILOSOPH PRIMA.
Consequences from Motion, and Quantity determined. Consequences from Quantity,
and Motion determined By Figure,..... Mathematiques, GEOMETRY. ARITHMETI QU

By Number,.... Mathematiques, GEOMETRY. ARITHMETI QU


Consequences from the Motion, and Quantity of Bodies in special. Consequences
from the Motion, and Quantity of the great parts of the World, as the Earth and
Stars, Cosmography, ASTRONOMY. GEOGRAPHY.

Consequences from the Motion of Special kinds, and Figures of Body,
Mechaniques, Science of EN NEERS. ARCHITECTUR NAVIGATION.
Doctrine of Weight,



PHYSIQUES, or Consequences from Qualities. Consequences from the Qualities of
Bodies Transient, such as sometimes appear, sometimes vanish,............
METEOROLOG Consequences from the Qualities of Bodies Permanent. Consequences
from the Qualities of the Stars. Consequences from the Light of the Stars.
Out of this, and the Motion of the Sun, is made the Science
of...................... SCIOGRAPHY. Consequences from the Influence of the
Stars,............... ASTROLOGY.
Consequences of the Qualities from Liquid Bodies that fill the space between
the Stars; such as are the Air, or substance aetheriall. Consequences from
the Qualities of Bodies Terrestrial. Consequences from the parts of the Earth,
that are without Sense, Consequences from the Qualities of Minerals, as Stones,
Metalls, etc. Consequences from the Qualities of Vegetables.
Consequences from the Qualiti^s of Animals. Consequences from the Qualities of
Animals in general Consequences from Vision,.... OPTIQUES. Consequences from
Sounds,.... MUSIC. Consequences from the rest of the Senses.
Consequences from the Qualities of Men in special Consequences from the
Passions of Men,............ ETHIQUES. Consequences from Speech, In Magnifying,
Vilifying, etc. POETRY. In Perswadi^g,.. RHETHORI QU In Reasoning,... LOGIQUE.
In Contracting,.. The Science of (...) and UNJUST.






Consequences from the Accidents of Politic Bodies; which is called
POLITIQUES, and CIVIL PHILOSOPHY. 1. Of Consequences from the Institution of
COMMONWEALTHS, to the Rights, and Duties of the Body Politic, or Soveraig^.
2. Of Consequences from the same, to the Duty, and Right of the Subjects.


Place this Table between folio 40. and 41.

CHAP. X. Of POWER, WORTH, DIGNITY, HONOR, and WORTHINESS.
THe POWER of a Man, (to take it Universally,) is his present Power.
means, to obtain some future apparent Good. And is either Original, or
Isntrumental.

Natural Power, is the eminence of the Faculties of Body, or Mind: as
extraordinary Strength, Form, Prudence, Arts, Eloquence, Liberality, Nobility.
Isntrumental are those Powers, which acquired by these, or by fortune, are
means and Instruments to acquire more: as Riches, Reputation, Friends, and the
secret working of God, which men call Good Luck. For the nature of Power, is in
this point, like to Fame, increasing as it proceeds; or like the motion of
heavy bodies, which the further they go, make still the more have.

The Greatest of humane Powers, is that which is compounded of the Powers of
most men, united by consent, in one person, Natural, or Civil, that has the
use of all their Powers depending on his will; such as is the Power of a
Commonwealth: Or depending on the wills of each particular; such as is the
Power of a Faction, or of diverse factions leagued. Therefore to have servants,
is Power; To have friends, is Power: for they are strengths united.

Also Riches joined with liberality, is Power; because it procures friends,
and servants: Without liberality, not so; because in this case they defend not;
but expose men to Envy, as a Prey.

Reputation of power, is Power; because it draws with it the adhaerence of
those that need protection.

So ^s Reputation of love of a man's Country, (called Popularity,) for the same
Reason.

Also, what quality soever makes a man beloved, or feared of many; or the
reputation of such quality, is Power; because it is a means to have the
assistance, and service of many.

Good success is Power; because it makes reputation of Wisdom, or good
fortune; which makes men either fear him, or rely on him.

Affability of men already in power, is increase of Power; because it gains
love.

Reputation of Prudence in the conduct of Peace or War, is Power; because to
prudent men, we commit the government of our selves, more willingly than to
others.

Nobility is Power, not in all places, but only in those Commonwealths, where
it has Privileges: for in such privileges consists their Power.

Eloquence is power; because it is seeming Prudence.

Form is Power; because being a promise of Good, it recommendeth men to the
favor of women and strangers.

The Sciences, are small Power; because not eminent; and therefore, not
acknowledged in any man; nor are at all, but in a few; and in them, but of a
few things. For Science is of that nature, as none can understand it to be, but
such as in a good measure have attained it.

Arts of public use, as Fortification, making of Engines, and other
Instruments of War; because they confer to Defense, and Victory, are Power:
And though the true Mother of them, be Science, namely the Mathematiques; yet,
because they are brought into the Light, by the hand of the Artificer, they be
esteemed (the Midwife passing with the vulgar for the Mother,) as his issue.

The Value, or WORTH of a man, is as of all other things, his Price; Worth.
that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his Power: and
therefore is not absolute; but a thing dependant on the need and judgment of
another. An able conductor of Soldiers, is of great Price in time of War
present, or imminent; but in Peace not so. A learned and incorrupt Judge, is
much Worth in time of Peace; but not so much in War. And as in other things, so
in men, not the seller, but the buyer determines the Price. For let a man (as
most men do,) rate themselves at the highest Value they can; yet their true
Value is no more than it is esteemed by others.

The manifestation of the Value we set on one another, is that which is
commonly called Honoring, and Dishonouring. To Value a man at a high rate, is
to Honor him; at a low rate, is to Dishonor him. But high, and low, in this
case, is to be understood by comparison to the rate that each man sets on
himself.

The public worth of a man, which is the Value set on him by the
Commonwealth, is that which men commonly call DIGNITY. Dignity.
And this Value of him by the Commonwealth, is understood, by offices of
Command, Judicature, public Employment; or by Names and Titles, introduced for
distinction of such Value.

To pray to another, for aid of any kind, is to HONOR; because To Honor and
Dishonor.
a sign we have an opinion he has power to help; and the more difficult the
aid is, the more is the Honor.

To obey, is to Honor; because no man obeyes them, whom they think have no
power to help, or hurt them. And consequently to disobey, is to Dishonor.

To give great gifts to a man, is to Honor him; because it is buying of
Protection, and acknowledging of Power. To give little gifts, is to Dishonor;
because it is but Alms, and fignifies an opinion of the need of small helps.

To be sedulous in promoting another good; also to flatter, is to Honor; as a
sign we seek his protection or aid. To neglect, is to Dishonor.

To give way, or place to another, in any Commodity, is to Honor; being a
confession of greater power. To arrogate, is to Dishonor.

To s^w any sign of love, or fear of another, is to Honor; for both to love,
and to fear, is to value. To contemn, or less to love or fear, then he
expects, is to Dishonor; for it is undervaluing.

To praise, magnify, or call happy, is to Honor; because nothing but
goodness, power, and felicity is valued. To revile, mock, or pity, is to
Dishonor.

To speak to another with consideration, to appear before him with decency, and
humility, is to Honor him; as signs of fear to offend. To speak to him
rashly, to do any thing before him obscenely, slovenly, impudently, is to
Dishonor.

To believe, to trust, to rely on another, is to Honor him; sign of opinion
of his virtue and power. To distrust, or not believe, is to Dishonor,

To hearken to a man's counsel, or discourse of what kind soever, is to Honor;
as a sign we think him wise, or eloquent, or witty. To sleep, or go forth, or
talk the while, is to Dishonor.

To do those things to another, which he takes for signs of Honor, or which
the Law or Custom makes so, is to Honor; because in approving the Honor done
by others, he acknowledges the power which others acknowledge. To refuse to do
them, is to Dishonor.

To agree with in opinion, is to Honor; as being a sign of approving his
judgment, and wisdom. To dissent, is Dishonor* and an upbraiding of error;
and (if the dissent be in many things) of folly.

To imitate, is to Honor; for it is vehemently to approve. To imitate ones
Enemy, is to Dishonor.

To honor those another honors, is to Honor him; as a sign of approbation
of his judgment. To honor his Enemies, is to Dishonor him.

To employ in counsel, or in actions of difficulty, is to Honor; as a sign
of opinion of his wisdom, or other power. To deny employment in the same
cases, to those that seek it, is to Dishonor.

All these ways of Honoring, are natural; and as well within, as without
Commonwealths. But in Commonwealths, where he, or they that have the supreme
Authority, can make whatsoever they please, to stand for signs of Honor,
there be other Honors.

A Sovereign does Honor a Subject, with whatsoever Title, o^ Office, or
Employment, or Action, that he himself will have taken for a sign of his will
to Honor him.

The King of Persia, Honored Mordecay, when he appointed he should be
conducted through the streets in the Kings Garment, upon one of the Kings
Horses, with a Crown on his head, and a Prince before him, proclayming, Thus
shall it be done to him that the King will honor. And yet another King of
Persia, or the same another time, to one that demanded for some great service,
to wear one of the Kings robes, gave him leave so to do; but with this
addition, that he should wear it as the Kings fool; and then it was
Dishonor. So that of Civil Honor, the Fountain is in the person of the
Commonwealth, and depends on the Will of the Sovereign; and is therefore
temporary, and called Civil Honor; such as are Magistracy, Offices, Titles;
and in some places Coats, and Scutchions painted: and men Honor such as have
them, as having so many signs of favor in the Commonwealth; which favor is
Power.

Honorable is whatsoever possession, action, or quality, is an argument
Honorable.
and sign of Power.

And therefore To be Honored, loved, or feared of many, is Honorable; as
arguments of Power. To be Honored of few or none, Dishonorable.
Dishonorable.

Dominion, and Victory is Honorable; because acquired by Power; and Servitude,
for need, or fear, is Dishonorable.

Good fortune (if lasting,) Honorable; as a sign of the favor of God. Ill
fortune, and losses, Dishonorable. Riches, are Honorable; for they are Power.
Poverty, Dishonorable. Magnanimity, Liberality, Hope, Courage, Confidence, are
Honorable; for they proceed from the conscience of Power. Pusillanimity,
Parsimony, Fear, Diffidence, are Dishonorable.

Timely Resolution, or determination of what a man is to do, is Honorable; as
being the contempt of small difficulties, and dangers. And Irresolution,
Dishonorable; as a sign of too much valuing of little impediments, and little
advantages: For when a man has weighed things as long as the time permits, and
resolves not, the difference of weight is but little; and therefore if he
resolve not, he overvalues little things, which is Pusillanimity.

All Actions, and Speeches, that proceed, or seem to proceed from much
Experience, Science, Discretion, or Wit, are Honorable; For all these are
Powers. Actions, or Words that proceed from Error, Ignorance, or Folly,
Dishonorable.

Gravity, as far forth as it seems to proceed from a mind employed on some
thing else, is Honorable; because employment is a sign of Power. But if it
seem to proceed from a purpose to appear grave, it is Dishonorable. For the
gravity of the former, is like the steadiness of a Ship laden with
Merchandise; but of the later, like the steadiness of a Ship ballasted with
Sand, and other trash.

To be Conspicuous, that is to say, to be known, for Wealth, Office, great
Actions, or any eminent Good, is Honorable; as a sign of the power for which
he is conspicuous. On the contrary, Obscurity, is Dishonorable.

To be descended from conspicuous Parents, is Honorable; because they the more
easily attain the aids, and friends of their Ancestors. On the contrary, to be
descended from obscure Parentage, is Dishonorable.

Actions proceeding from Equity, joined with loss, are Honorable; as signs
of Magnanimity: for Magnanimity is a sign of Power. On the contrary, Craft,
Shifting, neglect of Equity, is Dishonorable.

Covetousness of great Riches, and ambition of great Honors, are Honorable;
as signs of power to obtain them. Covetousness, and ambition, of little
gains, or preferments, is Dishonorable.

Nor does it alter the case of Honor, whether an action (so it be great and
difficult, and consequently a sign of much power,) be just or unjust: for
Honor consists only in the opinion of Power. Therefore the ancient Heathen
did not think they Dishonored, but greatly Honored the Gods, when they
introduced them in their Poems, committing Rapes, Thefts, and other great, but
unjust, or unclean acts: In so much as nothing is so much celebrated in
Jupiter, as his Adulteries; nor in Mercury, as his Frauds, and Thefts: of whose
praises, in a hymn of Homer, the greatest is this, that being born in the
morning, he had invented Music at noon, and before night, stolen away the
Cattle of Apollo, from his Herdsmen.

Also amongst men, till there were constituted great Commonwealths, it was
thought no dishonor to be a Pyrate, or a Highway Thief; but rather a lawful
Trade* not only amongst the Greeks, but also amongst all other Nations; as is
manifest by the Histories of ancient time. And at this day, in this part of the
world, private Duels are, and always will be Honorable, though unlawful,
till such time as there shall be Honor ordained for them that refuse, and
Ignominy for them that make the Challenge. For Duels also are many times
effects of Courage; and the ground of Courage is always Strength or Skill,
which are Power; though for the most part they be effects of rash speaking, and
of the fear of Dishonor, in one, or both the Combatants; who engaged by
rashness, are driven into the Lists to avoid disgrace.

Scutchions, and Coats of Arms haereditary, where they have any Coats of Arms.
eminent Privileges, are Honorable; otherwise not: for their Power consists
either in such Privileges, or in Riches, or some such thing as is equally
honored in other men. This kind of Honor, commonly called Gentry, has been
derived from the Ancient Germans. For there never was any such thing known,
where the German Customs were unknown. Nor is it now any where in use, where
the Germans have not inhabited. The ancient Greek Commanders, when they went to
war, had their Shields painted with such Devises as they pleased; insomuch as
an unpainted Buckler was a sign of Poverty, and of a common Soldier: but they
transmitted not the Inheritance of them. The Romans transmitted the Marks of
their Families: but they were the Images, not the Devises of their Ancestors.
Amongst the people of Asia, Afrique, and America, there is not, nor was ever,
any such thing. The Germans only had that custom; from whom it has been
derived into England, France, Spain and Italy, when in great numbers they
either aided the Romans, or made their own Conquests in these Western parts of
the world.

For Germany, being anciently, as all other Countries, in their beginnings,
divided amongst an infinite number of little Lords, or Masters of Families,
that continually had wars one with another; those Masters, or Lords,
principally to the end they might, when they were Covered with Arms, be known
by their followers; and partly for ornament, both painted their Armor, or their
Scutchion, or Coat, with the picture of some Beast, or other thing; and also
put some eminent* and visible mark upon the Crest of their Helmets. And this
ornament both of the Arms, and Crest, descended by inheritance to their
Children; to the eldest pure, and to the rest with some note of diversity, such
as the Old master, that is to say in Dutch, the Here-alt thought fit. But when
many such Families, joined together, made a greater Monarchy, this duty of the
Herealt, to distinguish Scutchions, was made a private Office a part. And the
issue of these Lords, is the great and ancient Gentry; which for the most part
bear living creatures, noted for courage, and rapine; or Castles, Battlements,
Belts, Weapons, Bars, Palisadoes, and other notes of War; nothing being then in
honor, but virtue military. Afterward, not only Kings, but popular
Commonwealths, gave diverse manners of Scutchions, to such as went forth to the
War, or returned from it, for encouragement, or recompense to their service.
All which, by an observing Reader, may be found in such ancient Histories,
Greek and Latin, as make mention of the German Nation, and Manners, in their
times.

Titles of Honor, such as are Duke, Count, Marquis, and Baron, Titles of
Honor.
are Honorable; as signifying the value set upon them by the Sovereign Power
of the Commonwealth: Which Titles, were in old time titles of Office, and
Command, derived some from the Romans, some from the Germans, and French.
Dukes, in Latin Duces, being Generals in War: Counts, Comites, such as bare
the General company out of friendship; and were left to govern and defend
places conquered, and pacified: Marquises, Marchiones, were Counts that
governed the Marches, or bounds of the Empire. Which titles of Duke, Count, and
Marquis, came into the Empire, about the time of Constantine the Great, from
the customs of the German Militia. But Baron, seems to have been a Title of
the Gauls, and signifies a Great man; such as were the Kings, or Princes men,
whom they employed in war about their persons; and seems to be derived from
Vir, to Ber, and Bar, that signified the same in the Language of the Gauls,
that Vir in Latin; and thence to Bero, and Baro: so that such men were called
Berones, and after Barons; and (in Spanish) Varones. But he that would know
more particularly the original of Titles of Honor, may find it, as I have
done this, in Mr. Seldens most excellent Treatise of that subject. In process
of time these offices of Honor, by occasion of trouble, and for reasons of
good and peaceable government, were turned into mere Titles; serving for the
most part, to distinguish the precedence, place, and order of subjects in the
Commonwealth: and men were made Dukes, Counts, Marquises, and Barons of
Places, wherein they had neither possession, nor command: and other Titles
also, were devised to the same end.

WORTHINESS, is a thing different from the worth, or value of Worthiness.
Fitness.
a man; and also from his merit, or desert; and consists in a particular
power, or ability for that, whereof he is said to be worthy: which particular
ability, is usually named FITNESS, or Aptitude.

For he is Worthiest to be a Commander, to be a Judge, or to have any other
charge, that is best fitted, with the qualities required to the well
discharging of it; and Worthiest of Riches, that has the qualities most
requisite for the well using of them: any of which qualities being absent, one
may nevertheless be a Worthy man, and valuable for some thing else. Again, a
man may be Worthy of Riches, Office, and Employment, that nevertheless, can
plead no right to have it before another; and therefore cannot be said to merit
or deserve it. For Merit, praesupposeth a right, and that the thing deserved is
due by promise: Of which I shall say more hereafter, when I shall speak of
Contracts.

CHAP. XI. Of the difference of MANNERS.
BY MANNERS, I mean not here, Decency of behavior; as how one man should
salute another, or how a man should wash his mouth, or pick his teeth before
company, and such other points of the Small Moralls; But those qualities of
mankind, that What is here meant by Manners.
concern their living together in Peace, and Unity. To which end we are to
consider, that the Felicity of this life, consists not in the repose of a
mind satisfied. For there is no such Finis ultimus, (utmost aim,) nor Summum
Bonum, (greatest Good,) as is spoken of in the Books of the old Moral
Philosophers. Nor can a man any more live, whose Desires are at an end, than
he, whose Senses and Imaginations are at a stand. Felicity is a continual
progress of the desire, from one object to another; the attaining of the
former, being still but the way to the later. The cause whereof is, That the
Object of man's desire, is not to enjoy once only, and for one instant of time;
but to assure for ever, the way of his future desire. And therefore the
voluntary actions and inclinations of all men, tend, not only to the
procuring, but also to the assuring of a contented life; and differ only in
the way: which arises partly from the diversity of passions, in diverse men;
and partly from the difference of the knowledge, or opinion each one has of the
causes, which produce the effect desired.

So that in the first place, I put for a general inclination of all mankind, A
restless desire of Power, in all men.
a perpetual and restless desire of Power after power, that cease only in
Death. And the cause of this, is not always that a man hopes for a more
intensive delight, than he has already attained to; or that he cannot be
content with a moderate power: but because he cannot assure the power and means
to live well, which he has present, without the acquisition of more. And from
hence it is, that Kings, whose power is greatest, turn their endeavors to the
assuring it at home by Laws, or abroad by Wars: and when that is done, there
succeeds a new desire; in some, of Fame from new Conquest; in others, of ease
and sensual pleasure; in others, of admiration, or being flattered for
excellence in some art, or other ability of the mind. Love of Contention from
Competition.


Competition of Riches, Honor, Command, or other power, enclineth to
Contention, Enmity, and War: Because the way of one Competitor, to the
attaining of his desire, is to kill, subdue, supplant, or repel the other.
Particularly, competition of praise, enclineth to a reverence of Antiquity. For
men contend with the living, not with the dead; to these ascribing more than
due, that they may obscure the glory of the other.

Desire of Ease, and sensual Delight, disposes men to obey a common Civil
obedience from love of Ease.
Power: Because by such Desires, a man does abandon the protection might be
hoped for from his own Industry, and labor. Fear of Death, and Wounds,
disposes to the same; and for the same reason. From fear of Death, or Wounds.
On the contrary, needy men, and hardy, not contented with their present
condition; as also, all men that are ambitious of Military command, are
inclined to continue the causes of war; and to stir up trouble and
sedition: for there is no honor Military but by war; nor any such hope to
mend an ill game, as by causing a new shuffle.

Desire of Knowledge, and Arts of Peace, enclineth men to obey a And from love
of Arts.
common Power: For such Desire, contains a desire of leisure; and
consequently protection from some other Power than their own.

Desire of Praise, disposes to laudable actions, such as please them Love of
Virtue, from love Praise.
whose judgment they value; for of those men whom we contemn, we contemn also
the Praises. Desire of Fame after death does the same. And though after death,
there be no sense of the praise given us on Earth, as being joys, that are
either swallowed up in the unspeakable joys of Heaven, or extinguished in the
extreme torments of Hell: yet is not such Fame vain; because men have a present
del^ght therein, from the foresight of it, and of the benefit that may redo^nd
thereby to their posterity: which though they now see not, yet they imagine;
and any thing that is pleasure in the sense, the same also is pleasure in the
imagination.

To have received from one, to whom we think our selves equal, Hate, from
difficulty of Requiting great Benefits.
greater benefits than there is hope to Requite, disposes to counterfeit love;
but really secret hatred; and puts a man into the estate of a desperate debtor,
that in declining the sight of his creditor, tacitly wishes him there, where
he might never see him more. For benefits oblige; and obligation is thraldom;
and unrequitable obligation, perpetual thraldom; which is to ones equal,
hateful. But to have received benefits from one, whom we acknowledge for
superior, enclines to love; because the obligation is no new depression: and
cheerful acceptance, (which men call Gratitude,) is such an honor done to
the obliger, as is taken generally for retribution. Also to receive benefits,
though from an equal, or inferior, as long as there is hope of requital,
disposes to love: for in the intention of the receiver, the obligation is of
aid, and service mutual; from whence proceeds an Emulation of who shall
exceed in benefiting; the most noble and profitable contention possible;
wherein the victor is pleased with his victory, and the other revenged by
confessing it. And from Conscience of deserving to (...).


To have done more hurt to a man, than he can, or is willing to expiate,
enclineth the doer to hate the sufferer. For he must expect revenge, or
forgiveness; both which are hateful.

Fear of oppression, disposes a man to anticipate, or to seek aid Promptness
to hurt, from Fear.
by society: for there is no other way by which a man can secure his life and
liberty.

Men that distrust their own subtilty, are in tumult, and sedition, And from
distrufl of their own wit*
better disposed for victory, than they that suppose themselves wife, or
crafty. For these love to consult, the other (fearing to be circumvented,) to
strike first. And in sedition, men being always in the procincts of battle,
to hold together, and use all advantages of force, is a better stratagem, than
any that can proceed from subtilty of Wit.

Vainglorious men, such as without being conscious to themselves Vain
undertaking from Vainglory.
of great sufficiency, delight in supposing themselves gallant men, are
inclined only to ostentation; but not to attempt: Because when danger or
difficulty appears, they look for nothing but to have their insufficiency
discovered.

Vainglorious men, such as estimate their sufficiency by the flattery of other
men, or the fortune of some precedent action, without assured ground of hope
from the true knowledge of themselves, are inclined to rash engaging; and in
the approach of danger, or difficulty, to retire if they can: because not
seeing the way of safety, they will rather hazard their honor, which may be
salved with an excuse; than their lives, for which no salve is sufficient.

Men that have a strong opinion of their own wisdom in matter of Ambition,
from opinion of sufficiency.
government, are disposed to Ambition. Because without public Employment in
counsel or magistracy, the honor of their wisdom is lost. And therefore
Eloquent speakers are inclined to Ambition; for Eloquence seems wisdom,
both to themselves and others.

Pusillanimity disposes men to Irresolution, and consequently to Irresolution,
from too great valuing of small matters.
lose the occasions, and fittest opportunities of action. For after men have
been in deliberation till the time of action approach, if it be not then
manifest what is best to be done, it is a sign, the difference of Motives, the
one way and the other, are not great: Therefore not to resolve then, is to lose
the occasion by weighing of trifles; which is Pusillanimity.

Frugality, (though in poor men a Virtue,) makes a man unapt to atchieve such
actions, as require the strength of many men at once: For it weakeneth their
Endeavor, which is to be nourished and kept in vigor by Reward.

Eloquence, with flattery, disposes men to confide in them that Con^idence in
others from Ignorance of the marks of Wisdom and Kindness.
have it; because the former is seeming Wisdom, the later seeming Kindness.
Add to them Military reputation, and it disposes men to adhaere, and subject
themselves to those men that have them. The two former, having given them
caution against danger from him; the later gives them caution against danger
from others.

Want of Science, that is, Ignorance of causes, disposes, or rather And from
Ignorance of natural causes.
constrains a man to rely on the advice, and authority of others. For all men
whom the truth concerns, if they rely not on their own, must rely on the
opinion of some other, whom they think wiser than themselves, and see not why
he should deceive them.

Ignorance of the signification of words; which is, want of understanding, And
from want of Understanding.
disposes men to take on trust, not only the truth they know not; but also
the errors; and which is more, the nonsense of them they trust: For neither
Error, nor nonsense, can without a perfect understanding of words, be detected.

From the same it proceeds, that men give different names, to one and the
same thing, from the difference of their own passions: As they that approve a
private opinion, call it Opinion; but they that mislike it, Haeresie: and yet
haeresie signifies no more than private opinion; but has only a greater
tincture of choler.

From the same also it proceeds, that men cannot distinguish, without study
and great understanding, between one action of many men, and many actions of
one multitude; as for example, between the one action of all the Senators of
Rome in killing Catiline, and the many actions of a number of Senators in
killing Caesar; and therefore are disposed to take for the action of the
people, that which is a multitude of actions done by a multitude of men, led
perhaps by the persuasion of one.

Ignorance of the causes, and original constitution of Right, Equity,
Adhaerence to Custom, from Ignorance of the nature of Right and Wrong.
Law, and Justice, disposes a man to make Custom and Example the rule of his
actions; in such manner, as to think that Unjust which it has been the custom
to punish; and that Just, of the impunity and approbation whereof they can
produce an Example, or (as the Lawyers which only use this false measure of
Justice barbarously call it) a Precedent; like little children, that have no
other rule of good and evil manners, but the correction they receive from
their Parents, and Masters; save that children are constant to their rule,
whereas men are not so; because grown strong, and stubborn, they appeal from
custom to reason, and from reason to custom, as it serves their turn;
receding from custom when their interest requires it, and setting themselves
against reason, as often as reason is against them: Which is the cause, that the
doctrine of Right and Wrong, is perpetually disputed, both by the Pen and the
Sword: Whereas the doctrine of Lines, and Figures, is not so; because men care
not, in that subject what be truth, as a thing that crosses no man's ambition,
profit, or lust. For I doubt not, but if it had been a thing contrary to any
man's right of dominion, or to the interest of men that have dominion, That the
three Angles of a Triangle, should be equal to two Angles of a Square; that
doctrine should have been, if not disputed, yet by the burning of all books of
Geometry, suppressed, as far as he whom it concerned was able.

Ignorance of remote causes, disposes men to attribute all events, Adhaerence
to private men, From ignorance of the Causes of Peace.
to the causes immediate, and Isntrumental: For these are all the causes they
perceive. And hence it comes to pass, that in all places, men that are grieved
with payments to the Public, discharge their anger upon the Publicans, that
is to say, Farmers, Collectors, and other Officers of the public Revenue; and
adhaere to such as find fault with the public Government; and thereby, when
they have engaged themselves beyond hope of justification, fall also upon the
Supreme Authority, for fear of punishment, or shame of receiving pardon.

Ignorance of natural causes disposes a man to Credulity, so as to Credulity
from Ignorance of nature.
believe many times impossibilities: For such know nothing to the contrary, but
that they may be true; being unable to detect the Impossibility. And Credulity,
because men love to be hearkened unto in company, disposes them to lying: so
that Ignorance it self without Malice, is able to make a man both to believe
lies, and tell them; and sometimes also to invent them.

Anxiety for the future time, disposes men to enquire into the causes
Curiosity to know, from Care of future time.
of things: because the knowledge of them, makes men the better able to order
the present to their best advantage.

Curiosity, or love of the knowledge of causes, draws a man from Natural Re
ligion, from the same.
consideration of the effect, to seek the cause; and again, the cause of that
cause; till of necessity he must come to this thought at last, that there is
some cause, whereof there is no former cause, but is eternal; which is it men
call God. So that it is impossible to make any profound enquiry into natural
causes, without being inclined thereby to believe there is one God Eternal;
though they cannot have any Idea of him in their mind, answerable to his
nature. For as a man that is born blind, hearing men talk of warming themselves
by the fire, and being brought to warm himself by the same, may easily
conceive, and assure himself, there is somewhat there, which men call Fire,
and is the cause of the heat he feels; but cannot imagine what it is like; nor
have an Idea of it in his mind, such as they have that see it: so also, by the
visible things of this world, and their admirable order, a man may conceive
there is a cause of them, which men call God; and yet not have an Idea, or
Image of him in his mind.

And they that make little, or no enquiry into the natural causes of things,
yet from the fear that proceeds from the ignorance it self, of what it is
that has the power to do them much good or harm, are inclined to suppose, and
feign unto themselves, several kinds of Powers Invisible; and to stand in awe
of their own imaginations; and in time of distress to invoke them; as also in
the time of an expected good success, to give them thanks; making the
creatures of their own fancy, their Gods. By which means it has come to pass,
that from the innumerable variety of Fancy, men have created in the world
innumerable sorts of Gods. And this Fear of things invisible, is the natural
Seed of that, which every one in himself calls Religion; and in them that
worship, or fear that Power otherwise than they do, Superstition.

And this seed of Religion, having been observed by many; some of those that
have observed it, have been inclined thereby to nourish, dress, and form it
into Laws; and to add to it of their own invention, any opinion of the causes
of future events, by which they thought they should best be able to govern
others, and make unto themselves the greatest use of their Powers.

CHAP. XII. OF RELIGION.
SEeing there are no signs, nor fruit of Religion, but in Man Religion, in Man
only.
only; there is no cause to doubt, but that the seed of Religion, is also
only in Man; and consists in some peculiar quality, or at least in some
eminent degree thereof, not to be found in other Living creatures.

And first, it is peculiar to the nature of Man, to be inquisitive into First,
from his desire of knowing Causes.
the Causes of the Events they see, some more, some less; but all men so much,
as to be curious in the search of the causes of their own good and evil
fortune.

Secondly, upon the sight of any thing that has a Beginning, to From the
consideration of the Beginning of things.
think also it had a cause, which determined the same to begin, then when it
did, rather than sooner or later.

Thirdly, whereas there is no other Felicity of Beasts, but the enjoying From
his observation of the Sequel of things.
of their quotidian Food, Ease, and Lusts; as having little, or no foresight of
the time to come, for want of observation, and memory of the order,
consequence, and dependence of the things they see; Man observes how one Event
has been produced by another; and remembers in them Antecedence and
Consequence; And when he cannot assure himself of the true causes of things,
(for the causes of good and evil fortune for the most part are invisible,) he
supposes causes of them, either such as his own fancy suggesteth; or trusts
to the Authority of other men, such as he thinks to be his friends, and wiser
than himself.

The two first, make Anxiety. For being assured that there be causes The
natural Cause of Religion, the Anxiety of the time to come.
of all things that have arrived hitherto, or shall arrive hereafter; it is
impossible for a man, who continually endeavors to secure himself against
the evil he fears, and procure the good he desires, not to be in a
perpetual solicitude of the time to come; So that every man, especially those
that are over provident, are in an estate like to that of Prometheus. For as
Prometheus, (which interpreted, is, The prudent man,) was bound to the hill
Caucasus, a place of large prospect, where, an Eagle feeding on his liver,
devoured in the day, as much as was repaired in the night: So that man, which
looks too far before him, in the care of future time, has his heart all the
day long, gnawed on by fear of death, poverty, or other calamity; and has no
repose, nor pause of his anxiety, but in sleep.

This perpetual fear, always accompanying mankind in the ignorance Which
makes them fear the Power of Invisible things.
of causes, as it were in the Dark, must needs have for object something. And
therefore when there is nothing to be seen, there is nothing to accuse, either
of their good, or evil fortune, but some Power, or Agent Invisible: In which
sense perhaps it was, that some of the old Poets said, that the Gods were at
first created by humane Fear: which spoken of the Gods, (that is to say, of
the many Gods of the Gentiles) is very true. But the acknowledging of one God
Eternal, Infinite, and Omnipotent, may more easily be derived, from the desire
men have to know the causes of natural bodies, and their several virtues, and
operations; than from the fear of what was to be fall them in time to come.
For he that from any effect he sees come to pass, should reason to the next
and immediate cause thereof, and from thence to the cause of that cause, and
plonge himself profoundly in the pursuit of causes; shall at last come to
this, that there must be (as even the Heathen Philosophers confessed) one First
Mover; that is, a First, and an Eternal cause of all things; which is that
which men mean by the name of God: And all this without thought of their
fortune; the solicitude whereof, both enclines to fear, and hinders them from
the search of the causes of other things; and thereby gives occasion of
feigning of as many Gods, as there be men that feign them.

And for the matter, or substance of the Invisible Agents, so fancyed; And
suppose them Incorporeall.
they could not by natural cogitation, fall upon any other conceit, but that
it was the same with that of the Soul of man; and that the Soul of man, was
of the same substance, with that which appears in a Dream, to one that
sleeps; or in a Looking-glass, to one that is awake; which, men not knowing
that such apparitions are nothing else but creatures of the Fancy, think to be
real, and external Substances; and therefore call them Ghosts; as the Latins
called them Imagines, and Umbrae; and thought them Spirits, that is, thin
aereall bodies; and those Invisible Agents, which they feared, to be like
them; save that they appear, and vanish when they please. But the opinion that
such Spirits were Incorporeall, or Immateriall, could never enter into the mind
of any man by nature; because, though men may put together words of
contradictory signification, as Spirit, and Incorporeall; yet they can never
have the imagination of any thing answering to them: And therefore, men that by
their own meditation, arrive to the acknowledgement of one Infinite,
Omnipotent, and Eternal God, choose rather to confess he is Incomprehensible,
and above their understanding; than to define his Nature by Spirit
Incorporeall, and then confess their definition to be unintelligible: or if
they give him such a title, it is not Dogmatically, with intention to make the
Divine Nature understood; but Piously, to honor him with attributes, of
significations, as remote as they can from the grossness of Bodies Visible.

Then, for the way by which they think these Invisible Agents But know not the
way how they effect any thing.
wrought their effects; that is to say, what immediate causes they used, in
bringing things to pass, men that know not what it is that we call causing,
(that is, almost all men) have no other rule to guess by, but by observing,
and remembering what they have seen to precede the like effect at some other
time, or times before, without seeing between the antecedent and subsequent
Event, any dependence or connection at all: And therefore from the like things
past, they expect the like things to come; and hope for good or evil luck,
superstitiously, from things that have no part at all in the causing of it: As
the Athenians did for their war at Lepanto, demand another Phormio; The
Pompeian faction for their war in Afrique, another Scipio; and others have
done in diverse other occasions since. In like manner they attribute their
fortune to a stander by, to a lucky or unlucky place, to words spoken,
especially if the name of God be amongst them; as Charming, and Conjuring (the
Leiturgy of Witches;) insomuch as to believe, they have power to turn a stone
into bread, bread into a man, or any thing, into any thing.

Thirdly, for the worship which naturally men exhibit to Powers But honor
them as they honor m^n.
invisible, it can be no other, but such expressions of their reverence, as
they would use toward men; Gifts, Petitions, Thanks, Submission of Body,
Considerate Addresses, sober Behavior, premeditated Words, Swearing (that is,
assuring one another of their promises,) by invoking them. Beyond that reason
suggesteth nothing; but leaves them either to rest there; or for further
ceremonies, to rely on those they believe to be wiser than themselves.

Lastly, concerning how these Invisible Powers declare to men the And attribute
to them all extraordinary events.
things which shall hereafter come to pass, especially concerning their good
or evil fortune in general, or good or ill success in any particular
undertaking, men are naturally at a stand; save that using to conjecture of the
time to come, by the time past, they are very apt, not only to take casual
things, after one or two encounters, for Prognostiques of the like encounter
ever after, but also to believe the like Prognostiques from other men, of whom
they have once conceived a good opinion.

And in these four things, Opinion of Ghosts, Ignorance of second Four
things, Natural seeds of Religion.
causes, Devotion toward what men fear, and Taking of things Casual for
Prognostiques, consists the Natural seed of Religion; which by reason of the
different Fancies, Judgments, and Passions of several men, has grown up into
ceremonies so different, that those which are used by one man, are for the most
part ridiculous to another.

For these seeds have received culture from two sorts of men. One Mide
different by Culture.
sort have been they, that have nourished, and ordered them, according to their
own invention. The other, have done it, by Gods commandment, and direction:
but both sorts have done it, with a purpose to make those men that relied on
them, the more apt to Obedience, Laws, Peace, Charity, and civil Society. So
that the Religion of the former sort, is a part of humane Politiques; and
teaches part of the duty which Earthly Kings require of their Subjects. And
the Religion of the later sort is Divine Politiques; and contains Precepts to
those that have yielded themselves subjects in the Kingdom of God. Of the
former sort, were all the founders of Commonwealths, and the Lawgivers of the
Gentiles: Of the later sort, were Abraham, Moses, and our Blessed Savior; by
whom have been derived unto us the Laws of the Kingdom of God.

And for that part of Religion, which consists in opinions concerning The
absurd opinion of Gentilisme.
the nature of Powers Invisible, there is almost nothing that has a name, that
has not been esteemed amongst the Gentiles, in one place or another, a God, or
Devil; or by their Poets feigned to be inanimated, inhabited, or possessed by
some Spirit or other.

The unformed matter of the World, was a God, by the name of Chaos.

The Heaven, the Ocean, the Planets, the Fire, the Earth, the Winds, were so
many Gods.

Men, Women, a Bird, a Crocodile, a Calf, a Dog, a Snake, an Onion, a Leeke,
De^fied. Besides, that they filled almost all places, with spirits called
Demons: the plains, with Pan, and Panises, or Satyrs; the Woods, with Fawnes,
and Nymphs; the Sea, with Tritons, and other Nymphs; every River, and Fountayn,
with a Ghost of his name, and with Nymphs; every house, with its Lares, or
Familiars; every man, with his Genius; Hell, with Ghosts, and spiritual
Officers, as Charon, Cerberus, and the Furies; and in the night time, all
places with Larvae, Lemures, Ghosts of men deceased, and a whole kingdom of
Fayries, and Bugbears. They have also ascribed Divinity, and built Temples to
mere Acciden^s, and Qualities; such as are Time, Night, Day, Peace, Concord,
Love, Contention, Virtue, Honor, Health, Rust, Fever, and the like; which when
they prayed for, or against, they prayed to, as if there were Ghosts of those
names hanging over their heads, and letting fall, or withholding that Good, or
Evil, for, or against which they prayed. They invoked also their own Wit, by
the name of Muses; their own Ignorance, by the name of Fortune; their own Lust,
by the name of Cupid; their own Rage, by the name Furies; their own privy
members by the name of Priapus; and attributed their pollutions, to ^ncubi, and
Succubae: insomuch as there was nothing, which a Poet could introduce as a
person in his Poem, which they did not make either a God, or a Devil.

The same authors of the Religion of the Gentiles, observing the second ground
for Religion, which is men's Ignorance of causes; and thereby their aptness to
attribute their fortune to causes, on which there was no dependence at all
apparent, took occasion to obtrude on their ignorance, in stead of second
causes, a kind of second and ministerial Gods; ascribing the cause of
Foecundity, to Venus; the cause of Arts, to Apolla; of Subtilty and Craft, to
Mercury; of Tempests and storms, to Aeolus; and of other effects, to other
Gods: insomuch as there was amongst the Heathen almost as great variety of
Gods, as of business.

And to the Worship, which naturally men conceived fit to be used toward
their Gods, namely Oblations, Prayers, Thanks, and the rest formerly named; the
same Legislators of the Gentiles have added their Images, both in Picture, and
Sculpture; that the more ignorant sort, (that is to say, the most part, or
generality of the people,) thinking the Gods for whose representation they were
made, were really included, and as it were housed within them, might so much
the more stand in fear of them: And endowed them with lands, and houses, and
officers, and revenues, set apart from all other humane uses; that is,
consecrated, and made holy to those their Idols; as Caverns, Groves, Woods,
Mountains, and whole Islands; and have attributed to them, not only the shapes,
some of Men, some of Beasts, some of Monsters; but also the Faculties, and
Passions of men and beasts; as Sense, Speech, Sex, Lust, Generation, (and this
not only by mixing one with another, to propagate the kind of Gods; but also
by mixing with men, and women, to beget mongrill Gods, and but inmates of
Heaven, as Bacchus, Hercules, and others;) besides, Anger. Revenge, and other
passions of living creatures, and the actions proceeding from them, as Fraud,
Theft, Adultery, Sodomie, and any vice that may be taken for an effect of
Power, or a cause of Pleasure; and all such Vices, as amongst men are taken to
be against Law, rather than against Honor.

Lastly, to the Prognostiques of time to come; which are naturally, but
Conjectures upon the Experience of time past; and supernaturally, divine
Revelation; the same authors of the Religion of the Gentiles, partly upon
pretended Experience, partly upon pretended Revelation, have added innumerable
other superstitious ways of Divination; and made men believe they should find
their fortunes, sometimes in the ambiguous or senseless answers of the Priests
at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, and other famous Oracles; which answers, were made
ambiguous by design, to own the event both ways; or absurd, by the
intoxicating vapor of the place, which is very frequent in sulphurous
Cavernes: Sometimes in the leaves of the Sibills; of whose Prophecyes (like
those perhaps of Nostradamus; for the fragments now extant seem to be the
invention of later times) there were some books in reputation in the time of
the Roman Republiques Sometimes in the insignificant Speeches of Madmen,
supposed to be possessed with a divine Spirit; which Possession they called
Enthusiasme; and these kinds of foretelling events, were accounted Theomancy,
or Prophecy: Sometimes in the aspect of the Stars at their Nativity; which
was called Horoscopy, and esteemed a part of judiciary Astrology: Sometimes in
their own hopes and fears, called Thumomancy, or Presage: Sometimes in the
Prediction of Witches, that pretended conference with the dead; which is called
Necromancy, Conjuring, and Witchcraft; and is but juggling and confederate
knavery: Sometimes in the Casual flight, or feeding of birds; called Augury:
Sometimes in the Entrayles of a sacrificed beast; which was Aruspicina:
Sometimes in Dreams: Sometimes in Croaking of Ravens, or chattering of Birds:
Sometimes in the Lineaments of the face; which was called Metoposcopy; or by
Palmistry in the lines of the hand; in casual words, called Omina: Sometimes
in Monsters, or unusual accidents; as Ecclipses, Comets, rare Meteors,
Earthquakes, Inundations, uncouth Births, and the like, which they called
Portenta, and Ostenta, because they thought them to portend, or foreshew some
great Calamity to come: Sometimes, in mere Lottery, as Cross and Pile; counting
holes in a sive; dipping of Verses in Homer, and Virgil; and innumerable other
such vain conceits. So easy are men to be drawn to believe any thing, from
such men as have gotten credit with them; and can with gentleness, and
dexterity, take hold of their fear, and ignorance.

And therefore the first Founders, and Legislators of Commonwealths The
designs of the Authors of the Religion of the Heathen.
amongst the Gentiles, whose ends were only to keep the people in obedience,
and peace, have in all places taken care; First, to imprint in their minds a
belief, that those precepts which they gave concerning Religion, might not be
thought to proceed from their own device, but from the dictates of some God, or
other Spirit; or else that they themselves were of a higher nature than mere
mortals, that their Laws might the more easily be received: So Numa Pompilius
pretended to receive the Ceremonies he instituted amongst the Romans, from the
Nymph Egeria: and the first King and founder of the Kingdom of Peru, pretended
himself and his wife to be the children of the Sun: and Mahomet, to set up
his new Religion, pretended to have conferences with the Holy Ghost, in form
of a Dove. Secondly, they have had a care, to make it believed, that the same
things were displeasing to the Gods, which were forbidden by the Laws.
Thirdly, to prescribe Ceremonies, Supplications, Sacrifices, and Festivalls, by
which they were to believe, the anger of the Gods might be appeased; and that
ill success in War, great contagions of Sickness, Earthquakes, and each man's
private Misery, came from the Anger of the Gods; and their Anger from the
Neglect of their Worship, or the forgetting, or mistaking some point of the
Ceremonies required. And though amongst the ancient Romans, men were not
forbidden to deny, that which in the Poets is written of the pains, and
pleasures after this life; which diverse of great authority, and gravity in that
state have in their Harangues openly derided; yet that belief was always more
cherished, than the contrary.

And by these, and such other Institutions, they obtained in order to their
end, (which was the peace of the Commonwealth,) that the common people in their
misfortunes, laying the fault on neglect, or error in their Ceremonies, or on
their own disobedience to the laws, were the less apt to mut^ny against their
Governors. And being entertained with the pomp, and pastime of Festivalls, and
public Games, made in honor of the Gods, needed nothing else but bread, to
keep them from discontent, murmuring, and commotion against the State. And
therefore the Romans, that had conquered the greatest part of the then known
World, made no scruple of tollerating any Religion whatsoever in the City of
Rome it self; unless it had something in it, that could not consist with their
Civil Government; nor do we read, that any Religion was there forbidden, but
that of the Jews; who (being the peculiar Kingdom of God) thought it
unlawful to acknowledge subjection to any mortal King or State whatsoever.
And thus you see how the Religion of the Gentiles was a part of their Policy.

But where God himself, by supernatural Revelation, planted The true
Religion, and the laws of Gods kingdom the same.
Religion; there he also made to himself a peculiar Kingdom; and gave Laws,
not only of behavior toward himself; but also toward one another; and
thereby in the Kingdom of God, the Policy, and laws Civil, are a part of
Religion; and therefore the distinction of Temporal, and Spiritual
Domination, has there no place. It is true, that God is King of all the Earth:
Yet may he be King of a peculiar, and chosen Nation. For there is no more
incongruity therein, than that he that has the general command of the whole
Army, should have withal a peculiar Regiment, or Company of his own. God is
King of all the Earth by his Power: but of his chosen people, he is King by
Covenant. But to speak more largly of the Kingdom of God, both by Nature, and
Covenant, I have in the following discourse assigned an other place. Chap. 35.


From the propagation of Religion, it is not hard to understand The causes of
Change in Religion.
the causes of the resolution of the same into its first seeds, or principles;
which are only an opinion of a Deity, and Powers invisible, and supernatural;
that can never be so abolished out of humane nature, but that new Religions may
again be made to spring out of them, by the culture of such men, as for such
purpose are in reputation.

For seeing all formed Religion, is founded at first, upon the faith which a
multitude has in some one person, whom they believe not only to be a wise man,
and to labou^ to procure their happiness, but also to be a holy man, to whom
God himself vouchsafes to declare his will supernaturally; It follows
necessarily, when they that have the Government of Religion, shall come to have
either the wisdom of those men, their sincerity, or their love suspected; or
that they shall be unable to show any probable token of Divine Revelation; that
the Religion which they desire to uphold, must be suspected likewise; and
(without the fear of the Civil Sword) contradicted and rejected.

That which takes away the reputation of Wisdom, in him that Injoyning
belief of Impossibilities.
forms a Religion, or adds to it when it is already formed, is the
enjoining of a belief of contradictories: For both parts of a contradiction
cannot possibly be true: and therefore to enjoyne the belief of them, is an
argument of ignorance; which detects the Author in that; and discredits him in
all things else he shall propound as from revelation supernatural: which
revelation a man may indeed have of many things above, but of nothing against
natural reason.

That which takes away the reputation of Sincerity, is the doing, Doing
contrary to the Religion they establish.
or saying of such things, as appear to be signs, that what they require
other men to believe, is not believed by themselves; all which doings, or
sayings are therefore called Scandalous, because they be stumbling blocks, that
make men to fall in the way of Religion: as Injustice, Cruelty, Profaneness,
Avarice, and Luxury. For who can believe, that he that does ordinarily such
actions, as proceed from any of these roots, believes there is any such
Invisible Power to be feared, as he affrighteth other men withal, for lesser
faults?

That which takes away the reputation of Love, is the being detected of
private ends: as when the belief they require of others, conduces or seems
to conduce to the acquiring of Dominion, Riches, Dignity, or secure Pleasure,
to themselves only, or specially. For that which men reap benefit by to
themselves, they are thought to do for their own sakes, and not for love of
others.

Lastly, the testimony that men can render of divine Calling, can Want of the
testimony of Miracles.
be no other, than the operation of Miracles; or true Prophecy, (which also is
a Miracle;) or extraordinary Felicity. And therefore, to those points of
Religion, which have been received from them that did such Miracles; those that
are added by such, as approve not their Calling by some Miracle, obtain no
greater belief, than what the Custom, and Laws of the places, in which they
be educated, have wrought into them. For as in natural things, men of
judgment require natural signs, and arguments; so in supernatural things,
they require signs supernatural, (which are Miracles,) before they consent
inwardly, and from their hearts.

All which causes of the weakening of men's faith, do manifestly appear in the
Examples following. First, we have the Example of the children of Israel; who
when Moses, that had approved his Calling to them by Miracles, and by the happy
conduct of them out of Egypt, was absent but 40. days, revolted from the
worship of the true God, recommended to them by him; and setting up Exodus 32.
1, 2.
a Golden Calfe for their God, relapsed into the Idolatry of the Egyptians;
from whom they had been so lately delivered. And again, after Moses, Aaron,
Joshua, and that generation which had seen the great works of God in Israel,
Judges 2. 11.
were dead; another generation arose, and served Baal. So that Miracles
failing, Faith also failed.

Again, when the sons of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 3.
being constituted by their father Judges in Bersabee, received bribes, and
judged unjustly, the people of Israel refused any more to have God to be their
King, in other manner than he was King of other people; and therefore cried out
to Samuel, to choose them a King after the manner of the Nations. So that
Justice failing, Faith also failed: Insomuch, as they deposed their God, from
reigning over them.

And whereas in the planting of Christian Religion, the Oracles ceased in all
parts of the Roman Empire, and the number of Christians increased wonderfully
every day, and in every place, by the preaching of the Apostles, and
Evangelists; a great part of that success, may reasonably be attributed, to
the contempt, into which the Priests of the Gentiles of that time, had brought
themselves, by their uncleanness, avarice, and juggling between Princes. Also
the Religion of the Church of Rome, was partly, for the same cause abolished in
England, and many other parts of Christendom; insomuch, as the failing of
Virtue in the Pastors, makes Faith fail in the People: and partly from
bringing of the Philosophy, and doctrine of Aristotle into Religion, by the
Schoolmen; from whence there arose so many contradictions, and absurdities,
as brought the Clergy into a reputation both of Ignorance, and of Fraudulent
intention; and inclined people to revolt from them, either against the will of
their own Princes, as in France, and Holland; or with their will, as in England.

Lastly, amongst the points by the Church of Rome declared necessary for
Salvation, there be so many, manifestly to the advantage of the Pope, and of
his spiritual subjects, residing in the territories of other Christian
Princes, that were it not for the mutual emulation of those Princes, they
might without war, or trouble, exclude all foreign Authority, as easily as
it has been excluded in England. For who is there that does not see, to whose
benefit it conduces, to have it believed, that a King has not his Authority
from Christ, unless a Bishop crown him? That a King, if he be a Priest, cannot
Marry? That whether a Prince be born in lawful Marriage, or not, must be
judged by Authority from Rome? That Subjects may be freed from their
Allegiance, if by the Court of Rome, the King be judged an Heretic? That a
King (as Chilperique of France) may be deposed by a Pope (as Pope Zachary,) for
no cause; and his Kingdom given to one of his Subjects? That the Clergy, and
Regulars, in what Country soever, shall be exempt from the Jurisdiction of
their King, in cases criminal? Or who does not see, to whose profit redound
the Fees of private Masses, and Vales of Purgatory; with other signs of
private interest, enough to mortify the most lively Faith, if (as I said) the
civil Magistrate, and Custom did not more sustain it, than any opinion they
have of the Sanctity, Wisdom, or Probity of their Teachers? So that I may
attribute all the changes of Religion in the world, to one and the same cause;
and that is, unpleasing Priests; and those not only amongst Catholics, but
even in that Church that has presumed most of Reformation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the NATURAL CONDITION of Mankind, as concerning their
Felicity, and Mis^ry.
NAture has made men so equal, in the faculties of body, and Men by nature
Equal.
mind; as that though there be found one man sometimes manifestly stronger in
body, or of quicker mind then another; yet when all is reckoned together, the
difference between man, and man, is not so considerable, as that one man can
thereupon claim to himself any benefit, to which another may not pretend, as
well as he. For as to the strength of body, the weakest has strength enough to
kill the strongest, either by secret machination, or by confederacy with
others, that are in the fame danger with himself.

And as to the faculties of the mind, (setting aside the arts grounded upon
words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon general, and infallible
rules, called Science; which very few have, and but in few things; as being not
a native faculty, born with us; nor attained, (as Prudence,) while we look
after somewhat else,) I find yet a greater equality amongst men, than that of
strength. For Prudence, is but Experience; which equal time, equally bestows
on all men, in those things they equally apply themselves unto. That which may
perhaps make such equality incredible, is but a vain conceit of ones own
wisdom, which almost all men think they have in a greater degree, than the
Vulgar; that is, than all men but themselves, and a few others, whom by Fame,
or for concurring with themselves, they approve. For such is the nature of men,
that howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be more witty, or more
eloquent, or more learned; Yet they will hardly believe there be many so wise
as themselves: For they see their own wit at hand, and other men's at a
distance. But this proves rather that men are in that point equal, than
unequal. For there is not ordinarily a greater sign of the equal
distribution of any thing, than that every man is contented with his share.

From this equality of ability, arises equality of hope in the From Equ^lity
proce^ds Di^idence.
attaining of our Ends. And therefore if any two men desire the same thing,
which nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the way
to their End, (which is principally their own conservation, and sometimes
their delectation only,) endeavor to destroy, or subdue one an other. And from
hence it comes to pass, that where an Invader has no more to fear, than an
other man's single power; if one plant, sow, build, or possess a convenient
Seat, others may probably be expected to come prepared with forces united, to
dispossess, and deprive him, not only of the fruit of his labor, but also of
his life, or liberty. And the Invader again is in the like danger of another.

And from this diffidence of one another, there is no way for any From
Diffidence War.
man to secure himself, so reasonable, as Anticipation; that is, by force, or
wiles, to master the persons of all men he can, so long, till he see no other
power great enough to endanger him: And this is no more than his own
conservation requires, and is generally allowed. Also because there be some,
that taking pleasure in contemplating their own power in the acts of conquest,
which they pursue farther than their security requires; if others, that
otherwise would be glad to be at ease within modest bounds, should not by
invasion increase their power, they would not be able, long time, by standing
only on their defense, to subsist. And by consequence, such augmentation of
dominion over men, being necessary to a man's conservation, it ought to be
allowed him.

Again, men have no pleasure, (but on the contrary a great deal of grief) in
keeping company, where there is no power able to overawe them all. For every
man looks that his companion should value him, at the same rate he sets upon
himself: And upon all signs of contempt, or undervaluing, naturally
endeavors, as far as he dares (which amongst them that have no common power to
keep them in quiet, is far enough to make them destroy each other,) to extort a
greater value from his contemners, by dommage; and from others, by the example.

So that in the nature of man, we find three principal causes of quarrel.
First, Competition; Secondly, Diffidence; Thirdly, Glory.

The first, makes men invade for Gain; the second, for Safety; and the third,
for Reputation. The first use Violence, to make themselves Masters of other
men's persons, wives, children, and cattle; the second, to defend them; the
third, for trifles, as a word, a smile, a different opinion, and any other
sign of undervalue, either direct in their Persons, or by reflection in their
Kindred, their Friends, their Nation, their Profession, or their Name.

Hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common Out of
Civil States, there is always War of every one against every one.
Power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is called
War; and such a war, as is of every man, against every man. For WAR,
consists not in Battle only, or the act of fighting; but in a tract of
time, wherein the Will to contend by Battle is sufficiently known: and
therefore the notion of Time, is to be considered in the nature of War; as it
is in the nature of Weather. For as the nature of Foul weather, lies not in a
shower or two of rain; but in an inclination thereto of many days together: So
the nature of War, consists not in actual fighting; but in the known
disposition thereto, during all the time there is no assurance to the contrary.
All other time is PEACE.

Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of War, where The Incommodities
of such a War.
every man is Enemy to every man; the same is consequent to the time, wherein
men live without other security, than what their own strength, and their own
invention shall furnish them withal. In such condition, there is no place for
Industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain: and consequently no Culture
of the Earth; no Navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported by
Sea; no commodious Building; no Instruments of moving, and removing such things
as require much force; no Knowledge of the face of the Earth; no account of
Time; no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and which is worst of all, continual
fear, and danger of violent death; And the life of man, solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish, and short.

It may seem strange to some man, that has not well weighed these things; that
Nature should thus dissociate, and render men apt to invade, and destroy one
another: and he may therefore, not trusting to this Inference, made from the
Passions, desire perhaps to have the same confirmed by Experience. Let him
therefore consider with himself, when taking a journey, he arms himself, and
seeks to go well accompanied; when going to sleep, he locks his doors; when
even in his house he locks his chests; and this when he knows there be Laws,
and public Officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall be done him; what
opinion he has of his fellow subjects, when he rides armed; of his fellow
Citizens, when he locks his doors; and of his children, and servants, when he
locks his chests. Does he not there as much accuse mankind by his actions, as I
do by my words? But neither of us accuse man's nature in it. The Desires, and
other Passions of man, are in themselves no Sin. No more are the Actions, that
proceed from those Passions, till they know a Law that forbids them: which till
Laws be made they cannot know: nor can any Law be made, till they have agreed
upon the Person that shall make it.

It may peradventure be thought, there was never such a time, nor condition of
war as this; and I believe it was never generally so, over all the world: but
there are many places, where they live so now. For the savage people in many
places of America, except the government of small Families, the concord whereof
depends on natural lust, have no government at all; and live at this day in
that brutish manner, as I said before. Howsoever, it may be perceived what
manner of life there would be, where there were no common Power to fear; by
the manner of life, which men that have formerly lived under a peaceful
government, use to degenerate into, in a civil War.

But though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were in a
condition of war one against another; yet in all times, Kings, and Persons of
Sovereign authority, because of their Independency, are in continual
jealousies, and in the state and posture of Gladiators; having their weapons
pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another; that is, their Forts, Garrisons,
and Guns upon the Frontiers of their Kingdoms; and continual Spies upon their
neighbors; which is a posture of War. But because they uphold thereby, the
Industry of their Subjects; there does not follow from it, that misery, which
accompanies the Liberty of particular men.

To this war of every man against every man, this also is consequent; In such
a War, nothing is Unjust.
that nothing can be Unjust. The notions of Right and Wrong, Justice and
Injustice have there no place. Where there is no common Power, there is no Law:
where no Law, no Injustice. Force, and Fraud, are in war the two Cardinal
virtues. Justice, and Injustice are none of the Faculties neither of the Body,
nor Mind. If they were, they might be in a man that were alone in the world, as
well as his Senses, and Passions. They are Qualities, that relate to men in
Society, not in Solitude. It is consequent also to the same condition, that
there be no Propriety, no Dominion, no Mine and Thine distinct; but only that
to be every man's, that he can get; and for so long, as he can keep it. And thus
much for the ill condition, which man by mere Nature is actually placed in;
though with a possibility to come out of it, consisting partly in the Passions,
partly in his Reason.

The Passions that incline men to Peace, are Fear of Death; Desire The
Passions that incline men to Peace.
of such things as are necessary to commodious living; and a Hope by their
Industry to obtain them. And Reason suggesteth convenient Articles of Peace,
upon which men may be drawn to agreement. These Articles, are they, which
otherwise are called the Laws of Nature: whereof I shall speak more
particularly, in the two following Chapters.

CHAP. XIV. Of the first and second NATURAL LAWS, and of CONTRACTS.
THe RIGHT OF NATURE, which Writers commonly call Right of Nature what.
Jus Natural, is the Liberty each man has, to use his own power, as he will
himself, for the preservation of his own Nature; that is to say, of his own
Life; and consequently, of doing any thing, which in his own Judgment, and
Reason, he shall conceive to be the aptest means thereunto.

By LIBERTY, is understood, according to the proper signification Liberty what.
of the word, the absence of external Impediments: which Impediments, may often
take away part of a man's power to do what he would; but cannot hinder him from
using the power left him, according as his judgment, and reason shall dictate
to him.

A LAW OF NATURE, ( Lex Naturalis,) is a Precept, or general A Law of Nature
what.
Rule, found out by Reason, by which a man is forbidden to do, that, which is
destructive of his life, or takes away the means of preserving the same; and
to omit, that, by which he thinks it may be best preserved. For though they
that speak of this subject, use to confound Jus, and Lex, Right and Law; yet
they ought to be distinguished; because RIGHT, consists in liberty to do, or
to forbear; Difference of Right and Law.
Whereas LAW, determines, and binds to one of them: so that Law, and Right,
differ as much, as Obligation, and Liberty; which in one and the same matter
are inconsistent.

And because the condition of Man, (as has been declared in the Naturally
every man has Right to everything.
precedent Chapter) is a condition of War of every one against every one; in
which case every one is governed by his own Reason; and there is nothing he can
make use of, that may not be a help unto him, in preserving his life against
his enemies; It follows, that in such a condition, every man has a Right to
every thing; even to one another body. And therefore, as long as this natural
Right of every man to every thing endures, there can be no security to any
man, (how strong or wise soever he be,) of living out the time, which Nature
ordinarily allows men to live. And consequently it is a precept, or general
rule of Reason, That every man, ought to endeavor The Fundamental Law of
Nature.
Peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it,
that he may seek, and use, all helps, and advantages of War. The first branch
of which Rule, contains the first, and Fundamental Law of Nature; which is,
to seek Peace, and follow it. The Second, the sum of the Right of Nature;
which is, By all means we can, to defend our selves.

From this Fundamental Law of Nature, by which men are commanded The seoond
Law of Nature.
to endeavor Peace, is derived this second Law; That a man be willing, when
others are so too, as farre-forth, as for Peace, and defense of himself he
shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be
contented with so much liberty against other men, as he would allow other men
against himself. For as long as every man holds this Right, of doing any
thing he likes; so long are all men in the condition of War. But if other
men will not lay down their Right, as well as he; then there is no Reason for
any one, to divest himself of his: For that were to expose himself to Prey,
(which no man is bound to) rather than to dispose himself to Peace. This is
that Law of the Gospel; Whatsoever you require that others should do to you,
that do ye to them. And that Law of all men, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris.

To lay down a man's Right to any thing, is to divest himself of What it is to
lay down a Right.
the Liberty, of hindering another of the benefit of his own Right to the same.
For he that renounceth, or passes away his Right, gives not to any other man
a Right which he had not before; because there is nothing to which every man
had not Right by Nature: but only stands out of his way, that he may enjoy
his own original Right, without hindrance from him; not without hindrance from
another. So that the efect which redoundeth to one man, by another man's defect
of Right, is but so much diminution of impediments to the use of his own Right
original.

Right is laid aside, either by simply Renouncing it; or by Transferring
Renouncing a Right what it is.
it to another. By Simply RENOUNCING; when he cares not to whom the benefit
thereof redoundeth. By TRANSFERRING; Transferring Right what.
when he intends the benefit thereof to some certain person, or persons. And
when a man has in either manner abandoned, or granted away his Right; then is
he said to be OBLIGED, or BOUND, not to Obligation.
hinder those, to whom such Right is granted, or abandoned, from the benefit of
it: and that he Ought, and it is his DUTY, not to make Duty.
void that voluntary act of his own: and that such hindrance is INJUSTICE, and
INJURY, as being Sine Jure; the Right being before Injustice.
renounced, or transferred. So that Injury, or Injustice, in the controversies
of the world, is somewhat like to that, which in the disputations of Scholars
is called Absurdity. For as it is there called an Absurdity, to contradict what
one maintained in the Beginning: so in the world, it is called Injustice, and
Injury, voluntarily to undo that, which from the beginning he had voluntarily
done. The way by which a man either simply Renounceth, or Transferreth his
Right, is a Declaration, or Signification, by some voluntary and sufficient
sign, or signs, that he does so Renounce, or Transfer; or has so
Renounced, or Transferred the same, to him that accepts it. And these Signs
are either Words only, or Actions only; or (as it happens most often) both
Words, and Actions. And the same are the BONDS, by which men are bound, and
obliged: Bonds, that have their strength, not from their own Nature, (for
nothing is more easily broken then a man's word,) but from Fear of some evil
consequence upon the rupture.

Whenever a man Transferreth his Right, or Renounceth it; it Not all Rights
are alienable.
is either in consideration of some Right reciprocally transferred to himself;
or for some other good he hops for thereby. For it is a voluntary act: and of
the voluntary acts of every man, the object is some Good to himself. And
therefore there be some Rights, which no man can be understood by any words, or
other signs, to have abandoned; or transferred. As first a man cannot lay down
the right of resisting them, that assault him by force, to take away his life;
because he cannot be understood to aim thereby, at any Good to himself. The
same may be said of Wounds; and Chayns, and Imprisonment; both because there is
no benefit consequent to such patience; as there is to the patience of
suffering another to be wounded, or imprisoned: as also because a man cannot
tell, when he sees men proceed against him by violence, whether they intend
his death or not. And lastly the motive, and end for which this renouncing, and
transferring of Right is introduced, is nothing else but the security of a man's
person, in his life, and in the means of so preserving life, as not to be weary
of it. And therefore if a man by words, or other signs, seem to despoyle
himself of the End, for which those signs were intended; he is not to be
understood as if he meant it, or that it was his will; but that he was ignorant
of how such words and actions were to be interpreted.

The mutual transferring of Right, is that which men call CONTRACT. Contract
what.


There is difference, between transferring of Right to the Thing; and
transferring, or tradition, that is, delivery of the Thing it self. For the
Thing may be delivered together with the Translation of the Right; as in buying
and selling with ready money; or exchange of goods, or lands: and it may be
delivered some time after.

Again, one of the Contractors, may deliver the Thing contracted for on his
part, and leave the other to perform his part at some determinate time after,
and in the mean time be trusted; and then the Contract on his part, is called
PACT,* or COVENANT: Or both parts Covenant what.
may contract now, to perform hereafter: in which cases, he that is to
perform in time to come, being trusted, his performance is called Keeping of
Promise, or Faith; and the failing of performance (if it be voluntary)
Violation of Faith.

When the transferring of Right, is not mutual; but one of the parties
transferreth, in hope to gain thereby friendship, or service from another, or
from his friends; or in hope to gain the reputation of Charity, or Magnanimity;
or to deliver his mind from the pain of compassion; or in hope of reward in
heaven; This is not Contract, but GIFT, FREE-GIFT, GRACE: which words signify
one and the Free-gift.
same thing.

Signs of Contract, are either Express, or by Inference. Signs of Contract
Express.
Express, are words spoken with understanding of what they signify: And such
words are either of the time Present, or Past; as, I Give, I Grant, I have
Given, I have Granted, I will that this be yours: Or of the future; as, I will
Give, I will Grant: which words of the future, are called PROMISE. Signs of
Contract by Inference.


Signs by Inference, are sometimes the consequence of Words; sometimes the
consequence of Silence; sometimes the consequence of Actions; sometimes the
consequence of Forbearing an Action: and generally a sign by Inference, of any
Contract, is whatsoever sufficiently argues the will of the Contractor.

Words alone, if they be of the time to come, and contain a bare Free gift
passes by words of the Present or Past.
promise, are an insufficient sign of a Free-gift and therefore not
obligatory. For if they be of the time to Come, as, To morrow I will Give, they
are a sign I have not given yet, and consequently that my right is not
transferred, but remains till I transfer it by some other Act. But if the
words be of the time Present, or Past, as, I have given, or do give to be
delivered to morrow, then is my to morrows Right given away to day; and that by
the virtue of the words, though there were no other argument of my will. And
there is a great difference in the signification of these words; Volo hoc tuum
esse cras, and Cras dabo; that is, between I will that this be thine to morrow,
and, I will give it thee to morrow: For the word I will, in the former manner
of speech, signifies an act of the will Present; but in the later, it fignifies
a promise of an act of the will to Come: and therefore the former words, being
of the Present, transfer a future right; the later, that be of the Future,
transfer nothing. But if there be other signs of the Will to transfer a
Right, besides Words; then, though the gift be Free, yet may the Right be
understood to pass by words of the future: as if a man propound a Prize to him
that comes first to the end of a race, The gift is Free; and though the words
be of the Future, yet the Right passes: for if he would not have his words so
be understood, he should not have let them run.

In Contracts, the right passes, not only where the words are of Signs of
Contract are words both of the Past, Present, and Future.
the time Present, or Past; but also where they are of the Future: because all
Contract is mutual translation, or change of Right; and therefore he that
promises only, because he has already received the benefit for which he
promises, is to be understood as if he intended the Right should pass: for
unless he had been content to have his words so understood, the other would
not have performed his part first. And for that cause, in buying, and selling,
and other acts of Contract, a Promise is equivalent to a Covenant; and
therefore obligatory.

He that performs first in the case of a Contract, is said to MERIT Merit
what.
that which he is to receive by the performance of the other; and he has it as
Due. Also when a Prize is propounded to many, which is to be given to him only
that wins; or money is thrown amongst many, to be enjoyed by them that catch
it; though this be a Free gift; yet so to Win, or so to Catch, is to Merit, and
to have it as DUE. For the Right is transferred in the Propounding of the
Prize, and in throwing down the money; though it be not determined to whom, but
by the Event of the contention. But there is between these two sorts of Merit,
this difference, that In Contract, I Merit by virtue of my own power, and the
Contractors need; but in this case of Free gift, I am enabled to Merit only by
the benignity of the Giver: In Contract, I merit at the Contractors hand that
he should depart with his right; In this case of Gift, I Merit not that the
giver should part with his right; but that when he has parted with it, it
should be mine, rather than another. And this I think to be the meaning of
that distinction of the Schools, between Meritum congrui, and Meritum
condigni. For God Almighty, having promised Paradise to those men (hoodwinkt
with carnal desires,) that can walk through this world according to the
Precepts, and Limits prescribed by him; they say, he that shall so walk, shall
Merit Paradise Ex congruo. But because no man can demand a right to it, by his
own Righteousness, or any other power in himself, but by the Free Grace of
God only; they say, no man can Merit Paradise ex condigno. This I say, I think
is the meaning of that distinction; but because Disputers do not agree upon the
signification of their own terms of Art, longer than it serves their turn; I
will not affirm any thing of their meaning: only this I say; when a gift is
given indefinitely, as a prize to be contended for, he that wins Meriteth,
and may claim the Prize as Due.

If a Covenant be made, wherein neither of the parties perform Covenants of
Mutual trust, when Invalid.
presently, but trust one another; in the condition of mere Nature, (which is a
condition of War of every man against every man,) upon any reasonable
suspicion, it is Void: But if there be a common Power set over them both, with
right and force sufficient to compel performance; it is not Void. For he that
performs first, has no assurance the other will perform after; because the
bonds of words are too weak to bridle men's ambition, avarice, anger, and other
Passions, without the fear of some coerceive Power; which in the condition of
mere Nature, where all men are equal, and judges of the justness of their own
fears, cannot possibly be supposed. And therefore he which performs first,
does but betray himself to his enemy; contrary to the Right (he can never
abandon) of defending his life, and means of living.

But in a civil estate, where there is a Power set up to constrain those that
would otherwise violate their faith, that fear is no more reasonable; and for
that cause, he which by the Covenant is to perform first, is obliged so to do.

The cause of fear, which makes such a Covenant invalid, must be always
something arising after the Covenant made; as some new fact, or other sign of
the Will not to perform: else it cannot make the Covenant void. For that which
could not hinder a man from promising, ought not to be admitted as a hindrance
of performing.

He that transferreth any Right, transferreth the Means of enjoying Right to
the End, Contains Right to the Means.
it, as far as lies in his power. As he that sells Land, is understood to
transfer the Herbage, and whatsoever grows upon it; Nor can he that sells a
Mill turn away the Stream that drives it. And they that give to a man the Right
of government in Sovereignty, are understood to give him the right of levying
money to maintain Soldiers; and of appointing Magistrates for the
administration of Justice.

To make Covenants with bruit Beasts, is impossible; because not No Covenant
with Beasts.
understanding our speech, they understand not, nor accept of any translation
of Right; nor can translate any Right to another: and without mutual
acceptance, there is no Covenant.

To make Covenant with God, is impossible, but by Mediation of Nor with God
wit^out special Revelation.
such as God speaks to, either by Revelation supernatural, or by his
Lieutenants that govern under him, and in his Name: For otherwise we know not
whether our Covenants be accepted, or not. And therefore they that Vow any
thing contrary to any law of Nature, Vow in vain; as being a thing unjust to
pay such Vow. And if it be a thing commanded by the Law of Nature, it is not
the Vow, but the Law that binds them.

The matter, or subject of a Covenant, is always something that No Covenant,
but of Possible and Future.
falls under deliberation; (For to Covenant, is an act of the Will; that is
to say an act, and the last act, of deliberation;) and is therefore always
understood to be something to come; and which is judged Possible for him that
Covenanteth, to perform.

And therefore, to promise that which is known to be Impossible, is no
Covenant. But if that prove impossible afterward, which before was thought
possible, the Covenant is valid, and binds, (though not to the thing it
self,) yet to the value; or, if that also be impossible, to the unfeigned
endeavor of performing as much as is possible: for to more no man can be
obliged.

Men are freed of their Covenants two ways; by Performing; or Covenants how
made void.
by being Forgiven. For Performance, is the natural end of obligation; and
Eorgivenesse, the restitution of liberty; as being a retransferring of that
Right, in which the obligation consisted.

Covenants entered into by fear, in the condition of mere Nature, Covenants
extorted by fear are valide.
are obligatory. For example, if I Covenant to pay a ransom, or service for my
life, to an enemy; I am bound by it. For it is a Contract, wherein one
receives the benefit of life; the other is to receive money, or service for it;
and consequently, where no other Law (as in the condition, of mere Nature)
forbids the performance, the Covenant is valid. Therefore Prisoners of
war, if trusted with the payment of their Ransom, are obliged to pay it: And
if a weaker Prince, make a disadvantageous peace with a stronger, for fear; he
is bound to keep it; unless (as has been said before) there arises some new,
and just cause of fear, to renew the war. And even in Commonwealths, if I be
forced to redeem my self from a Thief by promising him money, I am bound to
pay it, till the Civil Law discharge me. For whatsoever I may lawfully do
without Obligation, the same I may lawfully Covenant to do through fear: and
what I lawfully Covenant, I cannot lawfully break.

A former Covenant, makes void a later. For a man that has passed The former
Covenant to one, makes void the later to another.
away his Right to one man to day, has it not to pass to morrow to another:
and therefore the later promise passes no Right, but is null.

A Covenant not to defend my self from force, by force, is always A man's
Covenant not to defend himself, is void.
void. For (as I have showed before) no man can transfer, or lay down his
Right to save himself from Death, Wounds, and Imprisonment, (the avoiding
whereof is the only End of laying down any Right, and therefore the promise of
not resisting force, in no Covenant transferreth any right; nor is obliging.
For though a man may Covenant thus, Unless I do so, or so, kill me; he cannot
Covenant thus, Unless I do so, or so, I will not resist you, when you come to
kill me. For man by nature chooses the lesser evil, which is danger of death
in resisting; rather than the greater, which is certain and present death in
not resisting. And this is granted to be true by all men, in that they lead
Criminals to Execution, and Prison, with armed men, notwithstanding that such
Criminals have consented to the Law, by which they are condemned.

A Covenant to accuse ones self, without assurance of pardon, is No man
obliged to accuse himself.
likewise invalide. For in the condition of Nature, where every man is Judge,
there is no place for Accusation: and in the Civil State, the Accusation is
followed with Punishment; which being Force, a man is not obliged not to
resist. The same is also true, of the Accusation of those, by whose
Condemnation a man falls into misery; as of a Father, Wife, or Benefactor. For
the Testimony of such an Accuser, if it be not willingly given, is praesumed to
be corrupted by Nature; and therefore not to be received: and where a man's
Testimony is not to be credited, he is not bound to give it. Also Accusations
upon Torture, are not to be reputed as Testimonies. For Torture is to be used
but as means of conjecture, and light, in the further examination, and search
of truth: and what is in that case confessed, tends to the ease of him that
is Tortured; not to the informing of the Torturers: and therefore ought not to
have the credit of a sufficient Testimony: for whether he deliver himself by
true, or false Accusation, he does it by the Right of preserving his own life.

The force of Words, being (as I have formerly noted) too weak The End of an
Oath.
to hold men to the performance of their Covenants; there are in man's nature,
but two imaginable helps to strengthen it. And those are either a Fear of the
consequence of breaking their word; or a Glory, or Pride in appearing not to
need to break it. This later is a Generosity too rarely found to be presumed
on, especially in the pursuers of Wealth, Command, or sensual Pleasure; which
are the greatest part of Mankind. The Passion to be reckoned upon, is Fear;
whereof there be two very general Objects: one, The Power of Spirits
Invisible; the other, The Power of those men they shall therein Offend. Of
these two, though the former be the greater Power, yet the fear of the later
is commonly the greater Fear. The Fear of the former is in every man, his own
Religion: which has place in the nature of man before Civil Society. The
later has not so; at least not place enough, to keep men to their promises;
because in the condition of mere Nature, the inequality of Power is not
discerned, but by the event of Battle. So that before the time of Civil
Society, or in the interruption thereof by War, there is nothing can
strengthen a Covenant of Peace agreed on, against the temptations of Avarice,
Ambition, Lust, or other strong desire, but the fear of that Invisible Power,
which they every one Worship as God; and Fear as a Revenger of their perfidy.
All therefore that can be done between two men not subject to Civil Power, is
to put one another to swear by the God he fears: Which Swearing, or OATH, is
a The form of an Oath.
Form of Speech, added to a Promise; by which he that promises, ^gnisieth,
that unless he perform, he renounceth the mercy of his God, or calls to him
for vengeance on himself. Such was the Heathen Form, Let Jupiter kill me
else, as I kill this Beast. So is our Form, I shall do thus, and thus, so help
me God. And this, with the Rites and Ceremonies, which every one uses in his
own Religion, that the fear of breaking faith might be the greater.

By this it appears, that an Oath taken according to any other No Oath, but by
God.
Form, or Rite, then his, that swears, is in vain; and no Oath: And that
there is no Swearing by any thing which the Swearer thinks not God. For though
men have sometimes used to swear by their Kings, for fear, or flattery; yet
they would have it thereby understood, they attributed to them Divine honor.
And that Swearing unnecessarily by God, is but profaning of his name: and
Swearing by other things, as men do in common discourse, is not Swearing, but
an impious Custom, gotten by too much vehemence of talking.

It appears also, that the Oath adds nothing to the Obligation. For An Oath
adds nothing to the Obligation.
a Covenant, if lawful, binds in the sight of God, without the Oath, as much
as with it: if unlawful, binds not at all; though it be confirmed with an
Oath.

CHAP. XV. Of other Laws of Nature.
FRom that law of Nature, by which we are obliged to transfer The third Law
of Nature, Justice.
to another, such Rights, as being retained, hinder the peace of Mankind, there
follows a Third; which is this, That men perform their Covenants made:
without which, Covenants are in vain, and but Empty words; and the Right of all
men to all things remaining, we are still in the condition of War.

And in this law of Nature, consists the Fountain and Original Justice and
Jnjustice what.
of JUSTICE. For where no Covenant has preceded, there has no Right been
transferred, and every man has right to every thing; and consequently, no
action can be Unjust. But when a Covenant is made, then to break it is Unjust:
And the definition of INJUSTICE, is no other than the not Performance of
Covenant. And whatsoever is not Unjust, is Just.

But because Covenants of mutual trust, where there is a fear of not Justice
and Propriety begin with the Constitution of Commonwealth.
performance on either part, (as has been said in the former Chapter,) are
invalid; though the Original of Justice be the making of Covenants; yet
Injustice actually there can be none, till the cause of such fear be taken
away; which while men are in the natural condition of War, cannot be done.
Therefore before the names of Just, and Unjust can have place, there must be
some coercive Power, to compel men equally to the performance of their
Covenants, by the terror of some punishment, greater than the benefit they
expect by the breach of their Covenant; and to make good that Propriety, which
by mutual Contract men acquire, in recompense of the universal Right they
abandon: and such power there is none before the erection of a Commonwealth.
And this is also to be gathered out of the ordinary definition of Justice in
the Schools: For they say, that Justice is the constant Will of giving to
every man his own. And therefore where there is no Own, that is, no Propriety,
there is no Injustice; and where there is no coerceive Power erected, that is,
where there is no Commonwealth, there is no Propriety; all men having Right to
all things: Therefore where there is no Commonwealth, there nothing is Unjust.
So that the nature of Justice, consists in keeping of valid Covenants: but
the Validity of Covenants begins not but with the Constitution of a Civil
Power, sufficient to compel men to keep them: And then it is also that
Propriety begins.

The Fool has fayd in his heart, there is no such thing as Justice; Justice
not Contrary to Reason.
and sometimes also with his tongue; seriously alleging, that every man's
conservation, and contentment, being committed to his own care, there could be
no reason, why every man might not do what he thought conduced thereunto: and
therefore also to make, or not make; keep, or not keep Covenants, was not
against Reason, when it conduced to ones benefit. He does not therein deny,
that there be Covenants; and that they are sometimes broken, sometimes kept;
and that such breach of them may be called Injustice, and the observance of
them Justice: but he questioneth, whether Injustice, taking away the fear of
God, (for the same Fool has said in his heart there is no God,) may not
sometimes stand with that Reason, which dictateth to every man his own good;
and particularly then, when it conduces to such a benefit, as shall put a man
in a condition, to neglect not only the dispraise, and revilings, but also the
power of other men. The Kingdom of God is gotten by violence: but what if it
could be gotten by unjust violence? were it against Reason so to get it, when
it is impossible to receive hurt by it? and if it be not against Reason, it is
not against Justice: or else Justice is not to be approved for good. From such
reasoning as this, Succesfull wickedness has obtained the name of Virtue: and
some that in all other things have disallowed the violation of Faith; yet have
allowed it, when it is for the getting of a Kingdom. And the Heathen that
believed, that Saturn was deposed by his son Jupiter, believed nevertheless
the same Jupiter to be the avenger of Injustice: Somewhat like to a piece of
Law in Cokes Commentaries on Litleton; where he says, If the right Heir of
the Crown be attainted of Treason; yet the Crown shall descend to him, and eo
instante the Atteynder be void: From which instances a man will be very prone
to infer; that when the Heir apparent of a Kingdom, shall kill him that is
in possession, though his father; you may call it Injustice, or by what other
name you will; yet it can never be against Reason, seeing all the voluntary
actions of men tend to the benefit of themselves; and those actions are most
Reasonable, that conduce most to their ends. This specious reasoning is
nevertheless false.

For the question is not of promises mutual, where there is no security of
performance on either side; as when there is no Civil Power erected over the
parties promising; for such promises are no Covenants: But either where one of
the parties has performed already; or where there is a Power to make him
perform; there is the question whether it be against reason, that is, against
the benefit of the other to perform, or not. And I say it is not against
reason. For the manifestation whereof, we are to consider; First, that when a
man does a thing, which notwithstanding any thing can be foreseen, and reckoned
on, tends to his own destruction, howsoever some accident which he could not
expect, arriving may turn it to his benefit; yet such events do not make it
reasonably or wisely done. Secondly, that in a condition of War, wherein
every man to every man, for want of a common Power to keep them all in awe, is
an Enemy, there is no man can hope by his own strength, or wit, to defend
himself from destruction, without the help of Confederates; where every one
expects the same defense by the Confederation, that any one else does: and
therefore he which declares he thinks it reason to deceive those that help him,
can in reason expect no other means of safety, than what can be had from his
own single Power. He therefore that breaks his Covenant, and consequently
declares that he thinks he may with reason do so, cannot be received into any
Society, that unite themselves for Peace and Defense, but by the error of them
that receive him; nor when he is received, be retained in it, without seeing
the danger of their error; which errors a man cannot reasonably reckon upon
as the means of his security: and therefore if he be left, or cast out of
Society, he perishes; and if he live in Society, it is by the errors of other
men, which he could not foresee, nor reckon upon; and consequently against the
reason of his preservation; and so, as all men that contribute not to his
destruction, forbear him only out of ignorance of what is good for themselves.

As for the Instance of gaining the secure and perpetual felicity of Heaven,
by any way; it is frivolous: there being but one way imaginable; and that is
not breaking, but keeping of Covenant.

And for the other Instance of attaining Sovereignty by Rebellion; it is
manifest, that though the event follow, yet because it cannot reasonably be
expected, but rather the contrary; and because by gaining it so, others are
taught to gain the same in like manner, the attempt thereof is against reason.
Justice therefore, that is to say, Keeping of Covenant, is a Rule of Reason, by
which we are forbidden to do any thing destructive to our life; and
consequently a Law of Nature.

There be some that proceed further; and will not have the Law of Nature, to be
those Rules which conduce to the preservation of man's life on earth; but to the
attaining of an eternal felicity after death; to which they think the breach
of Covenant may conduce; and consequently be just and reasonable; (such are
they that think it a work of merit to kill, or depose, or rebel against, the
Sovereign Power constituted over them by their own consent.) But because there
is no natural knowledge of man's estate after death; much less of the reward
that is then to be given to breach of Faith; but only a belief grounded upon
other men's saying, that they know it supernaturally, or that they know those,
that knew them, that knew others, that knew it supernaturally; Breach of Faith
cannot be called a Precept of Reason, or Nature.

Others, that allow for a Law of Nature, the keeping of Faith, do Covenants not
discharged by the Vice of the Person to whom they are made.
nevertheless make exception of certain persons; as Heretics, and such as
use not to perform their Covenant to others: And this also is against reason.
For if any fault of a man, be sufficient to discharge our Covenant made; the
same ought in reason to have been sufficient to have hindered the making of it.

The names of Just, and Injust, when they are attributed to Men, Justice of
Men, and Justice of Actions what.
signify one thing; and when they are attributed to Actions, another. When
they are attributed to Men, they signify Conformity, or Inconformity of
Manners, to Reason. But when they are attributed to Actions, they signify the
Conformity, or Inconformity to Reason, not of Manners, or manner of life, but
of particular Actions. A Just man therefore, is he that takes all the care he
can, that his Actions may be all Just: and an Unjust man, is he that neglects
it. And such men are more often in our Language styled by the names of
Righteous, and Unrighteous; then Just, and Unjust; though the meaning be the
same. Therefore a Righteous man, does not lose that Title, by one, or a few
unjust Actions, that proceed from sudden Passion, or mistake of Things, or
Persons: nor does an Unrighteous man, lose his character, for such Actions, as
he does, or forbeares to do, for fear: because his Will is not framed by the
Justice, but by the apparent benefit of what he is to do. That which gives to
humane Actions the relish of Justice, is a certain Nobleness or Gallantnesse
of courage, (rarely found,) by which a man scorns to be beholding for the
contentment of his life, to fraud, or breach of promise. This Justice of the
Manners, is that which is meant, where Justice is called a Virtue; and
Injustice a Vice.

But the Justice of Actions denominates men, not Just, but Guiltless: and the
Injustice of the same, (which is also called Injury,) gives them but the name
of Guilty.

Again, the Injustice of Manners, is the disposition, or aptitude to Justice of
Manners, and Justice of Actions.
do Injury; and is Injustice before it proceed to Act; and without supposing
any individual person injured. But the Injustice of an Action, (that is to say
Injury,) supposes an individual person Injured; namely him, to whom the
Covenant was made: And therefore many times the injury is received by one man,
when the damage redoundeth to another. As when the Master commands his
servant to give money to a stranger; if it be not done, the Injury is done to
the Master, whom he had before Covenanted to obey; but the damage redoundeth
to the stranger, to whom he had no Obligation; and therefore could not Injure
him. And so also in Commonwealths, private men may remit to one another their
debts; but not robberies or other violences, whereby they are endammaged;
beca^se the detaining of Debt, is an Injury to themselves; but Robbery and
Violence, are Injuries to the Person of the Commonwealth.

Whatsoever is done to a man, conformable to his own Will signied Nothing done
to a man, by his own consent can be Injury.
to the doer, is no Injury to him. For if he that does it, has not passed
away his original right to do what he please, by some Antecedent Covenant,
there is no breach of Covenant; and therefore no Injury done him. And if he
have; then his Will to have it done being signified, is a release of that
Covenant: and so again there is no Injury done him.

Justice of Actions, is by Writers divided into Commutative, and Justice
Commutative, and Distributive.
Distributive: and the former they say consists in proportion Arithmeticall;
the later in proportion Geometrical. Commutative therefore, they place in the
equality of value of the things contracted for; And Distributive, in the
distribution of equal benefit, to men of equal merit. As if it were Injustice
to sell dearer than we buy; or to give more to a man than he merits. The value
of all things contracted for, is measured by the Appetite of the Contractors:
and therefore the just value, is that which they be contented to give. And
Merit (besides that which is by Covenant, where the performance on one part,
meriteth the performance of the other part, and falls under Justice
Commutative, not Distributive,) is not due by Justice; but is rewarded of Grace
only. And therefore this distinction, in the sense wherein it uses to be
expounded, is not right. To speak properly, Commutative Justice, is the Justice
of a Contractor; that is, a Performance of Covenant, in Buying, and Selling;
Hiring, and Letting to Hire; Lending, and Borrowing; Exchanging, Bartering, and
other acts of Contract.

And Distributive Justice, the Justice of an Arbitrator; that is to say, the
act of defining what is Just. Wherein, (being trusted by them that make him
Arbitrator,) if he perform his Trust, he is said to distribute to every man
his own: and this is indeed Just Distribution, and may be called (though
improperly) Distributive Justice; but more properly Equity; which also is a Law
of Nature, as shall be shown in due place.

As Justice depends on Antecedent Covenant; so does GRATITUDE The fourth Law
of Nature, Gratitude.
depend on Antecedent Grace; that is to say, Antecedent Freegift: and is the
fourth Law of Nature; which may be conceived in this Form, That a man which
receives Benefit from another of mere Grace, Endeavor that he which gives
it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good will. For no man gives,
but with intention of Good to himself; because Gift is Voluntary; and of all
Voluntary Acts, the Object is to every man his own Good; of which if men see
they shall be frustrated, there will be no beginning of benevolence, or trust;
nor consequently of mutual help; nor of reconciliation of one man to another;
and therefore they are to remain still in the condition of War; which is
contrary to the first and Fundamental Law of Nature, which commands men to
Seck Peace. The breach of this Law, is called Ingratitude; and has the same
relation to Grace, that Injustice has to Obligation by Covenant,

A fifth Law of Nature, is COMPLEASANCE; that is to say, That The fifth,
Mutual accommodetion, or Compleasance.
every man strive to accommodate himself to the rest. For the understanding
whereof, we may consider, that there is in men's aptness to Society; a
diversity of Nature, rising from their diversity of Affections; not unlike to
that we see in stones brought together for building of an Aedifice. For as that
stone which by the asperity, and irregularity of Figure, takes more room from
others, than it self fills; and for the hardness, cannot be easily made
plain, and thereby hinders the building, is by the builders cast away as
unprofitable, and troublesome: so also, a man that by asperity of Nature, will
strive to retain those things which to himself are superfluous, and to others
necessary; and for the stubbornness of his Passions, cannot be corrected, is to
be left, or cast out of Society, as combersome thereunto. For seeing every man,
not only by Right, but also by necessity of Nature, is supposed to endeavor
all he can, to obtain that which is necessary for his conservation; He that
shall oppose himself against it, for things superfluous, is guilty of the
war that thereupon is to follow; and therefore does that, which is contrary
to the fundamental Law of Nature, which commands to seek Peace. The
observers of this Law, may be called SOCIABLE, (the Latins call them Commodi;)
The contrary, Stubborn, Insociable, Froward, Intractable.

A sixth Law of Nature, is this, That upon caution of the Future time, The
sixth, Facility to Pardon.
a man ought to pardon the offenses past of them that repenting, desire it. For
PARDON, is nothing but granting of Peace; which though granted to them that
persevere in their hostility, be not Peace, but Fear; yet not granted to them
that give caution of the Future time, is sign of an aversion to Peace; and
therefore contrary to the Law of Nature.

A seventh is, That in Revenges, (that is, retribution of Evil for Evil,) The
seventh, that in Revenges, men respect only the future good.
Men look not at the greatness of the evil past, but the greatness of the
good to follow. Whereby we are forbidden to inflict punishment with any other
design, than for correction of the offender, or direction of others. For this
Law is consequent to the next before it, that commands Pardon, upon security
of the Future time. Besides, Revenge without respect to the Example, and profit
to come, is a triumph, or glorying in the hurt of another, tending to no end;
(for the End is always somewhat to Come;) and glorying to no end, is
vainglory, and contrary to reason; and to hurt without reason, tends to the
introduction of War; which is against the Law of Nature; and is commonly
styled by the name of Cruelty.

And because all signs of hatred, or contempt, provoke to fight; The eighth,
against Contumely.
insomuch as most men choose rather to hazard their life, than not to be
revenged; we may in the eighth place, for a Law of Nature, set down this
Precept, That no man by deed, word, countenance, or gesture, declare Hatred, or
Contempt of another. The breach of which Law, is commonly called Contumely.

The question who is the better man, has no place in the condition of The
ninth, against (...).
mere Nature; where, (as has been shown before,) all men are equal. The
inequallity that now is, has bin introduced by the Laws civil. I know that
Aristotle in the first book of his Politiques, for a foundation of his
doctrine, makes men by Nature, some more worthy to Command, meaning the wiser
sort (such as he thought himself to be for his Philosophy;) others to Serve,
(meaning those that had strong bodies, but were not Philosophers as he;) as if
Master and Servant were not introduced by consent of men, but by difference of
Wit: which is not only against reason; but also against experience. For there
are very few so foolish, that had not rather govern themselves, than be
governed by others: Nor when the wise in their own concei^, contend by force,
with them who distrust their own wisdom, do they always, or often, or almost
at any time, get the Victory. If Nature therefore have made men equal, that
equality is to be acknowledged: or if Nature have made men unequal; yet
because men that think themselves equal, will not enter into conditions of
Peace, but upon Equal terms, such equality must be admitted. And therefore
for the ninth law of Nature, I put this, ' That every man acknowledge other for
his Equal by Nature. The breach of this Precept is Pride.

On this law, depends another, That at the entrance into conditions The tenth
against Arrogance.
of Peace, no man require to reserve to himself any Right, which he is not
content should be reserved to every one of the rest. As it is necessary for all
men that seek peace, to lay down certain Rights of Nature; that is to say, not
to have liberty to do all they list: so is it necessary for man's life, to
retain some; as right to govern their own bodies; enjoy air, water, motion,
ways to go from place to place; and all things else without which a man cannot
live, or not live well. If in this case, at the making of Peace, men require
for themselves, that which they would not have to be granted to others, they do
contrary to the precedent law, that commands the acknowledgment of natural
equality, and therefore also against the law of Nature. The observers of this
law, are those we call Modest, and the breakers Arrogant men. The Greeks call
the violation of this law (...); that is, a desire of more than their share.

Also if a man be trusted to judge between man and man, it is a precept The
elev^nth Equity.
of the Law of Nature, that he deal Equally between them. For without that,
the Controversies of men cannot be determined but by War. He therefore that
is partial in judgment, does what in him lies, to deter men from the use of
Judges, and Arbitrators; and consequently, (against the fundamental Law of
Nature) is the cause of War.

The observance of this law, from the equal distribution to each man, of that
which in reason belongs to him, is called EQUITY, and (as I have said before)
distributive Justice: the violation, Acception of persons, (...).

And from this follows another law, That such things as cannot The twelfth,
Equal use of things Common.
be divided, be enjoyed in Common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the
thing permit, without Stint; otherwise Proportionably to the number of them
that have Right. For otherwise the distribution is Unequal, and contrary to
Equity.

But some things there be, that can neither be divided, nor enjoyed The
thirteenth, of Lot.
in common. Then, The Law of Nature, which prescribes Equity, requires, That
the Entire Right; or else, (making the use alternate,) the First Possession, be
determined by Lot. For equal distribution, is of the Law of Nature; and other
means of equal distribution cannot be imagined.

Of Lots there be two sorts, Arbitrary, and Natural. Arbitrary, is The
fourteenth, of Primogeniture, and First seizing.
that which is agreed on by the Competitors: Natural, is either Primogeniture,
(which the Greek calls (...), which signifies, Given by Lot*) or First Seizure.

And therefore those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor divided,
ought to be adjudged to the First Possessor; and in some cases to the
Firstborn, as acquired by Lot.

It is also a Law of Nature, That all men that mediate Peace, be allowed The
^fteenth, of Mediators.
safe Conduct. For the Law that commands Peace, as the End, commands
Intercession, as the Means; and to Intercession the Means is safe Conduct.

And because, though men be never so willing to observe these The sixteenth, of
Submission to Arbitrament.
Laws, there may nevertheless arise questions concerning a man's action;
First, whether it were done, or not done; Secondly (if done) whether against
the Law, or not against the Law; the former whereof, is called a question Of
Fact; the later a question Of Right; therefore unless the parties to the
question, Covenant mutually to stand to the sentence of another, they are as
far from Peace as ever. This other, to whose Sentence they submit, is called
an ARBITRATOR. And therefore it is of the Law of Nature, That they that are at
controversy, submit their Right to the judgment of an Arbitrator.

And seeing every man is presumed to do all things in order to his The
seventeenth, No man is his own Judge.
own benefit, no man is a fit Arbitrator in his own cause: and if he were never
so fit; yet Equity allowing to each party equal benefit, if one be admitted to
be Judge, the other is to be admitted also; and so the controversy, that is,
the cause of War, remains, against the Law of Nature.

For the same reason no man in any Cause ought to be received for The
eighteenth, no man to be Judge, that has in him a natural cause of Partiality.
Arbitrator, to whom greater profit, or honor, or pleasure apparently arises
out of the victory of one party, than of the other: for he has taken (though
an unavoydable bribe, yet) a bribe; and no man can be obliged to trust him. And
thus also the controversy, and the condition of War remains, contrary to the
Law of Nature.

And in a controversy of Fact, the Judge being to give no more credit The
nineteenth, of Witnesses.
to one, than to the other, (if there be no other Arguments) must give credit
to a third; or to a third and fourth; or more: For else the question is
undecided, and left to force, contrary to the Law of Nature.

These are the Laws of Nature, dictating Peace, for a means of the
conservation of men in multitudes; and which only concern the doctrine of
Civil Society. There be other things tending to the destruction of particular
men; as Drunkenness, and all other parts of Intemperance; which may therefore
also be reckoned amongst those things which the Law of Nature has forbidden;
but are not necessary to be mentioned, nor are pertinent enough to this place.

And though this may seem too subtle a deduction of the Laws of A Rule, by
which the Laws of Nature may e^sily be examined.
Nature, to be taken notice of by all men; whereof the most part are too busy
in getting food, and the rest too negligent to understand; yet to leave all men
unexcusable, they have been contracted into one easy sum, intelligible, even
to the meanest capacity; and that is, Do not that to another, which thou
would not have done to thy self; which shows him, that he has no more to
do in learning the Laws of Nature, but, when weighing the actions of other men
with his own, they seem too heavy, to put them into the other part of the
balance, and his own into their place, that his own passions, and self-love,
may add nothing to the weight; and then there is none of these Laws of Nature
that will not appear unto him very reasonable.

The Laws of Nature oblige in foro interno; that is to say, they bind The
Laws of Nature oblige inConscience always, but in Effect then only when
there is Security.
to a desire they should take place: but in foro externo; that is, to the
putting them in act, not always. For he that should be modest, and tractable,
and perform all he promises, in such time, and place, where no man else should
do so, should but make himself a prey to others, and procure his own certain
ruin, contrary to the ground of all Laws of Nature, which tend to Natures
preservation. And again, he that having sufficient Security, that others shall
observe the same Laws toward him, observes them not himself, seeks not
Peace, but War; and consequently the destruction of his Nature by Violence.

And whatsoever Laws bind in foro interno, may be broken, not only by a fact
contrary to the Law, but also by a fact according to it, in case a man think it
contrary. For though his Action in this case, be according to the Law; yet his
Purpose was against the Law; which where the Obligation is in foro interno, is
a breach.

The Laws of Nature are Immutable and Eternal; For Injustice, The Laws of
Nature are Eternal;
Ingratitude, Arrogance, Pride, Iniquity, Acception of persons, and the rest,
can never be made lawful. For it can never be that War shall preserve life,
and Peace destroy it.

The sames Laws, because they oblige only to a desire, and endeavor, And yet
Easy.
I mean an unfeigned and constant endeavor, are easy to be observed. For in
that they require nothing but endeavor; he that endeavors their
performance, fulfilleth them; and he that fulfilleth the Law, is Just.

And the Science of them, is the true and only Moral Philosophy. The Science
of these Laws, is the true Moral Philosophy.
For Moral Philosophy is nothing else but the Science of what is Good, and
Evil, in the conversation, and Society of mankind. Good, and Evil, are names
that signify our Appetites, and Aversions; which in different tempers,
customs, and doctrines of men, are different: And diverse men, differ not only
in their Judgment, on the senses of what is pleasant, and unpleasant to the
taste, smell, hearing, touch, and sight; but also of what is conformable, or
disagreeable to Reason, in the actions of common life. Nay, the same man, in
diverse times, differs from himself; and one time praises, that is, calls
Good, what another time he dispraiseth, and calls Evil: From whence arise
Disputes, Controversies, and at last War. And therefore so long a man is in the
condition of mere Nature, (which is a condition of War,) as private Appetite is
the measure of Good, and Evil: And consequently all men agree on this, that
Peace is Good, and therefore also the way, or means of Peace, which (as I have
showed before) are Justice, Gratitude, Modesty, Equity, Mercy, and the rest of
the Laws of Nature, are good; that is to say, Moral Virtues; and their
contrary Vices, Evil. Now the science of Virtue and Vice, is Moral
Philosophy; and therefore the true Doctrine of the Laws of Nature, is the true
Moral Philosophy. But the Writers of Moral Philosophy, though they
acknowledge the same Virtues and Vices; Yet not seeing wherein consisted their
Goodness; nor that they come to be praised, as the means of peaceable,
sociable, and comfortable living; place them in a mediocrity of passions: as if
not the Cause, but the Degree of daring, made Fortitude; or not the Cause, but
the Quantity of a gift, made Liberality.

These dictates of Reason, men use to call by the name of Laws, but
improperly: for they are but Conclusions, or Theoremes concerning what
conduces to the conservation and defense of themselves; whereas Law, properly
is the word of him, that by right has command over others. But yet if we
consider the same Theoremes, as delivered in the word of God, that by right
commands all things; then are they properly called Laws.

CHAP. XVI. Of PERSONS, AUTHORS, and things Personated.
A PERSON, is he, whose words or actions are considered, either as his A Person
what.
own, or as representing the words or actions of an other man, or of any other
thing to whom they are attributed, whether Truly or by Fiction.

When they are considered as his own, then is he called a Natural Person
Natural, and Artificial.
Person: And when they are considered as representing the words and actions of
an other, then is he a Feigned or Artificial person.

The word Person is latin: instead whereof the Greeks have (...), The word
Person, whence.
which signifies the Face, as Persona in latin signifies the disguise, or
outward appearance of a man, counterfeited on the Stage; and sometimes more
particularly that part of it, which disguiseth the face, as a Mask or Visard:
And from the Stage, has been translated to any Representer of speech and
action, as well in Tribunalls, as Theaters. So that a Person, is the same that
an Actor is, both on the Stage and in common Conversation; and to Personate, is
to Act, or Represent himself, or an other; and he that acts another, is said
to bear his Person, or act in his name; (in which sense Cicero uses it where
he says, Unus sustineo tres Personas; Mei, Adversarii, and Judicis, I bear
three Persons; my own, my Adversaries, and the Judges;) and is called in
diverse occasions, diversely; as a Representer, or Representative, a Lieutenant,
a Vicar, an Attorney, a Deputy, a Procurator, an Actor, and the like.

Of Persons Artificial, some have their words and actions Owned by those whom
they represent. And then the Person is the Actor; Actor.
and he that owneth his words and actions, is the AUTHOR: In which Author,
case the Actor acts by Authority. For that which in speaking of goods and
possessions, is called an Owner, and in latin Dominus, in Greek (...);
speaking of Actions, is called Author. And as the Right of possession, is
called Dominion; so the Right of doing any Action, is called AUTHORITY. So that
by Authority, is always Authority.
understood a Right of doing any act: and done by Authority, done by
Commssiion, or License from him whose right it is.

From hence it follows, that when the Actor makes a Covenant Covenants by
Authority, bind the Author.
by Authority, he binds thereby the Author, no less than if he had made it
himself; and no less subjecteth him to all the consequences of the same. And
therefore all that has been said formerly, ( Chap. 14.) of the nature of
Covenants between man and man in their natural capacity, is true also when
they are made by their Actors, Representers, or Procurators, that have
authority from them, so far-forth as is in their Commission, but no farther.

And therefore he that makes a Covenant with the Actor, or Representer, not
knowing the Authority he has, does it at his own peril. For no man is obliged
by a Covenant, whereof he is not Author; nor consequently by a Covenant made
against, or beside the Authority he gave.

When the Actor does any thing against the Law of Nature by But not the Actor.
command of the Author, if he be obliged by former Covenant to obey him, not
he, but the Author breaks the Law of Nature: for though the Action be against
the Law of Nature; yet it is not his: but contrarily, to refuse to do it, is
against the Law of Nature, that forbids breach of Covenant.

And he that makes a Covenant with the Author, by mediation of The Authority
is to be shown.
the Actor, not knowing what Authority he has, but only takes his word; in
case such Authority be not made manifest unto him upon demand, is no longer
obliged: For the Covenant made with the Author, is not valid, without his
Counter-assurance. But if he that so Covenanteth, knew before hand he was to
expect no other assurance, than the Actors word; then is the Covenant valid;
because the Actor in this case makes himself the Author. And therefore, as
when the Authority is evident, the Covenant obliges the Author, not the Actor;
so when the Authority is feigned, it obliges the Actor only; there being no
Author but himself.

There are few things, that are incapable of being represented by Things
personated, Inanimate.
Fiction. Inanimate things, as a Church, an Hospital, a Bridge, may be
Personated by a Rector, Master, or Overseer. But things Inanimate, cannot be
Authors, nor therefore give Authority to their Actors: Yet the Actors may have
Authority to procure their maintenance, given them by those that are Owners, or
Governors of those things. And therefore, such things cannot be Personated,
before there be some state of Civil Government.

Likewise Children, Fools, and Madmen that have no use of Reason, Irrational;
may be Personated by Guardians, or Curators; but can be no Authors (during
that time) of any action done by them, longer then (when they shall recover the
use of Reason) they shall judge the same reasonable. Yet during the Folly, he
that has right of governing them, may give Authority to the Guardian. But this
again has no place but in a State Civil, because before such estate, there is
no Dominion of Persons.

An Idol, or mere Figment of the brain, may be Personated; as False Gods;
were the Gods of the Heathen; which by such Officers as the State appointed,
were Personated, and held Possessions, and other Goods, and Rights, which men
from time to time dedicated, and consecrated unto them. But Idols cannot be
Authors: for an Idol is nothing. The Authority proceeded from the State: and
therefore before introduction of Civil Government, the Gods of the Heathen
could not be Personated.

The true God may be Personated. As he was; first, by Moses; The true God.
who governed the Israelites, (that were not his, but Gods people,) not in his
own name, with Hoc dicit Moses; but in Gods Name, with Hoc dicit Dominus.
Secondly by the Son of man, his own Son, our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ, that
came to reduce the Jews, and induce all Nations into the Kingdom of his
Father; not as of himself, but as sent from his Father. And thirdly, by the
Holy Ghost, or Comforter, speaking, and working in the Apostles: which Holy
Ghost, was a Comforter that came not of himself; but was sent, and proceeded
from them both.

A Multitude of men, are made One Person, when they are by one A Multitude of
men, how one Person.
man, or one Person, Represented; so that it be done with the consent of every
one of that Multitude in particular. For it is the Unity of the Representer,
not the Unity of the Represented, that makes the Person One. And it is the
Representer that bears the Person, and but one Person: And Unity, cannot
otherwise be understood in Multitude.

And because the Multitude naturally is not One, but Many; they Every one is
Author.
cannot be understood for one; but many Authors, of every thing their
Representative says, or does in their name; Every man giving their common
Representer, Authority from himself in particular; and owning all the actions
the Representer does, in case they give him Authority without stint: Otherwise,
when they limit him in what, and how far he shall represent them, none of
them owneth more, than they gave him commission to Act.

And if the Representative consist of many men, the voice of the An Actor may
be Many men made One by Plur^lity of Voy^*
greater number, must be considered as the voice of them all. For if the lesser
number pronounce (for example) in the Affirmative, and the greater in the
Negative, there will be Negatives more than enough to destroy the Affirmatives;
and thereby the excess of Negatives, standing uncontradicted, are the only
voice the Representative has.

And a Representative of even number, especially when the number
Representatives, when the number is even, unprofitable.
is not great, whereby the contradictory voices are oftentimes equal, is
therefore oftentimes mute, and incapable of Action. Yet in some cases
contradictory voices equal in number, may determine a question; as in
condemning, or absolving, equality of votes, even in that they condemn not, do
absolve; but not on the contrary condemn, in that they absolve not. For when a
Cause is heard; not to condemn, is to absolve: but on the contrary, to say
that not absolving, is condemning, is not true. The like it is in a
deliberation of executing presently, or deferring till another time: For when
the voices are equal, the not decreeing Execution, is a decree of Dilation.

Or if the number be odd, as three, or more, (men, or assemblies;) Negativ^
voice.
whereof every one has by a Negative Voice, authority to take away the effect
of all the Affirmative Voices of the rest, This number is no Representative;
because by the diversity of Opinions, and Interests of men, it becomes
oftentimes, and in cases of the greatest consequence, a mute Person, and unapt,
as for many things else, so for the government of a Multitude, especially in
time of War.

Of Authors there be two sorts. The first simply so called; which I have before
defined to be him, that owneth the Action of another simply. The second is he,
that owneth an Action, or Covenant of another conditionally; that is to say, he
undertaketh to do it, if the other does it not, at, or before a certain time.
And these Authors conditional, are generally called SURETYES, in Latin
Fidejussores, and Sponsores; and particularly for Debt, Praedes; and for
Appearance before a Judge, or Magistrate, Vades.

OF COMMONWEALTH.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a COMMONWEALTH.
THe final Cause, End, or Design of men, (who naturally The End of
Commonwe^th, particular Security:
love Liberty, and Dominion over others,) in the introduction of that restraint
upon themselves, (in which we see them live in Commonwealths,) is the
foresight of their own preservation, and of a more contented life thereby; that
is to say, of getting themselves out from that miserable condition of War,
which is necessarily consequent (as has been shown) to the natural Passions
Chap. 13.
of men, when there is no visible Power to keep them in awe, and tie them by
fear of punishment to the performance of their Covenants, and observation of
those Laws of Nature set down in the fourteenth and fifteenth Chapters.

For the Laws of Nature (as Justice, Equity, Modesty, Mercy, Which is not to
be had from the Law of Nature:
and (in sum) doing to others, as we would be done to,) of themselves,
without the terror of some Power, to cause them to be observed, are contrary
to our natural Passions, that carry us to Partiality, Pride, Revenge, and the
like. And Covenants, without the Sword, are but Words, and of no strength to
secure a man at all. Therefore notwithstanding the Laws of Nature, (which
every one has then kept, when he has the will to keep them, when he can do it
safely,) if there be no Power erected, or not great enough for our security;
every man will, and may lawfully rely on his own strength and art, for caution
against all other men. And in all places, where men have lived by small
Families, to rob and spoil one another, has been a Trade, and so far from
being reputed against the Law of Nature, that the greater spoils they gained,
the greater was their honor; and men observed no other Laws there^n, but the
Laws of Honor; that is, to abstain from cruelty, leaving to men their lives,
and instruments of husbandry. And as small Familyes did then; so now do Cities
and Kingdoms which are but greater Families (for their own security) enlarge
their Dominions* upon all pretenses of danger, and fear of Invasion, or
assistance that may be given to Invaders, endeavor as much as they can, to
subdue, or weaken their neighbors, by open force, and secret arts, for want of
other Caution, justly; and Nor from the conjunction of a few men or familyes:
are remembered for it in after ages with honor.

Nor is it the joining together of a small number of men, that gives them this
security; because in small numbers, small additions on the one side or the
other, make the advantage of strength so great, as is sufficient to carry the
Victory; and therefore gives encouragement to an Invasion. The Multitude
sufficient to confide in for our Security, is not determined by any certain
number, but by comparison with the Enemy we fear; and is then sufficient, when
the odds of the Enemy is not of so visible and conspicuous moment, to determine
the event of war, as to move him to attempt.

And be there never so great a Multitude; yet if their actions be Nor from a
great Multitude, unless directed by one judgment:
directed according to their particular judgments, and particular appetites,
they can expect thereby no defense, nor protection, neither against a Common
enemy, nor against the injuries of one another. For being distracted in
opinions concerning the best use and application of their strength, they do not
help, but hinder one another; and reduce their strength by mutual opposition
to nothing: whereby they are easily, not only subdued by a very few that agree
together; but also when there is no common enemy, they make war upon each
other, for their particular interests. For if we could suppose a great
Multitude of men to consent in the observation of Justice, and other Laws of
Nature, without a common Power to keep them all in awe; we might as well
suppose all Mankind to do the same; and then there neither would be, nor need
to be any Civil Government, or Commonwealth at all; because there would be
Peace without subjection.

Nor is it enough for the security, which men desire should last all And that
continually.
the time of their life, that they be governed, and directed by one judgment,
for a limited time; as in one Battle, or one War. For though they obtain a
Victory by their unanimous endeavor against a foreign enemy; yet afterward,
when either they have no common enemy, or he that by one part is held for an
enemy, is by another part held for a friend, they must needs by the difference
of their interests dissolve, and fall again into a War amongst themselves.

It is true, that certain living creatures, as Bees, and Ants, live sociably
Why certain creatures without reason, or speech, do nevertheless live in
Society, without any c^rcive Power.
one with another, (which are therefore by Aristotle numbered amongst Political
creatures;) and yet have no other direction, than their particular judgments
and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can signify to another, what he
thinks expedient for the common benefit: and therefore some man may perhaps
desire to know, why Mankind cannot do the same. To which I answer,

First, that men are conti^ually in competition for Honor and Dignity, which
these creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there arises on that
ground, Envy and Hatred, and finally War; but amongst these not so.

Secondly, that amongst these creatures, the Common good differs not from the
Private; and being by nature inclined to their private, they procure thereby
the common benefit. But man, whose Joy consists in comparing himself with
other men, can relish nothing but what is eminent.

Thirdly, that these creatures, having not (as man) the use of reason, do not
see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of their common
business: whereas amongst men, there are very many, that think themselves
wiser, and abler to govern the Public, better than the rest; and these strive
to reform and innovate, one this way, another that way; and thereby bring it
into Distraction and Civil war.

Fourthly, that these creatures, though they have some use of voice, in making
known to one another their desires, and other affections; yet they want that
art of words, by which some men can represent to others, that which is Good, in
the likeness of Evil; and Evil, in the likeness of Good; and augment, or
diminish the apparent greatness of Good and Evil; discontenting men, and
troubling their Peace at their pleasure.

Fifthly, irrational creatures cannot distinguish between Injury, and Damage;
and therefore as long as they be at ease, they are not offended with their
fellows: whereas Man is then most troublesome, when he is most at ease: for
then it is that he loves to show his Wisdom, and control the Actions of them
that govern the Commonwealth.

Lastly, the agreement of these creatures is Natural; that of men, is by
Covenant only, which is Artificial: and therefore it is no wonder if there be
somewhat else required (besides Covenant) to make their Agreement constant and
lasting; which is a Common Power, to keep them in awe, and to direct their
actions to the Common Benefit.

The only way to erect such a Common Power, as may be able to The Generation of
a Commonwealth.
defend them from the invasion of Forraigners, and the injuries of one another,
and thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by their own industry, and
by the fruits of the Earth, they may nourish themselves and live contentedly;
is, to confer all their power and strength upon one Man, or upon one Assembly
of men, that may reduce all their Wills, by plurality of voices, unto one Will:
which is as much as to say, to appoint one Man, or Assembly of men, to bear
their Person; and every one to own, and acknowledge himself to be Author of
whatsoever he that so bears their Person, shall Act, or cause to be Acted, in
those things which concern the Common Peace and Safety; and therein to submit
their Wills, every one to his Will, and their Judgments, to his Judgment. This
is more than Consent, or Concord; it is a real Unity of them all, in one and
the same Person, made by Covenant of every man with every man, in such manner,
as if every man should say to every man, I Authorize and give up my Right of
Governing my self, to this Man, or to this Assembly of men, on this condition,
that thou give up thy Right to him, and Authorize all his Actions in like
manner. This done, the Multitude so united in one Person, is called a
COMMONWEALTH, in latin CIVITAS. This is the Generation of that great
LEVIATHAN, or rather (to speak more reverently) of that Mortal God, to which
we owe under the Immortal God, our peace and defense. For by this Authority,
given him by every particular man in the Commonwealth, he has the use of so
much Power and Strength conferred on him, that by terror thereof, he is enabled
to perform the wills of them all, to Peace at home, and mutual aid against
their enemies abroad. And in him consists the Essence of the Commonwealth;
The Definition of a Commonwealth.
which (to define it,) is One Person, of whose Acts a great Multitude, by
mutual Covenants one with another, have made themselves every one the Author,
to the end he may use the strength and means of them all, as he shall think
expedient, for their Peace and Common Defense.

And he that carries this Person, is called SOVEREIGN, and Sovereign, and
Subje^t, what.
said to have Sovereign Power; and every one besides, his SUBJECT.

The attaining to this Sovereign Power, is by two ways. One, by Natural
force; as when a man makes his children, to submit themselves, and their
children to his government, as being able to destroy them if they refuse; or by
War subdueth his enemies to his will, giving them their lives on that
condition. The other, is when men agree amongst themselves, to submit to some
Man, or Assembly of men, voluntarily, on confidence to be protected by him
against all others. This later, may be called a Political Commonwealth, or
Commonwealth by Institution; and the former, a Commonwealth by Acquisition.
And first, I shall speak of a Commonwealth by Institution.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the RIGHTS of Sovereigns by Institution.
A Commonwealth is said to be Instituted, when a Multitude of The act of
Instituting a Commonwealth, what.
men do Agree, and Covenant, every one, with every one, that to whatsoever Man,
or Assembly of Men, shall be given by the major part, the Right to Present the
Person of them all, (that is to say, to be their Representative;) every one, as
well he that Voted for it, as he that Voted against it, shall Authorize all the
Actions and Judgments, of that Man, or Assembly of men, in the same manner, as
if they were his own, to the end, to live peaceably amongst themselves, and be
protected against other men.

From this Institution of a Commonwealth are derived all the The Consequences
to such Institution, are
Rights, and Facultyes of him, or them, on whom Sovereign Power is conferred
by the consent of the People assembled.

First, because they Covenant, it is to be understood, they are not 1. The
Subjects cannot change the form of government.
obliged by former Covenant to any thing repugnant hereunto. And Consequently
they that have already Instituted a Commonwealth, being thereby bound by
Covenant, to own the Actions, and Judgments of one, cannot lawfully make a new
Covenant, amongst themselves, to be obedient to any other, in any thing
whatsoever, without his permission. And therefore, they that are subjects to a
Monarch, cannot without his leave cast off Monarchy, and return to the
confusion of a disunited Multitude; nor transfer their Person from him that
bears it, to another Man, or other Assembly of men: for they are bound, every
man to every man, to Own, and be reputed Author of all, that he that already is
their Sovereign, shall do, and judge fit to be done: so that any one man
dissenting, all the rest should break their Covenant made to that man, which is
injustice: and they have also every man given the Sovereignty to him that
bears their Person; and therefore if they depose him, they take from him that
which is his own, and so again it is injustice. Besides, if he that attempteth
to depose his Sovereign, be killed, or punished by him for such attempt, he is
author of his own punishment, as being by the Institution, Author of all his
Sovereign shall do: And because it is injustice for a man to do any thing, for
which he may be punished by his own authority, he is also upon that title,
unjust. And whereas some men have pretended for their disobedience to their
Sovereign, a new Covenant, made, not with men, but with God; this also is
unjust: for there is no Covenant with God, but by mediation of some body that
represents Gods Person; which none does but Gods Lieutenant, who has the
Sovereignty under God. But this pretense of Covenant with God, is so evident a
lie, even in the pretenders own consciences, that it is not only an act of an
unjust, but also of a vile, and unmanly disposition.

Secondly, Because the Right of bearing the Person of them all, is 2.
Sovereign Power cannot be forfeited.
given to him they make Sovereign, by Covenant only of one to another, and
not of him to any of them; there can happen no breach of Covenant on the part
of the Sovereign; and consequently none of his Subjects, by any pretense of
forfeiture, can be freed from his Subjection. That he which is made Sovereign
makes no Covenant with his Subjects beforehand, is manifest; because either
he must make it with the whole multitude, as one party to the Covenant; or he
must make a several Covenant with every man. With the whole, as one party, it
is impossible; because as yet they are not one Person: and if he make so many
several Covenants as there be men, those Covenants after he has the
Sovereignty are void, because what act soever can be pretended by any one of
them for breach thereof, is the act both of himself, and of all the rest,
because done in the Person, and by the Right of every one of them in
particular. Besides, if any one, or more of them, pretend a breach of the
Covenant made by the Sovereign at his Institution; and others, or one other of
his Subjects, or himself alone, pretend there was no such breach, there is in
this case, no Judge to decide the controversy: it returns therefore to the
Sword again; and every man recovereth the right of Protecting himself by his
own strength, contrary to the design they had in the Institution. It is
therefore in vain to grant Sovereignty by way of precedent Covenant. The
opinion that any Monarch receives his Power by Covenant, that is to say on
Condition, proceeds from want of understanding this easy truth, that
Covenants being but words, and breath, have no force to oblige, contain,
constrain, or protect any man, but what it has from the public Sword; that
is, from the untyed hands of that Man, or Assembly of men that has the
Sovereignty, and whose actions are avouched by them all, and performed by the
strength of them all, in him united. But when an Assembly of men is made
Sovereign; then no man imagines any such Covenant to have past in the
Institution; for no man is so dull as to say, for example, the People of Rome,
made a Covenant with the Romans, to hold the Sovereignty on such or such
conditions; which not performed, the Romans might lawfully depose the Roman
People. That men see not the reason to be alike in a Monarchy, and in a Popular
Government, proceeds from the ambition of some, that are kinder to the
government of an Assembly, whereof they may hope to participate, than of
Monarchy, which they despair to enjoy.

Thirdly, because the major part has by consenting voices declared 3 No man
can without injustice protest against the Institution of the Sovereign
declared by the major part.
a Sovereign; he that dissented must now consent with the rest; that is, be
contented to avow all the actions he shall do, or else justly be destroyed by
the rest. For if he voluntarily entered into the Congregation of them that were
assembled, he sufficiently declared thereby his will (and therefore tacitly
covenanted) to stand to what the major part should ordain: and therefore if he
refuse to stand thereto, or make Protestation against any of their Decrees, he
does contrary to his Covenant, and therefore unjustly. And whether he be of the
Congregation, or not; and whether his consent be asked, or not, he must either
submit to their decrees, or be left in the condition of war he was in before;
wherein he might without injustice be destroyed by any man whatsoever.

Fourthly, because every Subject is by this Institution Author of 4 The
Sovereigns Actions cannot be justly accused by the Subject
all the Actions, and Judgments of the Sovereign Instituted; it follows, that
whatsoever he does, it can be no injury to any of his Subjects; nor ought he to
be by any of them accused of Injustice. For he that does any thing by authority
from another, does therein no injury to him by whose authority he acts: But
by this Institution of a Commonwealth, every particular man is Author of all
the Sovereign does; and consequently he that complains of injury from his
Sovereign, complains of that whereof he himself is Author; and therefore
ought not to accuse any man but himself; no nor himself of injury; because to
do injury to ones self, is impossible. It is true that they that have
Sovereign power, may commit Iniquity; but not Injustice, or Injury in the
proper signification. 5. What soever the Sovereign does, is unpunishable by
the Subject.


Fifthly, and consequently to that which was said last, no man that has
Sovereign power can justly be put to death, or otherwise in any manner by his
Subjects punished. For seeing every Subject is Author of the actions of his
Sovereign; he punishes another, for the actions committed by himself.

And because the End of this Institution, is the Peace and Defense of 6. The
Sovereign is judge of what is necessary for the Peace and Defense of his
Subjects.
them all; and whosoever has right to the End, has right to the Means; it
belongs of Right, to whatsoever Man, or Assembly that has the Sovereignty,
to be Judge both of the means of Peace and Defense; and also of the
hindrances, and disturbances of the same; and to do whatsoever he shall think
necessary to be done, both before hand, for the preserving of Peace and
Security, by prevention of Discord at home, and Hostility from abroad; and,
when Peace and Security are lost, for the recovery of the same. And therefore,

Sixthly, it is annexed to the Sovereignty, to be Judge of what Opinions And
Judge of what Doctrines are fit to be taught them.
and Doctrines are averse, and what conducing to Peace; and consequently, on
what occasions, how far, and what, men are to be trusted withal, in speaking
to Multitudes of people; and who shall examine the Doctrines of all books
before they be published. For the Actions of men proceed from their Opinions;
and in the well governing of Opinions, consists the well governing of men's
Actions, in order to their Peace, and Concord. And though in matter of
Doctrine, nothing ought to be regarded but the Truth; yet this is not repugnant
to regulating of the same by Peace. For Doctrine repugnant to Peace, can no
more be True, than Peace and Concord can be against the Law of Nature. It is
true, that in a Commonwealth, where by the negligence, or unskilfullnesse of
Governors, and Teachers, false Doctrines are by time generally received; the
contrary Truths may be generally offensive: Yet the most sudden, and rough
busling in of a new Truth, that can be, does never break the Peace, but only
sometimes awake the War. For those men that are so remissely governed, that
they dare take up Arms, to defend, or introduce an Opinion, are still in
War; and their condition not Peace, but only a Cessation of Arms for fear
of one another; and they live as it were, in the procincts of battle
continually. It belongs therefore to him that has the Sovereign Power, to be
Judge, or constitute all Judges of Opinions and Doctrines, as a thing necessary
to Peace; thereby to prevent Discord and Civil War.

Seventhly, is annexed to the Soveraigntie, the whole power of 7 The Right of
making Rules, whereby the Subjects may every man know what is so his own, as
no other Subject can without injustice take it from him.
prescribing the Rules, whereby every man may know, what Goods he may enjoy,
and what Actions he may do, without being molested by any of his fellow
Subjects: And this is it men call Propriety. For before constitution of
Sovereign Power (as has already been shown) all men had right to all things;
which necessarily causes War: and therefore this Propriety, being necessary
to Peace, and depending on Sovereign Power, is the Act of that Power, in order
to the public peace. These Rules of Propriety (or Meum and Tuum) and of Good,
Evil, Lawful, and Unlawful in the actions of Subjects, are the Civil Laws,
that is to say, the Laws of each Commonwealth in particular; though the name
of Civil Law be now restrained to the ancient Civil Laws of the City of
Rome; which being the head of a great part of the World, her Laws at that time
were in these parts the Civil Law. 8 To ^im also belongs the Right of all
Judicature and decision of Controversise:


Eighthly, is annexed to the Soveraigntie, the Right of Judicature; that is to
say, of hearing and deciding all Controversies, which may arise concerning Law,
either Civil, or Natural, or concerning Fact. For without the decision of
Controversies, there is no protection of one Subject, against the injuries of
another; the Laws concerning Meum and Tuum are in vain; and to every man
remains, from the natural and necessary appetite of his own conservation,
the right of protecting himself by his private strength, which is the
condition of War; and contrary to the end for which every Commonwealth is
instituted.

Ninthly, is annexed to the Sovereignty, the Right of making 9. And of making
War, and Peace, as he shall think best:
War, and Peace with other Nations, and Commonwealths; that is to say, of
Judging when it is for the public good, and how great forces are to be
assembled, armed, and paid for that end; and to levy money upon the Subjects, to
defray the expenses thereof. For the Power by which the people are to be
defended, consists in their Armies; and the strength of an Army, in the union
of their strength under one Command; which Command the Sovereign Instituted,
therefore has; because the command of the Militia, without other Institution,
makes him that has it Sovereign. And therefore whosoever is made General of
an Army, he that has the Sovereign Power is always Generallissimo.

Tenthly, is annexed to the Sovereignty, the choosing of all Counselors, 10.
And of choosing all Counselors, and Ministers; both of Peace, and War:
Ministers, Magistrates, and Officers, both in Peace, and War. For seeing the
Sovereign is charged with the End, which is the common Peace and Defense; he is
understood to have Power to use such Means, as he shall think most fit for his
discharge.

Eleventhly, to the Sovereign is committed the Power of Rewarding with riches,
or honor; and of Punishing with corporal, or pecuniary 11. And of Rewarding,
and Punishing, and that (where no former Law has determined the measure of it)
arbitrary:
punishment, or with ignominy every Subject according to the Law he has
formerly made; or if there be no Law made, according as he shall judge most to
conduce to the encouraging of men to serve the Commonwealth, or deterring of
them from doing dis-service to the same.

Lastly, considering what values men are naturally apt to set upon themselves;
what respect they look for from others; and how little they value other men;
from whence continually arise amongst them, 12. And of Honor and Order.
Emulation, Quarrels, Factions, and at last War, to the destroying of one
another, and diminution of their strength against a Common Enemy; It is
necessary that there be Laws of Honor, and a public rate of the worth of
such men as have deserved, or are able to deserve well of the Commonwealth;
and that there be force in the hands of some or other, to put those Laws in
execution. But it has already been shown, that not only the whole Militia, or
forces of the Commonwealth; but also the Judicature of all Controversies, is
annexed to the Sovereignty. To the Sovereign therefore it belongs also to
give titles of Honor; and to appoint what Order of place, and dignity, each
man shall hold; and what signs of respect, in public or private meetings,
they shall give to one another.

These are the Rights, which make the Essence of Sovereignty; and These Rights
are indivisible.
which are the marks, whereby a man may discern in what Man, or Assembly of
men, the Sovereign Power is placed, and resideth. For these are incommunicable,
and inseparable. The Power to coin Money; to dispose of the estate and persons
of Infant heirs; to have praeemption in Markets; and all other Statute
Praerogatives, may be transferred by the Sovereign; and yet the Power to
protect his Subjects be retained. But if he transfer the Militia, he retains
the Judicature in vain, for want of execution of the Laws: Or if he grant away
the Power of raising Money; the Militia is in vain: or if he give away the
government of Doctrines, men will be frighted into rebellion with the fear of
Spirits. And so if we consider any one of the said Rights, we shall presently
see, that the holding of all the rest, will produce no effect, in the
conservation of Peace and Justice, the end for which all Commonwealths are
Instituted. And this division is it, whereof it is said, a Kingdom divided in
it self cannot stand: For unless this division precede, division into
opposite Armies can never happen. If there had not first been an opinion
received of the greatest part of England, that these Powers were divided
between the King, and the Lords, and the House of Commons, the people had never
been divided, and fallen into this Civil War; first between those that
disagreed in Politiques; and after between the Dissenters about the liberty of
Religion; which have so instructed men in this point of Sovereign Right, that
there be few now (in England,) that do not see, that these Rights are
inseparable, and will be so generally acknowledged, at the next return of
Peace; and so continue, till their miseries are forgotten; and no longer,
except the vulgar be better taught than they have hitherto been.

And because they are essential and inseparable Rights, it follows And can by
no Grant pass away without direct renouncing of the Sovereign Power.
necessarily, that in whatsoever words any of them seem to be granted away, yet
if the Sovereign Power it self be not in direct terms renounced, and the name
of Sovereign no more given by the Grantees to him that Grants them, the Grant
is void: for when he has granted all he can, if we grant back the Sovereignty,
all is restored, as inseparably annexed thereunto.

This great Authority being Indivisible, and inseparably annexed The Power and
Honor of Subjects vanishes in the presence of the Power Sovereign.
to the Sovereignty, there is little ground for the opinion of them, that say
of Sovereign Kings, though they be singulis majores, of greater Power than
every one of their Subjects, yet they be Universis minores, of less power than
them all together. For if by all together, they mean not the collective body as
one person, then all together, and every one, signify the same; and the speech
is absurd. But if by all together, they understand them as one Person (which
person the Sovereign bears,) then the power of all together, is the same with
the Sovereigns power; and so again the speech is absurd: which absurdity they
see well enough, when the Sovereignty is in an Assembly of the people; but in a
Monarch they see it not; and yet the power of Sovereignty is the same in
whomsoever it be placed.

And as the Power, so also the Honor of the Sovereign, ought to be greater,
than that of any, or all the Subjects. For in the Sovereignty is the fountain
of Honor. The dignities of Lord, Earl, Duke, and Prince are his Creatures. As
in the presence of the Master, the Servants are equal, and without any honor
at all; So are the Subjects, in the presence of the Sovereign. And though they
shine some more, some less, when they are out of his sight; yet in his
presence, they shine no more than the Stars in presence of the Sun.

But a man may here object, that the Condition of Subjects is very Sovereign
Power not so hurtful as the want of it, and the hurt proceeds for the greatest
part from not submitting readily, to a less.
miserable; as being obnoxious to the lusts, and other irregular passions of
him, or them that have so unlimited a Power in their hands. And commonly they
that live under a Monarch, think it the fault of Monarchy; and they that live
under the government of Democracy, or other Sovereign Assembly, attribute all
the inconvenience to that form of Commonwealth; whereas the Power in all
forms, if they be perfect enough to protect them, is the same; not considering
that the estate of Man can never be without some incommodity or other; and that
the greatest, that in any form of Government can possibly happen to the people
in general, is scarce sensible, in respect of the miseries, and horrible
calamities, that accompany a Civil War; or that dissolute condition of
masterlesse men, without subjection to Laws, and a coercive Power to tie their
lands from rapine, and revenge: nor considering that the greatest pressure of
Sovereign Governors, proceeds not from any delight, or profit they can
expect in the damage, or weakening of their Subjects, in whose vigor,
consists their own strength and glory; but in the restiveness of themselves,
that unwillingly contributing to their own defense, make it necessary for their
Governors to draw from them what they can in time of Peace, that they may have
means on any emergent occasion, or sudden need, to resist, or take advantage on
their Enemies. For all men are by nature provided of notable multiplying
glasses, (that is their Passions and Self-love,) through which, every little
payment appears a great grievance; but are destitute of those prospective
glasses, (namely Moral and Civil Science,) to see a far off the miseries
that hang over them, and cannot without such payments be avoided.

CHAP. XIX. Of the several Kinds of Commonwealth by Institution, and of
Succession to the Sovereign Power.
THe difference of Commonwealths, consists in the difference The different
Forms of Commonwealths but three.
of the Sovereign, or the Person representative of all and every one of the
Multitude. And because the Sovereignty is either in one Man, or in an Assembly
of more than one; and into that Assembly either Every man has right to enter,
or not every one, but Certain men distinguished from the rest; it is manifest,
there can be but Three kinds of Commonwealth. For the Representative must
needs be One man, or (...): and if more, then it is the Assembly of All, or but
of a Part. When the Representative is One man, then is the Commonwealth a
MONARCHY: when an Assembly of All that will come together, then it is a
DEMOCRACY, or Popular Commonwealth: when an Assembly of a Part only, then it
is called an ARISTOCRACY. Other kind of Commonwealth there can be none: for
either One, or More, or All, must have the Sovereign Power (which I have shown
to be indivisible) entire.

There be other names of Government, in the Histories, and Tyranny and
Oligarchy, but different names of Monarchy, and Aristocracy.
books of Policy; as Tyranny, and Oligarchy: But (...) are not the names of
other Forms of Government, but of the same Forms misliked. For they that are
discontented under Monarchy, call it Tyranny; and they that are displeased with
Aristocracy, called it Oligarchy: So also, they which find themselves grieved
under a Democracy, call it Anarchy, (which signifies want of Government*) and
yet I think no man believes, that want of Government, is any new kind of
Government: nor by the same reason ought they to believe, that the Government
is of one kind, when they like it, and another, when they mislike it, or are
oppressed by the Governors.

It is manifest, that men who are in absolute liberty, may, if they Subordinate
Representatives dangerous.
please, give Authority to One man, to represent them every one; as well as
give such Authority to any Assembly of men whatsoever; and consequently may
subject themselves, if they think good, to a Monarch, as absolutely, as to any
other Representative. Therefore, where there is already erected a Sovereign
Power, there can be no other Representative of the same people, but only to
certain (...); ends, by the Sovereign limited. For that were to erect two
Sovereigns; and every man to have his person represented by two Actors, that by
opposing one another, must needs divide that Power, which (if men will live in
Peace) is indivisible; and thereby reduce the Multitude into the condition of
War, contrary to the end (...) which all Sovereignty is instituted. And
therefore as it is absurd, to think that a Sovereign Assembly, inviting the
People of their Dominion, to send up their Deputies, with power to make known
their Advise, or Desires, should therefore hold such Deputies, rather than
themselves, for the absolute Representative of the people: so it is absurd
also, to think the same in a Monarchy. And I know not how this so manifest a
truth, should of late be so little observed; that in a Monarchy, he that had
the Sovereignty from a descent of 600 years, was alone called Sovereign, had
the title of Majesty from every one of his Subjects, and was unquestionably
taken by them for their King, was notwithstanding never considered as their
Representative; that name without contradiction passing for the title of those
men, which at his command were sent up by the people to carry their Petitions,
and give him (if he permitted it) their advise. Which may serve as an
admonition, for those that are the true, and absolute Representative of a
People, to instruct men in the nature of that Office, and to take heed how they
admit of any other general Representation upon any occasion whatsoever, if
they mean to discharge the (...) committed to them.

The difference between these three kinds of Commonwealth, Comparison of
Monarchy, with Sovereign Assemblyes.
consists not in the difference of Power; but in the difference of
Convenience, or Aptitude to produce the Peace, and Security of the people; for
which end they were instituted. And to compare Monarchy with the other two, we
may observe; First, that whosoever bears the Person of the people, or is one
of that Assembly that bears it, (...) also his own natural Person. And though
he be careful in his politic Person to procure the common interest; yet he
is more or no less careful to procure the private good of himself, his
family, kindred and friends; and for the most part, if the public interest
chance to cross the private, he preferrs the private: for the Passions of men,
are commonly more potent than their Reason. From whence it follows, that where
the public and private interest are most closely united, there is the
public most advanced. Now in Monarchy, the private interest is the same with
the public. The riches, power, and honor of a Monarch arise only from the
riches, strength and reputation of his Subjects. For no King can be rich, nor
glorious, nor secure; whose Subjects are either poor, or contemptible, or too
weak through want, or dissension, to maintain a war against their enemies:
Whereas in a Democracy, or Aristocracy, the public prosperity conferres not
so much to the private fortune of one that is corrupt, or ambitious, as does
many times a perfidious advice, a treacherous action, or a Civil war.

Secondly, that a Monarch receives counsel of whom, when, and where he
pleases; and consequently may hear the opinion of men versed in the matter
about which he deliberates, of what rank or quality soever, and as long before
the time of action, and with as much secrecy, as he will. But when a Sovereign
Assembly has need of Counsel, none are admitted but such as have a Right
thereto from the beginning; which for the most part are of those who have been
versed more in the acquisition of Wealth than of Knowledge; and are to give
their advice in long discourses, which may, and do commonly excite men to
action, but not govern them in it. For the Understanding is by the flame of
the Passions, never enlightened, but dazzled: Nor is there any place, or time,
wherein an Assembly can receive Counsel with secrecy, because of their own
Multitude.

Thirdly, that the Resolutions of a Monarch, are subject to no other
Inconstancy, than that of Humane Nature; but in Assemblies, besides that of
Nature, there arises an Inconstancy from the Number. For the absence of a few,
that would have the Resolution once taken, continue firm, (which may happen by
security, negligence, or private impediments,) or the diligent appearance of a
few of the contrary opinion, undoes to day, all that was concluded yesterday.

Fourthly, that a Monarch cannot disagree with himself, out of envy, or
interest; but an Assembly may; and that to such a height, as may produce a
Civil War.

Fifthly, that in Monarchy there is this inconvenience; that any Subject, by
the power of one man, for the enriching of a favorite or flatterer, may be
deprived of all he possesses; which I confess is a great and inevitable
inconvenience. But the same may as well happen, where the Sovereign Power is
in an Assembly: For their power is the same; and they are as subject to evil
Counsel, and to be seduced by Orators, as a Monarch by Flatterers; and
becoming one an others Flatterers, serve one another Covetousness and
Ambition by turns. And whereas the Favorites of Monarchs, are few, and they
have none else to advance but their own Kindred; the Favorites of an Assembly,
are many; and the Kindred much more numerous, than of any Monarch. Besides,
there is no Favorite of a Monarch, which cannot as well succor his friends,
as hurt his enemies: But Orators, that is to say, Favorites of Sovereign
Assemblies, though they have great power to hurt, have little to save. For to
accuse, requires less Eloquence (such is man's Nature) than to excuse; and
condemnation, than absolution more resembles Justice.

Sixthly, that it is an inconvenience in Monarchy, that the Soveraigntie may
descend upon an Infant, or one that cannot discern between Good and Evil: and
consists in this, that the use of his Power, must be in the hand of another
Man, or of some Assembly of men, which are to govern by his right, and in his
name; as Curators, and Protectors of his Person, and Authority. But to say
there is inconvenience, in putting the use of the Sovereign Power, into the
hand of a Man, or an Assembly of men; is to say that all Government is more
Inconvenient, than Confusion, and Civil War. And therefore all the danger
that can be pretended, must arise from the Contention of those, that for an
office of so great honor, and profit, may become Competitors. To make it
appear, that this inconvenience, proceeds not from that form of Government
we call Monarchy, we are to consider, that the precedent Monarch, has
appointed who shall have the Tuition of his Infant Successor, either expressly
by Testament, or tacitly, by not controlling the Custom in that case received:
And then such inconvenience (if it happen) is to be attributed, not to the
Monarchy, but to the Ambition, and Injustice of the Subjects; which in all
kinds of Government, where the people are not well instructed in their Duty,
and the Rights of Sovereignty, is the same. Or else the precedent Monarch, has
not at all taken order for such Tuition; And then the Law of Nature has
provided this sufficient rule, That the Tuition shall be in him, that has by
Nature most interest in the preservation of the Authority of the Infant, and to
whom least benefit can accrue by his death, or diminution. For seeing every man
by nature seeks his own benefit, and promotion; to put an Infant into the
power of those, that can promote themselves by his destruction, or damage, is
not Tuition, but Treachery. So that sufficient provision being taken, against
all just quarrel, about the Government under a Child, if any contention arise
to the disturbance of the public Peace, it is not to be attributed to the
form of Monarchy, but to the ambition of Subjects, and ignorance of their
Duty. On the other side, there is no great Commonwealth, the Sovereignty
whereof is in a great Assembly, which is not, as to consultations of Peace, and
War, and making of Laws, in the same condition, as if the Government were in
a Child. For as a Child wants the judgment to dissent from counsel given him,
and is thereby necessitated to take the advice of them, or him, to whom he is
committed: So an Assembly wants the liberty, to dissent from the counsel of
the major part, be it good, or bad. And as a Child has need of a Tutor, or
Protector, to preserve his Person, and Authority: So also (in great
Commonwealths,) the Sovereign Assembly, in all great dangers and troubles,
have need of Custodes libertatis; that is of Dictators, or Protectors of their
Authority; which are as much as Temporary Monarchs; to whom for a time, they
may commit the entire exercise of their Power; and have (at the end of that
time) been oftener deprived thereof, than Infant Kings, by their Protectors,
Regents, or any other Tutors.

Though the Kinds of Soveraigntie be, as I have now shown, but three; that is
to say, Monarchy, where One Man has it; or Democracie, where the general
Assembly of Subjects has it; or Aristocracie, where it is in an Assembly of
certain persons nominated, or otherwise distinguished from the rest: Yet he
that shall consider the particular Commonwealths that have been, and are in
the world, will not perhaps easily reduce them to three, and may thereby be
inclined to think there be other Forms, arising from these mingled together.
As for example, Elective Kingdoms; where Kings have the Sovereign Power put
into their hands for a time; or Kingdoms, wherein the King has a power
limited: which Governments, are nevertheles by most Writers called Monarchy.
Likewise if a Popular, or Aristocraticall Commonwealth, subdue an Enemies
Country, and govern the same, by a President, Procurator, or other Magistrate;
this may seem perhaps at first sight, to be a Democraticall, or
Aristocraticall Government. But it is not so. For Elective Kings, are not
Sovereigns, but Ministers of the Sovereign; nor limited Kings Sovereigns,
but Ministers of them that have the Sovereign Power: Nor are those Provinces
which are in subjection to a Democracie, or Aristocracie of another
Commonwealth, Democratically, or Aristocratically governed, but Monarchically.

And first, concerning an Elective King, whose power is limited to his life, as
it is in many places of Christendom at this day; or to certain Years or
Months, as the Dictators power amongst the Romans; If he have Right to appoint
his Successor, he is no more Elective but Hereditary. But if he have no Power
to elect his Successor, then there is some other Man, or Assembly known, which
after his decease may elect a new, or else the Commonwealth dies, and
dissolveth with him, and returns to the condition of War. If it be known
who have the power to give the Soveraigntie after his death, it is known also
that the Soveraigntie was in them before: For none have right to give that
which they have not right to possess, and keep to themselves, it they think
good. But if there be none that can give the Soveraigntie, after the decease of
him that was first elected; then has he power, nay he is obliged by the Law of
Nature, to provide, by establishing his Successor, to keep those that had
trusted him with the Government, from relapsing into the miserable condition of
Civil war. And consequently he was, when elected, a Sovereign absolute,

Secondly, that King whose power is limited, is not superior to him, or them
that have the power to limit it; and he that is not superior, is not supreme;
that is to say not Sovereign. The Sovereignty therefore was always in that
Assembly which had the Right to Limit him; and by consequence the government
not Monarchy, but either Democracy, or Aristocracy; as of old time in Sparta;
where the Kings had a privilege to lead their Armies; but the Sovereignty was
in the Ephori.

Thirdly, whereas heretofore the Roman People, governed the land of Judea (for
example) by a President; yet was not Judea therefore a Democracy; because they
were not governed by any Assembly, into the which, any of them, had right to
enter; nor by an Aristocracy; because they were not governed by any Assembly,
into which, any man could enter by their Election: but they were governed by
one Person, which though as to the people of Rome was an Assembly of the
people, or Democracy; yet as to people of Judea, which had no right at all of
participating in the government, was a Monarch. For though where the people are
governed by an Assembly, chosen by themselves out of their own number, the
government is called a Democracy, or Aristocracy; yet when they are governed by
an Assembly, not of their own choosing, it is a Monarchy; not of One man, over
another man; but of one people, over another people.

Of all these Forms of Government, the matter being mortal, so Of the Right
of Succession.
that not only Monarchs, but also whole Assemblies die, it is necessary for the
conservation of the peace of men, that as there was order taken for an
Artificial Man, so there be order also taken, for an Artificial Eternity of
life; without which, men that are governed by an Assembly, should return into
the condition of War in every age; and they that are governed by One man,
as soon as their Governor dies. This Artificial Eternity, is that which men
call the Right of Succession.

There is no perfect form of Government, where the disposing of the Succession
is not in the present Sovereign. For if it be in any other particular Man, or
private Assembly, it is in a person subject, and may be assumed by the
Sovereign at his pleasure; and consequently the Right is in himself. And if it
be in no particular man, but left to a new choice; then is the Commonwealth
dissolved; and the Right is in him that can get it; contrary to the intention
of them that did Institute the Commonwealth, for their perpetual, and not
temporary security,

In a Democracy, the whole Assembly cannot fail, unless the Multitude that
are to be governed fail. And therefore questions of the right of Succession,
have in that form of Government no place at all.

In an Aristocracy, when any of the Assembly dies, the election of another
into his room belongs to the Assembly, as the Sovereign, to whom belongs
the choosing of all Counselors, and Officers. For that which the
Representative does, as Actor, every one of the Subjects does, as Author. And
though the Sovereign Assembly, may give Power to others, to elect new men, for
supply of their Court; yet it is still by their Authority, that the Election is
made; and by the same it may (when the public shall require it) be recalled.

The greatest difficulty about the right of Succession, is in Monarchy: The
present Monarch has Right to dispose of the Succ^ssim.
And the difficulty arises from this, that at first sight, it is not manifest
who is to appoint the Successor; nor many times, who it is whom he has
appointed. For in both these cases, there is required a more exact
ratiocination, than every man is accustomed to use. As to the question, who
shall appoint the Successor, of a Monarch that has the Sovereign Authority;
that is to say, who shall determine of the right of Inheritance, (for Elective
Kings and Princes have not the Sovereign Power in propriety, but in use only,)
we are to consider, that either he that is in possession, has right to dispose
of the Succession, or else that right is again in the dissolved Multitude. For
the death of him that has the Sovereign power in propriety, leaves the
Multitude without any Sovereign at all; that is, without any Representative in
whom they should be united, and be capable of doing any one action at all: And
therefore they are incapable of Election of any new Monarch; every man having
equal right to submit himself to such as he thinks best able to protect him;
or if he can, protect himself by his own sword; which is a return to
Confusion, and to the condition of a War of every man against every man,
contrary to the end for which Monarchy had its first Institution. Therefore it
is manifest, that by the Institution of Monarchy, the disposing of the
Successor, is always left to the Judgment and Will of the present Possessor.

And for the question (which may arise sometimes) who it is that the Monarch in
possession, has designed to the succession and inheritance of his power; it is
determined by his express Words, and Testament; or by other tacit signs
sufficient.

By express Words, or Testament, when it is declared by him in Succession
passes by express Words;
life time, viva voce, or by Writing; as the first Emperors of Rome declared
who should be their Heirs. For the word Heir does not of it self imply the
Children, or nearest Kindred of a man; but whomsoever a man shall any way
declare, he would have to succeed him in his Estate. If therefore a Monarch
declare expressly, that such a man shall be his Heir, either by Word or
Writing, then is that man immediately after the decease of his Predecessor,
Invested in the right of being Monarch.

But where Testament, and express Words are wanting, other natural Or, by not
controlling a Custom;
signs of the Will are to be followed: whereof the one is Custom. And
therefore where the Custom is, that the next of Kindred absolutely succeeds,
there also the next of Kindred has right to the Succession; for that, if the
will of him that was in posession had been otherwise, he might easily have
declared the same in his life time. And likewise where the Custom is, that the
next of the Male Kindred succeeds, there also the right of Succession is in
the next of the Kindred Male, for the same reason. And so it is if the Custom
were to advance the Female. For whatsoever Custom a man may by a word
control, and does not, it is a natural sign he would Or, by presumption of
natural affec^.
have that Custom stand.

But where neither Custom, nor Testament has preceded, there it is to be
understood, First, that a Monarchs will is, that the government remain
Monarchical; because he has approved that government in himself. Secondly,
that a Child of his own, Male, or Female, be preferred before any other;
because men are presumed to be more inclined by nature, to advance their own
children, than the children of other men; and of their own, rather a Male than
a Female; because men, are naturally fitter than women, for actions of labor
and danger. Thirdly, where his own Issue fails, rather a Brother than a
stranger; and so still the nearer in blood, rather than the more remote;
because it is always presumed that the nearer of kin, is the nearer in
affection; and it is evident that a man receives always, by reflection, the most
honor from the greatness of his nearest kindred.

But if it be lawful for a Monarch to dispose of the Succession by To dispose
of the Succession though to a King of another Nation, not unlawful.
words of Contract, or Testament, men may perhaps object a great inconvenience:
for he may sell, or give his Right of governing to a stranger; which, because
strangers (that is, men not used to live under the same government, nor
speaking the same language) do commonly undervalue one another, may turn to the
oppression of his Subjects; which is indeed a great inconvenience: but it
proceeds not necessarily from the subjection to a strangers government, but
from the unskilfulnesse of the Governors, ignorant of the true rules of
Politiques. And therefore the Romans when they had subdued many Nations, to
make their Government digestible, were wont to take away that grievance, as
much as they thought necessary, by giving sometimes to whole Nations, and
sometimes to Principal men of every Nation they conquered, not only the
Privileges, but also the Name of Romans; and took many of them into the Senate,
and Offices of charge, even in the Roman City. And this was it our most wise
King, King James, aimed at, in endeavoring the Union of his two Realms of
England and Scotland. Which if he could have obtained, had in all likelihood
prevented the Civil wars, which make both those Kingdoms, at this present,
miserable. It is not therefore any injury to the people, for a Monarch to
dispose of the Succession by Will; though by the fault of many Princes, it has
been sometimes found inconvenient. Of the lawfulness of it, this also is an
argument, that whatsoever inconvenience can arrive by giving a Kingdom to a
stranger, may arrive also by so marrying with strangers, as the Right of
Succession may descend upon them: yet this by all men is accounted lawful.

CHAP. XX. Of Dominion PATERNALL, and DESPOTICALL.
A Commonwealth by Acquisition, is that, where the Sovereign A Commonwealth by
Acquisition.
Power is acquired by Force; And it is acquired by force, when men singly, or
many together by plurality of voices, for fear of death, or bonds, do authorize
all the actions of that Man, or Assembly, that has their lives and liberty in
his Power.

And this kind of Dominion, or Sovereignty, differs from Sovereignty Wherein
(...) from a Commonwealth by Ins^on.
by Institution, only in this, That men who choose their Sovereign, do it for
fear of one another, and not of him whom they Institute: But in this case, they
subject themselves, to him they are afraid of. In both cases they do it for
fear: which is to be noted by them, that hold all such Covenants, as proceed
from fear of death, or violence, void: which if it were true, no man, in any
kind of Commonwealth, could be obliged to Obedience. It is true, that in a
Commonwealth once Instituted, or acquired, Promises proceeding from fear of
death, or violence, are no Covenants, nor obliging, when the thing promised is
contrary to the Laws; But the reason is not, because it was made upon fear,
but because he that promises, has no right in the thing promised. Also, when
he may lawfully perform, and does not, it is not the Invalidity of the
Covenant, that absolveth him, but the Sentence of the Sovereign. Otherwise,
whenever a man lawfully promises, he unlawfully breaks: But when the
Sovereign, who is the Actor, acquitteth him, then he is acquitted by him that
extorted the promise, as by the Author of such absolution.

But the Rights, and Consequences of Sovereignty, are the same The Rights of
Sovereignty the same in both.
in both. His Power cannot, without his consent, be Transferred to another: He
cannot Forfeit it: He cannot be Accused by any of his Subjects, of Injury: He
cannot be Punished by them: He is Judge of what is necessary for Peace; and
Judge of Doctrines: He is Sole Legislator; and Supreme Judge of Controversies;
and of the Times, and Occasions of War, and Peace: to him it belongs to
choose Magistrates, Counselors, Commanders, and all other Officers, and
Ministers; and to determine of Rewards, and Punishments, Honor, and Order. The
reasons whereof, are the same which are alleged in the precedent Chapter, for
the same Rights, and Consequences of Sovereignty by Institution.

Dominion is acquired two ways; By Generation, and by Conquest. Dominion
Paternall how attained.
The right of Dominion by Generation, is that, which the Parent has over his
Children; and is called PATERNALL. And is not so derived from the Generation,
as if therefore the Parent had Dominion Not by G^neration, but by Contract;
over his Child because he begat him; but from the Child's Consent, either
express, or by other sufficient arguments declared. For as to the Generation,
God has ordained to man a helper; and there be always two that are equally
Parents: the Dominion therefore over the Child, should belong equally to both;
and he be equally subject to both, which is impossible; for no man can obey two
Masters. And whereas some have attributed the Dominion to the Man only, as
being of the more excellent Sex; they misreckon in it. For there is not always
that difference of strength, or prudence between the man and the woman, as that
the right can be determined without War. In Commonwealths, this controversy
in decided by the Civil Law: and for the most part, (but not always) the
sentence is in favor of the Father; because for the most part Commonwealths
have been erected by the Fathers, not by the Mothers of families. But the
question lies now in the state of mere Nature; where there are supposed no
laws of Matrimony; no laws for the Education of Children; but the Law of
Nature, and the natural inclination of the Sexes, one to another, and to their
children. In this condition of mere Nature, either the Parents between
themselves dispose of the dominion over the Child by Contract; or do not
dispose thereof at all. If they dispose thereof, the right passes according to
the Contract. We find in History that the Amazons Contracted with the Men of
the neighboring Countries, to whom they had recourse for issue, that the issue
Male should be sent back, but the Female remain with themselves: so that the
dominion of the Females was in the Mother.

If there be no Contract, the Dominion is in the Mother. For in the Or
Education;
condition of mere Nature, where there are no Matrimonial laws, it cannot be
known who is the Father, unless it be delared by the Mother: and therefore the
right of Dominion over the Child depends on her will, and is consequently
hers. Again, seeing the Infant is first in the power of the Mother, so as she
may either nourish, or expose it; if she nourish it, it owes its life to the
Mother; and is therefore obliged to obey her, rather than any other; and by
consequence the Dominion over it is hers. But if she expose it, and another
find, and nourish it, the Dominion is in him that nourishes it. For it ought
to obey him by whom it is preserved; because preservation of life being the
end, for which one man becomes subject to another, every man is supposed to
promise obedience, to him, in whose power it is to save, or destroy him.

If the Mother be the Fathers subject, the Child, is in the Fathers Or
Precedent subjection of one of the Parents to the other.
power: and if the Father be the Mothers subject, (as when a Sovereign Queen
marries one of her subjects,) the Child is subject to the Mother; because the
Father also is her subject.

If a man and a woman, Monarchs of two several Kingdoms, have a Child, and
contract concerning who shall have the Dominion of him, the Right of the
Dominion passes by the Contract. If they contract not, the Dominion follows
the Dominion of the place of his residence. For the Sovereign of each Country
has Dominion over all that reside therein.

He that has the Dominion over the Child, has Dominion also over the Children
of the Child; and over their Childrens Children. For he that has Dominion over
the person of a man, has Dominion over all that is his; without which,
Dominion were but a Title, without the effect.

The Right of Succession to Paternall Dominion, proceeds in the The Right of
Succession follows the Rules of the Right of Possession.
same manner, as does the Right of Succession to Monarchy; of which I have
already sufficiently spoken in the precedent chapter.

Dominion acquired by Conquest, or Victory in war, is that which some Writers
call DESPOTICALL, from (...), which signifies a Lord, or Master; and is the
Dominion of the Master over his Servant. Despoticall Dominion how attained.
And this Dominion is then acquired to the Victor, when the Vanquished, to
avoid the present stroke of death, covenanteth either in express words, or by
other sufficient signs of the Will, that so long as his life, and the liberty
of his body is allowed him, the Victor shall have the use thereof, at his
pleasure. And after such Covenant made, the Vanquished is a SERVANT, and not
before: for by the word Servant (whether it be derived from Servire, to Serve,
or from Servare, to Save, which I leave to Grammarians to dispute) is not meant
a Captive, which is kept in prison, or bonds, till the owner of him that took
him, or bought him of one that did, shall consider what to do with him: (for
such men, (commonly called Slaves,) have no obligation at all; but may break
their bonds, or the prison; and kill, or carry away captive their Master,
justly:) but one, that being taken, has corporal liberty allowed him; and
upon promise not to run away, nor to do violence to his Master, is trusted by
him.

It is not therefore the Victory, that gives the right of Dominion Not by the
Victory, but by the Consent of the Vanquished.
over the Vanquished, but his own Covenant. Nor is he obliged because he is
Conquered; that is to say, beaten, and taken, or put to flight; but because he
comes in, and Submits to the Victor; Nor is the Victor obliged by an
enemies rendering himself, (without promise of life,) to spare him for this his
yielding to discretion; which obliges not the Victor longer, than in his own
discretion he shall think fit.

And that which men do, when they demand (as it is now called) Quarter, (which
the Greeks called (...), taking alive,) is to evade the present fury of the
Victor, by Submission, and to compound for their life, with Ransom, or
Service: and therefore he that has Quarter, has not his life given, but
deferred till farther deliberation; For it is not an yielding on condition of
life, but to discretion. And then only is his life in security, and his
service due, when the Victor has trusted him with his corporal liberty. For
Slaves that work in Prisons, or Fetters, do it not of duty, but to avoid the
cruelty of their taskmasters.

The Master of the Servant, is Master also of all he has; and may exact the
use thereof; that is to say, of his goods, of his labor, of his servants, and
of his children, as often as he shall think fit. For he holds his life of his
Master, by the covenant of obedience; that is, of owning, and authorizing
whatsoever the Master shall do. And in case the Master, if he refuse, kill him,
or cast him into bonds, or otherwise punish him for his disobedience, he is
himself the author of the same; and cannot accuse him of injury.

In sum the Rights and Consequences of both Paternall and Despoticall
Dominion, are the very same with those of a Sovereign by Institution; and for
the same reasons: which reasons are set down in the precedent chapter. So that
for a man that is Monarch of diverse Nations, whereof he has, in one the
Sovereignty by Institution of the people assembled, and in another by Conquest,
that is by the Submission of each particular, to avoid death or bonds; to
demand of one Nation more than of the other, from the title of Conquest, as
being a Conquered Nation, is an act of ignorance of the Rights o^ Sovereignty,
For the Sovereign is absolute over both alike; or else there is no Sovereignty
at all; and so every man may Lawfully protect himself, if he can, with his own
sword, which is the condition of war.

By this it appears, that a great Family if it be not part of some Difference
between a Family and a Kingdom.
Commonwealth, is of it self, as to the Rights of Sovereignty, a little
Monarchy; whether that Family consist of a man and his children; or of a man
and his servants; or of a man, and his children, and servants together: wherein
the Father or Master is the Sovereign. But yet a Family is not properly a
Commonwealth; unless it be of that power by its own number, or by other
opportunities, as not to be subdued without the hazard of war. For where a
number of men are manifestly too weak to defend themselves united, every one
may use his own reason in time of danger, to save his own life, either by
flight, or by submission to the enemy, as he shall think best; in the same
manner as a very small company of soldiers, surprised by an army, may cast
down their arms, and demand quarter, or run away, rather than be put to the
sword. And thus much shall suffice; concerning what I find by speculation, and
deduction, of Sovereign Rights, from the nature, need, and designs of men, in
erecting of Commonwealths, and putting themselves under Monarchs, or
Assemblies, entrusted with power enough for their protection.

Let us now consider what the Scripture teaches in the same point. The Rights
of Monarchy from Scripture.
To Moses, the children of Israel say thus. Exodus 20. 19.
Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; but let not God speak to us, lest we
dye. Exodus 20. 19.
This is absolute obedience to Moses. Concerning the Right of Kings, God
himself by the mouth of Samuel, says, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, etc.
This shall be the Right of the King you will have to reign over you. He shall
take your sons, and set them to drive his Chariots, and to be his horsemen, and
to run before his chariots; and gather in his harvest; and to make his engines
of War, and Instruments of his chariots; and shall take your daughters to make
perfumes, to be his Cooks, and Bakers. He shall take your fields, your
vine-yards, and your olive-yards, and give them to his servants. He shall take
the tyth of your corn and wine, and give it to the men of his chamber, and to
his other servants. He shall take your man-servants, and your maidservants,
and the choice of your youth, and employ them in his business. He shall take
the tyth of your flocks; and you shall be his servants. This is absolute power,
and ^ummed up in the last words, you shall be his servants. Again, when the
people heard what power their King was to have, yet they consented thereto, and
say thus, Verse. 10.
We will be as all other nations, and our King shall judge our causes, and go
before us, to conduct our wars. Here is confirmed the Right that Sovereigns
have, both to the Militia, and to all Judicature; in which is contained as
absolute power, as one man can possibly transfer to another. Again, the
prayer of King Solomon to God, was this. 1 Kings 3. 9.
Give to thy servant understanding, to judge thy people, and to di^cerne
between Good and Evil. It belongs therefore to the Sovereign to be Judge,
and to praescribe the Rules of discerning Good and Evil: which Rules are
Laws; and therefore in him is the Legislative Power. Saul sought the life of
David; yet when it was in his power to slay Saul, and his Servants would have
done it, David forbad them, saying, 1 Samuel 24. 9.
God forbid I should do such an act against my Lord, the anointed of God. For
obedience of servants St. Paul says, Coll. 3. 20.
Servants obey your masters in All things; and, Verse 22.
Children obey your Parents in All things. There is simple obedience in those
that are subject to Paternall, or Despoticall Dominion. Again, Math. 23. 2, 3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, and therefore All that they
shall bid you observe, that observe and do. There again is simple obedience.
And St Paul, Tit. 3. 2.
Warn them that they* subject themselves to Princes, and to those that are in
Authority, and obey them. This obedience is also simple. Lastly, our Savior
himself acknowledges, that men ought to pay such taxes as are by Kings
impo^ed, where he says, Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's; and paid such
taxes himself. And that the Kings word, is sufficient to take any thing from
any Subject, when there is need; and that the King is Judge of that need: For
he himself, as King of the Jews, commanded his Disciples to take the Ass,
and Asses Colt to carry him into Jerusalem, saying, Mat. 21. 2, 3.
Go into the Village over against you, and you shall find a she Ass tied, and
her Colt with her, unty them, and bring them to me. And if any man ask you,
what you mean by it, Say the Lord has need of them: And they will let them go.
They will not ask whether his necessity be a sufficient title; nor whether he
be judge of that necessity; but acquiesce in the will of the Lord.

To these places may be added also that of Genesis, Genesis 3 5.
You shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And verse 11. Who told thee that
thou wast naked? have thou eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee thou
should not eat? For the Cognizance or Judicature of Good and Evil, being
forbidden by the name of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge, as a trial of
Adams obedience; The Devil to inflame the Ambition of the woman, to whom that
fruit already seemed beautiful, told her that by tasting it, they should be as
Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Whereupon having both eaten, they did indeed take
upon them Gods office, which is Judicature of Good and Evil; but acquired no
new ability to distinguish between them aright. And whereas it is said, that
having eaten, they saw they were naked; no man has so interpreted that place,
as if they had been formerly blind, and saw not their own skins: the meaning is
plain, that it was then they first judged their nakedness (wherein it was Gods
will to create them) to be uncomely; and by being ashamed, did tacitly censure
God himself. And thereupon God says, Have thou eaten, etc. as if he should
say, do thou that owe me obedience, take upon thee to judge of my
Commandments? Whereby it is clearly, (though Allegorically,) Sovereign Power
ought in all Commonwealths to be absolute.
signified, that the Commands of them that have the right to command, are not
by their Subjects to be censured, nor disputed.

So that it appears plainly, to my understanding, both from Reason, and
Scripture, that the Sovereign Power, whether placed in One Man, as in Monarchy,
or in one Assembly of men, as in Popular, and Aristocraticall Commonwealths,
is as great, as possibly men can be imagined to make it. And though of so
unlimited a Power, men may fancy many evil consequences, yet the consequences
of the want of it, which is perpetual war of every man against his
neighbor, are much worse. The cond^tion of man in this life shall never be
without Inconveniences; but there happens in no Commonwealth any great
Inconvenience, but what proceeds from the Subjects disobedience, and breach of
those Covenants, from which the Commonwealth has its being. And whosoever
thinking Sovereign Power too great, will seek to make it less; must subject
himself, to the Power, that can limit it; that is to say, to a greater.

The greatest objection is, that of the Practice; when men ask, where, and
when, such Power has by Subjects been acknowledged. But one may ask them again,
when, or where has there been a Kingdom long free from Sedition and Civil
War. In those Nations, whose Commonwealths have been long-lived, and not
been destroyed, but by foreign war, the Subjects never did dispute of the
Sovereign Power. But howsoever, an argument from the Practice of men, that have
not sifted to the bottom, and with exact reason weighed the causes, and nature
of Commonwealths, and suffer daily those miseries, that proceed from the
ignorance thereof, is invalid. For though in all places of the world, men
should lay the foundation of their houses on the sand, it could not thence be
inferred, that so it ought to be. The skill of making, and maintaining
Commonwealths, consists in certain Rules, as does Arithmetique and Geometry;
not (as Tennis-play) on Practice only: which Rules, neither poor men have the
leisure, nor men that have had the leisure, have hitherto had the curiosity, or
the method to find out.

CHAP. XXI. Of the LIBERTY of Subjects.
LIBERTY, or FREEDOM, signifies (properly) the absence Liberty what.
of Opposition; (by Opposition, I mean external Impediments of motion;) and
may be applied no less to Irrational, and Inanimate creatures, than to
Rational. For whatsoever is so tied, or environed, as it cannot move, but
within a certain space, which space is determined by the opposition of some
external body, we say it has not Liberty to go further. And so of all living
creatures, whilst they are imprisoned, or restrained, with walls, or chayns;
and of the water whilst it is kept in by banks, or vessels, that otherwise
would spread it self into a larger space, we use to say, they are not at
Liberty, to move in such manner, as without those external impediments they
would. But when the impediment of motion, is in the constitution of the thing
it self, we use not to say, it wants the Liberty; but the Power to move; as
when a stone lies still, or a man is fastened to his bed by sickness.

And according to this proper, and generally received meaning What it is to be
Free.
of the word, A FREEMAN, is he, that in those things, which by his strength
and wit he is able to do, is not hindered to do what he has a will to. But when
the words Free, and Liberty, are applied to any thing but Bodies, they are
abused; for that which is not subject to Motion, is not subject to Impediment:
And therefore, when it is said (for example) The way is Free, no Liberty of the
way is signified, but of those that walk in it without stop. And when we say a
Gift is Free, there is not meant any Liberty of the Gift, but of the Giver,
that was not bound by any law, or Covenant to give it. So when we speak Freely,
it is not the Liberty of voice, or pronunciation, but of the man, whom no law
has obliged to speak otherwise then he did. Lastly, from the use of the word
Free Will, no Liberty can be inferred of the will, desire, or inclination, but
the Liberty of the man; which consists in this, that he finds no stop, in
doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination to do.

Fear, and Liberty are consistent; as when a man throws his Fear and
Liberty consistent.
goods into the Sea for fear the ship should sink, he does it nevertheless
very willingly, and may refuse to do it if he will: It is therefore the
action, of one that was free: so a man sometimes pays his debt, only for fear
of Imprisonment, which because no body hindered him from detaining, was the
action of a man at liberty. And generally all actions which men do in
Commonwealths, for fear of the law, are actions, which the doers had liberty
to omit.

Liberty, and Necessity are Consistent: As in the water, that has Liberty and
Necessity Consistent.
not only liberty, but a necessity of descending by the Channel; so likewise in
the Actions which men voluntarily do: which, because they proceed from their
will, proceed from liberty; and yet, because every act of man's will, and every
desire, and inclination proceeds from some cause, and that from another
cause, in a continual chain, (whose first link is in the hand of God the
first of all causes,) proceed from necessity. So that to him that could see the
connection of those causes, the necessity of all men's voluntary actions, would
appear manifest. And therefore God, that sees, and disposes all things,
sees also that the liberty of man in doing what he will, is accompanied with
the necessity of doing that which God will, and no more, nor less. For though
men may do many things, which God does not command, nor is therefore Author of
them; yet they can have no passion, nor appetite to any thing, of which
appetite Gods will is not the cause. And did not his will assure the necessity
of man's will, and consequently of all that on man's will depends, the liberty
of men would be a contradiction, and impediment to the omnipotence and liberty
of God. And this shall suffice, (as to the matter in hand) of that natural
liberty, which only is properly called liberty.

But as men, for the atteyning of peace, and conservation of themselves
Artificial Bonds, or Covenants.
thereby, have made an Artificial Man, which we call a Commonwealth; so also
have they made Artificial Chains, called Civil Laws, which they themselves,
by mutual covenants, have fastened at one end, to the lips of that Man, or
Assembly, to whom they have given the Sovereign Power; and at the other end to
their own Ears. These Bonds in their own nature but weak, may nevertheless be
made to hold, by the danger, though not by the difficulty of breaking them.

In relation to these Bonds only it is, that I am to speak now, of Liberty of
Subjects consists in Liberty from covenants.
the Liberty of Subjects. For seeing there is no Commonwealth in the world,
wherein there be Rules enough set down, for the regulating of all the actions,
and words of men, (as being a thing impossible:) it follows necessarily, that
in all kinds of actions, by the laws praetermitted, men have the Liberty, of
doing what their own reasons shall suggest, for the most profitable to
themselves. For if we take Liberty in the proper sense, for corporal Liberty;
that is to say, freedom from chains, and prison, it were very absurd for men
to clamor as they do, for the Liberty they so manifestly enjoy. Again, if we
take Liberty, for an exemption from Laws, it is no less absurd, for men to
demand as they do, that Liberty, by which all other men may be masters of
their lives. And yet as absurd as it is, this is it they demand; not knowing
that the Laws are of no power to protect them, without a Sword in the hands of
a man, or men, to cause those laws to be put in execution. The Liberty of a
Subject, lies therefore only in those things, which in regulating their
actions, the Sovereign has praetermitted: such as is the Liberty to buy, and
sell, and otherwise contract with one another; to choose their own abode, their
own diet, their own trade of life, and institute their children as they
themselves think fit; and the like. Liberty of the Subject consistent with the
unlimited power of the Sovereign.


Nevertheless we are not to understand, that by such Liberty, the Sovereign
Power of life, and death, is either abolished, or limited. For it has been
already shown, that nothing the Sovereign Representative can do to a Subject,
on what pretense soever, can properly be called Injustice, or Injury; because
every Subject is Author of every act the Sovereign does; so that he never
wants Right to any thing, otherwise, than as he himself is the Subject of
God, and bound thereby to observe the laws of Nature. And therefore it may, and
does often happen in Commonwealths, that a Subject may be put to death, by the
command of the Sovereign Power; and yet neither do the other wrong: As when
Jeptha caused his daughter to be sacrificed: In which, and the like cases, he
that so dies, had Liberty to do the action, for which he is nevertheless,
without Injury put to death. And the same holds also in a Sovereign Prince,
that puts to death an Innocent Subject. For though the action be against the
law of Nature, as being contrary to Equity, (as was the killing of Uriah, by
David;) yet it was not an Injury to Uriah; but to God. Not to Uriah, because
the right to do what he pleased, was given him by Uriah himself: And yet to
God, because David was Gods Subject; and prohibited all Iniquity by the law of
Nature. Which distinction, David himself, when he repented the fact, evidently
confirmed, saying, To thee only have I sinned. In the same manner, the people
of Athens, when they ^anished the most potent of their Commonwealth for ten
years, thought they committed no Injustice; and yet they never questioned what
crime he had done; but what hurt he would do: Nay they commanded the
banishment of they knew not whom; and every Citizen bringing his Oystershell
into the market place, written with the name of him he desired should be
banished, without actual accusing him, sometimes banished an Aristides, for
his reputation of Justice; And sometimes a scurrilous Jester, as Hyperbolus, to
make a Jest of it. And yet a man cannot say, the Sovereign People of Athens
wanted right to banish them; or an Athenian the Liberty to Jest, or to be Just.

The Liberty, whereof there is so frequent, and honorable mention, The
Liberty which writers praise, is the Liberty of Sovereigns* not of Private men.
in the Histories, and Philosophy of the Ancient Greeks, and Romans, and in the
writings, and discourse of those that from them have received all their
learning in the Politiques, is not the Liberty of Particular men; but the
Liberty of the Commonwealth: which is the same with that, which every man
then should have, if there were no Civil Laws, nor Commonwealth at all. And
the effects of it also be the same. For as amongst masterlesse men, there is
perpetual war, of every man against his neighbor; no inheritance, to transmit
to the Son, nor to expect from the Father; no propriety of Goods, or Lands; no
security; but a full and absolute Liberty in every Particular man: So in
States, and Commonwealths not dependent on one another, every Commonwealth,
(not every man) has an absolute Liberty, to do what it shall judge (that is
to say, what that Man, or Assembly that represents it, shall judge) most
conducing to their benefit. But withal, they live in the condition of a
perpetual war, and upon the confines of battle, with their frontiers armed,
and canons planted against their neighbors round about. The Athenians, and
Romans were free; that is, free Commonwealths: not that any particular men
had the Liberty to resist their own Representative; but that their
Representative had the Liberty to resist, or invade other people. There is
written on the Turrets of the city of Luca in great characters at this day, the
word LIBERTAS; yet no man can thence infer, that a particular man has more
Liberty, or Immunitie from the service of the Commonwealth there, than in
Constantinople. Whether a Commonwealth be Monarchical, or Popular, the
Freedom is still the same.

But it is an easy thing, for men to be deceived, by the specious name of
Liberty; and for want of Judgment to distinguish, mistake that for their
Private Inheritance, and Birth right, which is the right of the Public only.
And when the same error is confirmed by the authority of men in reputation for
their writings in this subject, it is no wonder if it produce sedition, and
change of Government. In these western parts of the world, we are made to
receive our opinions concerning the Institution, and Rights of Commonwealths,
from Aristotle, Cicero, and other men, Greeks and Romans, that living under
Popular States, derived those Rights, not from the Principles of Nature, but
transcribed them into their books, out of the Practice of their own
Commonwealths, which were Popular; as the Grammarians describe the Rules of
Language, out of the Practice of the time; or the Rules of Poetry, out of the
Poems of Homer and Virgil. And because the Athenians were taught, (to keep them
from desire of changing their Government,) that they were Freemen, and all that
lived under Monarchy were slaves; therefore Aristotle puts it down in his
Politiques, (lib. 6. cap. 2.) In democracy, Liberty is to be supposed: for it is
commonly held, that no man is Free in any other Government. And as Aristotle;
so Cicero, and other Writers have grounded their Civil doctrine, on the
opinions of the Romans, who were taught to hate Monarchy, at first, by them
that having deposed their Sovereign, shared amongst them the Sovereignty of
Rome; and afterward by their Successors. And by reading of these Greek, and
Latin Authors, men from their childhood have gotten a habit (under a false
show of Liberty,) of favoring tumults, and of licentious controlling the
actions of their Sovereigns; and again of controlling those controllers, with
the effusion of so much blood; as I think I may truly say, there was never any
thing so deerly bought, as these Western parts have bought the learning of the
Greek and Latin tongues.

To come now to the particulars of the true Liberty of a Subject; Liberty of
Subjects how to be measured.
that is to say, what are the things, which though commanded by the Sovereign,
he may nevertheless, without Injustice, refuse to do; we are to consider, what
Rights we pass away, when we make a Commonwealth; or (which is all one,) what
Liberty we deny our selves, by owning all the Actions (without exception) of
the Man, or Assembly we make our Sovereign. For in the act of our Submission,
consists both our Obligation, and our Liberty; which must therefore be
inferred by arguments taken from thence; there being no Obligation on any man,
which arises not from some Act of his own; for all men equally, are by Nature
Free. And because such arguments, must either be drawn from the express words,
I Authorize all his Actions, or from the Intention of him that submits
himself to his Power, (which Intention is to be understood by the End for
which he so submits;) The Obligation, and Liberty of the Subject, is to be
derived, either from those Words, (or others equivalent;) or else from the End
of the Institution of Sovereignty; namely, the Peace of the Subjects within
themselves, and their Defense against a common Enemy,

First therefore, seeing Sovereignty by Institution, is by Covenant Subjects
have Liberty to defend their own bodies, even against them that lawsully invade
them;
of every one to every one; and Sovereignty by Acquisition, by Covenants of the
Vanquished to the Victor, or Child to the Parent; It is manifest, that every
Subject has Liberty in all those things, the right whereof cannot by Covenant
be transferred. I have shown before in the 14. Chapter, that Covenants, not to
defend a man's own body, are void. Therefore,

If the Sovereign command a man (though justly condemned,) to Are not bound to
hurt themselves;
kill, wound, or mayme himself; or not to resist those that assault him; or to
abstain from the use of food, air, medicine, or any other thing, without which
he cannot live; yet has that man the Liberty to disobey.

If a man be interrogated by the Sovereign, or his Authority, concerning a
crime done by himself, he is not bound (without assurance of Pardon) to
confess it; because no man (as I have shown in the same Chapter) can be
obliged by Covenant to accuse himself.

Again, the Consent of a Subject to Sovereign Power, is contained in these
words, I Authorize, or take upon me, all his actions; in which there is no
restriction at all, of his own former natural Liberty: For by allowing him to
kill me, I am not bound to kill my self when he commands me. It Is one thing to
say, Kill me, or my fellow, if you please; another thing to say, I will kill my
self, or my fellow. It follows therefore, that

No man is bound by the words themselves, either to kill himself, or any other
man; And consequently, that the Obligation a man may sometimes have, upon the
Command of the Sovereign to execute any dangerous, or dishonorable Office,
depends not on the Words of our Submission; but on the Intention; which is to
be understood by the End thereof. When therefore our refusal to obey,
frustrates the End for which the Sovereignty was ordained; then there is no
Liberty to refuse: otherwise there is.

Upon this ground, a man that is commanded as a Soldier to fight Nor to
warfare, unless they voluntarily undertake it.
against the enemy, though his Sovereign have Right enough to punish his
refusal with death, may nevertheless in many cases refuse, without Injustice;
as when he substituteth a sufficient Soldier in his place: for in this case he
deserteth not the service of the Commonwealth. And there is allowance to be
made for natural timorousness, not only to women, (of whom no such dangerous
duty is expected,) but also to men of feminine courage. When Armies fight,
there is on one side, or both, a running away; yet when they do it not out of
treachery, but fear, they are not esteemed to do it unjustly, but dishonourably.
For the same reason, to avoid battle, is not Injustice, but Cowardice. But he
that inrowleth himself a Soldier, or takes impressed money, takes away the
excuse of a timorous nature; and is obliged, not only to go to the battle,
but also not to run from it, without his Captains leave. And when the Defense
of the Commonwealth, requires at once the help of all that are able to bear
Arms, every one is obliged; because otherwise the Institution of the
Commonwealth, which they have not the purpose, or courage to preserve, was in
vain.

To resist the Sword of the Commonwealth, in defense of another man, guilty,
or innocent, no man has Liberty; because such Liberty, takes away from the
Sovereign, the means of Protecting us; and is therefore destructive of the very
essence of Government. But in case a great many men together, have already
resisted the Sovereign Power unjustly, or committed some Capital crime, for
which every one of them expects death, whether have they not the Liberty then
to join together, and assist, and defend one another? Certainly they have: For
they but defend their lives, which the Guilty man may as well do, as the
Innocent. There was indeed injustice in the first breach of their duty; Their
bearing of Arms subsequent to it, though it be to maintain what they have done,
is no new unjust act. And if it be only to defend their persons, it is not
unjust at all. But the offer of pardon takes from them, to whom it is offered,
the plea of self-defence, and makes their perseverance in assisting, or
defending the rest, unlawful.

As for other Lyberties, they depend on the Silence of the Law. In The Greatest
Liberty of Subjects, depends on the Silence of the Law.
cases where the Sovereign has prescribed no rule, there the Subject has the
Liberty to do, or forbear, according to his own discretion. And therefore such
Liberty is in some places more, and in some less; and in some times more, in
other times less, according as they that have the Sovereignty shall think most
convenient. As for Example, there was a time, when in England a man might enter
in to his own Land, (and dispossess such as wrongfully possessed it,) by
force. But in aftertimes, that Liberty of Forcible Entry, was taken away by a
Statute made (by the King) in Parliament. And in some places of the world, men
have the Liberty of many wives: in other places, such Liberty is not allowed.

If a Subject have a controversy with his Sovereign, of debt, or of right of
possession of lands or goods, or concerning any service required at his hands,
or concerning any penalty, corporal, or pecuniary, grounded on a precedent
Law; he has the same Liberty to sue for his right, as if it were against a
Subject; and before such Judges, as are appointed by the Sovereign. For seeing
the Sovereign demands by force of a former Law, and not by virtue of his
Power; he declares thereby, that he requires no more, than shall appear to be
due by that Law. The suit therefore is not contrary to the will of the
Sovereign; and consequently the Subject has the Liberty to demand the hearing
of his Cause; and sentence, according to that Law. But if he demand, or take
any thing by pretense of his Power; there lies, in that case, no action of
Law: for all that is done by him in Virtue of his Power, is done by the
Authority of every Subject, and consequently, he that brings an action against
the Sovereign, brings it against himself.

If a Monarch, or Sovereign Assembly, grant a Liberty to all, or any of his
Subjects, which Grant standing, he is disabled to provide for their safety, the
Grant is void; unless he directly renounce, or transfer the Sovereignty to
another. For in that he might openly, (if it had been his will,) and in plain
terms, have renounced, or transferred it, and did not; it is to be understood
it was not his will; but that the Grant proceeded from ignorance of the
repugnancy between such a Liberty and the Sovereign Power: and therefore the
Sovereignty is still retained; and consequently all those Powers, which are
necessary to the exercising thereof; such as are the Power of War, and Peace,
of Judicature, of appointing Officers, and Councillors, of levying Money, and
the rest named in the 18th Chapter.

The Obligation of Subjects to the Sovereign, is understood to In what Cases
Subjects are absolved of their obedience to their Sovereign.
last as long, and no longer, than the power lasts, by which he is able to
protect them. For the right men have by Nature to protect themselves, when none
else can protect them, can by no Covenant be relinquished. The Sovereignty is
the Soul of the Commonwealth; which once departed from the Body, the members
do no more receive their motion from it. The end of Obedience is Protection;
which, wheresoever a man sees it, either in his own, or in another sword,
Nature applies his obedience to it, and his endeavor to maintain it. And
though Sovereignty, in the intention of them that make it, be immortal; yet is
it in its own nature, not only subject to violent death, by foreign war; but
also through the ignorance, and passions of men, it has in it, from the very
institution, many seeds of a natural mortality, by Intestine Discord.

If a Subject be taken prisoner in war; or his person, or his means In case of
Captivity.
of life be within the Guards of the enemy, and has his life and corporal
Liberty given him, on condition to be Subject to the Victor, he has Liberty
to accept the condition; and having accepted it, is the subject of him that
took him; because he had no other way to preserve himself. The case is the
same, if he be detained on the same terms, in a foreign country. But if a man
be held in prison, or bonds, or is not trusted with the liberty of his body;
he cannot be understood to be bound by Covenant to subjection; and therefore
may, if he can, make his escape by any means whatsoever.

If a Monarch shall relinquish the Sovereignty, both for himself, In case the
Sovereign cast off the government from himself and his Heyrs.
and his heirs; His Subjects return to the absolute Liberty of Nature;
because, though Nature may declare who are his Sons, and who are the nerest of
his Kin; yet it depends on his own will, (as has been said in the precedent
chapter,) who shall be his Heyr. If therefore he will have no Heir, there is
no Sovereignty, nor Subjection. The case is the same, if he dye without known
Kindred, and without declaration of his Heir. For then there can no Heir be
known, and consequently no Subjection be due.

If the Sovereign Banish his Subject; during the Banishment, he is In case of
Banishment.
not Subject. But he that is sent on a message, or has leave to travel, is
still Subject; but it is, by Contract between Sovereigns, not by virtue of the
covenant of Subjection. For whosoever enters into another dominion, is
Subject to all the Laws thereof; unless he have a privilege by the amity of
the Sovereigns, or by special license.

If a Monarch subdued by war, render himself Subject to the Victor; In case the
Sovereign render himself Subject to another.
his Subjects are delivered from their former obligation, and become obliged to
the Victor. But if he be held prisoner, or have not the liberty of his own
Body; he is not understood to have given away the Right of Soveraigntie; and
therefore his Subjects are obliged to yield obedience to the Magistrates
formerly placed, governing not in their own name, but in his. For, his Right
remaining, the question is only of the Administration; that is to say, of the
Magistrates and Officers; which, if he have not means to name, he is supposed
to approve those, which he himself had formerly appointed.

CHAP. XXII. Of SYSTEMES Subject, Political, and Private.
HAving spoken of the Generation, Form, and Power of The diverse sorts of
Systemes of People.
a Commonwealth, I am in order to speak next of the parts thereof. And first
of Systemes, which resemble the similar parts, or Muscles of a Body natural.
By SYSTEMES; I understand any numbers of men joined in one Interest, or one
Business. Of which, some are Regular, and some Irregular. Regular are those,
where one Man, or Assembly of men, is constituted Representative of the whole
number. All other are Irregular.

Of Regular, some are Absolute, and Independent, subject to none but their own
Representative: such are only Commonwealths; Of which I have spoken already in
the 5. last precedent chapters. Others are Dependent; that is to say,
Subordinate to some Sovereign Power, to which every one, as also their
Representative is Subject.

Of Systemes subordinate, some are Political, and some Private. Political
(otherwise Called Bodies Politic, and Persons in Law,) are those, which are
made by authority from the Sovereign Power of the Commonwealth. Private, are
those, which are constituted by Subjects amongst themselves, or by authority
from a stranger. For no authority derived from foreign power, within the
Dominion of another, is Public there, but Private.

And of Private Systemes, some are Lawful; some Unlawful: Lawful, are those
which are allowed by the Commonwealth: all other are Unlawful. Irregular
Systemes, are those which having no Representative, consist only in concourse
of People; which if not forbidden by the Commonwealth, nor made on evil
design, (such as are conflux of People to markets, or shows, or any other
harmless end,) are Lawful. But when the Intention is evil, or (if the
number be considerable) unknown, they are Unlawful.

In Bodies Politic, the power of the Representative is always In all Bodies
Politic the power of the Representative is Limited.
Limited: And that which prescribes the Limits thereof, is the Power
Sovereign. For Power Unlimited, is absolute Sovereignty. And the Sovereign, in
every Commonwealth, is the absolute Representative of all the subjects; and
therefore no other, can be Representative of any part of them, but so far
forth, as he shall give leave: And to give leave to a Body Politic of
Subjects, to have an absolute Representative to all intents and purposes, were
to abandon the government of so much of the Commonwealth, and to divide the
Dominion, contrary to their Peace and Defense, which the Sovereign cannot be
understood to do, by any Grant, that does not plainly, and directly discharge
them of their subjection. For consequences of words, are not the signs of his
will, when other consequences are signs of the contrary; but rather signs of
error, and misreckonning; to which all mankind is too prone.

The bounds of that Power, which is given to the Representative of a Body
Politic, are to be taken notice of, from two things. One is their Writ, or
Letters from the Sovereign: the other is the Law of the Commonwealth.

For though in the Institution or Acquisition of a Commonwealth, By Letters
Patents:
which is independent, there needs no Writing, because the Power of the
Representative has there no other bounds, but such as are set out by the
unwritten Law of Nature; yet in subordinate bodies, there are such diversities
of Limitation necessary, concerning their businesses, times, and places, as can
neither be remembered without Letters, nor taken notice of, unless such Letters
be Patent, that they may be read to them, and withal sealed, or testified,
with the Seals, or other permanent signs of the Authority Sovereign.

And because such Limitation is not always easy, or perhaps possible And the
Laws.
to be described in writing; the ordinary Laws, common to all Subjects, must
determine, what the Representative may lawfully do, in all Cases, where the
Letters themselves are silent. And therefore

In a Body Politic, if the Representative be one man, whatsoever When the
Representative is one man, his unwarranted Acts are his own only.
he does in the Person of the Body, which is not warranted in his Letters, nor
by the Laws, is his own act, and not the act of the Body, nor of any other
Member thereof besides himself: Because further than his Letters, or the Laws
limit, he represents no man's person, but his own. But what he does according
to these, is the act of every one: For of the Act of the Sovereign every one is
Author, because he is their Representative unlimited; and the act of him that
recedes not from the Letters of the Sovereign, is the act of the Sovereign, and
therefore every member of the Body is Author of it.

But if the Representative be an Assembly; whatsoever that Assembly When it is
an Assembly, it is the act of them that assented only.
shall Decree, not warranted by their Letters, or the Laws, is the act of the
Assembly, or Body Politic, and the act of every one by whose Vote the Decree
was made; but not the act of any man that being present Voted to the contrary;
nor of any man absent, unless he Voted it by procuration. It is the act of the
Assembly, because Voted by the major part; and if it be a crime, the Assembly
may be punished, as farre-forth as it is capable, as by dissolution, or
forfeiture of their Letters, (which is to such artificial, and fictitious
Bodies, capital,) or (if the Assembly have a Common stock, wherein none of the
Innocent Members have propriety,) by pecuniary Mulct. For from corporal
penalties Nature has exempted all Bodies Politic. But they that gave not
their Vote, are therefore Innocent, because the Assembly cannot Represent any
man in things unwarranted by their Letters, and consequently are involved in
their Votes.

If the person of the Body Politic being in one man, borrow When the
Representative is one man, if he borrow money, or owe it, by Contract; he is
liable only, the members not.
money of a stranger, that is, of one that is not of the same Body, (for no
Letters need limit borrowing, seeing it is left to men's own inclinations to
limit lending) the debt is the Representatives. For if he should have Authority
from his Letters, to make the members pay what he borrows, he should have by
consequence the Sovereignty of them; and therefore the grant were either void,
as proceeding from Error, commonly incident to humane Nature, and an
unsufficient sign of the will of the Granter; or if it be avowed by him, then
is the Representer Sovereign, and falls not under the present question, which
is only of Bodies subordinate. No member therefore is obliged to pay the debt
so borrowed, but the Representative himself: because he that lends it, being
a stranger to the Letters, and to the qualification of the Body, understands
those only for his debtors, that are engaged; and seeing the Representer can
engage himself, and none else, has him only for Debtor; who must therefore
pay him, out of the common stock (if there be any,) or (if there be none) out
of his own estate.

If he come into debt by Contract, or Mulct, the case is the same. When it is
an Assembly, they only are liable that have assented.


But when the Representative is an Assembly, and the debt to a stranger; all
they, and only they are responsible for the debt, that gave their votes to the
borrowing of it, or to the Contract that made it due, or to the fact for which
the Mulct was imposed; because every one of those in voting did engage himself
for the payment: For he that is author of the borrowing, is obliged to the
payment, even of the whole debt, though when paid by any one, he be discharged.

But if the debt be to one of the Assembly, the Assembly only is If the debt
be to one of the Assembly, the Body only is obliged.
obliged to the payment, out of their common stock (if they have any:) For
having liberty of Vote, if he Vote the Money, shall be borrowed, he Votes it
shall be paid; If he Vote if shall not be borrowed, or be absent, yet because
in lending, he voteth the borrowing, he contradicts his former Vote, and is
obliged by the later, and becomes both borrower and lender, and consequently
cannot demand payment from any particular man, but from the common Treasure
only; which failing he has no remedy, nor complaint, but against himself,
that being privy to the acts of the Assembly, and to their means to pay, and
not being enforced, did nevertheless through his own folly lend his money.

It is manifest by this, that in Bodies Politic subordinate, and Protestation
against the Decrees of Bodies Politic sometimes lawful; but against Sovereign
Power never.
subject to a Sovereign Power, it is sometimes not only lawful, but
expedient, for a particular man to make open protestation against the decrees
of the Representative Assembly, and cause their dissent to be Registered, or to
take witness of it; because otherwise they may be obliged to pay debts
contracted, and be responsible for crimes committed by other men: But in a
Sovereign Assembly, that liberty is taken away, both because he that protests
there, denies their Sovereignty; and also because whatsoever is commanded by
the Soverign Power, is as to the Subject (though not so always in the sight of
God) justified by the Command; for of such command every Bodies Politic for
Government of a Province, Colony, or Town.
Subject is the Author.

The variety of Bodies Politic, is almost infinite: for they are not only
distinguished by the several affairs, for which they are constituted, wherein
there is an unspeakable diversity; but also by the times, places, and numbers,
subject to many limitations. And as to their affairs, some are ordained for
Government; As first, the Government of a Province may be committed to an
Assembly of men, wherein all resolutions shall depend on the Votes of the major
part; and then this Assembly is a Body Politic, and their power limited by
Commission. This word Province signifies a charge, or care of business, which
he whose business it is, commits to another man, to be administered for* and
under him; and therefore when in one Commonwealth there be diverse Countries,
that have their Laws distinct one from another, or are far distant in place,
the Administration of the Government being committed to diverse persons, those
Countries where the Sovereign is not resident, but governs by Commission, are
called Provinces. But of the government of a Province, by an Assembly residing
in the Province it self, there be few examples. The Romans who had the
Sovereignty of many Provinces; yet governed them always by Presidents, and
Praetors; and not by Assemblies, as they governed the City of Rome, and
Territories adjacent. In like manner, when there were Colonies sent from
England, to Plant Virginia, and Sommer-Ilands; though the government of them
here, were committed to Assemblies in London, yet did those Assemblies never
commit the Government under them to any Assembly there; but did to each
Plantation send one Governor; For though every man, where he can be present by
Nature, desires to participate of government; yet where they cannot be present,
they are by Nature also inclined, to commit the Government of their common
Interest rather to a Monarchical, then a Popular form of Government: which is
also evident in those men that have great private estates; who when they are
unwilling to take the pains of administering the bu^inesse that belongs to
them, choose rather to trust one Servant, then an Assembly either of their
friends or servants. But howsoever it be in fact, yet we may suppose the
Government of a Province, or Colony committed to an Assembly: and when it is,
that which in this place I have to say, is this; that whatsoever debt is by
that Assembly contracted; or whatsoever unlawful Act is decreed, is the Act
only of those that assented, and not of any that dissented, or were absent,
for the reasons before alleged. Also that an Assembly residing out of the
bounds of that Colony whereof they have the government, cannot execute any
power over the persons, or goods of any of the Colonie, to seize on them for
debt, or other duty, in any place without the Colony it self, as having no
Jurisdiction, nor Authority elsewhere, but are left to the remedy, which the
Law of the place allows them. And though the Assembly have right, to impose a
Mulct upon any of their members, that shall break the Laws they make; yet out
of the Colonie it self, they have no right to execute the same. And that which
is said here, of the Rights of an Assembly, for the government of a Province,
or a Colony, is appliable also to an Assembly for the Government of a Town, an
University, or a College, or a Church, or for any other Government over the
persons of men.

And generally, in all Bodies Politic, if any particular member conceive
himself Injuried by the Body it self, the Cognizance of his cause belongs to
the Sovereign, and those the Sovereign has ordained for Judges in such causes,
or shall ordain for that particular cause; and not to the Body it self. For
the whole Body is in this case his fellow subject, which in a Sovereign
Assembly, is otherwise: for there, if the Sovereign be not Judge, though in his
own cause, there can be no Judge at all.

In a Body Politic, for the well ordering of foreign Traffic, Bodies
Politic for ordering of Trade.
the most commodious Representative is an Assembly of all the members; that is
to say, such a one, as every one that adventureth his money, may be present at
all the Deliberations, and Resolutions of the Body, if they will themselves.
For proof whereof, we are to consider the end, for which men that are
Merchants, and may buy and sell, export, and import their Merchandise,
according to their own discretions, do nevertheless bind themselves up in one
Corporation. It is true, there be few Merchants, that with the Merchandise they
buy at home, can freight a Ship* to export it; or with that they buy abroad, to
bring it home; and have therefore need to join together in one Society; where
every man may either participate of the gain; according to the proportion of
his adventure; or take his own, and sell what he transports, or imports, at
such prices as he thinks fit. But this is no Body Politic, there being no
Common Representative to oblige them to any other Law, than that which is
common to all other subjects. The End of their Incorporating, is to make their
gain the greater; which is done two ways; by sole buying, and sole selling,
both at home, and abroad. So that to grant to a Company of Merchants to be a
Corporation, or Body Politic, is to grant them a double Monopoly, whereof one
is to be sole buyers; another to be sole sellers. For when there is a Company
incorporate for any particular foreign Country, they only export the
Commodities vendible in that Country; which is sole buying at home, and sole
selling abroad. For at home there is but one buyer, and abroad but one that
sells: both which is gainful to the Merchant, because thereby they buy at
home at lower, and sell abroad at higher rates: And abroad there is but one
buyer of foreign Merchandise, and but one that sels them at home; both which
again are gainful to the adventurers.

Of this double Monopoly one part is disadvantageous to the people at home, the
other to forraigners. For at home by their sole exportation they set what price
they please on the husbandry, and handy works of the people; and by the sole
importation, what price they please on all foreign commodities the people have
need of; both which are ill for the people. On the contrary, by the sole
selling of the native commodities abroad, and sole buying the foreign
commodities upon the place, they raise the price of those, and abate the price
of these, to the disadvantage of the forraigner: For where but one sells, the
Merchandise is the dearer; and where but one buyeth the cheaper: Such
Corporations therefore are no other then Monopolies; though they would be very
profitable for a Commonwealth, if being bound up into one body in foreign
Markets they were at liberty at home, every man to buy, and sell at what price
he could.

The end then of these Bodies of Merchants, being not a Common benefit to the
whole Body, (which have in this case no common stock, but what is deducted out
of the particular adventures, for building, buying, victualling and manning of
Ships,) but the particular gain of every adventurer* it is reason that every
one be acquainted with the employment of his own; that is, that every one be of
the Assembly, that shall have the power to order the same; and be acquainted
with their accounts. And therefore the Representative of such a Body must be an
Assembly, where every member of the Body may be present at the consultations,
if he will.

If a Body Politic of Merchants, contract a debt to a stranger by the act of
their Representative Assembly, every Member is liable by himself for the whole.
For a stranger can take no notice of their private Laws, but considers them
as so many particular men, obliged every one to the whole payment, till payment
made by one discharges all the rest: But if the debt be to one of the Company,
the creditor is debtor for the whole to himself, and cannot therefore demand
his debt, but only from the common stock, if there be any.

If the Commonwealth impose a Tax upon the Body, it is understood to be laid
upon every Member proportionably to his particular adventure in the Company.
For there is in this case no other common stock, but what is made of their
particular adventures.

If a Mulct be laid upon the Body for some unlawful act, they only are liable
by whose votes the act was decreed, or by whose assistance it was executed; for
in none of the rest is there any other crime but being of the Body; which if a
crime, (because the Body was ordained by the authority of the Commonwealth,)
is not his.

If one of the Members be indebted to the Body, he may (...) sued by the Body;
but his goods cannot be taken, nor his person imprisoned by the authority of
the Body; but only by Authority of the Commonwealth: for if they can do it by
their own Authority, they can by their own Authority give judgment that the
debt is due, which is as much as to be Judge in their own Cause.

Those Bodies made for the government of Men, or of Traffic, A Body
Politic for Counsel to be given to the Sovereign.
be either perpetual, or for a time prescribed by writing. But there be Bodies
also whose times are limited, and that only by the nature of their business.
For example, if a Sovereign Monarch, or a Sovereign Assembly, shall think fit
to give command to the towns, and other several parts of their territory, to
send to him their Deputies, to inform him of the condition, and necessities of
the Subjects, or to advise with him for the making of good Laws, or for any
other cause, as with one Person representing the whole Country, such Deputies,
having a place and time of meeting assigned them, are there, and at that time,
a Body Politic, representing every Subject of that Dominion; but it is only
for such matters as shall be propounded unto them by that Man, or Assembly,
that by the Sovereign Authority sent for them; and when it shall be declared
that nothing more shall be propounded, nor debated by them, the Body is
dissolved. For if they were the absolute Representative of the people, then
were it the Sovereign Assembly; and so there would be two Sovereign Assemblies,
or two Sovereigns, over the same people; which cannot consist with their Peace.
And therefore where there is once a Sovereignty, there can be no absolute
Representation of the people, but by it. And for the limits of how far such a
Body shall represent the whole People, they are set forth in the Writing by
which they were sent for. For the People cannot choose their Deputies to other
intent, than is in the Writing directed to them from their Sovereign expressed.

Private Bodies Regular, and Lawful, are those that are constituted A Regular
Private Body, Lawful, as a Family.
without Letters, or other written Authority, saving the Laws common to all
other Subjects. And because they be united in one Person Representative, they
are held for Regular; such as are all Families, in which the Father, or Master
orders the whole Family. For he obliges his Children, and Servants, as far
as the Law permits, though not further, because none of them are bound to
obedience in those actions, which the Law has forbidden to be done. In all
other actions, during the time they are under domestique government, they are
subject to their Fathers, and Masters, as to their immediate Sovereigns. For
the Father, and Master being before the Institution of Commonwealth, absolute
Sovereigns in their own Families, they lose afterward no more of their
Authority, than the Law of the Commonwealth takes from them.

Private Bodies Regular, but Unlawful, are those that unite themselves Private
Bodies Regular, but Unlawful.
into one person Representative, without any public Authority at all; such as
are the Corporations of Beggars, Thieves and Gypsies, the better to order their
trade of begging, and stealing; and the Corporations of men, that by Authority
from any foreign Person, unite themselves in another Dominion, for the easier
propagation of Doctrines, and for making a party, against the Power of the
Commonwealth.

Irregular Systemes, in their nature, but Leagues, or sometimes Systemes
Irregular, such as are Private Leagues
mere concourse of people, without union to any particular design, not by
obligation of one to another, but proceeding only from a similitude of wills
and inclinations, become Lawful, or Unlawful, according to the lawfulness,
or unlawfulness of every particular man's design therein: And his design is
to be understood by the occasion.

The Leagues of Subjects, (because Leagues are commonly made for mutual
defense,) are in a Common wealth (which is no more than a League of all the
Subjects together) for the most part unnecessary, and savor of unlawful
design; and are for that cause Unlawful, and go commonly by the name of
Factions, or Conspiracies. For a League being a connection of men by Covenants,
if there be no power given to any one Man, or Assembly (as in the condition of
mere Nature) to compel them to performance, is so long only valid, as there
arises no just cause of distrust: and therefore Leagues between
Commonwealths, over whom there is no humane Power established, to keep them
all in awe, are not only lawful, but also profitable for the time they last.
But Leagues of the Subjects of one and the same Commonwealth, where every one
may obtain his right by means of the Sovereign Power, are unnecessary to the
maintaining of Peace and Justice, and (in case the design of them be evil, or
Unknown to the Commonwealth) unlawful. For all uniting of strength by private
men, is, if for evil intent, unjust; if for intent unknown, dangerous to the
Public, and unjustly concealed.

If the Sovereign Power be in a great Assembly, and a number of Secret Cabals.
men, part of the Assembly, without authority, consult a part, to contrive the
guidance of the rest; This is a Faction, or Conspiracy unlawful, as being a
fraudulent seducing of the Assembly for their particular interest. But if he,
whose private interest is to be debated, and judged in the Assembly, make as
many friends as he can; in him it is no Injustice; because in this case he is
no part of the Assembly. And though he hire such friends with money, (unless
there be an express Law against it,) yet it is not Injustice. For sometimes,
(as men's manners are,) Justice cannot be had without money; and every man may
think his own cause just, till it be heard, and judged.

In all Commonwealths, if a private man entertain more servants, Feuds of
private Families.
than the government of his estate, and lawful employment he has for them
requires, it is Faction, and unlawful. For having the protection of the
Commonwealth, he needs not the defense of private force. And whereas in
Nations not thoroughly civilized, several numerous Families have lived in
continual hostility, and invaded one another with private force; yet it is
evident enough, that they have done unjustly; or else that they had no
Commonwealth.

And as Factions for Kindred, so also Factions for Government of Factions for
Government.
Religion, as of Papists, Protestants, etc. or of State, as Patricians, and
Plebeians of old time in Rome, and of Aristocraticalls and Democraticalls of
old time in Greece, are unjust, as being contrary to the peace and safety of
the people, and a taking of the Sword out of the hand of the Sovereign.

Concourse of people, is an Irregular Systeme, the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness, whereof depends on the occasion, and on the number of them
that are assembled. If the occasion be lawful, and manifest, the Concourse is
lawful; as the usual meeting of men at Church, or at a public Show, in
usual numbers: for if the numbers be extraordinarily great, the occasion is
not evident; and consequently he that cannot render a particular and good
account of his being amongst them, is to be judged conscious of an unlawful,
and tumultuous design. It may be lawful for a thousand men, to join in a
Petition to be delivered to a Judge, or Magistrate; yet if a thousand men come
to present it, it is a tumultuous Assembly; because there needs but one or two
for that purpose. But in such cases as these, it is not a set number that makes
the Assembly Unlawful, but such a number, as the present Officers are not able
to suppress, and bring to Justice.

When an unusual number of men, assemble against a man whom they accuse; the
Assembly is an Unlawful tumult; because they may deliver their accusation to
the Magistrate by a few, or by one man. Such was the case of St. Paul at
Ephesus; where Demetrius, and a great number of other men, brought two of Paul's
companions before the Magistrate, saying with one Voice, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; which was their way of demanding Justice against them for teaching
the people such doctrine, as was against their Religion, and Trade. The
occasion here, considering the Laws of that People, was just; yet was their
Assembly Judged Unlawful, and the Magistrate reprehended them for it, in these
words, Acts 19. 40.
If Demetrius and the other workmen can accuse any man; of any thing, there be
Pleas, and Deputies, let them accuse one another. And if you have any other
thing to demand, your case may be judged in an Assembly Lawfully called. For we
are in danger to be accused for this days sedition, because, there is no cause
by which any man can render any reason of this Concourse of People. Where he
calls an Assembly, whereof men can give no just account, a Sedition, and such
as they could not answer for. And this is all I shall say concerning Systemes,
and Assemblyes of People, which may be compared (as I said,) to the Similar
parts of man's Body; such as be Lawful, to the Muscles; such as are Unlawful,
to Wens, Biles, and Apostemes, engendered by the unnatural conflux of evil
humors.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the PUBLIC MINISTERS of Sovereign Power.
IN the last Chapter I have spoken of the Similar parts of a Commonwealth: In
this I shall speak of the parts Organicall, which are Public Ministers.

A PUBLIC MINISTER, is he, that by the Sovereign, Public Minister Who.
(whether a Monarch, or an Assembly,) is employed in any affairs, with
Authority to represent in that employment, the Person of the Commonwealth. And
whereas every man, or assembly that has Sovereignty, represents two Persons,
or (as the more common phrase is) has two Capacities, one Natural, and another
Politic, (as a Monarch, has the person not only of the Commonwealth, but
also of a man; and a Sovereign Assembly has the Person not only of the
Commonwealth, but also of the Assembly); they that be servants to them in
their natural Capacity, are not Public Ministers; but those only that serve
them in the Administration of the Public business. And therefore neither
Ushers, nor Sergeants, nor other Officers that wait on the Assembly, for no
other purpose, (...) for the commodity of the men assembled, in an Aristocracy,
or Democracy; nor Stewards, Chamberlains, Cofferers, or any other Officers of
the household of a Monarch, are Public Ministers in a Monarchy.

Of Public Ministers, some have charge committed to them of Ministers for the
general Administration.
a general Administration, either of the whole Dominion, or of a part thereof.
Of the whole, as to a Protector, or Regent, may be committed by the
Predecessor of an Infant King, during his minority, the whole Administration of
his Kingdom. In which case, every Subject is so far obliged to obedience, as
the Ordinances he ^all make, and the commands he shall give be in the Kings
name, and not inconsistent with his Sovereign Power. Of a part, or Province;
as when either a Monarch, or a Sovereign Assembly, shall give the general
charge thereof to a Governor, Lieutenant, Prefect or Viceroy: And in this
case also, every one of that Province, is obliged to all he shall do in the
name of the Sovereign, and that not incompatible with the Sovereigns Right. For
such Protectors, Viceroys, and Governors, have no other right, but what
depends on the Sovereigns Will; and no Commission that can be given them, can
be interpret^d for a Declaration of the will to transfer the Sovernignty,
without express and perspicuous words to that purpose. And this kind of
Public Ministers resembles the Nerves, and Tendons that move the several
limbs of a body natural.

Others have special Administration; that is to say, charges of For special
Administration, as for Oeco^my.
some special business, either at home, or abroad: As at home, First, for the
Economy of a Commonwealth, They that have Authority concerning the Treasure,
as Tributes, Impositions, Rents, Fines, or whatsoever public revenue, to
collect, receive, issue, or take the Accounts thereof, are Public Ministers:
Ministers, because they serve the Person Representative, and can do nothing
against his Command, nor without his Authority: Public, because they serve
him in his. Political Capacity.

Secondly, they that have Authority concerning the Militia; to have the custody
of Arms, Forts, Ports; to Levy, Pay, or Conduct Soldiers; or to provide for
any necessary thing for the use of war, either by Land or Sea, are public
Ministers. But a Soldier without Command, though he fight for the
Commonwealth, does not therefore represent the Person of it; because there is
none to represent it to. For every one that has command, represents it to them
only whom he commands.

They also that have authority to teach, or to enable others to For instruction
of the People.
teach the people their duty to the Sovereign Power, and instruct them in the
knowledge of what is just, and unjust, thereby to render them more apt to live
in godliness, and in peace amongst themselves, and resist the public enemy,
are Public Ministers: Ministers, in that they do it not by their own
Authority, but by another; and Public, because they do it (or should do
it) by no Authority, but that of the Sovereign. The Monarch, or the Sovereign
Assembly only has immediate Authority from God, to teach and instruct the
people; and no man but the Sovereign, receives his power Dei gratia simply;
that is to say, from the favor of none but God: All other, receive theirs from
the favor and providence of God, and their Sovereigns; as in a Monarchy Dei
gratia and Regis; or Dei providentia and voluntate Regis.

They also to whom Jurisdiction is given, are Public Ministers. For
Judicature.
For in their Seats of Justice they represent the person of the Sovereign; and
their Sentence, is his Sentence; For (as has been before declared) all
Judicature is essentially annexed to the Sovereignty; and therefore all other
Judges are but Ministers of him, or them that have the Sovereign Power. And as
Controversies are of two sorts, namely of Fact, and of Law; so are Judgments,
some of Fact, some of Law: And consequently in the same controversy, there may
be two Judges, one of Fact, another of Law.

And in both these controversies, there may arise a controversy between the
party Judged, and the Judge; which because they be both Subjects to the
Sovereign, ought in Equity to be Judged by men agreed on by consent of both;
for no man can be Judge in his own cause. But the Sovereign is already agreed
on for Judge by them both, and is therefore either to hear the Cause, and
determine it himself, or appoint for Judge such as they shall both agree on.
And this agreement is then understood to be made between them diverse ways; as
first, if the Defendant be allowed to except against such of his Judges, whose
interest makes him suspect them, (for as to the Complaynant he has already
chosen his own Judge,) those which he excepteth not against, are Judges he
himself agrees on. Secondly, if he appeal to any other Judge, he can appeal
no further; for his appeal is his choice. Thirdly, if he appeal to the
Sovereign himself, and he by himself, or by Delegates which the parties shall
agree on, give Sentence; that Sentence is final: for the Defendant is Judged
by his own Judges, that is to say, by himself.

These properties of just and rational Judicature considered, I cannot
forbear to observe the excellent constitution of the Courts of Justice,
established both for Common, and also for Public Pleas in England. By Common
Pleas, I mean those, where both the Complaynant and Defendant are Subjects:
and by Public, (which are also called Pleas of the Crown) those, where the
Complaynant is the Sovereign. For whereas there were two orders of men, whereof
one was Lords, the other Commons; The Lords had this Privilege, to have for
Judges in all Capital crimes, none but Lords; and of them, as many as would be
present; which being ever acknowledged as a Privilege of favor, their Judges
were none but such as they had themselves desired. And in all controversies,
every Subject (as also in civil controversies the Lords) had for Judges, men
of the Country where the matter in controvesie lay; against which he might make
his exceptions, till at last Twelve men without exception being agreed on, they
were Judged by those twelve. So that having his own Judges, there could be
nothing alleged by the party, why the sentence should not be final. These
public persons, with Authority from the Sovereign Power, either to Instruct,
or Judge the people, are such members of the Commonwealth, as may fitly be
compared to the organs of Voice in a Body natural.

Public Ministers are also all those, that have Authority from For (...).
the Sovereign, to procure the Execution of Judgments given; to publish the
Sovereigns Commands; to suppress Tumults; to apprehend, and imprison
Malefactors; and other acts tending to the conservation of the Peace. For every
act they do by such Authority, is the act of the Commonwealth; and their
service, answerable to that of the Hands, in a Body natural.

Public Ministers abroad, are those that represent the Person of their own
Sovereign, to foreign States. Such are Ambassadors, Messengers, Agents, and
Heralds, sent by public Authority, and on public Business.

But such as are sent by Authority only of some private party of a troubled
State, though they be received, are neither Public, nor Private Ministers of
the Commonwealth; because none of their actions have the Commonwealth for
Author. Likewise, an Ambassador sent from a Prince, to congratulate, condole,
or to assist at a solemnity, though the Authority be Public; yet because the
business is Private, and belonging to him in his natural capacity*; is a
Private person. Also if a man be sent into another Country, secretly to explore
their counsels, and strength; though both the Authority, and the Business be
Public; yet because there is none to take notice of any Person in him, but
his own; he is but a Private Minister; but yet a Minister of the Commonwealth;
and may be compared to an Eye in the Body natural. And those that are
appointed to receive the Petitions or other informations of the People, and are
as it were the public Ear, are Public Ministers, and represent their
Sovereign in that office.

Neither a Counselor (nor a Council of State, if we consider Counselors
without other employment then to Advise are not Public Ministers.
it with no Authority of Judicature or Command, but only of giving Advice to
the Sovereign when it is required, or of offering it when it is not required,
is a Public Person. For the Advice is addressed to the Sovereign only, whose
person cannot in his own presence, be represented to him, by another. But a
Body of Counselors, are never without some other Authority, either of
Judicature, or of immediate Administration: As in a Monarchy, they represent
the Monarch, in delivering his Commands to the Public Ministers: In a
Democracy, the Council, or Senate propounds the Result of their deliberations
to the people, as a Council; but when they appoint Judges, or hear Causes, or
give Audience to Ambassadors, it is in the quality of a Minister of the People:
And in an Aristocracy the Council of State is the Sovereign Assembly it self;
and gives counsel to none but themselves.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the NUTRITION, and PROCREATION of a Commonwealth.
THe NUTRITION of a Commonwealth consists, in The Nourishment of a
Commonwealth consists in the Commodities of Sea and Land:
the Plenty, and Distribution of Materials conducing to Life: In Concoction, or
Preparation; and (when concocted) in the Conveyance of it, by convenient
conduits, to the Public use.

As for the Plenty of Matter, it is a thing limited by Nature, to those
commodities, which from (the two breasts of our common Mother) Land, and Sea,
God usually either freely gives, or for labor sells to mankind.

For the Matter of this Nutriment, consisting in Animals, Vegetals, and
Minerals, God has freely laid them before us, in or near to the face of the
Earth; so as there needs no more but the labor, and industry of receiving
them. Insomuch as Plenty depends (next to Gods favor) merely on the labor
and industry of men.

This Matter, commonly called Commodities, is partly Native, and partly
Foreign: Native, that which is to be had within the Territory of the
Commonwealth: Foreign, that which is imported from without. And because there
is no Territory under the Dominion of one Commonwealth, (except it be of very
vast extent,) that produces all things needful for the maintenance, and
motion of the whole Body; and few that produce not something more than
necessary; the superfluous commodities to be had within, become no more
superfluous, but supply these wants at home, by importation of that which may
be had abroad, either by Exchange, or by just War, or by Labor: for a man's
Labor also, is a commodity exchangeable for benefit, as well as any other
thing: And there have been Commonwealths that having no more Territory, than
has served them for habitation, have nevertheless, not only maintained, but
also increased their Power, partly by the labor of trading from one place to
another, and partly by selling the Manifactures, whereof the Materials were
brought in from other places.

The Distribution of the Materials of this Nourishment, is the constitution And
the right Distribution of them.
of Mine, and Thine, and His; that is to say, in one word Propriety; and
belongs in all kinds of Commonwealth to the Sovereign Power. For where there
is no Commonwealth, there is (as has been already shown) a perpetual war
of every man against his neighbor; And therefore every thing is his that
gets it, and keeps it by force; which is neither Propriety, nor Community;
but Uncertainty. Which is so evident, that even Cicero, (a passionate defender
of Liberty,) in a public pleading, attributes all Propriety to the Law
Civil, Let the Civil Law, says he, be once abandoned, or but negligently
guarded* (not to say oppressed,) and there is nothing, that any man can be sure
to receive from his Ancestor, or leave to his Children. And again; Take away
the Civil Law, and no man knows what is his own, and what another man's. Seeing
therefore the Introduction of Propriety is an effect of Commonwealth; which
can do nothing but by the Person that Represents i^, it is the act only of the
Sovereign; and consists in the Laws, which none can make that have not the
Sovereign Power. And this they well knew of old, who called that (...), (that
is to say, Distribution,) which we call Law; and defined Justice, by
distributing to every man his own.

In this Distribution, the First Law, is for Division of the Land it All
private Estates of land proceed originally from the Arbitrary Distribution of
the Sovereign.
self: wherein the Sovereign assigns to every man a portion, according as
he, and not according as any Subject, or any number of them, shall judge
agreeable to Equity, and the Common Good. The Children of Israel, were a
Commonwealth in the Wilderness; but wanted the commodities of the Earth, till
they were masters of the Land of Promise; which afterward was divided amongst
them, not by their own discretion, but by the discretion of Eleazar the Priest,
and Joshua their General: who when there were twelve Tribes, making them
thirteen by subdivision of the Tribe of Joseph; made nevertheless but twelve
portions of the Land; and ordained for the Tribe of Levi no land; but assigned
them the Tenth part of the whole fruits; which division was therefore
Arbitrary. And though a People coming into possession of a Land by war, do
not always exterminate the ancient Inhabitants, (as did the Jews,) but leave
to many, or most, or all of them their Estates; yet it is manifest they hold
them afterward, as of the Victors distribution; as the people of England held
all theirs of William the Conqueror. Propriety of a Subject excludes not the
Dominion of the Sovereign, but only of another Subject.


From whence we may collect, that the Propriety which a subject has in his
lands, consists in a right to exclude all other subjects from the use of
them; and not to exclude their Sovereign, be it an Assembly, or a Monarch. For
seeing the Sovereign, that is to say, the Commonwealth (whose Person he
represents,) is understood to do nothing but in order to the common Peace and
Security, this Distribution of lands, is to be understod as done in order to
the same: And consequently, whatsoever Distribution he shall make in prejudice
thereof, is contrary to the will of every subject, that committed his Peace,
and safety to his discretion, and conscience; and therefore by the will of
every one of them, is to be reputed void. It is true, that a Sovereign Monarch,
or the greater part of a Sovereign Assembly, may ordain the doing of many
things in pursuit of their Passions, contrary to their own consciences, which
is a breach of trust, and of the Law of Nature; but this is not enough to
authorize any subject, either to make war upon, or so much as to accuse of
Injustice, or any way to speak evil of their Sovereign; because they have
authorized all his actions, and in bestowing the Sovereign Power, made them
their own. But in what cases the Commands of Sovereigns are contrary to Equity,
and the Law of Nature, is to be considered The Public is not to be dieted.
hereafter in another place.

In the Distribution of land, the Commonwealth it self, may b^ conceived to
have a portion, and possess, and improve the same by their Representative; and
that such portion may be made sufficient, to sustain the whole expense to the
common Peace, and defense necessarily required: Which were very true, if there
could be any Representative conceived free from humane passions, and
infirmities. But the nature of men being as it is, the setting forth of
Public Land, or of any certain Revenue for the Commonwealth, is in vain;
and tends to the dissolution of Government, and to the condition of mere
Nature, and War, as soon as ever the Sovereign Power falls into the hands of a
Monarch, or of an Assembly, that are either too negligent of money, or too
hazardous in engaging the public stock, into a long, or costly war.
Commonwealths can endure no Diet: For seeing their expense is not limited by
their own appetite, but by external Accidents, and the appetites of their
neighbors, the Public Riches cannot be limited by other limits, than those
which the emergent occasions shall require. And whereas in England, there were
by the Conqueror, diverse Lands reserved to his own use, (besides Forests, and
Chases, either for his recreation, or for preservation of Woods,) and diverse
services reserved on the Land he gave his Subjects; yet it seems they were not
reserved for his Maintenance in his Public, but in his Natural capacity: For
he, and his Successors did for all that, lay Arbitrary Taxes on all Subjects
Land, when they judged it necessary. Or if those public Lands, and Services,
were ordained as a sufficient maintenance of the Commonwealth, it was contrary
to the scope of the Institution; being (as it appeared by those ensuing Taxes)
insufficient, and (as it appears by the late small Revenue of the Crown)
Subject to Alienation, and Diminution. It is therefore in vain, to assign a
portion to the Commonwealth; which may sell, or give it away; and does ^sell,
and give it away when it is done by their Representative.

As the Distribution of Lands at home; so also to assign in what The Places
and matter of Traffic depend, as their Distribution, on the Sovereign.
places, and for what commodities, the Subject shall traffic abroad,
belongs to the Sovereign. For if it did belong to private persons to use
their own discretion therein, some of them would be drawn for gain, both to
furnish the enemy with means to hurt the Commonwealth, and hurt it themselves,
by importing such things, as pleasing men's appetites, be nevertheless noxious,
or at least unprofitable to them. And therefore it belongs to the
Commonwealth, (that is, to the Sovereign only,) to approve, or disapprove both
of the places, and matter of foreign Traffic.

Further, seeing it is not enough to the Sustentation of a Commonwealth, The
Laws of transferring propriety belong also (...) the Sovereign.
that every man have a propriety in a portion of Land, or in some few
commodities, or a natural property in some useful art, and there is no art in
the world, but is necessary either for the being, or well being almost of every
particular man; it is necessary, that men distribute that which they can spare,
and transfer their propriety therein, mutually one to another, by exchange,
and mutual contract. And therefore it belongs to the Commonwealth, (that is
to say, to the Sovereign,) to appoint in what manner, all kinds of contract
between Subjects, (as buying, selling, exchanging, borrowing, lending, letting,
and taking to hire,) are to be made; and by what words, and signs they shall
be understood for valid. And for the Matter, and Distribution of the
Nourishment, to the several Members of the Commonwealth, thus much
(considering the model of the whole work) is sufficient.

By Concoction, I understand the reducing of all commodities, Money the Blood of
a Commonwealth.
which are not presently consumed, but reserved for Nourishment in time to
come, to some thing of equal value, and withal so portable, as not to hinder
the motion of men from place to place; to the end a man may have in what place
soever, such Nourishment as the place affords. And this is nothing else but
Gold, and Silver, and Money. For Gold and Silver, being (as it happens) almost
in all Countries of the world highly valued, is a commodious measure of the
value of all things else between Nations; and Money (of what matter soever
coined by the Sovereign of a Commonwealth,) is a sufficient measure of the
value of all things else, between the Subjects of that Commonwealth. By the
means of which measures, all commodities, Moveable, and Immovable, are made to
accompany a man, to all places of his resort, within and without the place of
his ordinary residence; and the same passes from Man to Man, within the
Commonwealth; and goes round about, Nourishing (as it passes) every part
thereof; In so much as this Concoction, is as it were the Sanguification of the
Commonwealth: For natural Blood is in like manner made of the fruits of the
Earth; and circulating, nourishes by the way, every Member of the Body of Man.

And because Silver and Gold, have their value from the matter it self; they
have first this privilege, that the value of them cannot be altered by the
power of one, nor of a few Commonwealths; as being a common measure of the
commodities of all places. But base Money, may easily be enhansed, or abased.
Secondly, they have the privilege to make Commonwealths move, and stretch out
their arms, when need is, into foreign Countries; and supply, not only
private Subjects that travel, but also whole Armies with Provision. But that
Coin, which is not considerable for the Matter, but for the Stamp of the
place, being unable to endure change of air, has its effect at home only;
where also it is subject to the change of Laws, and thereby to have the value
diminished, to the prejudice many times of those that have it.

The Conduits, and Ways by which it is conveyed to the Public The Conduits
and Way of money to the Public use.
use, are of two sorts; One, that Conveyeth it to the Public Coffers; The
other, that Issues the same out again for public payments. Of the first
sort, are Collectors, Receivers, and Treasurers; of the second are the
Treasurers again, and the Officers appointed for payment of several public
or private Ministers. And in this also, the Artificial Man maintains his
resemblance with the Natural; whose Veins receiving the Blood from the
several Parts of of the Body, carry it to the Heart; where being made Vital,
the Heart by the Arteries sends it out again, to enliven, and enable for motion
all the Members of the same.

The Procreation, or Children of a Commonwealth, are those The Children of a
Commonwealth Colonies.
we call Plantations, or Colonies; which are numbers of men sent out from the
Commonwealth, under a Conductor, or Governor, to inhabit a Foreign Country,
either formerly void of Inhabitants, or made void then, by war. And when a
Colony is settled, they are either a Commonwealth of themselves, discharged of
their subjection to their Sovereign that sent them, (as has been done by many
Commonwealths of ancient time,) in which case the Commonwealth from which
they went, was called their Metropolis, or Mother, and requires no more of
them, then Fathers require of the Children, whom they emancipate, and make free
from their domestique government, which is Honor, and Friendship; or else they
remain united to their Metropolis, as were the Colonies of the people of Rome;
and then they are no Commonwealths themselves, but Provinces, and parts of the
Commonwealth that sent them. So that the Right of Colonies (saving Honor, and
League with their Metropolis,) depends wholly on their License, or Letters,
by which their Sovereign authorized them to Plant.

CHAP. XXV. Of COUNSEL.
HOw fallacious it is to judge of the nature of things, by the ordinary
Counsel wha^.
and inconstant use of words, appears in nothing more, than in the confusion
of Counsels, and Commands, arising from the Imperative manner of speaking in
them both, and in many other occasions besides. For the words Do this, are the
words not only of him that Commands; but also of him that gives Counsel;
and of him that Exhorts; and yet there are but few, that see not, that these
are very different things; or that cannot distinguish between them, when they
perceive who it is that speaks, and to whom the Speech is directed, and upon
what occcasion. But finding those phrases in men's writings, and being not able,
or not willing to enter into a consideration of the circumstances, they mistake
sometimes the Precepts of Counselors, for the Precepts of them that Command;
and sometimes the contrary; according as it best agrees with the conclusions
they would infer, or the actions they approve. To avoid which mistakes, and
render to those terms of Commanding, Counselling, and Exhorting, their proper
and distinct significations, I define them thus.

COMMAND is, where a man says, Do this, or Do not this, without Differences
between Command. and Counsel*
expecting other reason than the Will of him that says it. From this it
follows manifestly, that he that Commands, pretends thereby his own
Benefit: For the reason of his Command is his own Will only, and the proper
object of every man's Will, is some Good to himself.

COUNSEL, is where a man says, Do, or Do not this, and deduceth his reasons
from the benefit that arriveth by it to him to whom he says it. And from this
it is evident, that he that gives Counsel, pretends only (whatsoever he
intends) the good of him, to whom he gives it.

Therefore between Counsel and Command, one great difference is, that Command
is directed to a man's own benefit; and Counsel to the benefit of another man.
And from this arises another difference, that a man may be obliged to do what
he is Commanded; as when he has covenanted to obey: But he cannot be obliged
to do as he is Counseled, because the hurt of not following it, is his own; or
if he should covenant to follow it, then is the Counsel turned into the nature
of a Command. A third difference between them is, that no man can pretend a
right to be of another man's Counsel; because he is not to pretend benefit by
it to himself: but to demand right to Counsel another, argues a will to know
his designs, or to gain some other Good to himself; which (as I said before)
is of every man's will the proper object.

This also is incident to the nature of Counsel; that whatsoever it be, he
that asks it, cannot in equity accuse, or punish it: For to ask Counsel of
another, is to permit him to give such Counsel as he shall think best; And
consequently, he that gives counsel to his Sovereign, (whether a Monarch, or
an Assembly) when he asks it, cannot in equity be punished for it, whether
the same be conformable to the opinion of the most, or not, so it be to the
Proposition in debate. For if the sense of the Assembly can be taken notice of,
before the Debate be ended, they should neither ask, nor take any further
Counsel; For the Sense of the Assembly, is the Resolution of the Debate, and
End of all Deliberation. And generally he that demands Counsel, is Author of
it; and therefore cannot punish it; and what the Sovereign cannot, no man else
can. But if one Subject gives Counsel to another, to do any thing contrary to
the Laws, whether that Counsel proceed from evil intention, or from
ignorance only, it is punishable by the Commonwealth; because ignorance of
the Law, is no good excuse, where every man is bound to take notice of the
Laws to which he is subject.

EXHORTATION, and DEHORTATION, is Counsel, accompanied Exhortation and
Dehortation what.
with signs in him that gives it, of vehement desire to have it followed; or
to say it more briefly, Counsel vehemently pressed. For he that Exhorts,
does not deduce the consequences of what he advises to be done, and tie
himself therein to the rigor of true reasoning; bnt encourages him he
Counsels, to Action: As he that Dehorteth, deterreth him from it. And
therefore they have in their speeches, a regard to the common Passions, and
opinions of men, in deducing their reasons; and make use of Similitudes,
Metaphors, Examples, and other tools of Oratory, to persuade their Hearers of
the Utility, Honor, or Justice of following their advise.

From whence may be inferred, First, that Exhortation and Dehortation, is
directed to the Good of him that gives the Counsel, not of him that asks
it, which is contrary to the duty of a Counselor; who (by the definition of
Counsel) ought to regard, not his own benefit, but his whom he advises. And
that he directs his Counsel to his own benefit, is manifest enough, by the
long and vehement urging, or by the artificial giving thereof; which being not
required of him, and consequently proceeding from his own occasions, is
directed principally to his own benefit, and but accidentarily to the good of
him that is Counseled, or not at all.

Secondly; that the use of Exhortation and Dehortation lies only, where a man
is to speak to a Multitude; because when the Speech is addressed to one, he may
interrupt him, and examine his reasons more rigorously, than can be done in a
Multitude; which are too many to enter into Dispute, and Dialogue with him that
speaks indifferently to them all at once.

Thirdly, that they that Exhort and Dehort, where they are required to give
Counsel, are corrupt Counselors, and as it were bribed by their own
interest. For though the Counsel they give be never so good; yet he that gives
it, is no more a good Counselor, than he that gives a Just Sentence for a
reward, is a Just Judge. But where a man may lawfully Command, as a Father in
his Family, or a Leader in an Army, his Exhortations and Dehortations, are not
only lawful, but also necessary, and laudable: But then they are no more
Counsels, but Commands; which when they are for Execution of sour labor;
sometimes necessity, and always humanity requires to be sweetened in the
delivery, by encouragement, and in the tune and phrase of Counsel, rather then
in harsher language of Command.

Examples of the difference between Command and Counsel, we may take from the
forms of Speech that express them in Holy Scripture. Have no other Gods but
me; Make to thy self no graven Image; Take not Gods name in vain; Sanctify
the Sabbath; Honor thy Parents; Kill not; Steal not, etc. are Commands;
because the reason for which we are to obey them, is drawn from the will of God
our King, whom we are obliged to obey. But these words, Sell all thou have;
give it to the poor; and follow me, are Counsel; because the reason for which
we are to do so, is drawn from our own benefit; which is this, that we shall
have Treasure in heaven. These words, Go into the Village over against you, and
you shall find an Ass tied, and her Colt; loose her, and bring her to me, are
a Command: for the reason of their fact is drawn from the will of their Master:
but these words, Repent, and be Baptized in the Name of Jesus, are Counsel;
because the reason why we should so do, tends not to any benefit of God
Almighty, who shall still be King in what manner soever we rebel; but of our
selves, who have no other means of avoiding the punishment hanging over us for
our sins. Differennce^ of fit and unfit Counselors.


As the difference of Counsel from Command, has been now deduced from the
nature of Counsel, consisting in a deducing of the benefit, or hurt that may
arise to him that is to be Counseled, by the necessary or probable
consequences of the action he propounds; so may also the differences between
apt, and inept Counselors be derived from the same. For Experience, being but
Memory of the consequences of like actions formerly observed, and Counsel but
the Speech whereby that experience is made known to another; the Virtues, and
Defects of Counsel, are the same with the Virtues, and Defects Intellectual:
And to the Person of a Commonwealth, his Counselors serve him in the place
of Memory, and Mental Discourse. But with this resemblance of the
Commonwealth, to a natural man, there is one dissimilitude joined, of great
importance; which is, that a natural man receives his experience, from the
natural objects of sense, which work upon him without passion, or interest of
their own; whereas they that give Counsel to the Representative person of a
Commonwealth, may have, and have often their particular ends, and passions,
that render their Counsels always suspected, and many times unfaithful. And
therefore we may set down for the first condition of a good Counselor, That
his Ends, and Interest, be not inconsistent with the Ends and Interest of him
he Counsels.

Secondly, Because the office of a Counselor, when an action comes into
deliberation, is to make manifest the consequences of it, in such manner, as he
that is Counseled may be truly and evidently informed; he ought to propound
his advise, in such form of speech, as may make the truth most evidently
appear; that is to say, with as firm ratiocination, as significant and proper
language, and as briefly, as the evidence will permit. And therefore rash, and
unevident Inferences; (such as are fetched only from Examples, or authority of
Books, and are not arguments of what is good, or evil, but witnesses of fact,
or of opinion.) obscure, confused, and ambiguous Expressions, also all
metaphorical Speeches, tending to the stirring up of Passion, (because such
reasoning, and such expressions, are useful only to deceive, or to lead him
we Counsel toward other ends than his own) are repugnant to the Office of a
Counselor.

Thirdly, Because the Ability of Counselling proceeds from Experience, and
long study; and no man is presumed to have experience in all those things that
to the Administration of a great Commonwealth are necessary to be known, No
man is presumed to be a good Counselor, but in such Business, as he has not
only been much versed in, but has also much meditated on, and considered. For
seeing the business of a Commonwealth is this, to preserve the people in
Peace at home, and defend them against foreign Invasion, we shall find, it
requires great knowledge of the disposition of Mankind, of the Rights of
Government, and of the nature of Equity, Law, Justice, and Honor, not to be
attained without study; And of the Strength, Commodities, Places, both of their
own Country, and their Neighbors; as also of the inclinations, and designs of
all Nations that may any way annoy them. And this is not attained to, without
much experience. Of which things, not only the whole sum, but every one of
the particulars requires the age, and observation of a man in years, and of
more than ordinary study. The wit required for Counsel, as I have said before
(Chap. 8.) is Judgment. And the differences of men in that point come from
different education, of some to one kind of study, or business, and of others
to another. When for the doing of any thing, there be Infallible rules, (as in
Engines, and Edifices, the rules of Geometry,) all the experience of the world
cannot equal his Counsel, that has learnt, or found out the Rule. And when
there is no such Rule, he that has most experience in that particular kind of
business, has therein the best Judgment, and is the best Counselor.

Fourthly, to be able to give Counsel to a Commonwealth, in a business that
has reference to another Commonwealth, It is necessary to be acquainted with
the Intelligences, and Letters that come from thence, and with all the records
of Treaties, and other transactions of State between them; which none can do,
but such as the Representative shall think fit. By which we may see, that they
who are not called to Counsel, can have no good Counsel in such cases to
obtrude.

Fifthly, Supposing the number of Counselors equal, a man is better
Counseled by hearing them apart, then in an Assembly; and that for many
causes. First, in hearing them apart, you have the advice of every man; but in
an Assembly many of them deliver their advise with I, or No, or with their
hands, or feet, not moved by their own sense, but by the eloquence of another,
or for fear of displeasing some that have spoken, or the whole Assembly, by
contradiction; or for fear of appearing duller in apprehension, than those
that have applauded the contrary opinion. Secondly, in an Assembly of many,
there cannot choose but be some whose interests are contrary to that of the
Public; and these their Interests make passionate, and Passion eloquent, and
Eloquence draws others into the same advice. For the Passions of men, which
asunder are moderate, as the heat of one brand; in Assembly are like many
brands, that inflame one another, (especially when they blow one another with
Orations) to the setting of the Commonwealth on fire, under pretense of
Counselling it. Thirdly, in hearing every man apart, one may examine (when
there is need) the truth, or probability of his reasons, and of the grounds of
the advice he gives, by frequent interruptions, and objections; which cannot be
done in an Assembly, where (in every difficult question) a man is rather
astonished and dazzled with the variety of discourse upon it, than informed of the
course he ought to take. Besides, there cannot be an Assembly of many, called
together for advice, wherein there be not some, that have the ambition to be
thought eloquent, and also learned in the Politiques; and give not their advice
with care of the business propounded, but of the applause of their (...)
orations, made of the diverse colored threads, or shreds of Authors; which is an
Impertinence at least, that takes away the time of serious Consultation, and in
the secret way of Counselling apart, is easily avoided. Fourthly, in
Deliberations that ought to be kept secret, (whereof there be many occasions in
Public Business,) the Counsels of many, and especially in Assemblies, are
dangerous; And therefore great Assemblies are necessitated to commit such
affairs to lesser numbers, and of such persons as are most versed, and in
whose fidelity they have most confidence.

To conclude, who is there that so far approves the taking of Counsel from a
great Assembly of Counselors, that wishes for, or would accept of their
pains, when there is a question of marrying his Children, disposing of his
Lands, governing his Household, or managing his private Estate, especially if
there be amongst them such as wish not his prosperity? A man that does his
business by the help of many and prudent Counselors, with every one
consulting apart in his proper element, does it best, as he that uses able
Seconds at Tennis play, placed in their proper stations. He does next best,
that uses his own Judgment only; as he that has no Second at all. But he that
is carried up and down to his business in a framed Counsel, which cannot move
but by the plurality of consenting opinions, the execution whereof is commonly
(out of envy, or interest) retarded by the part dissenting, does it worst of
all, and like one that is carried to the ball, though by good Players, yet in a
Wheele-barrough, or other frame, heavy of it self, and retarded also by the
inconcurrent judgments, and endeavors of them that drive it; and so much the
more, as they be more that set their hands to it; and most of all, when there
is one, or more amongst them, that desire to have him lose. And though it be
true, that many eyes see more then one; yet it is not to be understood of many
Counselors; but then only, when the final Resolution is in one man.
Otherwise, because many eyes see the same thing in diverse lines, and are apt to
look asquint toward their private benefit; they that desire not to miss their
mark, though they look about with two eyes, yet they never aim but with one;
And therefore no great Popular Commonwealth was ever kept up; but either by a
foreign Enemy that united them; or by the reputation of some one eminent Man
amongst them; or by the secret Counsel of a few; or by the mutual fear of
equal factions; and not by the open Consultations of the Assembly. And as for
very little Commonwealths, be they Popular, or Monarchical, there is no humane
wisdom can uphold them, longer then the Jealousy lasts of their potent
Neighbors.

CHAP. XXVI. Of CIVIL LAWS.
BY CIVIL LAWS, I understand the Laws, that Civil Law what.
men are therefore bound to observe, because they are Members, not of this, or
that Commonwealth in particular, but of a Commonwealth. For the knowledge of
particular Laws belongs to them, that profess the study of the Laws of
their several Countries; but the knowledge of Civil Law in general. to any
man. The ancient Law of Rome was called their Civil Law, from the word Civitas,
which signifies a Commonwealth: And those Countries, which having been under
the Roman Empire, and governed by that Law, retain still such part thereof as
they think fit, call that part the Civil Law, to distinguish it from the rest
of their own Civil Laws. But that is not it I intend to speak of here; my
design being not to show what is Law here, and there; but what is Law; as
Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and diverse others have done, without taking upon them
the profession of the study of the Law.

And first it is manifest, that Law in general, is not Counsel, but Command;
nor a Command of any man to any man; but only of him, whose Command is
addressed to one formerly obliged to obey him. And as for Civil Law, it adds
only the name of the person Commanding, which is Persona Civitatis, the Person
of the Commonwealth.

Which considered, I define Civil Law in this manner. CIVIL LAW, Is to every
Subject, those Rules, which the Commonwealth has Commanded him, by Word,
Writing, or other sufficient Sign of the Will, to make use of, for the
Distinction of Right, and Wrong; that is to say, of what is contrary, and what
is not contrary to the Rule.

In which definition, there is nothing that is not at first sight evident. For
every man sees, that some Laws are addressed to all the Subjects in general;
some to particular Provinces; some to particular Vocations; and some to
particular Men; and are therefore Laws, to every of those to whom the Command
is directed; and to none else. As also, that Laws are the Rules of Just, and
Unjust; nothing being reputed Unjust, that is not contrary to some Law.
Likewise, that none can make Laws but the Commonwealth; because our
Subjection is to the Commonwealth only: and that Commands, are to be signified
by sufficient Signs; because a man knows not otherwise how to obey them. And
therefore, whatsoever can from this definition by necessary consequence be
deduced, ought to be acknowledged for truth. Now I deduce from it this that
follows.

1 The Legislator in all Commonwealths, is only the Sovereign, The Sovereign
is Legistator:
be he one Man, as in a Monarchy, or one Assembly of men, as in a Democracy, or
Aristocracy. For the Legislator, is he that makes the Law. And the
Commonwealth only, praescribes, and commands the observation of those rules,
which we call Law: Therefore the Commonwealth is the Legislator. But the
Commonwealth is no Person, nor has capacity to do any thing, but by the
Representative, (that is, the Sovereign;) and therefore the Sovereign is the
sole Legislator. For the same reason, none can abrogate a Law made, but the
Sovereign; because a Law is not abrogated, but by another Law, that forbids
it to be put in execution.

2 The Sovereign of a Commonwealth, be it an Assembly, or And not Subject to
Civil Law.
one Man, is not Subject to the Civil Laws. For having power to make, and
repeal Laws, he may when he pleases, free himself from that subjection, by
repealing those Laws that trouble him, and making of new; and consequently he
was free before. For he is free, that can be free when he will: Nor is it
possible for any person to be bound to himself; because he that can bind, can
release; and therefore he that is bound to himself only, is not bound.

3. When long Use obtains the authority of a Law, it is not the Use, a Law
not by virtue of Time, but of the Sovereigns consent.
Length of Time that makes the Authority, but the Will of the Sovereign
signified by his silence, (for Silence is sometimes an argument of Consent;)
and it is no longer Law, then the Sovereign shall be silent therein. And
therefore if the Sovereign shall have a question of Right grounded, not upon
his present Will, but upon the Laws formerly made; the Length of Time shall
bring no prejudice to his Right; but the question shall be judged by Equity. For
many unjust Actions, and unjust Sentences, go uncontrolled a longer time, than
any mancan remember. And our Lawyers account no Customs Law, but such as are
reasonable, and that evil Customs are to be abolished: But the Judgment of
what is reasonable, and of what is to be abolished, belongs to him that
makes the Law, which is the Sovereign Assembly, or Monarch.

4. The Law of Nature, and the Civil Law, contain each other, The Law of
Nature, and the Civil Law contain each other.
and are of equal extent. For the Laws of Nature, which consist in Equity,
Justice, Gratitude, and other moral Virtues on these depending, in the
condition of mere Nature (as I have said before in the end of the 15th
Chapter,) are not properly Laws, but qualities that dispose men to peace, and
to obedience. When a Commonwealth is once settled, then are they actually
Laws, and not before; as being then the commands of the Commonwealth; and
therefore also Civil Laws: For it is the Sovereign Power that obliges men to
obey them. For in the differences of private men, to declare, what is Equity,
what is Justice, and what is moral Virtue, and to make them binding, there is
need of the Ordinances of Sovereign Power, and Punishments to be ordain d for
such as shall break them; which Ordinances are therefore part of the Civil
Law. The Law of Nature therefore is a part of the Civil Law in all
Commonwealths of the world. Reciprocally also, the Civil Law is a part of the
Dictates of Nature. For Justice, that is to say, Performance of Covenant, and
giving to every man his own, is a Dictate of the Law of Nature. But every
subject in a Commonwealth, has covenanted to obey the Civil Law, (either one
with another, as when they assemble to make a common Representative, or with
the Representative it self one by one, when subdued by the Sword they promise
obedience, that they may receive life;) And therefore Obedience to the Civil
Law is part also of the Law of Nature. Civil, and Natural Law are not
different kinds, but different parts of Law; whereof one part being written, is
called Civil, the other unwritten, Natural. But the Right of Nature, that is,
the natural Liberty of man, may by the Civil Law be abridged, and restrained:
nay, the end of making Laws, is no other, but such Restraint; without the
which there cannot possibly be any Peace. And Law was brought into the world
for nothing else, but to limit the natural liberty of particular men, in such
manner, as they might not hurt, but assist one another, and join together
against a common Enemy.

5. If the Sovereign of one Commonwealth, subdue a People Provincial Laws
are not made by Custom, but by the Sovereign Power*
that have lived under other written Laws, and afterward govern them by the
same Laws, by which they were governed before; yet those Laws are the Civil
Laws of the Victor, and not of the Vanquished Commonwealth. For the
Legislator is he, not by whose authority the Laws were first made* but by
whose authority they now continue to be Laws. And therefore where there be
diverse Provinces, within the Dominion of a Commonwealth, and in those
Provinces diversity of Laws, which commonly are called the Customs of each
several Province, we are not to understand that such Customs have their
force, only from Length of Time; but that they were anciently Laws written,
or otherwise made known, for the Constitutions, and Statutes of their
Sovereigns; and are now Laws, not by virtue of the Praescription of time, but
by the Constitutions of their present Sovereigns. But if an unwritten Law, in
all the Provinces of a Dominion, shall be generally observed, and no iniquity
appear in the use thereof; that Law can be no other but a Law of Nature,
equally obliging all mankind.

6. Seeing then all Laws, written, and unwritten, have their Authority, Some
foolish opinions of Lawyers concerning the making of Laws.
and force, from the Will of the Commonwealth; that is to say, from the Will
of the Representative; which in a Monarchy is the Monarch, and in other
Commonwealths the Sovereign Assembly; a man may wonder from whence proceed
such opinions, as are found in the Books of Lawyers of eminence in several
Commonwealths, directly, or by consequence making the Legislative Power depend
on private men, or subordinate Judges. As for example, That the Common Law,
has no Controuler but the Parliament; which is true only where a Parliament has
the Sovereign Power, and cannot be assembled, nor dissolved, but by their own
discretion. For if there be a right in any else to dissolve them, there is a
right also to control them, and consequently to control their controulings.
And if there be no such right, then the Controuler of Laws is not Parlamentum,
but Rex in Parlamento. And were a Parliament is Sovereign, if it should assemble
never so many, or so wise men, from the Countries subject to them, for
whatsoever cause; yet there is no man will believe, that such an Assembly has
thereby acquired to themselves a Legislative Power. Item, that the two arms of
a Commonwealth, are Force, and Justice; the first whereof is in the King; the
other deposited in the hands of the Parliament. As if a Commonwealth could
consist, where the Force were in any hand, which Justice had not the Authority
to command and govern.

7. That Law can never be against Reason, our Lawyers are agreed; and that not
the Letter, (that is, every construction of it,) but that which is according to
the Intention of the Legislator, is the Law. And it is true: but the doubt is,
of whose Reason it is, that shall be received for Law. It is not meant of any
private Reason; for then there would be as much contradiction in the Laws, as
there is in the Schools; nor yet, (as Sr. Ed. Coke makes it,) an Artificial
Sir Edw. Coke, upon L^tleton, Lib. 2. Chapter 6. (...). 97. b.
perfection of Reason, gotten by long study, observation, and experience, (as
his was.) For it is possible long study may increase, and confirm erroneous
Sentences: and where men build on false grounds, the more they build, the
greater is the ruin: and of those that study, and observe with equal time,
and diligence, the reasons and resolutions are, and must remain discordant: and
therefore it is not that Juris prudentia, or wisdom of subordinate Judges;
but the Reason of this our Artificial Man the Commonwealth, and his Command,
that makes Law: And the Commonwealth being in their Representative but one
Person, there cannot easily arise any contradiction in the Laws; and when
there does, the same Reason is able, by interpretation, or alteration, to take
it away. In all Courts of Justice, the Sovereign (which is the Person of the
Commonwealth,) is he that Judges: The subordinate Judge, ought to have regard
to the reason, which moved his Sovereign to make such Law, that his Sentence
may be according thereunto; which then is his Sovereigns Sentence; otherwise it
is his own, and an unjust one.

8. From this, that the Law is a Command, and a Command consists Law made, ^f
not also made known, is no Law.
in declaration, or manifestation of the will of him that commands, by voice,
writing, or some other sufficient argument of the same, we may understand, that
the Command of the Commonwealth, is Law only to those, that have means to take
notice of it. Over natural fools, children, or madmen there is no Law, no
more than over brute beasts; nor are they capable of the title of just, or
unjust; because they had never power to make any covenant, or to understand the
consequences thereof; and consequently never took upon them to authorize the
actions of any Sovereign, as they must do that make to themselves a
Commonwealth. And as those from whom Nature, or Accident has taken away the
notice of all Laws in general; so also every man, from whom any accident, not
proceeding from his own default, has taken away the means to take notice of
any particular Law, is excused, if he observe it not; And to speak properly,
that Law is no Law to him. It is therefore necessary, to consider in this
place, what arguments, and signs be sufficient for the knowledge of what is
the Law; that is to say, what is the will of the Sovereign, as well in
Monarchies, as in other forms of government.

And first, if it be a Law that obliges all the Subjects without exception,
Unwritten Laws are all of them Laws of Nature.
and is not written, nor otherwise published in such places as they may take
notice thereof, it is a Law of Nature. For whatsoever men are to take knowledge
of for Law, not upon other men's words, but every one from his own reason, must
be such as is agreeable to the reason of all men; which no Law can be, but the
Law of Nature. The Laws of Nature therefore need not any publishing, nor
Proclamation; as being contained in this one Sentence, approved by all the
world, Do not that to another, which thou think unreasonable to be done by
another to thy self.

Secondly, if it be a Law that obliges only some condition of men, or one
particular man, and be not written, nor published by word, then also it is a
Law of Nature; and known by the same arguments, and signs, that distinguish
those in such a condition, from other Subjects. For whatsoever Law is not
written, or some way published by him that makes it Law, can be known no way,
but by the reason of him that is to obey it; and is therefore also a Law not
only Civil, but Natural. For Example, if the Sovereign employ a Public
Minister, without written Instructions what to do; he is obliged to take for
Instructions the Dictates of Reason; As if he make a Judge, The Judge is to
take notice, that his Sentence ought to be according to the reason of his
Sovereign, which being always understood to be Equity, he is bound to it by
the Law of Nature: Or if an Ambassador, he is (in all things not contained in
his written Instructions) to take for Instruction that which Reason dictates to
be most conducing to his Sovereigns interest; and so of all other Ministers of
the Sovereignty, public and private. All which Instructions of natural
Reason may be comprehended under one name of Fidelity; which is a branch of
natural Justice.

The Law of Nature excepted, it belongs to the essence of all other Laws, to
be made known, to every man that shall be obliged to obey them, either by word,
or writing, or some other act, known to proceed from the Sovereign Authority.
For the will of another, cannot be understood, but by his own word, or act, or
by conjecture taken from his scope and purpose; which in the person of the
Commonwealth, is to be supposed always consonant to Equity and Reason. And in
ancient time, before letters were in common use, the Laws were many times put
into verse; that the rude people taking pleasure in singing, or reciting them,
might the more easily retain them in memory. And for the same reason Solomon
advises a man, to bind the ten Commandments Prove. 7. 3.
upon his ten fingers. And for the Law which Moses gave to the people of Israel
at the renewing of the Covenant, * he bids them to teach it their Deuteronomy. 11.
19.
Children, by discoursing of it both at home, and upon the way; at going to
bed, and at rising from bed; and to write it upon the posts, and doors of their
houses; and Deuteronomy. 31. 12.
to assemble the people, man, woman, and child, to hear it read.

Nor is it enough the Law be written, and published; but also that there be
manifest signs, that it proceeds from the will of the Sovereign. Nothing is
Law where the Legislator cannot be known.
For private men, when they have, or think they have force enough to secure
their unjust designs, and convoy them safely to their ambitious ends, may
publish for Laws what they please, without, or against the Legislative
Authority. There is therefore requisite, not only a Declaration of the Law, but
also sufficient signs of the Author, and Authority. The Author, or Legislator
is supposed in every Commonwealth to be evident, because he is the Sovereign,
who having been Constituted by the consent of every one, is supposed by every
one to be sufficiently known. And though the ignorance, and security of men be
such, for the most part, as that when the memory of the first Constitution of
their Commonwealth is worn out, they do not consider, by whose power they use
to be defended against their enemies, and to have their industry protected, and
to be righted when injury is done them; yet because no man that considers, can
make question of it, no excuse can be derived from the ignorance of where the
Sovereignty is placed. And it is a Dictate of Natural Reason, and consequently
an evident Law of Nature, that no man ought to weaken that power, the
protection whereof he has himself demanded, or wittingly received against
others. Therefore of who is Sovereign, no man, but by his own fault,
(whatsoever evil men suggest,) can make any doubt. The difficulty consists
in the evidence of the Authority derived from him; The removing whereof,
depends on the knowledge of the public Registers, public Counsels,
public Ministers, and public Seals; by which all Laws are sufficiently
verified; Verifyed, Difference between Verifying and Authorizing
I say, not Authorized: for the Verification, is but the Testimony and Record;
not the Authority of the Law; which consists in the Command of the Sovereign
only.

If therefore a man have a question of Injury, depending on the The Law
Verifyed by the subordinate Judge.
Law of Nature; that is to say, on common Equity; the Sentence of the Judge,
that by Commission has Authority to take cogninisance of such causes, is a
sufficient Verification of the Law of Nature in that individual case. For
though the advice of one that professes the study of the Law, be useful for
the avoiding of contention; yet it is but advice: it is the Judge must tell men
what is Law, upon the hearing of the Controversy.

But when the question is of injury, or crime, upon a written Law; By the
Public Registers.
every man by recourse to the Registers, by himself, or others, may (if he
will) be sufficiently informed, before he do such injury, or commit the crime,
whither it be an injury, or not: Nay he ought to do so: For when a man doubts
whether the act he goes about, be just, or injust; and may inform himself, if
he will; the doing is unlawful. In like manner, he that supposes himself
injured, in a case determined by the written Law, which he may by himself, or
others see and consider; if he complain before he consults with the Law, he
does unjustly, and bewrays a disposition rather to vex other men, than to
demand his own right.

If the question be of Obedience to a public Officer; To have By Letters
Patent, and Public Seal.
seen his Commission, with the Public Seal, and heard it read; or to have
had the means to be informed of it, if a man would, is a sufficient
Verification of his Authority. For every man is obliged to do his best
endeavor, to inform himself of all written Laws, that may concern his own
future actions.

The Legislator known; and the Laws, either by writing, or by The
Interpretation of the Law depends on the Sovereign Power.
the light of Nature, sufficiently published; there wants yet another very
material circumstance to make them obligatory. For it is not the Letter, but
the Intendment, or Meaning; that is to say, the authentic Interpretation of
the Law (which is the sense of the Legislator,) in which the nature of the Law
consists; And therefore the Interpretation of all Laws depends on the
Authority Sovereign; and the Interpreters can be none but those, which the
Sovereign, (to whom only the Subject owes obedience) shall appoint. For else,
by the craft of an Interpreter, the Law may be made to bear a sense, contrary
to that of the Sovereign; by which means the Interpreter becomes the Legislator.

All Laws, written, and unwritten, have need of Interpretation. All Law^ need
Interpretation.
The unwritten Law of Nature, though it be easy to such, as without partiality,
and passion, make use of their natural reason, and therefore leaves the
violaters thereof without excuse; yet considering there be very few, perhaps
none, that in some cases are not blinded by self love, or some other passion,
it is now become of all Laws the most obscure; and has consequently the
greatest need of able Interpreters. The written Laws, if they be short, are
easily mis-interpreted, from the diverse significations of a word, or two: if
long, they be more obscure by the diverse significations of many words: in so
much as no written Law, delivered in few, or many words, can be well
understood, without a perfect understanding of the final causes, for which the
Law was made; the knowledge of which final causes is in the Legislator. To him
therefore there can not be any knot in the Law, insoluble; either by finding
out the ends, to undo it by; or else by making what ends he will, (as
Alexander did with his sword in the Gordian knot,) by the Legislative power;
which no other Interpreter can do.

The Interpretation of the Laws of Nature, in a Commonwealth, The A^thenticall
Interpretation of Law is not that of writers.
depends not on the books of Moral Philosophy. The Authority of writers,
without the Authority of the Commonwealth, makes not their opinions Law, be
they never so true. That which I have written in this Treatise, concerning the
Moral Virtues, and of their necessity, for the procuring, and maintaining
peace, though it be evident Truth, is not therefore presently Law; but because
in all Commonwealths in the world, it is part of the Civil Law: For though it
be naturally reasonable; yet it is by the Sovereign Power that it is Law:
Otherwise, it were a great error, to call the Laws of Nature unwritten Law;
whereof we see so many volumes published, and in them so many contradictions
of one another, and of themselves.

The Interpretation of the Law of Nature, is the Sentence of the The
Interpreter of the Law is the Judge giving sentence viva* voce in every
particular case.
Judge constituted by the Sovereign Authority, to hear and determine such
controversies, as depend thereon; and consists in the application of the Law
to the present case. For in the act of Judicature, the Judge does no more but
consider, whither the demand of the party, be consonant to natural reason, and
Equity; and the Sentence he gives, is therefore the Interpretation of the Law
of Nature; which Interpretation is Authentic; not because it is his private
Sentence; but because he gives it by Authority of the Sovereign, whereby it
becomes the Sovereigns Sentence; which is Law for that time, to the parties
pleading.

But because there is no Judge Subordinate, nor Sovereign, but may The Sentence
of a Judge, does not bind him, or another Judge to give like Sentence in like
Cases ever after.
err in a Judgment of Equity; if afterward in another like case he find it
more consonant to Equity to give a contrary Sentence, he is obliged to do it.
No man's error becomes his own Law; nor obliges him to persist in it. Neither
(for the same reason) becomes it a Law to other Judges, though sworn to follow
it. For though a wrong Sentence given by authority of the Sovereign, if he know
and allow it, in such Laws as are mutable, be a constitution of a new Law, in
cases, in which every little circumstance is the same; yet in Laws immutable,
such as are the Laws of Nature, they are no Laws to the same, or other
Judges, in the like cases for ever after. Princes succeed one another; and one
Judge passes, another comes; nay, Heaven and Earth shall pass; but not one
title of the Law of Nature shall pass; for it is the Eternal Law of God.
Therefore all the Sentences of precedent Judges that have ever been, cannot all
together make a Law contrary to natural Equity: Nor any Examples of former
Judges, can warrant an unreasonable Sentence, or discharge the present Judge of
the trouble of studying what is Equity (in the case he is to Judge,) from the
principles of his own natural reason. For example sake, It Is against the Law
of Nature, To punish the Innocent; and Innocent is he that acquitteth himself
Judicially, and is acknowledged for Innocent by the Judge. Put the case now,
that a man is accused of a capital crime, and seeing the power and malice of
some enemy, and the frequent corruption and par^iality of Judges, runs away
for fear of the event, and afterward is taken, and brought to a legal
trial, and makes it sufficiently appear, he was not guilty of the crime, and
being thereof acquitted, is nevertheless condemned to lose his goods; this is
a manifest condemnation of the Innocent. I say therefore, that there is no
place in the world, where this can be an interpretation of a Law of Nature, or
be made a Law by the Sentences of precedent Judges, that had done the same. For
he that judged it first, judged unjustly; and no Injustice can be a pattern of
Judgment to succeeding Judges. A written Law may forbid innocent men to fly,
and they may be punished for flying: But that flying for fear of injury,
should be taken for presumption of guilt, after a man is already absolved of
the crime Judicially, is contrary to the nature of a Presumption, which has no
place after Judgment given. Yet this is set down by a great Lawyer for the
common Law of England. If a man (says he) that is Innocent, be accused of
Felony, and for fear flies for the same; albeit he judicially acquitteth
himself of the Felony; yet if it be found that he fled for the Felony, he
shall notwithstanding his Innocence, Forfeit all his goods, chattells, debts,
and duties. For as to the Forfeiture of them, the Law will admit no proof
against the Presumption in Law, grounded upon his flight. Here you see, An
Innocent man, Judicially acquitted, notwithstanding his Innocence, (when no
written Law forbad him to fly) after his acquitall, upon a Presumption in Law,
condemned to lose all the goods he has. If the Law ground upon his flight a
Presumption of the fact, (which was Capital,) the Sentence ought to have been
Capital: if the Presumption were not of ^he Fact, for what then ought he to
lose his goods? This therefore is no Law of England; nor is the condemnation
grounded upon a Presumption of Law, but upon the Presumption of the Judges. It
is also against Law, to say that no Proof shall be admitted against a
Presumption of Law. For all Judges, Sovereign and subordinate, if they refuse
to hear Proof, refuse to do Justice: for though the Sentence be Just, yet the
Judges that condemn without hearing the Proofs offered, are Unjust Judges; and
their Presumption is but Prejudice; which no man ought to bring with him to the
Seat of Justice, whatsoever precedent judgments, or examples he shall pretend
to follow. There be other things of this nature, wherein men's Judgments have
been perverted, by trusting to Precedents: but this is enough to show, that
though the Sentence of the Judge, be a Law to the party pleading, yet it is no
Law to any Judge, that shall succeed him in that Office.

In like manner, when question is of the Meaning of written Laws, he is not
the Interpreter of them, that writes a Commentary upon them. For Commentaries
are commonly more subject to cavil, than the Text; and therefore need other
Commentaries; and so there will be no end of such Interpretation. And therefore
unless there be an Interpreter authorized by the Sovereign, from which the
subordinate Judges are not to recede, the Interpreter can be no other than the
ordinary Judges, in the same manner, as they are in cases of the unwritten Law;
and their Sentences are to be taken by them that plead, for Laws in that
particular case; but not to bind other Judges, in like cases to give like
judgments. For a Judge may err in the Interpretation even of written Laws;
but no error of a subordinate Judge, can change the Law, which is the general
Sentence of the Sovereign.

In written Laws, men use to make a difference between the Letter, The
difference between the Letter and Sentence of the Law.
and the Sentence of the Law: And when by the Letter, is meant whatsoever can
be gathered from the bare words, it is well distinguished. For the
significations of almost all words, are either in themselves, or in the
metaphorical use of them, ambiguous; and may be drawn in argument, to make
many senses; but there is only one sense of the Law. But if by the Letter, be
meant the literal sense, then the Letter, and the Sentence or intention of the
Law, is all one. For the literal sense is that, which the Legislator intended,
should by the letter of the Law be signified. Now the Intention of the
Legislator is always supposed to be Equity: For it were a great contumely for
a Judge to think otherwise of the Sovereign. He ought therefore, if the Word
of the Law do not fully authorize a reasonable Sentence, to supply it with the
Law of Nature; or if the case be difficult, to respit Judgment till he have
received more ample authority. For Example, a written Law ordains, that he
which is thrust out of his house by force, shall be restored by force: It
happens that a man by negligence leaves his house empty, and returning is kept
out by force, in which case there is no special Law ordained. It is evident,
that this case is contained in the same Law: for else there is no remedy for
him at all; which is to be supposed against the Intention of the Legislator.
Again, the word of the Law, commands to Judge according to the Evidence: A
man is accused falsely of a fact, which the Judge saw himself done by another;
and not by him that is accused. In this case neither shall the Letter of the
Law be followed to the condemnation of the Innocent, nor shall the Judge give
Sentence against the evidence of the Witnesses; because the Letter of the Law
is to the contrary: but procure of the Sovereign that another be made Judge,
and himself Witness. So that the incommodity that follows the bare words of a
written Law, may lead him to the Intention of the Law, whereby to interpret the
same the better; though no Incommodity can warrant a Sentence against the Law.
For every Judge of Right, and Wrong, is not Judge of what is ^ommodious, or
Incommodious to the Commonwealth.

The abilities required in a good Interpreter of the Law, that is The abilities
required in a Judge.
to say, in a good Judge, are not the same with those of an Advocate; namely
the study of the Laws. For a Judge, as he ought to take notice of the Fact,
from none but the Witnesses; so also he ought to take notice of the Law, from
nothing but the Satutes, and Constitutions of the Sovereign, alleged in the
pleading, or declared to him by some that have authority from the Sovereign
Power to declare them; and need not take care beforehand, what he shall
Judge; for it shall be given him what he shall say concerning the Fact, by
Witnesses; and what he shall say in point of Law, from those that shall in
their pleadings show it, and by authority interpret it upon the place. The
Lords of Parliament in England were Judges, and most difficult causes have been
heard and determined by them; yet few of them were much versed in the study of
the Laws, and fewer had made profession of them: and though they consulted
with Lawyers, that were appointed to be present there for that purpose; yet
they alone had the authority of giving Sentence. In like manner, in the
ordinary trialls of Right, Twelve men of the common People, are the Judges, and
give Sentence, not only of the Fact, but of the Right; and pronounce simply
for the Complaynant, or for the Defendant; that is to say, are Judges not only
of the Fact, but also of the Right: and in a question of crime, not only
determine whether done, or not done; but also whether it be Murder, Homicide,
Felony, Assault, and the like, which are determinations of Law: but because
they are not supposed to know the Law of themselves, there is one that has
Authority to inform them of it, in the particular case they are to Judge of.
But yet if they judge not according to that he tells them, they are not subject
thereby to any penalty; unless it be made appear, they did it against their
consciences, or had been corrupted by reward.

The things that make a good Judge, or good Interpreter of the Laws, are,
first, A right understanding of that principal Law of Nature called Equity;
which depending not on the reading of other men's Writings, but on the goodness
of a man's own natural Reason, and Meditation, is presumed to be in those most,
that have had most leisure, and had the most inclination to meditate thereon.
Secondly, Contempt of unnecessary Riches, and Preferments. Thirdly, To be able
in judgment to divest himself of all fear, anger, hatred, love, and
compassion. Fourthly, and lastly, Patience to hear; diligent attention in
hearing; and memory to retain, digest and apply what he has heard.

The difference and division of the Laws, has been made in diverse Divisions of
Law.
manners, according to the different methods, of those men that have written of
them. For it is a thing that depends not on Nature, but on the scope of the
Writer; and is subservient to every man's proper method. In the Institutions of
Justinian, we find seven sorts of Civil Laws. 1. The Edicts, Constitutions,
and Epistles of the Prince, that is, of the Emperor; because the whole power
of the people was in him. Like these, are the Proclamations of the Kings of
England.

2. The Decrees of the whole people of Rome (comprehending the Senate,) when
they were put to the Question by the Senate. These were Laws, at first, by the
virtue of the Sovereign Power residing in the people; and such of them as by
the Emperors were not abrogated, remained Laws by the Authority Imperial.
For all Laws that bind, are understood to be Laws by his authority that has
power to repeal them. Somewhat like to these Laws, are the Acts of Parliament
in England.

3. The Decrees of the Common people (excluding the Senate,) when they were put
to the question by the Tribune of the people. For such of them as were not
abrogated by the Emperors, remained Laws by the Authority Imperial. Like to
these, were the Orders of the House of Commons in England.

4. Senatus consulta, the Orders of the Senate; because when the people of Rome
grew so numerous, as it was inconvenient to assemble them; it was thought fit
by the Emperor, that men should Consult the Senate, in stead of the people:
And these have some resemblance with the Acts of Counsel.

5. The Edicts of Praetors, and (in some Cases) of the Aediles: such as are the
Chief Justices in the Courts of England.

6. Responsa Prudentum; which were the Sentences, and Opinions of those
Lawyers, to whom the Emperor gave Authority to interpret the Law, and to give
answer to such as in matter of Law demanded their advice; which Answers, the
Judges in giving Judgment were obliged by the Constitutions of the Emperor to
observe: And should be like the Reports of Cases Judged, if other Judges be by
the Law of England bound to observe them. For the Judges of the Common Law of
England, are not properly Judges, but Juris Consulti; of whom the Judges, who
are either the Lords, or Twelve men of the Country, are in point of Law to ask
advice.

7. Also, Unwritten Customs, (which in their own nature are an imitation of
Law,) by the tacit consent of the Emperor, in case they be not contrary to
the Law of Nature, are very Laws.

Another division of Laws, is into Natural and Positive. Natur^ll are those
which have been Laws from all Eternity; and are called not only Natural, but
also Moral Laws; consisting in the Moral Virtues, as Justice, Equity, and
all habits of the mind that conduce to Peace, and Charity; of which I have
already spoken in the fourteenth and fifteenth Chapters.

Positive, are those which have not been from Eternity; but have been made
Laws by the Will of those that have had the Sovereign Power over others; and
are either written, or made known to men, by some other argument of the Will of
their Legislator.

Again, of Positive Laws some are Humane, some Divine: And Another Division of
Law.
of Humane positive laws, some are Distributive, some Penal. Distributive are
those that determine the Rights of the Subjects, declaring to every man what it
is, by which he acquireth and holds a propriety in lands, or goods, and a
right or liberty of action: and these speak to all the Subjects. Penal are
those, which declare, what Penalty shall be inflicted on those that violate the
Law; and speak to the Ministers and Officers ordained for execution. For though
every one ought to be informed of the Punishments ordained beforehand for their
transgression; nevertheless the Command is not addressed to the Delinquent,
(who cannot be supposed will faithfully punish himself,) but to public
Ministers appointed to see the Penalty executed. And these Penal Laws are for
the most part written together with the Laws Distributive; and are sometimes
called Judgments. For all Laws are general Judgments, or Sentences of the
Legislator; as also every particular Judgment, is a Law to him, whose case is
Judged.

Divine Positive Laws (for Natural Laws being Eternal, and Divine Positive
Law how made known to be Law.
Universal, are all Divine,) are those, which being the Commandments of God,
(not from all Eternity, nor universally addressed to all men, but only to a
certain people, or to certain persons,) are declared for such, by those whom
God has authorized to declare them. But this Authority of man to declare what
be these Positive Laws of God, how can it be known? God may command a man by a
supernatural way, to deliver Laws to other men. But because it is of the
essence of Law, that he who is to be obliged, be assured of the Authority of
him that declares it, which we cannot naturally take notice to be from God,
How can a man without supernatural Revelation be assured of the Revelation
received by the declarer? and how can he be bound to obey them? For the first
question, how a man can be assured of the Revelation of another, without a
Revelation particularly to himself, it is evidently impossible: For though a
man may be induced to believe such Revelation, from the Miracles they see him
do, or from seeing the Extraordinary sanctity of his life, or from seeing the
Extraordinary wisdom, or Extraordinary felicity of his Actions, all which are
marks of God extraordinary favor; yet they are not assured evidences of
special Revelation. Miracles are Mavelous works: but that which is
mavelous to one, may not be so to another. Sanctity may be feigned; and the
visible felicities of this world, are most often the work of God by Natural,
and ordinary causes. And therefore no man can infallibly know by natural
reason, that another has had a supernatural revelation of Gods will; but only
a belief; every one (as the signs thereof shall appear greater; or lesser) a
firmer, or a weaker belief.

But for the second, how he can be bound to obey them; it is not so hard. For
if the Law declared, be not against the Law of Nature (which is undoubtedly
Gods Law) and he undertake to obey it, he is bound by his own act; bound I say
to obey it, but not bound to believe it: for men's belief, and interior
cogitations, are not subject to the commands, but only to the operation of God,
ordinary, or extraordinary. Faith of Supernatural Law, is not a fulfilling,
but only an assenting to the same; and not a duty that we exhibit to God, but
a gift which God freely gives to whom he pleases; as also Unbelief is not a
breach of any of his Laws; but a rejection of them all, except the Laws
Natural. But this that I say, will be made yet cleerer* by the Examples, and
Testimonies concerning this point in holy Scripture. The Covenant God made with
Abraham (in a Supernatural manner) was thus, This is the Covenant which Genesis
17. 10.
thou shall observe between Me and Thee and thy Seed after thee. Abraham's Seed
had not this revelation, nor were yet in being; yet they are a party to the
Covenant, and bound to obey what Abraham should declare to them for Gods Law;
which they could not be, but in virtue of the obedience they owed to their
Parents; who (if they be Subject to no other earthly power, as here in the case
of Abraham) have Sovereign power over their children, and servants. Again,
where God says to Abraham, In thee shall all Nations of the earth be blessed:
For I know thou will command thy children, and thy house after thee to keep the
way of the Lord, and to observe Righteousness and Judgment, it is manifest,
the obedience of his Family, who had no Revelation, depended on their former
obligation to obey their Sovereign. At Mount Sinai Moses only went up to God;
the people were forbidden to approach on pain of death; yet were they bound to
obey all that Moses declared to them for Gods Law. Upon what ground, but on
this submission of their own, Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; but let
not God speak to us, lest we dye? By which two places it sufficiently
appears, that in a Commonwealth, a subject that has no certain and assured
Revelation particularly to himself concerning the Will of God, is to obey for
such, the Command of the Commonwealth: for if men were at liberty, to take for
Gods Commandments, their own dreams, and fancies, or the dreams and fancies of
private men; scarce two men would agree upon what is Gods Commandment; and yet
in respect of them, every man would despise the Commandments of the
Commonwealth. I conclude therefore, that in all things not contrary to the
Moral Law, (that is to say, to the Law of Nature,) all Subjects are bound to
obey that for divine Law, which is declared to be so, by the Laws of the
Commonwealth. Which also is evident to any man's reason; for whatsoever is not*
against the Law of Nature, may be made Law in the name of them that have the
Sovereign power; and there is no reason men should be the less obliged by it,
when it is propounded in the name of God. Besides, there is no place in the world
where men are permitted to pretend other Commandments of God, than are
declared for such by the Commonwealth. Christian States punish those that
revolt from Christian Religion, and all other States, those that set up any
Religion by them forbidden. For in whatsoever is not regulated by the
Commonwealth, it is Equity (which is the Law of Nature, and therefore an
eternal Law of God) that every man equally enjoy his liberty.

There is also another distinction of Laws, into Fundamental, and Another
division of Laws.
not Fundamental: but I could never see in any Author, what a Fundamental Law
signifies. Nevertheless one may very reasonably distinguish Laws in that
manner.

For a Fundamental Law in every Commonwealth is that, which A Fundamental
Law what.
being taken away, the Commonwealth fails, and is utterly dissolved; as a
building whose Foundation is destroyed. And therefore a Fundamental Law is
that, by which Subjects are bound to uphold whatsoever power is given to the
Sovereign, whether a Monarch, or a Sovereign Assembly, without which the
Commonwealth cannot stand; such as is the power of War and Peace, of
Judicature, of Election of Officers, and of doing whatsoever he shall think
necessary for the Public good. Not Fundamental is that, the abrogating
whereof, draws not with it the dissolution of the Commonwealth; such as are
the Laws concerning Controversies between subject and subject. Thus much of
the Division of Laws.

I find the words Lex Civilis, and Jus Civil, that is to say, Law Difference
between Law and Right:
and Right Civil, promiscuously used for the same thing, even in the most
learned Authors; which nevertheless ought not to be so. For Right is Liberty,
namely that Liberty which the Civil Law leaves us: But Civil Law is an
Obligation; and takes from us the Liberty which the Law of Nature gave us.
Nature gave a Right to every man to secure himself by his own strength, and to
invade a suspected neighbor, by way of prevention: but the Civil Law takes
away that Liberty, in all cases where the protection of the Law may be safely
stayed for. Insomuch as Lex and Jus, are as different as Obligation and Liberty.

Likewise Laws and Charters are taken (...) for the And between a Law and a
Charter.
same thing. Yet Charters are Donations of the Sovereign; and not Laws, but
exemptions from Law. The phrase of a Law is Jubeo, Injungo, I Command, and
Enjoin: the phrase of a Charter is Dedi, Concessi, I have Given, I have
Granted: but what is given or granted, to a man, is not forced upon him, by a
Law. A Law may be made to bind All the Subjects of a Commonwealth: a Liberty,
or Charter is only to One man, or some One part of the people. For to say all
the people of a Commonwealth, have Liberty in any case whatsoever; is to say,
that in such case, there has been no Law made; or else having been made, is
now abrogated.

CHAP. XXVII. Of CRIMES, EXCUSES, and EXTENUATIONS.
A Sin, is not only a Transgression of a Law, but also any Sin what.
Contempt of the Legislator. For such Contempt, is a breach of all his Laws at
once. And therefore may consist, not only in the Commission of a Fact, or in
the Speaking of Words by the Laws forbidden, or in the Omission of what the
Law commands, but also in the Intention, or purpose to transgress. For the
purpose to break the Law, is some degree of Contempt of him, to whom it
belongs to see it executed. To be delighted in the Imagination only, of
being possessed of another man's goods, servants, or wife, without any intention
to take them from him by force, or fraud, is no breach of the Law, that says,
Thou shall not covet: nor is the pleasure a man may have in imagining, or
dreaming of the death of him, from whose life he expects nothing but damage,
and displeasure, a Sin; but the resolving to put some Act in execution, that
tends thereto. For to be pleased in the fiction of that, which would please a
man if it were real, is a Passion so adhaerent to the Nature both of man, and
every other living creature, as to make it a Sin, were to make Sin of being
a man. The consideration of this, has made me think them too severe, both to
themselves, and others, that maintain, that the First motions of the mind,
(though checked with the fear of God) be Sins. But I confess it is safer to
err on that hand, than on the other.

A CRIME, is a sin, consisting in the Committing (by Deed, or A Crime what.
Word) of that which the Law forbids, or the Omission of what it has
commanded. So that every Crime is a sin; but not every sin a Crime. To
intend to steal, or kill, is a sin, though it never appear in Word, or
Fact: for God that sees the thoughts of man, can lay it to his charge: but
till it appear by some thing done, or said, by which the intention may be
argued by a humane Judge, it has not the name of Crime: which distinction the
Greeks observed, in the word (...), and (...), or (...); whereof the former,
(which is translated Sin,) signifies any swarving from the Law whatsoever;
but the two later, (which are translated Crime,) signify that sin only,
whereof one man may accuse another. But of Intentions, which never appear by
any outward act, there is no place for humane accusation. In like manner the
Latins by Peccatum, which is Sin, signify all manner of deviation from the
Law; but by Crimen, (which word they derive from Cerno, which signifies to
perceive,) they mean only such sins, as may be made appear before a Judge;
and therefore are not mere Intentions. Where no Civil Law is, there is (...)
Crime.


From this relation of Sin to the Law, and of Crime to the Civil Law, may be
inferred, First, that where Law cease, Sin cease. But because the Law of
Nature is eternal, Violation of Covenants, Ingratitude, Arrogance, and all
Facts contrary to any Moral virtue, can never cease to be Sin. Secondly,
that the Civil Law ceasing, Crimes cease: for there being no other Law
remaining, but that of Nature, there is no place for Accusation; every man
being his own Judge, and accused only by his own Conscience, and cleared by
the Uprightness of his own Intention. When therefore his Intention is Right,
his fact is no Sin: if otherwise, his fact is Sin; but not Crime. Thirdly,
That when the Sovereign Power cease, Crime also cease: for where there is
no such Power, there is no protection to be had from the Law; and therefore
every one may protect himself by his own power: for no man in the Institution
of Sovereign Power can be supposed to give away the Right of preserving his own
body; for the safety whereof all Sovereignty was ordained. But this is to be
understood only of those, that have not themselves contributed to the taking
away of the Power that protected them: for that was a Crime from the beginning.

The source of every Crime, is some defect of the Understanding; Ignorance of
the Law of Nature excuses no man.
or some error in Reasoning; or some sudden force of the Passions. Defect in
the Understanding, is Ignoran^e; in Reasoning, Erroneous Opinion. Again,
Ignorance is of three sorts; of the Law, and of the Sovereign, and of the
Penalty. Ignorance of the Law of Nature Excuses no man; because every man that
has attained to the use of Reason, is supposed to know, he ought not to do to
another, what he would not have done to himself. Therefore into what place
soever a man shall come, if he do any thing contrary to that Law, it is a
Crime. If a man come from the Indies hither, and persuade men here to receive a
new Religion, or teach them any thing that tends to disobedience of the Laws
of this Country, though he be never so well persuaded of the truth of what he
teaches, he commits a Crime, and may be justly punished for the same, not
only because his doctrine is false, but also because he does that which he
would not approve in another, namely, that coming from hence, he should
endeavor to alter the Religion there. But ignorance of the Civil Law, shall
Excuse a man in a strange Country, till it be declared to him; because, till
then no Civil Law is binding. Ignorance of the Civil Law excuses sometimes.


In the like manner, if the Civil Law of a man's own Country, be not so
sufficiently declared, as he may know it if he will; nor the Action against the
Law of Nature; the Ignorance is a good Excuse: In other cases Ignorance of the
Civil Law, Excuses not.

Ignorance of the Sovereign Power, in the place of a man's ordinary Ignorance of
the Sovereign excuses not.
residence, Excuses him not; because he ought to take notice of the Power, by
which he has been protected there.

Ignorance of the Penalty, where the Law is declared, Excuses Ignorance of the
Penalty excuses not.
no man: For in breaking the Law, which without a fear of penalty to follow,
were not a Law, but vain words, he undergoeth the penalty, though he know not
what it is; because, whosoever voluntarily does any action, accepts all the
known consequences of it; but Punishment is a known consequence of the
violation of the Laws, in every Commonwealth; which punishment, if it be
determined already by the Law, he is subject to that; if not, then is he
subject to Arbitrary punishment. For it is reason, that he which does Injury,
without other limitation than that of his own Will, should suffer punishment
without other limitation, than that of his Will whose Law is thereby violated.

But when a penalty, is either annexed to the Crime in the Law it Punishments
declared before the Fact, excuse from greater punishments after it.
self, or has been usually inflicted in the like cases; there the Delinquent
is Excused from a greater penalty. For the punishment foreknown, if not great
enough to deter men from the action, is an invitement to it: because when men
compare the benefit of their Injustice, with the harm of their punishment, by
necessity of Nature they choose that which appears best for themselves: and
therefore when they are punished more than the Law had formerly determined, or
more than others were punished for the same Crime; it is the Law that tempted,
and deceives them.

No Law, made after a Fact done, can make it a Crime: because if Nothing can be
made a Crime by a Law made after the Fact.
the Fact be against the Law of Nature, the Law was before the Fact; and a
Positive Law cannot be taken notice of, before it be made; and therefore cannot
be Obligatory. But when the Law that forbids a Fact, is made before the Fact
be done; yet he that does the Fact, is liable to the Penalty ordained after, in
case no lesser Penalty were made known before, neither by Writing, nor by
Example, for the reason immediately before alleged.

From defect in Reasoning, (that is to say, from Error,) men are False
Principles of Right and Wrong causes of Crime.
prone to violate the Laws, three ways. First, by Presumption of false
Principles: as when men from having observed how in all places, and in all
ages, unjust Actions have been authorized, by the force, and victories of those
who have committed them; and that potent men, breaking through the Cob-web
Laws of their Country, the weaker sort, and those that have failed in their
Enterprises, have been esteemed the only Criminals; have thereupon taken for
Principles, and grounds of their Reasoning, That Justice is but a vain word:
That whatsoever a man can get by his own Industry, and hazard, is his own: That
the Practice of all Nations cannot be unjust: That Examples of former times are
good Arguments of doing the like again; and many more of that kind: Which being
granted, no Act in it self can be a Crime, but must be made so (not by the
Law, but) by the success of them that commit it; and the same Fact be
virtuous, or vicious, as Fortune pleases; so that what Marius makes a Crime,
Sylla shall make meritorious, and Caesar (the same Laws standing) turn False
Teachers mis-interpreting the Law of Nature,
again into a Crime, to the perpetual disturbance of the Peace of the
Commonwealth.

Secondly, by false Teachers, that either mis-interpret the Law of Nature,
making it thereby repugnant to the Law Civil; or by teaching for Laws, such
Doctrines of their own, or Traditions of And false Inferences from true (...)
Teachers.
former times, as are inconsistent with the duty of a Subject.

Thirdly, by Erroneous Inferences from True Principles; which happens commonly
to men that are hasty, and praecipitate in concluding, and resolving what to
do; such as are they, that have both a great opinion of their own
understanding, and believe that things of this nature require not time and
study, but only common experience, and a good natural wit; whereof no man
thinks himself unprovided: whereas the knowledge, of Right and Wrong, which is
no less difficult, there is no man will pretend to, without great and long
study. And of those defects in Reasoning, there is none that can Excuse (though
some of them may Extenuate) a Crime, in any man, that pretends to the
administration of his own private business; much less in them that undertake
a public charge; because they pretend to the Reason, upon the want whereof
they would ground their Excuse.

Of the Passions that most frequently are the causes of Crime, one, By their
Passions;
is Vainglory, or a foolish over-rating of their own worth; as if difference
of worth, were an effect of their wit, or riches, or blood, or some other
natural quality, not depending on the Will of those that have the Sovereign
Authority. From whence proceeds a Presumption that the punishments ordained
by the Laws, and extended generally to all Subjects, ought not to be inflicted
on them, with the same rigor they are inflicted on poor, obscure, and simple
men, comprehended under the name of the Vulgar.

Therefore it happens commonly, that such as value themselves Presumption of
Riches,
by the greatness of their wealth, adventure on Crimes, upon hope of escaping
punishment, by corrupting public Justice, or obtaining Pardon by Money, or
other rewards.

And that such as have multitude of Potent Kindred; and popular And Friends;
men, that have gained reputation amongst the Multitude, take courage to
violate the Laws, from a hope of oppressing the Power, to whom it belongs to
put them in execution.

And that such as have a great, and false opinion of their own Wisdom.
Wisdom, take upon them to reprehend the actions, and call in question the
Authority of them that govern, and so to unsettle the Laws with their public
discourse, as that nothing shall be a Crime, but what their own designs
require should be so. It happens also to the same men, to be prone to all
such Crimes, as consist in Craft, and in deceiving of their Neighbors; because
they think their designs are too subtle to be perceived. These I say are
effects of a false presumption of their own Wisdom. For of them that are the
first movers in the disturbance of Commonwealth, (which can never happen
without a Civil War,) very few are left alive long enough, to see their new
Designs established: so that the benefit of their Crimes, redoundeth to
Posterity, and such as would least have wished it: which argues they were not
so wise, as they thought they were. And those that deceive upon hope of not
being observed, do commonly deceive themselves, (the darkness in which they
believe they lie hidden, being nothing else but their own blindness;) and are
no wiser than Children, that think all hid, by hiding their own eyes.

And generally all vainglorious men, (unless they be withal timorous,) are
subject to Anger; as being more prone than others to interpret for contempt,
the ordinary liberty of conversation: And there are few Crimes that may not be
produced by Anger. Hatred, Lust, Ambition, Covetousness, causes of Crime.


As for the Passions, of Hate, Lust, Ambition, and Covetousness, what Crimes
they are apt to produce, is so obvious to every man's experience and
understanding, as there needs nothing to be said of them, saving that they
are infirmities, so annexed to the nature, both of man, and all other living
creatures, as that their effects cannot be hindered, but by extraordinary use of
Reason, or a constant severity in punishing them. For in those things men hate,
they find a continual, and unavoydable molestation; whereby either a man's
patience must be everlasting, or he must be eased by removing the power of that
which molesteth him: The former is difficult; the later is many times
impossible, without some violation of the Law. Ambition, and Covetousness are
Passions also that are perpetually incumbent, and pressing; whereas Reason is
not perpetually present, to resist them: and therefore whenever the hope of
impunity appears, their effects proceed. And for Lust, what it wants in the
lasting, it has in the vehemence, which suffices to weigh down the
apprehension of all easy, or uncertain punishments.

Of all Passions, that which enclineth men least to break the Laws, Fear
sometimes cause of Crime, as when the danger is neither present, nor corporeal.
is Fear. Nay, (excepting some generous natures,) it is the only thing, (when
there is appearance of profit, or pleasure by breaking the Laws,) that makes
men keep them. And yet in many cases a Crime may be committed through Fear.

For not every Fear justifies the Action it produces, but the fear only of
corporeal hurt, which we call Bodily Fear, and from which a man cannot see how
to be delivered, but by the action. A man is assaulted, fears present death,
from which he sees not how to escape, but by wounding him that assaulteth him;
If he wound him to death, this is no Crime; because no man is supposed at the
making of a Commonwealth, to have abandoned the defense of his life, or
limbs, where the Law cannot arrive time enough to his assistance. But to kill
a man, because from his actions, or his threatenings, I may argue he will kill
me when he can, (seeing I have time, and means to demand protection, from the
Sovereign Power,) is a Crime. Again, a man receives words of disgrace, or some
little injuries (for which they that made the Laws, had assigned no
punishment, nor thought it worthy of a man that has the use of Reason, to take
notice of,) and is afraid, unless he revenge it, he shall fall into contempt,
and consequently be obnoxious to the like injuries from others; and to avoid
this, breaks the Law, and protects himself for the future, by the terror of
his private revenge. This is a Crime: For the hurt is not Corporeal, but
Fantastical, and (though in this corner of the world, made sensible by a
custom not many years since begun, amongst young and vain men,) so light, as a
gallant man, and one that is assured of his own courage, cannot take notice of.
Also a man may stand in fear of Spirits, either through his own superstition,
or through too much credit given to other men, that tell him of strange* Dreams
and Visions; and thereby be made believe they will hurt him, for doing, or
omitting diverse things, which nevertheless, to do, or omit, is contrary to the
Laws; And that which is so done, or omitted, is not to be Excused by this
fear; but is a Crime. For (as I have shown before in the second Chapter) Dreams
be naturally but the fancies remaining in sleep, after the impressions our
Senses had formerly received waking; and when men are by any accident unassured
they have slept, seem to be real Visions; and therefore he that presumes to
break the Law upon his own, or another Dream, or pretended Vision, or upon
other Fancy of the power of Invisible Spirits, than is permitted by the
Commonwealth, leaves the Law of Nature, which is a certain offense, and
follows the imagery of his own, or another private man's brain, which he can
never know whether it signifies any thing, or nothing, nor whether he that
tells his Dream, say true, or lie; which if every private man should have leave
to do, (as they must by the Law of Nature, if any one have it) there could no
Law be made to hold, and so all Commonwealth would be dissolved.

From these different sources of Crimes, it appears already, that Crimes not
equal.
all Crimes are not (as the Stoics of old time maintained) of the same allay.
There is place, not only for EXCUSE, by which that which seemed a Crime, is
proved to be none at all; but also for EXTENUATION, by which the Crime, that
seemed great, is made less. For though all Crimes do equally deserve the name
of Injustice, as all deviation from a strait line is equally crookedness,
which the Stoics rightly observed; yet it does not follow that all Crimes are
equally unjust, no more than that all crooked lines are equally crooked; which
the Stoics not observing, held it as great a Crime, to kill a Hen, against the
Law, as to kill ones Father.

That which totally Excuses a Fact, and takes away from it the Total Excuses.
nature of a Crime, can be none but that, which at the same time, takes away
the obligation of the Law. For the fact committed once against the Law, if he
that committed it be obliged to the Law, can be no other than a Crime.

The want of means to know the Law, totally Excuses: For the Law whereof a man
has no means to inform himself, is not obligatory. But the want of diligence
to enquire, shall not be considered as a want of means; Nor shall any man, that
pretends to reason enough for the Government of his own affairs, be supposed
to want means to know the Laws of Nature; because they are known by the reason
he pretends to: only Children, and Madmen are Excused from offenses against the
Law Natural.

Where a man is captive, or in the power of the enemy, (and he is then in the
power of the enemy, when his person, or his means of living, is so,) if it be
without his own fault, the Obligation of the Law cease; because he must obey
the enemy, or dye; and consequently such obedience is no Crime: for no man is
obliged (when the protection of the Law fails,) not to protect himself, by
the best means he can.

If a man by the terror of present death, be compelled to do a fact against
the Law, he is totally Excused; because no Law can oblige a man to abandon his
own preservation. And supposing such a Law were obligatory; yet a man would
reason thus, If I do it not* I die presently; if I do it, I die afterward;
therefore by doing it, there is time of life gained; Nature therefore compells
him to the fact.

When a man is destitute of food, or other thing necessary for his life, and
cannot preserve himself any other way, but by some fact against the Law; as if
in a great famine he take the food by force, or stealth, which he cannot
obtain for money* nor charity; or in defense of his life, snatch away another
man's Sword, he is totally Excused, for the reason next before alleged.

Again, Facts done against the Law, by the authority of another; Excuses
against the Author.
are by that authority Excused against the Author; because no man ought to
accuse his own fact in another, that is but his instrument: but it is not
Excused against a third person thereby injured; because in the violation of the
Law, both the Author, and Actor are Criminalls. From hence it follows that
when that Man, or Assembly, that has the Sovereign Power, commands a man to
do that which is contrary to a former Law, the doing of it is totally Excused:
For he ought not to condemn it himself, because he is the Author; and what
cannot justly be condemned by the Sovereign, cannot justly be punished by any
other. Besides, when the Sovereign commands any thing to be done against his
own former Law, the Command, as to that particular fact, is an abrogation of
the Law.

If that Man, or Assembly, that has the Sovereign Power, disclaim any Right
essential to the Sovereignty, whereby there acc^eth to the Subject, any
liberty inconsistent with the Sovereign Power, that is to say, with the very
being of a Commonwealth, if the Subject shall refuse to obey the Command in
any thing, contrary to the liberty granted, this is nevertheless a Sin, and
contrary to the duty of the Subject: for he ought to take notice of what is
inconsistent with the Sovereignty, because it was erected by his own consent,
and for his own defense; and that such liberty as is inconsistent with it, was
granted through ignorance of the evil consequence thereof. But if he not only
disobey, but also resist a public Minister in the execution of it, then it is
a Crime; because he might have been righted, (without any breach of the Peace,)
upon complaint.

The Degrees of Crime are taken on diverse Scales, and measured, First, by the
malignity of the Source, or Cause: Secondly, by the contagion of the Example:
Thirdly, by the mischief of the Effect; and Fourthly, by the concurrence of
Times, Places, and Persons.

The same Fact done against the Law, if it proceed from Presumption
Preseumption of Power, aggravateth.
of strength, riches, or friends to resist those that are to execute the Law,
is a greater Crime, than if it proceed from hope of not being discovered, or of
escape by flight: For Presumption of impunity by force, is a Root, from whence
springs, at all times, and upon all temptations, a contempt of all Laws;
whereas in the later case, the apprehension of danger, that makes a man fly,
renders him more obedient for the future. A Crime which we know to be so, is
greater than the same Crime proceeding from a false persuasion that it is
lawful: For he that commits it against his own conscience, presumes on his
force, or other power, which encourages him to commit the same again: but he
that does it by error, after the error shown him, is conformable to the Law.

He, whose error proceeds from the authority of a Teacher, or Evil Teachers,
Extenuate.
an Interpreter of the Law publicly authorized, is not so faulty, as he whose
error proceeds from a peremptory pursuit of his own principles, and
reasoning: For what is taught by one that teaches by public Authority, the
Commonwealth ^eacheth, and has a resemblance of Law, till the same Authority
controuleth it; and in all Crimes that contain not in them a denial of the
Sovereign Power, nor are against an evident Law, Excuses totally: whereas he
that groundeth his actions, on his private Judgment, ought according to the
rectitude, or error thereof, to stand, or fall.

The same Fact, if it have been constantly punished in other men, is Examples
of Impunity, Extenuate.
a greater Crime, than if there have been many precedent Examples of impunity.
For those Examples, are so many hopes of Impunity, given by the Sovereign
himself: And because he which furnishes a man with such a hope, and
presumption of mercy, as encourages him to offend, has his part in the
offense; he cannot reasonably charge the offender with the whole.

A Crime arising from a sudden Passion, is not so great, as when the
Praemeditation, Aggravateth.
same arises from long meditation: For in the former case there is a place for
Extenuation, in the common infirmity of humane nature: but he that does it with
praemeditation, has used circumspection, and cast his eye, on the Law, on the
punishment, and on the consequence thereof to humane society; all which in
committing the Crime, he has contemned, and postposed to his own appetite.
But there is no suddenness of Passion sufficient for a total Excuse: For all
the time between the first knowing of the Law, and the Commission of the Fact,
shall be taken for a time of deliberation; because he ought by meditation of
the Law, to rectify the irregularity of his Passions.

Where the Law is publicly, and with assiduity, before all the people read,
and interpreted; a fact done against it, is a greater Crime, than where men are
left without such instrustion, to enquire of it with difficulty, uncertainty,
and interruption of their Callings, and be informed by private men: for in this
case, part of the fault is discharged upon common infirmity; but in the former,
there is apparent negligence, which is not without some contempt of the
Sovetaign Power.

Those facts which the Law expressly condemns, but the Lawmaker Tacit
approbation of the Sovereign, Extenuates.
by other manifest signs of his will tacitly approves, are less Crimes, than
the same facts, condemned both by the Law, and Lawmaker. For seeing the will of
the Lawmakers is a Law, there appear in this case two contradictory Laws;
which would totally Excuse, if men were bound to take notice of the Sovereigns
approbation, by other arguments, than are expressed by his command. But because
there are punishments consequent, not only to the transgression of his Law,
but also to the observing of it* he is in part a cause of the transgression,
and therefore cannot reasonably impute the whole Crime to the ^quent. For
example, the Law condemns Duells; the punishment is made capital* On the
contrary part, he that refuses Duel, is subject to contempt and (...),
without remedy; and sometimes by the Sovereign himself thought unworthy to
have any charge, or preferment in War: If thereupon he accept Duel,
considering all men lawfully endeavor to obtain the good opinion of them that
have the Sovereign Power, he ought not in reason to be (...) punished; seeing
part of the fault may be discharged on the punisher: which I say, not as
wishing liberty of private revenges, or any other kind of disobedience; but a
care in Governors, not to countenance any thing obliquely, which directly they
forbid. The examples of Princes, to those that see them, are, and ever have
been, more potent to govern their actions, than the Laws themselves. And
thought it be our duty to do, not what they do, but what they say; yet will
that duty never be performed, till it please God to give men an extraordinary,
and supernatural grace to follow that Precept.

Again, if we compare Crimes by the mischief of their Effects, Comparison of
Crimes from their Effects.
First, the same fact, when it redounds to the damage of many, is greater,
than when it redounds to the hurt of few. And therefore, when a fact hurts,
not only in the present, but also, (by example) in the future, it is a greater
Crime, than if it hurt only in the present: for the former, is a fertile
Crime, and multiplyes to the hurt of many; the later is barren. To maintain
doctrines contrary to the Religion established in the Commonwealth, is a
greater fault, in an authorized Preacher, than in a private person: So also is
it, to live profanely, incontinently, or do any irreligious act whatsoever.
Likewise in a Professor of the Law, to maintain any point, or do any act, that
tends to the weakening of the Sovereign Power, is a greater Crime, than in
another man: Also in a man that has such reputation for wisdom, as that his
counsels are followed, or his actions imitated by many, his fact against the
Law, is a greater Crime, than the same fact in another: For such men not only
commit Crime, but teach it for Law to all other men. And generally all Crimes
are the greater, by the scandal they give; that is to say, by becoming
stumbling blocks to the weak, that look not so much upon the way they go in, as
upon the light that other men carry before them.

Also Facts of hostility against the present state of the Commonwealth, Laesa
Majestas.
are greater Crimes, than the same acts done to private men: For the damage
extends it self to all: Such are the betraying of the strengths, or revealing
of the secrets of the Commonwealth to an Enemy* also all attempts upon the
Representative of the Commonwealth, be it a Monarch, or an Assembly; and all
endeavors by word, or deed to diminish the Authority of the same, either in
the present time, or in succession: which Crimes the Latins understand by
Crimina laesae Majestatis, and consist in design, or act, contrary to a
Fundamental Law.

Likewise those Crimes, which render Judgments of no effect, are Bribery and
False testimony.
greater Crimes, than Injuries done to one, or a few persons; as to receive
money to give False judgment, or testimony, is a greater Crime, than otherwise
to deceive a man of the like, or a greater sum; because not only he has
wrong, that falls by such judgments; but all Judgments are rendered useless,
and occasion ministered to force, and private revenges.

Also Robbery, and Depeculation of the Public treasure, or Revenues,
Depeculation.
is a greater Crime, than the robbing, or defrauding of a Private man; because
to rob the public, is to rob many at once.

Also the Counterfeit usurpation of public Ministry, the Counterfeiting
Counterfeiting Authority.
of public Seals, or public Coin, than counterfeiting of a private man's
person, or his seal; because the fraud thereof, extends to the damage of
many.

Of facts against the Law, done to private men, the greater Crime, Crimes
against private men compared.
is that, where the damage in the common opinion of men, is most sensible. And
therefore

To kill against the Law, is a greater Crime, than any other injury, life
preserved.

And to kill with Torment, greater, than simply to kill.

And Mutilation of a limb, greater, than the spoiling a man of his goods.

And the spoiling a man of his goods, by Terror of death, or wounds, than by
clandestine surreption.

And by clandestine Surreption, than by consent fraudulently obtained.

And the violation of chastity by Force, greater, than by flattery.

And of a woman Married, than of a woman not married.

For all these things are commonly so valued; though some men are more, and
some less sensible of the same offense. But the Law regards not the
particular, but the general inclination of mankind.

And therefore the offense men take, from contumely, in words, or gesture, when
they produce no other harm, than the present grief of him that is reproached,
has been neglected in the Laws of the Greeks, Romans, and other both ancient,
and modern Commonwealths; supposing the true cause of such grief to consist,
not in the contumely, (which takes no hold upon men conscious of their own
virtue,) but in the Pusillanimity of him that is offended by it.

Also a Crime against a private man, is much aggravated by the person, time,
and place. For to kill ones Parent, is a greater Crime, than to kill another:
for the Parent ought to have the honor of a Sovereign, (though he have
surrendered his Power to the Civil Law,) because he had it originally by
Nature. And to Rob a poor man, is a greater Crime, than to rob a rich man;
because it is to the poor a more sensible damage.

And a Crime committed in the Time* or Place appointed for Devotion, is
greater, than if committed at another time or place: for it proceeds from a
greater contempt of the Law.

Many other case^ of Aggravation, and Extenuation might be added: but by these
I have set down, it is obvious to every man, to take the altitude of any other
Crime proposed.

Lastly, because in almost all Crimes there is an Injury done, not Public
Crimes what.
only to some Private men, but also to the Commonwealth; the same Crime, when
the accusation is in the name of the Commonwealth, is called Public Crime;
and when in the name of a Private man, a Private Crime; And the Pleas according
thereunto called Public, Judicia Publica, Pleas of the Crown; or Private
Pleas. As in an Accusation of Murder, if the accuser be a Private man, the plea
is a Private plea; if the accuser be the Sovereign, the plea is a Public plea.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of PUNISHMENTS, and REWARDS.
APUNISHMENT, is an Evil inflicted by public Authority, The definition of
Punishment.
on him that has done, or omitted that which is Judged by the same Authority
to be a Transgression of the Law; to the end that the will of men may thereby
the better be disposed to obedience.

Before I infer any thing from this definition, there is a question Right to
Punish whence derived.
to be answered, of much importance; which is, by what door the Right, or
Authority of Punishing in any case, came in. For by that which has been said
before, no man is supposed bound by Covenant, not to resist violence; and
consequently it cannot be intended, that he gave any right to another to lay
violent hands upon his person. In the making of a Commonwealth, every man
gives away the right of defending another; but not of defending himself. Also
he obliges himself, to assist him that has the Sovereignty, in the Punishing
of another; but of himself not. But to covenant to assist the Sovereign, in
doing hurt to another, unless he that so covenanteth have a right to do it
himself, is not to give him a Right to Punish. It is manifest therefore that
the Right which the Commonwealth (that is, he, or they that represent it) has
to Punish, is not grounded on any concession, or gift of the Subjects. But I
have also showed formerly, that before the Institution of Commonwealth, every
man had a right to every thing, and to do whatsoever he thought necessary to
his own preservation; subduing, hurting, or killing any man in order thereunto.
And this is the foundation of that right of Punishing, which is exercised in
every Commonwealth. For the Subjects did not give the Sovereign that right;
but only in laying down theirs, strengthened him to use his own, as he should
think fit, for the preservation of them all: so that it was not given* but left
to him, and to him only; and (excepting the limits set him by natural Law) as
entire, as in the condition of mere Nature, and of war of every one against
his neighbor.

from the definition of Punishment, I infer, First, that neither Private
injuries, and revenges no Punishments:
private revenges, nor injuries of private men, can properly be styled
Punishment; because they proceed not from public Authority.

Secondly, that to be neglected, and unpreferred by the public Nor denial of
preferment:
favor, is not a Punishment; because no new evil is thereby on any man
Inflicted; he is only left in the estate he was in before.

Thirdly, that the evil inflicted by public Authority, without Nor pain
inflicted without public hearing:
precedent public condemnation, is not to be styled by the name of
Punishment; but of an hostile act; because the fact for which a man is
Punished, ought first to be Judged by public Authority, to be a transgression
of the Law.

Fourthly, that the evil inflicted by usurped power, and Judges Nor pain
inflicted by Usurped power:
without Authority from the Sovereign, is not Punishment; but an act of
hostility; because the acts of power usurped, have not for Author, the person
condemned; and therefore are not acts of public Authority.

Fifthly, that all evil which is inflicted without intention, or possibility
Nor pain inflicted without respect to to the future good.
of disposing the Delinquent, or (by his example) other men, to obey the Laws,
is not Punishment; but an act of hostility; because without such an end, no
hurt done is contained under that name.

Sixthly, whereas to certain actions, there be annexed by Nature, Natural
evil consequences, no Punishments.
diverse hurtful consequences; as when a man in assaulting another, is himself
slain, or wounded; or when he falls into sickness by the doing of some
unlawful act; such hurt, though in respect of God, who is the author of
Nature, it may be said to be inflicted, and therefore a Punishment divine; yet
it is not contaned in the name of Punishment in respect of men, because it is
not inflicted by the Authority of man.

Seventhly, If the harm inflicted be less than the benefit, or contentment
Hurt inflicted, if less than the benefit of transgressing, is not Punishment.
that naturally follows the crime committed, that harm is not within the
definition; and is rather the Price, or Redemption, than the Punishment of a
Crime: Because it is of the nature of Punishment, to have for end, the
disposing of men to obey the Law; which end (if it be less than the benefit of
the transgression) it attaineth not, but works a contrary effect. Where the
Punishment is annexed to the Law, a greater hurt is not Punishment, but (...).


Eighthly, If a Punishment be determined and prescribed in the Law it self,
and after the crime committed, there be a greater Punishment inflicted, the
excess is not Punishment, but an act of hostility. For seeing the aim of
Punishment is not a revenge, but terror; and the terror of a great Punishment
unknown, is taken away by the declaration of a less, the unexpected addition
is no part of the Punishment. But where there is no Punishment at all
determined by the Law, there whatsoever is inflicted, has the nature of
Punishment. For he that goes about the violation of a Law, wherein no penalty
is determined, expects an indeterminate, that is to say, an arbitrary
Punishment.

Ninthly, Harm inflicted for a Fact done before there was a Law Hurt inflicted
for a fact done before the Law, no Punishment.
that forbad it, is not Punishment, but an act of Hostility: For before the
Law, there is no transgression of the Law: But Punishment supposes a fact
judged, to have been a transgression of the Law; Therefore Harm inflicted
before the Law made, is not Punishment, but an act of Hostility.

Tenthly, Hurt inflicted on the Representative of the Commonwealth, The
Representative of the Commonwealth Unpunishable.
is not Punishment, but an act of Hostility: Because it is of the nature of
Punishment, to be inflicted by public Authority, which is the Authority only
of the Representative it self.

Lastly, Harm inflicted upon one that is a declared enemy, falls Hurt to
Revolted Subjects is done by right of War, not by way of Punishment.
not under the name of Punishment: Because seeing they were either never
subject to the Law, and therefore cannot transgress it; or having been subject
to it, and professing to be no longer so, by consequence deny they can
transgress it, all the Harms that can be done them, must be taken as acts of
Hostility. But in declared Hostility, all infliction of evil is lawful. From
whence it follows, that if a subject shall by fact, or word, wittingly, and
deliberatly deny the authority of the Representative of the Commonwealth,
(whatsoever penalty has been formerly ordained for Treason,) he may lawfully
be made to suffer whatsoever the Representative will: For in denying
subjection, he denies such Punishment as by the Law has been ordained; and
therefore suffers as an enemy of the Commonwealth; that is, according to the
will of the Representative. For the Punishments set down in the Law, are to
Subjects, not to Enemies; such as are they, that having been by their own act
Subjects, deliberately revolting, deny the Sovereign Power.

The first, and most general distribution of Punishments, is into Divine, and
Humane. Of the former I shall have occasion, to speak, in a more convenient
place hereafter.

Humane, are those Punishments that be inflicted by the Commandment of Man;
and are either Corporal, or Pecu^ary, or Ignominy, or Imprisonment, or Exile,
or mixed of these. Punishments Corporal.


Corporal Punishment is that, which is inflicted on the body directly, and
according to the intention of him that inflicteth it: such as are stripes, or
wounds, or deprivation of such pleasures of the body, as were before lawfully
enjoyed.

And of these, some be Capital, some Less than Capital. Capital, Capital.
is the Infliction of Death; and that either simply, or with torment. Less
than Capital, are Stripes, Wounds, Chains, and any other corporal Pain, not
in its own nature mortal. For if upon the Infliction of a Punishment death
^ollow not in the intention of the Inflicter, the Punishment is not to be
esteemed Capital, though the harm prove mortal by an accident not to be
foreseen; in which case death is not inflicted, but hastened.

Pecuniary Punishment, is that which consists not only in the deprivation of
a Sum of Money, but also of Lands, or any other goods which are usually bought
and sold for money. And in case the Law, that ordains such a punishment, be
made with design to gather money, from such as shall transgress the same, it is
not properly a Punishment, but the Price of privilege, and exemption from the
Law, which does not absolutely forbid the fact, but only to those that are not
able to pay the money: except where the Law is Natural, or part of Religion;
for in that case it is not an exemption from the Law, but a transgression of
it. As where a Law exacteth a Pecuniary mulct, of them that take the name of
God in vain, the payment of the mulct, is not the price of a dispensation to
swear, but the Punishment of the transgression of a Law undispensable. In like
manner if the Law impose a Sum of Money to be paid, to him that has been
Injured; this is but a satisfaction for the hurt done him; and extinguisheth
the accusation of the party injured, not the crime of the offender.

Ignominy, is the infliction of such Evil, as is made Dishonorable; Ignominy.
or the deprivation of such Good, as is made Honorable by the Commonwealth.
For there be some things Honorable by Nature; as the effects of Courage,
Magnamity, Strength, Wisdom, and other abilities of body and mind: Others made
Honorable by the Commonwealth; as Badges, Titles, Offices, or any other
singular mark of the Sovereigns favor. The former, (though they may fail by
nature, or accident,) cannot be taken away by a Law; and therefore the loss of
them is not Punishment. But the later, may be taken away by the public
authority that made them Honorable, and are properly Punishments: Such are
degrading men condemned, of their Badges, Titles, and Offices; or declaring
them incapable of the like in time to come.

Imprisonment, is when a man is by public Authority deprived Imprisonment.
of liberty; and may happen from two diverse ends; whereof one is the safe
custody of a man accused; the other is the inflicting of pain on a man
condemned. The former is not Punishment; because no man is supposed to be
Punished, before he be Judicially heard, and declared guilty. And therefore
whatsoever hurt a man is made to suffer by bonds, or restraint, before his
cause be heard, over and above that which is necessary to assure his custody,
is against the Law of Nature. But the later is Punishment, because Evil, and
inflicted by public Authority, for somewhat that has by the same Authority
been Judged a Transgression of the Law. Under this word Imprisoment, I
comprehend all restraint of motion, caused by an external obstacle, be it a
House, which is called by the general name of a Prison; or an Island, as when
men are said to be confined to it; or a place where men are set to work, as in
old time men have been condemned to Quarries, and in these times to Galleys; or
be it a Chain, or any other such impediment.

Exile, (Banishment) is when a man is for a crime, condemned Exile.
to depart out of the dominion of the Commonwealth, or out of a certain part
thereof; and during a prefixed time, or for ever, not to return into it: and
seems not in its own nature, without other circumstances, to be a Punishment;
but rather an escape, or a public commandment to avoid Punishment by flight.
And Cicero says, there was never any such Punishment ordained in the City of
Rome; but calls it a refuge of men in danger. For if a man banished, be
nevertheless permitted to enjoy his Goods, and the Revenue of his Lands, the
mere change of air is no Punishment; nor does it tend to that benefit of the
Commonwealth, for which all Punishments are ordained, (that is to say, to the
forming of men's wills to the observation of the Law;) but many times to the
damage of the Commonwealth. For a Banished man, is a lawful enemy of the
Commonwealth that banished him; as being no more a Member of the same. But if
he be withal deprived of his Lands, or Goods, then the Punishment lies not in
the Exile, but is to be reckoned amongst Punishments Pecuniary.

All Punishments of Innocent subjects, be they great or little, are The
Punishment of Innocent Subjects is contrary to the Law of Nature.
against the Law of Nature: For Punishment is only for Transgression of the
Law, and therefore there can be no Punishment of the Innocent. It is therefore
a violation, First, of that Law of Nature, which forbids all men, in their
Revenges, to look at any thing but some future good: For there can arrive no
good to the Commonwealth, by Punishing the Innocent. Secondly, of that, which
forbids Ingratitude: For seeing all Sovereign Power, is originally given by
the consent of every one of the Subjects, to the end they should as long as
they are obedient, be protected thereby; the Punishment of the Innocent, is a
rendering of Evil for Good. And thirdly, of the Law that commands Equity;
that is to say, an equal distribution of Justice; which in Punishing the
Innocent is not observed.

But the Infliction of what evil soever, on an Innocent man, that But the
Harm done to Innocents in War, not so:
is not a Subject, if it be for the benefit of the Commonwealth, and without
violation of any former Covenant, is no breach of the Law of Nature. For all
men that are not Subjects, are either Enemies, or else they have ceased from
being so, by some precedent covenants. But against Enemies, whom the
Commonwealth judges capable to do them hurt, it is lawful by the original
Right of Nature to make war; wherein the Sword Judges not, nor does the
Victor make distinction of Nocent, and Innocent, as to the time past; nor has
other respect of mercy, than as it conduces to the good of his Nor that which
is done to declared Rebels.
own People. And upon this ground it is, that also in Subjects, who deliberatly
deny the Authority of the Commonwealth established, the vengeance is lawfully
extended, not only to the Fathers, but also to the third and fourth generation
not yet in being, and consequently innocent of the fact, for which they are
afflicted: because the nature of this offense, consists in the renouncing of
subjection; which is a relapse into the condition of war, commonly called
Rebellion; and they that so offend, suffer not as Subjects, but as Enemies. For
Rebellion, is but war renewed.

REWARD, is either of Gift, or by Contract. When by Contract, Reward is either
Salary, or Grace.
it is called Salary, and Wages; which is benefit due for service performed, or
promised. When of Gift, it is benefit proceeding from the grace of them that
bestow it, to encourage, or enable men to do them service. And therefore when
the Sovereign of a Common wealth appoints a Salary to any public Office, he
that receives it, is bound in Justice to perform his office; otherwise, he is
bound only in honor, to acknowledgement, and an endeavor of requital. For
though men have no lawful remedy, when they be commanded to quit their private
business, to serve the public, without Reward, or Salary; yet they are not
bound thereto, by the Law of Nature, nor by the Institution of the
Commonwealth, unless the service cannot otherwise be done; because it is
supposed the Sovereign may make use of all their means, insomuch as the most
common Soldier, may demand the wages of his warrefare, as a debt.

The benefit which a Sovereign bestows on a Subject, for fear of Benefits
bestowed for fear, are not Rewards.
some power, and ability he has to do hurt to the Commonwealth, are not
properly Rewards; for they are not Salaryes; because there is in this case no
contract supposed, every man being obliged already not to do the Commonwealth
disservice: nor are they Graces; because they be extorted by fear, which ought
not to be incident to the Sovereign Power: but are rather Sacrifices, which the
Sovereign (considered in his natural person, and not in the person of the
Commonwealth) makes, for the appeasing the discontent of him he thinks more
potent than himself; and encourage not to obedience, but on the contrary, to
the continuance, and increasing of further extortion.

And whereas some Salaries are certain, and proceed from the public Salaries
Certain and Casual.
Treasure; and others uncertain, and casual, proceeding from the execution of
the Office for which the Salary is ordained; the later is in some cases
hurtful to the Commonwealth; as in the case of Judicature. For where the
benefit of the Judges, and Ministers of a Court of Justice, arises for the
multitude of Causes that are brought to their cognizance, there must needs
follow two Inconveniences: One, is the nourishing of suits; for the more suits,
the greater benefit: and another that depends on that, which is contention
about Jurisdiction; each Court drawing to it self, as many Causes as it can.
But in offices of Execution there are not those Inconveniences; because their
employment cannot be increased by any endeavor of their own. And thus much
shall suffice for the nature of Punishment, and Reward; which are, as it were,
the Nerves and Tendons, that move the limbs and joints of a Commonwealth.

Hitherto I have set forth the nature of Man, (whose Pride and other Passions
have compelled him to submit himself to Government;) together with the great
power of his Governor, whom I compared to Leviathan, taking that comparison
out of the two last verses of the one and fortieth of Job; where God having set
forth the great power of Leviathan, calls him King of the Proud. There is
nothing, says he, on earth, to be compared with him. He is made so as not to
be afraid. He sees every high thing below him; and is King of all the
children of pride. But because he is mortal, and subject to decay, as all
other Earthly creatures are; and because there is that in heaven, (though not
on earth) that he should stand in fear of, and whose Laws he ought to obey; I
shall in the next following Chapters speak of his Diseases, and the causes of
his Mortality; and of what Laws of Nature he is bound to obey.

CHAP. XXIX. Of those things that Weaken, or tend to the DISSOLUTION of a
Commonwealth.
THough nothing can be immortal, which mortals make; Dissolution of
Commonwealths proceeds from their Imperfect Institution.
yet, if men had the use of reason they pretend to, their Commonwealths might
be secured, at least, from perishing by internal diseases. For by the nature
of their Institution, they are designed to live, as long as Mankind, or as the
Laws of Nature, or as Justice it self, which gives them life. Therefore when
they come to be dissolved, not by external violence, but intestine disorder,
the fault is not in men, as they are the Matter; but as they are the Makers,
and orderers of them. For men, as they become at last weary of irregular
justling, and hewing one another, and desire with all their hearts, to conform
themselves into one firm and lasting edifice; so for want, both of the art of
making fit Laws, to square their actions by, and also of humility, and
patience, to suffer the rude and combersome points of their present greatness
to be taken off, they cannot without the help of a very able Architect, be
compiled, into any other than a crasie building, such as hardly lasting out
their own time, must assuredly fall upon the heads of their posterity.

Amongst the Infirmities therefore of a Commonwealth, I will reckon in the
first place, those that arise from an Imperfect Institution, and resemble the
diseases of a natural body, which proceed from a Defectuous Procreation.

Of which, this is one, That a man to obtain a Kingdom, is sometimes Want of
Absolute power.
content with less Power, than to the Peace, and defense of the Commonwealth
is necessarily required. From whence it comes to pass, that when the
exercise of the Power laid by, is for the public safety to be resumed, it
has the resemblance of an unjust act; which disposes great numbers of men
(when occasion is presented) to rebel; In the same manner as the bodies of
children, gotten by diseased parents, are subject either to untimely death, or
to purge the ill quality, derived from their vicious conception, by breaking
out into biles and scabbs. And when Kings deny themselves some such necessary
Power, it is not always (though sometimes) out of ignorance of what is
necessary to the office they undertake; but many times out of a hope to recover
the same again at their pleasure: Wherein they reason not well; because such as
will hold them to their promises, shall be maintained against them by foreign
Commonwealths; who in order to the good of their own Subjects let slip few
occasions to weaken the estate of their Neighbors. So was Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury, supported against Henry the Second, by the Pope; the
subjection of Ecclesiastiques to the Commonwealth, having been dispensed with
by William the Conqueror at his reception, when he took an Oath, not to
infringe the liberty of the Church. And so were the Barons, whose power was by
William Rufus (to have their help in transferring the Succession from his Elder
brother, to himself,) increased to a degree, inconsistent with the Sovereign
Power, maintained in their Rebellion against King John, by the French.

Nor does this happen in Monarchy only. For whereas the style of the ancient
Roman Commonwealth, was, The Senate, and People of Rome; neither Senate, nor
People pretended to the whole Power; which first caused the seditions, of
Tiberius Gracchus, Caius Gracchus, Lucius Saturninus, and others; and
afterward the wars between the Senate and the People, under Marius and
Sylla; and again under Pompey and Caesar, to the Extinction of their Democraty,
and the setting up of Monarchy.

The people of Athens bound themselves but from one only Action; which was,
that no man on pain of death should propound the renewing of the war for the
Island of Salamis; And yet thereby, if Solon had not caused to be given out he
was mad, and afterward in gesture and habit of a madman, and in verse,
propounded it to the People that flocked about him, they had had an enemy
perpetually in readiness, even at the gates of their City; such damage, or
shifts, are all Commonwealths forced to, that have their Power never so little
limited.

In the second place, I observe the Diseases of a Commonwealth, Private
Judgment of Good and Evil.
that proceed from the poison of seditious doctrines; whereof one is, That
every private man is Judge of Good and Evil actions. This is true in the
condition of mere Nature, where there are no Civil Laws; and also under
Civil Government, in such cases as are not determined by the Law. But
otherwise, it is manifest, that the measure of Good and Evil actions, is the
Civil Law; and the Judge the Legislator, who is always Representative of the
Commonwealth. From this false doctrine, men are disposed to debate with
themselves, and dispute the commands of the Commonwealth; and afterward to
obey, or disobey them, as in their private judgments they shall think fit.
Whereby the Commonwealth is distracted and Weakened.

Another doctrine repugnant to Civil Society, is, that whatsoever Erroneous
conscience.
a man does against his Conscience, is Sin; and it depends on the
presumption of making himself judge of Good and Evil. For a man's Conscience,
and his Judgment is the same thing; and as the Judgment, so also the
Conscience may be erroneous. Therefore, thought he that is subject to no Civil
Law, sins in all he does against his Conscience, because he has no other
rule to follow but his own reason; yet it is not so with him that lives in a
Commonwealth; because the Law is the public Conscience, by which he has
already undertaken to be guided. Otherwise in such diversity, as there is of
private Consciences, which are but private opinions, the Commonwealth must
needs be distracted, and no man dare to obey the Sovereign Power, farther than
it shall seem good in his own eyes.

It has been also commonly taught, That Faith and Sanctity, are Pretense of
Inspiration.
not to be attained by Study and Reason, but by supernatural Inspiration, or
Infusion. which granted, I see not why any man should render a reason of his
Faith; or why every Christian should not be also a Prophet; or why any man
should take the Law of his Country, rather than his own Inspiration, for the
rule of his action. And thus we fall again into the fault of taking upon us to
Judge of Good and Evil; or to make Judges of it, such private men as pretend
to be supernaturally Inspired, to the Dissolution of all Civil Government.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by those accidents, which guide us into the
presence of them that speak to us; which accidents are all contrived by God
Almighty; and yet are not supernatural, but only, for the great number of
them that concur to every effect, unobservable. Faith, and Sanctity, are
indeed not very frequent; but yet they are not Miracles, but brought to pass
by education, discipline, correction, and other natural ways, by which God
works them in his elect, at such time as he thinks fit. And these three
opinions, pernicious to Peace and Government, have in this part of the world,
proceeded chiefly from the tongues, and pens of unlearned Divines; who joining
the words of Holy Scripture together, otherwise than is agreeable to reason, do
what they can, to make men think, that Sanctity and Natural Reason, cannot
stand together.

A fourth opinion, repugnant to the nature of a Commonwealth, Subjecting the
Sovereign Power to Civil Laws.
is this, That he that has the Sovereign Power, is subject to the Civil
Laws. It is true, that Sovereigns are all subject to the Laws of Nature;
because such laws be Divine, and cannot by any man, or Commonwealth be
abrogated. But to those Laws which the Sovereign himself, that is, which the
Commonwealth makes, he is not subject. For to be subject to Laws, is to be
subject to the Commonwealth, that is to the Sovereign Representative, that is
to himself; which is not subjection, but freedom from the Laws. Which
error, because it sets the Laws above the Sovereign, sets also a Judge
above him, and a Power to punish him; which is to make a new Sovereign; and
again for the same reason a third, to punish the second; and so continually
without end, to the Confusion, and Dissolution of the Commonwealth.

A Fif^h doctrine, that tends to the Dissolution of a Commonwealth,
Attributing of absolute Propri^ty to (...).
is, That every private man has an absolute Propriety in his Goods; such, as
excludes the Right of the Sovereign. Every man has indeed a Propriety that
excludes the Right of every other Subject: And he has it only from the
Sovereign Power; without the protection whereof, every other man should have
equal Right to the same. But if the Right of the Sovereign also be excluded,
he cannot perform the office they have put him into; which is, to defend them
both from foreign enemies, and from the injuries of one another; and
consequently there is no longer a Commonwealth.

And if the Propriety of Subjects, exclude not the Right of the Sovereign
Representative to their Goods; much less to their offices of Judicature, or
Execution, in which they Represent the Sovereign himself.

There is a Sixth doctrine, plainly, and directly against the essence Dividing
of the Sovereign Power.
of a Commonwealth; and it is this, That the Sovereign Power may be divided.
For what is it to divide the Power of a Commonwealth, but to Dissolve it; for
Powers divided mutually destroy each other. And for these doctrines, men are
chiefly beholding to some of those, that making profession of the Laws,
endeavor to make them depend upon their own learning, and not upon the
Legislative Power.

And as False Doctrine, so also oftentimes the Example of different Imitatio^
of Neighbor Natiou^.
Government in a neighboring Nation, disposes men to alteration of the form
already settled. So the people of the Jews were stirred up to reject God, and
to call upon the Prophet Samuel, for a King after the manner of the Nations: So
also the lesser Cities of Greece, were continually disturbed, with seditions of
the Aristocraticall, and Democraticall factions; one part of almost every
Commonwealth, desiring to imitate the Lacedaemonians; the other, the
Athenians. And I doubt not, but many men, have been contented to see the late
troubles in England, out of an imitation of the Low Countries; supposing there
needed no more to grow rich, than to change, as they had done, the form of
their Government. For the constitution of man's nature, is of it self subject
to desire novelty: When therefore they are provoked to the same, by the
neighborhood also of those that have been enriched by it, it is almost
impossible for them, not to be content with those that solicit them to change;
and love the first beginnings, though they be grieved with the continuance of
disorder; like hot bloods, that having gotten the itch, tear themselves with
their own nails, till they can endure the smart no longer.

And as to Rebellion in particular against Monarchy; one of the Imitation of
the Gre^ks, and Romans.
most frequent causes of it, is the Reading of the books of Policy, and
Histories of the ancient Greeks, and Romans; from which, young men, and all
others that are unprovided of the Antidote of solid Reason, receiving a strong,
and delightful impression, of the great exploits of war, achieved by the
Conductors of their Armies, receive withal a pleasing Idea, of all they have
done besides; and imagine their great prosperity, not to have proceeded from
the aemulation of particular men, but from the virtue of their popular form of
government: Not considering the frequent Seditions, and Civil wars, produced
by the imperfection of their Policy. From the reading, I say, of such books,
men have undertaken to kill their Kings, because the Greek and Latin writers,
in their books, and discourses of Policy, make it lawful, and laudable, for
any man so to do; provided before he do it, he call him Tyrant. For they say
not Regicide, that is, killing of a King, but Tyrannicide, that is, killing of
a Tyrant is lawful. From the same books, they that live under a Monarch
conceive an opinion, that the Subjects in a Popular Commonwealth enjoy
Liberty; but that in a Monarchy they are all Slaves. I say, they that live
under a Monarchy conceive such an opinion; not they that live under a Popular
Government: for they find no such matter. In sum, I cannot imagine, how any
thing can be more prejudicial to a Monarchy, than the allowing of such books
to be publicly read, without present applying such correctives of discreet
Masters, as are fit to take away their Venime: Which Venime I will not doubt to
compare to the biting of a mad Dog, which is a disease the Physicians call
Hydrophobia, or fear of Water. For as he that is so bitten, has a continual
torment of thirst, and yet abhors water; and is in such an estate, as if the
poison endeavored to convert him into a Dog: So when a Monarchy is once
bitten to the quick, by those Democraticall writers, that continually snarle at
that estate; it wants nothing more than a strong Monarch, which nevertheless
out of a certain Tyrannophobia, or fear of being strongly governed, when they
have him, they abhor.

As there have been Doctors, that hold there be three Souls in a man; so there
be also that think there may be more Souls, (that is, more Sovereigns,) than
one, in a Commonwealth; and set up a Supremacy against the Sovereignty, Canons
against Laws; and a Ghostly Authority against the Civil; working on men's
minds, with words and distinctions, that of themselves signify nothing, but
bewray (by their obscurity) that there walks (as some think invisibly)
another Kingdom, as it were a Kingdom of Fayries, in the dark. Now seeing it
is manifest, that the Civil Power, and the Power of the Commonwealth is the
same thing; and that Supremacy, and the Power of making (anons, and granting
Faculties, implies a Commonwealth; it follows, that where one is Sovereign,
another Supreme; where one can make Laws, and another make Canons; there must
needs be two Commonwealths, of one and the same Subjects; which is a Kingdom
divided in it self, and cannot stand. For notwithstanding the insignificant
distinction of Temporal, and Ghostly, they are still two Kingdoms, and every
Subject is subject to two Masters. For seeing the Ghostly Power challenges the
Right to declare what is Sin, it challenges by consequence to declare what
is Law, (Sin being nothing but the transgression of the Law;) and again, the
Civil Power challenging to declare what is Law, every Subject must obey two
Masters, who both will have their Commands be observed as Law; which is
impossible. Or, if it be but one Kingdom, either the Civil, which is the
Power of the Commonwealth, must be subordinate to the Ghostly, and then there
is no Sovereignty but the Ghostly; or the Ghostly must be subordinate to the
Temporal, and then there is no Supremacy but the Temporal. When therefore
these two Powers oppose one another, the Commonwealth cannot but be in great
danger of Civil war, and Dissolution. For the Civil Authority being more
visible, and standing in the cleerer light of natural reason cannot choose but
draw to it in all times a very considerable part of the people: And the
Spiritual, though it stand in the darkness of School distinctions, and hard
words; yet because the fear of Darkness, and Ghosts, is greater than other
fears, cannot want a party sufficient to Trouble, and sometimes to Destroy a
Commonwealth. And this is a Disease which not unfitly may be compared to the
Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness (which the Jews took to be one kind of
possession by Spirits) in the Body Natural. For as in this Disease, there is
an unnatural spirit, or wind in the head that obstructeth the roots of the
Nerves, and moving them violently, takes away the motion which naturally they
should have from the power of the Soul in the Brain, and thereby causes
violent, and irregular motions (which men call Convulsions) in the parts;
insomuch as he that is seized therewith, falls down sometimes into the water,
and sometimes into the fire, as a man deprived of his senses; so also in the
Body Politic, when the Spiritual power, moves the Members of a
Commonwealth, by the terror of punishments, and hope of rewards (which are
the Nerves of it,) otherwise than by the Civil Power (which is the Soul of
the Commonwealth) they ought to be moved; and by strange, and hard words
suffocates their understanding, it must needs thereby Distract the people, and
either Overwhelm the Commonwealth with Oppression, or cast it into the Fire of
a Civil war.

Sometimes also in the merely Civil government, there be more Mixed Government.
than one Soul: As when the Power of levying money, (which is the Nutritive
faculty,) has depended on a general Assembly; the Power of conduct and
command, (which is the Motive faculty,) on one man; and the Power of making
Laws, (which is the Rational faculty,) on the accidental consent, not only
of those two, but also of a third; This endangereth the Commonwealth, sometimes
for want of consent to good Laws; but most often for want of such Nourishment,
as is necessary to Life, and Motion. For although few perceive, that such
government, is not government, but division of the Commonwealth into three
Factions, and call it mixed Monarchy; yet the truth is, that it is not one
independent Commonwealth, but three independent Factions; nor one
Representative Person, but three. In the Kingdom of God, there may be three
Persons independent, without breach of unity in God that Reigns; but where
men Reign, that be subject to diversity of opinions, it cannot be so. And
therefore if the King bear the person of the People, and the general Assembly
bear also the person of the People, and another Assembly bear the person of a
Part of the people, they are not one Person, nor one Sovereign, but three
Persons, and three Sovereigns.

To what Disease in the Natural Body of man, I may exactly compare this
irregularity of a Commonwealth, I know not. But I have seen a man, that had
another man growing out of his side, with an head, arms, breast; and stomach,
of his own: If he had had another man growing out of his other side, the
comparison might then have been exact.

Hitherto I have named such Diseases of a Commonwealth, as Want of Money.
are of the greatest, and most present danger. There be other, not so great;
which nevertheless are not unfit to be observed. As first, the difficulty of
raising Money, for the necessary uses of the Commonwealth; especially in the
approach of war. This difficulty arises from the opinion, that every Subject
has of a Propriety in his lands and goods, exclusive of the Sovereigns Right
to the use of the same. From whence it comes to pass, that the Sovereign
Power, which foreseeth the necessities and dangers of the Commonwealth,
(finding the passage of money to the public Treasure obstructed, by the
tenacity of the people,) whereas it ought to extend it self, to encounter, and
prevent such dangers in their beginnings, contracteth it self as long as it
can, and when it cannot longer, struggles with the people by stratagems of Law,
to obtain little sums, which not sufficing, he is fain at last violently to
open the way for present supply, or Perish; and being put often to these
extremities, at last reduces the people to their due temper; or else the
Commonwealth must perish. Insomuch as we may compare this Distemper very aptly
to an Ague; wherein, the fleshy parts being congealed, or by venomous matter
obstructed; the Veins which by their natural course empty themselves into the
Heart, are not (as they ought to be) supplied from the Arteries, whereby there
succeeds at first a cold contraction, and trembling of the limbs; and
afterward a hot, and strong endeavor of the Heart, to force a passage for the
Blood; and before it can do that, contenteth it self with the small
refreshments of such things as cool for a time, till (if Nature be strong
enough) it break at last the contumacy of the parts obstructed, and dissipateth
the venom into sweat; or (if Nature be too weak) the Patient dies.

Again, there is sometimes in a Commonwealth, a Disease, which Monopolies and
abuses of Publicans.
resembles the Pleurisy; and that is, when the Treasure of the Commonwealth,
flowing out of its due course, is gathered together in too much abundance, in
one, or a few private men, by Monopolies, or by Farms of the Public
Revenues; in the same manner as the Blood in a Pleurisy, getting into the
Membrane of the breast, breeds there an Inflammation, accompanied with a
Fever, and painful stitches.

Also, the Popularity of a potent Subject, (unless the Commonwealth Popular
men.
have very good caution of his fidelity,) is a dangerous Disease; because the
people (which should receive their motion from the Authority of the Sovereign,)
by the flattery, and by the reputation of an ambitious man, are drawn away from
their obedience to the Laws, to follow a man, of whose virtues, and designs
they have no knowledge. And this is commonly of more danger in a Popular
Government, than in a Monarchy, because an Army is of so great force, and
multitude, as it may easily be made believe, they are the People. By this means
it was, that Julius Caesar, who was set up by the People against the Senate,
having won to himself the affections of his Army, made himself Master, both
of Senate and People. And this proceeding of popular, and ambitious men, is
plain Rebellion; and may be resembled to the effects of Witchcraft.

Another infirmity of a Commonwealth, is the immoderate Excessive greatness
of a ^own, multitude of Corporations.
greatness of a Town, when it is able to furnish out of its own Circuit, the
number, and expense of a great Army: As also the great number of Corporations;
which are as it were many lesser Commonwealths in the bowels of a greater,
like worms in the entrayles of a natural man. To which may be added, the
Liberty of Disputing Liberty of disputing against Sovereign Power.
against absolute Power, by pretenders to Political Prudence; which though
bred for the most part in the Lees of the people; yet animated by False
Doctrines, are perpetually meddling with the Fundamental Laws, to the
molestation of the Commonwealth; like the little Worms, which Physicians call
Ascarides.

We may further add, the insatiable appetite, or Bulimia, of enlarging
Dominion; with the incurable Wounds thereby many times received from the enemy;
And the Wens, of ununited conquests, which are many times a burden, and with
less danger lost, than kept; As also the Lethargy of Ease, and Consumption of
Riot and Vain Expense.

Lastly, when in a war (foreign, or intestine,) the enemies get a
Dissolution of the Commonwealth.
final Victory; so as (the forces of the Commonwealth keeping the field no
longer) there is no farther protection of Subjects in their loyaly* then is the
Commonwealth DISSOLVED, and every man at liberty to protect himself by such
courses as his own discretion shall suggest unto him. For the Sovereign, is the
public Soul, giving Life and Motion to the Commonwealth; which expiring,
the Members are governed by it no more, than the Carcass of a man, by his
departed (though Immortal) Soul. For though the Right of a Sovereign Monarch
cannot be extinguished by the act of another; yet the Obligation of the members
may. For he that wants protection, may seek it any where; and when he has it,
is obliged (without fraudulent pretense of having submitted himself out of
fear,) to protect his Protection as long as he is able. But when the Power of
an Assembly is once suppressed, the Right of the same perishes utterly;
because the Assembly it self is extinct; and consequently, there is no
possibility for the Sovereignty to re-enter.

CHAP. XXX. Of the OFFICE of the Sovereign Representative.
THe OFFICE of the Sovereign, (be it a Monarch, or an The Procuration of the
Good of the People.
Assembly,) consists in the end, for which he was trusted with the Sovereign
Power, namely the procuration of the safety of the people; to which he is
obliged by the Law of Nature, and to render an account thereof to God, the
Author of that Law, and to none but him. But by Safety here, is not meant a
bare Preservation, but also all other Contentments of life, which every man by
lawful Industry, without danger, or hurt to the Commonwealth, shall acquire to
himself.

And this is intended should be done, not by care applied to Individualls, By
Instr^ction and Laws.
further than their protection from injuries, when they shall complain; but by
a general Providence, contained in public Instruction, both of Doctrine, and
Example; and in the making, and executing of good Laws, to which individual
persons may apply their own cases.

And because, if the essential Rights of Sovereignty (specified Against the
duty of a Sovereign to relinquish any Essential Right of Sovereignty:
before in the eighteenth Chapter) be taken away, the Commonwealth is thereby
dissolved, and every man returns into the condition, and calamity of a war
with every other man, (which is the greatest evil that can happen in this
life;) it is the Office of the Sovereign, to maintain those Rights entire; and
consequently against his duty, First, to transfer to another, or to lay from
himself any of them. For he that deserteth the Means, deserteth the Ends; and
he deserteth the Means, that being the Sovereign, acknowledges himself
subject to the Civil Laws; and renounceth the Power of Supreme Judicature; or
of making War, or Peace by his own Authority; or of Judging of the
Necessities of the Commonwealth; or of levying Money, and Soldiers, when, and
as much as in his own conscience he shall judge necessary; or of making
Officers, and Ministers both of War, and Peace; or of appointing Teachers,
and examining what Doctrines are conformable, or contrary to the Defense,
Peace, and Good of the people. Secondly, it is against his Or not to se^ the
people taught the grounds of them.
Duty, to let the people be ignorant, or misinformed of the grounds, and
reasons of those his essential Rights; because thereby men are easy to be
seduced, and drawn to resist him, when the Commonwealth shall require their use
and exercise.

And the grounds of these Rights, have the rather need to be diligently, and
truly taught; because they cannot be maintained by any Civil Law, or terror
of legal punishment. For a Civil Law, that shall forbid Rebellion, (and such
is all resistance to the essential Rights of Sovereignty,) is not (as a Civil
Law) any obligation, but by virtue only of the Law of Nature, that forbids
the violation of Faith; which natural obligation if men know not, they cannot
know the Right of any Law the Sovereign makes. And for the Punishment, they
take it but for an act of Hostility; which when they think they have strength
enough, they will endeavor by acts of Hostility, to avoid.

As I have heard some say, that Justice is but a word, without substance;
Objection of those that say there are no Principles of Reason for absolute
Soveraig^ty.
and that whatsoever a man can by force, or art, acquire to himself, (not
only in the condition of war, but also in a Commonwealth,) is his own,
which I have already showed to be false: So there be also that maintain, that
there are no grounds, nor Principles of Reason, to sustain those essential
Rights, which make Sovereignty absolute. For if there were, they would have
been found out in some place, or other; whereas we see, there has not hitherto
been any Commonwealth, where those Rights have been acknowledged, or
challenged. Wherein they argue as ill, as if the Savage people of America,
should deny there were any grounds, or Principles of Reason, so to build a
house, as to last as long as the materials, because they never yet saw any so
well built. Time, and Industry, produce every day new knowledge. And as the art
of well building, is derived from Principles of Reason, observed by industrious
men, that had long studied the nature of materials, and the diverse effects of
figure, and proportion, long after mankind began (though poorly) to build: So,
long time after men have begun to constitute Commonwealths, imperfect, and apt
to relapse into disorder, there may, Principles of Reason be found out, by
industrious meditation, to make their constitution (excepting by external
violence) everlasting And such are those which I have in this discourse set
forth: Which whether they come not into the fight of those that have Power to
make use of them, or be neglected by them, or not, concerns my particular
interest, at this day, very little. But supposing that these of mine are not
such Principles of Reason; yet I am sure they are Principles from Authority of
Scripture; as I shall make it appear, when I shall come to speak of the
Kingdom of God, (administered by Moses,) over the Jews, his peculiar people by
Covenant.

But they say again, that though the Principles be right, yet Common Objection
from the Incapacity of the vulgar.
people are not of capacity enough to be made to understand them. I should be
glad, that the Rich, and Potent Subjects of a Kingdom, or those that are
accounted the most Learned, were no less incapable than they. But all men
know, that the obstructions to this kind of doctrine, proceed not so much from
the difficulty of the matter, as from the interest of them that are to learn.
Potent men, digest hardly any thing that sets up a Power to bridle their
affections; and Learned men, any thing that discovers their errors, and
thereby lesseneth their Authority: whereas the Common-peoples minds, unless
they be tainted with dependence on the Potent, or scribbled over with the
opinions of their Doctors, are like clean paper, fit to receive whatsoever by
Public Authority shall be imprinted in them. Shall whole Nations be brought
to acquiesce in the great Mysteries of Christian Religion, which are above
Reason; and millions of men be made believe, that the same Body may be in
innumerable places, at one and the same time, which is against Reason; and
shall not men be able, by their teaching, and preaching, protected by the Law,
to make that received, which is so consonant to Reason, that any unprejudicated
man, needs no more to learn it, than to hear it? I conclude therefore, that in
the instruction of the people in the Essential Rights (which are the Natural,
and Fundamental Laws) of Sovereignty, there is no difficulty, (whilst a
Sovereign has his Power entire,) but what proceeds from his own fault, or the
fault of those whom he trusts in the administration of the Commonwealth; and
consequently, it is his Duty, to cause them so to be instructed; and not only
his Duty, but his Benefit also, and Security, against the danger that may
arrive to himself in his natural Person, from Rebellion.

And (to descend to particulars) the People are to be taught, First, Subjects
are to be taught, not to affect change of Government:
that they ought not to be in love with any form of Government they see in
their neighbor Nations, more than with their own; nor (whatsoever present
prosperity they behold in Nations that are otherwise governed than they,) to
desire change. For the prosperity of a People ruled by an Aristocraticall, or
Democraticall assembly, comes not from Aristocracy, nor from Democracy, but
from the Obedience, and Concord of the Subjects: nor do the people flourish in
a Monarchy, because one man has the right to rule them, but because they obey
him. Take away in any kind of State, the Obedience, (and consequently the
Concord of the People,) and they shall not only not flourish, but in short
time be dissolved. And they that go about by disobedience, to do no more than
reform the Commonwealth, shall find they do thereby destroy it; like the
foolish daughters of Peleus (in the fable;) which desiring to renew the youth
of their decrepit Father, did by the Counsel of Medea, cut him in pieces, and
boil him, together with strange herbs, but made not of him a new man. This
desire of change, is like the breach of the first of Gods Commandments: For
there God says, Non habebis Does alienos; Thou shall not have the Gods of
other Nations; and in another place concerning Kings, that they are Gods.

Secondly, they are to be taught, that they ought not to be led with Nor adhere
(against the Sovereign) to Popular men*
admiration of the virtue of any of their fellow Subjects, how high soever he
stand, nor how conspicuously soever he shine in the Commonwealth; nor of any
Assembly, (except the Sovereign Assembly,) so as to defer to them any
obedience, or honor, appropriate to the Sovereign only, whom (in their
particular stations) they represent; nor to receive any influence from them,
but such as is conveyed by them from the Sovereign Authority. For that
Sovereign, cannot be imagined to love his People as he ought, that is not
Jealous of them, but suffers them by the flattery of Popular men, to be seduced
from their loyalty, as they have often been, not only secretly, but openly, so
as to proclaim Marriage with them in facie Ecclesiae by Preachers; and by
publishing the same in the open streets: which may fitly be compared to the
violation of the second of the ten Commandments.

Thirdly, in consequence to this, they ought to be informed, how Nor to Dispute
the Sovereign Power:
great a fault it is, to speak evil of the Sovereign Representative, (whether
One man, or an Assembly of men;) or to argue and dispute his Power, or any way
to use his Name irreverently, whereby he may be brought into Contempt with his
People, and their Obedience (in which the safety of the Commonwealth
consists) slackened. Which doctrine the third Commandment by resemblance
points to.

Fourthly, seeing people cannot be taught this, nor when it is taught, And to
have days set apart to learn their Duty:
remember it, nor after one generation past, so much as know in whom the
Sovereign Power is placed, without setting a part from their ordinary labor,
some certain times, in which they may attend those that are appointed to
instruct them; It is necessary that some such times be determined, wherein they
may assemble together, and (after prayers and praises given to God, the
Sovereign of Sovereigns) hear those their Duties told them, and the Positive
Laws, such as generally concern them all, read and expounded, and be put in
mind of the Authority that makes them Laws. To this end had the Jews every
seventh day, a Sabbath, in which the Law was read and expounded; and in the
solemnity whereof they were put in mind, that their King was God; that having
created the world in six days, he rested the seventh day; and by their resting
on it from their labor, that that God was their King, which redeemed them from
their servile, and painful labor in Egypt, and gave them a time, after they
had rejoiced in God, to take joy also in themselves, by lawful recreation. So
that the first Table of the Commandments, is spent all, in setting down the
sum of Gods absolute Power; not only as God, but as King by pact, (in
peculiar) of the Jews; and may therefore give light, to those that have
Sovereign Power conferred on them by the consent of men, to see what doctrine
they Ought to teach their Subjects.

And because the first instruction of Children, depends on the And to Honor
their Parents.
care of their Parents; it is necessary that they should be obedient to them,
whilst they are under their tuition; and not only so, but that also
afterward (as gratitude requires,) they acknowledge the benefit of their
education, by external signs of honor. To which end they are to be taught,
that originally the Father of every man was also his Sovereign Lord, with power
over him of life and death; and that the Fathers of families, when by
instituting a Commonwealth, they resigned that absolute Power, yet it was never
intended, they should lose the honor due unto them for their education. For to
relinquish such right, was not necessary to the Institution of Sovereign Power;
nor would there be any reason, why any man should desire to have children, or
take the care to nourish, and instruct them, if they were afterward to have no
other benefit from them, than from other men. And this accords with the fifth
Commandment.

Again, every Sovereign Ought to cause Justice to be taught, which And to avoid
doing of Injury:
(consisting in taking from no man what is his) is as much asto say, to cause
men to be taught not to deprive their Neighbors, by violence, or fraud, of any
thing which by the Sovereign Authority is theirs. Of things held in propriety,
those that are dearest to a man are his own life, and limbs; and in the next
degree, in most men,) those that concern conjugall affection; and after them
riches and means of living. Therefore the People are to be taught, to abstain
from violence to one another person, by private revenges; from violation of
conjugall honor; and from forcible rapine, and fraudulent surreption of one
another goods. For which purpose also it is necessary they be showed the evil
consequences of false Judgment, by corruption either of Judges or Witnesses,
whereby the distinction of propriety is taken away, and Justice becomes of no
effect: all which things are intimated in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth
Commandments.

Lastly, they are to be taught, that not only the unjust facts, but And to do
all this sincerely from the heart.
the designs and intentions to do them, (though by accident hindered,) are
Injustice; which consists in the pravity of the will, as well as in the
irregularity of the act. And this is the intention of the tenth Commandment,
and the sum of the second Table; which is reduced all to this one
Commandment of mutual Charity, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: as
the sum of the first Table is reduced to the love of God; whom they had then
newly received as their King.

As for the Means, and Conduits, by which the people may receive The use of
U^iversities*
this Instruction, we are to search, by what means so many Opinions, contrary
to the peace of Mankind, upon weak and false Principles, have nevertheless
been so deeply rooted in them. I mean those, which I have in the precedent
Chapter specified: as That men shall Judge of what is lawful and unlawful,
not by the Law it self, but by their own Consciences; that is to say, by their
own private Judgments: That Subjects sin in obeying the Commands of the
Commonwealth, unless they themselves have first judged them to be lawful:
That their Propriety in their riches is such, as to exclude the Dominion, which
the Commonwealth has over the same: That it is lawful for Subjects to kill
such, as they call Tyrants: That the Sovereign Power may be divided, and the
like; which come to be instilled into the People by this means. They whom
necessity, or covetousness keeps attent on their trades, and labor; and
they, on the other side, whom superfluity, or sloth carries after their
sensual pleasures, (which two sorts of men take up the greatest part of
Mankind,) being diverted from the deep meditation, which the learning of
truth, not only in the matter of Natural Justice, but also of all other
Sciences necessarily requires, receive the Notions of their duty, chiefly from
Divines in the Pulpit, and partly from such of their Neighbors, or familiar
acquaintance, as having the Faculty of discoursing readily, and plausibly, seem
wiser and better learned in cases of Law, and Conscience, than themselves. And
the Divines, and such others as make show of Learning, derive their knowledge
from the Universities, and from the Schools of Law, or from the Books, which
by men eminent in those Schools, and Universities have been published. It is
therefore manifest, that the Instruction of the people, depends wholly, on
the right teaching of Youth in the Universities. But are not (may some man say)
the Universities of England learned enough already to do that? or is it you
will undertake to teach the Universities? Hard questions. Yet to the first, I
doubt not to answer; that till toward the later end of Henry the eighth, the
Power of the Pope, was always upheld against the Power of the Commonwealth,
principally by the Universities; and that the doctrines maintained by so many
Preachers, against the Sovereign Power of the King, and by so many Lawyers, and
others, that had their education there, is a sufficient argument, that though
the Universities were not authors of those false doctrines, yet they knew not
how to plant the tru^. For in such a contradiction of Opinions, it is most
certain, that they have not been sufficiently instructed; and it is no wonder,
if they yet retain a relish of that subtle liquor, wherewith they were first
seasoned, against the Civil Authority. But to the later question, it is not
fit, nor needful for me to say either I, or No: for any man that sees what I
am doing, may easily perceive what I think.

The safety of the People, requires further, from him, or them that have the
Sovereign Power, that Justice be equally administered to all degrees of People;
that is, that as well the rich, and mighty, as poor and obscure persons, may be
righted of the injuries done them; so as the great, may have no greater hope of
impunity, when they do violence, dishonor, or any Injury to the meaner sort,
than when one of these, does the like to one of them: For in this consists
Equity; to which, as being a Precept of the Law of Nature, a Sovereign is as
much subject, as any of the meanest of his People. All breaches of the Law, are
offenses against the Commonwealth: but there be some, that are also against
private Persons. Those that concern the Commonwealth only, may without breach
of Equity be pardoned; for every man may pardon what is done against himself,
according to his own diseretion. But an offense against a private man, cannot
in Equity be pardoned, without the consent of him that is injured; or
reasonable satisfaction.

The Inequality of Subjects, proceeds from the Acts of Sovereign Power; and
therefore has no more place in the presence of the Sovereign; that is to say,
in a Court of Justice, then the Inequality between Kings, and their Subjects,
in the presence of the King of Kings. The honor of great Persons, is to be
valued for their beneficence, and the aids they give to men of inferior rank,
or not at all. And the violences, oppressions, and injuries they do, are not
extenuated, but aggravated by the greatness of their persons; because they
have least need to commit them. The consequences of this partiality toward the
great, proceed in this manner. Impunity makes Insolence; Insolence Hatred; and
Hatred, an Endeavor to pull down all oppressing and contumelious greatness,
though with the (...) of the Common wealth.

To Equal Justice, appertains also the Equal imposition of Equal ^xes.
Taxes; the Equality whereof depends not on the Equality of riches, but on
the Equality of the debt, that every man owes to the Commonwealth for his
defense. It is not enough, for a man to labor for the maintenance of his life;
but also to fight, (if need be,) for the securing of his labor. They must
either do as the Jews did after their return from captivity, in re-edifying
the Temple, build with one hand, and hold the Sword in the other; or else they
must hire others to fight for them. For the Impositions that are laid on the
People by the Sovereign Power, are nothing else but the Wages, due to them that
hold the public Sword, to defend private men in the exercise of several
Trades, and Callings. Seeing then the benefit that every one receives thereby,
is the enjoyment of life, which is equally dear to poor, and rich; the debt
which a poor man owes them that defend his life, is the same which a rich man
owes for the defense of his; saving that the rich, who have the service of the
poor, may be debtors not only for their own persons, but for many more. Which
considered, the Equality of Imposition, consists rather in the Equality of
that which is consumed, than of the riches of the persons that consume the
same. For what reasonis there, that he which labors much, and sparing the
fruits of his labor, consumes little, should be more charged, then he that
living idly, gets little, and spends all he gets; seeing the one has no
more protection from the Commonwealth, then the other? But when the
Impositions, are laid upon those things which men consume, every man pays
Equally for what he uses: Nor is the Commonwealth defrauded, by the luxurious
waste of private men.

And whereas many men, by accident unevitable, become unable Public Charity.
to maintain themselves by their labor; they ought not to be left to the
Charity of private persons; but to be provided for, (as far-forth as the
necessities of Nature require, by the Laws of the Commonwealth. For as it is
Uncharitableness in any man, to neglect the impotent; so it is in the
Sovereign of a Commonwealth, to expose them to the hazard of such uncertain
Charity.

But for such as have strong bodies, the case is otherwise: they are (...) of
Idleness.
to be forced to work; and to avoid the excuse of not finding employment, there
ought to be such Laws, as may encourage all manner of Arts; as Navigation,
Agriculture, Fishing, and all manner of Manifacture that requires labor. The
multitude of poor, and yet strong people still increasing, they are to be
transplanted into Countries not sufficiently inhabited: where nevertheless,
they are not to exterminate those they find there; but constrain them to
inhabit closer together, and not range a great deal of ground, to snatch what
they find; but to court each little Plot with art and labor, to give them
their sustenance in due season. And when all the world is overchargd with
Inhabitants, then the last remedy of all is War; which provideth for every
man, by Victory, or Death.

To the care of the Sovereign, belongs the making of Good Go^ Lawe^ wh^t.
Laws. But what is a good Law? By a Good Law, I mean not a. Just Law: for no
Law can be Unjust. The Law is made by the Sovereign Power, and all that is done
by such Power, is warranted, and owned by every one of the people; and that
which every man will have so, no man can say is unjust. It is in the Laws of a
Commonwealth, as in the Laws of Gaming: whatsoever the Gamesters all agree on,
is Injustice to none of them. A good Law is that, which is Needful, for the
Good of the People, and withal Perspicuous.

For the use of Laws, (which are but Rules Authorized) is not to Such as are
Necessary.
bind the People from all Voluntary actions; but to direct and keep them in
such a motion, as not to hurt themselves by their own impetuous desires,
rashness, or indiscretion; as Hedges are set, not to stop Travelers, but to
keep them in the way. And therefore a Law that is not Needful, having not the
true End of a Law, is not Good. A Law may be conceived to be Good, when it is
for the benefit of the Sovereign; though it be not Necessary for the People;
but it is not so. For the good of the Sovereign and People, cannot be
separated. It is a weak Sovereign, that has weak Subjects; and a weak People,
whose Sovereign wants Power to rule them at his will. Unnecessary Laws are
not good Laws; but trapps for Money: which where the right of Sovereign Power
is acknowledged, are superfluous; and where it is not acknowledged,
unsufficient to defend the People.

The Perspicuity, consists not so much in the words of the Law Such as are
Perspicuous.
it self, as in a Declaration of the Causes, and Motives, for which it was
made. That is it, that shows us the meaning of the Legislator; and the meaning
of the Legislator known, the Law is more easily understood by few, than many
words. For all words, are subject to ambiguity; and therefore multiplication of
words in the body of the Law, is multiplication of ambiguity: Besides it seems
to imply, (by too much diligence,) that whosoever can evade the words, is
without the compass of the Law. And this is a cause of many unnecessary
Processes. For when I consider how short were the Laws of ancient times; and
how they grew by degrees still longer; me thinks I see a contention between the
Penners, and Pleaders of the Law; the former seeking to circumscribe the later;
and the later to evade their circumscriptions; and that the Pleaders have got
the Victory. It belongs therefore to the Office of a Legislator, (such as is
in all Commonwealths the Supreme Representative, be it one Man, or an
Assembly,) to make the reason Perspicuous, why the Law was made; and the Body
of the Law it self, as short, but in as proper, and significant terms, as may
be.

It belongs also to the Office of the Sovereign, to make a right Punishments.
application of Punishments, and Rewards. And seeing the end of punishing is
not revenge, and discharge of choler; but correction, either of the offender,
or of others by his example; the severest Punishments are to be inflicted for
those Crimes, that are of most Danger to the Public; such as are those which
proceed from malice to the Government established; those that spring from
contempt of Justice; those that provoke Indignation in the Multitude; and
those, which unpunished, seem Authorized, as when they are committed by Sons,
Servants, or Favorites of men in Authority: For Indignation carries men, not
only against the Actors, and Authors of Injustice; but against all Power that
is likely to protect them; as in the case of Tarquin; when for the Insolent act
of one of his Sons, he was driven out of Rome, and the Monarchy it self
dissolved. But Crimes of Infirmity; such as are those which proceed from great
provocation, from great fear, great need, or from ignorance whether the Fact be
a great Crime, or not, there is place many times for Lenity, without prejudice
to the Commonwealth; and Lenity when there is such place for it, is required
by the Law of Nature. The Punishment of the Leaders, and teachers in a
Commotion; not the poor seduced People, when they are punished, can profit the
Commonwealth by their example. To be severe to the People, is to punish that
ignorance, which may in great part be imputed to the Sovereign, whose fault it
was, they were no better instructed.

In like manner it belongs to the Office, and Duty of the Sovereign, Rewards.
to apply his Rewards always so, as there may arise from them benefit to the
Commonwealth: wherein consists their Use, and End; and is then done, when
they that have well served the Commonwealth, are with as little expense of the
Common Treasure, as is possible, so well recompensed, as others thereby may be
encouraged, both to serve the same as faithfully as they can, and to study the
arts by which they may be enabled to do it better. To buy with Money, or
Preferment, from a Popular ambitious Subject, to be quiet, and desist from
making ill impressions in the minds of the People, has nothing of the nature
of Reward; (which is ordained not for disservice, but for service past;) nor a
sign of Gratitude, but of Fear: nor does it tend to the Benefit, but to the
Damage of the Public. It is a contention with Ambition, like that of
Hercules with the Monster Hydra, which having many heads, for every one that
was vanquished, there grew up three. For in like manner, when the stubbornness
of one Popular man, is overcome with Reward, there arise many more (by the
Example) that do the same Mischief, in hope of like Benefit: and as all forts
of Manifacture, so also Malice increases by being vendible. And though
sometimes a Civil war, may be differred, by such ways as that, yet the
danger grows still the greater, and the Public ruin more assured. It is
therefore against the Duty of the Sovereign, to whom the Public Safety is
committed, to Reward those that aspire to greatness by disturbing the Peace of
their Country, and not rather to oppose the beginnings of such men, with a
little danger, than after a longer time with greater.

Another Business of the Sovereign, is to choose good Counselors;
Counselors.
I mean such, whose advice he is to take in the Government of the
Commonwealth. For this word Counsel, Consilium, corrupted from Considium, is
of a large signification, and comprehends all Assemblies of men that sit
together, not only to deliberate what is to be done hereafter, but also to
judge of Facts past, and of Law for the present. I take it here in the first
sense only: And in this sense, there is no choice of Counsel, neither in a
Democracy, nor Aristocracy; because the persons Counselling are members of the
person Counseled. The choice of Counselors therefore is proper to Monarchy;
In which, the Sovereign that endeavors not to make choice of those, that in
every kind are the most able, discharges not his Office as he ought to do. The
most able Counselors, are they that have least hope of benefit by giving
evil Counsel, and most knowledge of those things that conduce to the Peace,
and Defense of the Commonwealth. It is a hard matter to know who expects
benefit from public troubles; but the signs that guide to a just suspicion,
is the soothing of the people in their unreasonable, or irremediable
grievances, by men whose estates are not sufficient to discharge their
accustomed expenses, and may easily be observed by any one whom it concerns to
know it. But to know, who has most knowledge of the Public affairs, is yet
harder; and they that know them, need them a great deal the less. For to
know, who knows the Rules almost of any Art, is a great degree of the
knowledge of the same Art; because no man can be assured of the truth of
another Rules, but he that is first taught to understand them. But the best
signs of Knowledge of any Art, are, much conversing in it, and constant good
effects of it. Good Counsel comes not by Lot, nor by Inheritance; and
therefore there is no more reason to expect good Advice from the rich, or
noble, in matter of State, than in delineating the dimensions of a fortress;
unless we shall think there needs no method in the study of the Politiques,
(as there does in the study of Geometry,) but only to be lookers on; which is
not so. For the Politiques is the harder study of the two. Whereas in these
parts of Europe, it has been taken for a Right of certain persons, to have
place in the highest Council of State by Inheritance; it is derived from the
Conquests of the ancient Germans; wherein many absolute Lords joining together
to conquer other Nations, would not enter in to the Confederacy, without such
Privileges, as might be marks of difference in time following, between their
Posterity, and the Posterity of their Subjects; which Privileges being
inconsistent with the Sovereign Power, by the favor of the Sovereign, they may
seem to keep; but contending for them as their Right, they must needs by
degrees let them go, and have at last no further honor, then adhaereth
naturally to their abilities.

And how able soever be the Counselors in any affair, the benefit of their
Counsel is greater, when they give every one his Advice, and the reasons of it
apart, than when they do it in an Assembly, by way of Orations; and when they
have praemeditated, than when they speak on the sudden; both because they have
more time, to survey the consequences of action; and are less subject to be
carried away to contradiction, through Envy, Emulation, or other Passions
arising from the difference of opinion.

The best Counsel* in those things that concern not other Nations, but only
the ease, and benefit the Subjects may enjoy, by Laws that look only inward,
is to be taken from the general informations, and complaints of the people of
each Province, who are best acquainted with their own wants, and ought
therefore, when they demand nothing in derogation of the essential Rights of
Sovereignty, to be diligently taken notice of. For without those Essential
Rights, (as I have often before said,) the Commonwealth cannot at all subsist.

A Commander of an Army in chief, if he be not Popular, shall Commanders.
not be beloved, nor feared as he ought to be by his Army; and consequently
cannot perform that office with good success. He must therefore be
Industrious, Valiant, Affable, Liberal and Fortunate, that he may gain an
opinion both of sufficiency, and of loving his Soldiers. This is Popularity,
and breeds in the Soldiers both desire, and courage, to recommend themselves
to his favor; and protects the severity of the General, in punishing (when
need is) the Mutinous, or negligent Soldiers. But this love of Soldiers, (if
caution be not given of the Commanders fidelity,) is a dangerous thing to
Sovereign Power; especially when it it is in the hands of an Assembly not
popular. It belongs therefore to the safety of the People, both that they be
good Conductors, and faithful Subjects, to whom the Sovereign Commits his
Armies.

But when the Sovereign himself is Popular; that is, reverenced and beloved of
his People, there is no danger at all from the Popularity of a Subject. For
Soldiers are never so generally unjust, as to side with their Captain; though
they love him, against their Sovereign, when they love not only his Person,
but also his Cause. And therefore those, who by violence have at any time
suppressed the Power of their lawful Sovereign, before they could settle
themselves in his place, have been always put to the trouble of contriving
their Titles, to save the People from the shame of receiving them. To have a
known Right to Sovereign Power, is so popular a quality, as he that has it
needs no more, for his own part, to turn the hearts of his Subjects to him, but
that they see him able absolutely to govern his own Family: Nor, on the part of
his enemies, but a disbanding of their Armies. For the greatest and most active
part of Mankind, has never hitherto been well contented with the present.

Concerning the Offices of one Sovereign to another, which are comprehended in
that Law, which is commonly called the Law of Nations, I need not say any thing
in this place; because the Law of Nations, and the Law of Nature, is the same
thing. And every Sovereign has the same Right, in procuring the safety of his
People, that any particular man can have, in procuring the safety of his own
Body. And the same Law, that di^tateth to men that have no Civil Government,
what they ought to do, and what to avoid in regard of one another, dictateth
the same to Commonwealths, that is, to the Consciences of Sovereign Princes,
and Sovereign Assemblies; there being no Court of Natural Justice, but in the
Conscience only; where not Man, but God reigns; whose Laws, (such of them
as oblige all Mankind,) in respect of God, as he is the Author of Nature, are
Natural; and in respect of the same God, as he is King of Kings, are Laws.
But of the Kingdom of God, as King of Kings, and as King also of a peculiar
People, I shall speak in the rest of this discourse.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the KINGDOM OF GOD BY NATURE.
THat the condition of mere Nature, that is to say, of absolute The scope of
the following Chapters.
Liberty, such as is theirs, that neither are Sovereigns, nor Subjects, is
Anarchy, and the condition of War: That the Praecepts, by which men are
guided to avoid that condition, are the Laws of Nature: That a Commonwealth,
without Sovereign Power, is but a word, without substance, and cannot stand:
That Subjects owe to Sovereigns, simple Obedience, in all things, wherein their
obedience is not repugnant to the Laws of God, I have sufficiently proved, in
that which I have already written. There wants only, for the entire knowledge
of Civil duty, to know what are those Laws of God. For without that, a man
knows not, when he is commanded any thing by the Civil Power, whether it be
contrary to the ^aw of God, or not: and so, either by too much civil
obedience, offends the Divine Majesty, or through fear of offending God,
transgresses the commandments of the Commonwealth. To avoid both these Rocks,
it is necessary to know what are the Laws Divine. And seeing the knowledge of
all Law, depends on the knowledge of the Sovereign Power; I shall say
something in that which follows, of the KINGDOM OF GOD.

God is King, let the Earth rejoice, says the Psalmist. And again, Psalm. 96 1.
God is King though the Nations be angry; and he that sits on the Psalm. 98.
1.
Cherubins, though the earth be moved. Whether men will or not, Who are
subjects in the kingdom of God.
they must be subject always to the Divine Power. By denying the Existence, or
Providence of God, men may shake off their Ease, but not their Yoke. But to
call this Power of God, which extends it self not only to Man, but also to
Beasts, and Plants, and Bodies inanimate, by the name of Kingdom, is but a
metaphorical use of the word. For he only is properly said to Reign, that
governs his Subjects, by his Word, and by promise of Rewards to those that obey
it, and by threatening them with Punishment that obey it not. Subjects therefore
in the Kingdom of God, are not Bodies Inanimate, nor creatures Irrational;
because they understand no Precepts as his: Nor Atheists; nor they that believe
not that God has any care of the actions of mankind; because they acknowledge
no Word for his, nor have hope of his rewards, or fear of his threatenings. They
therefore that believe there is a God that goeverneth the world, and has given
Praecepts, and propounded Rewards, and Punishments to Mankind, are Gods
Subjects; all the rest, are to be understood as Enemies.

To rule by Words, requires that such Words be manifestly made A Threefold Word
of God, Reason, Revelation, Proph^y.
known; for else they are no Laws: For to the nature of Laws belongs a
sufficient, and clear Promulgation, such as may take away the excuse of
Ignorance; which in the Laws of men is but of one only kind, and that is,
Proclamation, or Promulgation by the voice of man. But God declares his Laws
three ways; by the Dictates of Natural Reason, by Revelation, and by the
Voice of some man, to whom by the operation of Miracles, he procures credit
with the rest. From hence there arises a triple Word of God, Rational,
Sensible, and Prophetique: to which Correspondeth a triple Hearing; Right
Reason, Sense Supernatural, and Faith. As for Sense Supernatural, which
consists in Revelation, or Inspiration, there have not been any Universal
Laws so given, because God speaks not in that manner, but to particular
persons, and to diverse men diverse things.

From the difference between the other two kinds of Gods Word, A twofold
Kingdom of God, Natural and Prophetique.
Rational, and Prophetique, there may be attributed to God, a twofold
Kingdom, Natural, and Prophetique: Natural, wherein he governs as many of
Mankind as acknowledge his Providence, by the natural Dictates of Right
Reason; And Prophetique, wherein having chosen out one peculiar Nation (the
Jews) for his Subjects, he governed them, and none but them, not only by
natural Reason, but by Positive Laws, which he gave them by the mouths of his
holy Prophets. Of the Natural Kingdom of God I intend to speak in this
Chapter.

The Right of Nature, whereby God reigns over men, and punishes The Right of
Gods Sovereignty is derived from his Omnipotence.
those that break his Laws, is to be derived, not from his Creating them, as
if he required obedience, as of Gratitude for his benefits; but from his
Irresistible Power. I have formerly shown, how the Sovereign Right arises from
Pact: To show how the same Right may arise from Nature, requires no more, but
to show in what case it is never taken away. Seeing all men by Nature had Right
to All things, they had Right every one to reign over all the rest. But
because this Right could not be obtained by force, it concerned the safety of
every one, laying by that Right, to set up men (with Sovereign Authority) by
common consent, to rule and defend them: whereas if there had been any man of
Power Irresistible; there had been no reason, why he should not by that Power
have ruled, and defended both himself, and them, according to his own
discretion. To those therefore whose Power is irresistible, the dominion of all
men adhaereth naturally by their excellence of Power; and consequently it is
from that Power, that the Kingdom over men, and the Right of afflicting men at
his pleasure, belongs Naturally to God Almighty; not as Creator, and
Gracious; but as Omnipotent. And though Punishment be due for Sin only,
because by that word is understood Affliction for Sin; yet the Right of
Afflicting, is not always derived from men's Sin, but from Gods Power.

This question, Why Evil men often Prosper, and Good men suffer Sin not the
cause of all Affliction.
Adversity, has been much disputed by the Ancient, and is the same with this of
ours, by what Right God dispenses the Prosperities and Adversities of this
life; and is of that difficulty, as it has shaken the faith, not only of the
Vulgar, but of Philosophers, and which is more, of the Saints, concerning the
Divine Providence. How Good Psalm. 72. ver. 1, 2, 3.
(says David) is the God of Israel to those that are Upright in Heart; and yet
my feet were almost gone, my treadings had well-nigh slipped; for I was grieved
at the Wicked, when I saw the Ungodly in such Prosperity. And Job, how
earnestly does he expostulate with God, for the many Afflictions he suffered,
notwithstanding his Righteousness? This question in the case of Job, is
decided by God himself, not by arguments derived from Job's Sin, but his own
Power. For whereas the friends of Job drew their arguments from his Affliction
to his Sin, and he defended himself by the conscience of his Innocence, God
himself takes up the matter, and having justified the Affliction by arguments
drawn from his Power, such as this, Where Job 38. v. 4.
wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth, and the like, both
approved Job's Innocence, and reproved the Erroneous doctrine of his friends.
Conformable to this doctrine is the sentence of our Savior, concerning the man
that was born Blind, in these words, Neither has this man sinned, nor his
fathers; but that the works of God might be made manifest in him. And though it
be said, That Death entered into the world by sin, (by which is meant that if
Adam had never sinned, he had never dyed, that is, never suffered any
separation of his soul from his body,) it follows not thence, that God could
not justly have Afflicted him, though he had not Sinned, as well as he
afflicts other living creatures, that cannot sin.

Having spoken of the Right of Gods Sovereignty, as grounded Divine Laws.
only on Nature; we are to consider next, what are the Divine Laws, or
Dictates of Natural Reason; which Laws concern either the natural Duties of
one man to another, or the Honor naturally due to our Divine Sovereign. The
first are the same Laws of Nature, of which I have spoken already in the 14.
and 15. Chapters of this Treatise; namely, Equity, Justice, Mercy, Humility,
and the rest of the Moral Virtues. It remains therefore that we consider,
what Praecepts are dictated to men, by their Natural Reason only, without
other word of God, touching the Honor and Worship of the Divine Majesty.

Honor consists in the inward thought, and opinion of the Honor and Worship
what.
Power, and Goodness of another: and therefore to Honor God, is to think as
Highly of his Power and Goodness, as is possible. And of that opinion, the
external signs appearing in the Words, and Actions of men, are called
Worship; which is one part of that which the Latins understand by the word
Cultus: For Cultus signifies properly, and constantly, that labor which a man
bestows on any thing, with a purpose to make benefit by it. Now those things
whereof we make benefit, are either subject to us, and the profit they yield,
follows the labor we bestow upon them, as a natural effect; or they are not
subject to us, but answer our labor, according to their own Wills. In the
first sense the labor bestowed on the Earth, is called Culture; and the
education of Children a Culture of their minds. In the second sense, where
men's wills are to be wrought to our purpose, not by Force, but by Compleasance,
it signifies as much as Courting, that is, a winning of favor by good
offices; as by praises, by acknowledging their Power, and by whatsoever is
pleasing to them from whom we look for any benefit. And this is properly
Worship: in which sense Publicola, is understood for a Worshipper of the
People; and Cultus Dei, for the Worship of God.

From internal Honor, consisting in the opinion of Power and Several signs
of Honor.
Goodness, arise three Passions; Love, which has reference to Goodness; and
Hope, and Fear, that relate to Power: And three parts of external worship;
Praise, Magnifying, and Blessing: The subject of Praise, being Goodness; the
subject of Magnifying, and Blessing, being Power, and the effect thereof
Felicity. Praise, and Magnifying are signified both by Words, and Actions: By
Words, when we say a man is Good, or Great: By Actions, when we thank him for
his Bounty, and obey his Power. The opinion of the Happiness of another, can
only be expressed by words.

There be some signs of Honor, (both in Attributes and Actions,) Worship
Natural and Arbitrary.
that be Naturally so; as amongst Attributes, Good, Just, Liberal, and the
like; and amongst Actions, Prayers, Thanks, and Obedience. Others are so by
Institution, or Custom of men; and in some times and places are Honorable; in
others Dishonorable; in others Indifferent: such as are the Gestures in
Salutation, Prayer, and Thanksgiving, in different times and places,
differently used. The former is Natural; the later Arbitrary Worship.

And of Arbitrary Worship, there be two differences: For Worship Commanded and
Free.
sometimes it is a Commanded, sometimes Voluntary Worship: Commanded, when it
is such as he requires, who is Worshipped: Free, when it is such as the
Worshipper thinks fit. When it is Commanded, not the words, or gesture, but the
obedience is the Worship. But when Free, the Worship consists in the opinion of
the beholders: for if to them the words, or actions by which we intend honor,
seem ridiculous, and tending to contumely; they are no Worship; because no
signs of Honor; and no signs of Honor; because a sign is not a sign to
him that gives it, but to him to whom it is made; that is, to the spectator.

Again, there is a Public, and a Private Worship. Public, is Worship
Public and Private.
the Worship that a Commonwealth performs, as one Person. Private, is that
which a Private person exhibiteth. Public, in respect of the whole
Commonwealth, is Free; but in respect of Particular men it is not so. Private,
is in secret Free; but in the sight of the multitude, it is never without some
Restraint, either from the Laws, or from the Opinion of men; which is contrary
to the nature of Liberty.

The End of Worship amongst men, is Power. For where a man The End of Worship.
sees another worshipped, he supposes him powerful, and is the readier to
obey him; which makes his Power greater. But God has no Ends: the worship we do
him, proceeds from our duty, and is directed according to our capacity, by
those rules of Honor, that Reason dictateth to be done by the weak to the more
potent men, in hope of benefit, for fear of damage, or in thankfulness for
good already received from them.

That we may know what worship of God is taught us by the light Attributes of
Divine Honor.
of Nature, I will begin with his Attributes. Where, First, it is manifest, we
ought to attribute to him Existence: For no man can have the will to honor
that, which he thinks not to have any Being.

Secondly, that those Philosophers, who said the World, or the Soul of the
World was God, spoke unworthily of him; and denied his Existence: For by God,
is understood the cause of the World; and to say the World is God, is to say
there is no cause of it, that is, no God.

Thirdly, to say the World was not Created, but Eternal, (seeing that which is
Eternal has no cause,) is to deny there is a God.

Fourthly, that they who attributing (as they think) Ease to God, take from him
the care of Mankind; take from him his Honor: for it takes away men's love,
and fear of him; which is the root of Honor.

Fifthly, in those things that signify Greatness, and Power; to say he is
Finite, is not to Honor him: For it is not a sign of the Will to Honor God,
to attribute to him less than we can; and Finite, is less than we can;
because to Finite, it is easy to add more.

Therefore to attribute Figure to him, is not Honor; for all Figure is Finite:

Nor to say we conceive, and imagine, or have an Idea of him, in our mind: for
whatsoever we conceive is Finite:

Nor to attribute to him Parts, or Totality; which are the Attributes only of
things Finite:

Nor to say he is in this, or that Place: for whatsoever is in Place, is
bounded, and Finite:

Nor that he is Moved, or Rests: for both these Attributes ascribe to him
Place:

Nor that there be more Gods than one; because it implies them all Finite: for
there cannot be more than one Infinite:

Nor to ascribe to him (unless Metaphorically, meaning not the Passion, but
the Effect) Passions that partake of Grief; as Repentance, Anger Mercy: or of
Want; as Appetite, Hope, Desire; or of any Passive faculty: For Passion, is
Power limited by somewhat else.

And therefore when we ascribe to God a Will, it is not to be understood, as
that of Man, for a Rational Appetite; but as the Power, by which he effects
every thing.

Likewise when we attribute to him Sight, and other acts of Sense; as also
Knowledge, and Understanding; which in us is nothing else, but a tumult of the
mind, raised by external things that press the organicall parts of man's body:
For there is no such thing in God; and being things that depend on natural
causes, cannot be attributed to him.

He that will attribute to God, nothing but what is warranted by natural
Reason, must either use such Negative Attributes, as Infinite, Eternal,
Incomprehensible; or Superlatives, as Most High, most Great, and the like; or
Indefinite, as Good, Just, Holy, Creator; and in such sense as if he meant not
to declare what he is, (for that were to circumscribe him within the limits of
our Fancy,) but how much we admire him, and how ready we would be to obey him;
which is a sign of Humility, and of a Will to honor him as much as we can:
For there is but one Name to signify our Conception of his Nature, and that
is, I AM: and but one Name of his Relation to us, and that is God; in which is
contained Father, King, and Lord.

Concerning the actions of Divine Worship, it is a most general Actions that
are signs* of Divine Honor.
Precept of Reason, that they be signs of the Intention to Honor God; such as
are, First, Prayers: For not the Carvers, when they made Images, were thought
to make them Gods; but the People that Prayed to them.

Secondly, Thanksgiving; which differs from Prayer in Divine Worship, no
otherwise, than that Prayers precede, and Thanks succeed the benefit; the end
both of the one, and the other, being to acknowledge God, for Author of all
benefits, as well past, as future.

Thirdly, Gifts; that is to say, Sacrifices, and Oblations, (if they be of the
best,) are signs of Honor: for they are Thanksgivings.

Fourthly, Not to swear by any but God, is naturally a sign of Honor: for it
is a confession that God only knows the heart; and that no man's wit, or
strength can protect a man against Gods vengeance on the perjured.

Fifthly, it is a part of Rational Worship, to speak Considerately of God; for
it argues a Fear of him, and Fear, is a confession of his Power. Hence
follows, That the name of God is not to be used rashly, and to no purpose;
for that is as much, as in Vain: And it is to no purpose, unless it be by way
of Oath, and by order of the Commonwealth, to make Judgments certain; or
between Commonwealths, to avoid War. And that disputing of Gods nature is
contrary to his Honor: For it is supposed, that in this natural Kingdom of
God, there is no other way to know any thing, but by natural Reason; that is,
from the Principles of natural Science; which are so far from teaching us
any thing of Gods nature, as they cannot teach us our own nature, nor the
nature of the smallest creature living. And therefore, when men out of the
Principles of natural Reason, dispute of the Attributes of God, they but
dishonor him: For in the Attributes which we give to God, we are not to
consider the signification of Philosophical Truth; but the signification of
Pious Intention, to do him the greatest Honor we are able. From the want of
which consideration, have proceeded the volumes of disputation about the Nature
of God, that tend not to his Honor, but to the honor of our own wits, and
learning; and are nothing else but inconsiderate, and vain abuses of his Sacred
Name.

Sixthly, in Prayers, Thanksgiving, Offerings and Sacrifices, it is a Dictate
of natural Reason, that they be every one in his kind the best, and most
significant of Honor. As for example, that Prayers, and Thanksgiving, be made
in Words and Phrases, not sudden, nor light, nor Plebeian; but beautiful, and
well composed; For else we do not God as much honor as we can. And therefore
the Heathens did absurdly, to worship Images for Gods: But their doing it in
Verse, and with Music, both of Voice, and Instruments, was reasonable. Also
that the Beasts they offered in sacrifice, and the Gifts they offered, and
their actions in Worshipping, were full of submission, and commemorative of
benefits received, was according to reason, as proceeding from an intention to
honor him.

Seventhly, Reason directs not only to worship God in Secret; but also, and
especially, in Public, and in the sight of men: For without that, (that which
in honor is most acceptable) the procuring others to honor him, is lost.

Lastly, Obedience to his Laws (that is, in this case to the Laws of Nature,)
is the greatest worship of all. For as Obedience is more acceptable to God than
Sacrifice; so also to set light by his Commandments, is the greatest of all
contumelies. And these are the Laws of that Divine Worship, which natural
Reason dictateth to private men.

But seeing a Commonwealth is but one Person, it ought also to Public
Worship consists in Uniformity.
exhibit to God but one Worship; which then it does, when it commands it to
be exhibited by Private men, Publicly. And this is Public Worship; the
property whereof, is to be Uniforme: For those actions that are done
differently, by different men, cannot be said to be a Public Worship. And
therefore, where many sorts of Worship be allowed, proceeding from the
different Religions of Private men, it cannot be said there is any Public
Worship, nor that the Commonwealth is of any Religion at all.

And because words (and consequently the Attributes of God) All Attributes
depend on the Laws Civil.
have their signification by agreement, and constitution of men; those
Attributes are to be held significative of Honor, that men intend shall so be;
and whatsoever may be done by the wills of particular men, where there is no
Law but Reason, may be done by the will of the Commonwealth, by Laws Civil.
And because a Commonwealth has no Will, nor makes no Laws, but those that are
made by the Will of him, or them that have the Sovereign Power; it follows,
that those Attributes which the Sovereign ordains, in the Worship of God, for
signs of Honor, ought to be taken and used for such, by private men in their
public Worship.

But because not all Actions are signs by Constitution; but some are Not all
Actions.
Naturally signs of Honor, others of Contumely, these later (which are those
that men are ashamed to do in the sight of them they reverence) cannot be made
by humane power a part of Divine worship; nor the former (such as are decent,
modest, humble Behavior) ever be separated from it. But whereas there be an
infinite number of Actions, and Gestures, of an indifferent nature; such of
them as the Commonwealth shall ordain to be Publicly and Universally in use,
as signs of Honor, and part of Gods Worship, are to be taken and used for
such by the Subjects. And that which is said in the Scripture, It is better to
obey God than men, has place in the kingdom of God by Pact, and not by Nature.

Having thus briefly spoken of the Natural Kingdom of God, and Natural
Punishments.
his Natural Laws, I will add only to this Chapter a short declaration of
his Natural Punishments. There is no action of man in this life, that is not
the beginning of so long a chayn of Consequences, as no humane Providence, is
high enough, to give a man a prospect to the end. And in this Chayn, there are
linked together both pleasing and unpleasing events; in such manner, as he that
will do any thing for his pleasure, must engage himself to suffer all the
pains annexed to it; and these pains, are the Natural Punishments of those
actions, which are the beginning of more Harm than Good. And hereby it comes
to pass, that Intemperance, is naturally punished with Diseases; Rashness,
with Mischances; Injustice, with the Violence of Enemies; Pride, with Ruin;
Cowardice, with Oppression; Negligent government of Princes, with Rebellion;
and Rebellion, with Slaughter. For seeing Punishments are consequent to the
breach of Laws; Natural Punishments must be naturally consequent to the
breach of the Laws of Nature; and therefore follow them as their natural, not
arbitrary effects.

And thus far concerning the Constitution, Nature, and Right of The
Conclusion of the Second Part.
Sovereigns; and concerning the Duty of Subjects, derived from the Principles
of Natural Reason. And now, considering how different this Doctrine is, from
the Practice of the greatest part of the world, especially of these Western
parts, that have received their Moral learning from Rome, and Athens; and how
much depth of Moral Philosophy is required, in them that have the
Administration of the Sovereign Power; I am at the point of believing this my
labor, as useless, as the Commonwealth of Plato; For he also is of opinion
that it is impossible for the disorders of State, and change of Governments by
Civil War, ever to be taken away, till Sovereigns be Philosophers. But when
I consider again, that the Science of Natural Justice, is the only Science
necessary for Sovereigns, and their principal Ministers; and that they need
not be charged with the Sciences Mathematical, (as by Plato they are,)
further, than by good Laws to encourage men to the study of them; and that
neither Plato, nor any other Philosopher hitherto, has put into order, and
sufficiently, or probably proved all the Theoremes of Moral doctrine, that men
may learn thereby, both how to govern, and how to obey; I recover some hope,
that one time or other, this writing of mine, may fall into the hands of a
Sovereign, who will consider it himself, (for it is short, and I think clear,)
without the help of any interessed, or envious Interpreter; and by the exercise
of entire Sovereignty, in protecting the Public teaching of it, convert this
Truth of Speculation, into the Utility of Practice.

OF A CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the Principles of CHRISTIAN POLITIQUES.
I Have derived the Rights of Sovereign The Word of God delivered by Prophets
is the mainprinciple of Christian Politiques.
Power, and the duty of Subjects hitherto, from the Principles of Nature only;
such as Experience has found true, or Consent (concerning the use of words) has
made so; that is to say, from the nature of Men, known to us by Experience, and
from Definitions (of such words as are Essential to all Political reasoning)
universally agreed on. But in that I am next to handle, which is the Nature and
Rights of a CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH, whereof there depends much upon
Supernatural Revelations of the Will of God; the ground of my Discourse must
be, not only the Natural Word of God, but also the Prophetical.

Nevertheless, we are not to renounce our Senses, and Experience; Yet is not
natural Reason to be renounced.
nor (that which is the undoubted Word of God) our natural Reason. For they
are the talents which he has put into our hands to negotiate, till the coming
again of our blessed Savior; and therefore not to be folded up in the Napkin
of an Implicit aith, but employed in the purchase of Justice, Peace, and true
Religion. For though there be many things in Gods Word above Reason; that it is
to say, which cannot by natural reason be either demonstrated, or confuted;
yet there is nothing contrary to it; but when it seems so, the fault is
either in our unskilful Interpretation, or erroneous Ratiocination.

Therefore, when any thing therein written is too hard for our examination, we
are bidden to captivate our understanding to the Words; and not to labor in
sifting out a Philosophical truth by Logic, of such mysteries as are not
comprehensible, nor fall under any rule of natural science. For it is with the
mysteries of our Religion, as with wholesome pills for the sick, which swallowed
whole, have the virtue to cure; but chewed, are for the most part cast up again
without effect.

But by the Captivity of our Understanding, is not meant a Submission What it
is to captivate the Understanding.
of the Intellectual faculty, to the Opinion of any other man; but of the Will
to Obedience, where obedience is due. For Sense, Memory, Understanding, Reason,
and Opinion are not in our power to change; but always, and necessarily such,
as the things we see, hear, and consider suggest unto us; and therefore are not
effects of our Will, but our Will of them. We then Captivate our Understanding
and Reason, when we forbear contradiction; when we so speak, as (by lawful
Authority) we are commanded; and when we live accordingly; which in sum, is
Trust, and Faith reposed in him that speaks, though the mind be incapable of
any Notion at all from the words spoken.

When God speaks to man, it must be either immediately; or How God speaks
to men.
by mediation of another man, to whom he had formerly spoken by himself
immediately. How God speaks to a man immediately, may be understood by those
well enough, to whom he has so spoken; but how the same should be understood
by another, is hard, if not impossible to know. For if a man pretend to me,
that God has spoken to him supernaturally, and immediately, and I make doubt
of it, I cannot easily perceive what argument he can produce, to oblige me to
believe it. It is true, that if he be my Sovereign, he may oblige me to
obedience, so, as not by act or word to declare I believe him not; but not to
think any otherwise then my reason persuades me. But if one that has not such
authority over me, shall pretend the same, there is nothing that exacteth
either belief, or obedience.

For to say that God has spoken to him in the Holy Scripture, is not to say
God has spoken to him immediately, but by mediation of the Prophets, or of the
Apostles, or of the Church, in such manner as he speaks to all other Christian
men. To say he has spoken to him in a Dream, is no more then to say he dreamed
that God spoke to him; which is not of force to win belief from any man, that
knows dreams are for the most part natural, and may proceed from former
thoughts; and such dreams as that, from self conceit, and foolish arrogance,
and false opinion of a man's own godliness, or other virtue, by which he thinks
he has merited the favor of extraordinary Revelation. To say he has seen a
Vision, or heard a Voice, is to say, that he has dreamed between sleeping and
waking: for in such manner a man does many times naturally take his dream for a
vision, as not having well observed his own slumbering. To say he speaks by
supernatural Inspiration, is to say he finds an ardent desire to speak, or
some strong opinion of himself, for which he can allege no natural and
sufficient reason. So that though God Almighty can speak to a man, by Dreams,
Visions, Voice, and Inspiration; yet he obliges no man to believe he has so
done to him that pretends it; who (being a man) may err, and (which is more)
may lie. By what marks Prophets are known.


How then can he, to whom God has never revealed his Will immediately (saving
by the way of natural reason) know when he is to obey, or not to obey his Word,
delivered by him, that says he is a Prophet? Of 400 Prophets, of whom the K.
of Israel asked counsel, concerning 1 Kings 22.
the war he made against Ramoth Gilead, only Micaiah was a true 1 Kings 13.
one. The Prophet that was sent to prophecy against the Altar set up by
Jeroboam, though a true Prophet, and that by two miracles done in his presence
appears to be a Prophet sent from God, was yet deceived by another old Prophet,
that persuaded him as from the mouth of God, to eat and drink with him. If one
Prophet deceive another, what certainty is there of knowing the will of God, by
other way than that of Reason? To which I answer out of the Holy Scripture,
that there be two marks, by which together, not asunder, a true Prophet is to
be known. One is the doing of miracles; the other is the not teaching any other
Religion than that which is already established. Asunder (I say) neither of
these is sufficient. If Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
a Prophet rise amongst you, or a Dreamer of dreams, and shall pretend the
doing of amiracle, and the miracle come to pass; if he say, Let us follow
strange Gods, which thou have not known* thou shall not hearken to him, etc.
But that Prophet and Dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because be has
spoken to you to Revolt from the Lord your God. In which words two things are
to be observed; First, that God will not have miracles alone serve for
arguments, to approve the Prophets calling; but (as it is in the third verse)
for an experiment of the constancy of our adherence to himself. For the works
of the Egyptian Sorcerers, though not so great as those of Moses, yet were
great miracles. Secondly, that how great soever the miracle be, yet if it tend
to stir up revolt against the King, or him that governs by the Kings
authority, he that does such miracle, is not to be considered otherwise than as
sent to make trial of their allegiance. For these words, rev^lt from the Lord
your God, are in this place equivalent to revolt from your King. For they had
made God their King by pact at the foot of Mount Sinai; who ruled them by Moses
only; for he only spoke with God, and from time to time declared Gods
Commandments to the people. In like manner, after our Savior Christ had made
his Disciples acknowledge him for the Messiah, (that is to say, for Gods
anointed, whom the nation of the Jews daily expected for their King, but
refused when he came,) he omitted not to advertise them of the danger of
miracles. There shall arise (says he) false Christ's, and Mat. 24. 24.
false Prophets, and shall do great wonders and miracles, even to the seducing
(if it were possible) of the very Elect. By which it appears, that false
Prophets may have the power of miracles; yet are we not Gal. 1. 8.
to take their doctrine for Gods Word. St. Paul says further to the Galatians,
that if himself, or an Angel from heaven preach another Gospel to them, than
he had preached, let him be accursed.. That Gospel was, that Christ was King;
so that all preaching against the power of the King received, in consequence to
these words, is by St. Paul accursed. For his speech is addressed to those, who
by his preaching had already received Jesus for the Christ, that is to say, for
King The marks of a Prophet in the old law, Miracles, and Doctrine conformable
to the law.
of the Jews.

And as Miracles, without preaching that Doctrine which God has established;
so preaching the true Doctrine, without the doing of miracles is an
unsufficient argument of immediate Revelation. For if a man that teaches not
false Doctrine, should pretend to be a Prophet without showing any Miracle, he
is never the more to be regarded for his pretense, as is evident by Deuteronomy. 18.
v. 21, 22. If thou say in thy heart, How shall we know that the Word (of the
Prophet) is not that which the Lord has spoken. When the Prophet shall have
spoken in the name of the Lord, that which shall not come to pass, that is the
word which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it out of the
pride of his own heart, fear him not. But a man may here again ask, When the
Prophet has foretold a thing, how shall we know whether it will come to pass
or not? For he may foretell it as a thing to arrive after a certain long time,
longer then the time of man's life; or indefinitely, that it will come to pass
one time or other: in which case this mark of a Prophet is unusefull; and
therefore the miracles that oblige us to believe a Prophet, ought to be
confirmed by an immediate, or a not long deferred event. So that it is
manifest, that the teaching of the Religion which God has established, and the
showing of a p^esent Miracle, joined together, were the only marks whereby the
Scripture would have a true Prophet, that is to say, immediate Revelation to be
acknowledged; neither of them being singly sufficient to oblige any other man
to regard what he says.

Seeing therefore Miracles now cease, we have no sign left, whereby Miracles
ceasing, Prophets cease, and the Scripture supplies their place.
to acknowledge the pretended Revelations, or Inspirations of any private man;
nor obligation to give ear to any Doctrine, farther than it is conformable to
the Holy Scriptures, which since the time of our Savior, supply the place, and
sufficiently recompense the want of all other Prophecy; and from which, by wise
and learned interpretation, and careful ratiocination, all rules and precepts
necessary to the knowledge of our duty both to God and man, without
Enthusiasme, or supernatural Inspiration, may easily be deduced. And this
Scripture is it, out of which I am to take the Principles of my Discourse,
concerning the Rights of those that are the Supreme Governors on earth, of
Christian Commonwealths; and of the duty of Christian Subjects toward their
Sovereigns. And to that end, I shall speak in the next Chapter, of the Books,
Writers, Scope and Authority of the Bible.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Number, Antiquity, Scope, Authority, and Interpreters of
the Books of Holy SCRIPTURE.
BY the Books of Holy SCRIPTURE, are understood those, which Of the Books of
Holy Scripture.
ought to be the Canon, that is to say, the Rules of Christian life. And
because all Rules of life, which men are in conscience bound to observe, are
Laws; the question of the Scripture, is the question of what is Law throughout
all Christendom, both Natural, and Civil. For though it be not determined in
Scripture, what Laws every Christian King shall constitute in his own
Dominions; yet it is determined what laws he shall not constitute. Seeing
therefore I have already proved, that Sovereigns in their own Dominions are the
sole Legislators; those Books only are Canonical, that is, Law, in every
nation, which are established for such by the Sovereign Authority. It is true,
that God is the Sovereign of all Sovereigns; and therefore, when he speaks to
any Subject, he ought to be obeyed, whatsoever any earthly Potentate command to
the contrary. But the question is not of obedience to God, but of when, and
what God has said; which to Subjects that have no supernatural revelation,
cannot be known, but by that natural reason, which guided them, for the
obtaining of Peace and Justice, to obey the authority of their several
Commonwealths; that is to say, of their lawful Sovereigns. According to this
obligation, I can acknowledge no other Books of the Old Testament, to be Holy
Scripture, but those which have been commanded to be acknowledged for such, by
the Authority of the Church of England. What Books these are, is sufficiently
known, without a Catalogue of them here; and they are the same that are
acknowledged by St. Jerome, who holds the rest, namely, the Wisdom of
Solomon, Ecclesiasticus, Judith, Tobias, the first and the second of Maccabees,
(though he had seen the first in Hebrew) and the third and fourth of Esdras,
for Apocrypha. Of the Canonical, Josephus a learned Jew, that wrote in the
time of the Emperor Domitian, reckons twenty two, making the number agree
with the Hebrew Alphabet. St. Jerome does the same, though they reckon them in
different manner. For Josephus numbers five Books of Moses, thirteen of
Prophets, that writ the History of their own times (which how it agrees with
the Prophets writings contained in the Bible we shall see hereafter), and four
of Hymns and Moral Precepts. But St. Jerome reckons five Books of Moses,
eight of Prophets, and nine of other Holy writ, which he calls of Hagiographa.
The Septuagint, who were 70. learned men of the Jews, sent for by Ptoiemy King
of Egypt, to translate the Jewish law, out of the Hebrew into the Greek, have
left us no other for holy Scripture in the Greek tongue, but the same that are
received in the Church of England.

As for the Books of the New Testament, they are equally acknowledged for Canon
by all Christian Churches, and by all Sects of Christians, that admit any Books
at all for Canonical.

Who were the original writers of the several Books of Holy Their Antiquity.
Scripture, has not been made evident by any sufficient testimony of other
History, (which is the only proof of matter of fact); nor can be by any
arguments of natural Reason: for Reason serves only to convince the truth (not
of fact, but) of consequence. The light therefore that must guide us in this
question, must be that which is held out unto us from the Books themselves:
And this light, though it show us not the writer of every book, yet it is not
unusefull to give us knowledge of the time, wherein they were written.

And first, for the Pentateuch, it is not argument enough that they were
written by Moses, because they are called the five Books of Moses* no more than
these titles, The Book of Joshua, the Book of Judges, the Book of Ruth, and the
Books of the Kings, are arguments sufficient to prove, that they were written
by Joshua, by the Judges, by Ruth, and by the Kings. For in titles of Books,
the subject is marked, as often as the writer. The History of Livy, denotes the
Writer; but the History of Scanderbeg, is denominated from the subject. We read
in the last Chapter of Deuteronomie, ver. 6. concerning The Penta^ not written
by Moses.
the sepulcher of Moses, that no man knows of his sepulcher ^o this day, that
is, to the day wherein those words were written. It is therefore manifest, that
those words were written after his interrement. For it were a strange
interpretation, to say Moses spoke of his own sepulcher (though by Prophecy),
that it was not found to that day, wherein he was yet living. But it may
perhaps be alleged, that the last Chapter only, not the whole Pen^, was
written by some other man, but the rest not: Let us therefore consider that
which we find in the Book of Genesis, chap. 12. ver. 6. And Abraham passed
through the land to the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh, and the
Canaanite was then in the land; which must needs be the words of one that
wrote when the Canaanite was not in the land; and consequently, not of Moses,
who dyed before he came into it. Likewise Numbers 21. ver. 14. the Writer
cites another more ancient Book, Entitled, The Book of the Wars of the
Lord, wherein were registered the Acts of Moses, at the Red Sea, and at the
brook of Arnon. It is therefore sufficiently evident, that the five Books of
Moses were written after his time, though how long after it be not so manifest.

But though Moses did not compile those Books entirely, and in the form we have
them; yet he wrote all that which he is there said to have written: as for
example, the Volume of the Law, which is contained, as it seems, in the 11 of
Deuteronomie, and the following Chapters to the 27. which was also commanded to
be written on stones, in their entry into the land of Canaan. And this also did
Moses Deuteronomy. 31. 9.
himself write, and delivered to the Priests and Elders of Israel, to be read
every seventh year to all Israel, at their assembling in the feast of
Tabernacles. And this is that Law which God commanded, that their Kings (when
they should have established that form of Government) should take a copy of
from the Priests and Levites; and which Moses commanded the Priests and Levites
to lay in the side of the Deuteronomy. 31. 26.
Arc; and the same which having been lost, was long time after 2 King. 22. 8.
and 23. 1, 2, 3.
found again by Hilkiah, and sent to King Josias, who causing it to be read to
the People, renewed the Covenant between God and them.

That the Book of Joshua was also written long after the time of The Book of
Joshua written after his time.
Io^a, may be gathered out of many places of the Book it self. Joshua had set
up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, for a monument of their passage; of
which the Writer says thus, They are there unto this Josh. 4. 9.
day; for unto this day, is a phrase that signifies a time past, beyond the
memory of man. In like manner, upon the saying of the Lord, Josh. 5. 9.
that he had rolled off from the people the Reproach of Egypt, the Writer
says, The place is called Gilgal unto this day; which to have said in the time
of Joshua had been improper. So also the name of the Valley of Achor, from the
trouble that Achan raised in the Camp, Josh. 7. 26.
the Writer says, remains unto this day; which must needs be therefore long
after the time of Joshua. Arguments of this kind there be many other; as Josh.
8. 29. 13. 13. 14. 14. 15. 63.

The same is manifest by like arguments of the Book of Judges, The Book of
Judges and Ruth written long after the Captivity.
chap. 1. 21, 26. 6. 24. 10. 4. 15. 19. 17. 6. and Ruth 1. 1. but especially
Judge. 18. 30. where it is said, that Jonathan and his sons were Priests to
the Tribe of Dan, until the day of the captivity of the land.

That the Books of Samuel were also written after his own time, The like of the
Books of Samuel.
there are the like arguments, 1 Samuel 5. 5. 7. 13, 15. 27. 6. and 30. 25.
where, after David had adjudged equal part of the spoils, to them that
guarded the Ammunition, with them that fought, the Writer says, He made it a
Statute and an Ordinance to Israel to this day. Again, 2 Samuel 6. 4.
when David (displeased, that the Lord had slain VZZah, for putting out his
hand to sustain the Ark,) called the place PereZ-VZZah, the Writer faith, it is
called so to this day: the time therefore of the writing of that Book, must be
long after the time of the fact; that is, long after the time of David.

As for the two Books of the Kings, and the two Books of the The Books of the
Kings, and the* Chronicles.
Chronicles, besides the places which mention such monuments, as the Writer
says, remained till his own days; such as are 1 Kings 9. 13. 9. 21. 10. 12.
12. 19. 2 Kings 2. 22. 8. 22. 10. 27. 14. 7. 16. 6. 17. 23. 17. 34. 17. 41. 1 Chronicles. 4. 41. 5. 26. It is argument sufficient they were written after the
captivity in Babylon, that the History of them is continued till that time. For
the Facts Registered are always more ancient than the Register; and much more
ancient than such Books as make mention of, and quote the Register; as these
Books do in diverse places, referring the Reader to the Chronicles of the Kings
of Judah, to the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, to the Books of the Prophet
Samuel, of the Prophet Nathan, of the Prophet Ahijah; to the Vision of Iehdo,
to the Books of the Prophet Serveiah, and of the Prophet Addo.

The Books of Esdras and Nehemiah were written certainly after Ezra and
Nehemiah.
their return from captivity; because their return, the re-edification of the
walls and houses of Jerusalem, the renovation of the Covenant, and ordination
of their policy are therein contained.

The History of Queen Esther is of the time of the Captivity; Esther.
and therefore the Writer must have been of the same time, or after it.

The Book of Job has no mark in it of the time wherein it was written: Job.
and though it appear sufficiently ( Ezektel 14. 14. and James 5. 11.) that he
was no fained person; yet the Book it self seems not to be a History, but a
Treatise concerning a question in ancient time much disputed, why wicked men
have often prospered in this world, and good men have been afflicted; and it is
the more probable, because from the beginning, to the third verse of the third
chapter, where the complaint of Job begins, the Hebrew is (as St. Jerome
testifies) in prose; and from thence to the sixth verse of the last chapter in
Hexameter Verses; and the rest of that chapter again in prose. So that the
dispute is all in verse; and the prose is added, but as a Preface in the
beginning, and an Epilogue in the end But Verse is no usual style of such, as
either are themselves in great pain, as Job; or of such as come to comfort
them, as his friends; but in Philosophy, especially moral Philosophy, in
ancient time frequent.

The Psalms were written the most part by David, for the use of the The
Psalter.
Quire. To these are added some Songs of Moses, and other holy men; and some of
them after the return from the Captivity, as the 137. and the 126. whereby it
is manifest that the Psalter was compiled, and put into the form it now has,
after the return of the Jews from Babylon.

The Proverbs, being a Collection of wise and godly Sayings, partly The
Proverbs.
of Solomon, partly of Agur the son of Jakeh, and partly of the Mother of King
Le^el, cannot probably be thought to have been collected by Solomon, rather
then by Agur, or the Mother of Lemuel; and that, though the sentences be
theirs, yet the collection or compiling them into this one Book, was the work
of some other godly man, that lived after them all. Ecclesiastes and the
Canticles.


The Books of Ecclesiastes and the Canticles have nothing that was not
Solomon's, except it be the Titles, or Inscriptions. For The Words of the
Preacher, the Son of David, King in Jerusalem; and, The Song of Songs, which is
Solomon's, seem to have been made for distinctions sake, then, when the Books
of Scripture were gathered into one body of the Law; to the end, that not the
Doctrine only, but the Authors also might be extant.

Of the Prophets, the most ancient, are Sophoniah, Jonas, Amos, Hosea, The
Prophets.
Isaiah and Michaiah, who lived in the time of Amaziah, and Azariah, otherwise
Ozias, Kings of Judah. But the Book of Jonas is not properly a Register of his
Prophecy, (for that is contained in these few words, Forty days and Ninivy
shall be destroyed,) but a History or Narration of his frowardness and
disputing Gods commandments; so that there is small probability he should be
the Author, seeing he is the subject of it. But the Book of Amos is his
Prophecy.

Jeremiah, Abdias, Nahum, and Habakkuk prophesied in the time of Josiah.

Ezekiel, Daniel, Aggeus, and Zacharias, in the Captivity.

When Joel and Malachi prophesied, is not evident by their Writings. But
considering the Inscriptions, or Titles of their Books, it is manifest enough,
that the whole Scripture of the Old Testament, was set forth in the form we
have it, after the return of the Jews from their Captivity in Babylon, and
before the time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, that caused it to be translated
into Greek by seventy men, which were sent him out of Judea for that purpose.
And if the Books of Apocrypha (which are recommended to us by the Church,
though not for Canonical, yet for profitable Books for our instruction) may in
this point be credited, the Scripture was set forth in the form we have it in,
by Esd^; as may appear by that which he himself says, in the second book,
chapt. 14. verse 21, 22, etc. where speaking to God, he says thus, Thy law is
burnt; therefore no man knows the things which thou have done, or the works
that are to begin. But if I have found Grace before thee, send down the holy
Spirit into me, and I shall write all that has been done in the world, since
the beginning, which were written in thy Law, that men may find thy path, and
that they which will live in the later days, may live. And verse 45. And it
came to pass when the forty days were fulfilled, that the Highest spoke,
saying, The first that thou have written, publish openly, that the worthy and
unworthy may read it; but keep the seventy last, that thou may deliver them
only to such as be wise among the people. And thus much concerning the time of
the writing of the Books of the Old Testament.

The Writers of the New Testament lived all in less then an The New Testament.
age after Christ's Ascension, and had all of them seen our Savior, or been his
Disciples, except St. Paul, and St. Luke; and consequently whatsoever was
written by them, is as ancient as the time of the Apostles. But the time
wherein the Books of the New Testament were received, and acknowledged by the
Church to be of their writing, is not altogether so ancient. For, as the Books
of the Old Testament are derived to us, from no other time then that of Esdras,
who by the direction of Gods Spirit retrived them, when they were lost: Those
of the New Testament, of which the copies were not many, nor could easily be
all in any one private man's hand, cannot be derived from a higher time, than
that wherein the Governors of the Church collected, approved, and recommended
them to us, as the writings of those Apostles and Disciples, under whose names
they go. The first enumeration of all the Books, both of the Old, and New
Testament, is in the Canons of the Apostles, supposed to be collected by
Clement the first (after St. Peter) Bishop of Rome. But because that is but
supposed, and by many questioned, the Council of Laodicea is the first we
know, that recommended the Bible to the then Christian Churches, for the
Writings of the Prophets and Apostles: and this Council was held in the 364.
year after Christ. At which time, though ambition had so far prevailed on the
great Doctors of the Church, as no more to esteem Emperors, though Christian,
for the Shepherds of the people, but for Sheep; and Emperors not Christian,
for Wolves; and endeavored to pass their Doctrine, not for Counsel, and
Information, as Preachers; but for Laws, as absolute Governors; and thought
such frauds as tended to make the people the more obedient to Christian
Doctrine, to be pious; yet I am persuaded they did not therefore falsify the
Scriptures, though the copies of the Books of the New Testament, were in the
hands only of the Ecclesiastics; because if they had had an intention so to
do, they would surely have made them more favorable to their power over
Christian Princes, and Civil Sovereignty, than they are. I see not therefore
any reason to doubt, but that the Old, and New Testament, as we have them now,
are the true Registers of those things, which were done and said by the
Prophets, and Apostles. And so perhaps are some of those Books which are called
Apocrypha, and left out of the Canon, not for inconformity of Doctrine with the
rest, but only because they are not found in the Hebrew. For after the conquest
of Asia by Alexander the Great, there were few learned Jews, that were not
perfect in the Greek tongue. For the seventy Interpreters that converted the
Bible into Greek, were all of them Hebrews; and we have extant the works of
Philo and Josephus both Jews, written by them eloquently in Greek. But it is
not the Writer, but the authority of the Church, that makes a Book Canonical.
And although these Books were Their Scope.
written by diverse men, yet it is manifest the Writers were all endued with one
and the same Spirit, in that they conspire to one and the same end, which is
the setting forth of the Rights of the Kingdom of God, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. For the Book of Genesis, deriveth the Genealogy of Gods people,
from the creation of the World, to the going into Egypt: the other four Books
of Moses, contain the Election of God for their King, and the Laws which he
prescribed for their Government: The Books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and Samuel,
to the time of Saul, describe the acts of Gods people, till the time they cast
off Gods yoke, and called for a King, after the manner of their neighbor
nations: The rest of the History of the Old Testament, derives the succession
of the line of David, to the Captivity, out of which line was to spring the
restorer of the Kingdom of God, even our blessed Savior God the Son, whose
coming was foretold in the Books of the Prophets, after whom the Evangelists
write his life, and actions, and his claim to the Kingdom, whilst he lived on
earth: and lastly, the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles, declare the coming
of God, the Holy Ghost, and the Authority he left with them, and their
successors, for the direction of the Jews, and for the invitation of the
Gentiles. In sum, the Histories and the Prophecies of the old Testament, and
the Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament, have had one and the same scope,
to convert men to the obedience of God; 1. in Moses, and the Priests; 2. in the
man Christ; and 3. in the Apostles and the successors to Apostolical power.
For these three at several times did represent the person of God: Moses, and
his successors the High Priests, and Kings of Judah, in the Old Testament:
Christ himself, in the time he lived on earth: and the Apostles, and their
successors, from the day of Pentecost (when the Holy Ghost descended on them)
to this day.

It is a question much disputed between the diverse sects of Christian The
question of the Authority of the Scriptures stated.
Religion, From whence the Scriptures derive their Authority; which question is
also propounded sometimes in other terms, as, How we know them to be the Word
of God, or, Why we b^leeve them to be so: And the difficulty of resolving it,
arises chiefly from the impropernesse of the words wherein the question it
self is couched. For it is believed on all hands, that the first and original
Author of them is God; and consequently the question disputed, is not that.
Again, it is manifest, that none can know they are Gods Word, (though all true
Christians believe it,) but those to whom God himself has revealed it
supernaturally; and therefore the question is not rightly moved, of our Know
edge of it. Lastly, when the question is propounded of our Belief; because
some are moved to believe for one, and others for other reasons, there can be
rendered no one general answer for them all. The question truly stated is, By
what Authority they are made Law.

As far as they differ not from the Laws of Nature, there is no Their Authority
and Interpretation.
doubt, but they are the Law of God, and carry their Authority with them,
legible to all men that have the use of natural reason: but this is no other
Authority, then that of all other Moral Doctrine consonant to Reason; the
Dictates whereof are Laws, not made, but Eternal.

If they be made Law by God himself, they are of the nature of written Law,
which are Laws to them only to whom God has so sufficiently published them, as
no man can excuse himself, by saying, he knew not they were his.

He therefore, to whom God has not supernaturally revealed, that they are his,
nor that those that published them, were sent by him, is not obliged to obey
them, by any Authority, but his, whose Commands have already the force of Laws;
that is to say, by any other Authority, then that of the Commonwealth,
residing in the Sovereign, who only has the Legislative power. Again, if it be
not the Legislative Authority of the Commonwealth, that gives them the force
of Laws, it must be some other Authority derived from God, either private, or
public: if private, it obliges only him, to whom in particular God has been
pleased to reveal it. For if every man should be obliged, to take for Gods
Law, what particular men, on pretense of private Inspiration, or Revelation,
should obtrude upon him, (in such a number of men, that out of pride, and
ignorance, take their own Dreams, and extravagant Fancies, and Madness, for
testimonies of Gods Spirit; or out of ambition, pretend to such Divine
testimonies, falsely, and contrary to their own consciences,) it were
impossible that any Divine Law should be acknowledged. If public, it is the
Authority of the Commonwealth, or of the Church. But the Church, if it be one
person, is the same thing with a Commonwealth of Christians; called a
Commonwealth, because it consists of men united in one person, their
Sovereign; and a Church, because it consists in Christian men, united in one
Christian Sovereign. But if the Church be not one person, then it has no
authority at all; it can neither command, nor do any action at all; nor is
capable of having any power, or right to any thing; nor has any Will, Reason,
nor Voice; for all these qualities are personal. Now if the whole number of
Christians be not contained in one Commonwealth, they are not one person; nor
is there an Universal Church that has any authority over them; and therefore
the Scriptures are not made Laws, by the Universal Church: or if it be one
Commonwealth, then all Christian Monarchs, and States are private persons, and
subject to be judged, deposed, and punished by an Universal Sovereign of all
Christendom. So that the question of the Authority of the Scriptures, is
reduced to this, Whether Christian Kings, and the Sovereign Assemblies in
Christian Commonwealths, be absolute in their own Territories, immediately
under God; or subject to one Vicar of Christ, constituted of the Universal
Church; to be judged, condemned, deposed, and put to death, as he shall think
expedient, or necessary for the common good.

Which question cannot be resolved, without a more particular consideration of
the Kingdom of God; from whence also, we are to judge of the Authority of
Interpreting the Scripture. For, whosoever has a lawful power over any
Writing, to make it Law, has the power also to approve, or disapprove the
interpretation of the same.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Signification of SPIRIT, ANGEL, and INSPIRATION in the
Books of Holy Scripture.
SEeing the foundation of all true Ratiocination, is the constant Body and
Spirit how taken in the Scripture.
Signification of words; which in the Doctrine following, depends not (as in
natural science) on the Will of the Writer, nor (as in common conversation) on
vulgar use, but on the sense they carry in the Scripture; It is necessary,
before I proceed any further, to determine, out of the Bible, the meaning of
such words, as by their ambiguity, may render what I am to infer upon them,
obscure, or disputable. I will begin with the words BODY, and SPIRIT, which in
the language of the Schools are termed, Substances, Corporeal, and
Incorporeall.

The Word Body, in the most general acceptance, signifies that which
fills, or occupyeth some certain room, or imagined place; and depends not
on the imagination, but is a real part of that we call the Universe. For the
Universe, being the Aggregate of all Bodies, there is no real part thereof
that is not also Body; nor any thing properly a Body, that is not also part of
(that Aggregate of all Bodies) the Universe. The same also, because Bodies are
subject to change, that is to say, to variety of appearance to the sense of
living creatures, is called Substance, that is to say, Subject, to various
accidents; as sometimes to be Moved, sometimes to stand Still; and to seem to
our senses sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold, sometimes of one Color, Smell, Taste,
or Sound, sometimes of another. And this diversity of Seeming, (produced by the
diversity of the operation of bodies, on the organs of our sense) we attribute
to alterations of the Bodies that operate, and call them Accidents of those
Bodies. And according to this acceptance of the word, Substance and Body,
signify the same thing; and therefore Substance incorporeall are words, which
when they are joined together, destroy one another, as if a man should say, an
Incorporeall Body.

But in the sense of common people, not all the Universe is called Body, but
only such parts thereof as they can discern by the sense of Feeling, to resist
their force, or by the sense of their Eyes, to hinder them from a farther
prospect. Therefore in the common language of men, Air, and aeriall
substances, use not to be taken for Bodies, but (as often as men are sensible
of their effects) are called Wind, or Breath, or (because the same are called
in the Latin Spiritus) Spirits; as when they call that aeriall substance,
which in the body of any living creature, gives it life and motion, Vital and
Animal spirits. But for those Idols of the brain, which represent Bodies to
us, where they are not, as in a Looking-glass, in a Dream, or to a Distempered
brain waking, they are (as the Apostle says generally of all Idols) nothing;
Nothing at all, I say, there where they seem to be^; and in the brain it self,
nothing but tumult, proceeding either from the action of the objects, or from
the disorderly agitation of the Organs of our Sense. And men, that are
otherwise employed, then to search into their causes, know not of themselves,
what to call them; and may therefore easily be persuaded, by those whose
knowledge they much reverence, some to call them Bodies, and think them made of
air compacted by a power supernatural, because the sight judges them
corporeal; and some to call them Spirits, because the sense of Touch
discerns nothing in the place where they appear, to resist their fingers: So
that the proper signification of Spirit in common speech, is either a subtle,
fluid, and invisible Body, or a Ghost, or other Idol or Phantasme of the
Imagination. But for metaphorical significations, there be many: for sometimes
it is taken for Disposition or Inclination of the mind; as when for the
disposition to controwl the sayings of other men, we say, a spirit of
contradiction; For a disposition to uncleanness, an unclean spirit* for
perverseness, a froward spirit; for sullenness, a dumb spirit, and for
inclination to godliness, and Gods service, the Spirit of God: sometimes for
any eminent ability, or extraordinary passion, or disease of the mind, as when
great wisdom is called the spirit of wisdom; and mad men are said to be
possessed with a spirit.

Other signification of Spirit I find no where any; and where none of these can
satisfy the sense of that word in Scripture, the place falls not under
humane Understanding; and our Faith therein consists not in our Opinion, but
in our Submission; as in all places where God is said to be a Spirit; or where
by the Spirit of God, is meant God himself. For the nature of God is
incomprehensible; that is to say, we understand nothing of what he is, but only
that he is; and therefore the Attributes we give him, are not to tell one
another, what he is, nor to signify our opinion of his Nature, but our desire
to honor him with such names as we conceiv^ most honorable amongst our selves.

Genesis 1. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters. Here The
Spirit of God taken in the Scripture sometimes for a Wind, or Breath.
if by the Spirit of God be meant God himself, then is Motion attributed to
God, and consequently Place, which are intelligible only of Bodies, and not of
substances incorporeall; and so the place is above our understanding, that can
conceive nothing moved that changes not place, or that has not dimension; and
whatsoever has dimension, is Body. But the meaning of those words is best
understood by the like place, Genesis 8. 1. Where, when the earth was covered with
Waters, as in the beginning, God intending to abate them, and again to discover
the dry land, uses the like words, I will bring my Spirit upon the Earth, and
the waters shall be diminished: in which place by Spirit is understood a Wind,
(that is an Air or Spirit moved,) which might be called (as in the former
place) the Spirit of God, because it was Gods work.

Genesis 41. 38. Pharaoh calls the Wisdom of Joseph, the Spirit of Secondly,
for extraordinary gifts of the Understanding.
God. For Joseph having advised him to look out a wise and discreet man, and to
set him over the land of Egypt, he says thus, Can we find such a man as this
is, in whom is the Spirit of God? And Exodus 28. 3. Thou shall speak (says God)
to all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the Spirit of VVisdome,
to make Aaron Garments, to consecrate him. Where extraordinary Understanding,
though but in making Garments, as being the Gift of God, is called the Spirit
of God. The same is found again, Exodus 31. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 35. 31. And Isaiah
11. 2, 3. where the Prophet speaking of the Messiah, says, The Spirit of the
Lord shall abide upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit
of counsel, and fortitude; and the Spirit of the fear of the Lord. Where
manifestly is meant, not so many Ghosts, but so many eminent graces that God
would give him.

In the Book of Judges, an extraordinary Zeal, and Courage in the Thirdly, for
extraordinary Affections.
the defense of Gods people, is called the Spirit of God; as when it excited
Othoniel, Gideon, Jephtha, and Samson to deliver them from servitude, Judge. 3.
10. 6. 34. 11. 29. 13. 25. 14. 6, 19. And of Saul, upon the news of the
insolence of the Ammonites toward the men of Jabesh Gilead, it is said (1 Samuel
11. 6.) that The Spirit of God came upon Saul, and his Anger (or, as it is in
the Latin, his Fury) was kindled greatly. Where it is not probable was meant a
Ghost, but an extraordinary Zeal to punish the cruelty of the Ammonites. In
like manner by the Spirit of God, that came upon Saul, when he was amongst the
Prophets that praised God in Songs, and Music (1 Samuel 19. 20.) is to be
understood, not a Ghost, but an unexpected and sudden Zeal to join with them in
their devotion.

The false Prophet Zedekiah, says to Micaiah (1 Kings 22. 24.) Fourthly, for
the gift of Prediction by Dreams and Visions.
Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee? Which cannot
be understood of a Ghost; for Micaiah declared before the Kings of Israel and
Judah, the event of the battle, as from a Vision, and not as from a Spirit,
speaking in him.

In the same manner it appears, in the Books of the Prophets, that though
they spoke by the Spirit of God, that is to say, by a special grace of
Prediction; yet their knowledge of the future, was not by a Ghost within them,
but by some supernatural Dream or Vision.

Genesis 2. 7. It is said, God made man of the dust of the Earth, and Fif^ly, for
Life.
breathed into his nostrills (spiraculum vitae) the breath of life, and man was
made a living soul. There the breath of life inspired by God, signifies no
more, but that God gave him life; And ( Job 27. 3.) as long as the Spirit of
God is in my nostrils; is no more then to say, as long as I live. So in Ezekiel.
1. 20. the Spirit of life was in the wheels, is equivalent to, the wheels were
alive. And ( Ezekiel. 2. 30.) the Spirit entered into me, and set me on my feet,
that is, I recovered my vital strength; not that any Ghost, or incorporeall
substance entered into, and possessed his body.

In the 11 chap. of Numbers. verse 17. I will take (says God) of the Sixthly,
for a subordination to authority.
Spirit, which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall bear the
burden of the people with thee; that is, upon the seventy Elders: whereupon
two of the seventy are said to prophecy in the camp; of whom some complained,
and Joshua desired Moses to forbid them; which Moses would not do. Whereby it
appears; that Joshua knew not they had received authority so to do, and
prophesied according to the mind of Moses, that is to say, by a Spirit, or
Authority subordinate to his own.

In the like sense we read ( Deuteronomy. 34. 9.) that Joshua was full of the Spirit
of wisdom, because Moses had laid his hands upon him: that is, because he was
ordained by Moses, to prosecute the work he had himself begun, (namely, the
bringing of Gods people into the promised land), but prevented by death, could
not finish.

In the like sense it is said, ( Romans 8. 9.) If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his: not meaning thereby the Ghost of Christ, but a
submission to his Doctrine. As also (1 John 4. 2.) Hereby you shall know the
Spirit of God; Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God; by which is meant the Spirit of unfeigned Christianity, or
submission to that main Article of Christian faith, that Jesus is the Christ;
which cannot be interpreted of a Ghost.

Likewise these words ( Luke 4. 1.) And Jesus full of the Holy Ghost (that is,
as it is expressed, Mat. 4. 1. and Mar. 1. 12. of the Holy Spirit,) may be
understood, for Zeal to do the work for which he^ was sent by God the Father:
but to interpret it of a Ghost, is to say, that God himself (for so our
Savior was,) was filled with God; which is very unproper, and unsignificant.
How we came to translate Spirits, by the word Ghosts, which signifies nothing,
neither in heaven, nor earth, but the Imaginary inhabitants of man's brain, I
examine not: but this I say, the word Spirit in the text signifies no such
thing; but either properly a real substance, or Metaphorically, some
extraordinary ability or affection of the Mind, or of the Body.

The Disciples of Christ, seeing him walking upon the sea, ( Mat. Seventhly,
for Aeriall Bodies.
14. 26. and Mark 6. 49.) supposed him to be a Spirit, meaning thereby an
Aeriall Body, and not a Phantasme: for it is said, they all saw him; which
cannot be understood of the delusions of the brain, (which are not common to
many at once, as visible Bodies are; but singular, because of the differences
of Fancies), but of Bodies only. In like manner, where he was taken for a
Spirit, by the same Apostles ( Luke 24. 3, 7.); so also ( Acts 12. 15.) when
St. Peter was delivered out of Prison, it would not be believed; but when the
Maid said he was at the door, they said it was his Angel; by which must be
meant a corporeal substance, or we must say, the Disciples themselves did
follow the common opinion of both Jews and Gentiles, that some such apparitions
were not Imaginary, but Real; and such as needed not the fancy of man for
their Existence: These the Jews called Spirits, and Angels, Good or Bad; as the
Greeks called the same by the name of Demons. And some such apparitions may be
real, and substantial; that is to say, subtle Bodies, which God can form by
the same power, by which he formed all things, and make use of, as of
Ministers, and Messengers (that is to say, Angels) to declare his will, and
execute the same when he pleases, in extraordinary and su^naturall manner. But
when he has so formed them they are Substances, endued with dimensions, and
take up room, and can be moved from place to place, which is peculiar to
Bodies; and therefore are not Ghosts incorporeall, that is to say, Ghosts that
are in no place; that is to say, that are no where; that is to say, that
see^ing to be somewhat, are nothing. But if Corporeal be taken in the most
vulgar manner, for such Substances as are perceptible by our external Senses;
then is Substance Incorporeall, a thing not Imaginary, but Real; namely, a
thin Substance Invisible, but that has the same dimensions that are in grosser
Bodies.

By the name of ANGEL, is signified generally, a Messenger; and Angel what.
most often, a Messenger of God: And by a Messenger of God, is signified, any
thing that makes known his extraordinary Presence; that is to say, the
extraordinary manifestation of his power, especially by a Dream, or Vision.

Concerning the creation of Angels, there is nothing delivered in the
Scriptures. That they are Spirits, is often repeated: but by the name of
Spirit, is signified both in Scripture, and vulgarly, both amongst Jews, and
Gentiles, sometimes thin Bodies; as the Air, the Wind, the Spirits Vital, and
Animal, of living creatures; and sometimes the Images that rise in the fancy
in Dreams, and Visions; which are not real Substances, nor last any longer
then the Dream, or Vision they appear in; which Apparitions, though no real
Substances, but Accidents of the brain; yet when God raises them
supernaturally, to signify his Will, they are not unproperly termed Gods
Messengers, that is to say, his Angels.

And as the Gentiles did vulgarly conceive the Imagery of the brain, for things
really subsistent without them, and not dependent on the fancy; and out of them
framed their opinions of Demons, Good and Evil; which because they seemed to
subsist really, they called Substances; and because they could not feel them
with their hands, Incorporeall: so also the Jews upon the same ground, without
any thing in the Old Testament that constrained them thereunto, had generally
an opinion, (except the sect of the Sadduces,) that those apparitions (which it
pleased God sometimes to produce in the fancy of men, for his own service, and
therefore called them his Angels) were substances, not dependent on the fancy,
but permanent creatures of God; whereof those which they thought were good to
them, they esteemed the Angels of God, and those they thought would hurt them,
they called Evil Angels, or Evil Spirits; such as was the Spirit of Python,
and the Spirits of Madmen, of Lunatiques, and Epileptiques: For they esteemed
such as were troubled with such diseases, Daemoniaques.

But if we consider the places of the Old Testament where Angels are mentioned,
we shall find, that in most of them, there can nothing else be understood by
the word Angel, but some image raised (supernaturally) in the fancy, to
signify the presence of God in the execution of some supernatural work; and
therefore in the rest, where their nature is not expressed, it may be understood
in the same manner.

For we read Genesis 16. that the same apparition is called, not only an Angel,
but God; where that which (verse 7.) is called the Angel of the Lord, in the
tenth verse, says to Agar, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly; that is,
speaks in the person of God. Neither was this apparition a Fancy figured, but
a Voice. By which it is manifest, that Angel signifies there, nothing but God
himself, that caused Agar supernaturally to apprehend a voice from heaven; or
rather, nothing else but a Voice supernatural, testifying Gods special
presence there. Why therefore may not the Angels that appeared to Lot, and are
called Genesis 19. 13. Men; and to whom, though they were two, Lot speaks (ver.
18.) as but to one* and that one, as God, (for the words are, Lot said unto
them, Oh not so my Lord) be understood of images of men, supernaturally formed
in the Fancy; as well as before by Angel was understood a fancyed Voice? When
the Angel called to Abraham out of heaven, to stay his hand ( Genesis 22. 11.)
from slaying Isaac, there was no Apparition, but a Voice; which nevertheless
was called properly enough a Messenger, or Angel of God, because it declared
Gods will supernaturally, and saves the labor of supposing any permanent
Ghosts. The Angels which Jacob saw on the Ladder of Heaven ( Genesis 28. 12.) were
a Vision of his sleep; therefore only Fancy, and a Dream; yet being
supernatural, and signs of Gods special presence, those apparitions are not
improperly called Angels. The same is to be understood ( Genesis 31. 11.) where
Jacob says thus, The Angel of the Lord appeared to me in my sleep. For an
apparition made to a man in his sleep, is that which all men call a Dream,
whether such Dream be natural, or supernatural: and that which there Jacob
calls an Angel, was God himself; for the same Angel says (verse 13.) I am
the God of Bethel.

Alfo ( Exodus 14. 9.) the Angel that went before the Army of Israel to the Red
Sea, and then came behind it, is (verse 19.) the Lord himself; and he appeared
not in the form of a beautiful man, but in form (by day) of a pillar of cloud,
and (by night) in form of a pillar of fire; and yet this Pillar was all the
apparition, and Angel promised to Moses* Exodus 14. 9.) for the Armies guide:
For this cloudy pillar, is said, to have descended, and stood at the door of
the Tabernacle, and to have talked with Moses.

There you see Motion, and Speech, which are commonly attributed to Angels,
attributed to a Cloud, because the Cloud served as a sign of Gods pre^ence; and
was no less an Angel, then if it had had the form of a Man, or Child of never
so great beauty; or Wings, as usually they are painted, for the false
instruction of common people. For it is not the shape; but their use, that
makes them Angels. But their use is to be significations of Gods presence in
supernatural operations; As when Moses ( Exodus 33. 14.) had desired God to go
along with the Camp, (as he had done always before the making of the Golden
Calfe,) God did not answer, I will go, nor I will send an Angel in my stead;
but thus, my presence shall go (...) thee.

To mention all the places of the Old Testament where the name of Angel is
found, would be too long. Therefore to comprehend them all at once, I say,
there is no text in that part of the Old Testament, which the Church of England
holds for Canonical; from which we can conclude, there is, or has been
created, any permanent thing (understood by the name of Spirit or Angel,) that
has not quantity; and that may not be, by the understanding divided; that is
to say, considered by parts; so as one part may be in one place, and the next
part in the next place to it; and, in sum, which is not (taking Body for
that, which is some what, or some where) Corporeal; but in every place, the
sense will bear the interpretation of Angel, for Messenger; as John Baptist is
called an Angel, and Christ the Angel of the Covenant; and as (according to the
same Analogy) the Dove, and the Fiery Tongues, in that they were signs of Gods
special presence, might also be called Angels. Though we find in Daniel two
names of Angels, Gabriel, and Michael; yet it is clear out of the text it
self, ( Dan. 12. 1.) that by Michael is meant Christ, not as an Angel, but as
a Prince: and that Gabriel (as the like apparitions made to other holy men in
their sleep) was nothing but a supernatural phantasme, by which it seemed to
Daniel, in his dream, that two Saints being in talk, one of them said to the
other, Gabriel, let us make this man understand his Vision: For God needs
not, to distinguish his Celestial servants by names, which are useful only
to the short memories of Mortals. Nor in the New Testament is there any place,
out of which it can be proved, that Angels (except when they are put for such
men, as God has made the Messengers, and Ministers of his word, or works) are
things permanent, and withal incorporeall. That they are permanent, may be
gathered from the words of our Savior himself, ( Mat. 25. 41.) where he
says, it shall be said to the wicked in the last day, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: which place is manifest
for the permanence of Evil Angels, (unless we might think the name of Devil
and his Angels may be understood of the Churches Adversaries and their
Ministers;) but then it is repugnant to their Immateriality; because
Everlasting fire is no punishment to impatible substances, such as are all
things Incorporeall. Angels therefore are not thence proved to be Incorporeall.
In like manner where St. Paul says (1 Cor. 6. 3.) Know ye not that we shall
judge the Angels? And 2 Pet. 2. 4. ( For if God spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down into hell. And ( Jude 1, 6.) And the Angels that
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved
in everlasting chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the last day;
though it prove the Permanence of Angelical nature, it confirms also their
Materiality. And ( Mat. 22. 30.) In the resurrection men do neither marry, nor
give in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven: but in the
resurrection men shall be Permanent, and not Incorporeall; so therefore also
are the Angels.

There be diverse other places out of which may be drawn the like conclusion. To
men that understand the signification of these words, Substance, and
Incorporeall; as Incorporeall is taken not for subtle body, but for not Body,
they imply a contradiction: insomuch as to say, an Angel, or Spirit is (in that
sense) an Incorporeall Substance, is to say in effect, there is no Angel nor
Spirit at all. Considering therefore the signification of the word Angel in the
Old Testament, and the nature of Dreams and Visions that happen to men by the
ordinary way of Nature; I was inclined to this opinion, that Angels were
nothing but supernatural apparitions of the Fancy, raised by the special and
extraordinary operation of God, thereby to make his presence and commandments
known to mankind, and chiefly to his own people. But the many places of the New
Testament, and our Saviors own words, and in such texts, wherein is no
suspicion of corruption of the Scripture, have extorted from my feeble Reason,
an acknowledgment, and belief, that there be also Angels substantial, and
permanent. But to believe they be in no place, that is to say, no where, that
is to say, nothing, as they (though indirectly) say, that will have them
Incorporeall, cannot by Scripture be evinced.

On the signification of the word Spirit, depends that of the word
Inspiration what.
INSPIRATION; which must either be taken properly; and then it is nothing but
the blowing into a man some thin and subtle air, or wind, in such manner as a
man fills a bladder with his breath; or if Spirits be not corporeal, but
have their existence only in the fancy, it is nothing but the blowing in of a
Phantasme; which is improper to say, and impossible; for Phantasmes are not,
but only seem to be somewhat. That word therefore is used in the Scripture
metaphorically only: As ( Genesis 2. 7.) where it is said, that God inspired into
man the breath of life, no more is meant, then that God gave unto him vital
motion. For we are not to think that God made first a living breath, and then
blew it into Adam after he was made, whether that breath were real, or
seeming; but only as it is ( Acts 17. 25.) that he gave him life, and breath;
that is, made him a living creature. And where it is said (2 Timothy 3. 16.) all
Scripture is given by Inspiration from God, speaking there of the Scripture of
the Old Testament, it is an easy metaphor, to signify, that God inclined the
spirit or mind of those Writers, to write that which should be useful, in
teaching, reproving, correcting, and instructing men in the way of righteous
living. But where St. Peter (2 Pet. 1. 21.) says, that Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, but the holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Spirit, by the Holy Spirit, is meant the voice of God in a Dream,
or Vision supernatural, which is not Insp^ration: Nor when our Savior
breathing on his Disciples, said, Receive the Holy Spirit, was that Breath the
Spirit, but a sign of the spiritual graces he gave unto them. And though it be
said of many, and of our Savior himself, that he was full of the Holy Spirit;
yet that Fullness is not to be understood for Infusion of the substance of God,
but for accumulation of his gifts, such as are the gift of sanctity of life, of
tongues, and the like, whether attained supernaturally, or by study and
industry; for in all cases they are the gifts of God. So likewise where God
says ( Joel 2. 28.) I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons
and your Daughters shall prophecy, your Old men shall dream Dreams, and your
Young men shall see Visions, we are not to understand it in the proper sense,
as if his Spirit were like water, subject to effusion, or infusion; but as if
God had promised to give them Prophetical Dreams, and Vision. For the proper
use of the word infused, in speaking of the graces of God, is an abuse of it;
for those graces are Virtues, not Bodies to be carried hither and thither, and
to be powered into men, as into barrels.

In the same manner, to take Inspiration in the proper sense, or to say that
Good Spirits entered into men to make them prophecy, or Evil Spirits into those
that became Phrenetique, Lunatique, or Epileptique, is not to take the word in
the sense of the Scripture; for the Spirit there is taken for the power of God,
working by causes to us unknown. As also ( Acts 2. 2.) the wind, that is there
said to fill the house wherein the Apostles were assembled on the day of
Pentecost, is not to be understood for the Holy Spirit, which is the Deity it
self; but for an External sign of Gods special working on their hearts, to
effect in them the internal graces, and holy virtues he thought requisite for
the performance of their Apostleship.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Signification in Scripture of KINGDOM OF GOD, of HOLY,
SACRED, and SACRAMENT.
THe Kingdom of God in the Writings of Divines, and The Kingdom of God taken
by Divines Metaphorically, but in the Scriptures properly.
specially in Sermons, and Treatises of Devotion, is taken most commonly for
Eternal Felicity, after this life, in the Highest Heaven, which they also call
the Kingdom of Glory; and sometimes for (the earnest of that felicity)
Sanctification, which they term the Kingdom of Grace; but never for the
Monarchy, that is to say, the Sovereign Power of God over any Subjects acquired
by their own consent, which is the proper signification of Kingdom.

To the contrary, I find the KINGDOM OF GOD, to signify in most places of
Scripture, a Kingdom properly so named, constituted by the Votes of the People
of Israel in peculiar manner; wherein they chose God for their King by Covenant
made with him, upon Gods promising them the possession of the land of Canaan;
and but seldom metaphorically; and then it is taken for Dominion over sin;
(and only in the New Testament;) because such a Dominion as that, every Subject
shall have in the Kingdom of God, and without prejudice to the Sovereign.

From the very Creation, God not only reigned over all men naturally by his
might; but also had peculiar Subjects, whom he commanded by a Voice, as one man
speaks to another. In which manner he reigned over Adam, and gave him
commandment to abstain from the tree of cognizance of Good and Evil; which
when he obeyed not, but tasting thereof, took upon him to be as God, judging
between Good and Evil, not by his Creators commandment, but by his own sense,
his punishment was a privation of the estate of Eternal life, wherein God had
at first created him: And afterward God punished his posterity, for their
vices, all but eight persons, with an universal deluge; And in these eight did
consist the then Kingdom of God.

After this, it pleased God to speak to Abraham, and ( Genesis 17. 7, 8.) The
original of the Kingdom of God.
to make a Covenant with him in these words, I will establish my Covenant
between me, and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an
ev^rlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee; And I
will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a
stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession. In this
Covenant Abraham promises for himself and his posterity to obey as God, the
Lord that spoke to him: and God on his part promises to Abraham the land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession. And for a memorial, and a token of this
Covenant, he ordains (verse II.) the Sacrament of Circumcision. This is it
which is called the Old Covenant, or Testament; and contains a Contract
between God and Abraham; by which Abraham obliges himself, and his posterity,
in a peculiar manner to be subject to Gods positive Law; for to the Law Moral
he was obliged before, as by an Oath of Allegiance. And though the name of King
be not yet given to God, nor of Kingdom to Abraham and his seed; yet the thing
is the same; namely, an Institution by pact, of Gods peculiar Sovereignty over
the seed of Abraham; which in the renewing of the same Covenant by Moses, at
Mount Sinai, is expressly called a peculiar Kingdom of God over the Jews: and
it is of Abraham (not of Moses) St. Paul says ( Romans 4. 11.) that he is the
Father of the Faithful; that is, of those that are loyal, and do not violate
their Allegiance sworn to God, then by Circumcision, and afterward in the New
Covenant by Baptism.

This Covenant, at the Foot of Mount Sinai, was renewed by That the Kingdom of
God is properly his Civil Sovereignty over a peculiar people by pact.
Moses ( Exodus 19. 5.) where the Lord commands Moses to speak to the people
in this manner, If you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then
ye shall be a peculiar people to me, for all the Earth is mine; And ye shall
be unto me a Sacerdotall Kingdom, and an holy Nation. For a Peculiar people,
the vulgar Latin has, Peculium de cunctis populis: the English Translation
made in the beginning of the Reign of King James, has, a Peculiar treasure
unto me above all Nations; and the Geneva French, the most precious Jewel of
all Nations. But the truest Translation is the first, because it is confirmed
by St. Paul himself ( Tit. 2. 14.) where he says, alluding to that place, that
our blessed Savior gave himself for us, that he might purify us to himself, a
peculiar (that is, an extraordinary) people: for the word is in the Greek
(...), which is opposed commonly to the word (...): and as this signifies
ordinary, quotidian, or (as in the Lords Prayer) of daily use; so the other
signifies that which is overplus, and stored up, and enjoyed in a special
manner; which the Latins call Peculium: and this meaning of the place is
confirmed by the reason God rendereth of it, which follows immediately, in
that he adds, For all the Earth is mine, as if he should say, All the Nations
of the world are mine; but it is not so that you are mine, but in a special
manner: For they are all mine, by reason of my Power; but you shall be mine, by
your own Consent, and Covenant; which is an addition to his ordinary title, to
all nations.

The same is again confirmed in express words in the same text, Ye shall be
to me a Sacerdotall Kingdom, and an holy Nation. The Vulgar Latin has it,
Regnum Sacerdotale, to which agrees the Translation of that place (1 Pet. 2.
9.) Sacerdotium Regale, a Regal Priesthood; as also the Institution it self, by
which no man might enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, that is to say, no man
might enquire Gods will immediately of God himself, but only the High Priest.
The English Translation before mentioned, following that of Geneva, has, a
Kingdom of Priests; which is either meant of the succession of one High Priest
after another, or else it accords not with St. Peter, nor with the exercise
of the High priesthood: For there was never any but the High priest only, that
was to inform the People of Gods Will; nor any Convocation of Priests ever
allowed to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum.

Again, the title of a Holy Nation confirms the same: For Holy signifies, that
which is Gods by special, not by general Right. All the Earth (as is said in
the text) is Gods; but all the Earth is not called Holy, but that only which
is set apart for his especial service, as was the Nation of the Jews. It is
therefore manifest enough by this one place, that by the Kingdom of God, is
properly meant a Commonwealth, instituted (by the consent of those which were
to be subject thereto) for their Civil Government, and the regulating of their
behavior, not only toward God their King, but also toward one another in
point of justice, and toward other Nations both in peace and war; which
properly was a Kingdom, wherein God was King, and the High priest was to be
(after the death of Moses) his sole Viceroy, or Lieutenant.

But there be many other places that clearly prove the same. As first (1 Samuel
8. 7.) when the Elders of Israel (grieved with the corruption of the Sons of
Samuel) demanded a King, Samuel displeased therewith, prayed unto the Lord; and
the Lord answering said unto him, Hearken unto the voice of the People, for
they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign
over them. Out of which it is evident, that God himself was then their King;
and Samuel did not command the people, but only delivered to them that which
God from time to time appointed him.

Again, (1 Samuel 12. 12.) where Samuel says to the People, When ye saw that
Nahash King of the Children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay,
but a King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King: It is
manifest that God was their King, and governed the Civil State of their
Commonwealth.

And after the Israelites had rejected God, the Prophets did foretell his
restitution; as ( Isaiah 24. 23.) Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the
Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in
Jerusalem; where he speaks expressly of his Reign in Zion, and Jerusalem;
that is, on Earth. And (Micah 4. 7.) And the Lord shall reign over them in
Mount Zion: This Mount Zion is in Jerusalem upon the Earth. And ( Ezekiel. 20.
33.) As I live, says the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and a stretched
out arm, and with fury powered out, I will rule over you; and (verse 37.) I will
cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the
Covenant; that is, I will reign over you, and make you to stand to that
Covenant which you made with me by Moses, and brake in your rebellion against
me in the days of Samuel, and in your election of another King.

And in the New Testament, the Angel Gabriel says of our Savior ( Luke 1. 32,
33.) He shall be great, and be called the Son of the most High, and the Lord
shall give him the throne of his Father David; and he shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever; and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. This is
also a Kingdom upon Earth; for the claim whereof, as an enemy to Caesar, he
was put to death; the title of his cross, was, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the
Jews; he was crowned in scorn with a crown of Thorns; and for the proclaiming
of him, it is said of the Disciples ( Acts 17. 7.) That they did all of them
contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying there was another King, one Jesus.
The Kingdom therefore of God, is a real, not a metaphorical Kingdom; and so
taken, not only in the Old Testament, but the New; when we say, For thine is
the Kingdom, the Power, and Glory, it is to be understood of Gods Kingdom, by
force of our Covenant, not by the Right of Gods Power; for such a Kingdom God
always has; so that it were superfluous to say in our prayer, Thy Kingdom
come, unless it be meant of the Restoration of that Kingdom of God by
Christ, which by revolt of the Israelites had been interrupted in the election
of Saul. Nor had it been proper to say, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; ot
to pray, Thy Kingdom come, if it had still continued.

There be so-many other places that confirm this interpretation, that it were a
wonder there is no greater notice taken of it, but that it gives too much light
to Christian Kings to see their right of Ecclesiastical Government. This they
have observed, that in stead of a Sacerdotall Kingdom, translate, a Kingdom
of Priests: for* they may as well translate a Royal Priesthood, (as it is in
St. Peter) into a Priesthood of Kings. And whereas, for a peculiar people, they
put a precious jewel, or treasure, a man might as well call the special
Regiment, or Company of a General, the Generals precious Jewel, or his
Treasure.

In short, the Kingdom of God is a Civil Kingdom; which consisted, first in
the obligation of the people of Israel to those Laws, which Moses should bring
unto them from Mount Sinai; and which afterward the High Priest for the time
being, should deliver to them from before the Cherubins in the Sanctum
Sanctorum; and which Kingdom having been cast off, in the election of Saul,
the Prophets foretold, should be restored by Christ; and the Restoration
whereof we daily pray for, when we say in the Lords Prayer, Thy Kingdom come;
and the Right whereof we acknowledge, when we add, For thine is the Kingdom,
the Power, and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen; and the Proclaiming whereof, was
the Preaching of the Apostles; and to which men are prepared, by the Teachers
of the Gospel; to embrace which Gospel, (that is to say, to promise obedience
to Gods government) is, to be in the Kingdom of Grace, because God has
gratis given to such the power to be the Subjects (that is, Children) of God
hereafter, when Christ shall come in Majesty to judge the world, and actually
to govern his own people, which is called the Kingdom of Glory. If the
Kingdom of God (called also the Kingdom of Heaven, from the gloriousness,
and admirable height of that throne) were not a Kingdom which God by his
Lieutenants, or Vicars, who deliver his Commandments to the people, did
exercise on Earth; there would not have been so much contention, and war,
about who it is, by whom God speaks to us; neither would many Priests have
troubled themselves with Spiritual Jurisdiction, nor any King have denied it
them.

Out of this literal interpretation of the Kingdom of God, arises Holy what.
also the true interpretation of the word HOLY. For it is a word, which in Gods
Kingdom answers to that, which men in their Kingdoms use to call Public,
or the Kings.

The King of any Country is the Public Person, or Representative of all his
own Subjects. And God the King of Israel was the Holy one of Israel. The Nation
which is subject to one earthly Sovereign, is the Nation of that Sovereign,
that is, of the Public Person. So the Jews, who were Gods Nation, were called
( Exodus 19. 6.) a Holy Nation. For by Holy, is always understood, either God
himself, or that which is Gods in propriety; as by Public, is always meant,
either the Person of the Commonwealth it self, or something that is so the
Commonwealths, as no private person can claim any propriety therein.

Therefore the Sabbath (Gods day) is a Holy day; the Temple, (Gods house) a
Holy house; Sacrifices, Tithes, and Offerings (Gods tribute) Holy duties;
Priests, Prophets, and anointed Kings, under Christ (Gods Ministers) Holy men;
the Celestial ministering Spirits (Gods Messengers) Holy Angels; and the like:
and wheresoever the word Holy is taken properly, there is still something
signified of Propriety, gotten by consent. In saying Hallowed be thy name, we
do but pray to God for grace to keep the first Commandment, of having no other
Gods but him. Mankind is Gods Nation in propriety: but the Jews only were a
Holy Nation. Why, but because they became his Propriety by covenant?

And the word Profane, is usually taken in the Scripture for the same with
Common; and consequently their contraries, Holy, and Proper, in the Kingdom of
God must be the same also. But figuratively, those men also are called Holy,
that led such godly lives, as if they had forsaken all worldly designs, and
wholly devoted, and given themselves to God. In the proper sense, that which is
made Holy by Gods appropriating or separating it to his own use, is said to be
sanctified by God, as the Seventh day in the fourth Commandment; and as the
Elect in the New Testament were said to be sanctified, when they were endued
with the Spirit of godliness. And Sacred what.
that which is made Holy by the dedication of men, and given to God, so as to
be used only in his public service, is called aso SACRED, and said to be
consecrated, as Temples, and other Houses of Public Prayer, and their
Utensils, Priests, and Ministers, Victimes, Offerings, and the external matter
of Sacraments.

Of Holiness there be degrees: for of those things that are set apart Degrees
of Sanctity.
for the service of God, there may be some set apart again, for a nearer and
more especial service. The whole Nation of the Israelites were a people Holy to
God; yet the tribe of Levi was amongst the Israelites a Holy tribe; and amongst
the Levites, the Priests were yet more Holy; and amongst the Priests, the High
Priest was the most Holy. So the Land of Judea was the Holy Land; but the Holy
City wherein God was to be worshipped, was more Holy; and again, the Temple
more Holy than the City; and the Sanctum Sanctorum more Holy than the rest of
the Temple.

A SACRAMENT, is a separation of some visible thing from common Sacrament.
use; and a consecration of it to Gods service, for a sign, either of our
admission into the Kingdom of God, to be of the number of his peculiar people,
or for a Commemoration of the same. In the Old Testament, the sign of Admission
was Circumcision; in the New Testament, Baptism. The Commemoration of it in
the Old Testament, was the Eating (at a certain time, which was Anniversary)
of the Paschall Lamb; by which they were put in mind of the night wherein they
were delivered out of their bondage in Egypt; and in the New Testament, the
celebrating of the Lords Supper; by which, we are put in mind, of our
deliverance from the bondage of sin, by our Blessed Saviors death upon the
cross. The Sacraments of Admission, are but once to be used, because there
needs but one Admission; but because we have need of being often put in mind of
our deliverance, and of our Alleagance, the Sacraments of Commemoration have
need to be reiterated. And these are the principal Sacraments, and as it were
the solemn oaths we make of our Allegiance. There be also other
Consecrations, that may be called Sacraments, as the word implies only
Consecration to Gods service; but as it implies an oath, or promise of
Allegiance to God, there were no other in the Old Testament, but Circumcision,
and the Passover; nor are there any other in the New Testament, but Baptism,
and the Lords Supper.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the WORD OF GOD, and of PROPHETS.
WHen there is mention of the Word of God, or of Man, it Word what.
does not signify a part of Speech, such as Grammarians call a Nown, or a
Verb, or any simple voice, without a contexture with other words to make it
significative; but a perfect Speech or Discourse, whereby the speaker
affirms, denies, commands, promises, threatens, wishes, or
interrogateth. In which sense it is not Vocabulum, that signifies a Word* but
Sermo, (in Greek (...)) that is, some Speech, Discourse, or Saying.

Again, if we say the Word of God, or of Man, it may be understood The words
spoken by God, and concerning God, both are called* Gods Word in Scripture.
sometimes of the Speaker, (as the words that God has spoken, or that a Man
has spoken: In which sense, when we say, the Gospel of St. Matthew, we
understand St. Matthew to be the Writer of it: and sometimes of the Subject: In
which sense, when we read in the Bible, The words of the days of the Kings of
Israel, or Judah, it is meant, that the acts that were done in those days, were
the Subject of those Words; And in the Greek, which (in the Scripture)
retains many Hebraismes, by the Word of God is oftentimes meant, not that
which is spoken by God, but concerning God, and his government; that is to say,
the Doctrine of Religion: Insomuch, as it is all one, to say (...), and
Theologia; which is, that Doctrine which we usually call Divinity, as is
manifest by the places following [ Acts 13. 46.] Then Paul and Barnabas waxed
bold, and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been
spoken to you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everiasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. That which is here called
the Word of God, was the Doctrine of Christian Religion; as it appears
evidently by that which goes before. And [ Acts 5. 20.] where it is said to the
Apostles by an Angel, Go stand and speak in the Temple, all the Words of this
life; by the Words of this life, is meant, the Doctrine of the Gospel; as is
evident by what they did in the Temple, and is expressed in the last verse of
the same Chap. Daily in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach
and preach Christ Jesus: In which place it is manifest, that Jesus Christ was
the subject of this Word of life; or (which is all one) the subject of the
Words of this life eternal, that our Savior offered them. So [ Acts 15. 7.]
the Word of God, is called the Word of the Gospel, because it contains the
Doctrine of the Kingdom of Christ; and the same Word [ Romans 10. 8, 9.] is
called the Word of Faith; that is, as is there expressed, the Doctrine of
Christ come, and raised from the dead. Also [ Mat. 13. 19.] When any one
hears the Word of the Kingdom; that is, the Doctrine of the Kingdom taught
by Christ. Again, the same Word, is said [ Acts 12. 24.] to grow and to be
multiplied; which to understand of the Evangelicall Doctrine is easy, but of
the Voice, or Speech of God, hard and strange. In the same sense the Doctrine
of Devils, signifies not the Words of any Devil, but the Doctrine of Heathen
men concerning Demons, and those Phantasms 1 Timothy 4. 1.
which they worshipped as Gods.

Considering these two significations of the WORD OF GOD, as it is taken in
Scripture, it is manifest in this later sense (where it is taken for the
Doctrine of Christian Religion,) that the whole Scripture is the Word of God:
but in the former sense not so. For example, though these words, I am the Lord
thy God, etc. to the end of the Ten Commandments, were spoken by God to Moses;
yet the Preface, God spoke these words and said, is to be understood for the
Words of him that wrote the holy History. The Word of God, as it is taken for
that which he has spoken, is understood sometimes Properly, The Word of God
metaphorically used, first, for the Decrees and Power of God.
sometimes Metaphorically. Properly, as the words, he has spoken to his
Prophets: Metaphorically, for his Wisdom, Power, and eternal Decree, in
making the world; in which sense, those Fiats, Let their be light, Let there be
a firmament, Let us make man, etc. [Gen. 1.] are the Word of God. And in the
same sense it is said [ John 1. 3.] All things were made by it, and without it
was nothing made that was made: And [ Heb. 1. 3.] He upholdeth all things by
the Word of his Power; that is, by the Power of his Word; that is, by his
Power: and [ Heb. 11. 3. The worlds were framed by the Word of God; and many
other places to the same sense: As also amongst the Latins, the name of Fate,
which signifies properly The word spoken, is taken in the same sense.

Secondly, for the effect of his Word; that is to say, for the thing Secondly,
for the effect of his Word.
it self, which by his Word is Affirmed, Commanded, Threatened, or Promised; as
[ Psalm 105. 19.] where Joseph is said to have been kept in prison, till his
Word was come; that is, till that was come to pass which he had [ Genesis 40.
13.] foretold to Pharaohs Butler, concerning his being restored to his office:
for there by his word was come, is meant, the thing it self was come to pass.
So also [1 King. 18. 36.] Elijah says to God, I have done all these thy
Words, in stead of I have done all these things at thy Word, or commandment:
and [ Ier. 17. 15.] Where is the Word of the Lord, is put for, Where is the
Evil he threatened: And [ Ezekiel. 12. 28.] There shall none of my Words be
prolonged any more: by words are understood those things, which God promised to
his people. And in the New Testament [ Mat. 24. 35.] heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my Words shall not pass away; that is, there is nothing that I have
promised or foretold, that shall not come to pass. And in this s^nse it is,
that St. John the Evangelist, and, I think, St. John only calls our Savior
himself as in the flesh the Word of God [as Ioh. 1. 14.] the Word was made
Flesh; that is to say, the Word, or Promise that Christ should come into the
world; who in the beginning was with God; that is to say, it was in the purpose
of God the Father, to send God the Son into the world, to enlighten men in the
way of Eternal life; but it was not till then put in execution, and actually
incarnate; So that our Savior is there called the Word, not because he was the
promise, but the thing promised. They that taking occasion from this place, do
commonly call him the Verb of God, do but render the text more obscure. They
might as well term him the Nown of God: for as by Nown, so also by Verb, men
understand nothing but a part of speech, a voice, a sound, that neither
affirms, nor denies, nor commands, nor promises, nor is any substance
corporeal, or spiritual; and therefore it cannot be said to be either God,
or Man; whereas our Savior is both. And this Word which St. John in his
Gospel says was with God, is [in his 1 Epistle, verse 1.] called the Word of
life; and [verse 2.] the Eternal life, which was with the Father: so that he
can be in no other sense called the Word, then in that, wherein he is called
Eternal life; that is, he that has procured us Eternal life, by his coming
in the flesh. So also [ Apocalypse 19. 13.] the Apostle speaking of Christ,
clothed in a garment dipped in blood, says; his name is the Word of God; which
is to be understood, as if he had said his name had been, He that was come
according to the purpose of God from the beginning, and according to his Word
and promises delivered by the Prophets. So that there is nothing here of the
Incarnation of a Word, but of the Incarnation of God the Son, therefore called
the Word, because his Incarnation was the Performance of the Promise; In like
manner as the Holy Ghost is called the Promise. Acts 1. 4.
Luke 24. 49.


There are also places of the Scripture, where, by the Word of God, is Thirdly,
for the words of reason and equity.
signified such Words as are consonant to reason, and equity, though spoken
sometimes neither by Prophet, nor by a holy man. For Pharaoh Necho was an
Idolater; yet his Words to the good King Josiah, in which he advised him by
Messengers, not to oppose him in his march against Carchemish, are said to have
proceeded from the mouth of God; and that Josiah not harkening to them, was
slain in the battle; as is to be read 2 Chronicles. 35. verse. 21, 22, 23. It is
true, that as the same History is related in the first Book of Esdras, not
Pharaoh, but Jeremiah spoke these words to Josiah, from the mouth of the Lord.
But we are to give credit to the Canonical Scripture, whatsoever be written
in the Apocrypha.

The Word of God, is then also to be taken for the Dictates of reason, and
equity, when the same is said in the Scriptures to be written in man's heart;
as Psalm 36. 31. Ierem. 31. 33. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 14. and many other like places.

The name of PROPHET, signifies in Scripture sometimes Prolocutor; Diverse
acceptions of the word Prophet.
that is, he that speaks from God to Man, or from man to God: And sometimes
Praedictor, or a foreteller of things to come: And sometimes one that speaks
incoherently, as men that are distracted. It is most frequently used in the
sense of speaking from God to the People. So Moses, Samuel, Elijah, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and others were Prophets. And in this sense the High Priest was a
Prophet, for he only went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, to enquire of God; and
was to declare his answer to the people. And therefore when Caiphas said, it
was expedient that one man should die for the people, St. John says [chap. 11.
51.] that He spoke not this of himself, but being High Priest that year, he
prophesied that one man should dye for the nation. Also they that in Christian
Congregations taught the people [1 Cor. 14. 3.] are said to Prophecy. In the
like sense it is, that God says to Moses [Exod. 4. 16.] concerning Aaron, He
shall be thy Spokes-man to the People; and he shall be to thee a mouth, and
thou shall be to him instead of God: that which here is Spokes-man, is [chap.
7. 1.] interpreted Prophet; See (says God) I have made thee a God to Pharaoh,
and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet. In the sense of speaking from man
to God, Abraham is called a Prophet [ Genes. 20. 7.] where God in a Dream
speaks to Abimelech in this manner, Now therefore restore the man his wife,
for he is a Prophet, and shall pray for thee; whereby may be also gathered,
that the name of Prophet may be given, not unproperly to them that in Christian
Churches, have a Calling to say public prayers for the Congregation. In the
same sense, the Prophets that came down from the High place (or Hill of God)
with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp [1 Samuel 10. 5, 6. and
[vers. 10.] Saul amongst them, are said to Prophecy, in that they praised God,
in that manner publicly. In the like sense, is Miriam [ Exodus 15. 20.] called
a Prophetes^e. So is it also to be taken [1 Cor. 11. 4, 5.] where St. Paul
says, Every man that prays or prophecyeth with his head covered, etc. and
every woman that prays or prophecyeth with her head uncovered: For Prophecy
in that place, signifies no more, but praising God in Psalms, and Holy Songs;
which women might do in the Church, though it were not lawful for them to
speak to the Congregation. And in this signification it is, that the Poets of
the Heathen, that composed Hymns and other sorts of Poems in the honor of
their Gods, were called Vates (Prophets) as is well enough known by all that
are versed in the Books of the Gentiles, and as is evident [ Tit. 1. 12.] where
St. Paul says of the Cretians, that a Prophet of their own said, they were
Liars; not that St. Paul held their Poets for Prophets, but acknowledges that
the word Prophet was commonly used to signify them that celebrated the honor
of God in Verse.

When by Prophecy is meant Praediction, or foretelling of future Praediction of
future contingents, not always Prophecy.
Contigents; not only they were Prophets, who were Gods Spokesmen, and foretold
those things to others, which God had foretold to them; but also all those
Impostors, that pretend by the help of familiar spirits, or by superstitious
divination of events past, from false causes, to foretell the like events in
time to come: of which (as I have declared already in the 12. chapter of this
Discourse) there be many kinds, who gain in the opinion of the common sort of
men, a greater reputation of Prophecy, by one casual event that may be but
wrested to their purpose, than can be lost again by never so many failings.
Prophecy is not an Art, nor (when it is taken for Praediction) a constant
Vocation; but an extraordinary, and temporary Employment from God, most often
of Good men, but sometimes also of the Wicked. The woman of Endor, who is said
to have had a familiar spirit, and thereby to have raised a Phantasme of
Samuel, and foretold Saul his death, was not therefore a Prophetess; for
neither had she any science, whereby she could raise such a Phantasme; nor does
it appear that God commanded the raising of it; but only guided that Imposture
to be a means of Saul's terror and discouragement; and by consequent, of the
discomfiture, by which he fell. And for Incoherent Speech, it was amongst the
Gentiles taken for one sort of Prophecy, because the Prophets of their Oracles,
intoxicated with a spirit, or vapor from the cave of the Pythian Oracle at
Delphi, were for the time really mad, and spoke like madmen; of whose loose
words a sense might be made to fit any event, in such sort, as all bodies are
said to be made of Materia prima. In the Scripture I find it also so taken [1 Samuel 18. 10.] in these words, And the Evil spirit came upon Saul, and he
Prophesied in the midst of the house.

And although there be so many significations in Scripture of the The manner
how God has spoken to the Prophets.
word Prophet; yet is that the most frequent, in which it is taken for him, to
whom God speaks immediately, that which the Prophet is to say from him, to
some other man, or to the people. And hereupon a question may be asked, in what
manner God speaks to such a Prophet. Can it (may some say) be properly said,
that God has voice and language, when it cannot be properly said, he has a
tongue, or other organs, as a man? The Prophet David argues thus, Shall he
that made the eye, not see? or he that made the ear, not hear? But this may be
spoken, not (as usually) to signify Gods nature, but to signify our intention
to honor him. For to see, and hear, are Honorable Attributes, and may be given
to God, to declare (as far as our capacity can conceive) his Almighty power.
But if it were to be taken in the strict; and proper sense, one might argue
from his making of all other parts of man's body, that he had also the same use
of them which we have; which would be many of them so uncomely, as it would be
the greatest contumely in the world to ascribe them to him. Therefore we are to
interpret Gods speaking to men immediately, for that way (whatsoever it be), by
which God makes them understand his will: And the ways whereby he does this,
are many; and to be sought only in the Holy Scripture: where though many times
it be said, that God spoke to this, and that person, without declaring in what
manner; yet there be again many places, that deliver also the signs by which
they were to acknowledge his presence, and commandment; and by these may be
understood, how he spoke to many of the rest.

In what manner God spoke to Adam, and Eve, and Cain, and Noah, To the
Extraordinary Prophets of the Old Testament he spoke by Dreams, or Visions.
is not expressed; nor how he spoke to Abraham, till such time as he came out
of his own country to Sichem in the land of Canaan; and then [ Genesis 12. 7.]
God is said to have appeared to him. So there is one way, whereby God made his
presence manifest; that is, by an Apparition, or Vision. And again, [ Genesis 15.
1.] The Word of the Lord came to Abraham in a Vision; that is to say, somewhat,
as a sign of Gods presence, appeared as Gods Messenger, to speak to him. Again,
the Lord appeared to Abraham [ Genesis 18. 1.] by an apparition of three Angels;
and to Abimelech [ Genesis 20. 3.] in a dream: To Lot [ Genesis 19. 1.] by an
apparition of two Angels: And to Hagar [ Genesis 21. 17.] by the apparition of one
Angel: And to Abraham again [ Genesis 22. 11.] by the apparition of a voice from
heaven: And [ Genesis 26. 24.] to Isaac in the night; (that is, in his sleep, or
by dream): And to Jacob [ Genesis 18. 12.] in a dream; that is to say (as are the
words of the text) Jacob dreamed that he saw a ladder, etc. And [ Genesis 32. 1.]
in a Vision of Angels: And to Moses [ Exodus 3. 2.] in the apparition of a flame
of fire out of the midst of a bush: And after the time of Moses, (where the
manner how God spoke immediately to man in the Old Testament, is expressed) he
spoke always by a Vision, or by a Dream; as to Gideon, Samuel, Eliah, Elisha,
Isaiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the Prophets; and often in the New Testament,
as to Joseph, to St. Peter, to St. Paul, and to St. John the Evangelist in the
Apocalypse.

Only to Moses he spoke in a more extraordinary manner in Mount Sinai, and in
the Tabernaele; and to the High Priest in the Tabernacle, and in the Sanctum
Sanctorum of the Temple. But Moses, and after him the High Priests were
Prophets of a more eminent place, and degree in Gods favor; And God himself in
express words declares, that to other Prophets he spoke in Dreams and
Visions, but to his servant Moses, in such manner as a man speaks to his
friend. The words are these [ Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.] If there be a Prophet among
you, I the Lord will make my self known to him in a Vision, and will speak unto
him in a Dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my house;
with him I will speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, not in dark speeches;
and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. And [ Exodus 33. 11.] The Lord
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. And yet this
speaking of God to Moses, was by mediation of an Angel, or Angels, as appears
expressly, Acts 7. ver. 35. and 53. and Gal. 3. 19. and was therefore a
Vision, though a more clear Vision than was given to other Prophets. And
conformable hereunto, where God says ( Deuteronomy. 13. 1.) If there arise amongst
you a Prophet, or Dreamer of Dreams, the later word is but the interpretation
of the former. And [ Joel 2. 28.] Your sons and your daughters shall Prophecy;
your old men shall dream Dreams, and your young men shall see Visions: where
again, the word Prophecy is expounded by Dream, and Vision. And in the same
manner it was, that God spoke to Solomon, promising him Wisdom, Riches, and
Honor; for the text says, [1 Kings 3. 15.] And Solomon awoak, and behold it
was a Dream: So that generally the Prophets extraordinary in the Old Testament
took notice of the Word of God no otherwise, than from their Dreams, or
Visions; that is to say, from the imaginations which they had in their sleep,
or in an Ecstasy: which imaginations in every true Prophet were supernatural;
but in false Prophets were either natural, or feigned.

The same Prophets were nevertheless said to speak by the Spirit; as [ Zach.
7. 12.] where the Prophet speaking of the Jews, says, They made their hearts
hard as Adamant, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of
Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets. By which it is manifest,
that speaking by the Spirit, or Inspiration, was not a particular manner of
Gods speaking, different from Vision, when they* that were said to speak by the
Spirit, were extraordinary Prophets, such as for every new message, were to
have a particular Commission, or (which is all one) a new Dream, or Vision.

Of Prophets, that were so by a perpetual Calling in the Old Testament, To
Prophets of perpetual Calling, and Supreme, God spoke in the Old Testament
from the Mercy Seat, in a manner not expressed in the Scripture.
some were supreme, and some subordinate: Supreme were first Moses; and after
him the High Priests, every one for his time, as long as the Priesthood was
Royal; and after the people of the Jews, had rejected God, that he should no
more reign over them, those Kings which submitted themselves to Gods
government, were also his chief Prophets; and the High Priests o^fice became
Ministerial. And when God was to be consulted, they put on the holy vestments,
and enquired of the Lord, as the King commanded them, and were deprived of
their office, when the King thought fit. For King Saul [1 Samuel 13. 9.]
commanded the burnt offering to be brought, and [1 Samuel 14. 18.] he commands
the Priest to bring the Ark near him; and [ver. 19.] again to let it alone,
because he saw an advantage upon his enemies. And in the same chapter Saul
asks counsel of God. In like manner King David, after his being anointed,
though before he had possession of the Kingdom, is said to enquire of the Lord
[1 Samuel 23. 2.] whether he should fight against the Philistines at Keilah; and
[verse 10.] David commands the Priest to bring him the Ephod, to enquire
whether he should stay in Keilah, or not. And King Solomon [1 Kings 2. 27.]
took the Priesthood from Abiathar, and gave it [verse 35.] to Zadoc. Therefore
Moses, and the High Priests, and the pious Kings, who enquired of God on all
extraordinary occasions, how they were to carry themselves, or what event they
were to have, were all Sovereign Prophets. But in what manner God spoke unto
them, is not manifest. To say that when Moses went up to God in Mount Sinai, it
was a Dream, or Vision, such as other Prophets had, is contrary to that
distinction which God made between Moses, and other Prophets, Numb. 12. 6, 7,
8. To say God spoke or appeared as he is in his own nature, is to deny his
Infiniteness, Invisibility, Incomprehensibility. To say he spoke by
Inspiration, or Infusion of the Holy Spirit, as the Holy Spirit signifies the
Deity, is to make Moses equal with Christ, in whom only the Godhead [as St.
Paul speaks Col. 2. 9.] dwells* bodily. And lastly, to say he spoke by the
Holy Spirit, as it signifies the graces, or gifts of the Holy Spirit, is to
attribute nothing to him supernatural. For God disposes men to Piety,
Justice, Mercy, Truth, Faith, and all manner of Virtue, both Moral, and
Intellectual, by doctrine, example, and by several occasions, natural, and
ordinary.

And as these ways cannot be applied to God, in his speaking to Moses, at Mouut
Sinai; so also, they cannot be applied to him, in his speaking to the High
Priests, from the Mercy-Seat. Therefore in what manner God spoke to those
Sovereign Prophets of the Old Testament, whose office it was to enquire of him,
is not intelligible. In the time of the New Testament, there was no Sovereign
Prophet, but our Savior; who was both God that spoke, and the Prophet to whom
he spoke.

To subordinate Prophets of perpetual Calling, I find not any To Prophets of
perpetual Calling, but subordinate, God spoke by the Spirit.
place that proves God spoke to them supernaturally; but only in such manner,
as naturally he inclines men to Piety, to Belief, to Righteousness, and to
other virtues all other Christian men. Which way, though it consist in
Constitution, Instruction, Education, and the occasions and invitements men
have to Christian virtues; yet it is truly attributed to the operation of the
Spirit of God, or Holy Spirit, (which we in our language call the Holy Ghost):
For there is no good inclination, that is not of the operation of God. But
these operations are not always supernatural. When therefore a Prophet is
said to speak in the Spirit, or by the Spirit of God, we are to understand no
more, but that he speaks according to Gods will, declared by the supreme
Prophet. For the most common acceptance of the word Spirit, is in the
signification of a man's intention, mind, or disposition.

In the time of Moses, there were seventy men besides himself, that Prophesied
in the Camp of the Israelites. In what manner God spoke to them, is declared
in the 11 of Numbers, verse 25. The Lord came down in a cloud, and spoke unto
Moses, and took of the Spirit that was upon him, and gave it to the seventy
Elders. And it came to pass, when the Spirit rested upon them, they
Prophesied, and did not cease. By which it is manifest, first, that their
Prophesying to the people, was subservient, and subordinate to the Prophesying
of Moses; for that God took of the Spirit of Moses, to put upon them; so that
they Prophesied as Moses would have them: otherwise they had not been suffered
to Prophecy at all. For there was [verse 27.] a complaint made against them to
Moses; and Joshua would have Moses to have forbidden them; which he did not,
but said to Joshua, Be not jealous in my behalf. Secondly, that the Spirit of
God in that place, signifies nothing but the Mind and Disposition to obey, and
assist* Moses in the administration of the Government. For if it were meant
they had the substantial Spirit of God; that is, the Divine nature, inspired
into them, then they had it in no less manner then Christ himself, in whom
only the Spirit of God dwelt bodily. It is meant therefore of the Gift and
Grace of God, that guided them to cooperate with Moses; from whom their Spirit
was derived. And it appears [verse 16.] that, they were such as Moses himself
should appoint for Elders and Officers of the People: For the words are, Gather
unto me seventy men, whom thou know to be Elders and Officers of the people:
where, thou know, is the same with thou appointest, or have appointed to be
such. For we are told before [ Exodus 18.] that Moses following the counsel of
Jethro his Father-in-law, did appoint Judges, and Officers over the people,
such as feared God; and of these, were those Seventy, whom God by putting upon
them Moses spirit, inclined to aid Moses in the Administration of the Kingdom:
and in this sense the Spirit of God is said [1 Samuel 16. 13, 14.] presently upon
the anointing of David, to have come upon David, and left Saul; God giving his
graces to him he chose to govern his people, and taking them away from him, he
rejected. So that by the Spirit is meant Inclination to Gods service; and not
any supernatural Revelation.

God spoke also many times by the event of Lots; which were ordered ^od
sometimes also spoke by Lots.
by such as he had put in Authority over his people. So we read that God
manifested by the Lots which Saul caused to be drawn [1 Samuel 14. 43.] the fault
that Jonathan had committed, in eating a honeycomb, contrary to the oath taken
by the people. And [ Josh. 18. 10.] God divided the land of Canaan amongst the
Israelite, by the lots that Joshua did cast before the Lord in Shiloh. In the
same manner it seems to be, that God discovered [ Joshua 7. 16, etc.] the
crime of Achan. And these are the ways whereby God declared his Will in the
Old Testament.

All which ways he used also in the New Testament. To the Virgin Mary, by a
Vision of an Angel: To Joseph in a Dream: again to Paul in the way to Damascus
in a Vision of our Savior: and to Peter in the Vision of a sheet let down from
heaven, with diverse sorts of flesh, of clean, and unclean beasts; and in
prison, by Vision of an Angel: And to all the Apostles, and Writers of the New
Testament, by the graces of his Spirit; and to the Apostles again (at the
choosing of Matthias in the place of Judas Iscariot) by lot.

Seeing then all Prophecy supposes Vision, or Dream, (which two, Every man
ought to examine the probability of a pretended Prophets Calling.
when they be natural, are the same,) or some especial gift of God, so rarely
observed in mankind, as to be admired where observed; And seeing as well such
gifts, as the most extraordinary Dreams, and Visions, may proceed from God, not
only by his supernatural, and immediate, but also by his natural operation,
and by mediation of second causes; there is need of Reason and Judgment to
discern between natural, and supernatural Gifts, and between natural, and
supernatural Visions, or Dreams. And consequently men had need to be very
circumspect, and wary, in obeying the voice of man, that pretending himself to
be a Prophet, requires us to obey God in that way, which he in Gods name
tells us to be the way to happiness. For he that pretends to teach men the
way of so great felicity, pretends to govern them; that is to say, to rule, and
reign over them; which is a thing, that all men naturally desire, and is
therefore worthy to be suspected of Ambition and Imposture; and consequently,
ought to be examined, and tried by every man, before he yield them obedience;
unless he have yielded it them already, in the institution of a Commonwealth;
as when the Prophet is the Civil Sovereign, or by the Civil Sovereign
Authorized. And if this examination of Prophets, and Spirits, were not allowed
to every one of the people, it had been to no purpose, to set out the marks, by
which every man might be able, to distinguish between those, whom they ought,
and those whom they ought not to follow. Seeing therefore such marks are set
out [ Deuteronomy. 13. 1, etc.] to know a Prophet by; and [1 John 4. 1. etc.] to know
a Spirit by: and seeing there is so much Prophesying in the Old Testament; and
so much Preaching in the New Testament against Prophets; and so much greater a
number ordinarily of false Prophets, then of true; every one is to beware of
obeying their directions, at their own peril. And first, that there were many
more false then true Prophets, appears by this, that when Ahab [1 Kings 12.]
consulted four hundred Prophets, they were all false Impostors, but only one
Michaiah. And a little before the time of the Captivity, the Prophets were
generally liars. The Prophets (says the Lord by Jeremy, cha. 14. verse 14.)
prophecy Lies in my name. I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, nor
spoke unto them, they prophecy to you a false Vision, a thing of naught; and
the deceit of their heart. In so much as God commanded the People by the mouth
of the Prophet I^remiah [chap. 23. 16.] not to obey them. Thus says the Lord
of Hosts, hearken not unto the words of the Prophets, that prophecy to you.
They make you vain, they speak a Vision of their own heart, and not out of the
mouth of the Lord.

Seeing then there was in the time of the Old Testament, such quarrels All
prophecy but of the Sovereign Prophet is to be examined by every Subject.
amongst the Visionary Prophets, one contesting with another, and asking, When
departed the Spirit from me, to go to thee? as between Michaiah, and the rest
of the four hundred; and such giving of the Lie to one another, (as in Ierem.
14. 14.] and such controversies in the New Testament at this day, amongst the
Spiritual Prophets: Every man then was, and now is bound to make use of his
Natural Reason, to apply to all Prophecy those Rules which God has given us,
to discern the true from the false. Of which Rules, in the Old Testament, one
was, conformable doctrine to that which Moses the Sovereign Prophet had taught
them; and the other the miraculous power of foretelling what God would bring to
pass, as I have already shown out of Deuteronomy. 13. 1. etc. And in the New
Testament there was but one only mark; and that was the preaching of this
Doctrine, That Jesus is the Christ, that is, the King of the Jews, promised in
the Old Testament. Whosoever denied that Article, he was a false Prophet,
whatsoever miracles he might seem to work; and he that taught it was a true
Prophet. For St. John [1 Epist. 4. 2, etc.] speaking expressly of the means to
examine Spirits, whether they be of God, or not; after he had told them that
there would arise false Prophets, says thus, Hereby know ye the Spirit of God.
Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God;
that is, is approved and allowed as a Prophet of God: not that he is a godly
man, or one of the Elect, for this, that he confesses, professes, or
preaches Jesus to be the Christ; but for that he is a Prophet avowed. For God
sometimes speaks by Prophets, whose persons he has not accepted; as he did
by Baalam; and as he foretold Saul of his death, by the Witch of Endor. Again
in the next verse, Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of Christ. And this is the Spirit of Antichrist. So that
the Rule is perfect on both sides; that he is a true Prophet, which preaches
the Messiah already come, in the person of Jesus; and he a false one that
denies him come, and looks for him in some future Impostor, that shall take
upon him that honor falsely, whom the Apostle there properly calls
Antichrist. Every man therefore ought to consider who is the Sovereign Prophet;
that is to say, who it is, that is Gods Vicegerent on Earth; and has next
under God, the Authority of Governing Christian men; and to observe for a Rule,
that Doctrine, which in the name of God, he has commanded to be taught; and
thereby to examine and try out the truth of those Doctrines, which pretended
Prophets with miracle, or without, shall at any time advance: and if they find
it contrary to that Rule, to do as they did, that came to Moses, and
complained that there were some that Propecyed in the Camp, whose Authority so
to do they doubted of; and leave to the Sovereign, as they did to Moses to
uphold, or to forbid them, as he should see cause; and if he disavow them,
then no more to obey their voice; or if he approve them, then to obey them, as
men to whom God has given a part of the Spirit of their Sovereign. For when
Christian men, take not their Christian Sovereign, for Gods Prophet; they must
either take their own Dreams, for the Prophecy they mean to be governed by,
and the tumor of their own hearts for the Spirit of God; or they must suffer
themselves to be lead by some strange Prince; or by some of their fellow
subjects, that can bewitch them, by slander of the government, into rebellion,
without other miracle to confirm their calling, then sometimes an extraordinary
success, and Impunity; and by this means destroying all laws, both divine, and
humane, reduce all Order, Government, and Society, to the first Chaos of
Violence, and Civil war.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of MIRACLES, and their Use.
BY Miracles are signified the Admirable works of God: and therefore A Miracle
is a work that causes Admiration.
they are also called Wonders. And because they are for the most part, done,
for a signification of his commandment, in such occasions, as without them,
men are apt to doubt, (following their private natural reasoning,) what he
has commanded, and what not, they are commonly in Holy Scripture, called
Signs, in the same sense, as they are called by the Latins, Ostenta, and
Portenta, from showing, and fore-signifying that, which the Almighty is about
to bring to pass.

To understand therefore what is a Miracle, we must first understand And must
therefore be rare, and whereof there is no natural cause known.
what works they are, which men wonder at, and call Admirable. And there be but
two things which make men wonder at any event: The one is, if it be strange,
that is to say, such, as the like of it has never, or very rarely been
produced: The other is, if when it is produced, we cannot imagine it to have
been done by natural means, but only by the immediate hand of God. But when
we see some possible, natural cause of it, how rarely soever the like has
been done; or if the like have been often done, how impossible soever it be to
imagine a natural means thereof, we no more wonder, nor esteem it for a
Miracle.

Therefore, if a Horse, or Cow should speak, it were a Miracle; because both
the thing is strange, and the natural cause difficult to imagine: So also were
it, to see a strange deviation of nature, in the production of some new shape
of a living creature. But when a man, or other Animal, engenders his like,
though we know no more how this is done, than the other; yet because it is
usual, it is no Miracle. In like manner, if a man be metamorphosed into a
stone, or into a pillar, it is a Miracle; because strange: but if a piece of
wood be so changed; because we see it often, it is no Miracle: and yet we know
no more, by what operation of God, the one is brought to pass, than the other.

The first Rainbow that was seen in the world, was a Miracle, because the
first; and consequently strange; and served for a sign from God, placed in
heaven, to assure his people, there should be no more an universal destruction
of the world by Water. ^ut at this day, because they are frequent, they are not
Miracles, neither to them that know their natural causes, nor to them who know
them not. Again, there be many rare works produced by the Art of man: yet when
we know they are done; because thereby we know also the means how they are
done, we count them not for Miracles, because not wrought by the immediate hand
of God, but of humane Industry.

Furthermore, seeing Admiration and Wonder, is consequent to That which seems
a Miracle to one man, may seem otherwise to another.
the knowledge and experience, wherewith men are endued, some more, some less;
it follows, that the same thing, may be a Miracle to one, and not to another.
And thence it is, that ignorant, and superstitious men make great Wonders of
those works, which other men, knowing to proceed from Nature, (which is not the
immediate, but the ordinary work of God,) admire not at all: As when Ecclipses
of the Sun and Moon have been taken for supernatural works, by the common
people; when nevertheless, there were others, could from their natural
causes, have foretold the very hour they should arrive: Or, as when a man, by
confederacy, and secret intelligence, getting knowledge of the private actions
of an ignorant, unwary man, and thereby tells him, what he has done in former
time; it seems to him a Miraculous thing; but amongst wise, and cautelous men,
such Miracles as those, cannot easily be done.

Again, it belongs to the nature of a Miracle, that it be wrought The End of
Miracles.
for the procuring of credit to Gods Messengers, Ministers, and Prophets, that
thereby men may know, they are called, sent, and employed by God, and thereby
be the better inclined to obey them. And therefore, though the creation of the
world, and after that the destruction of all living creatures in the universal
deluge, were admirable works; yet because they were not done to procure credit
to any Prophet, or other Minister of God, they use not to be called Miracles.
For how admirable soever any work be, the Admiration consists not in that it
could be done, because men naturally believe the Almighty can do all things,
but because he does it at the Prayer, or Word of a man. But the works of God in
Egypt, by the hand of Moses, were properly Miracles; because they were done
with intention to make the people of Israel believe, that Moses came unto them,
not out of any design of his own interest, but as sent from God. Therefore
after God had commanded him to deliver the Israelites from the Egyptian
bondage, when he said They will not believe me, but will say, the Lord has not
appeared unto me, God gave him power, to turn the Rod he had in his hand into a
Serpent, and again to return it into a Rod; and by putting his hand into his
bosom, to make it leprous; and again by putting it out to make it whole, to
make the Children of Israel believe (as it is verse 5.) that the God of their
Fathers had appeared unto him: And if that were not enough, he gave him power
to turn their waters into blood. And when he had done these Miracles before
the people, it is said (verse 41.) that they believed him. Nevertheless, for
fear of Pharaoh, they durst not Exo. 4. 1, etc.
yet obey him. Therefore the other works which were done to plague Pharaoh, and
the Egyptians, tended all to make the Israelites believe in Moses, and were
properly Miracles. In like manner if we consider all the Miracles done by the
hand of Moses, and all the rest of the Prophets, till the Captivity; and those
of our Savior, and his Apostles afterward; we shall find, their end was
always to beget, or confirm belief, that they came not of their own motion,
but were sent by God. We may further observe in Scripture, that the end of
Miracles, was to beget belief, not universally in all men, elect, and
reprobate; but in the elect only; that is to say, in such as God had determined
should become his Subjects. For those miraculous plagues of Egypt, had not for
end, the conversion of Pharaoh; For God had told Moses before, that he would
harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he should not let the people go: And when he
let them go at last, not the Miracles persuaded him, but the plagues forced
him to it. So also of our Savior, it is written, ( Mat. 13. 58.) that he
wrought not many Miracles in his own country, because of their unbeleef; and
(in Mark 6. 5.) in stead of, he wrought not many, it is, he could work none.
It was not because he wanted power; which to say, were blasphemy against God;
nor that the end of Miracles was not to convert incredulous men to Christ; for
the end of all the Miracles of Moses, of the Prophets, of our Savior, and of
his Apostles was to add men to the Church; but it was, because the end of
their Miracles, was to add to the Church (not all men, but) such as should be
saved; that is to say, such as God had elected. Seeing therefore our Savior
was sent from his Father, he could not use his power in the conversion of
those, whom his Father had rejected. They that expounding this place of St.
Mark, say, that this word, He could not, is put for, He would not, do it
without example in the Greek tongue, (where Would not, is put sometimes for
Could not, in things inanimate, that have no will; but Could not, for Would
not, never,) and thereby lay a stumbling block before weak Christians; as if
Christ could do no Miracles, but amongst the credulous.

From that which I have here set down, of thenature, and use of The definition
of a Miracle.
a Miracle, we may define it thus, A MIRACLE, is a work of God, (besides his
operation by the way of Nature, ordained in the Creation,) done, for the making
manifest to his elect, the mission of an extraordinary Minister for their
salvation.

And from this definition, we may infer; First, that in all Miracles, the
work done, is not the effect of any virtue in the Prophet; because it is the
effect of the immediate hand of God; that is to say, God has done it, without
using the Prophet therein, as a subordinate cause.

Secondly, that no Devil, Angel, or other created Spirit, can do a Miracle. For
it must either be by virtue of some natural science, or by Incantation, that
is, virtue of words. For if the Inchanters do it by their own power
independent, there is some power that proceeds not from God; which all men
deny: and if they do it by power given them, then is the work not from the
immediate hand of God, but natural, and consequently no Miracle.

There be some texts of Scripture, that seem to attribute the power of working
wonders (equal to some of those immediate Miracles, wrought by God himself,)
to certain Arts of Magic, and Incantation. As for example, when we read that
after the Rod of Moses being east on the ground became a Serpent, the Magicians
of Egypt Exodus 7. 11.
did the like by their Enchantments; and that after Moses had turned the waters
of the Egyptian Streams, Rivers, Ponds, and Pooles of water into blood, the
Magicians of Egypt did so likewise, with their Exodus 7. 22.
Enchantments; and that after Moses had by the power of God brought frogs upon
the land, the Magicians also did so with their Enchantments, Exodus 8. 7.
and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt; will not a man be apt to
attribute Miracles to Enchantments; that is to say, to the efficacy of the
sound of Words; and think the sam^ very well proved out of this, and other such
places? and yet there is no place of Scripture, that tells us what an
Enchantment is. If therefore Enchantment be not, as many think it, a working of
strange effects by spells, and words; but Imposture, and delusion, wrought by
ordinary means; and so far from supernatural, as the Impostors need not the
study so much as of natural causes, but the ordinary ignorance, stupidity, and
superstition of mankind, to do them; those texts that seem to countenance the
power of Magic, Witcheraft, and Enchantment, must needs have another sense,
than at first sight they seem to bear.

For it is evident enough, that Words have no effect, but on those that That
men are apt to be deceived by false Miracles.
understand them; and then they have no other, but to signify the intentions,
or passions of them that speak; and thereby produce, hope, fear, or other
passions, or conceptions in the hearer. Therefore when a Rod seems a Serpent,
or the Waters Blood, or any other Miracle seems done by Enchantment; if it be
not to the edification of Gods people, not the Rod, nor the Water, nor any
other thing is enchanted; that is to say, wrought upon by the Words, but the
Spectator. So that all the Miracle consists in this, that the Enchanter has
deceived a man; which is no Miracle, but a very easy matter to do.

For such is the ignorance, and aptitude to error generally of all men, but
especially of them that have not much knowledge of natural causes, and of the
nature, and interests of men; as by innumerable and easy tricks to be abused.
What opinion of miraculous power, before it was known there was a Science of
the course of the Stars, might a man have gained, that should have told the
people, This hour, or day the Sun should be darkened? A Juggler by the handling
of his goblets, and other trinkets, if it were not now ordinarily practiced,
would be thought to do his wonders by the power at least of the Devil. A man
that has practiced to speak by drawing in of his breath, (which kind of men in
ancient time were called Ventriloqui,) and so make the weakness of his voice
seem to proceed, not from the weak impulsion of the organs of Speech, but from
distance of place, is able to make very many men believe it is a voice from
Heaven, whatsoever he please to tell them. And for a crafty man, that has
enquired into the secrets, and familiar confessions that one man ordinarily
makes to another of his actions and adventures past, to tell them him again is
no hard matter; and yet there be many, that by such means as that, obtain the
reputation of being Conjurers. But it is too long a business, to reckon up the
several sorts of those men, which the Greeks called Thaumaturgi, that is to
say, workers of things wonderful; and yet these do all they do, by their own
single dexterity. But if we look upon the Impostures wrought by Confederacy,
there is nothing how impossible soever to be done, that is impossible to be
believed. For two men conspiring, one to seem lame, the other to cure him with
a charm, will deceive many: but many conspiring, one to seem lame, another so
to cure him, and all the rest to bear witness; will deceive many more.

In this aptitude of mankind, to give too hasty belief to pretended Cautions
against the Imposture of Miracles.
Miracles, there can be no better, nor I think any other caution, then that
which God has prescribed, first by Moses, (as I have said before in the
precedent chapter,) in the beginning of the 13. and end of the 18. of
Deuteronomy; That we take not any for Prophets, that teach any other Religion,
then that which Gods Lieutenant, (which at that time was Moses,) has
established; nor any, (though he teach the same Religion,) whose Praediction we
do not see come to pass. Moses therefore in his time, and Aaron, and his
successors in their times, and the Sovereign Governor of Gods people, next
under God himself, that is to say, the Head of the Church in all times, are to
be consulted, what doctrine he has established, before we give credit to a
pretended Miracle, or Prophet. And when that is done, the thing they pretend to
be a Miracle, we must both see it done, and use all means possible to consider,
whether it be really done; and not only so, but whether it be such, as no man
can do the like by his natural power, but that it requires the immediate hand
of God. And in this also we must have recourse to Gods Lieutenant; to whom in
all doubtful cases, we have submitted our private judgments. For example; if
a man pretend, that after certain words spoken over a piece of bread, that
presently God has made it not bread, but a God, or a man, or both, and
nevertheless it looks still as like bread as ever it did; there is no reason
for any man to think it really done; nor consequently to fear him, till he
enquire of God, by his Vicar, or Lieutenant, whether it be done, or not. If he
say not, then follows that which Moses says, ( Deuteronomy. 18. 22.) he has spoken
it presumptuously, thou shall not fear him. If he say it is done, then he is not
to contradict it. So also if we see not, but only hear tell of a Miracle, we
are to consult the Lawful Church; that is to say, the lawful Head thereof, how
far we are to give credit to the relators of it. And this is chiefly the case
of men, that in these days live under Christian Sovereigns. For in these times,
I do not know one man, that ever saw any such wondrous work, done by the charm,
or at the word, or prayer of a man, that a man endued but with a mediocrity of
reason, would think supernatural: and the question is no more, whether what
we see done, be a Miracle; whether the Miracle we hear, or read of, were a
real work, and not the Act of a tongue, or pen; but in plain terms, whether
the report be true, or a lie. In which question we are not every one, to make
our own private Reason, or Conscience, but the Public Reason, that is, the
reason of Gods Supreme Lieutenant, Judge; and indeed we have made him Judge
already, if we have given him a Sovereign power, to do all that is necessary
for our peace and defense. A private man has always the liberty, (because
thought is free,) to believe, or not believe in his heart, those acts that have
been given out for Miracles, according as he shall see, what benefit can accrue
by men's belief, to those that pretend, or countenance them, and thereby
conjecture, whether they be Miracles, or Lies. But when it comes to confession
of that faith, the Private Reason must submit to the Public; that is to say,
to Gods Lieutenant. But who is this Lieutenant of God, and Head of the Church,
shall be considered in its proper place hereafter.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Signification in Scripture of ETERNAL LIFE, HELL,
SALVATION, THE WORLD TO COME, and REDEMPTION.
THe maintenance of Civil Society, depending on Justice; and Justice on the
power of Life and Death, and other less Rewards and Punishments, residing in
them that have the Sovereignty of the Commonwealth; It is impossible a
Commonwealth should stand, where any other than the Sovereign, has a power of
giving greater rewards than Life; and of inflicting greater punishments, then
Death. Now seeing Eternal life is a greater reward, than the life present; and
Eternal torment a greater punishment than the death of Nature; It is a thing
worthy to be well considered, of all men that desire (by obeying Authority) to
avoid the calamities of Confusion, and Civil war, what is meant in holy
Scripture, by Life Eternal, and Torment Eternal; and for what offenses, and
against whom committed, men are to be Eternally tormented; and for what
actions, they are to obtain Eternal life.

And first we find, that Adam was created in such a condition of The place of
Adams Eternity if he had not sinned, had been the terrestiall Paradise.
life, as had he not broken the commandment of God, he had enjoyed it in the
Paradise of Eden Everlastingly. For there was the Tree of life; whereof he was
so long allowed to eat, as he should forbear to eat of the tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil; which was not allowed him. And therefore as soon as he had
eaten of it, God thrust him out of Paradise, lest he should put forth his hand,
and take Genesis 3. 22.
also of the tree of life, and live for ever. By which it seems to me, (with
submission nevertheless both in this, and in all questions, whereof the
determination depends on the Scriptures, to the interpretation of the Bible
authorized by the Commonwealth, whose Subject I am,) that Adam if he had not
sinned, had had an Eternal Life on Earth: and that Mortality entered upon
himself, and his posterity, by his first Sin. Not that actual Death then
entered; for Adam then could never have had children; whereas he lived long
after, and saw a numerous posterity ere he dyed. But where it it is said, In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, it must needs be
meant of his Mortality, and certitude of death. Seeing then Eternal life was
lost by Adams forfeiture, in committing sin, he that should cancel that
forfeiture was to recover thereby, that Life again. Now Jesus Christ has
satisfied for the sins of all that believe in him; and therefore recovered to
all believers, that ETERNAL LIFE, which was lost by the sin of Adam. And in
this sense it is, that the comparison of St. Paul holds ( Romans 5. 18, 19.) As
by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by
the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to Justification of
Life. Which is again (1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.) more perspicuously delivered in these
words, For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Concerning the place wherein men shall enjoy that Eternal Life, Texts
concerning the place of Life Eternal, for Believers.
which Christ has obtained for them, the texts next before alleged seem to
make it on Earth. For if as in Adam, all die, that is, have forfeited Paradise,
and Eternal Life on Earth, even so in Christ all shall be made alive; then
all men shall be made to live on Earth; for else the comparison were not
proper. Hereunto seems to agree that of the Psalmist, ( Psalm. 133. 3.) Upon
Zion God commanded the blessing, even Life for evermore: for Zion, is in
Jerusalem, upon Earth: as also that of S. Joh. ( Rev. 2. 7.) To him that
overcommeth I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God. This was the tree of Adams Eternal life; but his life was
to have been on Earth. The same seems to be confirmed again by St. Joh. (
Rev. 21. 2.) where he says, I John saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband: and
again v. 10. to the same effect: As if he should say, the new Jerusalem, the
Paradise of God, at the coming again of Christ, should come down to Gods people
from Heaven, and not they go up to it from Earth. And this differs nothing
from that, which the two men in white clothing (that is, the two Angels) said
to the Apostles, that were looking upon Christ ascending ( Acts 1. 11.) This
same Jesus, who is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, as you have
seen him go up into Heaven. Which sounds as if they had said, he should come
down to govern them under his Father, Eternally here; and not take them up to
govern them in Heaven; and is conformable to the Restoration of the Kingdom of
God, instituted under Moses; which was a Political government of the Jews on
Earth. Again, that saying of our Savior ( Mat. 22. 30.) that in the
Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the
Angels of God in heaven, is a description of an Eternal Life, resembling that
which we lost in Adam in the point of Marriage. For seeing Adam, and Eve, if
they had not sinned, had lived on Earth Eternally, in their individual
persons; it is manifest, they should not continually have procreated their
kind. For if Immortals should have generated, as Mankind does now; the Earth in
a small time, would not have been able to afford them place to stand on. The
Jews that asked our Savior the question, whose wife the woman that had married
many brothers, should be, in the resurrection, knew not what were the
consequences of Life Eternal: and therefore our Savior puts them in mind of
this consequence of Immortality; that there shall be no Generation, and
consequently no marriage, no more then there is marriage, or generation among
the Angels. The comparison between that Eternal life which Adam lost, and our
Savior by his Victory over death has recovered; holds also in this, that as
Adam lost Eternal Life by his sin, and yet lived after it for a time; so the
faithful Christian has recovered Eternal Life by Christ's passion, though he
die a natural death, and remain dead for a time; namely, till the
Resurrection. For as Death is reckoned from the Condemnation of Adam, not from
the Execution; so Life is reckoned from the Absolution, not from the
Resurrection of them that are elected in Christ.

That the place wherein men are to live Eternally, after the Resurrection,
Ascension into heaven.
is the Heavens, meaning by Heaven, those parts of the world, which are the
most remote from Earth, as where the stars are, or above the stars, in another
Higher Heaven, called Coelum Empyreum, (whereof there is no mention in
Scripture, nor ground in Reason) is not easily to be drawn from any text that I
can find. By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant the Kingdom of the King that
dwells in Heaven and his Kingdom was the people of Israel, whom he ruled by
the Prophets his Lieutenants, first Moses, and after him Eleazar, and the
Sovereign Priests, till in the days of Samuel they rebelled, and would have a
mortal man for their King, after the manner of other Nations. And when our
Savior Christ, by the preaching of his Ministers, shall have persuaded the
Jews to return, and called the Gentiles to his obedience, then shall there be a
new Kingdom of Heaven; because our King shall then be God, whose throne is
Heaven; without any necessity evident in the Scripture, that man shall ascend
to his happiness any higher than Gods footstool the Earth. On the contrary, we
find written ( Ioh. 3. 13.) that no man has ascended into Heaven, but he that
came down from Heaven, even the Son of man, that is in Heaven. Where I observe
by the way, that these words are not, as those which go immediately before, the
words of our Savior, but of St. John himself; for Christ was then not in
Heaven, but upon the Earth. The like is said of David ( Acts 2. 34.) where St.
Peter, to prove the Ascension of Christ, using the words of the Psalmist, (
Psalm. 16. 10.) Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, not suffer thine Holy one
to see corruption, says, they were spoken (not of David, but) of Christ; and
to prove it, adds this Reason, For David is not ascended into Heaven. But to
this a man may easily answer, and say, that though their bodies were not to
ascend till the general day of Judgment, yet their souls were in Heaven as
soon as they were departed from their bodies; which also seems to be
confirmed by the words of our Savior ( Luke 20. 37, 38.) who proving the
Resurrection out of the words of Moses, says thus, That the dead are raised,
even Moses showed, at the bush, when he calls the Lord, the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. For he is not a God of the Dead,
but of the Living; for they all live to him. But if these words be to be
understood only of the Immortality of the Soul, they prove not at all that
which our Savior intended to prove, which was the Resurrection of the Body,
that is to say, the Immortality of the Man. Therefore our Savior means, that
those Patriarchs were Immortal; not by a property consequent to the essence,
and nature of mankind; but by the will of God, that was pleased of his mere
grace, to bestow Eternal life upon the faithful. And though at that time the
Patriarchs and many other faithful men were dead, yet as it is in the text,
they lived to God; that is, they were written in the Book of Life with them
that were absolved of their sins, and ordained to Life eternal at the
Resurrection. That the Soul of man is in its own nature Eternal, and a living
Creature inpedendent on the body; or that any mere man is Immortal, otherwise
than by the Resurrection in the last day, (except Enos and Elias,) is a
doctrine nor apparent in Scripture. The whole 14. Chapter of Job, which is the
speech not of his friends, but of himself, is a complaint of this Mortality of
Nature; and yet no contradiction of the Immortality at the Resurrection. There
is hope of a tree (says he verse 7.) if it be cast down, Though the root
thereof wax old, and the stock thereof die in the ground, yet when it senteth
the water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a Plant. But man dies, and
wastes away, yea, man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? and (verse 12.)
man lies down, and rises not, till the heavens be no more. But when is it,
that the heavens shall be no more? St. Peter tells us, that it is at the
general Resurrection. For in his 2. Epistle, 3. Chapter, and 7 verse, he
says, that the Heavens and the Earth that are now, are reserved unto fire
against the day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, and (verse 12.)
looking for, and hasting to the coming of God, wherein the Heavens shall be on
fire, and shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat.
Nevertheless, we according to the promise look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Therefore where Job says, man rises
not till the Heavens be no more; it is all one, as if he had said, the
Immortal Life (and Soul and Life in the Scripture, do usually signify the
same thing) begins not in man, till the Resurrection, and day of Judgment;
and has for cause, not his specificall nature, and generation; but the
Promise. For St. Peter says not, We look for new heavens, and a new earth,
(from Nature,) but from Promise.

Lastly, seeing it has been already proved out of diverse evident places of
Scripture, in the 35. chapter of this book, that the Kingdom of God is a Civil
Commonwealth, where God himself is Sovereign, by virtue first of the Old, and
since of the New Covenant, wherein he reigns by his Vicar, or Lieutenant; the
same places do therefore also prove, that after the coming again of our
Savior in his Majesty, and glory, to reign actually, and Eternally; the
Kingdom of God is to be on Earth. But because this doctrine (though proved out
of places of Scripture not few, nor obscure) will appear to most men a novelty;
I do but propound it; maintaining nothing in this, or any other paradox of
Religion; but attending the end of that dispute of the sword, concerning the
Authority, (not yet amongst my Contrymen decided,) by which all sorts of
doctrine are to be approved, or rejected; and whose commands, both in speech,
and writing, (whatsoever be the opinions of private men) must by all men, that
mean to be protected by their Laws, be obeyed. For the points of doctrine
concerning the Kingdom God, have so great influence on the Kingdom of Man, as
not to be determined, but by them, that under God have the Sovereign Power.

As the Kingdom of God, and Eternal Life, so also Gods Enemies, The place
after Judgment, of those who were never in the Kingdom of God, (...) having
been in, are cast out.
and their Torments after Judgment, appear by the Scripture, to have their
place on Earth. The name of the place, where all men remain till the
Resurrection, that were either buried, or swallowed up of the Earth, is usually
called in Scripture, by words that signify under ground; which the Latins
read generally Infernus, and Inferi, and the Greeks (...); that is to say, a
place where men cannot see; and contains as well the Grave, as any other
deeper place. But for the place of the damned after the Resurrection, it is not
determined, neither in the Old, nor New Testament, by any note of situation;
but only by the company: as that it shall be, where such wicked men were, as
God in former times in extraordinary, and miraculous manner, had destroyed from
off the face of the Tartarus.
Earth: As for example, that they are in Inferno, in Tartarus, or in the
bottomless pit; because Corah, Dathan, and Abirom, were swallowed up alive
into the earth. Not that the Writers of the Scripture would have us believe,
there could be in the globe of the Earth, which is not only finite, but also
(compared to the height of the Stars) of no considerable magnitude, a pit
without a bottom; that is, a hole of infinite depth, such as the Greeks in
their Daemonologie (that is to say, in their doctrine concerning Demons,) and
after them the Romans called Tartarus; of which Virgill says,

Bis patet in praeceps, tantum tenditque sub umbras,
Quantus ad ^thereum coeli suspectus Olympum:
for that is a thing the proportion of Earth to Heaven cannot bear: but that
we should believe them there, indefinitely, where those men are, on whom God
inflicted that Exemplary punnishment.

Again, hecause those mighty men of the Earth, that lived in the The
congregation of Giants.
time of Noah, before the flood, (which the Greeks called Heroes, and the
Scripture Giants, and both say, were begotten, by copulation of the children of
God, with the children of men,) were for their wicked life destroyed by the
general deluge; the place of the Damned, is therefore also sometimes marked
out, by the company of those deceased Giants; as Proverbs 21. 16. The man that
wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the congregation of
the Giants, and Job 26. 5. Behold the Giants groan under water, and they that
dwell with them. Here the place of the Damned, is under the water. And Isaiah
14. 9. Hell is troubled how to meet thee, (that is, the King of Babylon) and
will displace the Giants for thee: and here again the place of the Damned, (if
the sense be literal,) is to be under water.

Thirdly, because the Cities of Sodom, and Gomorrah, by the extraordinary Lake
of Fire.
wrath of God, were consumed for their wickedness with Fire and Brimstone, and
together with them the country about made a stinking bituminous Lake: the
place of the Damned is sometimes expressed by Fire, and a Fiery Lake: as in the
Apocalypse chapter 21. 8. But the timorous, incredulous, and abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall
have their part in the Lake that burnetb with Fire, and Brimstone; which is the
second Death. So that it is manifest, that Hell Fire, which is here expressed
by Metaphor, from the real Fire of Sodom, signifies not any certain kind, or
place of Torment; but is to be taken indefinitely, for Destruction, as it is in
the 20. Chapter, at the 14. verse; where it is said, that Death and Hell were
cast into the Lake of Fire; that is to say, were abolished, and destroyed; as
if after the day of Judgment, there shall be no more Dying, nor no more going
into Hell; that is, no more going to Hades (from which word perhaps our word
Hell is derived,) which is the same with no more Dying.

Fourthly, from the Plague of Darkness inflicted on the Egyptians, Utter
Darkness.
of which it is written ( Exodus 10. 23.) They saw not one another, neither rose
any man from his place for three days; but all the Children of Israel had light
in their dwellings; the place of the wicked after Judgment, is called Utter
Darkness, or (as it is in the original) Darkness without. And so it is
expressed ( Mat. 22. 13.) where the King commands his Servants, to bind hand
and foot the man that had not on his Wedding garment, and to cast him out,
(...), External darkness, or Darkness without: which though translated Utter
darkness, does not signify how great, but where that darkness is to be;
namely, without the habitation of Gods Elect.

Lastly, whereas there was a place near Jerusalem, called the Valley Gehenna,
and Tophet.
of the Children of Hinnon; in a part whereof, called Tophet, the Jews had
committed most grievous Idolatry, sacrificing their children to the Idol
Moloch; and wherein also God had afflicted his enemies with most grievous
punishments; and wherein Josias had burnt the Priests of Moloch upon their own
Altars, as appears at large in the 2 of Kings chap. 23. the place served
afterward, to receive the filth, and garbage which was carried thither, ont of
the City; and there used to be fires made, from time to time, to purify the
air, and take away the stench of Carrion. From this abominable place, the Jews
used ever after to call the place of the Damned, by the name of Gehenna, or
Valley of Hinnon. And this Gehenna, is that word, which is usually now
translated HELL; and from the fires from time to time there burning, we have
the notion of Everlasting, and Unquenchable Fire.

Seeing now there is none, that so interprets the Scripture, as that Of the
literal sense of the Scripture concerning Hell.
after the day of Judgment, the wicked are all Eternally to be punished in the
Valley of Hinnon; or that they shall so rise again, as to be ever after under
ground, or under water; or that after the Resurrection, they shall no more see
one another; nor stir from one place to another; it follows, me thinks, very
necessarily, that that which is thus said concerning Hell Fire, is spoken
metaphorically; and that therefore there is a proper sense to be enquired
after, (for of all Metaphors there is some real ground, that may be expressed
in proper words) both of the Place of Hell, and the nature of Hellish Torments,
and Tormenters.

And first for the Tormenters, we have their nature, and properties, Satan,
Devil, not Proper names, but Appellatives.
exactly and properly delivered by the names of, The Enemy, or Satan; The
Accuser, or Diabolus; The Destroyer, or Abaddon. Which significant names,
Satan, Devil, Abaddon, set not forth to us any Individual person, as proper
names use to do; but only an office, or quality; and are therefore
Appellatives; which ought not to have been left untranslated, as they are, in
the Latin, and Modern Bibles; because thereby they seem to be the proper names
of Demons; and men are the more easily seduced to believe the doctrine of
Devils; which at that time was the Religion of the Gentiles, and contrary to
that of Moses, and of Christ.

And because by the Enemy, the Accuser, and Destroyer, is meant, the Enemy of
them that shall be in the Kingdom of God; therefore if the Kingdom of God
after the Resurrection, be upon the Earth, (as in the former Chapter I have
shown by Scripture it seems to be,) The Enemy, and his Kingdom must be on
Earth also. For so also was it, in the time before the Jews had deposed God.
For Gods Kingdom was in Palestine; and the Nations round about, were the
Kingdoms of the Enemy; and consequently by Satan, is meant any Earthly Enemy
of the Church.

The Torments of Hell, are expressed sometimes, by weeping, Torments of Hell.
and gnashing of teeth, as Mat. 8. 12. Sometimes, by the worm of Conscience; as
Isa. 66. 24. and Mark 9. 44, 46, 48: sometimes, by Fire, as in the place now
quoted, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, and many places
beside: sometimes by shame, and cont^mpt, as Da^. 12. 2. And many of them that
sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake; some to Everlasting life; and some
to shame, and everlasting contempt. All which places design metaphorically a
grief, and discontent of mind, from the sight of that Eternal felicity in
others, which they themselves through their own incredulity, and disobedience
have lost. And because such felicity in others, is not sensible but by
comparison with their own actual miseries; it follows that they are to
suffer such bodily pains, and calamities, as are incident to those, who not
only live under evil and cruel Governors, but have also for Enemy, the
Eternal King of the Saints, God Almighty. And amongst these bodily pains, is
to be reckoned also to every one of the wicked a second Death. For though the
Scripture be clear for an universal Resurrection; yet we do not read, that
to any of the Reprobate is promised an Eternal life. For whereas St. Paul (1
Cor. 15. 42, 43.) to the question concerning what bodies men shall rise with
again, says, that the body is sown in corruption, and is raised in
incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power; Glory and Power cannot be applied to the
bodies of the wicked: Nor can the name of Second Death, be applied to those
that can never die but once: And although in Metaphorical speech, a Calamitous
life Everlasting, may be called an Everasting Death yet it cannot well be
understood of a Second Death. The fire prepared for the wicked, is an
Everlasting Fire: that is to say, the estate wherein no man can be without
torture, both of body and mind, after the Resurrection, shall endure for ever;
and in that sense the Fire shall be unquenchable, and the torments Everlasting:
but it cannot thence be inferred, that he who shall be cast into that fire, or
be tormented with those torments, shall endure, and resist them so, as to be
eternally burnt, and tortured, and yet never be destroyed, nor die. And though
there be many places that affirm Everlasting Fire, and Torments (into which men
may be cast successively one after another for ever;) yet I find none that
affirm there shall be an Eternal Life therein of any individual person; but
to the contrary, an Everlasting Death, which is the Second Death: For after
Death, and the Grave shall have delivered Apoc. 20. 13, 14.
up the dead which were in them, and every man be judged according to his
works; Death and the Grave shall also be cast into the Lake of Fire. This is
the Second Death. Whereby it is evident, that there is to be a Second Death of
every one that shall be condemned at the day of Judgment, after which he
shall die no more.

The joys of Life Eternal, are in Scripture comprehended all The Joys of
Life Eternal, and Salvation the same thing.
under the name of SALVATION, or being saved. To be saved, is to be secured,
either respectively, against special Evils, or absolutely, against all Evil,
comprehending Want, Sickness, and Death it self. And because man was created
in a condition Immortal, Salvation from Sin, and from Misery, all one.
not subject to corruption, and consequently to nothing that tends to the
dissolution of his nature; and fell from that happiness by the sin of Adam; it
follows, that to be saved from Sin, is to be saved from all the Evil, and
Calamities that Sin has brought upon us. And therefore in the Holy
Scripture, Remission of Sin, and Salvation from Death and Misery, is the same
thing, as it appears by the words of our Savior, who having cured a man sick
of the Palsy, by saying, ( Mat. 9. 2.) Son be of good cheer, thy Sins be
forgiven thee; and knowing that the Scribes took for blasphemy, that a man
should pretend to forgive Sins, asked them (v. 5.) whether it were easier to
say, Thy Sins be forgiven thee, or, Arise and walk; signifying thereby, that
it was all one, as to the saving of the sick, to say, Thy Sins are forgiven,
and Arise and walk; and that he used that form of speech, only to show he had
power to forgive Sins. And it is besides evident in reason, that since Death
and Misery, were the punishments of Sin, the discharge of Sin, must also be a
discharge of Death and Misery; that is to say, Salvation absolute, such as the
faithful are to enjoy after the day of Judgment, by the power, and favor of
Jesus Christ, who for that cause is called our SAVIOR.

Concerning Particular Salvations, such as are understood, 1 Samuel 14. 39. as
the Lord lives that saves Israel, that is, from their temporary enemies, and
2 Samuel 22. 4. Thou art my Savior, thou savest me from violence; and 2 Kings
13. 5. God gave the Israelites a Savior, and so they were delivered from the
hand of the Assyrians, and the like, I need say nothing; there being neither
difficulty, nor interest, to corrupt the interpretation of texts of that kind.

But concerning the General Salvation, hecause it must be in the The Place of
Eternal Salvation.
Kingdom of Heaven, there is great difficulty concerning the Place. On one
side, by Kingdom (which is an estate ordained by men for their perpetual
security against enemies, and want) it seems that this Salvation should be on
Earth. For by Salvation is set forth unto us, a glorious Reign of our King, by
Conquest; not a safety by Escape: and therefore there where we look for
Salvation, we must look also for Triumph; and before Triumph, for Victory; and
before Victory, for Battle; which cannot well be supposed, shall be in Heaven.
But how good soever this reason may be, I will not trust to it, without very
evident places of Scripture. The state of Salvation is described at large,
Isaiah 33. ver. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Look upon Zion, the City of our solemnities; [thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the
stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be
broken.

But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers, and
streams; wherein shall go no Gally with oars; neither shall gallant ship
pass ^hereby.

For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he
will save us.

Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast; they
could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame
take the prey.

And the Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the people that shall dwell
therein shall be forgiven their Iniquity.

In which words we have the place from whence Salvation is to proceed,
Jerusalem, a quiet habitation; the Eternity of it, a tabernacle that shall not
be taken down, etc. The Savior of it, the Lord, their Judge, their Lawgiver,
their King, he will save us; the Salvation, the Lord shall be to them as abroad
mote of swift waters, etc. the condition of their Enemies, their tacklings are
loose, their masts weak, the lame shall take the spoil of them. The condition of
the Saved, The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: And lastly, all this is
comprehended in Forgiveness of sin, The people that dwell therein shall be
forgiven their iniquity. By which ^t is evident, that Salvation shall be on
Earth, then, when God shall reign, (at the coming again of Christ) in
Jerusalem; and from Jerusalem shall proceed the Salvation of the Gentiles that
shall be received into Gods Kingdom: as is also more expressly declared by
the same Prophet, Chap. 65. 20, 21. And they (that is, the Gentiles who had any
Jew in bondage) shall bring all your brethren, for an offering to the Lord, out
of all nations, upon horses, and in charets, and in litters, and upon mules,
and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the
Children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the House of the
Lord. And I will also take of them for Priests and for Lev^tes, says the Lord:
Whereby it is manifest, that the chief seat of Gods Kingdom (which is the
Place, from whence the Salvation of us that were Gentiles, shall proceed) shall
be Jerusalem: And the same is also confirmed by our Savior, in his discourse
with the woman of Samaria, concerning the place of Gods worship; to whom he
says, John 4. 22. that the Samaritans worshipped they knew not what, but the
Jews worship what they knew, For Salvation is of the Jews (ex Iudae is, that
is, begins at the Jews): as if he should say, you worship God, but know not by
whom he will save you, as we do, that know it shall be by one of the tribe of
Judah, a Jew, not a Samaritan. And therefore also the woman not impertinently
answered him again, We know the Messiah shall come. So that which out Savior
says, Salvation is from the Jews, is the same that Paul says ( Romans 1. 16,
17.) The Gospel is the power of God to Salvation to every one that believes:
To the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of
God revealed from faith to faith; from the faith of the Jew, to the faith of
the Gentile. In the like sense the Prophet Joel describing the day of Judgment,
(chap. 2. 30, 31.) that God (...) show wonders in heaven, and in earth, blood,
and fire, and pillars os smoke. The Sun should be turned to darkness, and the
Moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come, he adds
verse 32. and it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord, shall be saved. For in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem shall be
Salvation. And Obadiah verse 17. says the same, Upon Mount Zion shall be
Deliverance; and there shall be holiness, and the house of Jacob shall
possess their possessions, that is, the possessions of the Heathen, which
possessions he expresses more particularly in the following verses, by the
mount of Esau* the Land of the Philistines, the fields of Ephraim, of Samaria,
Gilead, and the Cities of the South, and concludes with these words, the
Kingdom shall be the Lords. All these places are for Salvation, and the
Kingdom of God (after the day of Judgment) upon Earth. On the other side, I
have not found any text that can probably be drawn, to prove any Ascension of
the Saints into Heaven; that is to say, into any Coelum Empyreum, or other
aetheriall Region; saving that it is called the Kingdom of Heaven: which name
it may have, because God, that was King of the Jews, governed them by his
commands, sent to Moses by Angels from Heaven; and after their revolt, sent his
Son from Heaven, to reduce them to their obedience; and shall send him thence
again, to rule both them, and all other faithful men, from the day of
Judgment, Everlastingly: or from that, that the Throne of this our Great King
is in Heaven; whereas the Earth is but his Footstool. But that the Subjects of
God should have any place as high as his Throne, or higher than his Footstool,
it seems not suitable to the dignity of a King, nor can I find any evident
text for it in holy Scripture.

From this that has been said of the Kingdom of God, and of Salvation, it is
not hard to interpret what is meant by the WORLD TO COME. There are three
worlds mentioned in Scripture, the Old World, the Present World, and the
World to come. Of the first, St. Peter 2 Pet. 2. 5.
speaks, If God spared not the Old World, but saved Noah the eighth person, a
Preacher of righteousness, bringing the flood upon the world of the ungodly,
etc. So the first World, was from Adam to the general Flood. Of the present
World, our Savior speaks ( John 18. 36.) My Kingdom is not of this World.
For he came only to teach men the way of Salvation, and to renew the Kingdom
of his Father, by 2 Pet. 3. 13.
his doctrine. Of the World to come, St. Peter speaks, Nevertheless we
according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth. This is that
WORLD, wherein Christ coming down from Heaven, in the clouds, with great power,
and glory, shall send his Angels, and shall gather together his elect, from the
four winds, and from the uttermost parts of the Earth, and thence forth reign
over them, (under his Father) Everlastingly.

Salvation of a sinner, suppposeth a precedent REDEMPTION; for Redemption.
he that is once guilty of Sin, is obnoxious to the Penalty of the same; and
must pay (or some other for him) such Ransom, as he that is offended, and has
him in his power, shall require. And seeing the person offended, is Almighty
God, in whose power are all things; such Ransom is to be paid before Salvation
can be acquired, as God has been pleased to require. By this Ransom, is not
intended a satisfaction for Sin, equivalent to the Offense; which no sinner for
himself, nor righteous man can ever be able to make for another: The damage a
man does to another, he may make amends for by restitution, or recompense, but
sin cannot be taken away by recompense; for that were to make the liberty to
sin, a thing vendible. But sins may be pardoned to the repentant, either
gratis, or upon such penalty, as God is pleased to accept. That which God
usually accepted in the Old Testament, was some Sacrifice, or Oblation. To
forgive sin is not an act of Injustice, though the punishment have been
threatened. Even amongst men, though the promise of Good, bind the promiser; yet
threats, that is to say, promises of Evil, bind them not; much less shall
they bind God, who is infinitely more merciful then men. Our Savior Christ
therefore to Redeem us, did not in that sense satisfy for the Sins of men, as
that his Death, of its own virtue, could make it unjust in God to punish
sinners with Eternal death; but did make that Sacrifice, and Oblation of
himself, at his first coming, which God was pleased to require, for the
Salvation at his second coming, of such as in the mean time should repent, and
believe in him. And though this act of our Redemption, be not always in
Scripture called a Sacrifice, and Oblation, but sometimes a Price; yet by Price
we are not to understand any thing, by the value whereof, he could claim right
to a pardon for us, from his offended Father; but that Price which God the
Father was pleased in mercy to demand.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the signification in Scripture of the word CHURCH.
THe word Church, (Ecclesia) signifies in the Books of Holy Church the Lords
house.
Scripture diverse things. Sometimes (though not often) it is taken for Gods
House, that is to say, for a Temple, wherein Christians assemble to perform
holy duties publicly; as, 1 Cor. 14. ver. 34. Let your women keep silence in
the Churches: but this is Metaphorically put, for the Congregation there
assembled; and has been since used for the Edifice it self, to distinguish
between the Temples of Christians, and Idolaters. The Temple of Jerusalem was
Gods house, and the House of Prayer; and so is any Edifice dedicated by
Christians to the worship of Christ, Christ's house: and therefore the Greek
Fathers call it (...), The Lords house; and thence, in our language it came to
be called Kyrke, and Church.

Church (when not taken for a House) signifies the same that Ecclesia Ecclesia
properly what.
signified in the Grecian Commonwealths; that is to say, a Congregation, or an
Assembly of Citizens, called forth, to hear the Magistrate speak unto them; and
which in the Commonwealth of Rome was called Concio, as he that spoke was
called Ecclesiastes, and Concionator. And when they were called forth by
lawful Authority, Acts 19. 39.
it was Ecclesia legitima, a Lawful Church, (...). But when they were excited
by tumultuous, and seditious clamor, then it was a confused Church, (...).

It is taken also sometimes for the men that have right to be of the
Congregation, though not actually assembled; that is to say, for the whole
multitude of Christian men, how far soever they be dispersed: as ( Act. 8. 3.)
where it is said, that Saul made havoc of the Church: And in this sense is
Christ said to be Head of the Church. And sometimes for a certain part of
Christians, as ( Col. 4. 15. Salute the Church that is in his house. Sometimes
also for the Elect only; as ( Ephesians. 5. 27.) A Glorious Church, without spot,
or wrinkle, holy, and without blem^sh; which is meant of the Church triumphant,
or, Church to come. Sometimes, for a Congregation assembled, of professors of
Christianity, whether their profession be true, or counterfeit, as it is
understood, Mat. 18. 17. where it is said, Tell it to the Church, and if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Gentile, or Publican.

And in this last sense only it is that the Church can be taken for one In what
sense the Church is one Person.
Person; that is to say, that it can be said to have power to will, to
pronounce, to command, to be obeyed, to make laws, or to do any other action
whatsoever; For without authority from a lawful Congregation, whatsoever act
be done in a concourse of people, it is the particular act of every one of
those that were present, and gave their aid to the performance of it; and not
the act of them all in gross, as of one body; much less the act of them that
were absent, or that being present, were not willing it should be done.
According to this sense, I define a CHURCH to be, A company of men professing
Christian Church defined.
Religion, united in the person of one Sovereign; at whose command they ought
to assemble, and without whose authority they ought not to assemble. And
because in all Commonwealths, that Assembly, which is without warrant from the
Civil Sovereign, is unlawful; that Church also, which is assembled in any
Commonwealth, that has forbidden them to assemble, is an unlawful Assembly.

It follows also, that there is on Earth, no such universal Church, A
Christian Commonwealth, and a Church all one.
as all Christians are bound to obey; because there is no power on Earth, to
which all other Commonwealths are subject: There are Christians, in the
Dominions of several Princes and States; but every one of them is subject to
that Commonwealth, whereof he is himself a member; and consequently, cannot be
subject to the commands of any other Person. And therefore a Church, such a one
as is capable to Command, to Judge, Absolve, Condemn, or do any other act, is
the same thing with a Civil Commonwealth, consisting of Christian men; and is
called a Civil State, for that the subjects of it are Men; and a Church, for
that the subjects thereof are Christians. Temporal and Spiritual Government,
are but two words brought into the world, to make men see double, and mistake
their Lawful Sovereign. It is true, that the bodies of the faithful, after
the Resurrection, shall be not only Spiritual, but Eternal: but in this life
they are gross, and corruptible. There is therefore no other Government in
this life, neither of State, nor Religion, but Temporal; nor teaching of any
doctrine, lawful to any Subject, which the Governor both of the State, and of
the Religion, forbids to be taught: And that Governor must be one; or else
there must needs follow Faction, and Civil war in the Commonwealth, between
the Church and State; between Spiritualists, and Temporalists; between the
Sword of Justice, and the Shield of Faith; and (which is more) in every
Christian man's own breast, between the Christian, and the Man. The Doctors of
the Church, are called Pastors; so also are Civil Sovereigns: But if Pastors
be not subordinate one to another, so as that there may be one chief Pastor,
men will be taught contrary Doctrines, whereof both may be, and one must be
false. Who that one chief Pastor is, according to the law of Nature, has been
already shown; namely, that it is the Civil Sovereign: And to whom the
Scripture has assigned that Office, we shall see in the Chapters following.

CHAP. XL. Of the RIGHTS of the Kingdom of God, in Abraham, Moses, the High
Priests, and the Kings of Judah.
THe Father of the Faithful, and first in the Kingdom of God The Sovereign
Rights of Abraham.
by Covenant, was Abraham. For with him was the Covenant first made; wherein he
obliged himself, and his seed after him, to acknowledge and obey the commands
of God; not only such, as he could take notice of, (as Moral Laws,) by the
light of Nature; but also such, as God should in special manner deliver to him
by Dreams, and Visions. For as to the Moral law, they were already obliged,
and needed not have been contracted withal, by promise of the Land of Canaan.
Nor was there any Contract, that could add to, or strengthen the Obligation,
by which both they, and all men else were bound naturally to obey God Almighty:
And therefore the Covenant which Abraham made with God, was to take for the
Commandment of God, that which in the name of God was commanded him, in a
Dream, or Vifion; and to deliver it to his family, and cause them to observe
the same.

In this Contract of God with Abraham, we may observe three points of
important consequence in the government of Gods people. First, that at the
making of this Covenant, God spoke only to Abraham; and therefore contracted
not with any of his family, or seed, otherwise then as their wills (which make
the essence of all Covenants) were before the Contract involved in the will of
Abraham; who was therefore supposed to have had a lawful power, to make them
perform all that he covenanted for them. According whereunto ( Genesis 18. 18,
19.) God says, All the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him, For I
know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord. From whence may be concluded this first point,
that they to whom God has not spoken immediately, are to receive the positive
commandments of God, from their Sovereign; as the family and seed of Abraham
did from Abraham their Father, and Lord, and Abraham had the sole power of
ordering the Religion of his own people.
Civil Sovereign. And consequently in every Commonwealth, they who have no
supernatural Revelation to the contrary, ought to obey the laws of their own
Sovereign, in the external acts and profession of Religion. As for the inward
thought, and belief of men, which humane Governors can take no notice of, (for
God only knows the heart) they are not voluntary, nor the effect of the
laws, but of the unrevealed will, and of the power of God; and consequently
fall not under obligation.

From whence proceeds another point; that it was not unlawful No pretense of
Private Spirit against the Religion of Abraham.
for Abraham, when any of his Subjects should pretend Private Vision, or
Spirit, or other Revelation from God, for the countenancing of any doctrine
which Abraham should forbid, or when they followed, or adhered to any such
pretender, to punish them; and consequently that it is lawful now for the
Sovereign to punish any man that shall oppose his Private Spirit against the
Laws: For he has the same place in the Commonwealth, that Abraham had in his
own Family.

There arises also from the same, a third point; that as none but Abraham sole
Judge, and Interpreter of what God spoke.
Abraham in his family, so none but the Sovereign in a Christian Commonwealth,
can take notice what is, or what is not the Word of God. For God spoke only to
Abraham; and it was he only, that was able to know what God said, and to
interpret the same to his family: And therefore also, they that have the place
of Abraham in a Commonwealth, are the only Interpreters of what God has
spoken.

The same Covenant was renewed with Isaac; and afterward with The authority of
Moses whereon grounded.
Jacob; but afterward no more, till the Israelites were freed from the
Egyptians, and arrived at the Foot of Mount Sinai: and then it was renewed by
Moses (as I have said before, chap. 35.) in such manner, as they became from
that time forward the Peculiar Kingdom of God; whose Lieutenant was Moses, for
his own time: and the succession to that office was settled upon Aaron, and his
heirs after him, to be to God a Sacerdotall Kingdom for ever.

By this constitution, a Kingdom is acquired to God. But seeing Moses had no
authority to govern the Israelites, as a successor to the right of Abraham,
because he could not claim it by inheritance; it appears not as yet, that the
people were obliged to take him for Gods Lieutenant, longer than they believed
that God spoke unto him. And therefore his authority (notwithstanding the
Covenant they made with God) depended yet merely upon the opinion they had of
his Sanctity, and of the reality of his Conferences with God, and the verity of
his Miracles; which opinion coming to change, they were no more obliged to take
any thing for the law of God, which he propounded to them in Gods name. We are
therefore to consider, what other ground there was, of their obligation to obey
him. For it could not be the commandment of God that could oblige them;
because God spoke not to them immediately, but by the mediation of Moses
himself: And our Savior says of himself, John 5. 31.
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true; much less if Moses
bear witness of himself, (especially in a claim of Kingly power over Gods
people) ought his testimony to be received. His authority therefore, as the
authority of all other Princes, must be grounded on the Consent of the People,
and their Promise to obey him. And so it was: For the people (Exodus 20. 18.)
when they saw the Thunderings, and the Lightnings, and the noise of the
Trumpet, and the monntaine smoking, removed, and stood a far off. And they
said unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak
with us lest we die. Here was their promise of obedience; and by this it was
they obliged themselves to obey whatsoever he should deliver unto them for the
Commandment of God.

And notwithstanding the Covenant constituteth a Sacerdotall Moses was (under
God) Sovereign of the Jews, all his own time, though Aaron had the Priesthood.
Kingdom, that is to say, a Kingdom hereditary to Aaron; yet that is to be
understood of the succession, after Moses should be dead. For whosoever
orders, and establishes the Policy, as first founder of a Commonwealth (be
it Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy) must needs have Sovereign Power over
the people all the while he is doing of it. And that Moses had that power all
his own time, is evidently affirmed in the Scripture. First, in the text last
before cited, because the people promised obedience, not to Aaron but to him.
Secondly, ( Exodus 24. 1, 2.) And God said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord,
thou, and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel. And
Moses alone shall come near the Lord, but they shall not come nigh, neither
shall the people go up with him. By which it is plain, that Moses who was
alone called up to God, (and not Aaron, nor the other Priests, nor the Seventy
Elders, nor the People who were forbidden to come up) was alone he, that
represented to the Israelites the Person of God; that is to say, was their sole
Sovereign under God. And though afterward it be said (verse 9.) Then went up
Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel, and
they saw the God of Israel, and there was under his feet, as it were a paved
work of a sapphire stone. etc. yet this was not till after Moses had been with
God before, and had brought to the people the words which God had said to him.
He only went for the bnsinesse of the people; the others, as the Nobles of his
retinue, were admitted for honor to that special grace, which was not allowed
to the people; which was, as in the verse after appears) to see God and live.
God laid not his hand upon them, they saw God, and did eat and drink (that is,
did live), but did not carry any commandment from him to the people. Again, it
is every where said, The Lord spoke unto Moses, as in all other occasions of
Government; so also in the ordering of the Ceremonies of Religion, contained in
the 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 Chapters of Exodus, and throughout
Leviticus: to Aaron seldom. The Calfe that Aaron made, Moses threw into the
fire. Lastly, the question of the Authority of Aaron, by occasion of his and
Miriams mutiny agaiust Moses, was ( Numbers 12.) judged by God himself for
Moses. So also in the question between Moses, and the People, who had the Right
of Governing the People, when Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and two hundred and
fifty Princes of the Assembly gathered themselves together (Numb. 16. 3.)
against Moses, and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon
you, seeing all the congregation are Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is
amongst them, why lift you up your selves above the congregation of the Lord?
God caused the Earth to swallow Corah, Dathan, and Abiram with their wives and
children alive, and consumed those two hundred and fifty Princes with fire.
Therefore neither Aaron, nor the People, nor any Aristocracy of the chief
Princes of the People, but Moses alone had next under God the Sovereignty over
the Israelites: And that not only in causes of Civil Policy, but also of
Religion: For Moses only spoke with God, and therefore only could tell the
People, what it was that God required at their hands. No man upon pain of death
might be so presumptuous as to approach the Mountain where God talked with
Moses. Thou shall set bounds (says the Lord, Exodus 19. 12.) to the people
round about, and say, Take heed to your selves that you go not up into the
Mount, or touch the border of it; whosoever touches the Mount shall surely be
put to death. And again (verse 21.) Go down, charge the people, lest they
break through unto the Lord to gaze. Out of which we may conclude, that
whosoever in a Christian Commonwealth holds the place of Moses, is the sole
Messenger of God, and Interpreter of his Commandments. And according hereunto,
no man ought in the interpretation of the Scripture to proceed further then the
bounds which are set by their several Sovereigns. For the Scriptures since God
now speaks in them, are the Mount Sinai; the bounds whereof are the Laws of
them that represent Gods Person on Earth. To look upon them, and therein to
behold the wondrous works of God, and learn to fear him is allowed; but to
interpret them; that is, to pry into what God says to him whom he appoints
to govern under him, and make themselves Judges whether he govern as God
commands him, or not, is to transgress the bounds God has set us, and to
gaze upon God irreverently.

There was no Prophet in the time of Moses, nor pretender to the All spirits
were subordinate to the spirit of Moses.
Spirit of God, but such as Moses had approved, and Authorized. For there were
in his time but Seventy men, that are said to Prophecy by the Spirit of God,
and these were of all Moses his election; concerning whom God said to Moses (
Numb. 11. 16.) Gather to me Seventy of the Elders of Israel, whom thou know
to be the Elders of the People. To these God imparted his Spirit; but it was
not a different Spirit from that of Moses; for it is said (verse 25.) God came
down in a cloud, and took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and gave it to the
Seventy Elders. But as I have shown before (chap. 36.) by Spirit, is understood
the Mind; so that the sense of the place is no other than this, that God endued
them with a mind conformable, and subordinate to that of Moses, that they might
Prophecy, that is to say, speak to the people in Gods name, in such manner, as
to set forward (as Ministers of Moses, and by his authority) such doctrine as
was agreeable to Moses his doctrine. For they were but Ministers; and when two
of them Prophesied in the Camp, it was thought a new and unlawful thing; and
as it is in the 27. and 28. verses of the same Chapter, they were accused of
it, and Joshua advised Moses to forbid them, as not knowing that it was by
Moses his Spirit that they Prophesied. By which it is manifest, that no Subject
ought to pretend to Prophecy, or to the Spirit, in opposition to the doctrine
established by him, whom God has set in the place of Moses.

Aaron being dead, and after him also Moses, the Kingdom, as After Moses the
Sovereignty was in the High Priest.
being a Sacerdotall Kingdom, descended by virtue of the Covenant, to Aarons
Son, Eleazar the High Priest: And God declared him (next under himself) for
Sovereign, at the same time that he appointed Joshua for the General of their
Army. For thus God says expressly ( Numb. 27. 21.) concerning Joshua; He
shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him, before
the Lord, at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in,
both he, and all the Children of Israel with him: Therefore the Supreme Power
of making War and Peace, was in the Priest. The Supreme Power of Judicature
belonged also to the High Priest: For the Book of the Law was in their keeping;
and the Priests and Levites only, were the subordinate Judges in causes
Civil, as appears in Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10. And for the manner of Gods worship,
there was never doubt made, but that the High Priest till the time of Saul, had
the Supreme Authority. Therefore the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power were both
joined together in one and the same person, the High Priest; and ought to be
so, in whosoever governs by Divine Right; that is, by Authority immediate
from God. Of the Sovereign power between the time of Joshua and of Saul.


After the death of Joshua, till the time of Saul, the time between is noted
frequently in the Book of Judges, that there was in those days no King in
Israel; and sometimes with this addition, that every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. By which is to be understood, that where it is said,
there was no King, is meant, there was no Sovereign Power in Israel. And so it
was, if we consider the Act, and Exercise of such power. For after the death of
Joshua, and Eleazar, there arose another generation (Judges 2. 10.) that knew
not the Lord, nor the works which he had done for Israel, but did evil in the
sight of the Lord, and served Baalim. And the Jews had that quality which St.
Paul notes, to look for a sign, not only before they would submit themselves
to the government of Moses, but also after they had obliged themselves by their
submission. Whereas Signs, and Miracles had for End to procure Faith, not to
keep men from violating it, when they have once given it; for to that men are
obliged by the law of Nature. But if we consider not the Exercise, but the
Right of Governing, the Sovereign power was still in the High Priest. Therefore
whatsoever obedience was yielded to any of the Judges (who were men chosen by
God extraordinarily, to save his rebellious subjects out of the hands of the
enemy,) it cannot be drawn into argument against the Right the High Priest had
to the Sovereign Power, in all matters, both of Policy and Religion. And
neither the Judges, nor Samuel himself had an ordinary, but extraordinary
calling to the Government; and were obeyed by the Israelites, not out of duty,
but out of reverence to their favor with God, appearing in their wisdom,
courage, or felicity. Hitherto therefore the Right of Regulating both the
Policy, and the Religion, were inseparable.

To the Judges, succeeded Kings: And whereas before, all authority, Of the
Rights of the Kings of Israel.
both in Religion, and Policy, was in the High Priest; so now it was all in the
King. For the Sovereignty over the people, which was before, not only by
virtue of the Divine Power, but also by a particular pact of the Israelites in
God, and next under him, in the High Priest, as his Vicegerent on earth, was
cast off by the People, with the consent of God himself. For when they said to
Samuel (1 Samuel 8. 5.) make us a King to judge us, like all the Nations, they
signified that they would no more be governed by the commands that should be
laid upon them by the Priest, in the name of God; but by one that should
command them in the same manner that all other nations were commandcd; and
consequently in deposing the High Priest of Royal authority, they deposed that
peculiar Government of God. And yet God consented to it, saying to Samuel
(verse 7.) Hearken unto the voice of the People, in all that they shall say
unto thee; for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I
should not reign over them. Having therefore rejected God, in whose Right the
Priests governed, there was no authority left to the Priests, but such as the
King was pleased to allow them; which was more, or less, according as the
Kings were good, or evil. And for the Government of Civil affairs, it is
manifest, it was all in the hands of the King. For in the same Chapter, verse
20. They say they will be like all the Nations; that their King shall be their
Judge, and go before them, and fight their battles; that is, he shall have
the whole authority, both in Peace and War. In which is contained also the
ordering of Religion: for there was no other Word of God in that time, by which
to regulate Religion, but the Law of Moses, which was their Civil Law.
Besides, we read (1 Kings 2. 27.) that Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being
Priest before the Lord: He had therefore authority over the High Priest, as
over any other Subject; which is a great mark of Supremacy in Religion. And we
read also (1 Kings 8.) that he dedicated the Temple; that he blessed the
People; and that he himself in person made that excellent prayer, used in the
Consecrations of all Churches, and houses of Prayer; which is another great
mark of Supremacy in Religion. Again, we read (2 Kings 22.) that when there was
question concerning the Book of the Law found in the Temple, the same was not
decided by the High Priest but Josiah sent both him, and others to enquire
concerning it, of Hulda, the Prophetess; which is another mark of the
Supremacy in Religion. Lastly, we read (1 Chronicles. 26. 30.) that David made
Hashabiah and his brethren, Hebronites, Officers of Israel among them Westward,
in all business of the Lord, and in the service of the King. Likewise (verse
32.) that he made other Hebronites, rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites,
and the half tribe of Manasseh (these were the rest of Israel that dwelt
beyond Jordan) for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King. Is
not this full Power, both temporal and spiritual, as they call it, that would
divide it? To conclude; from the first institution of Gods Kingdom, to the
Captivity, the Supremacy of Religion, was in the same hand with that of the
Civil Sovereignty; and the Priests office after the election of Saul, was not
Magisteriall, but Ministerial.

Notwithstanding the government both in Policy and Religion, The practice of
Supremacy in Religion, was not in the time of the Kings, according to the Right
thereof.
were joined, first in the High Priests, and afterward in the Kings, so far
forth as concerned the Right; yet it appears by the same Holy History, that
the people understood it not; but there being amongst them a great part, and
probably the greatest part, that no longer than they saw great miracles, or
(which is equivalent to a miracle) great abilities, or great felicity in the
enterprises of their Governors, gave sufficient credit, either to the fame of
Moses, or to the Colloquies between God and the Priests; they took occasion as
often as their Governors displeased them, by blaming sometimes the Policy,
sometimes the Religion, to change the Government, or revolt from their
Obedience at their pleasure: And from thence proceeded from time to time the
civil troubles, divisions, and calamities of the Nation. As for example, after
the death of Eleazar and Joshua, the next generation which had not seen the
wonders of God, but were left to their own weak reason, not knowing themselves
obliged by the Covenant of a Sacerdotall Kingdom, regarded no more the
Commandment of the Priest, nor any law of Moses, but did every man that which
was right in his own eyes; and obeyed in Civil affairs, such men, as from time
to time they thought able to deliver them from the neighbor Nations that
oppressed them; and consulted not with God (as they ought to doc,) but with
such men, or women, as they guessed to be Prophets by their Praedictions of
things to come; and though they had an Idol in their Chapel, yet if they had a
Levite for their Chaplain, they made account they worshipped the God of Israel.

And afterward when they demanded a King, after the manner of the nations; yet
it was not with a design to depart from the worship of God their King; but
despairing of the justice of the sons of Samuel, they would have a King to judge
them in Civil actions; but not that they would allow their King to change the
Religion which they thought was recommended to them by Moses. So that they
always kept in store a pretext, either of Justice, or Religion, to discharge
them selves of their obedience, whenever they had hope to prevail. Samuel
was displeased with the people, for that they desired a King, (for God was
their King already, and Samuel had but an authority under him); yet did Samuel,
when Saul observed not his counsel, in destroying Agag as God had commanded,
anoint another King, namely, David, to take the succession from his heirs.
Rehoboam was no Idolater; but when the people thought him an Oppressor; that
Civil pretense carried from him ten Tribes to Jeroboam an Idolater. And
generally through the whole History of the Kings, as well of Judah, as of
Israel, there were Prophets that always controlled the Kings, for
transgressing the Religion; and sometimes also for Errors 2 Chro. 19. 2.
of State; as Jehosaphat was reproved by the Prophet Jehu, for aiding the King
of Israel against the Syrians; and Hezekiah, by Isaiah, for showing his
treasures to the Ambassadors of Babylon. By all which it appears, that though
the power both of State and Religion were in the Kings; yet none of them were
uncontrolled in the use of it, but such as were gracious for their own natural
abilities, or felicities. So that from the practice of those times, there can
no argument be drawn, that the Right of Supremacy in Religion was not in the
Kings, unless we place it in the Prophets; and conclude, that because Hezekiah
praying to the Lord before the Cherubins, was not answered from thence, nor
then, but afterward by the Prophet Isaiah, therefore Isaiah was supreme Head
of the Church; or because Josiah consulted Hulda the Prophetess, concerning
the Book of the Law, that therefore neither he, nor the High Priest, but Hulda
the Prophetess had the Supreme authority in matter of Religion; which I think
is not the opinion of any Doctor.

During the Captivity, the Jews had no Commonwealth at all: After the
Captivity the Jews ^ad no settled Commonwealth.
And after their return, though they renewed their Covenant with God, yet there
was no promise made of obedience, neither to Esdras, nor to any other: And
presently after they became subjects to the Greeks (from whose Customs, and
Daemonology, and from the doctrine of the Cabalists, their Religion became much
corrupted): In such sort as nothing can be gathered from their confusion, both
in State and Religion, concerning the Supremacy in either. And therefore so far
forth as concerns the Old Testament, we may conclude, that whosoever had the
Sovereignty of the Commonwealth amongst the Jews, the same had also the
Supreme Authority in matter of Gods external worship; and represented Gods
Person; that is the person of God the Father; though he were not called by the
name of Father, till such time as he sent into the world his Son Jesus Christ,
to redeem mankind from their sins, and bring them into his Everlasting
Kingdom, to be saved for evermore. Of which we are to speak in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. XLI. Of the OFFICE of our BLESSED SAVIOR.
WE find in Holy Scripture three parts of the Office of the Three parts of the
Office of Christ.
Messiah: The first of a Redeemer, or Savior: The second of a Pastor,
Counselor, or Teacher, that is, of a Prophet sent from God, to convert such as
God has elected to Salvation: The third of a King, an eternal King, but under
his Father, as Moses and the High Priests were in their several times. And to
these three parts are correspondent three times. For our Redemption he wrought
at his first coming, by the Sacrifice, wherein he offered up himself for our
sins upon the Cross: our Conversion he wrought partly then in his own
Person; and partly works now by his Ministers; and will continue to work till
his coming again. And after his coming again, shall begin that his glorious
Reign over his elect, which is to last eternally.

To the Office of a Redeemer, that is, of one that pays the Ransom of His
Office as a Redeemer.
Sin, (which Ransom is Death,) it appertains, that he was Sacrificed, and
thereby bare upon his own head, and carried away from us our iniquities, in
such sort as God had required. Not that the death of one man, though without
sin, can satisfy for the offenses of all men, in the rigor of Justice, but
in the Mercy of God, that ordained such Sacrifices for sin, as he was pleased
in his mercy to accept. In the Old Law (as we may read, Leviticus the 16.) the
Lord required, that there should every year once, be made an Atonement for the
Sins of all Israel, both Priests, and others; for the doing whereof, Aaron
alone was to sacrifice for himself and the Priests a young Bullock; and for the
rest of the people, he was to receive from them two young Goats, of which he
was to sacrifice one; but as for the other, which was the Escape Goat, he was to
lay his hands on the head thereof, and by a confession of the iniquities of the
people, to lay them all on that head, and then by some opportune man, to cause
the Goat to be led into the wilderness, and there to escape, and carry away
with him the iniquities of the people. As the Sacrifice of the one Goat was a
sufficient (because an acceptable) price for the Ransom of all Israel; so the
death of the Messiah, is a sufficient price, for the Sins of all mankind,
because there was no more required. Our Savior Christ's sufferings seem to be
here figured, as clearly; as in the oblation of Isaac, or in any other type of
him in the Old Testament: He was both the sacrificed Goat, and the Escape Goat;
He was oppressed, and he was afflicted (Esaias 53. 7.); he opened not his mouth;
he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep is dumb before the
shearer, so opened he not his mouth: Here he is the sacrificed G^at. He has
born our Griefs, (ver. 4.) and carried our sorrows: And again, (ver. 6.) the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all: And so he is the Escape Goat.
He was cut off from the land of the living (ver. 8.) for the transgression of
my People: There again he is the sacrificed Goat. And again, (ver. 11.) he
shall bear their sins: He is the Escape Goat. Thus is the Lamb of God
equivalent to both those Goats; sacrificed, in that he dyed; and escaping, in
his Resurrection; being raised opportunely by his Father, and removed from the
habitation of men in his Ascension.

For as much therefore, as he that redeemeth, has no title to Christ's Kingdom
not of this wo^ld.
the thing redeemed, before the Redemption, and Ransom paid; and this Ransom
was the Death of the Redeemer; it is manifest, that our Savior (as man) was
not King of those that he Redeemed, before he suffered death; that is, during
that time he conversed bodily on the Earth. I say, he was not then King in
present, by virtue of the Pact, which the faithful make with him in Baptism:
Nevertheless, by the renewing of their Pact with God in tisme, they were
obliged to obey him for King, (under his Father) whenever he should be
pleased to take the Kingdom upon him. According whereunto, our Savior himself
expressly says, ( John 18. 36.) My Kingdom is not of this world. Now seeing
the Scripture makes mention but of two worlds; this that is now, and shall
remain to the day of Judgment, (which is therefore also called, the last day;)
and that which shall be after the day of Judgment, when there shall be a new
Heaven, and a new Earth; the Kingdom of Christ is not to begin till the
general Resurrection. And that is it which our Savior says, ( Mat. 16. 27.)
The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then
he shall reward every man according to his works. To reward every man according
to his works, is to execute the Office of a King; and this is not to be till he
come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels. When our Savior says, (
Mat. 23. 2.) The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat; All therefore
whatsoever they bid you do, that observe and do; he declares plainly, that
he ascribes Kingly Power, for that time, not to himself, but to them. And so
he does also, where he says, ( Luke 12. 14.) Who made me a Judge, or Divider
over you? And ( John 12. 47.) I came not to judge the world, but to save the
world. And yet our Savior came into this world that he might be a King, and
a Judge in the world to come: For he was the Messiah, that is, the Christ,
that is, the Anointed Priest, and the Sovereign Prophet of God; that is to say,
he was to have all the power that was in Moses the Prophet, in the High Priests
that succeeded Moses, and in the Kings that succeeded the Priests. And St. John
says expressly (chap. 5. ver. 22.) The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son. And this is not repugnant to that other
place, I came not to judge the world: for this is spoken of the world present,
the other of the world to come; as also where it is said, that at the second
coming of Christ, ( Mat. 19. 28.) Ye that have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his Glory, ye
shall also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

If then Christ whilst he was on Earth, had no Kingdom The End of Christ's
coming was to renew the Covenant of the Kingdom of God, and to persuade the
Elect to embrace it, which was the second part of his Office.
in this world, to what end was his first coming? It was to restore unto God,
by a new Covenant, the Kingdom, which being his by the Old Covenant, had been
cut off by the rebellion of the Israelites in the election of Saul. Which to
do, he was to preach unto them, that he was the Messiah, that is, the King
promised to them by the Prophets; and to offer himself in sacrifice for the
sins of them that should by faith submit themselves thereto; and in case the
nation generally should refuse him, to call to his obedience such as should
believe in him amongst the Gentiles. So that there are two parts of our
Saviors Office during his abode upon the Earth: One to Proclaim himself the
Christ; and another by Teaching, and by working of Miracles, to persuade, and
prepare men to live so, as to be worthy of the Immortality Believers were to
enjoy, at such ti^e as he should come in majesty, to take possession of his
Fathers Kingdom. And therefore it is, that the time of his preaching, is often
by himself called the Regeneration; which is not properly a Kingdom, and
thereby a warrant to deny obedience to the Magistrates that then were, (for he
commanded to obey those that sat then in Moses chair, and to pay tribute to
Caesar; but only an earnest of the Kingdom of God that was to come, to those
to whom God had given the grace to be his disciples, and to believe in him; For
which cause the Godly are said to be already in the Kingdom of Grace, as
naturalized in that heavenly Kingdom.

Hitherto therefore there is nothing done, or taught by Christ, The preaching
of Christ not contrary to the then law of the Jews, nor of Caesar.
that tends to the diminution of the Civil Right of the Jews, or of Caesar.
For as touching the Commonwealth which then was amongst the Jews, both they
that bare rule amongst them, and they that were governed, did all expect the
Messiah, and Kingdom of God; which they could not have done if their Laws had
forbidden him (when he came) to manifest, and declare himself. Seeing therefore
he did nothing, but by Preaching, and Miracles go about to prove himself to be
that Messiah, he did therein nothing against their laws. The Kingdom he
claimed was to be in another world: He taught all men to obey in the mean time
them that sat in Moses seat: He allowed them to give Caesar his tribute, and
refused to take upon himself to be a Judge. How then could his words, or
actions be seditious, or tend to the overthrow of their then Civil
Government? But God having determined his sacrifice, for the reduction of his
elect to their former covenanted obedience, for the means, whereby he would
bring the same to effect, made use of their malice, and ingratitude. Nor was it
contrary to the laws of Caesar. For though Pilate himself (to gratify the
Jews) delivered him to be crucified; yet before he did so, he pronounced
openly, that he found no fault in him: And put for title of his condemnation,
not as the Jews required, that he pretended to be King; bnt simply, That he
was King of the Jews; and notwithstanding their clamor, refused to alter it;
saying, What I have written, I have written.

As for the third part of his Office, which was to be King*, I The third part
of his Office was to be King (under his Father) of the Elect.
have already shown that his Kingdom was not to begin till the Resurrection.
But then he shall be King, not only as God, in which sense he is King already,
and ever shall be, of all the Earth, in virtue of his omnipotence; but also
peculiarly of his own Elect, by virtue of the pact they make with him in their
Baptism. And therefore it is, that our Savior says ( Mat. 19. 28.) that his
Apostles should sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel,
When the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory: whereby he signified
that he should reign then in his humane nature; and ( Mat. 16. 27.) The Son of
man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall
reward every man according to his works. The same we may read, Mark 13. 26.
and 14. 62. and more expressly for the time, Luke 22. 29, 30. I appoint unto
you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me, that you may eat and drink
at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. By which it is manifest, that the Kingdom of Christ appointed to him
by his Father, is not to be before the Son of Man shall come in Glory, and make
his Apostles Judges of the twelve tribes of Israel. But a man may here ask,
seeing there is no marriage in the Kingdom of Heaven, whether men shall then
eat, and drink; what eating therefore is meant in this place? This is expounded
by our Savior ( John 6. 27.) where he says, Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of man shall give you. So that by eating at Christ's table, is meant the
eating of the Tree of Life; that is to say, the enjoying of Immortality, in the
Kingdom of the Son of Man. By which places, and many more, it is evident, that
our Saviors Kingdom is to be exercised by him in his humane nature.

Again, he is to be King then, no otherwise than as subordinate, Christ's
authority in the Kingdom of God subordinate to that* of his Father.
or Vicegerent of God the Father, as Moses was in the wilderness; and as the
High Priests were before the reign of Saul: and as the Kings were after it. For
it is one of the Prophecies concerning Christ, that he should be like (in
Office) to Moses: I will raise them up a Prophet (says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.
18.) from amongst their Brethren like unto thee, and will put my words into his
mouth, and this similitude with Moses, is also apparent in the actions of our
Savior himself, whilst he was conversant on Earth. For as Moses chose twelve
Princes of the tribes, to govern under him; so did our Savior choose twelve
Apostles, who shall sit on twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel: And as Moses authorized Seventy Elders, to receive the Spirit of God,
and to Prophecy to the people, that is, (as I have said before,) to speak unto
them in the name of God; so our Savior also ordained seventy Disciples, to
preach his Kingdom, and Salvation to all Nations. And as when a complaint was
made to Moses, against those of the Seventy that prophesied in the camp of
Israel, he justified them in it, as being subservient therein to his
government; so also our Savior, when St. John complained to him of a certain
man that cast out Devils in his name, justified him therein, saying, ( Luke 9.
50.) Forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is on our part.

Again, our Savior resembled Moses in the institution of Sacraments, both of
Admission into the Kingdom of God, and of Commemoration of his deliverance of
his Elect from their miserable condition. As the Children of Israel had for
Sacrament of their Reception into the Kingdom of God, before the time of
Moses, the rite of Circumcision, which rite having been omitted in the
Wilderness, was again restored as soon as they came into the land of Promise;
so also the Jews, before the coming of our Savior, had a rite of Baptizing,
that is, of washing with water all those that being Gentiles, embraced the God
of Israel. This rite St. John the Baptist used in the reception of all them
that gave their names to the Christ, whom he preached to be already come into
the world; and our Savior instituted the same for a Sacrament to be taken by
all that believed in him. From what cause the rite of Baptism first proceeded,
is not expressed formally in the Scripture; but it may be probably thought to
be an imitation of the law of Moses, concerning Leprousie; wherein the Leprous
man was commanded to be kept out of the camp of Israel for a certain time;
after which time being judged by the Priest to be clean, he was admitted into
the camp after a solemn Washing. And this may therefore be a type of the
Washing in Baptism; wherein such men as are cleansed of the Leprousie of Sin
by Faith, are received into the Church with the solemnity of Baptism. There is
another conjecture drawn from the Ceremonies of the Gentiles, in a certain case
that rarely happens; and that is, when a man that was thought dead, chanced to
recover, other men made scruple to converse with him, as they would do to
converse with a Ghost, unless he were received again into the number of men,
by Washing, as Children new born were washed from the uncleanness of their
nativity, which was a kind of new birth. This ceremony of the Greeks, in the
time that Judaea was under the Dominion of Alexander, and the Greeks his
successors, may probably enough have crept into the Religion of the Jews. But
seeing it is not likely our Savior would countenance a Heathen rite, it is
most likely it proceeded from the Legal Ceremony of Washing after Leprosy.
And for the other Sacrament, of eating the Paschall Lamb, it is manifestly
imitated in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; in which the Breaking of the
Bread, and the pouring out of the Wine, do keep in memory our deliverance from
the Misery of Sin, by Christ's Passion, as the eating of the Paschall Lamb,
kept in memory the deliverance of the Jews out of the Bondage of Egypt. Seeing
therefore the authority of Moses was but subordinate, and he but a Lieutenant
to God; it follows, that Christ, whose authority, as man, was to be like
that of Moses, was no more but subordinate to the authority of his Father. The
same is more expressly signified, by that that he teaches us to pray, Our
Father, Let thy Kingdom come; and, For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and
the Glory; and by that it is said, that He shall come in the Glory of his
Father; and by that which St. Paul says, (1 Cor. 15. 24.) then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; and
by many other most express places.

Our Savior therefore, both in Teaching, and Reigning, One and the same God is
the Person represented by Moses, and by Christ.
represents (as Moses did) the Person of God; which God from that time
forward, but not before, is called the Father; and being still one and the same
substance, is one Person as represented by Moses, and another Person as
represented by his Son the Christ. For Person being a relative to a
Representer, it is consequent to plurality of Representers, that there be a
plurality of Persons, though of one and the same Substance.

CHAP. XLII. Of POWER ECCLESIASTICAL.
FOr the understanding of POWER ECCLESIASTICAL, what, and in whom it is, we
are to distinguish the time from the Ascension of our Savior, into two parts;
one before the Conversion of Kings, and men endued with Sovereign Civil Power;
the other after their Conversion. For it was long after the Ascension, before
any King, or Civil Sovereign embraced, and publicly allowed the teaching of
Christian Religion.

And for the time between, it is manifest, that the Power Ecclesiastical, Of
the Holy Spirit that fell on the Apostles.
was in the Apostles; and after them in such as were by them ordained to Preach
the Gospel, and to convert men to Christianity, and to direct them that were
converted in the way of Salvation; and after these the Power was delivered
again to others by these ordained, and this was done by Imposition of hands
upon such as were ordained; by which was signified the giving of the Holy
Spirit, or Spirit of God, to those whom they ordained Ministers of God, to
advance his Kingdom. So that Imposition of hands, was nothing else but the
Seal of their Commission to Preach Christ, and teach his Doctrine; and the
giving of the Holy Ghost by that ceremony of Imposition of hands, was an
imitation of that which Moses did. For Moses used the same ceremony to his
Minister Joshua, as we read De^teronomy 34. ver. 9. And Joshua the Son of Nun
was full of the Spirit of VVisdome; for Moses had laid his hands upon him. Our
Savior therefore between his Resurrection, and Ascension, gave his Spirit to
the Apostles; first, by Breathing on them, and saying, (John 20. 22.) Receive
ye the Holy Spirit; and after his Ascension ( Acts 2. 2, 3.) by sending down
upon them, a mighty wind, and Cloven tongues of fire; and not by Imposition of
hands; as neither did God lay his hands on Moses: and his Apostles afterward,
transmitted the same Spirit by Imposition of hands, as Moses did to Joshua. So
that it is manifest hereby, in whom the Power Ecclesiastical continually
remained, in those first times, where there was not any Christian
Commonwealth; namely, in them that received the same from the Apostles, by
successive laying on of hands.

Here we have the Person of God born now the third time. Of the Trinity.
For as Moses, and the High Priests, were Gods Representative in the Old
Testament; and our Savior himself as Man, during his abode on earth: So the
Holy Ghost, that is to say, the Apostles, and their successors, in the Office
of Preaching, and Teaching, that had received the Holy Spirit, have Represented
him ever since. But a Person, (as I have shown before, chapt. 13.) is he that
is Represented, as often as he is Represented; and therefore God, who has been
Represented (that is, Personated) thrice, may properly enough be said to be
three Persons; though neither the word Person, nor Trinity be ascribed to him
in the Bible. St. John indeed (1 Epist. 5. 7.) says, There be three that bear
witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these Three
are One: But this disagreeth not, but accords fitly with three Persons in the
proper signification of Persons; which is, that which is Represented by
another. For so God the Father, as Represented by Moses, is one Person; and as
Represented by his Son, another Person; and as Represented by the Apostles,
and by the Doctors that taught by authority from them derived, is a third
Person; and yet every Person here, is the Person of one and the same God. But a
man may here ask, what it was whereof these three bare witness. St. John
therefore tells us (verse 11.) that they bear witness, that God has given us
eternal life in his Son. Again, if it should be asked, wherein that testimony
appears, the Answer is easy; for he has testified the same by the miracles
he wrought, first by Moses; secondly, by his Son himself; and lastly by his
Apostles, that had received the Holy Spirit; all which in their times
Represented the Person of God; and either prophesied, or preached Jesus Christ.
And as for the Apostles, it was the character of the Apostleship, in the twelve
first and great Apostles, to bear Witness of his Resurrection; as appears
expressly ( Acts 1. ver. 21, 22.) where St. Peter, when a new Apostle was to
be chosen in the place of Judas Iscariot, uses these words, Of these men which
have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst
us, beginning at the Baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a Witness with us of his Resurrection:
which words interpret the bearing of Witness, mentioned by St. John. There is
in the same place mentioned another Trinity of Witnesses in Earth. For (ver.
8.) he says, there are three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the
Water, and the Blood; and these three agree in one: that is to say, the graces
of Gods Spirit, and the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which
all agree in one Testimony, to assure the consciences of believers, of eternal
life; of which Testimony he says (verse 10.) He that believes on the Son of
man has the Witness in himself. In this Trinity on Earth, the Unity is not of
the thing; for the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, are not the same
substance, though they give the same testimony: But in the Trinity of Heaven,
the Persons are the persons of one and the same God, though Represented in
three different times and occasions. To conclude, the doctrine of the Trinity,
as far as can be gathered directly from the Scripture, is in substance this;
that the God who is always One and the same, was the Person Represented by
Moses; the Person Represented by his Son Incarnate; and the Person Represented
by the Apostles. As Represented by the Apostles, the Holy Spirit by which they
spoke, is God; As Represented by his Son that was God and Man), the Son is that
God; As represented by Moses, and the High Priests, the Father, that is to say,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that God: From whence we may gather the
reason why those names Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in the signification of the
Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament: For they are Persons, that is,
they have their names from Representing; which could not be, till diverse men
had Represented Gods Person in ruling, or in directing under him.

Thus we see how the Power Ecclesiastical was left by our Savior to the
Apostles; and how they were (to the end they might the better exercise that
Power,) endued with the Holy Spirit, which is therefore called sometime in the
New Testament Paracletus which signifies an Assister, or one called to for
help, though it be commonly translated a Comforter. Let us now consider the
Power it self, what it was, and over whom.

Cardinal Bellarmine in his third general Controversy, has The Power
Ecclesiastical is but the power to teach.
handled a great many questions concerning the Ecclesiastical Power of the
Pope of Rome; and begins with this, Whether it ought to be Monarchical,
Aristocraticall, or Democraticall. All which sorts of Power, are Sovereign, and
Coercive. If now it should appear, that there is no Coercive Power left them by
our Savior; but only a Power to proclaim the Kingdom of Christ, and to
persuade men to submit themselves thereunto; and by precepts and good counsel,
to teach them that have submitted, what they are to do, that they may be
received into the Kingdom of God when it comes; and that the Apostles, and
other Ministers of the Gospel, are our Schoolemasters, and not our Commanders,
and their Precepts not Laws, but wholesome Counsels; then were all that
dispute in vain.

I have shown already (in the last Chapter,) that the Kingdom of An argument
thereof, the Power of Christ himself:
Christ is not of this world: therefore neither can his Ministers (unless they
be Kings,) require obedience in his name. For if the Supreme King, have not his
Regal Power in this world; by what authority can obedience be required to his
Officers? As my Father sent me, (so says our Savior) I send you. But our
Savior was sent to persuade the Jews to return to, and to invite the Gentiles,
to receive the Kingdom of his Father, and not to reign in Majesty, no not, as
his Fathers Lieutenant, till the day of Judgment.

The time between the Ascension, and the general Resurrection, From the name
of Regeneration:
is called, not a Reigning, but a Regeneration; that is, a Preparatiof men for
the second and glorious coming of Christ, at the day of Judgment; as appears
by the words of our Savior, Mat. 19. 28. You that have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, you
shall also sit upon twelve Thrones; And of St. Paul ( Ephesians. 6. 15.) Having
your feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

And is compared by our Savior, to Fishing; that is, to winning From the
compari^on of it, with Fishing, Leaven, Seed.
men to obedience, not by Coercion, and Punishing; but by Persuasion: and
therefore he said not to his Apostles, he would make them so many Nimrods,
Hunters of men; but Fishers of men. It is compared also to Leaven; to Sowing of
Seed, and to the Multiplication of a grain of Mustard Seed; by all which
Compulsion is excluded; and consequently there can in that time be no actual
R^igning. The work of Christ's Ministers, is Evangelization; that is, a
Proclamation of Christ, and a preparation for his second coming; as the
Evangelization of John Baptist, was a preparation to his first coming.

Again, the Office of Christ's Ministers in this world, is to make From the
nature of (...):
men Believe, and have Faith in Christ: But Faith has no relation to, nor
dependence at all upon Compulsion, or Commandment; but only upon certainty,
or probability of Arguments drawn from Reason, or from something men believe
already. Therefore the Ministers of Christ in this world, have no Power by that
title, to Punish any man for not Believing, or for Contradicting what they say;
they have I say no Power by that title of Christ's Ministers, to Punish such:
but if they have Sovereign Civil Power, by politic institution, then they may
indeed lawfully Punish any Contradiction to their laws whatsoever: And St.
Paul, of himself and other the then Preachers of the Gospel, says in
express 2 Cor. 1. 24.
words, We have no Dominion over your Faith, but are Helpers of your Joy.

Another Argument, that the Ministers of Christ in this present From the
Authority Christ has l^st to Civil Princes.
world have no right of Commanding, may be drawn from the lawful Authority
which Christ has left to all Princes; as well Christians, as Infidels. St.
Paul says (Col. 3. 20.) Children obey your Parents in all things; for this is
well pleasing to the Lord. And ver. 22. Servants obey in all things your
Masters according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as me^-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, as fearing the Lord: This is spoken to them whose Masters
were Infidells; and yet they are bidden to obey them in all things. And again,
concerning obedience to Princes. ( Romans 13. the first 6. verses (exhorting to
be subject to the Higher Powers, he says, that all Power is ordained of God;
and that we ought to be subject to them, not only for fear of incurring their
wrath, but also for conscience sake. And St. Peter, (1 Epist. chap. 2. ver. 13,
14, 15.) Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as to them that be
sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well; for so is the will of God. And again St. Paul ( Tit. 3. 1.) Put men
in mind to be subject to Principalities, and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.
These Princes, and Powers, whereof St. Peter, and St. Paul here speak, were all
Infidels: much more therefore we are to observe those Christians, whom God has
ordained to have Sovereign Power over us. How then can we be obliged to obey
any Minister of Christ, if he should command us to do any thing contrary the
Command of the King, or other Sovereign Representant of the Commonwealth,
whereof we are members, and by whom we look to be protected? It is therefore
manifest, that Christ has not left to his Ministers in this world, unless
they be also endued with Civil Authority, any authority to Command other men.

But what (may some object) if a King, or a Senate, or other What Christians
may do to avoid persecution.
Sovereign Person forbid us to believe in Christ? To this I answer, that such
forbidding is of no effect; because Belief, and Unbeleef never follow men's
Commands. Faith is a gift of God, which Man can neither give, nor take away by
promise of rewards, or menaces of torture. And if it be further asked, What if
we be commanded by our lawful Prince, to say with our tongue, we believe
not; must we obey such command? Profession with the tongue is but an external
thing, and no more then any other gesture whereby we signify our obedience*
and wherein a Christian, holding firmly in his heart the Faith of Christ, has
the same liberty which the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman the Syrian. Naaman
was converted in his heart to the God of Israel; For he says (2 Kings 5. 17.)
Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering, nor sacrifice unto
other Gods but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that
when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans
on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon; when I bow my self in
the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. This the
Prophet approved, and bid him Go in peace. Here Naaman believed in his heart;
but by bowing before the Idol Rimmon, he denied the true God in effect, as much
as if he had done it with his lips. But then what shall we answer to our
Saviors saying, Whosoever denies me before men, I will deny him before my
Father which is in Heaven? This we may say, that whatsoever a Subject, as
Naaman was, is compelled to in obedience to his Sovereign, and does it not in
order to his own mind, but in order to the laws of his country, that action is
not his, but his Sovereigns; nor is it he that in this case denies Christ
before men, but his Governor, and the law of his country. If any man shall
accuse this doctrine, as repugnant to true, and unfegined Christianity; I ask
him, in case there should be a subject in any Christian Commonwealth, that
should be inwardly in his heart of the Mohammedan Religion, whether if his
Sovereign command him to be present at the divine service of the Christian
Church, and that on pain of death, he think that Mohammedan obliged in
conscience to suffer death for that cause, rather than to obey that command of
his lawful Prince. If he say, he ought rather to suffer death, then he
authorizeth all private men, to disobey their Princes, in maintenance of their
Religion, true, or false: if he say, he ought to be obedient, then he allows
to himself, that which he denies to another, contrary to the words of our
Savior, Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, that do ye unto
them; and contrary to the Law of Nature, (which is the indubitable everlasting
Law of God) Do not to another, that which thou would not he should do unto
thee.

But what then shall we say of all those Martyrs we read of in the Of Martyrs.
History of the Church, that they have needlessely cast away their lives? For
answer hereunto, we are to distinguish the persons that have been for that
cause put to death; whereof some have received a Calling to preach, and
profess the Kingdom of Christ openly; others have had no such Calling, nor
more has been required of them than their own faith. The former sort, if they
have been put to death, for bearing witness to this point, that Jesus Christ
is risen from the dead, were true Martyrs; For a Martyr is, (to give the true
definition of the word) a Witness of the Resurrection of Jesus the Messiah;
which none can be but those that conversed with him on earth, and saw him after
he was risen: For a Witness must have seen what he testifies, or else his
testimony is not good. And that none but such, can properly be called Martyrs
of Christ, is manifest out of the words of St. Peter, Act. 1. 21, 22.
Wherefore of these men which have companyed with us all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out amongst us, beginning from the Baptism of John unto that
same day he was taken up from us, must one one be ordained to be a Martyr
(that is a Witness) with us of his Resurrection: Where we may observe, that he
which is to be a Witness of the truth of the Resurrection of Christ, that is
to say, of the truth of this fundamental article of Christian Religion, that
Jesus was the Christ, must be some Disciple that conversed with him, and saw
him before, and after his Resurrection; and consequently must be one of his
original Disciples: whereas they which were not so, can Witness no more, but
that their antecessors said it, and are therefore but Witnesses of other men's
testimony; and are but second Martyrs, or Martyrs of Christ's Witnesses.

He, that to maintain every doctrine which he himself draws out of the
History our Saviors of life, and of the Acts, or Epistles of the Apostles; or
which he believes upon the authority of a private man, will oppose the Laws and
Authority of the Civil State, is very far from being a Martyr of Christ, or a
Martyr of his Martyrs. It Is one Article only, which to die for, meriteth so
honorable a name; and that Article is this, that Jesus is the Christ; that is
to say, He that has redeemed us, and shall come again to give us salvation,
and eternal life in his glorious Kingdom. To die for every tenet that serves
the ambition, or profit of the Clergy, is not required; nor is it the Death of
the Witness, but the Testimony it self that makes the Martyr: for the word
signifies nothing else, but the man that bears Witness, whether he be put
to death for his testimony, or not.

Also he that is not sent to preach this fundamental article, but takes it
upon him of his private authority, though he be a Witness, and consequently a
Martyr, either primary of Christ, or secundary of his Apostles, Disciples, or
their Successors; yet is he not obliged to suffer death for that cause; because
being not called thereto, it is not required at his hands; nor ought he to
complain, if he loses the reward he expects from those that never set him on
work. None therefore can be a Martyr, neither of the first, nor second degree,
that have not a warrant to preach Christ come in the flesh; that is to say,
none, but such as are sent to the conversion of Infidels. For no man is a
Witness to him that already believes, and therefore needs no Witness; but to
them that deny, or doubt, or have not heard it. Christ sent his Apostles, and
his Seventy Disciples, with authority to preach; he sent not all that believed:
And he sent them to unbeleevers; I send you (says he) as sheep amongst wolves;
not as sheep to other sheep.

Lastly, the points of their Commission, as they are expressly Argument from
the points of their Commission,
set down in the Gospel, contain none of them any authority over the
Congregation.

We have first ( Mat. 10.) that the twelve Apostles were sent to To Preach;
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and commanded to Preach, that the
Kingdom of God was at hand. Now Preaching in the original, is that act, which
a Crier, Herald, or other Officer uses to do publicly in Proclaiming of a
King. But a Crier has not right to Command any man. And ( Luke 10. 2.) the
seventy Disciples are sent out, as Laborers, not as Lords of the Harvest; and
are bidden (verse 9.) to say, The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you; and by
Kingdom here is meant, not the Kingdom of Grace, but the Kingdom of Glory;
for they are bidden to denounce it (ver. 11.) to those Cities which shall not
receive them, as a threatening, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom, than for such a City. And ( Mat. 20. 28.) our Savior tells his
Disciples, that sought Priority of place, their Office was to minister, even as
the Son of man came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Preachers
therefore have not Magisteriall, but Ministerial power: Be not called
Masters, (says our Savior, Mat. 23. 10.) for one is your Master, even Christ.

Another point of their Commission, is, to Teach all nations; as it And Teach;
is in Mat. 28. 19. or as in St. Mark 16. 15. Go into all the world, and
Preach the Gospel to every creature. Teaching therefore, and Preaching is the
same thing. For they that Proclaim the coming of a King, must withal make
known by what right he comes, if they mean men shall submit themselves unto
him: As St. Paul did to the Jews of Thessalonica, when three Sabbath days he
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening, and alleging that Christ
must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus is
Christ. But to teach out of the Old Testament that Jesus was Christ, (that is
to say, King,) and risen from the dead, is not to say, that men are bound after
they believe it, to obey those that tell them so, against the laws, and
commands of their Sovereigns; but that they shall do wisely, to expect the
coming of Christ hereafter, in Patience, and Faith, with Obedience to their
present Magistrates.

Another point of their Commission, is to Baptize, in the name of To Baptize;
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. What is Baptism? Dipping
into water. But what is it to Dip a man into the water in the name of any
thing? The meaning of these words of Baptism is this. He that is Baptized, is
Dipped or Washed, as a sign of becoming a new man, and a loyal subject to
that God, whose Person was represented in old time by Moses, and the High
Priests, when he reigned over the Jews; and to Jesus Christ, his Son, God,
and Man, that has redeemed us, and shall in his humane nature Represent his
Fathers Person in his eternal Kingdom after the Resurrection; and to
acknowledge the Doctrine of the Apostles, who assisted by the Spirit of the
Father, and of the Son, were left for guides to bring us into that Kingdom, to
be the only, and assured way thereunto. This, being our promise in Baptism;
and the Authority of Earthly Sovereigns being not to be put down till the day
of Judgment; (for that is expressly affirmed by S. Paul 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23, 24,
where he says, As in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive. But
every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are
Christ's, at his coming; Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up
the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, and
all Authority and Power) it is manifest, that we do not in Baptism constitute
over us another authority, by which our external actions are to be governed
in this life; but promise to take the doctrine of the Apostles for our
direction in the way to life eternal.

The Power of Remission, and Retention of Sins, called also the And to
Forgive, and Retain Sins.
Power of Loosing, and Binding, and sometimes the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is a consequence of the Authority to Baptize, or refuse to Baptize. For
Baptism is the Sacrament of Allegiance, of them that are to be received into
the Kingdom of God; that is to say, into Eternal life; that is to say, to
Remission of Sin: For as Eternal life was lost by the Committing, so it is
recovered by the Remitting of men's Sins. The end of Baptism is Remission of
Sins: and therefore St. Peter, when they that were converted by his Sermon on
the day of Pentecost, asked what they were to do, advised them to repent, and
be Baptized in the name of Jesus, for the Remission of Sins. And therefore
seeing to Baptize is to declare the Reception of men into Gods Kingdom; and to
refuse to Baptize is to declare their Exclusion; it follows, that the Power
to declare them Cast out, or Retained in it, was given to the same Apostles,
and their Substitutes, and Successors. And therefore after our Savior had
breathed upon them, saying, ( John 20. 22.) Receive the Holy Ghost, he adds
in the next verse, Whose soever Sins ye Remit, they are Remitted unto them;
and whose soever Sins ye Retain, they are Retained. By which words, is not
granted an Authority to Forgive, or Retain Sins, simply and absolutely, as God
Forgiveth or Retains them, who knows the Heart of man, and truth of his
Penitence and Conversion; but conditionally, to the Penitent: And this
Forgiveness, or Absolution, in case the absolved have but a feigned
Repentance, is thereby without other act, or sentence of the Absolvent, made
void, and has no effect at all to Salvation, but on the contrary, to the
Aggravation of his Sin. Therefore the Apostles, and their Successors, are to
follow but the outward marks of Repentance; which appearing, they have no
Authority to deny Absolution; and if they appear not, they have no authority
to Absolve. The same also is to be observed in Baptism: for to a converted
Jew, or Gentile, the Apostles had not the Power to deny Baptism; nor to grant
it to the Un-penitent. But seeing no man is able to discern the truth of
another man's Repentance, further than by external marks, taken from his words,
and actions, which are subject to hypocrisy; another question will arise, Who
it is that is constituted Judge of those marks. And this Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.
question is decided by our Savior himself; If thy Brother (says he) shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee, and him alone;
if shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. But if he will not hear thee,
then take with thee one, or two more. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican. By which it is manifest, that the
Judgment concerning the truth of Repentance, belonged not to any one Man, but
to the Church, that is, to the Assembly of the Faithull, or to them that have
authority to be their Representant. But besides the Judgment, there is
necessary also the pronouncing of Sentence: And this belonged always to the
Apostle, or some Pastor of the Church, as Prolocutor; and of this our Savior
speaks in the 18 verse, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And
conformable hereunto was the practice of St. Paul ( 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, and 5.)
where he says, For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
determined already, as though I were present, concerning him that has so done
this deed; In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered together,
and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, To deliver such a one
to Satan; that is to say, to cast him out of the Church, as a man whose Sins
are not Forgiven. Paul here pronounces the Sentence; but the Assembly was
first to hear the Cause, (for St. Paul was absent;) and by consequence to
condemn him. But in the same chapter (ver. 11, 12.) the Judgment in such a case
is more expressly attributed to the Assembly: But now I have written unto you,
not to keep company, if any man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, etc.
with such a one no not to eat. For what have I to do to judge them that are
without? Do not ye judge them that are within? The Sentence therefore by which a
man was put out of Church, was pronounced by the Apostle, or Pastor; but the
Judgment concerning the merit of the cause, was in the Church; that is to say,
(as the times were before the conversion of Kings, and men that had Sovereign
Authority in the Commonwealth,) the Assembly of the Christians dwelling in the
same City; as in Corinth, in the Assembly of the Christians of Corinth.

This part of the Power of the Keys, by which men were thrust Of
Excommunication.
out from the Kingdom of God, is that which is called Excommunication; and to
excommunicate, is in the Original, (...), to cast out of the Synagogue; that
is, out of the place of Divine service; a word drawn from the custom of the
Jews, to cast out of their Synagogues, such as they thought in manners, or
doctrine, contagious, as Lepers were by the Law of Moses separated from the
congregation of Israel, till such time as they should be by the Priest
pronounced clean.

The Use and Effect of Excommunication, whilst it was not yet The use of
Excommunication without Civil Power,
strengthened with the Civil Power, was no more, than that they, who were not
Excommunicate, were to avoid the company of them that were. It was not enough
to repute them as Heathen, that never had been Christians; for with such they
might eat, and drink; which with Excommunicate persons they might not do; as
appears by the words of St. Paul, (1 Cor. 5. ver. 9, 10, etc.) where he
tells them, he had formerly forbidden them to company with Fornicators; but
(because that could not be without going out of the world,) he restrains it
to such Fornicators, and otherwise vicious persons, as were of the brethren;
with such a one (he says) they ought not to keep company, no not to eat. And
this is no more than our Savior says ( Mat. 18. 17.) Let him be to thee as a
Heathen, and as a Publican. For Publicans (which signifies Farmers, and
Receivers of the revenue of the Commonwealth) were so hated, and detested by
the Jews that were to pay it, as that Publican and Sinner were taken amongst
them for the same thing: Insomuch, as when our Savior accepted the invitation
of Zacchaeus a Publican; though it were to Convert him, yet it was ohjected to
him as a Crime. And therefore, when our Savior, to Heathen, added Publican, he
did forbid them to eat with a man Excommunicate.

As for keeping them out of their Synagogues, or places of Assembly, they had
no Power to do it, but that of the owner of the place, whether he were
Christian, or Heathen. And because all places are by right, in the Dominion of
the Commonwealth; as well he that was Excommunicated, as he that never was
Baptized, might enter inter into them by Commission from the Civil Magistrate;
as Paul before his conversion entered into their Synagogues at Damascus, to Acts
9. 2.
apprehend Christians, men and women, and to carry them bound to Jerusalem, by
Commission from the High Priest.

By which it appears, that upon a Christian, that should become an Of no effect
upon an Apostate.
Apostate, in a place where the Civil Power did persecute, or not assist the
Church, the effect of Excommunication had nothiug in it, neither of damage in
this world, nor of terror: Not of terror, because of their unbeleef; nor of
damage, because they are ret^rned thereby into the favor of the world; and in
the world to come, were to be in no worse estate, then they which never had
believed. The damage redounded rather to the Church, by provocation of them
they cast out, to a freer execution of their malice.

Excommunication therefore had its effect only upon those, that But upon the
faithful only.
believed that Jesus Christ was to come again in Glory, to reign over, and to
judge both the quick, and the dead, and should therefore refuse entrance into
his Kingdom, to those whose Sins were Retained; that is, to those that were
Excommunicated by the Church. And thence it is that St. Paul calls
Excommunication, a delivery of the Excommunicate person to Satan. For without
the Kingdom of Christ, all other Kingdoms after Judgment, are comprehended in
the Kingdom of Satan. This is it that the faithful stood in fear of, as long
as they stood Excommunicate, that is to say, in an estate wherein their sins
were not Forgiven. Whereby we may understand, that Excommunication in the time
that Christian Religion was not authorized by the Civil Power, was used only
for a correction of manners, not of errors in opinion: for it is a punishment,
whereof none could be sensible but such as believed, and expected the coming
again of our Savior to judge the world; and they who so believed, needed no
other opinion, but only uprightness of life, to be saved.

There lies Excommunication for Injustice; as ( Mat. 18.) If thy For what
fault lies Excommunication.
Brother offend thee, tell it him privately; then with Witnesses; lastly, tell
the Church; and then if he obey not, Let him be to thee as an Heathen man, and
a Publican. And there lies Excommunication for a Scandalous Life, as (1 Cor.
5. 11.) If any man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or
an Idolater, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one ye are not to
eat. But to Excommunicate a man that held this foundation, that Jesus was the
Christ, for difference of opinion in other points, by which that Foundation was
not destroyed, there appears no authority in the Scripture, nor example in
the Apostles. There is indeed in St. Paul ( Titus 3. 10.) a text that seems
to be to the contrary. A man that is an Haeretique, after the first and second
admonition, reject. For an Haeretiqne, is he, that being a member of the
Church, teaches nevertheless some private opinion, which the Church has
forbidden: and such a one, S. Paul advises Titus, after the first, and second
admonition, to Reject. But to Reject (in this place) is not to Excommunicate
the Man; But to give over admonishing him, to let him alone, to set by
disputing with him, as one that is to be convinced only by himself. The same
Apostle says (2 Timothy 2. 23.) Foolish and unlearned questions avoid: The word
Avoid in this place, and Reject in the former, is the same in the Original,
(...): but Foolish questions may be set by without Excommunication. And again,
( Tit. 3. 9.) Avoid Foolish questions, where the Original (...), ( set themby)
is equivalent to the former word Reject. There is no other place that can so
much as colourably be drawn, to countenance the Casting out of the Church
faithful men, such as believed the foundation, only for a singular
superstructure of their own, proceeding perhaps from a good and pious
conscience. But on the contrary, all such places as command avoiding such
disputes, are written for a Lesson to Pastors, (such as Timothy and Titus were)
not to make new Articles of Faith, by determining every small controversy,
which oblige men to a needless burden of Conscience, or provoke them to break
the union of the Church. Which Lesson the Apostles themselves observed well. S.
Peter, and S. Paul, though their controversy were great, (as we may read in
Gal. 2. 11.) yet they did not cast one another out of the Church.
Nevertheless, during the Apostles times, there were other Pastors that
observed it not; As Diotrephes (3 John 9. etc.) who cast out of the Church,
such as S. John himself thought fit to be received into it, out of a pride he
took in Praeeminence; so early it was, that Vainglory, and Ambition had found
entrance into the Church of Christ.

That a man be liable to Excommunication, there be many conditions Ofpersons
liaable to Excommunication.
requisite; as First, that he be a member of some Commonalty, that is to say,
of some lawful Assembly, that is to say, of some Christian Church, that has
power to judge of the cause for which he is to be Excommunicated. For where
there is no Community, there can be no Excommunication; nor where there is no
power to Judge, can there be any power to give Sentence.

From hence it follows, that one Church cannot be Excommunicated by another:
For either they have equal power to Excommunicate each other, in which case
Excommunication is not Discipline, nor an act of Authority, but Schism, and
Dissolution of charity; or one is so subordinate to the other, as that they
both have but one voice, and then they be but one Church; and the part
Excommunicated, is no more a Church, but a dissolute number of individual
persons.

And because the sentence of Excommunication, imports an advice, not to keep
company, nor so much as to eat with him that is Excommunicate, if a Sovereign
Prince, or Assembly be Excommunicate, the sentence is of no effect. For all
Subjects are bound to be in the company and presence of their own Sovereign
(when he requires it) by the law of Nature; nor can they lawfully either
expel him from any place of his own Dominion, whether profane or holy; nor go
out of his Dominion, without his leave; much less (if he call them to that
honor,) refuse to eat with him. And as to other Princes and States, because
they are not parts of one and the same congregation, they need not any other
sentence to keep them from keeping companywith the State Excommunicate: for the
very Institution, as it uniteth many men into one Community; so it dissociateth
one Community from another: so that Excommunication is not needful for keeping
Kings and States asunder; nor has any further effect then is in the nature of
Policy it self; unless it be to instigate Princes to war upon one another.

Nor is the Excommunication of a Christian Subject, that obeys the laws of
his own Sovereign, whether Christian, or Heathen, of any effect. For if he
believe that Jesus is the Christ, he has the Spirit of God, (1 John 4. 1.) and
God dwells in him, and he in God, (1 John 4. 15.) But he that has the
Spirit of God; he that dwells in God; he in whom God dwells, can receive
no harm by the Excommunication of men. Therefore, he that believes Jesus to be
the Christ, is free from all the dangers threatened to persons Excommunicate. He
that beleveeth it not, is no Christian. Therefore a true and unfeigned
Christian is not liable to Excommunication: Nor he also that is a professed
Christian, till his Hypocrisy appear in his Manners, that is, till his
behavior be contrary to the law of his Sovereign, which is the rule of
Manners, and which Christ and his Apostles have commanded us to be subject to.
For the Church cannot judge of Manners but by external Actions, which Actions
can never be unlawful, but when they are against the Law of the Commonwealth.

If a man's Father, or Mother, or Master be Excommunicate, yet are not the
Children forbidden to keep them Company, nor to Eat with them; for that were
(for the most part) to oblige them not to eat at all, for want of means ^o get
food; and to authorize them to disobey*their Parents, and Masters, contrary to
the Precept of the Apostles.

In sum, the Power of Excommunication cannot be extended further than to the
end for which the Apostles and Pastors of the Church have their Commission from
our Savior; which is not to rule by Command and Coaction, but by Teaching and
Direction of men in the way of Salvation in the world to come. And as a Master
in any Science, may abandon his Scholar, when he obstinately neglects the
practice of his rules; but not accuse him of Injustice, because he was never
bound to obey him: so a Teacher of Christian doctrine may abandon his Disciples
that obstinately continue in an unchristian life; but he cannot say, they do
him wrong, because they are not obliged to obey him: For to a Teacher that
shall so complain, may be applied the Answer of God to Samuel in the like
place, They have not rejected thee, but me. Excommunication 1 Samuel 8.
therefore when it wants the assistance of the Civil Power, as it does, when
a Christian State, or Prince is Excommunicate by a forain Authority, is without
effect; and consequently ought to be without terror. The name of Fulmen
Excommunicationis (that is, the Thunderbolt of Excommunication) proceeded from
an imagination of the Bishop of Rome, which first used it, that he was King of
Kings, as the Heathen made Jupiter King of the Gods; and assigned him in their
Poems, and Pictures, a Thunderbolt, wherewith to subdue, and punish the Giants,
that should dare to deny his power: Which imagination was grounded on two
errors; one, that the Kingdom of Christ is of this world, contrary to our
Saviors own words, My Kingdom is not of this world; the other, that he is
Christ's Vicar, not only over his own Subjects, but over all the Christians of
the World; whereof there is no ground in Scripture, and the contrary shall be
proved in its due place.

St. Paul coming to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Of the
Interpreter of the Scriptures before Civil Sovereigns became Christians.
Jews, ( Acts 17. 2, 3.) As his manner was, went in unto them, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, Opening and alleging,
that Christ must needs have suffered and r^sen again from the dead; and that
this Jesus whom he preached was the Christ. The Scriptures here mentioned were
the Scriptures of the Jews, that is, the Old Testament. The men, to whom he was
to prove that Jesus was the Christ, and risen again from the dead, were also
Jews, and did believe already, that they were the Word of God. Hereupon (as it
is verse 4.) some of them believed, and (as it is in the 5. ver.) some believed
not. What was the reason, when they all believed the Scripture, that they did
not all believe alike; but that some approved, others disapproved the
Interpretation of St. Paul that cited them; and every one Interpreted them to
himself? It was this; S. Paul came to them without any Legal Commission, and
in the manner of one that would not Command, but Persuade; which he must needs
do, either by Miracles, as Moses did to the Israelites in Egypt, that they
might see his Authority in Gods works; or by Reasoning from the already
received Scripture, that they might see the truth of his doctrine in Gods Word.
But whosoever persuades by reasoning from principles written, makes him to
whom he speaks Judge, both of the meaning of those principles, and also of
the force of his inferences upon them. If these Jews of Thessalonica were not,
who else was the Judge of what S. Paul alledg^d out of Scripture? If S. Paul,
what needed he to quote any places to prove his doctrine? It had been enough to
have said, I find it so in Scripture, that is to say, in your Laws, of which I
am Interpreter, as sent by Christ. The Interpreter therefore of the Scripture,
to whose Interpretation the Jews of Thessalonica were bound to stand, could be
none: every one might believe, or not believe, according as the Allegations
seemed to himself to be agreeable, or not agreeable to the meaning of the
places alleged. And generally in all cases of the world, he that pretends
any proof, makes Judge of his proof him to whom he addresseth his speech.
And as to the case of the Jews in particular, they were bound by express words
( Deuteronomy. 17.) to receive the determination of all hard questions, from the
Priests and Judges of Israel for the time being. But this is to be understood
of the Jews that were yet unconverted.

For the conversion of the Gentiles, there was no use of alleging the
Scriptures, which they believed not. The Apostles therefore labored by Reason
to confute their Idolatry; and that done, to persuade them to the faith of
Christ, by their testimony of his Life, and Resurrection. So that there could
not yet be any controversy concerning the authority to Interpret Scripture;
seeing no man was obliged during his infidelity, to follow any man's
Interpretation of any Scripture, except his Sovereigns Interpretation of the
Laws of his country.

Let us now consider the Conversion it self, and see what there was therein,
that could be cause of such an obligation. Men were converted to no other thing
then to the Belief of that which the Apostles preached: And the Apostles
preached nothing, but that Jesus was the Christ, that is to say, the King that
was to save them, and reign over them eternally in the world to come; and
consequently that he was not dead, but risen again from the dead, and gone up
into Heaven, and should come again one day to j^dg the world, (which also
should rise again to be judged,) and reward every man according to his works.
None of them preached that himself, or any other Apostle was such an
Interpreter of the Scripture, as all that became Christians, ought to take
their Interpretation for Law. For to Interpret the Laws, is part of the
Administration of a present Kingdom; which the Apostles had not. They prayed
then, and all other Pastors ever since, Let thy Kingdom come; and exhorted
their Converts to obey their then Ethnique Princes. The New Testament was not
yet published in one Body. Every of the Evangelists was Interpreter of his own
Gospel; and every Apostle of his own Epistle; And of the Old Testament, our
Savior himself says to the Jews ( John 5. 39.) Search the Scriptures; for in
them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me.
If he had not meant they should Interpret them, he would not have bidden them
take thence the proof of his being the Christ: he would either have Interpreted
them himself, or referred them to the Interpretation of the Priests.

When a difficulty arose, the Apostles and Elders of the Church assembled
themselves together, and determined what should be preached, and taught, and
how they should Interpret the Scriptures to the People; but took not from the
People the liberty to read, and Interpret them to themselves. The Apostles sent
diverse. Letters to the Churches, and other Writings for their instruction;
which had been in vain, if they had not allowed them to Interpret, that is, to
consider the meaning of them. And as it was in the Apostles time, it must be
till such time as there should be Pastors, that could authorize an Interpreter,
whose Interpretation should generally be stood to: But that could not be till
Kings were Pastors, or Pastors Kings.

There be two senses, wherein a Writing may be said to be Canonical; Of the
Power to make Scripture Law.
for Canon, signifies a Rule; and a Rule is a Precept, by which a man is
guided, and directed in any action whatsoever. Such Precepts, though given by a
Teacher to his Disciple, or a Counselor to his friend, without power to
Compel him to observe them, are nevertheless Canons; because they are Rules:
But when they are given by one, whom he that receives them is bound to obey,
then are those Canons, not only Rules, but Laws: The question therefore here,
is of the Power to make the Scriptures (which are the Rules of Christian Faith)
Laws.

That part of the Scripture, which was first Law, was the Ten Of the Ten
Commandments.
Commandments, written in two Tables of Stone, and delivered by God himself
to Moses; and by Moses made known to the people. Before that time there was no
written Law of God, who as yet having not chosen any people to be his peculiar
Kingdom, had given no Law to men, but the Law of Nature, that is to say, the
Precepts of Natural Reason, written in every man's own heart. Of these two
Tables, the first contains the law of Sovereignty; 1. That they should not
obey, nor honor the Gods of other Nations, in these words, Non-habebis Deos
alienos coram me, that is, Thou shall not have for Gods, the Gods that other
Nations worship; but only me: whereby they were forbidden to obey, or honor,
as their King and Governor, any other God, than him that spoke unto them then
by Moses, and afterward by the High Priest. 2. That they should not make any
Image to represent him; that is to say, they were not to choose to themselves,
neither in heaven, nor in earth, any Representative of their own fancying, but
obey Moses and Aaron, whom he had appointed to that office. 3. That they should
not take the Name of God in vain; that is, they should not speak rashly of
their King, nor dispute his Right, nor the commissions of Moses and Aaron, his
Lieutenants. 4. That they should every Seventh day abstain from their ordinary
labor, and employ that time in doing him Public Honor. The second Table
contains the Duty of one man toward another, as To honor Parents; Not to
kill; Not to Commit Adultery; Not to steal; Not to corrupt Judgment by false
witness; and finally, Not so much as to design in their heart the doing of
any injury one to another. The question now is, Who it was that gave to these
written Tables the obligatory force of Laws. There is no doubt but they were
made Laws by God himself: But because a Law obliges not, nor is Law to any,
but to them that acknowledge it to be the act of the Sovereign; how could the
people of Israel that were forbidden to approach the Mountain to hear what God
said to Moses, be obliged to obedience to all those laws which Moses propounded
to them? Some of them were indeed the Laws of Nature, as all the Second Table;
and therefore to be acknowledged for Gods Laws; not to the Israelites alone,
but to all people: But of those that were peculiar to the Israelites, as those
of the first Table, the question remains; saving that they had obliged
themselves, presently after the propounding of them, to obey Moses, in these
words ( Exodus 20. 19.) Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; but let not God
speak to us, lest we dye. It was therefore only Moses then, and after him the
High Priest, whom (by Moses) God declared should administer this his peculiar
Kingdom, that had on Earth, the power to make this short Scripture of the
Decalogue to be Law in the Commonwealth of Israel. But Moses, and Aaron, and
the succeeding High Priests were the Civil Sovereigns. Therefore hitherto, the
Canonizing, or making of the Scripture Law, belonged to the Civil Sovereign.
Of the Judicial, and Leviticall Law.


The Judicial Law, that is to say, the Laws that God prescribed to the
Magistrates of Israel, for the rule of their administration of Justice, and of
the Sentences, or Judgments they should pronounce, in Pleas between man and
man; and the Leviticall Law, that is to say, the rule that God prescribed
touching the Rites and Ceremonies of the Priests and Levites, were all
delivered to them by Moses only; and therefore also became Laws, by virtue of
the same promise of obedience to Moses. Whether these laws were then written,
or not written, but dictated to the People by Moses (after his forty days
being with God in the Mount) by word of mouth, is not expressed in the Text;
but they were all positive Laws, and equivalent to holy Scripture, and made
Canonical by Moses the Civil Sovereign.

After the Israelites were come into the Plains of Moab over against The Second
Law.
Jericho, and ready to enter into the land of Promise, Moses to the former Laws
added diverse others; which therefore are called Deuteronomy; that is, Second
Laws. And are (as it is written, Deuteronomy. 29. 1.) The words of a Covenant which
the Lord commanded Moses to make with the Children of Israel, besides the
Covenant which he made with them in Horeb. For having explained those former
Laws, in the beginning of the Book of Deuteronomy, he adds others, that begin
at the 12. Cha. and continue to the end of the 26. of the same Book. This Law (
Deuteronomy. 27. 1.) they were commanded to write upon great stones playstered over,
at their passing over Jordan: This Law also was written by Moses himself in a
Book; and delivered into the hands of the Priests, and to the Elders of Israel.
(Deuteronomy. 31. 9.) and commanded (ve. 26.) to be put in the side of the Arc; for
in the Ark it self was nothing but the Ten Commandments. This was the Law,
which Moses ( Deuteronomy 17. 18.) commanded the Kings of Israel should keep a
copy of: And this is the Law, which having been long time lost, was found
again in the Temple in the time of Josiah, and by his authority received for
the Law of God. But both Moses at the writing, and Josiah at the recovery
thereof, had both of them the Civil Sovereignty. Hitherto therefore the Power
of making Scripture Canonical, was in the Civil Sovereign.

Besides this Book of the Law, there was no other Book, from the time of Moses,
till after the Captivity, received amongst the Jews for the Law of God. For the
Prophets (except a few) lived in the time of the Captivity it self; and the
rest lived but a little before it; and were so far from having their Prophecies
generally received for Laws, as that their persons were persecuted, partly by
false Prophets, and partly by the Kings which were seduced by them. And this
Book it self, which was confirmed by Josiah for the Law of God, and with it all
the History of the Works of God, was lost in the Captivity, and sack of the
City of Jerusalem, as appears by that of 2 Esdras 14. 21. Thy Law is burnt;
therefore no man knows the things that are done of thee, or the works that
shall begin. And before the Captivity, between the time when the Law was lost,
(which is not mentioned in the Scripture, but may probably be thought to be the
time of Rehoboam, when 1 Kings 14: 26.
Shishak King of Egypt took the spoil of the Temple,) and the time of Josiah,
when it was found again, they had no written Word of God, but ruled according
to their own discretion, or by the direction of such, as each of them esteemed
Prophets.

From hence we may infer, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament, The Old
Testament when made Canonical.
which we have at this day, were not Canonical, nor a Law unto the Jews, till
the renovation of their Covenant with God at their return from the Captivity,
and restoration of their Commonwealth under Esdras. But from that time
forward they were accounted the Law of the Jews, and for such translated into
Greek by Seventy Elders of Judaea, and put into the Library of Ptolemy at
Alexandria, and approved for the Word of God. Now seeing Esdras was the High
Priest, and the High Priest was their Civil Sovereign, it is manifest, that
the Scriptures were never made Laws, but by the Sovereign Civil Power.

By the Writings of the Fathers that lived in the time before The New Testament
began to be Canonical under Christian Sovereigns.
that Christian Religion was received, and authorized by Constantine the
Emperor, we may find, that the Books we now have of the New Testament, were
held by the Christians of that time (except a few, in respect of whose paucity
the rest were called the Catholic Church, and others Haeretiques) for the
dictates of the Holy Ghost; and consequently for the Canon, or Rule of Faith:
such was the reverence and opinion they had of their Teachers; as generally the
reverence that the Disciples bear to their first Masters, in all manner of
doctrine they receive from them, is not small. Therefore there is no doubt, but
when S. Paul wrote to the Churches he had converted; or any other Apostle, or
Disciple of Christ, to those which had then embraced Christ, they received
those their Writings for the true Christian Doctrine. But in that time, when
not the Power and Authority of the Teacher, but the Faith of the Hearer caused
them to receive it, it was not the Apostles that made their own Writings
Canonical, but every Convert made them so to himself.

But the question here, is not what any Christian made a Law, or Canon to
himself, (which he might again reject, by the same right he received it;) but
what was so made a Canon to them, as without injustice they could not do any
thing contrary thereunto. That the New Testament should in this sense be
Canonical, that is to say, a Law in any place where the Law of the
Commonwealth had not made it so, is contrary to the nature of a Law. For a
Law, (as has been already shown) is the Commandment of that Man, or Assembly,
to whom we have given Sovereign Authority, to make such Rules for the direction
of our actions, as he shall think fit; and to punish us, when we do any thing
contrary to the same. When therefore any other man shall offer unto us any
other Rules, which the Sovereign Ruler has not prescribed, they are but
Counsel, and Advice; which, whether good, or bad, he that is counseled, may
without injustice refuse to observe; and when contrary to the Laws already
established, without injustice cannot observe, how good soever he conceives it
to be. I say, he cannot in this case observe the same in his actions, nor in
his dicourse with other men; though he may without blame believe his private
Teachers, and wish he had the liberty to practice their advice; and that it
were publicly received for Law. For internal Faith is in its own nature
invisible, and consequently exempted from all humane jurisdiction; whereas the
words, and actions that proceeed from it, as breaches of our Civil obedience,
are injustice both before God and Man. Seeing then our Savior has denied his
Kingdom to be in this world, seeing he had said, he came not to judge, but to
save the world, he has not subjected us to other Laws than those of the
Commonwealth; that is, the Jews to the Law of Moses, (which he says ( Mat.
5.) he came not to destroy, but to fulfill,) and other Nations to the Laws of
their several Sovereigns, and all men to the Laws of Nature; the observing
whereof, both he himself, and his Apostles have in their teaching recommended
to us, as a necessary condition of being admitted by him in the last day into
his eternal Kingdom, wherein shall be Protection, and Life everlasting.
Seeing then our Savior, and his Apostles, left not new Laws to oblige us in
this world, but new Doctrine to prepare us for the next; the Books of the New
Testament, which contain that Doctrine, until obedience to them was
commanded, by them that God had given power to on earth to be Legislators, were
not obligatory Canons, that is, Laws, but only good, and safe advice, for the
direction of sinners in the way to salvation, which every man might take, and
refuse at his own peril, without injustice.

Again, our Savior Christ's Commission to his Apostles, and Disciples, was to
Proclaim his Kingdom (not present, but) to come; and to Teach all Nations; and
to Baptize them that should believe; and to enter into the houses of them that
should receive them; and where they were not received, to shake off the dust of
their feet against them; but not to call for fire from heaven to destroy them,
nor to compel them to obedience by the Sword. In all which there is nothing of
Power, but of Persuasion. He sent them out as Sheep unto Wolves, not as Kings
to their Subjects. They had not in Commission to make Laws; but to obey, and
teach obedience to Laws made; and consequently they could not make their
Writings obligatory Canons, without the help of the Sovereign Civil Power. And
therefore the Scripture of the New Testament is there only Law, where the
lawful Civil Power has made it so. And there also the King, or Sovereign,
makes it a Law to himself; by which he subjecteth himself, not to the Doctor,
or Apostle that converted him, but to God himself, and his Son Jesus Christ, as
immediately as did the Apostles themselves.

That which may seem to give the New Testament, in respect of Of the Power of
Counsels to make the Scriptures Law.
those that have embraced Christian Doctrine, the force of Laws, in the times,
and places of persecution, is the decrees they made amongst themselves in their
Synods. For we read ( Acts 15. 28.) the style of the Council of the Apostles,
the Elders, and the whole Church, in this manner, It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things, etc. which is a style that signifies a Power to lay a burden on them
that had received their Doctrine. Now to lay a burden on another, seems the
same that to oblige; and therefore the Acts of that Council were Laws to the
then Christians. Nevertheless, they were no more Laws than are these other
Precepts, Repent; Be Baptized; Keep the Commandments; Believe the Gospel; Come
unto me; Sell all that thou have; Give it to the poor; and, Follow me; which
are not Commands, but Invitations, and Callings of men to Christianity, like
that of Esaias 55. 1. Ho, every man that thir^teth, come ye to the waters, come,
and buy wine and milk without money. For first, the Apostles power was no
other than that of our Savior, to invite men to embrace the Kingdom of God;
which they themselves acknowledged for a Kingdom (not present, but) to come;
and they that have no Kingdom, can make no Laws. And secondly, if their Acts
of Council, were Laws, they could not without sin be disobeyed. But we read
not any where, that they who received not the Doctrine of Christ, did therein
sin; but that they died in their sins; that is, that their sins against the
Laws to which they owed obedience, were not pardoned. And those Laws were the
Laws of Nature, and the Civil Laws of the State, whereto every Christian man
had by pact submitted himself. And therefore by the Burden, which the Apostles
might lay on such as they had converted, are not to be understood Laws, but
Conditions, proposed to those that sought Salvation; which they might accept,
or refuse at their own peril, without a new sin, though not without the hazard
of being condemned, and excluded out of the Kingdom of God for their sins
past. And therefore of Infidels, S. John says not, the wrath of God shall come
upon them, but the wrath of God remains upon them; and not that they shall
John 3. 36.
be condemned; but that they are condemned already. Nor can it be John 3. 18.
conceived, that the benefit of Faith, is Remission of sins, unless we
conceive withal, that the damage of Infidelity, is the Retention of the same
sins.

But to what end is it (may some man ask), that the Apostles, and other
Pastors of the Church, after their time, should meet together, to agree upon
what Doctrine should be taught, both for Faith and Manners, if no man were
obliged to observe their Decrees? To this may be answered, that the Apostles,
and Elders of that Council, were obliged even by their entrance into it, to
teach the Doctrine therein concluded, and decreed to be taught, so far forth,
as no precedent Law, to which they were obliged to yield obedience, was to the
contrary; but not that all other Christians should be obliged to observe, what
they taught. For though they might deliberate what each of them should teach;
yet they could not deliberate what others should do, unless their Assembly had
had a Legislative Power; which none could have but Civil Sovereigns. For though
God be the Sovereign of all the world, we are not bound to take for his Law,
whatsoever is propounded by every man in his name; nor any thing contrary to
the Civil Law, which God has expressly commanded us to obey.

Seeing then the Acts of Council of the Apostles, were then no Laws, but
Counsels; much less are Laws the Acts of any other Doctors, or Counsels
since, if assembled without the Authority of the Civil Sovereign. And
consequently, the Books of the New Testament, though most perfect Rules of
Christian Doctrine, could not be made Laws by any other authority then that of
Kings, or Sovereign Assemblies.

The first Council, that made of the Scriptures we now have, Canon, is not
extant: For that Collection of the Canons of the Apostles, attributed to
Clemens, the first Bishop of Rome after S. Peter, is subject to question: For
though the Canonical books be there reckoned up; yet these words, Sint vobis
omnibus Clericis and L^icis Libri venerandi, etc. contain a distinction of
Clergy, and Laity, that was not in use so near St. Peter's time. The first
Council for settling the Canonical Scripture, that is extant, is that of
Laodicea, Can. 59. which forbids the reading of other Books then those in the
Churches; which is a Mandate that is not addressed to every Ch^istian, but to
those only that had authority to read any thing publicly in the Church; that
is, to Ecclesiastiques only.

Of Ecclesiastical Officers in the time of the Apostles, some Of the Right of
constituting Ecclesiastical Officers in the time of the Apostles.
were Magisteriall, some Ministerial. Magisteriall were the Offices of
preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom of God to Infidels; of administaing the
Sacraments, and Divine Service; and of teaching the Rules of Faith and Manners
to those that were converted. Ministerial was the Office of Deacons, that is,
of them that were appointed to the administration of the secular necessities of
the Church, at such time as they lived upon a common stock of money, raised out
of the voluntary contributions of the faithful.

Amongst the Officers Magisteriall, the first, and principal were the
Apostles; whereof there were at first but twelve; and these were chosen and
constituted by our Savior himself; and their Office was not only to Preach,
Teach, and Baptize, but also to be Nar^yrs, (Witnesses of our Saviors
Resurrection.) This Testimony, was the specificall, and essential mark;
whereby the Apostleship was distinguished from other Magistracy
Ecclesiastical; as being necessary for an Apostle, either to have seen our
Savior after his Resurrection, or to have conversed with him before, and seen
his works, and other arguments of his Divinity, whereby they might be taken for
sufficient Witnesses. And therefore at the election of a new Apostle in the
place of Judas Iscariot, S. Peter says ( Acts 1. 21, 22.) Of these men that
have companyed with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among
us, beginning from the Baptism of John unto that same day that he was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a Witness with us of his Resurrection:
where, by this word must, is employed a necessary property of an Apostle, to
have companyed with the first and prime Apostles in the time that our Savior
manifested himself in the flesh.

The first Apostle, of those which were not constituted by Matthias made
Apostle by the Congregation.
Christ in the time he was upon the Earth, was Matthias, chosen in this manner:
There were assembled together in Jerusalem about 120 Christians ( Acts 1. 15.)
These appointed two, Joseph the Just, and Matthias (ver. 23.) and caused lots
to be drawn; and (ver. 26.) the Lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with
the Apostles. So that here we see the ordination of this Apostle, was the act
of the Congregation, and not of St. Peter, nor of the eleven, otherwise then as
Members of the Assembly.

After him there was never any other Apostle ordained, but Paul Paul and
Barnabas made Apostles by the Church of Antioch.
and Barnabas; which was done (as we read ( Acts 13. 1, 2, 3.) in this manner.
There were in the Church that was at Antioch, certain Prophets, and Teachers;
as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and
Manaen; which had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul. As they
ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas, and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they
had fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

By which it is manifest, that though they were called by the Holy Ghost, their
Calling was declared unto them, and their Mission authorized by the particular
Church of Antioch. And that this their calling was to the Apostleship, is
apparent by that, that they are both called ( Acts 14. 14.) Apostles: And that
it was by virtue of this act of the Church of Antioch, that they were Apostles,
S. Paul declares plainly ( Romans 1. 1.) in that he uses the word, which the
Holy Ghost used at his calling: For he styles himself, An Apostle separated
unto the Gospel of God; alluding to the words of the Holy Ghost, Separate me
Barnabas and saul^, etc. But seeing the work of an Apostle, was to be a
Witness of the Resurrection of Christ, a man may here ask, how S. Paul, that
conversed not with our Savior before his passion, could know he was risen. To
which is easily answered, that our Savior himself appeared to him in the way
to Damascus, from Heaven, after his Ascension; and chose him for a vessel to
bear his name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and Children of Israel; and
consequently (having seen the Lord after his passion) was a competent Witness
of his Resurrection: And as for Barnabas, he was a Disciple before the Passion.
It is therefore evident that Paul, and Barnabas were Apostles; and yet chosen,
and authorized (not by the first Apostles alone, but) by the Church of Antioch;
as Matthias was chosen, and authorized by the Church of Jerusalem.

Bishop, a word formed in o^r language, out of the Greek Episcopus, What
Offices in the Church are Magisteriall.
signifies an Overseer, or Superintendent of any business, and particularly a
Pastor, or Shepherd; and thence by metaphor was taken, not only amongst the
Jews that were originally Shepherds, but also amongst the Heathen, to signify
the Office of a King, or any other Ruler, or Guide of People, whether he ruled
by Laws, or Doctrine. And so the Apostles were the first Christian Bishops,
instituted by Christ himself: in which sense the Apostleship of Judas is
called ( Acts 1. 20.) his Bishopric. And afterward, when there were
constituted Elders in the Christian Churches, with charge to guide Christ's
flock by their doctrine, and advice; these Elders were also called Bishops.
Timothy was an Elder (which word Elder, in the New Testament is a name of
Office, as well as of Age;) yet he was also a Bishop. And Bishops were then
content with the Title of Elders. Nay S. John himself, the Apostle beloved of
our Lord, begins his Second Epistle with these words, The Elder to the Elect
Lady. By which it is evident, that Bishop, Pastor, Elder, Doctor, that is to
say, Teacher, were but so many diverse names of the same Office in the time of
the Apostles. For there was then no government by Coercion, but only by
Doctrine, and Persuading. The Kingdom of God was yet to come, in a new world;
so that there could be no authority to compel in any Church, till the
Commonwealth had embraced the Christian Faith; and consequently no diversity
of Authority, though there were diversity of Employments.

Besides these Magisteriall employments in the Church; namely, Apostles,
Bishops, Elders, Pastors, and Doctors, whose calling was to proclaim Christ to
the Jews, and Infidels, and to direct, and teach those that believed we read in
the New Testament of no other. For by the names of Evangelists and Prophets, is
not signified any Office, but several Gifts, by which several men were
profitable to the Church: as Evangelists, by writing the life and acts of our
Savior; such as were S. Matthew and S. John Apostles, and S. Mark and S. Luke
Disciples, and whosoever else wrote of that subject, (as S. Thomas, and S.
Barnabas are said to have done, though the Church have not received the Books
that have gone under their names:) and as Prophets, by the gift of interpreting
the Old Testament; and sometimes by declaring their special Revelations to the
Church. For neither these gifts, nor the gifts of Languages, nor the gift of
Casting out Devils, or of Curing other diseases, nor any thing else did make an
Officer in the Church, save only the due calling and election to the charge of
Teaching.

As the Apostles, Matthias, Paul, and Barnabas, were not made by Ordination of
Teachers.
our Savior himself, but were elected by the Church, that is, by the Assembly
of Christians; namely, Matthias by the Church of Jerusalem, and Paul, and
Barnabas by the Church of Antioch; so were also the Presbyters, and Pastors in
other Cities, elected by the Churches of those Cities. For proof whereof, let
us consider, first, how S. Paul proceeded in the Ordination of Presbyters, in
the Cities where he had converted men to the Christian Faith, immediately after
he and Barnabas had received their Apostleship. We read ( Acts 4. 23.) that
they ordained Elders in every Church; which at first sight may be taken for an
Argument, that they themselves chose, and gave them their authority: But if we
confider the Original text, it will be manifest, that they were authorized,
and chosen by the Assembly of the Christians of each City. For the words there
are, (...), that is, When they had Ordained them Elders by the Holding up of
Hands in every Congregation. Now it is well enough known, that in all those
Cities, the manner of choosing Magistrates, and Officers, was by plurality of
suffrages; and (because the ordinary way of distinguishing the Affirmative
Votes from the Negatives, was by Holding up of Hands) to ordain an Officer in
any of the Cities, was no more but to bring the people together, to elect them
by plurality of Votes, whether it were by plurality of elevated hands, or by
plurality of voices, or plurality of balls, or beans, or small stones, of which
every man cast in one, into a vessel marked for the Affirmative, or Negative;
for diverse Cities had diverse customs in that point. It was therefore the
Assembly that elected their own Elders: the Apostles were only Presidents of
the Assembly to call them together for such Election, and to pronounce them
Elected, and to give them the benediction, which now is called Consecration.
And for this cause they that were Presidents of the Assemblies, as (in the
absence of the Apostles) the Elders were, were called (...), and in Latin
A^tistites; which words signify the Principal Person of the Assembly, whose
office was to number the Votes, and to declare thereby who was chosen; and
where the Votes were equal, to decide the matter in question, by adding his
own; which is the Office of a President in Council. And (because all the
Churches had their Presbyters ordained in the same manner,) where the word is
Constitute, (as Titus 1. 5.) (...), For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou should constitute Elders in every City, we are to understand the same
thing; namely, that he should call the faithful together, and ordain them
Presbyters by plurality of suffrages. It had been a strange thing, if in a
Town, where men perhaps had never seen any Magistrate otherwise chosen then by
an Assembly, those of the Town becoming Christians, should so much as have
thought on any other way of Election of their Teachers, and Guides, that is to
say, of their Presbyters, (otherwise called Bishops,) then this of plurality of
suffrages, intimated by S. Paul ( Acts 14. 23.) in the word (...): Nor was
there ever any choosing of Bishops, (before the Emperors found it necessary to
regulate them in order to the keeping of the peace amongst them,) but by the
Assemblies of the Christians in every several Town.

The same is also confirmed by the continual practice even to this day, in the
Election of the Bishops of Rome. For if the Bishop of any place, had the right
of choosing another, to the succession of the Pastoral Office, in any City, at
such time as he went from thence, to plant the same in another place; much more
had he had the Right, to appoint his successor in that place, in which he last
resided and dyed: And we find not, that ever any Bishop of Rome appointed his
successor. For they were a long time chosen by the People, as we may see by the
sedition raised about the Election, between Damasus, and Vrsicinus; which
Ammianus Marcellinus says was so great, that Iuventius the Prefect, unable to
keep the peace between them, was forced to go out of the City; and that there
were above an hundred men found dead upon that occasion in the Church it self.
And though they afterward were chosen, first, by the whole Clergy of Rome, and
afterward by the Cardinals; yet never any was appointed to the succession by
his predecessor. If therefore they pretended no right to appoint their own
successors, I think I may reasonably conclude, they had no right to appoint the
successors of other Bishops, without receiving some new power; which none could
take from the Church to bestow on them, but such as had a lawful authority,
not only to Teach, but to Command the Church; which none could do, but the
Civil Sovereign.

The word Minister in the Original (...), signifies one that Ministers of the
Church what:
voluntarily does the business of another man; and differs from a Servant
only in this, that Servants are obliged by their condition, to what is
commanded them; whereas Ministers are obliged only by their undertaking, and
bound therefore to no more than that they have undertaken: So that both they
that teach the Word of God, and they that administer the secular affairs of the
Church, are both Ministers, but they are Ministers of different Persons. For
the Pastors of the Church, called ( Acts 6. 4.) The Ministers of the Word, are
Ministers of Christ, whose Word it is: But the Ministry of a Deacon, which is
called (verse 2. of the same Chapter) Serving of Tables, is a service done to
the Church, or Congregation: So that neither any one man, nor the whole Church,
could ever of their Pastor say, he was their Minister; but of a Deacon, whether
the charge he undertook were to serve tables, or distribute maintenance to the
Christians, when they lived in each City on a common stock, or upon
collections, as in the first times, or to take a care of the House of Prayer,
or of the Revenue, or other worldly business of the Church, the whole
Congregation might properly call him their Minister.

For their employment, as Deacons, was to serve the Congregation; though upon
occasion they omitted not to Preach the Gospel, and maintain the Doctrine of
Christ, every one according to his gifts, as S. Steven did; and both to Preach,
and Baptize, as Philip* did: For that Philip, which ( Act. 8. 5.) Preached the
Gospel at Samaria, and (verse 38.) Baptized the Eunuch, was Philip the Deacon,
not Philip the Apostle. For it is manifest (verse 1.) that when Philip preached
in Samaria, the Apostles were at Jerusalem, and (verse 14.) when they heard
that Samaria had received the Word of God, sent Peter and John to them; by
imposition of whose hands, they that were Baptized, (verse 15.) received (which
before by the Baptism of Philip they had not received) the Holy Ghost. For it
was necessary for the conferring of the Holy Ghost, that their Baptism should
be administered, or confirmed by a Minister of the Word, not by a Minister of
the Church. And therefore to confirm the Baptism of those that Philip the
Deacon had Baptized, the Apostles sent out of their own number from Jerusalem
to Samaria, Peter, and John; who conferred on them that before were but
Baptized, those graces that were signs of the Holy Spirit, which at that time
did accompany all true Believers; which what they were may be understood by
that which S. Mark says (chap. 16. 17.) These signs follow them that believe
in my Name; they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues;
They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them; They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. This to
do, was it that Philip could not give; but the Apostles could, and (as appears
by this place) effectually did to every man that truly believed, and was by a
Minister of Christ himself Baptized: which power either Christ's Ministers in
this age cannot confer, or else there are very few true Believers, or Christ
has very few Ministers.

That the first Deacons were chosen, not by the Apostles, but by a And how
chosen.
Congregation of the Disciples; that is, of Christian men of all sorts, is
manifest out of Acts 6. where we read that the Twelve, after the number of
Disciples was multiplied, called them together, and having told them, that it
was not fit that the Apostles should leave the Word of God, and serve tables,
said unto them (verse 3.) Brethren look you out among you seven men of honest
report, full of the Holy Ghost, and of Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. Here it is manifest, that though the Apostles declared them elected;
yet the Congregation chose them; which also, (verse the fifth) is more
expressly said, where it is written, that the saying pleased the multitude,
and they chose seven, etc.

Under the Old Testament, the Tribe of Levi were only capable Of
Ecclesiastical Revenue, under the Law of Moses.
of the Priesthood, and other inferior Offices of the Church. The land was
divided amongst the other Tribes (Levi excepted,) which by the subdivision of
the Tribe of Joseph, into Ephraim and Manasses, were still twelve. To the Tribe
of Levi were assigned certain Cities for their habitation, with the suburbs for
their cattle: but for their portion, they were to have the tenth of the fruits
of the land of their Brethren. Again, the Priests for their maintenance had the
tenth of that tenth, together with part of the oblations, and sacrifices. For
God had said to Aaron ( Numb. 18. 20.) Thou shall have no inheritance in their
land, neither shall thou have any part amongst them, I am thy part, and thine
inheritance amongst the Children of Israel. For God being then King, and having
constituted the Tribe of Levi to be his Public Ministers, he allowed them for
their maintenance, the Public revenue, that is to say, the part that God had
reserved to himself; which were Tithes, and Offerings: and that is it which is
meant, where God says, I am thine inheritance. And therefore to the Levites
might not unfitly be attributed the name of Clergy from (...), which signifies
Lot, or Inheritance; not that they were heirs of the Kingdom of God, more than
other; but that Gods inheritance, was their maintenance. Now seeing in this
time God himself was their King, and Moses, Aaron, and the succeeding High
Priests were his Lieutenants; it is manifest, that the Right of Tithes, and
Offerings was constituted by the Civil Power.

After their rejection of God in the demanding of a King, they enjoyed still
the same revenue; but the Right thereof was derived from that, that the Kings
did never take it from them: for the Public Revenue was at the disposing of
him that was the Public Person; and that (till the Captivity) was the King.
And again, after the return from the Captivity, they paid their Tithes as
before to the Priest. Hitherto therefore Church Livings were determined by the
Civil Sovereign.

Of the maintenance of our Savior, and his Apostles, we read In our Saviors
time, and after.
only they had a Purse, (which was carried by Judas Iscariot;) and, that of
the Apostles, such as were Fishermen, did sometimes use their trade; and that
when our Savior sent the Twelve Apostles to Preach, he forbad them to carry
Gold, and Silver, and Brass in their Mat. 10. 9, 10.
purses, for that the workman is worthy of his hire: By which it is probable,
their ordinary maintenance was not unsuitable to their employment; for their
employment was (ver. 8.) freely to give, because they had freely received; and
their maintenance was the free gift of those that believed the good tyding they
carried about of the coming of the Messiah their Savior. To which we may add,
that which was contributed out of gratitude; by such as our Savior had healed
of diseases; of which are mentioned Certain women (Luke 8. 2, 3.) which had
been healed of evil spirits and infirmities; Mary Magdalen, out of whom went
seven Devils; and Ioanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward; and Susanna, and
many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.

After our Saviors Ascension, the Christians of every City lived in Common,
Acts 4. 34.
upon the money which was made of the sale of their lands and possessions, and
laid down at the feet of the Apostles, of good will, not of duty; for whilst
the Land remained (says S. Peter to Ananias ( Acts 5. 4.) was it not thine?
and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? which shows he needed not
have saved his land, nor his money by lying, as not being bound to contribute
any thing at all, unless he had pleased. And as in the time of the Apostles,
so also all the time downward, till after Constantine the Great, we shall find,
that the maintenance of the Bishops, and Pastors of the Christian Church, was
nothing but the voluntary contribution of them that had embraced their
Doctrine. There was yet no mention of Tithes: but such was in the time of
Constantine, and his Sons, the affection of Christians to their Pastors, as
Ammianus Marcellinus says (describing the sedition of Damasus and Vrsicinus
about the Bishopric,) that it was worth their contention, in that the Bishops
of those times by the liberality of their flock, and especially of Matrons,
lived splendidly, were carried in Coaches, and were sumptuous in their fare and
apparel.

But here may some ask, whether the Pastor were then bound to live The
Ministers of the Gospel lived on the Benevolence of their flocks. 1 Cor. 9. 13.
upon voluntary contribution, as upon alms, For who (says S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.
7.) goes to war at his own charges? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? And again, Do ye not know that they which minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the
Altar, partake with the Altar; that is to say, have part of that which is
offered at the Altar for their maintenance? And then he concludes, Even so
has the Lord appointed, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. From which place may be inferred indeed, that the Pastors of the Church
ought to be maintained by their flocks; but not that the Pastors were to
determine, either the quantity, or the kind of their own allowance, and be (as
it were) their own Carvers. Their allowance must needs therefore be determined,
either by the gratitude, and liberality of every particular man of their flock,
or by the whole Congregation. By the whole Congregation it could not be,
because their Acts were then no Laws: Therefore the maintenance of Pastors
before Emperors and Civil Sovereigns had made Laws to settle it, was nothing
but Benevolence. They that served at the Altar lived on what was offered. So
may the Pastors also take what is offered them by their flock; but not exact
what is not offered. In what Court should they sue for it, who had no
Tribunalls? Or if they had Arbitrators amongst themselves, who should execute
their Judgments, when they had no power to arm their Officers? It remains
therefore, that there could be no certaire maintenance assigned to any Pastors
of the Church, but by the whole Congregation; and then only, when their
Decrees should have the force (not only of Canons, but also) of Laws; which
Laws could not be made, but by Emperors, Kings, or other Civil Sovereigns.
The Right of Tithes in Moses Law, could not be applied to the then Ministers of
the Gospel; because Moses and the High Priests were the Civil Sovereigns of
the people under God, whose Kingdom amongst the Jews was present; whereas the
Kingdom of God by Christ is yet to come.

Hitherto has been shown what the Pastors of the Church are; what are the
points of their Commission (as that they were to Preach, to Teach, to Baptize,
to be Presidents in their several Congregations;) what is Ecclesiastical
Censure, viz. Excommunication, that is to say, in those places where
Christanity was forbidden by the Civil Laws, a putting of themselves out of
the company of the Excommunicate, and where Christianity was by the Civil Law
commanded, a putting the* Excommunicate out of the Congregations of Christians;
who elected the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, (that it was, the
Congregation); who consecrated and blessed them, (that it was the Pastor); what
was their due revenue, (that it was none but their own possessions, and their
own labor, and the voluntary contributions of devout and grateful
Christians). We are to consider now, what Office in the Church those persons
have, who being Civil Sovereigns, have embraced also the Christian Faith.

And first, we are to remember, that the Right of Judging That the Civil
Sovereign being a Christian has the Right of appointing Pastors.
what Doctrines are fit for Peace, and to be taught the Subjects, is in all
Commonwealths inseparably annexed (as has been already proved cha. 18.) to
the Sovereign Power Civil, whether it be in one Man, or in one Assembly of
men. For it is evident to the meanest capacity, that men's actions are derived
from the opinions they have of the Good, or Evil, which from those actions
redound unto themselves; and consequently, men that are once possessed of an
opinion, that their obedience to the Sovereign Power, will be more hurtful to
them, than their disobedience, will disobey the Laws, and thereby overthrow the
Commonwealth, and introduce confusion, and Civil war; for the avoiding
whereof, all Civil Government was ordained. And therefore in all
Commonwealths of the Heathen, the Sovereigns have had the name of Pastors of
the People, because there was no Subject that could lawfully Teach the people,
but by their permission and authority.

This Right of the Heathen Kings, cannot be thought taken from them by their
conversion to the Faith of Christ; who never ordained, that Kings for believing
in him, should be deposed, that is, subjected to any but himself, or (which is
all one) be deprived of the power necessary for the conservation of Peace
amongst their Subjects, and for their defense against foraign Enemies. And
therefore Christian Kings are still the Supreme Pastors of their people, and
have power to ordain what Pastors they please, to teach the Church, that is, to
teach the People committed to their charge.

Again, let the right of choosing them be (as before the conversion of Kings)
in the Church, for so it was in the time of the Apostles themselves (as has
been shown already in this chapter); even so also the Right will be in the
Civil Sovereign, Christian. For in that he is a Christian, he allows the
Teaching; and in that he is the Sovereign (which is as much as to say, the
Church by Representation,) the Teachers he elects, are elected by the Church.
And when an Assembly of Christians choose their Pastor in a Christian
Commonwealth, it is the Sovereign that electeth him, because it is done by his
Authority; In the same manner, as when a Town choose their Mayor, it is the act
of him that has the Sovereign Power: For every act done, is the act of him,
without whose consent it is invalid. And therefore whatsoever examples may be
drawn out of History, concerning the Election of Pastors, by the People, or by
the Clergy, they are no arguments against the Right of any Civil Sovereign,
because they that elected them did it by his Authority.

Seeing then in every Christian Commonwealth, the Civil Sovereign is the
Supreme Pastor, to whose charge the whole flock of his Subjects is committed,
and consequently that it is by his authority, that all other Pastors are made,
and have power to teach, and perform all other Pastoral offices; it follows
also, that it is from the Civil Sovereign, that all other Pastors derive their
right of Teaching, Preaching, and other functions pertaining to that Office;
and that they are but his Ministers; in the same manner as the Magistrates of
Towns, Judges in Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies, are all but
Ministers of him that is the Magistrate of the whole Commonwealth, Judge of
all Causes, and Commander of the whole Militia, which is always the Civil
Sovereign. And the reason hereof, is not because they that Teach, but because
they that are to Learn, are his Subjects. For let it be supposed, that a
Christian King commit the Authority of Ordaining Pastors in his Dominions to
another King, (as diverse Christian Kings allow that power to the Pope;) he does
not thereby constitute a Pastor over himself, nor a Sovereign Pastor over his
People; for that were to deprive himself of the Civil Power; which depending
on the opinion men have of their Duty to him, and the fear they have of
Punishment in another world, would depend also on the skill, and loyalty of
Doctors, who are no less subject, not only to Ambition, but also to Ignorance,
than any other sort of men. So that where a stranger has authority to appoint
Teachers, it is given him by the Sovereign in whose Dominions he teaches.
Christian Doctors are our Schoolmasters to Christianity; But Kings are Fathers
of Families, and may receive Schoolmasters for their Subjects from the
recommendation of a stranger, but not from the command; especially when the ill
teaching them shall redound to the great and manifest profit of him that
recommends them: nor can they be obliged to retain them, longer than it is for
the Public good; the care of which they stand so long charged withal, as
they retain any other essential Right of the Sovereignty.

If a man therefore should ask a Pastor, in the execution of his The Pastor all
Authority of Sovereigns only is de Jure Divino, that of other Pastors is Jure
Civili.
Office, as the chief Priests and Elders of the people ( Mat. 21. 23.) asked
our Savior, By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this
authority: he can make no other just Answer, but that he does it by the
Authority of the Commonwealth, given him by the King, or Assembly that
represents it. All Pastors, except the Supreme, execute their charges in the
Right, that is by the Authority of the Civil Sovereign, that is, Iure Civili.
But the King, and every other Sovereign, executes his Office of Supreme
Pastor, by immediate Authority from God, that is to say, in Gods Right, or Iure
Divino. And therefore none but Kings can put into their Titles (a mark of their
submission to God only) Dei gratia Rex, etc. Bishops ought to say in the
beginning of their Mandates, By the favor of the Kings Majesty, Bishop of such
a Diocese; or as Civil Ministers, In his Majesty's Name. For in saying,
Divina providentia, which is the same with Dei gratia, though disguised, they
deny to have received their authority from the Civil State; and sliely slip
off the Collar of their Civil Subjection, contrary to the unity and defense of
the Commonwealth.

But if every Christian Sovereign be the Supreme Pastor of his Christian Kings
have Power to execute all manner of Pastoral function.
own Subjects, it seems that he has also the Authority, not only to Preach
(which perhaps no man will deny;) but also to Baptize, and to Administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and to Consecrate both Temples, and Pastors to
Gods service; which most men deny; partly because they use not to do it; and
partly because the Administration of Sacraments, and Consecration of Persons,
and Places to holy uses, requires the Imposition of such men's hands, as by the
like Imposition successively from the time of the Apostles have been ordained
to the like Ministry. For proof therefore that Christian Kings have power to
Baptize, and to Consecrate, I am to render a reason, both why they use not to
do it, and how, without the ordinary ceremony of Imposition of hands, they are
made capable of doing it, when they will.

There is no doubt but any King, in case he were skillful in the Sciences,
might by the same Right of his Office, read Lectures of them himself, by which
he authorizeth others to read them in the Universities. Nevertheless, because
the care of the sum of the business of the Commonwealth takes up his whole
time, it were not convenient for him to apply himself in Person to that
particular. A King may also if he please, sit in Judgment, to hear and
determine all manner of Causes, as well as give others authority to do it in
his name; but that the charge that lies upon him of Command and Government,
constrain him to be continually at the Helm, and to commit the Ministerial
Offices to others under him. In the like manner our Savior (who surely had
power to Baptize) Baptized none John 4. 2.
himself, but sent his Apostles and Disciples to Baptize. So also S. Paul, by
the necessity of Preaching in diverse and far distant places, Baptized few:
Amongst all the Corinthians he Baptized only 1 Cor. 1. 14, 16.
Crispus, Cajus, and Stephanus; and the reason was, because his principal 1
C^r. 1. 17.
Charge was to Preach. Whereby it is manifest, that the greater Charge, (such
as is the Government of the Church,) is a dispensation for the less. The
reason therefore why Christian Kings use not to Baptize, is evident, and the
same, for which at this day there are few Baptized by Bishops, and by the Pope
fewer.

And as concerning Imposition of Hands, whether it be needful, for the
authorizing of a King to Baptize, and Consecrate, we may consider thus.

Imposition of Hands, was a most ancient public ceremony amongst the Jews, by
which was designed, and made certain, the person, or other thing intended in a
man's prayer, blessing, sacrifice, consecration, condemnation, or other speech.
So Jacob in blessing the children of Joseph ( Genesis 48. 14.) Laid his right Hand
on Ephraim the younger, and his left Hand on Manasseh the first born; and this
he did wittingly (though they were so presented to him by Joseph, as he was
forced in doing it to stretch out his arms acrosse) to design to whom he
intended the greater blessing. So also in the sacrificing of the Burnt
offering, Aaron is commanded [ Exodus 29. 10.] to Lay his Hands on the head of
the bullock; and [ver. 15.] to Lay his Hand on the head of the ram. The same
is also said again, Levit. 1. 4. and 8. 14. Likewise Moses when he ordained
Joshua to be Captain of the Israelites, that is, consecrated him to Gods
service, [ Numb. 27. 23.] Laid his Hands upon him, and gave him his Charge,
designing, and rendering certain, who it was they were to obey in war. And in
the consecration of the Levites [ Numb. 8. 10.] God commanded that the Children
of Israel should Put their Hands upon the Levites. And in the condemnation of
him that had blasphemed the Lord [ Levit. 24. 14.) God commanded that all that
heard him should Lay their Hands on his head, and that all the Congregation
should stone him. And why should they only that heard him, Lay their Hands upon
him, and not rather a Priest, Levite, or other Minister of Justice, but that
none else were able to design, and demonstrate to the eyes of the Congregation,
who it was that had blasphemed, and ought to die? And to design a man, or any
other thing, by the Hand to the Eye, is less subject to mistake, than when it
is done to the Ear by a Name.

And so much was this ceremony observed, that in blessing the whole
Congregation at once, which cannot be done by Laying on of Hands, yet Aaron
[Levit. 9. 22.] did lift up his Hand toward the people when he blessed them.
And we read also of the like ceremony of Consecration of Temples amongst the
Heathen, as that the Priest laid his Hands on some post of the Temple, all the
while he was uttering the words of Consecration. So natural it is to design
any individual thing, rather by the Hand, to assure the Eyes, than by Words to
inform the Ear in matters of Gods Public service.

This ceremony was not therefore new in our Saviors time. For Jairus [ Mark 5.
23.] whose daughter was sick, besought our Savior (not to heal her, but) to ay
h is Hands upon her, that she might be healed. And [ Matthew. 19. 13.] they
brought unto him little children, that he should Put his Hands on them, and
Pray.

According to this ancient Rite, the Apostles, and Presbyters, and the
Presbytery it self, Laid Hands on them whom they ordained Pastors, and withal
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost; and that not only once,
but sometimes oftener, when a new occasion was presented: but the end was still
the same, namely a punctual, and religious designation of the person, ordained
either to the Pastoral Charge in general, or to a particular Mission* so [
Act. 6. 6.] The Apostles Prayed, and Laid their Hands on the seven Deacons;
which was done, not to give them the Holy Ghost, (for they were full of the
Holy Ghost before they were chosen, as appears imdiately before, verse 3.)
but to design them to that Office. And after Philip the Deacon had converted
certain persons in Samaria, Peter and John went down [ Act 8. 17.] and Laid
their Hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. And not only an Apostle,
but a Presbyter had this power: For S. Paul advises Timothy [1 Timothy 5. 22.]
Lay Hands suddenly on no man; that is, design no man rashly to the Office of a
Pastor. The whole Presbytery Laid their Hands on Timothy, as we read 1 Timothy 4.
14. but this is to be understood, as that some did it by the appointment of the
Presbytery, and most likely their (...), or Prolocutor, which it may be was St.
Paul himself. For in his 2 Epist. to Tim. ver. 6. he says to him, Stir up
the gift of God which is in thee, by the Laying on of my Hands: where note by
the way, that by the Holy Ghost, is not meant the third Person in the Trinity,
but the Gifts necessary to the Pastoral Office. We read also, that St. Paul
had Imposition of Hands twice; once from Ananias at Damascus [ Acts 9. 17, 18.]
at the time of his Baptism; and again [ Acts 13. 3.] at Antioch, when he was
first sent out to Preach. The use then of this ceremony considered in the
Ordination of Pastors, was to design the Person to whom they gave such Power.
But if there had been then any Christian, that had had the Power of Teaching
before; the Baptizing of him, that is, the making him a Christian, had given
him no new Power, but had only caused him to preach true Doctrine, that is, to
use his Power aright; and therefore the Imposition of Hands had been
unnecessary; Baptism it self had been sufficient. But every Sovereign, before
Christianity, had the power of Teaching, and Ordaining Teachers; and therefore
Christianity gave them no new Right, but only directed them in the way of
teaching Truth; and consequently they needed no Imposition of Hands (besides
that which is done in Baptism) to authorize them to exercise any part of the
Pastoral Function, as namely, to Baptize, and Consecrate. And in the Old
Testament, though the Priest only had right to Consecrate, during the time that
the Sovereignty was in the High Priest; yet it was not so when the Sovereignty
was in the King: For we read [1 Kings 8.] That Solomon Blessed the People,
Consecrated the Temple, and pronounced that Public Prayer, which is the
pattern now for Consecration of all Christian Churches, and Chapels: whereby
it appears, he had not only the right of Ecclesiastical Government; but also
of exercising Ecclesiastical Functions.

From this consolidation of the Right Politic, and Ecclesiastique The Civil
Sovereign if a Christian, is head of the Church in his own Dominions.
in Christian Sovereigns, it is evident, they have all manner of Power over
their Subjects, that can be given to man, for the government of men's external
actions, both in Policy, and Religion; and may make such Laws, as themselves
shall judge fittest, for the government of their own Subjects, both as they are
the Commonwealth, and as they are the Church: for both State, and Church are
the same men.

If they please therefore, they may (as many Christian Kings now do) commit
the government of their Subjects in matters of Religion to the Pope; but then
the Pope is in that point Subordinate to them, and exercises that Charge in
another Dominion Iure Civili, in the Right of the Civil Sovereign; not Iure
Divino, in Gods Right; and may therefore be discharged of that Office, when the
Sovereign for the good of his Subjects shall think it necessary. They may also
if they please, commit the care of Religion to one Supreme Pastor, or to an
Assembly of Pastors; and give them what power over the Church, or one over
another, they think most convenient; and what titles of honor, as of Bishops,
Archbishops, Priests, or Presbyters, they will; and make such Laws for their
maintenance, either by Tithes, or otherwise, as they please, so they do it out
of a sincere conscience, of which God only is the Judge. It is the Civil
Sovereign, that is to appoint Judges, and Interpreters of the Canonical
Scriptures; for it is he that makes them Laws. It is he also that gives
strength to Excommunications; which but for such Laws and Punishments, as may
humble obstinate Libertines, and reduce them to union with the rest of the
Church, would be contemned. In sum, he has the Supreme Power in all causes,
as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, as far as concerns actions, and words,
for those only are known, and may be accused; and of that which cannot be
accused, there is no Judge at all, but God, that knows the heart. And these
Rights are incident to all Sovereigns, whether Monarchs, or Assemblies: for
they that are the Representants of a Christian People, are Representants of the
Church: for a Church, and a Commonwealth of Christian People, are the same
thing.

Though this that I have here said, and in other places of this Cardinal
Bellarmines Books De Summo Pontifice considered.
Book, seem clear enough for the asserting of the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power
to Christian Sovereigns; yet because the Pope of Romes challenge to that Power
universally, has been maintained chiefly, and I think as strongly as is
possible, by Cardinal Bellarmine, in his Controversy De Summo Pontifice; I
have thought it necessary, as briefly as I can, to examine the grounds, and
strength of his Discourse.

Of five Books he has written of this subject, the first contains The first
book.
three Questions: One, Which is simply the best government, Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy; and concludes for neither, but for a government
mixed of all three: Another, which of these is the best Government of the
Church; and concludes for the mixed, but which should most participate of
Monarchy: The third, whether in this mixed Monarchy, St. Peter had the place of
Monarch. Concerning his first Conclusion, I have already sufficiently proved
(chapt. 18.) that all Governments, which men are bound to obey, are Simple, and
Absolute. In Monarchy there is but One Man Supreme; and all other men that have
any kind of Power in the State, have it by his Commission, during his pleasure;
and execute it in his name: And in Aristocracy, and Democracy, but One Supreme
Assembly, with the same Power that in Monarchy belongs to the Monarch, which
is not a Mixed, but an Absolute Sovereignty. And of the three sorts, which is
the best, is not to be disputed, where any one of them is already established;
but the present ought always to be preferred, maintained, and accounted best;
because it is against both the Law of Nature, and the Divine positive Law, to
do any thing tending to the subversion thereof. Besides, it makes nothing to
the Power of any Pastor, (unless he have the Civil Sovereignty,) what kind of
Government is the best; because their Calling is not to govern men by
Commandment, but to teach them, and persuade them by Arguments, and leave it
to them to consider, whether they shall embrace, or reject the Doctrine taught.
For Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, do mark out unto us three sorts of
Sovereigns, not of Pastors; or, as we may say, three sorts of Masters of
Families, not three sorts of Schoolmasters for their children.

And therefore the second Conclusion, concerning the best form of Government of
the Church, is nothing to the question of the Popes Power without his own
Dominions: For in all other Commonwealths his Power (if he have any at all)
is that of the Schoolmaster only, and not of the Master of the Family.

For the third Conclusion, which is, that St. Peter was Monarch of the Church,
he brings for his chief argument the place of S. Matthew. (chap. 16. 18, 19.)
Thou art Peter, And upon this rock I will build my Church, etc. And I will give
thee the keys of Heaven; whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
Which place well considered, proves no more, but that the Church of Christ
has for foundation one only Article; namely, that which Peter in the name of
all the Apostles professing, gave occasion to our Savior to speak the words
here cited; which that we may clearly understand, we are to consider, that our
Savior preached by himself, by John Baptist, and by his Apostles, nothing but
this Article of Faith, that he was the Christ; all other Articles requiring
faith no otherwise, than as founded on that. John began first, ( Mat. 3. 2.)
preaching only this, The Kingdom of God is at hand. Then our Savior himself (
Mat. 4. 17.) preached the same: And to his Twelve Apostles, when he gave them
their Commission ( Mat. 10. 7.) there is no mention of preaching any other
Article but that. This was the fundamental Article, that is the Foundation of
the Churches Faith. Afterward the Apostles being returned to him, he asks
them all, ( Mat. 16. 13.) not Peter only, Who men said he was; and they
answered, that some said he was John the Baptist, some Elias, and others
Ieremias, or one of the Prophets: Then (ver. 15.) he asked them all again, (not
Peter only) Whom say ye that I am? Therefore S. Peter answered (for them all)
Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God; which I said is the Foundation of
the Faith of the whole Church; from which our Savior takes the occasion of
saying, Upon this stone I will build my Church: By which it is manifest, that
by the Foundation-Stone of the Church, was meant the Fundamental Article of
the Churches Faith. But why then (will some object) does our Savior interpose
these words, Thou art Peter? If the original of this text had been rigidly
translated, the reason would easily have appeared: We are therefore to
consider, that the Apostle Simon, was surnamed Stone, (which is the
signification of the Syriacke word Cephas, and of the Greek word Petrus). Our
Savior therefore after the confession of that Fundamental Article, alluding
to his name, said (as if it were in English) thus, Thou art Stone, and upon
this Stone I will build my Church: which is as much as to say, this Article,
that I am the Christ, is the Foundation of all the Faith I require in those
that are to be members of my Church: Neither is this allusion to a name, an
unusual thing in common speech: But it had been a strange, and obscure speech,
if our Savior intending to build his Church on the Person of S. Peter, had
said, thou art a Stone, and upon this Stone I will build my Church, when it was
so obvious without ambiguity to have said, I will build my Church on thee; and
yet there had been still the same allusion to his name.

And for the following words, I will give thee the Keys of Heaven, etc. it is
no more than what our Savior gave also to all the rest of his Disciples [
Matthew. 18. 18.] Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven.
And whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. But
howsoever this be interpreted, there is no doubt but the Power here granted
belongs to all Supreme Pastors; such as are all Christian Civil Sovereigns in
their own Dominions. In so much, as if St. Peter, or our Savior himself had
converted any of them to believe him, and to acknowledge his Kingdom; yet
because his Kingdom is not of this world, he had left the supreme care of
converting his subjects to none but him; or else he must have deprived him of
the Sovereignty, to which the Right of Teaching is inseparably annexed. And
thus much in refutation of his first Book, wherein he would prove St. Peter to
have been the Monarch Universal of the Church, that is to say, of all the
Christians in the world.

The second Book has two Conclusions: One, that S. Peter The second Book.
was Bishop of Rome, and there dyed: The other, that the Popes of Rome are his
Successors. Both which have been disputed by others. But supposing them true;
yet if by Bishop of Rome, be understood either the Monarch of the Church, or
the Supreme Pastor of it; not Silvester, but Constantine (who was the first
Christian Emperor) was that Bishop; and as Constantine, so all other Christian
Emperors were of Right supreme Bishops of the Roman Empire; I say of the Roman
Empire, not of all Christendom: For other Christian Sovereigns had the same
Right in their several Territories, as to an Office essentially adhaerent to
their Sovereignty. Which shall serve for answer to his second Book.

In the third Book, he handles the question whether the Pope be The third Book.
Antichrist. For my part, I see no argument that proves he is so, in that sense
the Scripture uses the name: nor will I take any argument from the quality of
Antichrist, to contradict the Authority he exercises, or has heretofore
exercised in the Dominions of any other Prince, or State.

It is evident that the Prophets of the Old Testament foretold, and the Jews
expected a Messiah, that is, a Christ, that should re-establish amongst them
the kingdom of God, which had been rejected by them in the time of Samuel, when
they required a King after the manner of other Nations. This expectation of
theirs, made them obnoxious to the Imposture of all such, as had both the
ambition to attempt the attaining of the Kingdom, and the art to deceive the
People by counterfeit miracles, by hypocritical life, or by orations and
doctrine plausible. Our Savior therefore, and his Apostles forewarned men of
False Prophets, and of False Christ's. False Christ's, are such as pretend to be
the Christ, but are not, and are called properly Antichrists, in such sense, as
when there happens a Schism in the Church by the election of two Popes, the
one calls the other Antipapa, or the false Pope. And therefore Antichrist in
the proper signification has two essential marks; One, that he denies Jesus
to be Christ; and another that he professes himself to be Christ. The first
Mark is set down by S. John in his 1 Epist. 4. chapter 3. ver. Every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; And this
is the Spirit of Antichrist. The other Mark is expressed in the words of our
Savior, ( Mat. 24. 5.) Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and
again, If any man shall say unto you, L^e, here is Christ, there is Christ,
believe it not. And therefore Antichrist must be a False Christ, that is, some
one of them that shall pretend themselves to be Christ. And out of these two
Marks, to deny Jesus to be the Christ, and to affirm himself to be the Christ,
it follows, that he must also be an Adversary of Jesus the true Christ, which
is another usual signification of the word Antichrist. But of these many
Antichrists, there is one special one, (...), The Antichrist, or Antichrist
definitely, as one certain person; not indefinitely an Antichrist. Now seeing
the Pope of Rome, neither pretends himself, nor denies Jesus to be the
Christ, I perceive not how he can be called Antichrist; by which word is not
meant, one that falsely pretends to be His Lieutenant, or Vicar general, but
to be He. There is also some Mark of the time of this special Antichrist, as
( Mat. 24. 15.) when that abominable Destroyer, spoken of by Daniel, Dan. 9. 27.
shall stand in the Holy place, and such tribulation as was not since the
beginning of the world, nor ever shall be again, insomuch as if it were to last
long, (ver. 22.) no flesh could be saved; but for the elects sake those days
shall be shortened (made fewer). But that tribulation is not yet come; for it
is to be followed immediately (ver. 29.) by a darkening of the Sun and Moon, a
falling of the Stars, a concussion of the Heavens, and the glorious coming
again of our Savior in the clouds. And therefore The Antichrist is not yet
come; whereas, many Popes are both come and gone. It is true, the Pope in
taking upon him to give Laws to all Christian Kings, and Nations, usurpeth a
Kingdom in this world, which Christ took not on him: but he does it not as
Christ, but as for Christ, wherein there is nothing of The Antichrist.

In the fourth Book, to prove the Pope to be the supreme Judge in The fourth
Book.
all questions of Faith and Manners, ( which is as much as to be the absolute
Monarch of all Christians in the world,) he brings three Propositions: The
first, that his Judgments are Infallible: The second, that he can make very
Laws, and punish those that observe them not: The third, that our Savior
conferred all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical on the Pope of Rome.

For the Infallibility of his Judgments, he alleges the Scriptures: Texts for
the Infa^ibility of the Popes Judgment in points of Faith.
and first, that of Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired you that he
may sist you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not;
and when thou art converted, strengthen thy thy Brethren. This, according to
Bellarmines exposition, is, that Christ gave here to Simon Peter two
privileges: one, that neither his Faith should fail, nor the Faith of any of
his successors: the other, that neither he, nor any of his successors should
ever define any point concerning Faith, or Manners erroneously, or contrary to
the definition of a former Pope: Which is a strange, and very much strained
interpretation. But he that with attention reads that chapter, shall find
there is no place in the whole Scripture, that makes more against the Popes
Authority, than this very place. The Priests and Scribes seeking to kill our
Savior at the Passover, and Judas possessed with a resolution to betray him,
and the day of killing the Passover being come, our Savior celebrated the
same with his Apostles, which he said, till the Kingdom of God was come he
would do no more; and withal told them, that one of them was to betray him:
Hereupon they questioned, which of them it should be; and withal (seeing the
next Passover their Master would celebrate should be when he was King) entered
into a contention, who should then be the greatest man. Our Savior therefore
told them, that the Kings of the Nations had Dominion over their Subjects, and
are called by a name (in Hebrew) that signifies Bountiful; but I cannot be so
to you, you must endeavor to serve one another; I ordain you a Kingdom, but
it is such as my Father has ordained me; a Kingdom that I am now to purchase
with my blood, and not to possess till my second coming; then ye shall eat
and drink at my Table, and sit on Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel:
And then addressing himself to St. Peter, he says, Simon, Simon, Satan seeks
by suggesting a present domination, to weaken your faith of the future; but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith shall not fail; Thou therefore (Note
this,) being converted, and understanding my Kingdom as of another world,
confirm the same faith in thy Brethren: To which S. Peter answered (as one that
no more expected any authority in this world) Lord I am ready to go with thee,
not only to Prison, but to Death. Whereby it is manifest, S. Peter had not
only no jurisdiction given him in this world, but a charge to teach all the
other Apostles, that they also should have none. And for the Infallibility of
St. Peter's sentence definitive in matter of Faith, there is no more to be
attributed to it out of this Text, than that Peter should continue in the
belief of this point, namely, that Christ should come again, and possess the
Kingdom at the day of Judgment; which was not given by this Text to all his
Successors; for we see they claim it in the World that now is.

The second place is that of Matthew. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. By
which (as I have already shown in this chapter) is proved no more, than that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against the confession of Peter, which gave
occasion to that speech; namely this, that Jesus is Christ the Son of God.

The third Text is John 21. ver. 16, 17. Feed my sheep; which contains no more
but a Commission of Teaching: And if we grant the rest of the Apostles to be
contained in that name of Sheep; then it is the supreme Power of Teaching: but
it was only for the time that there were no Christian Sovereigns already
possessed of that Supremacy. But I have already proved, that Christian
Sovereigns are in their own Dominions the supreme Pastors, and instituted
thereto, by virtue of their being Baptized, though without other Imposition of
Hands. For such Imposition being a Ceremony of designing the person, is
needless, when he is already designed to the Power of Teaching what Doctrine
he will, by his institution to an Absolute Power over his Subjects. For as I
have proved before, Sovereigns are supreme Teachers (in general) by their
Office; and therefore oblige themselves (by their Baptism) to teach the
Doctrine of Christ: And when they suffer others to teach their people, they do
it at the peril of their own souls; for it is at the hands of the Heads of
Families that God will require the account of the instruction of his Children
and Servants. It is of Abraham himself, not of a hireling, that God says (
Genesis 18. 19.) I know him that he will command his Children, and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and do justice and judgment.

The fourth place is that of Exodus 28. 30. Thou shall put in the Breastplate of
Judgment, the Vrim and the Thummin: which he says is interpreted by the
Septuagint (...), that is, Evidence and Truth: And thence concludes, God had
given Evidence, and Truth, (which is almost Infallibility,) to the High Priest.
But be it Evidence and Truth it self that was given; or be it but Admonition
to the Priest to endeavor to inform himself clearly, and give judgment
uprightly; yet in that it was given to the High Priest, it was given to the
Civil Sovereign: For such next under God was the High Priest in the the
Commonwealth of Israel; and is an argument for Evidence and Truth, that is,
for the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of Civil Sovereigns over their own Subjects,
against the pretended Power of the Pope. These are all the Texts he brings
for the Infallibility of the Judgment of the Pope, in point of Faith.

For the Infallibility of his Judgment concerning Manners, he Texts for the
same in point of Manners.
brings one Text, which is that of John 16. 13. When the Spirit of truth is
come, he will lead you into all truth: where (says he) by all truth, is
meant, at least, all truth necessary to salvation. But with this mitigation, he
attributes no more Infallibility to the Pope, than to any man that professes
Christianity, and is not to be damned: For if any man (...) in any point,
wherein not to err is necessary to Salvation, it is impossible he should be
saved; for that only is necessary to Salvation, without which to be saved is
impossible. What points these are, I shall declare out of the Scripture in the
Chapter following. In this place I say no more, but that though it were
granted, the Pope could not possibly teach any error at all, yet does not this
entitle him to any Jurisdiction in the Dominions of another Prince, unless we
shall also say, a man is obliged in conscience to set on work upon all
occasions the best workman, even then also when he has formerly promised his
work to another.

Besides the Text, he argues from Reason, thus. If the Pope could err in
necessaries, then Christ has not sufficiently provided for the Churches
Salvation; because he has commanded her to follow the Popes directions. But
this Reason is invalid, unless he show when, and where Christ commanded that,
or took at all any notice of a Pope: Nay granting whatsoever was given to S.
Peter, was given to the Pope: yet seeing there is in the Scripture no command
to any man to obey St. Peter, no man can be just, that obeys him, when his
commands are contrary to those of his lawful Sovereign.

Lastly, it has not been declared by the Church, nor by the Pope himself,
that he is the Civil Sovereign of all the Christians in the world; and
therefore all Christians are not bound to acknowledge his Jurisdiction in point
of Manners. For the Civil Sovereignty, and supreme Judicature in controversies
of Manners, are the same thing: And the Makers of Civil Laws, are not only
Declarers, but also Makers of the justice, and injustice of actions; there
being nothing in men's Manners that makes them righteous, or unrighteous, but
their conformity with the Law of the Sovereign. And therefore when the Pope
challenges Supremacy in controversies of Manners, he teaches men to disobey
the Civil Sovereign; which is an erroneous Doctrine, contrary to the many
precepts of our Savior and his Apostles, delivered to us in the Scripture.

To prove the Pope has Power to make Laws, he alleges many places; as first,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. The man that will do presumptuously, and will not he arken unto
the Priest, (that stands to Minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto
the Judge,) even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from
Israel. For answer whereunto, we are to remember that the High Priest (next and
immediately under God) was the Civil Sovereign; and all Judges were to be
constituted by him. The words alleged sound therefore thus. The man that will
presume to disobey the Civil Sovereign for the time being, or any of his
Officers in the execution of their places, that man shall die, etc. which is
clearly for the Civil Sovereignty, against the Universal power of the Pope.

Secondly, he alleges that of Matthew. 16. Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. and
interprets it for such binding as is attributed ( Matthew. 23. 4.) to the
Scribes and Pharisees, They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and
lay them on men's shoulders; by which is meant (he says) Making of Laws; and
concludes thence, that the Pope can make Laws. But this also makes only for
the Legislative power of Civil Sovereigns: For the Scribes, and Pharisees sat
in Moses Chair, but Moses next under God was Sovereign of the People of
Israel: and therefore our Savior commanded them to do all that they should
say, but not all that they should do. That is, to obey their Laws, but not
follow their Example.

The third place, is John 21. 16. Feed my sheep; which is not a Power to make
Laws, but a command to Teach. Making Laws belongs to the Lord of the Family;
who by his own discretion chooses his Chaplain, as also a Schoolmaster to
Teach his children.

The fourth place John 20. 21. is against him. The words are, As my Father sent
me, so send I you. But our Savior was sent to Redeeem (by his Death) such as
should Believe; and by his own, and his Apostles preaching to prepare them for
their entrance into his Kingdom; which he himself says, is not of this world,
and has taught us to pray for the coming of it hereafter, though he refused (
Acts 1. 6, 7.) to tell his Apostles when it should come; and in which, when it
comes, the twelve Apostles shall sit on twelve Thrones (every one perhaps as
high as that of St. Peter) to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Seeing then
God the Father sent not our Savior to make Laws in this present world, we may
conclude from the Text, that neither did our Savior send S. Peter to make Laws
here, but to persuade men to expect his second coming with a steadfast faith;
and in the mean time, if Subjects, to obey their Princes; and if Princes, both
to believe it themselves, and to do their best to make their Subjects do the
same; which is the Office of a Bishop. Therefore this place makes most
strongly for the joining of the Ecclesiastical Supremacy to the Civil
Sovereignty, contrary to that which Cardinal Bellarmine alleges it for.

The fifth place is Acts 15. 28. It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to
us, to lay upon you no greater burden, than these necessary things, that ye
abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication. Here he notes the word Laying of burdens for
the Legislative Power. But who is there, that reading this Text, can say, this
style of the Apostles may not as properly be used in giving Counsel, as in
making Laws? The style of a Law is, We command: But, We think good, is the
ordinary style of them, that but give Advice; and they lay a Burden that give
Advice, though it be conditional, that is, if they to whom they give it, will
attain their ends: And such is the Burden, of abstaining from things
strangled, and from blood; not absolute, but in case they will not err. I have
shown before (chap. 25.) that Law, is distinguished from Counsel, in this,
that the reason of a Law, is taken from the design, and benefit of him that
prescribes it; but the reason of a Counsel, from the design, and benefit of
him, to whom the Counsel is given. But here, the Apostles aim only at the
benefit of the converted Gentiles, namely their Salvation; not at their own
benefit; for having done their endeavor, they shall have their reward, whether
they be obeyed, or not. And therefore the Acts of this Council, were not Laws,
but Counsels.

The sixth place is that of Romans 13. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, for there is no Power but of God; which is meant, he says not only of
Secular, but also of Ecclesiastical Princes. To which I answer, first, that
there are no Ecclesiastical Princes but those that are also Civil
Sovereigns; and their Principalities exceed not the compass of their Civil
Sovereignty; without those bounds though they may be received for Doctors, they
cannot be acknowledged for Princes. For if the Apostle had meant, we should be
subject both to our own Princes, and also to the Pope, he had taught us a
doctrine, which Christ himself has told us is impossible, namely, to serve two
Masters. And though the Apostle say in another place, I write these things
being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the
Power which the Lord has given me; it is not, that he challenged a Power
either to put to death, imprison, banish, whip, or fine any of them, which are
Punishments; but only to Excommunicate, which (without the Civil Power) is no
more but a leaving of their company, and having no more to do with them, than
with a Heathen man, or a Publican; which in many occasions might be a greater
pain to the Excommunicant, than to the Excommunicate.

The seventh place is 1 Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come unto you with a Rod, or in
love, and the spirit of lenity? But here again, it is not the Power of a
Magistrate to punish offenders, that is meant by a Rod; but only the Power of
Excommunication, which is not in its own nature a Punishment, but only a
Denouncing of punishment, that Christ shall inflict, when he shall be in
possession of his Kingdom, at the day of Judgment. Nor then also shall it be
properly a Punishment, as upon a Subject that has broken the Law; but a
Revenge, as upon an Enemy, or Revolter, that denies the Right of our Savior
to the Kingdom: And therefore this proves not the Legislative Power of any
Bishop, that has not also the Civil Power.

The eighth place is, Timothy 3. 2. A Bishop must be the husband but of one
wife, vigilant, sober, etc. which he says was a Law. I thought that none could
make a Law in the Church, but the Monarch of the the Church, St. Peter. But
suppose this Precept made by the authority of St. Peter; yet I see no reason
why to call it a Law, rather than an Advice, seeing Timothy was not a Subject,
but a Disciple of S. Paul; nor the flock under the charge of Timothy, his
Subjects in the Kingdom, but his Scholars in the School of Christ: If all the
Precepts he gives Timothy, be Laws, why is not this also a Law, Drink no
longer water, but use a little wine for thy healths sake? And why are not also
the Precepts of good Physicians, so many Laws? but that it is not the
Imperative manner of speaking, but an absolute Subjection to a Person, that
makes his Precepts Laws.

In like manner, the ninth place, 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against an Elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three VVitnesses, is a wise Precept, but not a
Law.

The tenth place is, Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that
despises you, despises me. And there is no doubt, but he that despises the
Counsel of those that are sent by Christ, despises the Counsel of Christ
himself. But who are those now that are sent by Christ, but such as are
ordained Pastors by lawful Authority? and who are lawfully ordained, that are
not ordained by the Sovereign Pastor? and who is ordained by the Sovereign
Pastor in a Christian Commonwealth, that is not ordained by the authority of
the Sovereign thereof? Out of this place therefore it follows, that he which
hears his Sovereign being a Christian, hears Christ; and he that despises
the Doctrine which his King being a Christian, authorizeth, despises the
Doctrine of Christ (which is not that which Bellarmine intends here to prove,
but the contrary). But all this is nothing to a Law. Nay more, a Christian
King, as a Pastor, and Teacher of his Subjects, makes not thereby his Doctrines
Laws. He cannot oblige men to believe; though as a Civil Sovereign he may make
Laws suitable to his Doctrine, which may oblige men to certain actions, and
sometimes to such as they would not otherwise do, and which he ought not to
command; and yet when they are commanded, they are Laws; and the external
actions done in obedience to them, without the inward approbation, are the
actions of the Sovereign, and not of the Subject, which is in that case but as
an instrument, without any motion of his own at all; because God has
commanded to obey them.

The eleventh, is every place, where the Apostle for Counsel, puts some
word, by which men use to signify Command; or calls the following of his
Counsel, by the name of Obedience. And therefore they are alleged out of 1
Cor. 11. 2. I commend you for keeping my Precepts as I delivered them to you.
The Greek is, I commend you for keeping those things I delivered to you, as I
delivered them. Which is far from signifying that they were Laws, or any thing
else, but good Counsel. And that of 1 Thessalonians. 4. 2. You know what
commandments we gave you: where the Greek word is (...), equivalent to (...),
what we delivered to you, as in the place next before alleged, which does not
prove the Traditions of the Apostles, to be any more than Counsels; though as
is said in the 8 verse, he that despises them, despises not man, but God: For
our Savior himself came not to Judge, that is, to be King in this world; but
to Sacrifice himself for Sinners, and leave Doctors in his Church, to lead, not
to drive men to Christ, who never accepts forced actions, (which is all the
Law produces;) but the inward conversion of the heart; which is not the work
of Laws, but of Counsel, and Doctrine.

And that of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any man Obey not our word by this Epistle, note
that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed: where from the
word Obey, he would infer, that this Epistle was a Law to the Thessalonians.
The Epistles of the Emperors were indeed Laws. If therefore the Epistle of S.
Paul were also a Law, they were to obey two Masters. But the word Obey, as it
is in the Greek (...), signifies harkening to, or putting in practice, not
onley that which is Commanded by him that has right to punish, but also that
which is delivered in a way of Counsel for our good; and therefore St. Paul
does not bid kill him that disobeys, nor beat, nor imprison, nor amerce him,
which Legislators may all do; but avoid his company, that he may be ashamed:
whereby it is evident, it was not the Empire of an Apostle, but his Reputation
amongst the Faithful, which the Christians stood in awe of.

The last place is that of Heb. 13. 17. Obey your Leaders, and submit your
selves to them, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account:
And here also is intended by Obedience, a following of their Counsel: For the
reason of our Obedience, is not drawn from the will and command of our Pastors,
but from our own benefit, as being the Salvation of our Souls they watch for,
and not for the Exaltation of their own Power, and Authority. If it were meant
here, that all they teach were Laws, then not only the Pope, but every Pastor
in his Parish should have Legislative Power. Again, they that are bound to
obey, their Pastors, have no power to examine their commands. What then shall
we say to St. John who bids us (1 Epist. chap. 4. ver. 1.) Not to believe
every Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world? It is therefore manifest, that we
may dispute the Doctrine of our Pastors; but no man can dispute a Law. The
Commands of Civil Sovereigns are on all sides granted to be Laws: if any else
can make a Law besides himself, all Commonwealth, and consequently all Peace,
and Justice must cease; which is contrary to all Laws, both Divine and Humane.
Nothing therefore can be drawn from these, or any other places of Scripture, to
prove the Decrees of the Pope, where he has not also the Civil Sovereignty, to
be Laws.

The last point he would prove, is this, That our Savior Christ The question
of Superiority between the Pope and other Bishops.
has committed Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction immediately to none but the Pope.
Wherein he handles not the Question of Supremacy between the Pope and
Christian Kings, but between the Pope and other Bishops. And first, he says it
is agreed, that the Jurisdiction of Bishops, is at least in the general de
Iure Divino, that is, in the Right of God; for which he alleges S. Paul,
Ephesians. 4. 11. where he says, that Christ after his Ascension into heaven,
gave gifts to men, some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and some Teachers And thence inferres, they have indeed their
Jurisdiction in Gods Right; but will not grant they have it immediately from
God, but derived through the Pope. But if a man may be said to have his
Jurisdiction de Jure Divino, and yet not immediately; what lawful
Jurisdiction, though but Civil, is there in a Christian Commonwealth, that is
not also de Jure Divino? For Christian Kings have their Civil Power from God
immediately; and the Magistrates under him exercise their several charges in
virtue of his Commission; wherein that which they do, is no less de Jure
Divino mediato, than that which the Bishops do, in virtue of the Popes
Ordination. All lawful Power is of God, immediately in the Supreme Governor,
and mediately in those that have Authority under him: So that either he must
grant every Constable in the State, to hold his Office in the Right of God; or
he must not hold that any Bishop holds his so, besides the Pope himself.

But this whole Dispute, whether Christ left the Jurisdiction to the Pope
only, or to other Bishops also, if considered out of those places where the
Pope has the Civil Sovereignty, is a contention de lana Caprina: For none of
them (where they are not Sovereigns) has any Jurisdiction at all. For
Jurisdiction is the Power of hearing and determining Causes between man and
man; and can belong to none, but him that has the Power to prescribe the Rules
of Right and Wrong; that is, to make Laws; and with the Sword of Justice to
compel men to obey his Decisions, pronounced either by himself, or by the
Judges he ordains thereunto; which none can lawfully do, but the Civil
Sovereign.

Therefore when he alleges out of the 6 of Luke, that our Savior called his
Disciples together, and chose twelve of them which he named Apostles, he
proves that he Elected them (all, except Matthias, Paul and Barnabas,) and
gave them Power and Command to Preach, but not to Judge of Causes between man
and man: for that is a Power which he refused to take upon himself, saying,
Who made me a Judge, or a Divider, amongst you? and in another place, My
Kingdom is not of this world. But he that has not the Power to hear, and
determine Causes between man and man, cannot be said to have any Jurisdiction
at all. And yet this hinders not, but that our Savior gave them Power to
Preach and Baptize in all parts of the world, supposing they were not by their
own lawful Sovereign forbidden: For to our own Sovereigns Christ himself, and
his Apostles, have in sundry places expressly commanded us in all things to be
obedient.

The arguments by which he would prove, that Bishops receive their Jurisdiction
from the Pope (seeing the Pope in the Dominions of other Princes has no
Jurisdiction himself,) are all in vain. Yet because they prove, on the
contrary, that all Bishops receive Jurisdiction when they have it from their
Civil Sovereigns, I will not omit the recital of them.

The first, is from Numbers 11. where Moses not being able alone to undergo
the whole burden of administering the affairs of the People of Israel, God
commanded him to choose Seventy Elders, and took part of the spirit of Moses,
to put it upon those Seventy Elders: by which is understood, not that God
weakened the spirit of Moses, for that had not eased him at all, but that they
had all of them their authority from him; wherein he does truly, and
ingenuously interpret that place. But seeing Moses had the entire Sovereignty
in the Commonwealth of the Jews, it is manifest, that it is thereby signified,
that they had their Authority from the Civil Sovereign: and therefore that
place proves, that Bishops in every Christian Commonwealth have their
Authority from the Civil Sovereign; and from the Pope in his own Territories
only, and not in the Territories of any other State.

The second argument, is from the nature of Monarchy; wherein all Authority is
in one Man, and in others by derivation from him: But the Government of the
Church, he says, is Monarchical. This also makes for Christian Monarchs. For
they are really Monarchs of their own people; that is, of their own Church (for
the Church is the same thing with a Christian people;) whereas the Power of the
Pope, though he were S. Peter, is neither Monarchy, nor has any thing of
Archicall, nor Craticall, but only of Didacticall; For God accepts not a
forced, but a willing obedience.

The third, is, from that the Sea of S. Peter is called by S. Cyprian, the
Head, the Source, the Root, the Sun, from whence the Authority of Bishops is
derived. But by the Law of Nature (which is a better Principle of Right and
Wrong, than the word of any Doctor that is but a man) the Civil Sovereign in
every Commonwealth, is the Head, the Source, the Root, and the Sun, from which
all Jurisdiction is derived. And therefore the Jurisdiction of Bishops, is
derived from the Civil Sovereign.

The fourth, is taken from the Inequality of their Jurisdictions: For if God
(says he) had given it them immediately, he had given as well Equality of
Jurisdiction, as of Order: But we see, some are Bishops but of own Town, some
of a hundred Towns, and some of many whole Provinces; which differences were
not determined by the command of God; their Jurisdiction therefore is not of
God, but of Man; and one has a greater, another a less, as it pleases the
Prince of the Church. Which argument, if he had proved before, that the Pope
had had an Universal Jurisdiction over all Christians, had been for his
purpose. But seeing that has not been proved, and that it is notoriously
known, the large Jurisdiction of the Pope was given him by those that had it,
that is, by the Emperors of Rome, (for the Patriarch of Constantinople, upon
the same title, namely, of being Bishop of the Capital City of the Empire, and
Seat of the Emperor, claimed to be equal to him,) it follows, that all
other Bishops have their Jurisdiction from the Sovereigns of the place wherein
they exercise the same: And as for that cause they have not their Authority de
Iure Divino; so neither has the Pope his de Iure Divino, except only where
he is also the Civil Sovereign.

His fifth argument is this, If Bishops have their Jurisdiction immediately from
God, the Pope could not take it from them, for he can do nothing contrary to
Gods ordination; And this consequence is good, and well proved. But (says he)
the Pope can do this, and has done it. This also is granted, so he do it in
his own Dominions, or in the Dominions of any other Prince that has given him
that Power; but not universally, in Right of the Popedom: For that power
belongs to every Christian Sovereign, within the bounds of his own Empire,
and is inseparable from the Sovereignty. Before the People of Israel had (by
the commandment of God to Samuel) set over themselves a King, after the manner
of other Nations, the High Priest had the Civil Government; and none but he
could make, nor depose an inferior Priest: But that Power was afterward in
the King, as may be proved by this same argument of Bellarmine; For if the
Priest (be he the High Priest or any other) had his Jurisdiction immediately
from God, then the King could not take it from him; for he could do nothing
contrary to Gods ordinance: But it is certain, that King Solomon (1 Kings 2.
26.) deprived Abiathar the High Priest of his Office, and placed Zadok (verse
35.) in his room. Kings therefore may in the like manner Ordain, and Deprive
Bishops, as they shall think fit, for the well governing of their Subjects.

His sixth argument is this, If Bishops have their Jurisdiction de Iure Divino
(that is, immediately from God,) they that maintain it, should bring some Word
of God to prove it: But they can bring none. The argument is good; I have
therefore nothing to say against it. But it is an argument no less good, to
prove the Pope himself to have no Jurisdiction in the Dominion of any other
Prince.

Lastly, he brings for argument, the testimony of two Popes, Innocent, and
Leo; and I doubt not but he might have alleged, with as good reason, the
testimonies of all the Popes almost since S. Peter: For considering the love of
Power naturally implanted in mankind, whosoever were made Pope, he would be
tempted to uphold the same opinion. Nevertheless, they should therein but do,
as Innocent, and Leo did, bear witness of themselves, and therefore their
witness should not be good.

In the fifth Book he has four Conclusions. The first is, That the Of the Popes
^mporall Power.
Pope is not Lord of all the world: The second, That the Pope is not Lord of
all the Christian world: The third, That the Pope (without his own Territory)
has not any Temporal Jurisdiction DIRECTLY: These three Conclusions are easily
granted. The fourth is, That the Pope has (in the Dominions of other Princes)
the Supreme Temporal Power INDIRECTLY: which is denied; unless he mean by
Indirectly* that he has gotten it by Indirect means, then is that also granted.
But I understand, that when he says: he has it Indirectly, he means, that
such Temporal Jurisdiction belongs to him of Right, but that this Right is
but a Consequence of his Pastoral Authority, the which he could not exercise,
unless he have the other with it: And therefore to the Pastoral Power (which
he calls Spiritual) the Supreme Power Civil is necessarily annexed; and that
thereby he has a Right to change Kingdoms, giving them to one, and taking
them from another, when he shall think it conduces to the Salvation of Souls.

Before I come to consider the Arguments by which he would prove this
Doctrine, it will not be amiss to lay open the Consequences of it; that
Princes, and States, that have the Civil Sovereignty in their several
Commonwealths, may bethink themselves, whether it be convenient for them, and
conducing to the good of their Subjects, of whom they are to give an account at
the day of Judgment, to admit the same.

When it is said, the Pope has not (in the Territories of other States) the
Supreme Civil Power Directly; we are to understand, he does not challenge it,
as other Civil Sovereigns do, from the original submission thereto of those
that are to be governed. For it is evident, and has already been sufficiently
in this Treatise demonstrated, that the Right of all Sovereigns, is derived
originally from the consent of every one of those that are to be governed;
whether they that choose him, do it for their common defense against an Enemy,
as when they agree amongst themselves to appoint a Man, or an Assembly of men
to protect them; or whether they do it, to save their lives, by submission to
a conquering Enemy. The Pope therefore, when he disclaimeth the Supreme Civil
Power over other States Directly, denies no more, but that his Right comes to
him by that way; He cease not for all that, to claim it another way; and
that is, (without the consent of them that are to be governed) by a Right given
him by God, (which he calls indirectly,) in his Assumption to the Papacy.
But by what way soever he pretend, the Power is the same; and he may (if it be
granted to be his Right) depose Princes and States, as often as it is for the
Salvation of Souls, that is, as often as he will; for he claims also the
Sole Power to Judge, whether it be to the Salvation of men's Souls, or not. And
this is the Doctrine, not only that Bellarmine here, and many other Doctors
teach in their Sermons and Books, but also that some Counsels have decreed,
and the Popes have accordingly, when the occasion has served them, put in
practice. For the fourth Council of Lateran held under Pope Innocent the
third* (in the third Chap. De Haereticis,) has this Canon. If a King at the
Popes admonition, do not purge his Kingdom of Haeretiques, and being
Excommunicate for the same, make not satisfaction within a year, his Subjects
are absolved of their Obedience. And the practice hereof has been seen on
diverse occasions; as in the Deposing of Chilperique, King of France; in the
Translation of the Roman Empire to Charlemaine; in the Oppression of John King
of England; in Transferring the Kingdom of Navarre; and of late years, in the
League against Henry the third of France, and in many more occ^rrences. I think
there be few Princes that consider not this as Injust, and Inconvenient; but I
wish they would all resolve to be Kings, or Subjects. Men cannot serve two
Masters: They ought therefore to ease them, either by holding the Reins of
Government wholly in their own hands; or by wholly delivering them into the
hands of the Pope; that such men as are willing to be obedient, may be
protected in their obedience. For this distinction of Temporal, and Spiritual
Power is but words. Power is as really divided, and as dangerously to all
purposes, by sharing with another Indirect Power, as with a Direct one. But to
come now to his Arguments.

The first is this, The Civil Power is subject to the Spiritual: Therefore he
that has the Supreme Power Spiritual, has right to command Temporal
Princes, and dispose of their Temporalls in order to the Spiritual. As for the
dictinction of Temporal, and Spiritual, let us consider in what sense it may
be said intelligibly, that the Temporal, or Civil Power is subject to the
Spiritual. There be but two ways that those words can be made sense. For when
we say, one Power is subject to another Power, the meaning either is, that he
which has the one, is subject to him that has the other; or that the one
Power is to the other, as the means to the end. ^r we cannot understand, that
one Power has Power over another Power; or that one Power can have Right or
Command over another: For Subjection, Command, Right, and Power are accidents,
not of Powers, but of Persons: One Power may be subordinate to another, as the
art of a Sadler, to the art of a Rider. If then it be granted, that the Civil
Government be ordained as a means to bring us to a Spiritual felicity; yet it
does not follow, that if a King have the Civil Power, and the Pope the
Spiritual, that therefore the King is bound to obey the Pope, more then every
Sadler is bound to obey every Rider. Therefore as from Subordination of an Art,
cannot be inferred the Subjection of the Professor; so from the Subordination
of a Government, cannot be inferred the Subjection of the Governor. When
therefore he says, the Civil Power is Subject to the Spiritual, his meaning
is, that the Civil Sovereign, is Subject to the Spiritual Sovereign. And the
Argument stands thus, The Civil Sovereign, is subject to the Spiritual;
Therefore the Spiritual Prince may command Temporal Princes. Where the
Conclusion is the same, with the Antecedent he should have proved. But to prove
it, he alleges first, this reason, Kings and Popes, Clergy and Laity make but
one Commonwealth; that is to say, but one Church: And in all Bodies the
Members depend one upon another: But things Spiritual depend not of things
Temporal: Therefore Temporal depend on Spiritual. And therefore are Subject
to them. In which Argumentation there be two gross errors: one is, that all
Christian Kings, Popes, Clergy, and all other Christian men, make but one
Commonwealth: For it is evident that France is one Commonwealth, Spain
another, and Venice a third, etc. And these consist of Christians; and
therefore also are several Bodies of Christians; that is to say, several
Churches: And their several Sovereigns Represent them, whereby they are
capable of commanding and obeying, of doing and suffering, as a natural man;
which no General or Universal Church is, till it have a Representant; which
it has not on Earth: for if it had, there is no doubt but that all
Christendom were one Commonwealth, whose Sovereign were that Representant,
both in things Spiritual and Temporal: And the Pope, to make himself this
Representant, wants three things that our Savior has not given him, to
Command, and to Judge, and to Punish, otherwise than (by Excommunication) to
run from those that will not Learn of him: For though the Pope were Christ's
only Vicar, yet he cannot exercise his government, till our Saviors second
coming: And then also it is not the Pope, but St. Peter himself, with the
other Apostles, that are to be Judges of the world.

The other error in this his first Argument is, that he says, the Members of
every Commonwealth, as of a natural Body, depend one of another: It is true,
they cohaere together; but they depend only on the Sovereign, which is the
Soul of the Commonwealth; which failing, the Commonwealth is dissolved into a
Civil war, no one man so much as cohaering to another, for want of a common
Dependence on a known Sovereign; Just as the Members of the natural Body
dissolve into Earth, for want of a Soul to hold them together. Therefore there
is nothing in this similitude, from whence to infer a dependence of the Laity
on the Clergy, or of the Temporal Officers on the Spiritual; but of both on
the Civil Sovereign; which ought indeed to direct his Civil commands to the
Salvation of Souls; but is not therefore subject to any but God himself. And
thus you see the labored fallacy of the first Argument, to deceive such men as
distinguish not between the Subordination of Actions in the way to the End; and
the Subjection of Persons one to another in the administration of the Means.
For to every End, the Means are determined by Nature, or by God himself
supernaturally: but the Power to make men use the Means, is in every nation
resigned (by the Law of Nature, which forbids men to violate their Faith
given) to the Civil Sovereign.

His second Argument is this, Every Commonwealth, (because it is supposed to
^e perfect and sufficient in it self,) may command any other Commonwealth, not
subject to it, and force it to change the administration of the Government; nay
depose the Prince, and set another in his room, if it cannot otherwise defend
it self against the injuries he goes about to do them: much more may a
Spiritu^ll Commonwealth command a Temporal one to change the administration
of their Government, and may depose Princes, and institute others, when they
cannot otherwise defend the Spiritual Good.

That a Commonwealth, to defend it self against injuries, may lawfully do
all that he has here said, is very true; and has already in that which has
gone before been sufficiently demonstrated. And if it were also true, that
there is now in this world a Spiritual Commonwealth, distinct from a Civil
Commonwealth, then might the Prince thereof, upon injury done him, or upon
want of caution that injury be not done him in time to come, repair, and
secure himself by War; which is in sum, deposing, killing, or subduing, or
doing any act of Hostility. But by the same reason, it would be no less
lawful for a Civil Sovereign, upon the like injuries done, or feared, to make
war upon the Spiritual Sovereign; which I believe is more than Cardinal
Bellarmine would have inferred from his own proposition.

But Spiritual Commonwealth there is none in this world: for it is the same
thing with the Kingdom of Christ; which he himself says, is not of this
world; but shall be in the next world, at the Resurrection, when they that have
lived justly, and believed that he was the Christ, shall (though they died
Natural bodies) rise Spiritual bodies; and then it is, that our Savior shall
judge the world, and conquer his Adversaries, and make a Spiritual
Commonwealth. In the mean time, seeing there are no men on earth, whose bodies
are Spiritual; there can be no Spiritual Commonwealth amongst men that are
yet in the flesh; unless we call Preachers, that have Commission to Teach,
and prepare men for their reception into the Kingdom of Christ at the
Resurrection, a Commonwealth; which I have proved already to be none.

The third Argument is this; It is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an
Infidel, or Haereticall King, in case he endeavor to draw them to his
Haeresie, or Infidelity. But to judge whether a King draw his subjects to
Haeresie, or not, belongs to the Pope. Therefore has the Pope Right, to
determine whether the Prince be to be deposed, or not deposed.

To this I answer, that both these assertions are false. For Christians, (or
men of what Religion soever,) if they tolerate not their King, whatsoever law
he makes, though it be concerning Religion, do violate their faith,
contrary to the Divine Law, both Natural and Positive: Nor is there any Judge
of Haeresie amongst Subjects, but their own Civil Sovereign: For Haeresie is
nothing else, but a private opinion, obstinately maintained, contrary to the
opinion which the Public Person (that is to say, the Representant of the
Commonwealth) has commanded to be taught. By which it is manifest, that an
opinion publicly appointed to be taught, cannot be Haeresie; nor the
Sovereign Princes that authorize them, Haeretiques. For Haeretiques are none
but private men, that stubbornly defend some Doctrine, prohibited by their
lawful Sovereigns.

But to prove that Christians are not to tolerate Infidel, or Haereticall
Kings, he alleges a place in Deuteronomy. 17. where God forbids the Jews, when
they shall set a King over themselves, to choose a stranger: And from thence
infers, that it is unlawful for a Christian, to choose a King, that is not
a Christian. And it is true, that he that is a Christian, that is, he that has
already obliged himself to receive our Savior when he shall come, for his
King, shall tempt God too much in choosing for King in this world, one that he
knows will endeavor, both by terror, and persuasion to make him violate his
faith. But, it is (says he) the same danger, to choose one that is not a
Christian, for King, and not to depose him* when he is chosen. To this I say,
the question is not of the danger of not deposing; but of the Justice of
deposing him. To choose him, may in some cases be unjust; but to depose him,
when he is chosen, is in no case Just. For it is always violation of faith,
and consequently against the Law of Nature, which is the eternal Law of God.
Nor do we read, that any such Doctrine was accounted Christian in the time of
the Apostles; nor in the time of the Roman Emperors, till the Popes had the
Civil Sovereignty of Rome. But to this he has replied, that the Christians of
old, deposed not Nero, nor Dioclesian, nor Julian, nor Valens an Arrian, for
this cause only, that they wanted Temporal forces. Perhaps so. But did our
Savior, who for calling for, might have had twelve Legions of immortal,
invulnerable Angels to assist him, want forces to depose Caesar, or at least
Pilate, that unjustly, without finding fault in him, delivered him to the Jews
to be crucified? Or if the Apostles wanted Temporal forces to depose Nero,
was it therefore necessary for them in their Epistles to the new made
Christians, to teach them (as they did) to obey the Powers constituted over
them, (whereof Nero in that time was one,) and that they ought to obey them,
not for fear of their wrath, but for conscience sake? Shall we say they did not
only obey, but also teach what they meant not, for want of strength? It is not
therefore for want of strength, but for conscience sake, that Christians are to
tolerate their Heathen Princes, or Princes (for I cannot call any one whose
Doctrine is the Public Doctrine, an Haeretique) that authorize the teaching
of an Error. And whereas for the Temporal Power of the Pope, he alleges
further, that St. Paul (1 Cor. 6.) appointed Judges under the Heathen Princes
of those times, such as were not ordained by those Princes; it is not true. For
St. Paul does but advise them, to take some of their Brethren to compound their
differences, as Arbitrators, rather than to go to law one with another before
the Heathen Judges; which is a wholesome Precept, and full of Charity, fit to
be practiced also in the best Christian Commonwealths. And for the danger
that may arise to Religion, by the Subjects tolerating of an Heathen, or an
Erring Prince, it is a point, of which a Subject is no competent Judg^; or if
he be, the Popes Temporal Subjects may judge also of the Popes Doctrine. For
every Christian Prince, as I have formerly proyed, is no less Supreme Pastor
of his own Subjects, than the Pope of his.

The fourth Argument, is taken from the Baptism of Kings; wherein, that they
may be made Christians they submit their Scepters to Christ; and promise to
keep, and defend the Christian Faith. This is true; for Christian Kings are no
more but Christ's Subjects: but they may, for all that, be the Popes Fellows;
for they are Supreme Pastors of their own Subjects; and the Pope is no more but
King, and Pastor, even in Rome it self.

The fifth Argument, is drawn from the words spoken by our Savior, Feed my
sheep; by which was given all Power necessary for a Pastor; as the Power to
chase away Wolves, such as are Haeretiques; the Power to shut up Rams, if
they be mad, or push at the other Sheep with their Horns, such as are Evil
(though Christian) Kings; and Power to give the Flock convenient food: From
whence he infers, that St. Peter had these three Powers given him by
Christ. To which I answer, that the last of these Powers, is no more than the
Power, or rather Command to Teach. For the first, which is to chase away
Wolves, that is, Haeretiques, the place he quoteth is ( Matthew. 7. 15.) Beware
of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves. But neither are Haeretiques false Prophets, or at all
Prophets: nor (admitting Haeretiques for the Wolves there meant,) were the
Apostles commanded to kill them, or if they were Kings, to depose them; but to
beware of, fly, and avoid them: nor was it to St. Peter, nor to any of the
Apostles, but to the multitude of the Jews that followed him into the mountain,
men for the most part not yet converted, that he gave this Counsel, to Beware
of false Prophets: which therefore if it confer a Power of chasing away
Kings, was given, not only to private men; but to men that were not at all
Christians. And as to the Power of Separating, and Shutting up of furious
Rams, (by which he means Christian Kings that refuse to submit themselves
to the Roman Pastor,) our Savior refused to take upon him that Power in this
world himself, but advised to let the Corn and Tares grow up together till the
day of Judgment: much less did he give it to St. Peter, or can S. Peter give
it to the Popes. St. Peter, and all other Pastors, are bidden to esteem those
Christians that disobey the Church, that is, (that disobey the Christian
Sovereign) as Heathen men, and as Publicans. Seeing then men challenge to the
Pope no authority over Heathen Princes, they ought to challenge none over those
that are to be esteemed as Heathen.

But from the Power to Teach only, he infers also a Coercive Power in the
Pope, over Kings. The Pastor (says he) must give his flock convenient food:
Therefore the Pope may, and ought to compel Kings to do their duty. Out of
which it follows, that the Pope, as Pastor of Christian men, is King of
Kings: which all Christian Kings ought indeed either to Confess, or else they
ought to take upon themselves the Supreme Pastoral Charge, every one in his
own Dominion.

His sixth, and last Argument, is from Examples. To which I answer, first, that
Examples prove nothing: Secondly, that the Examples he alleges make not so
much as a probability of Right. The fact of Jehoiada, in Killing Athaliah (2
Kings 11.) was either by the Authority of King Joash, or it was a horrible
Crime in the High Priest which (ever after the election of King Saul) was a
mere Subject. The fact of St. Ambrose, in Excommunicating Theodosius the
Emperor, (if it were true he did so,) was a Capital Crime. And for the
Popes, Gregory 1. Greg. 2. Zachary, and Leo 3. their Judgments are void, as
given in their own Cause; and the Acts done by them conformably to this
Doctrine, are the greatest Crimes (especially that of Zachary) that are
incident to Humane Nature. And thus much of Power Ecclesiastical; wherein I
had been more brief, forbearing to examine these Arguments of Bellarmine, if
they had been his, as a Private man, and not as the Champion of the Papacy,
against all other Christian Princes, and States.

CHAP. XLIII. Of what is NECESSARY for a Man's Reception into the Kingdom of
Heaven.
THe most frequent praetext of Sedition, and Civil War, The difficulty of
obeying God and Man both at once,
in Christian Commonwealths has a long time proceeded from a difficulty, not
yet sufficiently resolved, of obeying at once, both God, and Man, then when
their Commandments are one contrary to the other. It is manifest enough, that
when a man receives two contrary Commands, and knows that one of them is Gods,
he ought to obey that, and not the other, though it be the command even of his
lawful Sovereign (whether a Monarch, or or a sovereign Assembly,) or the
command of his Father. The difficulty therefore consists in this, that men
when they are commanded in the name of God, know not in diverse Cases, whether
the command be from God, or whether he that commands, do but abuse Gods name
for some private ends of his own. For as there were in the Church of the Jews,
many false Prophets, that sought reputation with the people, by feigned Dreams,
and Visions; so there have been in all times in the Church of Christ, false
Teachers, that seek reputation with the people, by fantastical and false
Doctrines; and by such reputation (as is the nature of Ambition,) to govern
them for their private benefit.

But this difficulty of obeying both God, and the Civil Sovereign Is none to
them that distinguish between what is, and what is not Necessary to Salvation.
on earth, to those that can distinguish between what is Necessary, and what is
not Necessary for their Reception into the Kingdom of God, is of no moment.
For if the command of the Civil Sovereign be such, as that it may be obeyed,
without the forfeiture of life Eternal; not to obey it is unjust; and the
precept of the Apostle takes place; Servants obey your Masters in all things;
and, Children obey your Parents in all things; and the precept of our Savior,
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, All therefore they shall say,
that observe, and do. But if the command be such, as cannot be obeyed, without
being damned to Eternal Death, then it were madness to obey it, and the
Counsel of our Savior takes place, ( Mat. 10. 28.) Fear not those that kill
the body, but cannot kill the soul. All men therefore that would avoid, both
the punishments that are to be in this world inflicted, for disobedience to
their earthly Sovereign, and those that shall be inflicted in the world to come
for disobedience to God, have need be taught to distinguish well between what
is, and what is not Necessary to Eternal Salvation.

All that is NECESSARY to Salvatian, is contained in two Virtues, All that is
Necessary to Salvation is contained in Faith and Obedience.
Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Laws. The latter of these, if it were
perfect, were enough to us. But because we are all guilty of disobedience to
Gods Law, not only originally in Adam, but also actually by our own
transgressions, there is required at our hands now, not only Obedience for the
rest of our time, but also a Remission of sins for the time past; which
Remission is the reward of our Faith in Christ. That nothing else is
Necessarily required to Salvation, is manifest from this, that the Kingdom of
Heaven is shut to none but to Sinners; that is to say, to the disobedient, or
transgressors of the Law; nor to them, in case they Repent, and Believe all the
Articles of Christian Faith, Necessary to Salvation.

The Obedience required at our hands by God, that accepts in What Obedience
is Necessary;
all our actions the Will for the Deed, is a serious Endeavor to Obey him; and
is called also by all such names as signify that Endeavor. And therefore
Obedience, is sometimes called by the names of Charity, and Love, because they
imply a Will to Obey; and our Savior himself makes our Love to God, and to
one another, a Fulfilling of the whole Law: and sometimes by the name of
Righteousness; for Righteousness is but the will to give to every one his
own, that is to say, the will to obey the Laws: and sometimes by the name of
Repentance; because to Repent, implies a turning away from finne, which is the
same, with the return of the will to Obedience. Whosoever therefore unfeignedly
desires to fulfill the Commandments of God, or repents him truly of his
transgressions, or that loves God with all his heart, and his neighbor as
himself, has all the Obedience Necessary to his Reception into the Kingdom of
God: For if God should require perfect Innocence, there could no flesh be saved.

But what Commandments are those that God has given us? And to what Laws.
Are all those Laws which were given to the Jews by the hand of Moses, the
Commandments of God? If they be, why are not Christians taught to Obey them?
If they be not, what others are so, besides the Law of Nature? For our Savior
Christ has not given us new Laws, but Counsel to observe those we are
subject to; that is to say, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of our several
Sovereigns: Nor did he make any new Law to the Jews in his Sermon on the Mouut,
but only expounded the Laws of Moses, to which they were subject before. The
Laws of God therefore are none but the Laws of Nature, whereof the principal
is, that we should not violate our Faith, that is, a commandment to obey our
Civil Sovereigns, which we constituted over us, by mutual pact one with
another. And this Law of God, that commands Obedience to the Law Civil,
commands by consequence Obedience to all the Precepts of the Bible; which (as
I have proved in the precedent Chapter) is there only Law, where the Civil
Sovereign has made it so; and in other places but Counsel; which a man at his
own peril, may without injustice refuse to obey.

Knowing now what is the Obedience Necessary to Salvation, and In the Faith of
a Christian, who is the Person believed.
to whom it is due; we are to consider next concerning Faith, whom, and why we
believe; and what are the Articles, or Points necessarily to be believed by
them that shall be saved. And first, for the Person whom we believe, because it
is impossible to believe any Person, before we know what he says, it is
necessary he be one that we have heard speak. The Person therefore, whom
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and the Prophets believed, was God himself, that
spoke unto them supernaturally: And the Person, whom the Apostles and Disciples
that conversed with Christ believed, was our Savior himself. But of them, to
whom neither God the Father, nor our Savior ever spoke, it cannot be said,
that the Person whom they believed, was God. They believed the Apostles, and
after them the Pastors and Doctors of the Church, that recommended to their
faith the History of the Old and New Testament: so that the Faith of Christians
ever since our Saviors time, has had for foundation, first, the reputation of
their Pastors, and afterward, the authority of those that made the Old and New
Testament to be received for the Rule of Faith; which none could do but
Christian Sovereigns; who are therefore the Supreme Pastors, and the only
Persons, whom Christians now hear speak from God; except such as God speaks
to, in these days supernaturally. But because there be many false Prophets gone
out into the world, other men are to examine such Spirits (as St. John advises
us; 1 Epistle, Chap. 4. ver. 1.) whether they be of God, or not. And therefore,
seeing the Examination of Doctrines belongs to the Supreme Pastor, the Person
which all they that have no special revelation are to believe, is (in every
Commonwealth) the Supreme Pastor, that is to say, the Civil Sovereign.

The causes why men believe any Christian Doctrine, are various: The causes of
Christian Faith.
For Faith is the gift of God; and he works it in each several man, by such
ways, as it seems good unto himself. The most ordinary immediate cause of
our belief; concerning any point of Christian Faith, is, that we believe the
Bible to be the Word of God. But why we believe the Bible to be the Word of
God, is much disputed, as all questions must needs be, that are not well
stated. For they make not the question to be, Why we Believe it, but, How we
Know it; as if Believing and Knowing were all one. And thence while one side
ground their Knowledge upon the Infallibility of the Church, and the other
side, on the Testimony of the Private Spirit, neither side concludes what it
pretends. For how shall a man know the Infallibility of the Church, but by
knowing first the Infallibility of the Scripture? Or how shall a man know his
own Private spirit to be other than a belief, grounded upon the Authority, and
Arguments of his Teachers; or upon a Presumption of his own Gifts? Besides,
there is nothing in the Scripture, from which can be inferred the Infallibility
of the Church; much less, of any particular Church; and least of all, the
Infallibility of any particular man.

It is manifest therefore, that Christian men do not know, but Faith comes by
Hearing.
only believe the Scripture to be the Word of God; and that the means of
making them believe which God is pleased to afford men ordinarily, is according
to the way of Nature, that is to say, from their Teachers. It is the Doctrine
of St. Paul concerning Christian Faith in general, ( Romans 10. 17.) Faith
comes by Hearing, that is, by Hearing our lawful Pastors. He says also (ver.
14, 15. of the same Chapter) How shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they
Preach, except they be sent? Whereby it is evident, that the ordinary cause of
believing that the Scriptures are the Word of God, is the same with the cause
of the believing of all other Articles of our Faith, namely, the Hearing of
those that are by the Law allowed and appointed to Teach us, as our Parents in
their Houses, and our Pastors in the Churches: Which also is made more manifest
by experience. For what other cause can there be assigned, why in Christian
Commonwealths all men either believe, or at least profess the Scripture to
be the Word of God, and in other Commonwealths scarce any; but that in
Christian Commonwealths they are taught it from their infancy; and in other
places they are taught otherwise?

But if Teaching be the cause of Faith, why do not all believe? It is certain
therefore that Faith is the gift of God, and he gives it to whom he will.
Nevertheless, because to them to whom he gives it, he gives it by the means
of Teachers, the immediate cause of Faith is Hearing. In a School, where many
are taught, and some profit, others profit not, the cause of learning in them
that profit, is the Master; yet it cannot be thence inferred, that learning is
not the gift of God. All good things proceed from God; yet cannot all that have
them, say they are Inspired; for that implies a gift supernatural, and the
immediate hand of God; which he that pretends to, pretends to be a Prophet, and
is subject to the examination of the Church.

But whether men Know, or Believe, or Grant the Scriptures to be the Word of
God; if out of such places of them, as are without obscurity, I shall show what
Articles of Faith are necessary, and only necessary for Salvation, those men
must needs Know, Believe, or Grant the same.

The ( Vnum Necessarium) Only Article of Faith, which the Scripture The only
Necessary Article of Christian Faith;
makes simply Necessary to Salvation, is this, that JESUS IS THE CHRIST. By
the name of Christ, is understood the King, which God had before promised by
the Prophets of the Old Testament, to send into the world, to reign (over the
Jews, and over such of other nations as should believe in him) under himself
eternally; and to give them that eternal life, which was lost by the sin of
Adam. Which when I have proved out of Scripture, I will further show when, and
in what sense some other Articles may be also called Necessary.

For Proof that the Belief of this Article, Jesus is the Christ, is all Proved
from the Scope of the Evangelists:
the Faith required to Salvation, my first Argument shall be from the Scope of
the Evangelists; which was by the description of the life of our Savior, to
establish that one Article, Jesus is the Christ. The sum of St. Matthews
Gospel is this, That Jesus was of the stock of David; Born of a Virgin; which
are the Marks of the true Christ: That the Magi came to worship him as King of
the Jews: That Herod for the same cause sought to kill him: That John Baptist
proclaimed him: That he preached by himself, and his Apostles that he was that
King: That he taught the Law, not as a Scribe, but as a man of Authority: That
he cured diseases by his Word only, and did many other Miracles, which were
foretold the Christ should do: That he was saluted King when he entered into
Jerusalem: That he forewarned them to beware of all others that should pretend
to be Christ: That he was taken, accused, and put to death* for saying, he was
King: That the cause of his condemnation written on the Cross, was JESUS OF
NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS. All which tend to no other end than this,
that men should believe, that Jesus is the Christ. Such therefore was the Scope
of St. Matthews Gospel. But the Scope of all the Evangelists (as may appear by
reading them) was the same. Therefore the Scope of the whole Gospel, was the
establishing of that only Article. And St. John expressly makes it his
conclusion, John 20. 31. These things are written, that you may know that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of the living God.

My second Argument is taken from the Subject of the Sermons of From the
Sermons of the Apostles:
the Apostles, both whilst our Savior lived on earth, and after his
Ascension. The Apostles in our Saviors time were sent, Luke 9. 2. to Preach
the Kingdom of God: For neither there, nor Mat. 10. 7. gives he any
Commission to them, other than this, As ye go, Preach, saying, the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; that is, that Jesus is the Messiah, the Christ, the King
which was to come. That their Preaching also after his ascension was the same,
is manifest out of Acts 17. 6. They drew (says St. Luke) Jason and certain
Brethren unto the Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the world
upside down are come hither also, whom Jason has received. And these all do
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, saying, that there is another King, one
Jesus: And out of the 2. and 3. verses of the same Chapter, where it is said,
that St. Paul as his manner was, went in unto them; and three Sabbath days
reasoned with them out of the Scriptures; opening and alleging, that Christ
must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead, and that this Jesus
(whom he preached) is Christ.

The third Argument is, from those places of Scripture, by which From the
Easiness of the Doctrine:
all the Faith required to Salvation is declared to be Easy. For if an inward
assent of the mind to all the Doctrines concerning Christian Faith now taught,
(whereof the greatest part are disputed,) were necessary to Salvation, there
would be nothing in the world so hard, as to be a Christian. The Thief upon the
Cross though repenting, could not have been saved for saying, Lord remember me
when thou come into thy Kin^dome; by which he testified no belief of any
other Article, but this, That Jesus was the King. Nor could it be said (as it
is Mat. 11. 30.) that Christ's yoke is Easy, and his burden Light: Nor that
Little Children believe in him, as it is Matthew. 18. 6. Nor could St. Paul have
said (1 Cor. 1. 21.) It pleased God by the Foolishness of preaching, to save
them that believe: Nor could St. Paul himself have been saved, much less have
been so great a Doctor of the Church so suddenly, that never perhaps thought of
Transubstantiation, nor Purgatory, nor many other Articles now obtruded.

The fourth Argument is taken from places express, and such as From formal
^ud clear texts.
receive no controversy of Interpretation; as first, John 5. 39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they
that testify of me. Our Savior here speaks of the Scriptures only of the
Old Testament; for the Jews at that time could not search the Scriptures of the
New Testament, which were not written. But the Old Testament has nothing of
Christ, but the Marks by which men might know him when he came; as that he
should descend from David; be born at Bethlem, and of a Virgin; do great
Miracles, and the like. Therefore to believe that this Jesus was He, was
sufficient to eternal life: but more than sufficient is not Necessary; and
consequently no other Article is required. Again, ( John 11. 26.) Whosoever
lives and believes in me, shall not die eternally, Therefore to believe in
Christ, is faith sufficient to eternal life; and consequently no more faith
than that is Necessary, But to believe in Jesus, and to believe that Jesus is
the Christ, is all one, as appears in the verses immediately following. For
when our Savior (verse 26.) had said to Martha, Beleevest thou this? she
answers (verse 27.) Yea Lord, I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of
God, which should come into the world: Therefore this Article alone is faith
sufficient to life eternal; and more than sufficient is not Necessary.
Thirdly, John 20. 31. These things are written that ye might believe, that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life
through his name. There, to believe that Jesus is the Christ, is faith
sufficient to the obtaining of life; and therefore no other Article is
Necessary. Fourthly, 1 John 4. 2. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And 1 Ioh. 5. 1. Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. And verse 5. Who is he that
overcommeth the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
Fifthly, Act. 8. ver. 36, 37. See (says the Eunuch) here is water, what does
hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou beleevest with all thy heart
thou may. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God. Therefore this Article believed, Jesus is the Christ, is sufficient to
Baptism, that is to say, to our Reception into the Kingdom of God, and by
consequence, only Necessary. And generally in all places where our Savior
says to any man, Thy faith has saved thee, the ca^se he says it, is some
Confession, which directly, or by consequence, implies a belief, that Jesus is
the Christ.

The last Argument is from the places, where this Article is From that it is
the Foundation of all other Articles.
made the Foundation of Faith: For he that holds the Foundation shall be
saved. Which places are first, Mat. 24. 23. If any man shall say unto you, Lo,
here is Christ, or there, believe it not, for there shall arise false Christ's,
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, etc. Here we see,
this Article Jesus is the Christ, must be held, though he that shall teach
the contrary should do great miracles. The second place is, Gal. 1. 8. Though
we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. But the Gospel which Paul, and
the other Apostles, preached, was only this Article, that Jesus is the Christ:
Therefore for the Belief of this Article, we are to reject the Authority of an
Angel from heaven; much more of any mortal man, if he teach the contrary.
This is therefore the Fundamental Article of Christian Faith. A third place
is, 1 John 4. 1. Beloved, bele^ve not every spirit. Hereby ye shall know the
Spirit of God; every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God. By which it is evident, that this Article, is the measure,
and rule, by which to estimate, and examine all other Articles; and is
therefore only Fundamental. A fourth is, Matt. 16. 18. where after St. Peter
had professed this Article, saying to our Savior, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God, Our Savior answered, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church: from whence I infer, that this Article is that, on which all
other Doctrines of the Church are built, as on their Foundation. A fifth is (1
Cor. 3. ver. 11, 12, etc.) Other Foundation can no man lay, than that which is
laid, Jesus is the Christ. Now if any man build upon this Foundation, Gold,
Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; Every man's work shall be made
manifest; For the Day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire,
and the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. If any man's work
abide, which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward: If any man's
work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet
so as by fire. Which words, being partly plain and easy to understand, and
partly allegorical and difficult; out of that which is plain, may be inferred,
that Pastors that teach this Foundation, that Jesus is the Christ, though they
draw from it false consequences, (which all men are sometimes subject to,) they
may nevertheless be saved; much more that they may be saved, who being no
Pastors, but Hearers, believe that which is by their lawful Pastors taught
them. Therefore the belief of this Article is sufficient; and by consequence,
there is no other Article of Faith Necessarily required to Salvation.

Now for the part which is Allegorical, as That the fire shall try every man's
work, and that They shall be saved, but so as by fire, or through fire, (for
the original is (...),) it makes nothing against this conclusion which I have
drawn from the other words, that are plain. Nevertheless, because upon this
place there has been an argument taken, to prove the fire of Purgatory, I will
also here offer you my conjecture concerning the meaning of this trial of
Doctrines, and saving of men as by Fire. The Apostle here seems to allude to
the words of the Prophet Zachary, Chapter 13. 8; 9. who speaking of the
Restoration of the Kingdom of God, says thus, Two parts therein shall be cut
off, and die, but the third shall be left therein; And I will bring the third
part through the Fire, and will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try
them as Gold is tried; they shall call on the name of the Lord, and I will hear
them. The day of Judgment, is the day of the Restoration of the Kingdom of
God; and at that day it is, that St. Peter tells us * shall be the
Conflagration of the world, wherein the wicked 2 Pet. 3. v. 7, 10, 12.
shall perish; but the remnant which God will save, shall pass through that
Fire, unhurt, and be therein (as Silver and Gold are refined by the fire from
their dross) tried, and refined from their Idolatry, and be made to call upon
the name of the true God. Alluding whereto St. Paul here says, That the Day
(that is, the Day of Judgment, the Great Day of our Saviors coming to restore
the Kingdom of God in Israel) shall try every man's doctrine, by Judging, which
are Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; And then they that have
built false Consequences on the true Foundation, shall see their Doctrines
condemned; nevertheless they themselves shall be saved, and pass unhurt
through this universal Fire, and live eternally, to call upon the name of the
true and only God. In which sense there is nothing that accords not with the
rest of Holy Scripture, or any glimpse of the fire of Purgatory.

But a man may here ask, whether it be not as necessary to In what sense
other Articles may be called N^cessary.
Salvation, to believe, that God is Omnipotent; Creator of the world; that
Jesus Christ is risen; and that all men else shall rise again from the dead at
the last day; as to believe, that Jesus is the Christ. To which I answer, they
are; and so are many more Articles: but they are such, as are contained in this
one, and may be deduced from it, with more, or less difficulty. For who is
there that does not see, that they who believe Jesus to be the Son of the God
of Israel, and that the Israelites had for God the Omnipotent Creator of all
things, do therein also believe, that God is the Omnipotent Creator of all
things? Or how can a man believe, that Jesus is the King that shall reign
eternally, unless he believe him also risen again from the dead? For a dead
man cannot exercise the Office of a King. In sum, he that holds this
Foundation, Jesus is the Christ, holds Expressly all that he sees rightly
deduced from it, and Implicitly all that is consequent thereunto, though he
have not skill enough to discern the consequence. And therefore it holds
still good, that the belief of this one Article is sufficient faith to obtain
remission of sins to the Penitent, and consequently to bring them into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Now that I have shown, that all the Obedience required to Salvation, That
Faith, and Obedience are both of them Necessary to Salvation.
consists in the will to obey the Law of God, that is to say, in Repentance;
and all the Faith required to the same, is comprehended in the belief of this
Article Jesus is the Christ; I will further allege those places of the
Gospel, that prove, that all that is Necessary to Salvation is contained in
both these joined together. The men to whom St. Peter preached on the day of
Pentecost, next after the Ascension of our Savior, asked him, and the rest of
the Apostles, saying, ( Act. 2. 37.) Men and Brethren what shall we do? To
whom St. Peter answered (in the next verse) Repent, and be Baptized every one
of you, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. Therefore Repentance, and Baptism, that is, believing that Jesus is the
Christ, is all that is Necessary to Salvation. Again, our Savior being asked
by a certain Ruler, ( Luke 18. 18.) What shall I do to inherit eternal life?
Answered (verse 20.) Thou know the Commandments, Do not commit Adultery,
Do not Kill, Do not Steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor thy Father, and
thy Mother: which when he said he had observed, our Savior added, Sell all
thou have, give it to the Poor, and come and follow me: which was as much as to
say, Rely on me that am the King: Therefore to fulfill the Law, and to believe
that Jesus is the King, is all that is required to bring a man to eternal
life. Thirdly, St. Paul says ( Romans 1. 17.) The Just shall live by Faith; not
every one, but the Just; therefore Faith and Justice (that is, the will to be
Just, or Repentance) are all that is Necessary to life eternal. And ( Mark 1.
15.) our Savior preached, saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand, Repent and Believe the Evangile, that is, the Good news that
the Christ was come. Therefore to Repent, and to Believe that Jesus is the
Christ, is all that is required to Salvation.

Seeing then it is Necessary that Faith, and Obedience (employed in What each of
them contributes thereunto.
the word Repentance) do both concur to our Salvation; the question by which
of the two we are Justified, is impertinently disputed. Nevertheless, it will
not be impertinent, to make manifest in what manner each of them contributes
thereunto; and in what sense it is said, that we are to be Justified by the
one, and by the other. And first, if by Righteousness be understood the
Justice of the Works themselves, there is no man that can be saved; for there
is none that has not transgressed the Law of God. And therefore when we are
said to be Justified by Works, it is to be understood of the Will, which God
does always accept for the Work it self, as well in good, as in evil men.
And in this sense only it is, that a man is callod Just, or Unjust; and that
his Justice Justifies him, that is, gives him the title; in Gods acceptance,
of Just; and renders him capable of living by his Faith, which before he was
not. So that Justice Justifies in that sense, in which to Justify, is the same
that to Denominate a man Just; and not in the signification of discharging the
Law; whereby the punishment of his sins should be unjust.

But a man is then also said to be Justified, when his Plea, though in it self
unsufficient, is accepted; as when we Plead our Will, our Endeavor to fulfill
the Law, and Repent us of our failings, and God accepts it for the
Performance it self: And because God accepts not the Will for the Deed, but
only in the Faithful; it is therefore Faith that makes good our Plea; and in
this sense it is, that Faith only Justifies: So that Faith and Obedience are
both Necessary to Salvation; yet in several senses each of them is said to
Justify.

Having thus shown what is Necessary to Salvation; it is not hard Obedience to
God and to the Civil Sovereign not inconsistent, whether Christian,
to reconcile our Obedience to God, with our Obedience to the Civil Sovereign;
who is either Christian, or Infidel. If he be a Christian, he allows the
belief of this Article, that Jesus is the Christ; and of all the Articles that
are contained in, or are by evident consequence deduced from it: which is all
the Faith Necessary to Salvation. And because he is a Sovereign, he requires
Obedience to all his own, that is, to all the Civil Laws; in which also are
contained all the Laws of Nature, that is, all the Laws of God: for besides the
Laws of Nature, and the Laws of the Church, which are part of the Civil Law,
(for the Church that can make Laws is the Commonwealth,) there be no other
Laws Divine. Whosoever therefore obeys his Christian Sovereign, is not
thereby hindered, neither from believing, nor from obeying God. But suppose that
a Christian King should from this Foundation Jesus is the Christ, draw some
false consequences, that is to say, make some superstructions of Hay, or
Stubble, and command the teaching of the same; yet seeing St. Paul says, he
shall be saved; much more shall he be saved, that teaches them by his command;
and much more yet, he that teaches not, but only believes his lawful Teacher.
And in case a Subject be forbidden by the Civil Sovereign to profess some of
those his opinions, upon what just ground can he disobey? Christian Kings may
err in deducing a Consequence, but who shall Judge? Shall a private man Judge,
when the question is of his own obedience? or shall any man Judge but he that is
appointed thereto by the Church, that is, by the Civil Sovereign that
represents it? or if the Pope, or an Apostle Judge, may he not err in
deducing of a consequence? did not one of the two, St. Peter, or St. Paul err
in a superstructure, when St. Paul withstood St. Peter to his face? There can
therefore be no contradiction between the Laws of God, and the Laws of a
Christian Commonwealth. Or Infidel.


And when the Civil Sovereign is an Infidel, every one of his own Subjects
that resists him, sins against the Laws of God (for such as are the Laws
of Nature,) and rejects the counsel of the Apostles, that admonishes all
Christians to obey their Princes, and all Children and Servants to obey their
Parents, and Masters, in all things. And for their Faith, it is internal, and
invisible; They have the license that Naaman had, and need not put themselves
into danger for it. But if they do, they ought to expect their reward in
Heaven, and not complain of their Lawful Sovereign; much less make war upon
him. For he that is not glad of any just occasion of Martyrdom, has not the
faith he professes, but pretends it only, to set some color upon his own
contumacy. But what Infidel King is so unreasonable, as knowing he has a
Subject, that waits for the second coming of Christ, after the present world
shall be burnt, and intends then to obey him (which is the intent of
believing that Jesus is the Christ,) and in the mean time thinks himself
bound to obey the Laws of that Infidel King, (which all Christians are obliged
in conscience to do,) to put to death, or to persecute such a Subject?

And thus much shall suffice, concerning the Kingdom of God, and Policy
Ecclesiastical. Wherein I pretend not to advance any Position of my own, but
only to show what are the Consequences that seem to me deducible from the
Principles of Christian Politiques, (which are the holy Scriptures,) in
confirmation of the Power of Civil Sovereigns, and the Duty of their Subjects.
And in the allegation of Scripture, I have endeavored to avoid such texts as
are of obscure, or controverted Interpretation; and to allege none, but in
such sense as is most plain, and agreeable to the harmony and scope of the
whole Bible; which was written for the re-establishment of the Kingdom of God
in Christ. For it is not the bare Words, but the Scope of the writer that
gives the true light, by which any writing is to be interpreted; and they
that insist upon single Texts, without considering the main Design, can derive
no thing from them clearly; but rather by casting atoms of Scripture, as dust
before men's eyes, make every thing more obscure than it is; an ordinary
artifice of those that seek not the truth, but their own advantage.

OF THE KINGDOM OF DARKNESS.
CHAP. XLIV. Of Spiritual Darkness from MISINTERPRETATION of Scripture.
BEsides these Sovereign Powers, Divine, and The Kingdom of Darkness what.
Humane, of which I have hitherto discoursed* there is mention in Scripture of
another Power, namely, Ephesians. 6. 12.
that of the Rulers of the Darkness of this world, Mat. 12. 26.
the Kingdom of S^tan, and Mat. 9. 34.
the Princpality of (...) over Demons, that is to say, over Phantasmes that
appear in the Air: For which cause Satan is also called Ephesians. 2. 2.
the Prince of the Power of the Air; and (because he rules in the darkness of
this world) Joh. 16. 11.
The Prince of this world: And in consequence hereunto, they who are under his
Dominion, in opposition to the faithful (who are the Children of the Light)
are called the Children of Darkness. For seeing Beelzebub is Prince of
Phantasmes, Inhabitants of his Dominion of Air and Darkness, the Children of
Darkness, and these Demons, Phantasmes, or Spirits of Illusion, signify
allegorically the same thing. This considered, the Kingdom of Darkness, as it
is set forth in these, and other places of the Scripture, is nothing else but a
Confederacy of Dece^vers, that to obtain do^ over men in this present world,
endeavor by dark, and erroneons Doctrines, to extinguish in them the Light,
both of Nature, and of the Gospel; and so to dis-prepare them for the Kingdom
of God to co^.

As men that are utterly deprived from their Nativity, of the The Church not
yet fully ^reed of Darkness.
light of the bodily Eye, have no Idea at all, of any such light; and no man
conceives in his imagination any greater light, than he has at some time, or
other, perceived by his outward Senses: so also is it of the light of the
Gospel, and of the light of the Understanding, that no man can conceive there
is any greater degree of it, than that which he has already attained unto. And
from hence it comes to pass, that men have no other means to acknowledge their
own Darkness, but only by reasoning from the un-foreseen mischances, that
befall them in their ways; The Darkest part of the Kingdom of Satan, is that
which is without the Church of God; that is to say, amongst them that believe
not in Jesus Christ. But we cannot say, that therefore the Church enjoys (as
the land of Goshen) all the light, which to the performance of the work
enjoined us by God, is necessary. Whence comes it, that in Christendom there
has been, almost from the time of the Apostles, such justling of one another
out of their places, both by foreign, and Civil war? such stumbling at every
little asperity of their own fortune, and every little eminence of that of
other men? and such diversity of ways in running to the same mark, Felicity, if
it be not Night amongst us, or at least a Mist? we are therefore yet in the
Dark.

The Enemy has been here in the Night of our natural Ignorance, Four Causes of
Spiritual Darkness.
and sown the tares of Spiritual Errors; and that, First, by abusing, and
putting out the light of the Scriptures: For we err, not knowing the
Scriptures. Secondly, by introducing the Daemonology of the Heathen Poets, that
is to say, their fabulous Doctrine concerning Demons, which are but Idols, or
Phantasms of the brain, without any real nature of their own, distinct from
humane fancy; such as are dead men's Ghosts, and Fairies, and other matter of
old Wives tales. Thirdly, by mixing with the Scripture diverse relics of the
Religion, and much of the vain and erroneous Philosophy of the Greeks,
especially of Aristotle. Fourthly, by mingling with both these, false, or
uncertain Traditions, and fained, or uncertain History. And so we come to err,
by giving heed to seducing Spirits, and the Daemonology of such as speak lies
in Hypocrisy, (or as it is in the Original, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. of those that
play the part of liars) with a seared conscience, that is, contrary to their
own knowledge. Concerning the first of these, which is the Seducing of men by
abuse of Scripture, I intend to speak briefly in this Chapter.

The greatest, and main abuse of Scripture, and to which almost Errors from
misinterpreting the Scriptures, concerning the Kingdom of God.
all the rest are either consequent, or subservient, is the wresting of it, to
prove that the Kingdom of God, mentioned so often in the Scripture, is the
present Church, or multitude of Christian men now living, or that being dead,
are to rise again at the last day: whereas the Kingdom of God was first
instituted by the Ministry of Moses, over the Jews only; who were therefore
called his Peculiar People; and ceased afterward, in the election of Saul, when
they refused to be governed by God any more, and demanded a King after the
manner of the nations; which God himself consented unto, as I have more at
large proved before, in the 35. Chapter. After that time, there was no other
Kingdom of God in the world, by any Pact, or otherwise, than he ever was, is,
and shall be King, of all men, and of all creatures, as governing according to
his Will, by his infinite Power. Nevertheless, he promised by his Prophets to
restore this his Government to them again, when the time he has in his secret
counsel appointed for it shall be fully come, and when they shall turn unto
him by repentance, and amendment of life: and not only so, but he invited also
the Gentiles to come in, and enjoy the happiness of his Reign, on the same
conditions of conversion and repentance; and he promised also to send his Son
into the world, to expiate the sins of them all by his death, and to prepare
them by his Doctrine, to receive him at his second coming: Which second coming
not yet being, the Kingdom of God is not yet come, and we are not now under
any other Kings by Pact, but our Civil Sovereigns; saving only, that
Christian men are already in the Kingdom of Grace, in as much as they have
already the Promise of being received at his coming again.

Consequent to this Error, that the present Church is Christ's As that the
Kingdom of God is the present Church:
Kingdom, there ought to be some one Man, or Assembly, by whose mouth our
Savior (now in heaven) speaks, gives law, and which represents his Person
to all Christians, or diverse Men, or diverse Assemblies that do the same to
diverse parts of Christendom. This power Regal under Christ, being challenged,
universally by the Pope, and in particular Commonwealths by Assemblies of the
Pastors of the place, (when the Scripture gives it to none but to Civil
Sovereigns,) comes to be so passionately disputed, that it puts out the
Light of Nature, and causes so great a Darkness in men's understanding, that
they see not who it is to whom they have engaged their obedience.

Consequent to this claim of the Pope to Vicar General of Christ And that the
Pope is his Vicar general:
in the present Church, (supposed to be that Kingdom of his, to which we are
addressed in the Gospel,) is the Doctrine, that it is necessary for a Christian
King, to receive his Crown by a Bishop; as if it were from that Ceremony, that
he derives the clause of Dei gratia in his title; and that then only he is
made King by the favor of God, when he is crowned by the authority of Gods
universal Vicegerent on earth; and that every Bishop whosoever be his
Sovereign, takes at his Consecration an oath of absolute Obedience to the
Pope. Consequent to the same, is the Doctrine of the fourth Council of
Lateran, held under Pope Innocent the third, (Chap. 3. de Haereticis.) That if
a King at the Popes admonition, do not purge his Kingdom of Haeresies, and
being excommunicate for the same, do not give satisfaction within a year, his
Subjects are absolved of the bond of their obedience. Where, by Haeresies are
understood all opinions which the Church of Rome has forbidden to be
maintained. And by this means, as often as there is any repugnancy between the
Political designs of the Pope, and other Christian Princes, as there is very
often, there arises such a Mist amongst their Subjects, that they know not a
stranger that thrusts himself into the throne of their lawful Prince, from
him whom they had themselves placed there; and in this Darkness of mind, are
made to fight one against another, without discerning their enemies from their
friends, under the conduct of another man's ambition.

From the same opinion, that the present Church is the Kingdom And that the
Pastors are the Clergy.
of God, it proceeds that Pastors, Deacons, and all other Ministers of the
Church, take the name to themselves of the Clergy; giving to other Christians
the name of Laity, that is, simply People. For Clergy signifies those, whose
maintenance is that Revenue, which God having reserved to himself during his
Reign over the Israelites, assigned to the tribe of Levi (who were to be his
public Ministers, and had no portion of land set them out to live on, as
their brethren) to be their inheritance. The Pope therefore, (pretending the
present Church to be, as the Realm of Israel, the Kingdom of God) challenging
to himself and his subordinate Ministers, the like revenue, as the Inheritance
of God, the name of Clergy was suitable to that claim. And thence it is, that
Tithes, and other tributes paid to the Levites, as Gods Right, amongst the
Israelites, have a long time been demanded, and taken of Christians, by
Ecclesiastiques, Iure divino, that is, in Gods Right. By which means, the
people every where were obliged to a double tribute; one to the State, another
to the Clergy; whereof, that to the Clergy, being the tenth of their revenue,
is double to that which a King of Athens (and esteemed a Tyrant) exacted of his
subjects for the defraying of all public charges: For he demanded no more but
the twentieth part; and yet abundantly maintained therewith the Commonwealth.
And in the Kingdom of the Jews, during the Sacerdotall Reign of God, the
Tithes and Offerings were the whole Public Revenue.

From the same mistaking of the present Church for the Kingdom of God, came in
the distinction between the Civil and the Canon Laws: The Civil Law being the
Acts of Sovereigns in their own Dominions, and the Canon Law being the Acts of
the Pope in the same Dominions. Which Canons, though they were but Canons, that
is, Rules Propounded, and but voluntarily received by Christian Princes, till
the translation of the Empire to Charlemain; yet afterward, as the power of
the Pope increased, became Rules Commanded, and the Emperors themselves (to
avoid greater mischiefs, which the people blinded might be led into) were
forced to let them pass for Laws.

From hence it is, that in all Dominions, where the Popes Ecclesiastical power
is entirely received, Jews, Turks, and Gentiles, are in the Roman Church
tolerated in their Religion, as far forth, as in the exercise and profession
thereof they offend not against the civil power: whereas in a Christian,
though a stranger, not to be of the Roman Religion, is Capital; because the
Pope pretends that all Christians are his Subjects. For otherwise it were as
much against the law of Nations, to persecute a Christian stranger, for
professing the Religion of his own country, as an Infidel; or rather more, in
as much as they that are not against Christ, are with him.

From the same it is that in every Christian State there are certain men, that
are exempt, by Ecclesiastical liberty, from the tributes, and from the
tribunals of the Civil State; for so are the secular Clergy, besides Monks and
Friars, which in many places, bear so great a proportion to the common people,
as if need were, there might be raised out of them alone, an Army, sufficient
for any war the Church militant should employ them in, against their own, or
other Princes.

A second general abuse of Scripture, is the turning of Consecration Error
from mistaking Consecration for Conjuration.
into Conjuration, or Enchantment. To Consecrate, is in Scripture, to Offer,
Give, or Dedicate, in pious and decent language and gesture, a man, or any
other thing to God, by separating of it from common use; that is to say, to
Sanctify, or make it Gods, and to be used only by those, whom God has
appointed to be his Public Ministers, (as I have already proved at large in
the 35. Chapter;) and thereby to change, not the thing Consecrated, but only
the use of it, from being Profane and common, to be Holy, and peculiar to Gods
service. But when by such words, the nature or quality of the thing it self,
is pretended to be changed, it is not Consecration, but either an extraordinary
work of God, or a vain and impious Conjuration. But seeing (for the frequency
of pretending the change of Nature in their Consecrations,) it cannot be
esteemed a work extraordinary, it is no other than a Conjuration or
Incantation, whereby they would have men to believe an alteration of Nature
that is not, contrary to the testimony of man's Sight, and of all the rest of
his Senses. As for example, when the Priest, in stead of Consecrating Bread and
Wine to Gods peculiar service in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (which is
but a separation of it from the common use, to signify, that is, to put men in
mind of their Redemption, by the Passion of Christ, whose body was broken, and
blood shed upon the Cross for our transgressions,) pretends, that by saying of
the words of our Savior, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, the nature of
Bread is no more there, but his very Body; notwithstanding there appears not
to the Sight, or other Sense of the Receiver, any thing that appeared not
before the Consecration. The Egyptian Conjurers, that are said to have turned
their Rods to Serpents, and the Water into Blood, are thought but to have
deluded the senses of the Spectators by a false show of things, yet are
esteemed Enchanters: But what should we have thought of them, if there had
appeared in their Rods nothing like a Serpent, and in the Water enchanted,
nothing like Blood, nor like any thing else but Water, but that they had faced
down the King, that they were Serpents that looked like Rods, and that it was
Blood that seemed Water? That had been both Enchantment, and Lying. And yet in
this daily act of the Priest, they do the very same, by turning the holy words
into the manner of a Charm, which produces nothing new to the Sense; but they
face us down, that it has turned the Bread into a Man; nay more, into a God;
and require men to worship it, as if it were our Savior himself present God
and Man, and thereby to commit most gross Idolatry. For if it be enough to
excuse it of Idolatry, to say it is no more Bread, but God; why should not the
same excuse serve the Egyptians, in case they had the faces to say, the Leeks,
and Onyons they worshipped, were not very Leeks, and Onyons, but a Divinity
under their species, or likeness. The words, This is my Body, are aequivalent
to these, This signifies, or represents my Body; and it is an ordinary figure
of Speech: but to take it literally, is an abuse; nor though so taken, can it
extend any further, than to the Bread which Christ himself with his own hands
Consecrated. For he never said, that of what Bread soever, any Priest
whatsoever, should say, This is my Body, or, This is Christ's Body, the same
should presently be transubstantiated. Nor did the Church of Rome ever
establish this Transubstantiation, till the time of Innocent the third; which
was not above 500. years ago, when the Power of Popes was at the Highest, and
the Darkness of the time grown so great, as men discerned not the Bread that
was given them to eat, especially when it was stamped with the figure of Christ
upon the Cross, as if they would have men believe it were Transubstantiated,
not only into the Body of Christ, but also into the Wood of his Cross, and
that they did eat both together in the Sacrament.

The like Incantation, in stead of Consecration, is used also in Incantation in
the Ceremonies of Baptism.
the Sacrament of Baptism: Where the abuse of Gods name in each several
Person, and in the whole Trinity, with the sign of the Cross at each name,
makes up the Charm: As first, when they make the Holy water, the Priest says,
I Conjure thee, thou Creature of Water, in the name of God the Father Almighty,
and in the name of Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, and in virtue of the
Holy Ghost, that thou become Conjured water, to drive away all the Powers of
the Enemy, and to eradicate, and supplant the Enemy, etc. And the same in the
Benediction of the Salt to be mingled with it; That thou become Conjured Salt,
that all Phantasmes, and Knavery of the Devils fraud may fly and depart from
the place wherein thou art sprinkled; and every unclean Spirit be Conjured by
Him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead. The same in the
Benediction of the Oil, That all the Power of the Enemy, all the Host of the
Devil, all Assaults and Phantasmes of Satan, may be driven away by this
Creature of Oil. And for the Infant that is to be Baptized, he is subject to
many Charms: First, at the Church door the Priest blows thrice in the Child's
face, and says, Go out of him unclean Spirit, and give place to the Holy
Ghost the Comforter. As if all Children, till blown on by the Priest were
Daemoniaques: Again, before his entrance into the Church, he says as before, I
Conjure thee, etc. to go out, and depart from this Servant of God: And again
the same Exorcisme is repeated once more before he be Baptized. These, and some
other Incantations, are those that are used in stead of Benedictions, and
Consecrations, in administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper; wherein every thing that serves to those holy uses (except the
unhallowed Spittle of the Priest) has some set form of Exorcisme.

Nor are the other rites, as of Marriage, of Extreme Unction, of And in
Marriage, in Visitation of the Sick, and in Consecration of Places.
Visitation of the Sick, of Consecrating Churches, and Churchyards, and the
like, exempt from Charms; in as much as there is in them the use of Enchanted
Oil, and Water, with the abuse of the Cross, and of the holy word of David,
Asperges me Domine Hyssopo, as things of efficacy to drive away Phantasmes, and
Imaginary Spirits.

Another general Error, is from the Misinterpretation of the Errors from
mistaking Eternal Life, and Everlasting Death:
words Eternal Life, Everlasting Death, and the Second Death. For though we
read plainly in holy Scripture, that God created Adam in an estate of Living
for Ever, which was conditional, that is to say, if he disobeyed not his
Commandment; which was not essential to Humane Nature, but consequent to the
virtue of the Tree of Life; whereof he had liberty to eat, as long as he had
not sinned; and that he was thrust out of Paradise after he had sinned, lest
he should eat thereof, and live for ever; and that Christ's Passion is a
Discharge of sin to all that believe on him; and by consequence, a restitution
of Eternal Life, to all the Faithful, and to them only: yet the Doctrine is
now, and has been a long time far otherwise; namely, that every man has
Eternity of Life by Nature, in as much as his Soul is Immortal: So that the
flaming Sword at the entrance of Paradise, though it hinder a man from coming
to the Tree of Life, hinders him not from the Immortality which God took from
him for his Sin; nor makes him to need the sacrificing of Christ, for the
recovering of the same; and consequently, not only the faithful and
righteous, but also the wicked, and the Heathen, shall enjoy Eternal Life,
without any Death at all; much less a Second, and Everlasting Death. To salve
this, it is said, that by Second, and Everlasting Death, is meant a Second, and
Everlasting Life, but in Torments; a Figure never used, but in this very Case.

All which Doctrine is founded only on some of the obscurer places of the New
Testament; which nevertheless, the whole scope of the Scripture considered,
are clear enough in a different sense, and unnecessary to the Christian Faith.
For supposing that when a man dies, there remains nothing of him but his
carcass; cannot God that raised inanimated dust and clay into a living
creature by his Word, as easily raise a dead carcass to life again, and
continue him alive for Ever, or make him die again, by another Word? The Soul
in Scripture, signifies always, either the Life, or the Living Creature; and
the Body and Soul jointly, the Body alive. In the fifth day of the Creation,
God said, Let the waters produce Reptile animae viventis, the creeping thing
that has in it a Living Soul; the English translate it, that has Life: And
again, God created Whales, and omnem animam viventem; which in the English is,
every Living Creature: And likewise of Man, God made him of the dust of the
earth, and breathed in his face the breath of Life, and factus est Homo in
animam viventem, that is, and Man was made a Living Creature: And after Noah
came out of the Arc, God says, he will no more smite omnem animam viventem,
that is, every Living Creature: And Deuteronomy. 12. 23. Eat not the Blood, for the
Blood is the Soul; that is, the Life. From which places, if by Soul were
meant a Substance Incorporeall, with an existence separated from the Body, it
might as well be inferred of any other living Creature, as of Man. But that the
Souls of the Faithful, are not of theirown Nature, but by Gods special Grace,
to remain in their Bodies, from the Resurrection to all Eternity, I have
already I think sufficiently proved out of the Scriptures, in the 38. Chapter.
And for the places of the New Testament, where it is said that any man shall be
cast Body and Soul into Hell fire, it is no more than Body and Life; that is to
say, they shall be cast alive into the perpetual fire of Gehenna.

This window it is, that gives entrance to the Dark Doctrine, As the Doctrine
of Purgatory, and Exorcismes, and Invocation of Saints.
first, of Eternal Torments; and afterward of Purgatory, and consequently of
the walking abroad, especially in places Consecrated, Solitary, or Dark, of the
Ghosts of men deceased; and thereby to the pretenses of Exorcisme and
Conjuration of Phantasmes; as also of Invocation of men dead; and to the
Doctrine of Indulgences; that is to say, of exemption for a time, or for ever,
from the fire of Purgatory, wherein these Incorporeall Substances are pretended
by burning to be cleansed, and made fit for Heaven. For men being generally
possessed before the time of our Savior, by contagion of the Daemonology of
the Greeks, of an opinion, that the Souls of men were substances distinct from
their Bodies, and therefore that when the Body was dead, the Soul^ of every
man, whether godly, or wicked, must subsist somewhere by virtue of its own
nature, without acknowledging therein any supernatural gift of Gods; the
Doctors of the Church doubted a long time, what was the place, which they were
to abide in, till they should be reunited to their Bodies in the Resurrection;
supposing for a while, they lay under the Altars: but afterward the Church of
Rome found it more profitable, to build for them this place of Purgatory; which
by some other Churches in this later age, has been demolished.

Let us now consider, what texts of Scripture seem most to The Texts alleged
for the Doctrines aforementioned have been answered before.
confirm these three general Errors, I have here touched. As for those which
Cardinal Bellarmine has alleged, for the present Kingdom of God administered
by the Pope, (than which there are none that make a better show of proof,) I
have already answered them; and made it evident, that the Kingdom of God,
instituted by Moses, ended in the election of Saul: After which time the Priest
of his own authority never deposed any King. That which the High Priest did to
Athaliah, was not done in his own right, but in the right of the young King
Joash her Son: But Solomon in his own right deposed the High Priest Abiathar,
and set up another in his place. The most difficult place to answer, of all
those that can be brought, to prove the Kingdom of God by Christ is already in
this world, is alleged, not by Bellarmine, nor any other of the Church of
Rome; but by Beza; that will have it to begin from the Resurrection of Christ.
But whether he intend thereby, to entitle the Presbytery to the Supreme Power
Ecclesiastical in the Commonwealth of Geneva, (and consequently to every
Presbytery in every other Commonwealth,) or to Princes, and other Civil
Sovereigns, I do not know. For the Presbytery has challenged the power to
Excomunicate their own Kings, and to be the Supreme Moderators in Religion,
in the places where they have that form of Church government, no less then the
Pope callengeth it universally.

The words are (Mark 9. 1.) Verily I say unto you, that there be Answer to the
text on which Beza infers that the Kingdom of Christ began at the
Resurrection.
some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have
seen the Kingdom of God come with power. Which words, if taken grammatically,
make it certain, that either some of those men that stood by Christ at that
time, are yet alive; or else, that the Kingdom of God must be now in this
present world. And then there is another place more difficult: For when the
Apostles after our Saviors Resurrection, and immediately before his Ascension,
asked our Savior, saying, (Acts 1. 6.) Will thou at this time restore again
the Kingdom to Israel, he answered them, It is not for you to know the times
and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power; But ye shall
receive power by the coming of the Holy Ghost upon you, and ye shall be my
(Martyrs) witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and in Samaria, and
unto the uttermost part of the Earth: Which is as much as to say, My Kingdom
is not yet come, nor shall you foreknow when it shall come; for it shall come
as a thief in the night; But I will send you the Holy Ghost, and by him you
shall have power to bear witness to all the world (by your preaching) of my
Resurrection, and the works I have done, and the doctrine I have taught, that
they may believe in me, and expect eternal life, at my coming again: How
does this agree with the coming of Christ's Kingdom at the Resurrection? And
that which St. Paul says (1 Thessal. 1. 9, 10.) That they turned from Idols,
to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven; Where
to wait for his Son from Heaven, is to wait for his coming to be King in
power; which were not necessary, if his Kingdom had been then present.
Again, if the Kingdom of God began (as Beza on that place ( Mark 9. 1.) would
have it) at the Resurrection; what reason is there for Christians ever since
the Resurrection to say in their prayers, Let thy Kingdom Come? It is
therefore manifest, that the words of St. Mark are not so to be interpreted.
There be some of them that stand here (says our Savior) that shall not taste
of death till they have seen the Kingdom of God come in power. If then this
Kingdom were to come at the Resurrection of Christ, why is it said, some of
them, rather than all? For they all lived till after Christ was risen.

But they that require an exact interpretation of this text, let them
Explication of the Place in Mark 9. 1.
interpret first the like words of our Savior to St. Peter concerning St.
John, (chap. 21. 22.) If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? upon which was grounded a report that he should not dye: Nevertheless
the truth of that report was neither confirmed, as well grounded; nor refuted,
as ill grounded on those words; but left as a saying not understood. The same
difficulty is also in the place of St. Mark. And if it be lawful to
conjecture at their meaning, by that which immediately follows, both here, and
in St. Luke, where the same is again repeated, it is not unprobable, to say
they have relation to the Transfiguration, which is described in the verses
immediately following; where it is said, that After six days Jesus takes with
him Peter, and James, and John (not all, but some of his Disciples) and leads
them up into an high mountain apart by themselves, and was transfigured before
them. And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no Fuller
on earth can white them. And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses, and
they were talking with Jesus, etc. So that they saw Christ in Glory and
Majesty, as he is to come; insomuch as They were sore afraid. And thus the
promise of our Savior was accomplished by way of Vision: For it was a Vision,
as may probably be inferred out of St. Luke, that recites the same story (chapter
9. ve. 28.) and says, that Peter and they that were with him, were heavy with
sleep: But most certainly out of Matthew. 17. 9. (where the same is again
related;) for our Savior charged the^, saying, Tell no man the Vision until
the Son of man be Risen from the dead. Howsoever it be, yet there can from
thence be taken no argument, to prove that the Kingdom of God takes beginning
till the day of Judgment.

As for some other texts, to prove the Popes Power over civil Sovereigns
Abuse of some other texts *in defense of the Power of the Pope.
(besides those of Bellarmine;) as that the two Swords that Christ and his
Apostles had amongst them, were the Spiritual and the Temporal Sword, which
they say St. Peter had given him by Christ: And, that of the two Luminaries,
the greater signifies the Pope, and the lesser the King; One might as well
infer out of the first verse of the Bible, that by Heaven is meant the Pope,
and by Earth the King: Which is not arguing from Scripture, but a wanton
insulting over Princes, that came in fashion after the time the Popes were
grown so secure of their greatness, as to contemn all Christian Kings; and
Treading on the necks of Emperors, to mock both them, and the Scripture, in
the words of the 91. Psalm, Thou shall Tread upon the Lion and the Adder, the
young Lion and the Dragon thou shall Trample under thy feet. The manner of
Consecrations in the Scripture, was without Exorcisms.


As for the rites of Consecration, though they depend for the most part upon
the discretion and judgment of the governors of the Church, and not upon the
Scriptures; yet those governors are obliged to such direction, as the nature of
the action it self requires; as that the ceremonies, words, and gestures, be
both decent, and significant, or at least conformable to the action. When Moses
consecrated the Tabernacle, the Altar, and the Vessels belonging to them, (
Exodus 40.) he anointed them with the Oil which God had commanded to be made
for that purpose; and they were holy: There was nothing Exorcized, to drive
away Phantasmes. The same Moses (the civil Sovereign of Israel) when he
consecrated Aaron (the High Priest,) and his Sons, did wash them with Water,
(not Exorcized water,) put their Garments upon them, and anointed them with
Oil; and they were sanctified, to minister unto the Lord in the Priests
office; which was a simple and decent cleansing, and adorning them, before he
presented them to God, to be his servants. When King Solomon, (the civil
Sovereign of Israel) consecrated the Temple he had built, (2 Kings 8.) he
stood before all the ^ongregation of Israel; and having blessed them, he gave
thanks to God, for putting into the heart of his father, to build it; and for
giving to himself the grace to accomplish the same; and then prayed unto him,
first, to accept that House, though it were not suitable to his infinite
Greatness; and to hear the prayers of his Servants that should pray therein,
or (if they were absent,) toward it; and lastly, he offered a sacrifice of
Peace Offering, and the House was dedicated. Here was no Procession; the King
stood still in his first place; no Exorcised Water; no Asperges me, nor other
impertinent application of words spoken upon another occasion; but a decent,
and rational speech, and such as in making to God a present of his new built
House, was most conformable to the occasion.

We read not that St. John did Exorcize the Water of Jordan; nor Philip the
Water of the river wherein he baptized the Eunuch; nor that any Pastor in the
time of the Apostles, did take his spittle, and put it to the nose of the
person to be Baptized, and say, In odorem suavitatis, that is, for a sweet
savor unto the Lord; wherein neither the Ceremony of Spittle, for the
uncleanness; nor the application of that Scripture for the levity, can by any
authority of man be justified.

To prove that the Soul separated from the Body, lives The immortality of
man's Soul, not proved by Scripture to be of Nature, but of Grace.
eternally, not only the Souls of the Elect, by especial grace, and
restoration of the Eternal Life which Adam lost by Sin, and our Savior
restored by the Sacrifice of himself, to the Faithful; but also the Souls of
Reprobates, as a property naturally consequent to the essence of mankind,
without other grace of God, but that which is universally given to all mankind;
there are diverse places, which at the first sight seem sufficiently to serve
the turn: but such, as when I compare them with that which I have before
(Chapter 38.) alleged out of the 14 of Job, seem to me much more subject to a
diverse interpretation, than the words of Job.

And first there are the words of Solomon ( Ecclesiastes 12. 7.) Then shall the
Dust return to Dust, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God that gave
it. Which may bear well enough (if there be no other text directly against it)
this interpretation, that God only knows, (but Man not,) what becomes of a
man's spirit, when he expireth; and the same Solomon, in the same Book, (Chap.
3. ver. 20, 21.) delivers the same sentence in the sense I have given it: His
words are, All go (man and beast) to the same place; all are of the dust, and
all turn to dust again; who knows that the spirit of Man goes upward, and
that the spirit of the Beast goes downward to the earth? That is, none knows
but God; Nor is it an unusual phrase to say of things we understand not, God
Knows what, and God Knows where. That of Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with God, and
he was not; for God took him; which is expounded Heb. 13. 5. He was translated,
that he should not die; and was not found, because God had translated him. For
before his Translation, he had this testimony, (...) he pleased God, making as
much for the Immortality of the Body, as of the Soul, proves, that this his
translation was peculiar to them that please God; not common to them with the
wicked; and depending on Grace, not on Nature. But on the contrary, what
interpretation shall we give, besides the literal sense of the words of
Solomon ( Eccles. 3. 19.) That which befalls the Sons of Men, befalls
Beasts, even one thing befalls them; as the one dies, so does the other;
yea, they have all one breath (one spirit;) so that a Man has no praeeminence
above a Beast, for all is vanity. By the literal sense, here is no Natural
Immortality of the Soul; nor yet any repugnancy with the Life Eternal, which
the Elect shall enjoy by Grace. And (chap. 4. ver. 3.) Better is he that has
not yet been, than both they; that is, than they that live, or have lived;
which, if the Soul of all them that have lived, were Immortal, were a hard
saying; for then to have an Immortal Soul, were worse than to have no Soul
at all. And again, (Chapt. 9. 5.) The living know they shall die, but the dead
know not any thing; that is, Naturally, and before the resurrection of the body.

Another place which seems to make for a Natural Immortality of the Soul, is
that, where our Savior says, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are living: but
this is spoken of the promise of God, and of their certitude to rise again, not
of a Life then actual; and in the same sense that God said to Adam, that on
the day he should eat of the forbidden fruit, he should certainly die; from
that time forward he was a dead man by sentence; but not by execution, till
almost a thousand years after. So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were alive by
promise, then, when Christ spoke; but are not actually till the Resurrection.
And the History of Dives and Lazarus, make nothing against this, if we take it
(as it is) for a Parable.

But there be other places of the New Testament, where an Immortality seems
to be directly attributed to the wicked. For it is evident, that they shall all
rise to Judgment. And it is said besides in many places, that they shall go
into Everlasting fire, Everlasting torments, Everlasting punishments; and that
the worm of conscience never dies; and all this is comprehended in the word
Everlasting Death, which is ordinarily interpreted Everlasting Life in
torments: And yet I can find no where that any man shall live in torments
Everlastingly. Also, it seems hard, to say, that God who is the Father of
Mercies, that does in Heaven and Earth all that he will; that has the hearts
of all men in his disposing; that works in men both to do, and to will; and
without whose free gift a man has neither inclination to good, nor repentance
of evil, should punish men's transgressions without any end of time, and with
all the extremity of torture, that men can imagine, and more. We are therefore
to consider, what the meaning is, of Everlasting Fire, and other the like
phrases of Scripture.

I have showed already, that the Kingdom of God by Christ begins at the day
of Judgment: That in that day, the Faithful shall rise again, with glorious,
and spiritual Bodies, and be his Subjects in that his Kingdom, which shall
be Eternal: That they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, nor eat
and drink, as they did in their natural bodies; but live for ever in their
individual persons, without the specificall eternity of generation: And that
the Reprobates also shall rise again, to receive punishments for their sins: As
also, that those of the Elect, which shall be alive in their earthly bodies at
that day, shall have their bodies suddenly changed, and made spiritual, and
Immortal. But that the bodies of the Reprobate, who make the Kingdom of
Satan, shall also be glorious, or spiritual bodies, or that they shall be as
the Angels of God, neither eating, nor drinking, nor engendring; or that their
life shall be Eternal in their individual persons, as the life of every
faithful man is, or as the life of Adam had been if he had not sinned, there
is no place of Scripture to prove it; save only these places concerning
Eternal Torments; which may otherwise be interpreted.

From whence may be inferred, that as the Elect after the Resurrection shall be
restored to the estate, wherein Adam was before he had sinned; so the Reprobate
shall be in the estate, that Adam, and his posterity were in after the sin
committed; saving that God promised a Redeemer to Adam, and such of his seed as
should trust in him, and repent; but not to them that should die in their sins,
as do the Reprobate.

These things considered, the texts that mention Eternal Fire, Eternal
Torments what.
Eternal Torments, or the Worm that never dies, contradict not the Doctrine
of a Second, and Everlasting Death, in the proper and natural sense of the
word Death. The Fire, or Torments prepared for the wicked in Gehenna, Tophet,
or in what place soever, may continue for ever; and there may never want wicked
men to be tormented in them; though not every, nor any one Eternally. For the
wicked being left in the estate they were in after Adams sin, may at the
Resurrection live as they did, marry, and give in marriage, and have gross and
corruptible bodies, as all mankind now have; and consequently may engender
perpetually, after the Resurrection, as they did before: For there is no place
of Scripture to the contrary. For St. Paul, speaking of the Resurrection (1
Cor. 15.) understands it only of the Resurrection to Life Eternal; and not
the Resurrection to Punishment. And of the first, he says that the Body is
Sown in Corruption, raised in Incorruption; sown in Dishonor, raised in
Honor; sown in Weakness, raised in Power; sown a Natural body, raised a
Spiritual body: There is no such thing can be said of the bodies of them that
rise to Punishment. So also our Savior, when he speaks of the Nature of Man
after the Resurrection, means, the Resurrection to Life Eternal, not to
Punishment. The text is Luke 20. verses 34. 35, 36. a fertile text. The
Children of this world marry, and are given in marriage; but they that shall be
counted worthy to obtain that world, and the Resurrection from the dead,
neither marry, nor are given in marriage: Neither can they die any more; for
they are equal to the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the Children
of the Resurrection: The Children of this world, that are in the estate which
Adam left them in, shall marry, and be given in marriage; that is, corrupt, and
generate successively; which is an Immortality of the Kind, but not of the
Persons of men: They are not worthy to be counted amongst them that shall
obtain the next world, and an absolute Resurrection from the dead; but only a
short time, as inmates of that world; and to the end only to receive condign
punishment for their contumacy. The Elect are the only children of the
Resurrection; that is to say, the sole heirs of Eternal Life: they only can
die no more: it is they that are equal to the Angels, and that are the
children of God; and not the Reprobate. To the Reprobate there remains after
the Resurrection, a Second, and Eternal Death: between which Resurrection, and
their Second, and Eternal death, is but a time of Punishment and Torment; and
to last by succession of sinners thereunto, as long as the kind of Man by
propagation shall endure; which is Eternally.

Upon this Doctrine of the Natural Eternity of separated Souls, is Answer of
the Texts alleged for Purgatory.
founded (as I said) the Doctrine of Purgatory. For supposing Eternal Life by
Grace only, there is no Life, but the Life of the Body; and no Immortality
till the Resurrection. The texts for Purgatory alleged by Bellarmine out of
the Canonical Scripture of the old Testament, are first, the Fasting of David
for Saul and Jonathan, mentioned (2 Kings, 1. 12.); and again, (2 Samuel 3. 35.)
for the death of Abner. This Fasting of David, he says, was for the obtaining
of something for them at Gods hands, after their death; because after he had
Fasted to procure the recovery of his own child, as soon as he knew it was
dead, he called for meat. Seeing then the Soul has an existence separate
from the Body, and nothing can be obtained by men's Fasting for the Souls that
are already either in Heaven, or Hell, it follows that there be some Souls
of dead men, that are neither in Heaven, nor in Hell; and therefore they must
be in some third place, which must be Purgatory. And thus with hard straining,
he has wrested those places to the proof of a Purgatory: whereas it is
manifest, that the ceremonies of Mourning, and Fasting, when they are used for
the death of men, whose life was not profitable to the Mourners, they are used
for honors sake to their persons; and when it is done for the death of them by
whose life the Mourners had benefit, it proceeds from their particular damage:
And so David honored Saul, and Abner, with his Fasting; and in the death of
his own child, recomforted himself, by receiving his ordinary food.

In the other places, which he alleges out of the old Testament, there is not
so much as any show, or color of proof. He brings in every text wherein there
is the word Anger, or Fire, or Burning, or Purging, or Clensing, in case any of
the Fathers have but in a Sermon rhetorically applied it to the Doctrine of
Purgatory, already believed. The first verse of Psalm, 37. O Lord rebuke me
not in thy wrath; nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure: What were this to
Purgatory, if Augustine had not applied the Wrath to the fire of Hell, and the
Displeasure to that of Purgatory? And what is it to Purgatory, that of Psalm,
66. 12. We went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us to a moist
place; and other the like texts, (with which the Doctors of those times
intended to adorn, or extend their Sermons, or Commentaries) haled to their
purposes by force of wit?

But he alleges other places of the New Testament, that are not Places of the
New Testament for Purgatory answered.
so easy to be answered: And first that of Matthew. 12. 32. Whosoever speaks a
word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world,
nor in the world to come: Where he will have Purgatory to be the World to come,
wherein some sins may be forgiven, which in this World were not forgiven:
notwithstanding that it is manifest, there are but three Worlds; one from the
Creation to the Flood, which was destroyed by Water, and is called in Scripture
the Old World; another from the Flood, to the day of Judgment, which is the
Present World, and shall be destroyed by Fire; and the third, which shall be
from the day of Judgment forward, everlasting, which is called the World to
come; and in which it is agreed by all, there shall be no Purgatory: And
therefore the World to come, and Purgatory, are inconsistent. But what then can
be the meaning of those our Saviors words? I confess they are very hardly to
be reconciled with all the Doctrines now unanimously received: Nor is it any
shame, to confess the profoundnesse of the Scripture, to be too great to be
sounded by the shortness of humane understanding. Nevertheless, I may
propound such things to the consideration of more learned Divines, as the text
it self suggesteth. And first, seeing to speak against the Holy Ghost, as
being the third Person of the Trinity, is to speak against the Church, in
which the Holy Ghost resideth; it seems the comparison is made, between the
Easiness of our Savior, in bearing with offenses done to him while he
himself taught the world, that is, when he was on earth, and the Severity of
the Pastors after him, against those which should deny their authority, which
was from the Holy Ghost: As if he should say* You that deny my Power; nay you
that shall crucify me, shall be pardoned by me, as often as you turn unto
me by Repentance: But if you deny the Power of them that teach you hereafter,
by virtue of the Holy Ghost, they shall be inexorable, and shall not forgive
you, but persecute you in this World, and leave you without absolution, (though
you turn to me, unless you turn also to them,) to the punishments (as much as
lies in them) of the World to come: And so the words may be taken as a
Prophecy, or Praediction concerning the times, as they have along been in the
Christian Church: Or if this be not the meaning, (for I am not peremptory in
such difficult places,) perhaps there may be place left after the Resurrection
for the Repentance of some sinners: And there is also another place, that
seems to agree therewith. For considering the words of St. Paul (1 Cor. 15.
29.) What shall they do which are Baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not
at all? why also are they Baptized for the dead? a man may probably infer, as
some have done, that in St. Paul's time, there was a custom by receiving
Baptism for the dead, (as men that now believe, are Sureties and Undertakers
for the Faith of Infants, that are not capable of believing,) to undertake for
the persons of their deceased friends, that they should be ready to obey, and
receive our Savior for their King, at his his coming again; and then the
forgiveness of sins in the world to come, has no need of a Purgatory. But in
both these interpretations, there is so much of paradox, that I trust not to
them; but propound them to those that are thoroughly versed in the Scripture, to
inquire if there be no clearer place that contradicts them. Only of thus much,
I see evident Scripture, to persuade me, that there is neither the word, nor
the thing of Purgatory, neither in this, nor any other text; nor any thing that
can prove a necessity of a place for the Soul without the Body; neither for
the Soul of Lazarus during the four days he was dead; nor for the Souls of
them which the Roman Church pretend to be tormented now in Purgatory. For God,
that could give a life to a piece of clay, has the same power to give life
again to a dead man, and renew his inanimate, and rotten Carcass, into a
glorious, spiritual, and immortal Body.

Another place is that of 1 Cor. 3. where it is said, that they which built
Stubble, Hay, etc. on the true Foundation, their work shall perish; but they
themselves shall be saved; but as through Fire: This Fire, he will have to be
the Fire of Purgatory. The words, as I have said before, are an allusion to
those of Zach. 13. 9. where he says, I will bring the third part through the
Fire, and refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tried:
Which is spoken of the coming of the Messiah in Power and Glory; that is, at
the day of Judgment, and Conflagration of the present world; wherein the Elect
shall not be consumed, but be refined; that is, depose their erroneous
Doctrines, and Traditions, and have them as it were sindged of; and shall
afterward call upon the name of the true God. In like manner, the Apostle
says of them, that holding this Foundation Jesus is the Christ, shall build
thereon some other Doctrines that be erroneous, that they shall not be consumed
in that fire which renews the world, but shall pass through it to Salvation;
but so, as to see, and relinquish their former Errors. The Builders, are the
Pastors; the Foundation, that Jesus is the Christ; the Stubble and Hay, False
Consequences drawn from it through Ignorance, or Frailty; the Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones, are their True Doctrines; and their Refining or Purging, the
Relinquishing of their Errors. In all which there is no color at all for the
burning of Incorporeall, that is to say, Impatible Souls.

A third place is that of 1 Cor. 15. before mentioned, concerning Baptism for
the Dead, how understood.
Baptism for the Dead: out of which he concludes, first, that Prayers for the
Dead are not unprofitable; and out of that, that there is a Fire of Purgatory:
But neither of them rightly. For of many interpretations of the word Baptism,
he approves this in the first place, that by Baptism is meant
(metaphorically) a Baptism of Penance; and that men are in this sense
Baptized, when they Fast, and Pray, and give Alms: And so Baptism for the
Dead, and Prayer for the Dead, is the same thing. But this is a Metaphor, of
which there is no example, neither in the Scripture, nor in any other use of
language; and which is also discordant to the harmony, and scope of the
Scripture. The word Baptism is used ( Mar. 10. 38. and Luke 12. 50.) for being
Dipped in ones own blood, as Christ was upon the Cross, and as most of the
Apostles were, for giving testimony of him. But it is hard to say, that Prayer,
Fasting, and Alms, have any similitude with Dipping. The same is used also
Mat. 3. 11. (which seems to make somewhat for Purgatory) for a Purging with
Fire. But it is evident the Fire and Purging here mentioned, is the same
whereof the Prophet Zachary speaks (chap. 13. v. 9.) I will bring the third
part through the Fire, and will Refine them, etc. And St. Peter after him (1
Epist. 1. 7.) That the trial of your Faith, which is much more precious than
of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with Fire, might be found unto
praise, and honor, and glory at the Appearing of Jesus Christ; And St. Paul (1
Cor. 3. 13.) The Fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. But St.
Peter, and St. Paul speak of the Fire that shall be at the Second Appearing of
Christ; and the Prophet Zachary of the Day of Judgment: And therefore this
place of S. Mat. may be interpreted of the same; and then there will be no
necessity of the Fire of Purgatory.

Another interpretation of Baptism for the Dead, is that which I have before
mentioned, which he prefers to the second place of probability: And thence
also he infers the utility of Prayer for the Dead. For if after the
Resurrection, such as have not heard of Christ, or not believed in him, may be
received into Christ's Kingdom; it is not in vain, after their death, that
their friends should pray for them, till they should be risen. But granting
that God, at the prayers of the faithful, may convert unto him some of those
that have not heard Christ preached, and consequently cannot have rejected
Christ, and that the charity of men in that point, cannot be blamed; yet this
concludes nothing for Purgatory, because to rise from Death to Life, is one
thing; to rise from Purgatory to Life is another; as being a rising from Life
to Life, from a Life in torments to a Life in joy.

A fourth place is that of Mat. 5. 25. Agree with thine Adversary quickly,
whilst thou art in the way with him, left at any time the Adversary deliver
thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast
into prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence,
till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. In which Allegory, the Offender is
the Sinner; both the Adversary and the Judge is God; the Way is this Life; the
Prison is the Grave; the Officer, Death; from which, the sinner shall not rise
again to life eternal, but to a second Death, till he have paid the utmost
farthing, or Christ pay it for him by his Passion, which is a full Ransom for
all manner of sin, as well lesser sins, as greater crimes; both being made by
the passion of Christ equally venial.

The fifth place, is that of Matthew. 5. 22. Whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a cause, shall be guilty in Judgment. And whosoever shall say to his
Brother, RACHA, shall be guilty in the Council. But whosoever shall say, Thou
Fool, shall be guilty to hell fire. From which words he infers three sorts
of Sins, and three sorts of Punishments; and that none of those sins, but the
last, shall be punished with hell fire; and consequently, that after this life,
there is punishment of lesser sins in Purgatory. Of which inference, there is
no color in any interpretation that has yet been given of them: Shall there
be a distinction after this life of Courts of Justice, as there was amongst the
Jews in our Saviors time, to hear, and determine diverse sorts of Crimes; as
the Judges, and the Council? Shall not all Judicature appertain to Christ, and
his Apostles? To undersand therefore this text, we are not to consider it
solitarily, but jointly with the words precedent, and subsequent. Our Savior
in this Chapter interprets the Law of Moses; which the Jews thought was then
fulfilled, when they had not transgressed the Grammatical sense thereof,
howsoever they had transgressed against the sentence, or meaning of the
Legislator. Therefore whereas they thought the Sixth Commandment was not
broken, but by Killing a man; nor the Seventh, but when a man lay with a woman,
not his wife; our Savior tells them, the inward Anger of a man against his
brother, if it be without just cause, is Homicide: You have heard (says he)
the Law of Moses, Thou shall not Kill, and that Whosoever shall Kill, shall be
condemned before the Judges, or before the Session of the Seventy: But I say
unto you, to be Angry with ones Brother without cause; or to say unto him
Racha, or Fool, is Homicide, and shall be punished at the day of Judgment, and
Session of Christ, and his Apostles, with Hell fire: so that those words were
not used to distinguish between diverse Crimes, and diverse Courts of Justice,
and diverse Punishments; but to tax the distinction between sin, and sin, which
the Jews drew not from the difference of the Will in Obeying God, but from the
difference of their Temporal Courts of Justice; and to show them that he that
had the Will to hurt his Brother, though the effect appear but in Reviling, or
not at all, shall be cast into hell fire, by the Judges, and by the Session,
which shall be the same, not different Courts at the day of Judgment. This
considered, what can be drawn from this text, to maintain Purgatory, I cannot
imagine.

The sixth place is Luke 16. 9. Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
that when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting Tabernacles. This he
alleges to prove Invocation of Saints departed. But the sense is plain, That
we should make friends with our Riches, of the Poor; and thereby obtain their
Prayers whilst they live. He that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord.

The seventh is Luke 23. 42. Lord remember me when thou come into thy
Kingdom: Therefore, says he, there is Remission of sins after this life. But
the consequence is not good. Our Savior then forgave him; and at his coming
again in Glory, will remember to raise him again to Life Eternal.

The Eight is Acts 2. 24. where St. Peter says of Christ, that God had raised
him up, and loosed the Pains of Death, because it was not possible he should
be holden of it: Which he interprets to be a descent of Christ into
Purgatory, to loose some Souls there from their torments: whereas it is
manifest, that it was Christ that was loosed; it was he that could not be
holden of Death, or the Grave; and not the Souls in Purgatory. But if that
which Beza says in his notes on this place be well observed, there is none
that will not see, that in stead of Pains, it should be Bands; and then there
is no further cause to seek for Purgatory in this Text.

CHAP. XLV. Of DAEMONOLOGY, and other Relics of the Religion of the Gentiles.
THe impression made on the organs of Sight, by lucide Bodies, The Original of
Daemonclogy.
either in one direct line, or in many lines, reflected from Opaque, or
refracted in the passage through Diaphanous Bodies, produces in living
Creatures, in whom God has placed such Organs, an Imagination of the Object,
from whence the Impression proceeds; which Imagination is called Sight; and
seems not to be a mere Imagination, but the Body it self without us; in the
same manner, as when a man violently presses his eye, there appears to him a
light without, and before him, which no man perceives but himself; because
there is indeed no such thing without him, but only a motion in the interior
organs, pressing by resistance outward, that makes him think so. And the motion
made by this pressure, continuing after the object which caused it is removed,
is that we call Imagination, and Memory, and (in sleep, and sometimes in great
distemper of the organs by Sickness, or Violence) a Dream: of which things I
have already spoken briefly, in the second and third Chapters.

This nature of Sight having never been discovered by the ancient pretenders to
Natural Knowledge; much less by those that consider not things so remote (as
that Kowledge is) from their present use; it was hard for men to conceive of
those Images in the Fancy, and in the Sense, otherwise, than of things really
without us: Which some (because they vanish away, they know not whither, nor
how,) will have to be absolutely Incorporeall, that is to say Immateriall, or
Forms without Matter; Color and Figure, without any colored or figured Body;
and that they can put on Aerie bodies (as a garment) to make them Visible when
they will to our bodily Eyes; and others say, are Bodies, and living Creatures,
but made of Air, or other more subtle and aethereall Matter, which is, then,
when they will be seen, condensed. But Both of them agree on one general
appellation of them, DEMONS. As if the Dead of whom they Dreamed, were not
Inhabitants of their own Brain, but of the Air, or of Heaven, or Hell; not
Phantasmes, but Ghosts; with just as much reason, as if one should say, he saw
his own Ghost in a Looking-glass, or the Ghosts of the Stars in a River; or
call the ordinary apparition of the Sun, of the quantity of about a foot, the
Demon, or Ghost of that great Sun that enlighteneth the whole visible world:
And by that means have feared them, as things of an unknown, that is, of an
unlimited power to do them good, or harm; and consequently, given occasion to
the Governors of the Heathen Commonwealths to regulate this their fear, by
establishing that DAEMONOLOGY (in which the Poets, as Principal Priests of the
Heathen Religion, were specially employed, or reverenced) to the Public
Peace, and to the Obedience of Subjects necessary thereunto; and to make some
of them Good Demons, and others Evil; the one as a Spur to the Observance,
the other, as Reins to withhold them from Violation of the Laws.

What kind of things they were, to whom they attributed the name What were the
Demons of the Ancients.
of Demons, appears partly in the Genealogy of their Gods, written by
Hesiod, one of the most ancient Poets of the Graecians; and partly in other
Histories; of which I have observed some few before, in the 12. Chapter of this
discourse.

The Graecians, by their Colonies and Conquests, communicated How that Doctrine
was spread.
their Language and Writings into Asia, Egypt, and Italy; and therein, by
necessary consequence their Daemonology, or (as St. Paul calls it) their
Doctrines of Devils: And by that means, the contagion was derived also to the
Jews, both of Iudaea, and Alexandria, and other parts, whereinto they were
dispersed. But the name of Demon they How far received by the Jews.
did not (as the Graecians) attribute to Spirits both Good, and Evil; but to
the Evil only: And to the Good Demons they gave the name of the Spirit of
God; and esteemed those into whose bodies they entered to be Prophets. In sum,
all singularity if Good, they attributed to the Spirit of God; and if Evil, to
some Demon, but a (...), an Evil Demon, that is, a Devil. And therefore,
they called Daemoniaques, that is, possessed by the Devil, such as we call
Madmen or Lunatiques; or such as had the Falling Sickness; or that spoke any
thing, which they for want of understanding, thought absurd: As also of an
Unclean person in a notorious degree, they used to say he had an Unclean
Spirit; of a Dumb man, that he had a Dumb Devil; and of John Baptist (Math.
11. 18.) for the singularity of his fasting, that he had a Devil; and of our
Savior, because he said, he John 8. 52.
that keeps his sayings should not see Death in aeternum, Now we know thou
have a Devil; Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead: And again, because
he said ( John 7. 20.) They went about to kill him, the people answered, Thou
have a Devil, who goes about to kill thee? Whereby it is manifest, that the
Jews had the same opinions concerning Phantasmes, namely, that they were not
Phantasmes that is, Idols of the brain, but things real, and independent on
the Fancy.

Which doctrine if it be not true, why (may some say; did not our Why our
Savior controlled it not.
Savior contradict it, and teach the contrary? nay why does he use on diverse
occasions, such forms of speech as seem to confirm it? To this I answer, that
first, where Christ says, A spirit has not flesh and bone, though he show
that there be Spirits, yet he denies not that they are Bodies: And where St.
Paul says, We shall rise spiritual Bodies, he acknowledges the nature of
Spirits, but that they are Bodily Spirits; which is not difficult to
understand. For Air and many other things are Bodies, though not Flesh and
Bone, or any other gross body, to be discerned by the eye. But when our
Savior speaks to the Devil, and commands him to go out of a man, if by
the Devil, be meant a Disease as Phrenesy, or Lunacy, or a corporeal Spirit,
is not the speech improper? can Diseases hear? or can there be a corporeal
Spirit in a Body of Flesh and Bone, full already of vital and animal Spirits?
Are there not therefore Spirits, that neither have Bodies, nor are mere
Imaginations? To the first I answer, that the addressing of our Saviors
command to the Madness, or Lunacy he cures, is no more improper, than was his
rebuking of the Fever, or of the Wind, and Sea; for neither do these hear: Or
than was the command of God, to the Light, to the Firmament, to the Sun, and
Stars, when he commanded them to be: for they could not hear before they
had a being. But those speeches are not improper, because they signify the
power of Gods Word: no more therefore is it improper, to command Madness, or
Lunacy (under the appellation of Devils, by which they were then commonly
understood,) to depart out of a man's body. To the second, concerning their
being Incorporeall, I have not yet observed any place of Scripture, from whence
it can be gathered, that any man was ever possessed with any other Corporeal
Spirit, but that of his own, by which his body is naturally moved.

Our Savior, immediately after the Holy Ghost descended upon The Scriptures
do not teach that Spirits are Incorporeall.
him in the form of a Dove, is said by St. Matthew (Chapt. 4. 1.) to have been
led up by the Spirit into the Wilderness; and the same is recited ( Luke 4.
1.) in these words, Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, was led in the Spirit
into the Wilderness: Whereby it is evident, that by Spirit there, is meant the
Holy Ghost. This cannot be interpreted for a Possession: For Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, are but one and the same substance; which is no possession of one
substance, or body, by another. And whereas in the verses following, he is said
to have been taken up by the Devil into the Holy City, and set upon a pinnacle
of the Temple, shall we conclude thence that he was possessed of the Devil,
or carried thither by violence? And again, carried thence by the Devil into an
exceeding high mountain, who showed him thence all the Kingdoms of the world:
Wherein, we are not to believe he was either possessed, or forced by the
Devil; nor that any Mountain is high enough, (according to the literal
sense,) to show him one whole Hemisphere. What then can be the meaning of this
place, other than that he went of himself into the Wilderness; and that this
carrying of him up and down, from the Wilderness to the City, and from thence
into a Mountain, was a Vision? Conformable whereunto, is also the phrase of St.
Luke, that he was led into the Wilderness, not by, but in the Spirit: whereas
concerning His being Taken up into the Mountain, and unto the Pinnacle of the
Temple, he speaks as St. Matthew does. Which suiteth with the nature of a
Vision.

Again, where St. Luke says of Judas Iscariot, that Satan entered into him, and
thereupon that he went and communed with the Chief Priests, and Captains, how
he might betray Christ unto them: it may be answered, that by the Entering of
Satan (that is the Enemy) into him, is meant, the hostile and traiterours
intention of selling his Lord and Master. For as by the Holy Ghost, is
frequently in Scripture understood, the Graces and good Inclinations given by
the Holy Ghost; so by the Entering of Satan, may be understood the wicked
Cogitations, and Designs of the Adversaries of Christ, and his Disciples. For
as it is hard to say, that the Devil was entered into Judas, before he had any
such hostile design; so it is impertinent to say, he was first Christ's Enemy
in his heart, and that the Devil entered into him afterward. Therefore the
Entering of Satan, and his Wicked Purpose, was one and the same thing.

But if there be no Immateriall Spirit, nor any Possession of men's bodies by
any Spirit Corporeal, it may again be asked, why our Savior and his Apostles
did not teach the People so; and in such clear words, as they might no more
doubt thereof. But such questions as these, are more curious, than necessary
for a Christian man's Salvation. Men may as well ask, why Christ that could
have given to all men Faith, Piety, and all manner of moral Virtues, gave it
to some only, and not to all: and why he left the search of natural Causes,
and Sciences, to the natural Reason and Industry of men, and did not reveal it
to all, or any man supernaturally; and many other such questions: Of which
nevertheless there may be alleged probable and pious reasons. For as God,
when he brought the Israelites into the Land of Promise, did not secure them
therein, by subduing all the Nations round about them; but left many of them,
as thorns in their sides, to awaken from time to time their Piety and
Industry: so our Savior, in conducting us toward his heavenly Kingdom, did
not destroy all the difficulties of Natural Questions; but left them to
exercise our Industry, and Reason; the Scope of his preaching, being only to
show us this plain and direct way to Salvation, namely, the belief of this
Article, that he was the Christ, the Son of the living God, sent into the world
to sacrifice himself for our Sins, and at his coming again, gloriously to
reign over his Elect, and to save them from their Enemies eternally: To which,
the opinion of Possession by Spirits, or Phantasmes, are no impediment in the
way; though it be to some an occasion of going out of the way, and to follow
their own Inventions. If we require of the Scripture an account of all
questions, which may be raised to trouble us in the performance of Gods
commands; we may as well complain of Moses for not having set down the time
of the creation of such Spirits, as well as of the Creation of the Earth, and
Sea, and of Men, and Beasts. To conclude, I find in Scripture that there be
Angels, and Spirits, good and evil; but not that they are Incorporeall, as are
the Apparitions men see in the Dark, or in a Dream, or Vision; which the
Latins call Spectra, and took for Demons. And I find that there are Spirits
Corporeal, (though subtle and Invisible;) but not that any man's body was
possessed, or inhabited by them; And that the Bodies of the Saints shall be
such, namely, Spiritual Bodies, as St. Paul calls them.

Nevertheless, the contrary Doctrine, namely, that there be Incorporeall The
Power of Casting out Devils, not the same it was in the Primitive Church.
Spirits, has hitherto so prevailed in the Church, that the use of Exorcisme,
(that is to say, of ejection of Devils by Conjuration) is thereupon built; and
(*though rarely and faintly practiced) is not yet totally given over. That
there were many Daemoniaques in the Primitive Church, and few Madmen, and
other such singular diseases; whereas in these times we hear of, and see many
Madmen, and few Daemoniaques, proceeds not from the change of Nature; but of
Names. But how it comes to pass, that whereas heretofore the Apostles, and
after them for a time, the Pastors of the Church, did cure those singular
Diseases, which now they are not seen to do; as likewise, why it is not in the
power of every true Believer now, to do all that the Faithful did then, that
is to say, as we read ( Mark 16. 17.) In Christ's name to cast out Devils, to
speak with new Tongues, to take up Serpents, to drink deadly Poison without
harm taking, and to cure the Sick by the laying on of their hands, and all this
without other words, but in the Name of Jesus, is another question. And it is
probable, that those extraordinary gifts were given to the Church, for no
longer a time, than men trusted wholly to Christ, and looked for their felicity
only in his Kingdom to come; and consequently, that when they sought
Authority, and Riches, and trusted to their own Subtilty for a Kingdom of this
world, these supernatural gifts of God were again taken from them.

Another relic of Gentilisme, is the Worship of Images, neither instituted
Another relic of Gentilisme, Worshipping of Images, left in the Church, not
brought into it.
by Moses in the Old, nor by Christ in the New Testament; nor yet brought in
from the Gentiles; but left amongst them, after they had given their names to
Christ. Before our Savior preached, it was the general Religion of the
Gentiles, to worship for Gods, those Apparences that remain in the Brain from
the impression of external Bodies upon the organs of their Senses, which are
commonly called Ideas, Idols, Phantasmes, Conceits, as being Representations of
those external Bodies, which cause them, and have nothing in them of reality,
no more than there is in the things that seem to stand before us in a Dream:
And this is the reason why St. Paul says, We know that an Idol is Nothing: Not
that he thought that an Image of Metal, Stone, or Wood, was nothing; but that
the thing which they honored, or feared in the Image, and held for a God, was a
mere Figment, without place, habitation, motion, or existence, but in the
motions of the Brain. And the worship of these with Divine Honor, is that
which is in the Scripture called Idolatry, and Rebellion against God. For God
being King of the Jews, and his Lieutenant being first Moses, and afterward the
High Priest; if the people had been permitted to worship, and pray to Images,
(which are Representations of their own Fancies,) they had had no farther
dependence on the true God, of whom their can be no similitude; nor on his
prime Ministers, Moses, and the High Priests; but every man had governed
himself according to his own appetite, to the utter eversion of the
Commonwealth, and their own destruction for want of Union. And therefore the
first Law of God was, They should not take for Gods, ALIENOS DEOS, that is, the
Gods of other nations, but that only true God, who vouchsafed to commune with
Moses, and by him to give them laws and directions, for their peace, and for
their salvation from their enemies. And the second was, that they should not
make to themselves any Image to Worship, of their own Invention. For it is the
same deposing of a King, to submit to another King, whether he be set up by a
neighbor nation, or by our selves.

The places of Scripture pretended to countenance the setting up Answer to
certain seeming texts for Images.
of Images, to worship them; or to set them up at all in the places where God
is worshipped, are First, two Examples; one of the Cherubins over the Ark of
God; the other of the Brazen Serpent: Secondly, some texts whereby we are
commanded to worship certain Creatures for their relation to God; as to worship
his Footstool: And lastly, some other texts, by which is authorized, a
religious honoring of Holy things. But before I examine the force of those
places, to prove that which is pretended, I must first explain what is to be
understood by Worshipping, and what by Images, and Idols.

I have already shown in the 20 Chapter of this Discourse, that What is Worship.
to Honor, is to value highly the Power of any person: and that such value is
measured, by our comparing him with others. But because there is nothing to be
compared with God in Power; we Honor him not but Dishonor him by any Value
less than Infinite. And thus Honor is properly of its own nature, secret, and
internal in the heart. But the inward thoughts of men, which appear outwardly
in their words and actions, are the signs of our Honoring, and these go by
the name of WORSHIP, in Latin CULTUS. Therefore, to Pray to, to Swear by, to
Obey, to be Diligent, and Officious in Serving: in sum, all words and
actions that betoken Fear to Offend, or Desire to Please, is Worship, whether
those words and actions be sincere, or feigned: and because they appear as
signs of Honoring, are ordinarily also called Honor.

The Worship we exhibit to those we esteem to be but men, as to Distinction
between Divine and Civil Worship.
Kings, and men in Authority, is Civil Worship: But the worship we exhibit to
that which we think to be God, whatsoever the words, ceremonies, gestures, or
other actions be, is Divine Worship. To fall prostrate before a King, in him
that thinks him but a Man, is but Civil Worship: And he that but puts off
his hat in the Church, for this cause, that he thinks it the House of God,
worshippeth with Divine Worship. They that seek the distinction of Divine and
Civil Worship, not in the intention of the Worshipper, but in the Words (...),
and (...), deceive themselves. For whereas there be two sorts of Servants; that
sort, which is of those that are absolutely in the power of their Masters, as
Slaves taken in war, and their Issue, whose bodies are not in their own power,
(their lives depending on the Will of their Masters, in such manner as to
forfeit them upon the least disobedience,) and that are bought and sold as
Beasts, were called (...), that is properly, Slaves, and their Service (...):
The other, which is of those that serve (for hire, or in hope of benefit from
their Masters) voluntarily; are called (...); that is, Domestique Servants; to
whose service the Masters have no further right, than is contained in the
Covenants made betwixt them. These two kinds of Servants have thus much common
to them both, that their labor is appointed them by another: And the word
(...), is the general name of both, signifying him that works for another,
whether, as a Slave, or a voluntary Servant: So that (...) signifies generally
all Service; but (...) the service of Bondmen only, and the condition of
Slavery: And both are used in Scripture (to signify our Service of God)
promiscuously. (...), because we are Gods Slaves; (...), because we Serve him:
and in all kinds of Service is contained, not only Obedience, but also
Worship; that is, such actions, gestures, and words, as signify Honor.

An IMAGE (in the most strict signification of the word) is the An Image what.
Phantasmes.
Resemblance of some thing visible: In which sense the Fantastical Forms,
Apparitions, or Seemings of visible Bodies to the Sight, are only Images; such
as are the Show of a man, or other thing in the Water, by Reflection, or
Refraction; or of the Sun, or Stars by Direct Vision in the Air; which are
nothing real in the things seen, nor in the place where they seem to be; nor
are their magnitudes and figures the same with that of the object; but
changeable, by the variation of the organs of Sight, or by glasses; and are
present oftentimes in our Imagination, and in our Dreams, when the object is
absent; or changed into other colors, and shapes, as things that depend only
upon the Fancy. And these are the Images which are originally and most properly
called Ideas, and IDOLS, and derived from the language of the Graecians, with
whom the word (...) signifies to See. They are also called PHANTASMES, which
is in the same language, Apparitions. And from these Images it is that one of
the faculties of man's Nature, is called the Imagination. And from hence it is
manifest, that there neither is, nor can be any Image made of a thing
Invisible.

It is also evident, that there can be no Image of a thing Infinite: for all
the Images, and Phantasmes that are made by the Impression of things visible,
are figured: but Figure is a quantity every way determined: And therefore there
can be no Image of God; nor of the So^le of Man; nor of Spirits; but only of
Bodies Visible, that is, Bodies that have light in themselves, or are by such
^nligtened.

And whereas a man can fancy Shapes he never saw; making up a Fictions.
Figure out of the parts of diverse creatures; as the Poets make their
Centaures, Chimaeras, and other Monsters never seen: So can he also give Matter
to those Shapes, and make them in Wood, Clay Material Images.
or Metal. And these are also called Images, not for the resemblance* of any
corporeal thing, but for the resemblance of some Fantastical Inhabitants of
the Brain of the Maker. But in these Idols, as they are originally in the
Brain, and as they are painted, carved, molded, or moulten in matter, there is
a similitude of the one to the other, for which the Material Body made by Art,
may be said to be the Image of the Fantastical Idol made by Nature.

But in a larger use of the word Image, is contained also, any Representation
of one thing by another. So an earthly Sovereign may be called the Image of
God: And an inferior Magistrate the Image of an earthly Sovereign. And many
times in the Idolatry of the Gentiles there was little regard to the similitude
of their Material Idol to the Idol in their fancy, and yet it was called the
Image of it. For a Stone unhewn has been set up for Neptune, and diverse other
shapes far different from the shapes they conceived of their Gods. And at this
day we see many Images of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, unlike one
another, and without correspondence to any one man's Fancy; and yet serve well
enough for the purpose they were erected for; which was no more but by the
Names only, to represent the Persons mentioned in the History; to which every
man applies a Mental Image of his own making, or none at all. And thus an
Image in the largest sense, is either the Resemblance, or the Representation of
some thing Visible; or both together, as it happens for the most part.

But the name of Idol is extended yet further in Scripture, to signify also
the Sun, or a Star, or any other Creature, visible or invisible, when they
are worshipped for Gods.

Having shown what is Worship, and what an Image; I will now Idolatry what.
put them together, and examine what that IDOLATRY is, which is forbidden in
the Second Commandment, and other places of the Scripture.

To worship an Image, is voluntarily to do those external acts, which are
signs of honoring either the matter of the Image, which is Wood, Stone,
Metal, or some other visible creature; or the Phantasme of the brain, for the
resemblance, or representation whereof, the matter was formed and figured; or
both together, as one ^nimate Body, composed of the Matter and the Phantasme,
as of a Body and Soul.

To be uncovered, before a man of Power and Authority, or before the Throne of
a Prince, or in such other places as he ordains to that purpose in his
absence, is to Worship that man, or Prince with Civil Worship; as being a
sign, not of honoring the stool, or place, but the Person; and is not
Idolatry. But if he that does it, should suppose the Soul of the Prince to be
in the Stool, or should present a Petition to the Stool, it were Divine
Worship, and Idolatry.

To pray to a King for such things, as he is able to do for us, though we
prostrate our selves before him, is but Civil Worship; because we acknowledge
no other power in him, but humane: But voluntarily to pray unto him for fair
weather, or for any thing which God only can do for us, is Divine Worship,
and Idolatry. On the other side if a King compel a man to it by the terror of
Death, or other great corporal punishment, it is not Idolatry: For the Worship
which the Sovereign commands to be done unto himself by the terror of his
Laws, is not a sign that he that obeys him, does inwardly honor him as a
God, but that he is desirous to save himself from death, or from a miserable
life; and that which is not a sign of internal honor, is no Worship; and
therefore no Idolatry. Neither can it be said, that he that does it,
scandalizeth, or lays any stumbling block before his Brother; because how
wise, or learned soever he be that worshippeth in that manner, another man
cannot from thence argue, that he approves it; but that he does it for fear;
and that it is not his act, but the act of his Sovereign.

To worship God, in some peculiar Place, or turning a man's fa^ toward an
Image, or determinate Place, is not to worship, or honor the Place, or Image;
but to acknowledge it Holy, that is to say, to acknowledge the Image, or the
Place to be set apart from common use: for that is the meaning of the word
Holy; which implies no new quality in the Place, or Image; but only a new
Relation by Appropriation to God; and therefore is not Idolatry; no more than
it was Idolatry to worship God before the Brazen Serpent; or for the Jews when
they were out of their own country, to turn their faces (when they prayed)
toward the Temple of Jerusalem; or for Moses to put off his Shoes when he was
before the Flaming Bush, the ground appertaining to Mount Sinai; which place
God had chosen to appear in, and to give his Laws to the People of Israel, and
was therefore Holy ground, not by inhaerent sanctity, but by separation to Gods
use; or for Christians to worship in the Churches, which are once solemnly
dedicated to God for that purpose, by the Authority of the King, or other true
Representant of the Church. But to worship God, as inanimating, or inhabiting,
such Image, or place; that is to say, an infinite substance in a finite place,
is Idolatry: for such finite Gods, are but Idols of the brain, nothing real;
and are commonly called in the Scripture by the names of Vanity, and Lies, and
Nothing. Also to worship God, not as inanimating, or present in the place, or
Image; but to the end to be put in mind of him, or of some works of his, in
case the Place, or Image be dedicated, or set up by private authority, and not
by the authority of them that are our Sovereign Pastors, is Idolatry. For the
Commandment is, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. God
commanded Moses to set up the Brazen Serpent; he did not make it to himself;
it was not therefore against the Commandment. But the making of the Golden
Calfe by Aaron, and the People, as being done without authority from God, was
Idolatry; not only because they held it for God, but also because they made it
for a Religious use, without warrant either from God their Sovereign, or from
Moses, that was his Lieutenant.

The Gentiles worshipped for Gods, Jupiter, and others; that living, were men
perhaps that had done great and glorious Acts; and for the Children of God,
diverse men and women, supposing them gotten between an Immortal Deity, and a
mortal man. This was Idolatry, because they made them so to themselves, having
no authority from God, neither in his eternal Law of Reason, nor in his
positive and revealed Will. But though our Savior was a man, whom we also
believe to be God Immortal, and the Son of God; yet this is no Idolatry;
because we build not that belief upon our own fancy, or judgment, but upon the
Word of God revealed in the Scriptures. And for the adoration of the Eucharist,
if the words of Christ, This is my Body, signify, that he himself, and the
seeming bread in his hand; and not only so, but that all the seeming morsells
of bread that have ever since been, and any time hereafter shall be
consecrated by Priests; be so many Christ's bodies, and yet all of them but one
body, then is that no Idolatry, because it is authorized by our Savior: but if
that text do not signify that, (for there is no other that can be alleged
for it,) then, because it is a worship of humane institution, it is Idolatry.
For it is not enough to say, God can transubstantiate the Bread into Christ's
Body: For the Gentiles also held God to be Omnipotent; and might upon that
ground no less excuse their Idolatry, by pretending, as well as others, a
transubstantiation of their Wood, and Stone into God Almighty.

Whereas there be, that pretend Divine In^piration, to be a supernatural
entering of the Holy Ghost into a man, and not an acquisition of Gods graces, by
doctrine, and study; I think they are in a very dangerous Dilemma. For if they
worship not the men whom they believe to be so inspired, they fall into
Impiety; as not adoring Gods supernatural Presence. And again, if they worship
him, they commit Idolatry; for the Apostles would never permit themselves to be
so worshipped. Therefore the safest way is to believe, that by the Descending
of the Dove upon the Apostles; and by Christ's Breathing on them, when he gave
them the Holy Ghost; and by the giving of it by I^position of Hands, are
understood the signs which God has been pleased to use, or ordain to be
used, of his promise to assist those persons in their study to Preach his
Kingdom, and in their Conversation, that it might not be Scandalous, but
Edifying to others.

Besides the Idolatrous Worship of Images, there is also a Scandalous
Scandalous worship of Images.
Worship of them; which is also a sin; but not Idolatry. For Idolatry is to
worship by signs of an internal, and real honor: but Scandalous Worship, is
but Seeming Worship; and may sometimes be joined with an inward, and hearty
detestation, both of the Image, and of the Fantastical Demon, or Idol, to
which it is dedicated; and proceed only from the fear of death, or other
grievous punishment; and is nevertheless a sin in them that so worship, in
case they be men whose actions are looked at by others, as lights to guide them
by; because following their ways, they cannot but stumble, and fall in the way
of Religion: Whereas the example of those we regard not, works not on us at
all, but leaves us to our own diligence and caution; and consequently are no
causes of our falling.

If therefore a Pastor lawfully called to teach and direct others, or any
other, of whose knowledge there is a great opinion, do external honor to an
Idol for fear; unless he make his fear, and unwillingnesse to it, as evident
as the worship; he Scandalizeth his Brother, by seeming to approve Idolatry.
For his Brother arguing from the action of his teacher, or of him whose
knowledge he esteems great, concludes it to be lawful in it self. And this
Scandal, is Sin, and a Scandal given. But if one being no Pastor, nor of
eminent reputation for knowledge in Christian Doctrine, do the same, and
another follow him; this is no Scandal given; for he had no cause to follow
such example: but is a pretense of Scandal which he takes of himself for an
excuse before m^n: For an unlearned man, that is in the power of an Idolatrous
King, or State, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an Idol, he
detesteth the Idol in his heart, he does well; though if he had the fortitude
to suffer death, rather than worship it, he should do better. But if a Pastor,
who as Christ's Messenger, has undertaken to teach Christ's Doctrine to all
nations, should do the same, it were not only a sinful Scandal, in respect
of other Christian men's consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his charge.

The sum of that which I have said hitherto, concerning the Worship of
Images, is this, that he that worshippeth in an Image, or any Creature, either
the Matter thereof, or any Fancy of his own, which he thinks to dwell in it;
or both together; or believes that such things hear his Prayers, or see his
Devotions, without Ears, or Eyes, commits Idolatry: and he that
counterfeiteth such Worship for fear of punishment, if he be a man whose
example has power amongst his Brethren, commits a sin: But he that
worshippeth the Creator of the world before such an Image, or in such a place
as he has not made, or chosen of himself, but taken from the commandment of
Gods Word, as the Jews did in worshipping God before the Cherubins, and before
the Brazen Serpent for a time, and in, or toward the Temple of Jerusalem,
which was also but for a time, commits not Idolatry.

Now for the Worship of Saints, and Images, and Relics, and other things at
this day practiced in the Church of Rome, I say they are not allowed by the
Word of God, nor brought into the Church of Rome, from the Doctrine there
taught; but partly left in it at the first conversion of the Gentiles; and
afterward countenanced, and confirmed, and augmented by the Bishops of Rome.

As for the proofs alleged out of Scripture, namely, those examples Answer
(...) the Argument from the Cherubins, and Brazen Serpent.
of Images appointed by God to be set up; They were not set up for the people,
or any man to worship; but that they should worship God himself before them;
as before the Cherubins over the Ark, and the Brazen Serpent. For we read not,
that the Priest, or any other did worship the Cherubins; but contrarily we
read (2 Kings 18.4.) that Hezekiah brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent which
Moses had set up, because the People burnt incense to it. Besides, those
examples are not put for our Imitation, that we also should set up Images,
under pretense of worshipping God before them; because the words of the second
Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.
distinguish between the Images that God commanded to be set up, and those which
we set up to our selves. And therefore from the Cherubins, or Brazen Serpent,
to the Images of man's devising; and from the Worship commanded by God^ to the
Will^ Worship of men, the argument is not good. This also is to be considered,
that as Hezekiah brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent, because the Jews did
worship it, to the end they should do so no more; so also Christian Sovereigns
ought to break down the Images which their Subjects have been accustomed to
worship; that there be no more occasion of such Idolatry. For at this day, the
ignorant People, where Images are worshipped, do really believe there is a
Divine Power in the Images; and are told by their Pastors, that some of them
have spoken; and have bled; and that miracles have been done by them; which
they apprehend as done by the Saint, which they think either is the Image it
self, or in it. The Israelites, when they worshipped the Calfe, did think they
worshipped the God that brought them out of Egypt; and yet it was Idolatry,
because they thought the Calfe either was that God, or had him in his belly.
And though some man may think it impossible for people to be so stupid, as to
think the Image to be God, or a Saint; or to worship it in that notion; yet it
is manifest in Scripture to the contrary; where when the Golden Calfe was made,
the people said, Exodus 32. 2.
These are thy Gods O Israel; and where the Images of Laban Genesis 31. 30.
are called his Gods. And we see daily by experience in all sorts of People,
that such men as study nothing but their food and ease, are content to believe
any absurdity, rather than to trouble themselves to examine it; holding their
faith as it were by entaile unalienable, except by an express and new Law.

But they infer from some other places, that it is lawful to paint Painting
of Fancies no Idolatry: but abusing them to Religious Worship is.
Angels, and also God himself: as from Gods walking in the Garden; from Jacobs
seeing God at the top of the ladder; and from other Visions, and Dreams. But
Visions, and Dreams, whether natural, or snpernaturall, are but Phantasmes:
and he that painteth an Image of any of them, makes not an Image of God, but
of his own Phantasm, which is, making of an Idol. I say not, that to draw a
Picture after a fancy, is a Sin; but when it is drawn, to hold it for a
Representation of God, is against the second Commandment; and can be of no
use, but to worship. And the same may be said of the Images of Angels, and of
men dead; unless as Monuments of friends, or of men worthy remembrance: For
such use of an Image, is not Worship of the Image; but a civil honoring of the
Person, not that is, but that was: But when it is done to the Image which we
make of a Saint, for no other reason, but that we think he hears our prayers,
and is pleased with the honor we do him, when dead, and without sense, we
attribute to him more than humane power; and therefore it is Idolatry.

Seeing therefore there is no authority, neither in the Law of Moses, nor in
the Gospel, for the religious Worship of Images, or other Representations of
God, which men set up to themselves; or for the Worship of the Image of any
Creature in Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth: And whereas Christian Kings,
who are living Representants of God, are not to be worshipped by their
Subjects, by any act, that signifies a greater esteem of his power, than the
nature of mortal man is capable of; It cannot be imagined, that the Religious
Worship now in use, was brought into the Church, by misunderstanding of the
Scripture. It rests therefore, that it was left in it, by not destroying the
Images themselves, in the conversion of the Gentiles that worshipped them.

The cause whereof, was the immoderate esteem, and prices set How Idolatry was
left in the Church.
upon the workmanship of them, which made the owners (though converted, from
worshipping them as they had done Religiously for Demons) to retain them still
in their houses, upon pretense of doing it in the honor of Christ, of the
Virgin Mary, and of the Apostles, and other the Pastors of the Primitive
Church; as being easy, by giving them new names, to make that an Image of the
Virgin Mary, and of her Son our Savior, which before perhaps was called the
Image of Venus, and Cupid; and so of a Jupiter to make a Barnabas, and of
Mercury a Paul, and the like. And as worldly ambition creeping by degrees into
the Pastors, drew them to an endeavor of pleasing the new made Christians; and
also to a liking of this kind of honor, which they also might hope for after
their decease, as well as those that had already gained it: so the worshipping
of the Images of Christ and his Apostles, grew more and more Idolatrous; save
that somewhat after the time of Constantine, diverse Emperors, and Bishops, and
general Counsels observed, and opposed the unlawfulness thereof; but too
late, or too weakly.

The Canonizing of Saints, is another Relic of Gentilisme: It is Canonizing
of Saints.
neither a misunderstanding of Scripture, nor a new invention of the Roman
Church, but a custom as ancient as the Commonwealth of Rome it self. The
first that ever was canonized at Rome, was Romulus, and that upon the narration
of Julius Proculus, that swore before the Senate, he spoke with him after his
death, and was assured by him, he dwelt in Heaven, and was there called
Quirinus, and would be propitious to the State of their new City: And thereupon
the Senate gave public testimony of his Sanctity. Julius Caesar, and other
Emperors after him, had the like testimony; that is, were Canonized for Saints;
for by such testimony is CANONIZATION, now defined; and is the same with the
(...) of the Heathen.

It is also from the Roman Heathen, that the Popes have received The name of
Pontifex.
the name, and power of PONTIFEX MAXIMUS. This was the name of him that in the
ancient Commonwealth of Rome, had the Supreme Authority under the Senate and
People, of regulating all Ceremonies, and Doctrines concerning their Religion:
And when Augustus Caesar changed the State into a Monarchy, he took to himself
no more but this office, and that of Tribune of the People, (that is to say,
the Supreme Power both in State, and Religion;) and the succeeding Emperors
enjoyed the same. But when the Emperor Constantine lived, who was the first
that professed and authorized Christian Religion, it was consonant to his
profession, to cause Religion to be regulated (under his authority) by the
Bishop of Rome: Though it do not appear they had so soon the name of Pontifex;
but rather, that the succeeding Bishops took it of themselves, to countenance
the power they exercised over the Bishops of the Roman Provinces. For it is not
any Privilege of St. Peter, but the Privilege of the City of Rome, which the
Emperors were always willing to uphold, that gave them such authority over
other Bishops; as may be evidently seen by that, that the Bishop of
Constantinople, when the Emperor made that City the Seat of the Empire,
pretended to be equal to the Bishop of Rome; though at last, not without
contention, the Pope carried it, and became the Pontifex Maximus; but in right
only of the Emperor; and not without the bounds of the Empire; nor any where,
after the Emperor had lost his power in Rome; though it were the Pope himself
that took his power from him. From whence we may by the way observe, that
there is no place for the superiority of the Pope over other Bishops, except in
the territories whereof he is himself the Civil Sovereign; and where the
Emperor having Sovereign Power Civil, has expressly chosen the Pope for the
chief Pastor under himself, of his Christian Subjects.

The carrying about of Images in Procession; is another Relic of Procession
of Images.
the Religion of the Greeks, and Romans: For they also carried their Idols from
place to place, in a kind of Chariot, which was peculiarly dedicated to that
use, which the Latins called Thensa, and Vehiculum Deorum; and the Image was
placed in a frame, or Shrine, which they called Ferculum: And that which they
called Pompa, is the same that now is named Procession: According whereunto,
amongst the Divine Honors which were given to Julius Caesar by the Senate, this
was one, that in the Pomp (or Procession) at the Circaean games, he should
have Thensam and Ferculum, a sacred Chariot, and a Shrine; which was as much,
as to be carried up and down as a God: Just as at this day the Popes are
carried by Switzers under a Canopie.

To these Processions also belonged the bearing of burning Torches, Wax
Candles, and Torches lighted.
and Candles, before the Images of the Gods, both amongst the Greeks, and
Romans. For afterward the Emperors of Rome received the same honor; as we read
of Caligula, that at his reception to the Empire, he was carried from Misenum
to Rome, in the midst of a throng of People, the ways beset with Altars, and
Beasts for Sacrifice, and burning Torches: And of Caracalla that was received
into Alexandria with Incense, and with casting of Flowers, and (...), that is,
with Torches; for (...) were they that amongst the Greeks carried Torches
lighted in the Processions of their Gods: And in process of time, the devout,
but ignorant People, did many times honor their Bishops with the like pomp of
Wax Candles, and the Images of our Savior, and the Saints, constantly, in the
Church it self. And thus came in the use of Wax Candles; and was also
established by some of the ancient Counsels.

The Heathens had also their Aqua Lustralis; that is to say, Holy Water. The
Church of Rome imitates them also in their Holy Days. They had their
Bacchanalia; and we have our Wakes, answering to them: They their Saturnalia,
and we our Carnevalls, and Shrovetuesdays liberty of Servants: They their
Procession of Priapus; we our fetching in, erection, and dancing about
May-poles; and Dancing is one kind of Worship: They had their Procession called
Ambarvalia; and we our Procession about the fields in the Rogation week. Nor do
I think that these are all the Ceremonies that have been left in the Church,
from the first conversion of the Gentiles: but they are all that I can for the
present call to mind; and if a man would well observe that which is delivered in
the Histories, concerning the Religious Rites of the Greeks and Romans, I
doubt not but he might find many more of these old empty Bottles of Gentilisme,
which the Doctors of the Romance Church, either by Negligence, or Ambition,
have filled up again with the new Wine of Christianity, that will not fail in
time to break them.

CHAP. XLVI. Of DARKNESS from VAIN PHILOSOPHY, and FABULOUS TRADITIONS.
BY PHILOLOSPHY, is understood the Knowledge acquired What Philosophy is.
by Reasoning, from the Manner of the Generation of any thing, to the
Properties; or from the Properties, to some possible Way of Generation of the
same; to the end to be able to produce, as far as matter, and humane force
permit, such Effects, as ^umane life requires. So the Geometrician, from the
Construction of Figures, finds out many Properties thereof; and from the
Properties, new Ways of their Construction, by Reasoning; to the end to be able
to measure Land, and Water; and for infinite other uses. So the Astronomer,
from the Rising, Setting, and Moving of the Sun, and Stars, in diverse parts
of the Heavens, finds out the Causes of Day, and Night, and of the different
Seasons of the Year; whereby he keeps an account of Time: And the like of
other Sciences.

By which Definition it is evident, that we are not to account as Prudence no
part of Philosophy.
any part thereof, that original knowledge called Experience, in which
consists Prudence: Because it is not attained by Reasoning, but found as well
in Brute Beasts, as in Man; and is but a Memory of successions of events in
times past, wherein the omission of every little circumstance altering the
effect, frustrateth the expectation of the most Prudent: whereas nothing is
produced by Reasoning aright, but general, eternal, and immutable Truth.

Nor are we therefore to give that name to any false Conclusions: No false
Doctrine is part of Philosophy: No more is Revelation supernatural: Nor
learning taken upon credit of Authors.
For he that Reasons aright in words he understands, can never conclude an
Error:

Nor to that which any man knows by supernatural Revelation; because it is not
acquired by Reasoning:

Nor that which is gotten by Reasoning from the Authority of Books; because it
is not by Reasoning from the Cause to the Effect, nor from the Effect to the
Cause; and is not Knowledge, but Faith.

The faculty of Reasoning being consequent to the use of Speech, Of the
Beginnings and Progress of Philosophy.
it was not possible, but that there should have been some general Truths
found out by Reasoning, as ancient almost as Language it self. The Savages of
America, are not without some good Moral Sentences; also they have a little
Arithmetic, to add, and divide in Numbers not too great: but they are not
therefore Philosophers. For as there were Plants of Corn and Wine in small
quantity dispersed in the Fields and Woods, before men knew their virtue, or
made use of them for their nourishment, or planted them apart in Fields, and
Vineyards; in which time they fed on Akorns, and drank Water: so also there
have been diverse true, general, and profitable Speculations from the
beginning; as being the natural plants of humane Reason: But they were at
first but few in number; men lived upon gross Experience; there was no Method;
that is to say, no Sowing, nor Planting of Knowledge by it self, apart from the
Weeds, and common Plants of Error and Conjecture: And the cause of it being
the want of leisure from procuring the necessities of life, and defending
themselves against their neighbors, it was impossible, till the erecting of
great Commonwealths, it should be otherwise. Leisure is the mother of
Philosophy; and Commonwealth, the mother of Peace, and Leisure. Where first
were great and flourishing Cities, there was first the study of Philosophy. The
Gymnosophists of India, the Magi of Persia, and the Priests of Chaldaea and
Egypt, are counted the most ancient Philosophers; and those Countries were the
most ancient of Kingdoms. Philosophy was not risen to the Graecians, and other
people of the West, whose Commonwealths (no greater perhaps then Lucca, or
Geneva) had never Peace, but when their fears of one another were equal; nor
the Leisure to observe any thing but one another. At length, when War had
united many of these Grecian lesser Cities, into fewer, and greater; then
began Seven men, of several parts of Greece, to get the reputation of being
Wise; some of them for Moral and Politic Sentences; and others for the
learning of the Chaldaeans and Egyptians, which was Astronomy, and Geometry.
But we hear not yet of any Schools of Philosophy.

After the Athenians by the overthrow of the Persian Armies, had Of the Schools
of Philosophy amongst the Athenians.
gotten the Dominion of the Sea; and thereby, of all the Islands, and Maritime
Cities of the Archipelago, as well of Asia as Europe; and were grown wealthy;
they that had no employment, neither at home, nor abroad, had little else to
employ themselves in, but either (as St. Luke says, Acts 17. 21. in telling and
hearing news, or in discoursing of Philosophy publicly to the youth of the
City. Every Master took some place for that purpose. Plato in certain public
Walks called Academia, from one Ac^demus: Aristotle in the Walk of the Temple
of Pan, called Lycaeum: others in the Stoa, or covered Walk, wherein the
Merchants Goods were brought to land: others in other places; where they spent
the time of their Leisure, in teaching or in disputing of their Opinions: and
some in any place, where they could get the youth of the City together to hear
them talk. And this was it which Carneades also did at Rome, when he was
Ambassador: which caused Cato to advise the Senate to dispatch him quickly,
for fear of corrupting the manners of the young men that delighted to hear him
speak (as they thought) fine things.

From this it was, that the place where any of them taught, and disputed, was
called Schola, which in their Tongue signifies Leisure; and their
Disputations, Diatribae, that is to say, Passing of the time. Also the
Philosophers themselves had the name of their Sects, some of them from these
their Schools: For they that followed (...) Doctrine, were called Academiques;
The followers of Aristotle, Peripatetiques, from the Walk he taught in; and
those that Zeno taught, Stoiques, from the Stoa: as if we should denominate men
from More-fields, from Pauls-Church, and from the Exchange, because they meet
there often, to prate and loyter.

Nevertheless, men were so much taken with this custom, that in time it
spread it self over all Europe, and the best part of Afrique; so as there were
Schools publicly erected, and maintained for Lectures, and Disputations,
almost in every Commonwealth.

There were also Schools, anciently, both before, and after the Of the Schools
of the Jews.
time of our Savior, amongst the Jews: but they were Schools of their Law. For
though they were called Synagogues, that is to say, Congregations of the
People; yet in as much as the Law was every Sabbath day read, expounded, and
disputed in them, they differed not in nature, but in name only from Public
Schools; and were not only in Jerusalem, but in every City of the Gentiles,
where the Jews inhabited. There was such a School at Damascus, whereinto Paul
entered, to persecute. There were others at Antioch, Iconium and Thessalonica,
whereinto he entered, to dispute: And such was the Synagogue of the Libertines,
Cyren^ans, Alexandrians, Cilicians, and those of Asia; that is to say, the
School of Libertines, and of Jews, that were strangers in Jerusalem: And of
this School they were that disputed ( Act. 6. 9.) with Saint Steven.

But what has been the Utility of those Schools? what Science is The School of
the Graecians unprofitable.
there at this day acquired by their Readings and Disputings? That we have of
Geometry, which is the Mother of all Natural Science, we are not indebted for
it to the Schools. Plato that was the best Philosopher of the Greeks, forbad
entrance into his School, to all that were not already in some measure
Geometricians. There were many that studied that Science to the great advantage
of mankind: but there is no mention of their Schools; nor was there any Sect of
Geometricians; nor did they then pass under the name of Philosophers. The
natural Philosophy of those Schools, was rather a Dream than Science, and set
forth in senseless and insignificant Language; which cannot be avoided by
those that will teach Philosophy, without having first attained great knowledge
in Geometry: For Nature works by Motion; the Ways, and Degrees whereof
cannot be known, without the knowledge of the Proportions and Properties of
Lines, and Figures. Their Moral Philosophy is but a description of their own
Passions. For the rule of Manners, without Civil Government, is the Law of
Nature; and in it, the Law Civil; that determines what is Honest, and
Dishonest; what is Just, and Unjust; and generally what is Good, and Evil:
whereas they make the Rules of Good, and Bad, by their own Liking, and
Disliking: By which means, in so great diversity of taste, there is nothing
generally agreed on; but every one does (as far as he dares) whatsoever seems
good in his own eyes, to the subversion of Commonwealth. Their Loigque which
should be the Method of Reasoning, is nothing else but Captions of Words, and
Inventions how to puzzle such as should go about to pose them. To conclude,
there is nothing so absurd, that the old Philosophers (as Cicero says, who was
one of them) have not some of them maintained. And I believe that scarce any
thing can be more absurdly said in natural Philosophy, than that which now is
called Aristotle's Metaphysiques; nor more repugnant to Government, than much of
that he has said in his Politiques; nor more ignorantly, than a great part of
his Ethiques.

The School of the Jews, was originally a School of the Law The Schools of
the Jews unprofitable.
of Moses; who commanded ( Deuteronomy. 31. 10.) that at the end of every seventh
year, at the Feast of the Tabernacles, it should be read to all the people,
that they might hear, and learn it: Therefore the reading of the Law (which was
in use after the Captivity) every Sabbath day, ought to have had no other end,
but the acquainting of the people with the Commandments which they were to
obey, and to expound unto them the writings of the Prophets. But it is
manifest, by the many reprehensions of them by our Savior, that they corrupted
the Text of the Law with their false Commentaries, and vain Traditions; and so
little understood the Prophets, that they did neither acknowledge Christ, nor
the works he did; of which the Prophets prophesied. So that by their Lectures
and Disputations in their Synagogues, they turned the Doctrine of their Law
into a Fantastical kind of Philosophy, concerning the incomprehensible nature
of God, and of Spirits; which they compounded of the Vain Philosophy and
Theology of the Graecians, mingled with their own fancies, drawn from the
obscurer places of the Scripture, and which might most easily be wrested to
their purpose; and from the Fabulous Traditions of their Ancestors.

That which is now called an University, is a Joining together, University what
it is.
and an Incorporation under one Government of many Public Schools, in one and
the same Town or City. In which, the principal Schools were ordained for the
three Professions, that is to say, of the Roman Religion, of the Roman Law,
and of the Art of Medicine. And for the study of Philosophy it has no
otherwise place, then as a handmaid to the Roman Religion: And since the
Authority of Aristotle is only current there, that study is not properly
Philosophy, (the nature whereof depends not on Authors,) but Aristotelity.
And for Geometry, till of very late times it had no place at all; as being
subservient to nothing but rigide Truth. And if any man by the ingenuity of his
own nature, had attained to any degree of perfection therein, he was commonly
thought a Magician, and his Art Diabolical.

Now to descend to the particular Tenets of Vain Philosophy, derived Errors
brought into Religion from Aristotle's Metaphysiques.
to the Universities, and thence into the Church, partly from Aristotle, partly
from Blindness of understanding; I shall first consider their Principles.
There is a certain Philosophia prima, on which all other Philosophy ought to
depend; and consists principally, in right limiting of the significations of
such Appellations, or Names, as are of all others the most Universal: Which
Limitations serve to avoid ambiguity, and aequivocation in Reasoning; and are
commonly called Definitions; such as are the Definitions of Body, Time, Place,
Matter, Form, Essence, Subject, Substance, Accident, Power, Act, Finite,
Infinite, Quantity, Quality, Motion, Action, Passion, and diverse others,
necessary to the explaining of a man's Conceptions concerning the Nature and
Generation of Bodies. The Explication (that is, the settling of the meaning) of
which, and the like Terms, is commonly in the Schools called Metaphysiques; as
being a part of the Philosophy of Aristotle, which has that for title: but it
is in another sense; for there it signifies as much, as Books written, or
placed after his natural Philosophy: But the Schools take them for Books of
supernatural Philosophy: for the word Metaphysiques will bear both these
senses. And indeed that which is there written, is for the most part so far
from the possibility of being understood, and so repugnant to natural Reason,
that whosoever thinks there is any thing to be understood by it, must needs
think it supernatural.

From these Metaphysiques, which are mingled with the Scripture Errors
concerning Abstract Essences.
to make School Divinity, we are told, there be in the world certain
Essences separated from Bodies, which they call Abstract Essences, and
Substantial Forms: For the Interpreting of which Iargon, there is need of
somewhat more than ordinary attention in this place. Also I ask pardon of those
that are not used to this kind of Discourse, for applying my self to those
that are. The World, (I mean not the Earth only, that denominates the Lovers
of it Worldly men, but the Universe, that is, the whole mass of all things
that are) is Corporeal, that is to say, Body; and has the dimensions of
Magnitude, namely, Length, Breadth, and Depth: also every part of Body, is
likewise Body, and has the like dime^ions; and consequently every part of the
Universe, is Body; and that which is not Body, is no part of the Universe: And
because the Universe is All, that which is no part of it, is Nothing; and
consequently no where. Nor does it follow from hence, that Spirits are nothing;
for they have dimensions, and are therefore really Bodies; though that name in
common Speech be given to such Bodies only, as are visible, or palpable; that
is, that have some degree of Opacity: But for Spirits, they call them
Incorporeall; which is a name of more honor, and may therefore with more piety
be attributed to God himself; in whom we consider not what Attribute
expresses best his Nature, which is Incomprehensible; but what best expresses
our desire to honor Him.

To know now upon what grounds they say there be Essences Abstract, or
Substantial Forms, we are to consider what those words do properly signify.
The use of Words, is to register to our selves, and make manifest to others the
Thoughts and Conceptions of our Minds. Of which Words, some are the names of
the Things conceived; as the names of all sorts of Bodies, that work upon the
Senses, and leave an Impression in the Imagination: Others are the names of the
Imaginations themselves; that is to say, of those Ideas, or mental Images we
have of all things we see, or remember: And others again are names of Names;
or of different sorts of Speech: As Universal, Plural, Singular, are the
names of Names; and Definition, Affirmation, Negation, True, False, Syllogism,
Interrogation, Promise, Covenant, are the names of certain Forms of Speech.
Others serve to show the Consequence, or Repugnance of one name to another; as
when one says, A Man is a Body, he intends that the name of Body is
necessarily consequent to the name of Man; as being but several names of the
same thing, Man; which Consequence is signified by coupling them together with
the word Is. And as we use the Verb Is; so the Latins use their Verb Est,
and the Greeks their (...) through all its Declinations. Whether all other
Nations of the world have in their several languages a word that answers to
it, or not, I cannot tell; but I am sure they have not need of it: For the
placing of two names in order may serve to signify their Consequence, if it
were the custom, (for Custom is it, that give words their force,) as well as
the words Is, or Be, or Are, and the like.

And if it were so, that there were a Language without any Verb answerable to
Est, or Is, or Be; yet the men that used it would be not a jot the less
capable of Inferring, Concluding, and of all kind of Reasoning, than were the
Greeks, and Latins. But what then would become of these Terms, of Entity,
Essence, Essential, ^ssentiality, that are derived from it, and of many more
that depend on these, applied as most commonly they are? They are therefore no
Names of Things; but Signs, by which we make known, that we conceive the
Consequence of one name or Attribute to another: as when we say, a Man, is, a
living Body, we mean not that the Man is one thing, the Living Body another,
and the Is, or Being a third: but that the Man, and the Living Body, is the
same thing; because the Consequence, If he be a Man, he is a living Body, is
a true Consequence, signified by that word Is. Therefore, to be a Body, to
Walk, to be Speaking, to Live, to See, and the like Infinitives; also
Corp^reity, Walking, Speaking, Life, Sight, and the like, that signify just
the same, are the names of Nothing; as I have elsewhere more amply expressed.

But to what purpose (may some man say) is such subtilty in a work of this
nature, where I pretend to nothing but what is necessary to the doctrine of
Government and Obedience? It is ^o this purpose, that men may no longer suffer
themselves to be abused, by them, that by this doctrine of Separated Essences,
built on the Vain Philosophy of Aristotle, would fright them from Obeying the
Laws of their Country, with empty names; as men fright Birds from the Corn
with an empty doublet, a hat, and a crooked stick. For it is upon this ground,
that when a Man is dead and buried, they say his Soul (that is his Life) can
walk separated from his Body, and is seen by night amongst the graves. Upon the
same ground they say, that the Figure, and Color, and Taste of a piece of
Bread, has a being, there, where they say there is no Bread: And upon the same
ground they say, that Faith, and Wisdom, and other Virtues are sometimes
powered into a man, sometimes blown into him from Heaven; as if the Virtuous,
and their Virtues could be asunder; and a great many other things that serve to
lessen the dependence of Subjects on the Sovereign Power of their Country. For
who will endeavor to obey the Laws, if he expect Obedience to be Powered or
Blown into him? Or who will not obey a Priest, that can make God, rather than
his Sovereign; nay than God himself? Or who, that is in fear of Ghosts, will
not bear great respect to those that can make the Holy Water, that drives them
from him? And this shall suffice for an example of the Errors, which are
brought into the Church, from the Entities, and Essences of Aristotle: which it
may be he knew to be false Philosophy; but writ it as a thing consonant to, and
corroborative of their Religion; and fearing the fate of Socrates.

Being once fallen into this Error of Separated Essences, they are thereby
necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow it. For seeing they
will have these Forms to be real, they are obliged to assign them some place.
But because they hold them Incorporeall, without all dimension of Quantity, and
all men know that Place is Dimension, and not to be filled, but by that which
is Corporeal; they are driven to uphold their credit with a distinction, that
they are not indeed any where Circumscriptive, but Definitive: Which Terms
being mere Words, and in this occasion insignificant, pass only in Latin,
that the vanity of them may be concealed. For the Circumscription of a thing,
is nothing else but the Determination, or Defining of its Place; and so both
the Terms of the Distinction are the same. And in particular, of the Essence of
a Man, which (they say) is his Soul, they affirm it, to be All of it in his
little Finger, and All of it in every other Part (how small soever) of his
Body; and yet no more Soul in the Whole Body, than in any one of those Parts.
Can any man think that God is served with such absurdities? And yet all this is
necessary to believe, to those that will believe the Existence of an
Incorporeall Soul, Separated from the Body.

And when they come to give account, how an Incorporeall Substance can be
capable of Pain, and be tormented in the fire of Hell, or Purgatory, they have
nothing at all to answer, but that it cannot be known how fire can burn Souls.

Again, whereas Motion is change of Place, and Incorporeall Substances are not
capable of Place, they are troubled to make it seem possible, how a Soul can
go hence, without the Body to Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory; and how the Ghosts
of men (and I may add of their clothes which they appear in) can walk by night
in Churches, Churchyards, and other places of Sepulture. To which I know not
what they can answer, unless they will say, they walk definitive, not
circumscriptive, or spiritually, not temporally: for such egregious
distinctions are equally applicable to any difficulty whatsoever.

For the meaning of Eternity, they will not have it to be an Endless
Nunc-stans.
Succession of Time; for then they should not be able to render a reason how
Gods Will, and Praeordaining of things to come, should not be before his
Praescience of the same, as the Efficient Cause before the Effect, or Agent
before the Action; nor of many other their bold opinions concerning the
Incomprehensible Nature of God. But they will teach us, that Eternity is the
Standing still of the Present Time, a Nunc-stans (as the Schools call it;)
which neither they, nor any else understand, no more than they would a
Hic-stans for an Infinite greatness of Place.

And whereas men divide a Body in their thought, by numbering One Body in many
places, and many Bodies in one place at once.
parts of it, and in numbering those parts, number also the parts of the Place
it filled; it cannot be, but in making many parts, we make also many places of
those parts; whereby there cannot be conceived in the mind of any man, more,
or fewer parts, than there are places for: yet they will have us believe, that
by the Almighty power of God, one body may be at one and the same time in many
places; and many bodies at one and the same time in one place; as if it were an
acknowledgment of the Divine Power, to say, that which is, is not; or that
which has been, has not been. And these are but a small part of the
Incongruities they are forced to, from their disputing Philosophically, in
stead of admiring, and adoring of the Divine and Incomprehensible Nature; whose
Attributes cannot signify what he is, but ought to signify our desire to
honor him, with the best Appellations we can think on. But they that venture
to reason of his Nature, from these Attributes of Honor, losing their
understanding in the very first attempt, fall from one Inconvenience into
another, without end, and without number; in the same manner, as when a man
ignorant of the Ceremonies of Court, coming into the presence of a greater
Person than he is used to speak to, and stumbling at his entrance, to save
himself from falling, lets slip his Cloak; to recover his Cloak, lets fall
his Hat; and with one disorder after another, discovers his astonishment and
rusticity.

Then for Physiques, that is, the knowledge of the subordinate, Absurdities in
natural Philosopy, as Gravity the Cause of Heaviness.
and secundary causes of natural events; they render none at all, but empty
words. If you desire to know why some kind of bodies sink naturally downwards
toward the Earth, and others go naturally from it; The Schools will tell you
out of Aristotle, that the bodies that sink downwards, are Heavy; and that this
Heaviness is it that causes them to descend: But if you ask what they mean by
Heaviness, they will define it to be an endeavor to go to the center of the
Earth: so that the cause why things sink downward, is an Endeavor to be below:
which is as much as to say, that bodies descend, or ascend, because they do.
Or they will tell you the center of the Earth is the place of Rest, and
Conservation for Heavy things; and therefore they endeavor to be there: As if
Stones, and Metalls had a desire, or could discern the place they would be at,
as Man does; or loved Rest, as Man does not; or that a piece of Glass were
less safe in the Window, than falling into the Street.

If we would know why the same Body seems greater (without adding Quantity put
into Body already made.
to it) one time, than another; they say, when it seems less, it is Condensed;
when greater, Rarefied. What is that Condensed, and Rarefied? Condensed, is
when there is in the very same Matter, less Quantity than before; and
Rarefied, when more. As if there could be Matter, that had not some determined
Quantity; when Quantity is nothing else but the Determination of Matter; that
is to say of Body, by which we say one Body is greater, or lesser than another,
by thus, or thus much. Or as if a Body were made without any Quantity at all,
and that afterward more, or less were put into it, according as it is
intended the Body should be more, or less Dense.

For the cause of the Soul of Man, they say, Creatur Infundendo, Pouring in of
Souls.
and Creando Infunditur: that is, It is Created by Pouring it in, and Powered in
by Creation.

For the Cause of Sense, an ubiquity of Species; that is, of the Shows Ubiquity
of Apparition.
or Apparitions of objects; which when they be Apparitions to the Eye, is
Sight; when to the Ear, Hearing; to the Palate, Taste; to the Nostrill,
Smelling; and to the rest of the Body, Feeling.

For cause of the Will, to do any particular action, which is Will, the Cause
of Willing.
called Volitio, they assign the Faculty, that is to say, the Capacity in
general, that men have, to will sometimes one thing, sometimes another, which
is called Voluntas; making the Power the cause of the Act: As if one should
assign for cause of the good or evil Acts of men, their Ability to do them.

And in many occasions they put for cause of Natural events, Ignorance an
occult Cause.
their own Ignorance; but disguised in other words: As when they say, Fortune
is the cause of things contingent; that is, of things whereof they know no
cause: And as when they attribute many Effects to occult qualities; that is,
qualities not known to them; and therefore also (as they think) to no Man
else. And to Sympathy, Antipathy, Antiperistasis, Specificall Qualities, and
other like Terms, which signify neither the Agent that produces them, nor
the Operation by which they are produced.

If such Metaphysiques, and Physiques as this, be not Vain Philosophy, there
was never any; nor needed St. Paul to give us warning to avoid it.

And for their Moral, and Civil Philosophy, it has the same, One makes the
things incongruent, another the Incongruity.
or greater absurdities. If a man do an action of Injustice, that is to say,
an action contrary to the Law, God they say is the prime cause of the Law, and
also the prime cause of that, and all other Actions; but no cause at all of the
Injustice; which is the Inconformity of the Action to the Law. This is Vain
Philosophy. A man might as well say, that one man makes both a straight line,
and a crooked, and another makes their Incongruity. And such is the Philosophy
of all men that resolve of their Conclusions, before they know their Premises;
pretending to comprehend, that which is Incomprehensible; and of Attributes of
Honor to make Attributes of Nature; as this distinction was made to maintain
the Doctrine of Free Will, that is, of a Will of man, not subject to the Will
of God.

Aristotle, and other Heathen Philosophers define Good, and Evil, Private
Appetite the rule of Public good:
by the Appetite of men; and well enough, as long as we consider them governed
every one by his own Law: For in the condition of men that have no other Law
but their own Appetites, there can be no general Rule of Good, and Evil
Actions. But in a Commonwealth this measure is false: Not the Appetite of
Private men, but the Law, which is the Will and Appetite of the State is the
measure. And yet is this Doctrine still practiced; and men judge the Goodness,
or Wickedness of their own, and of other men's actions, and of the actions of
the Commonwealth it self, by their own Passions; and no man calls Good or
Evil, but that which is so in his own eyes, without any regard at all to the
Public Laws; except only Monks, and Friars, that are bound by Vow to that
simple obedience to their Superior, to which every Subject ought to think
himself bound by the Law of Nature to the Civil Sovereign. And this private
measure of Good, is a Doctrine, not only Vain, but also Pernicious to the
Public State.

It is also Vain and false Philosophy, to say the work of Marriage And that
lawful Marriage is Unchastity:
is repugnant to Chastity, or Continence, and by consequence to make them
Moral Vices; as they do, that pretend Chastity, and Continence, for the
ground of denying Marriage to the Clergy. For they confess it is no more, but
a Constitution of the Church, that requires in those holy Orders that
continually attend the Altar, and administration of the Eucharist, a continual
Abstinence from women, under the name of continual Chastity, Continence, and
Purity. Therefore they call the lawful use of Wives, want of Chastity, and
Continence; and so make Marriage a Sin, or at least a thing so impure, and
unclean, as to render a man unfit for the Altar. If the Law were made because
the use of Wives is Incontinence, and contrary to Chastity, then all Marriage
is vice: If because it is a thing too impure, and unclean for a man consecrated
to God; much more should other natural, necessary, and daily works which all
men do, render men unworthy to be* Priests, because they are more unclean.

But the secret foundation of this prohibition of Marriage of Priests, is not
likely to have been laid so slightly, as upon such errors in Moral
Philosophy; nor yet upon the preference of single life, to the estate of
Matrimony; which proceeded from the wisdom of St. Paul, who perceived how
inconvenient a thing it was, for those that in those times of persecution were
Preachers of the Gospel, and forced to fly from one country to another, to be
clogged with the care of wife and children; but upon the design of the Popes,
and Priests of after times, to make themselves the Clergy, that is to say, sole
Heirs of the Kingdom of God in this world; to which it was necessary to take
from them the use of Marriage, because our Savior says, that at the coming of
his Kingdom the Children of God shall neither Marry, nor be given in
Marriage, but shall be as the Angels in heaven; that is to say, Spiritual*
Seeing then they had taken on them the name of Spiritual, to have allowed
themselves (when there was no need) the propriety of Wives, had been an
Incongruity.

From Aristotle's Civil Philosophy, they have learned, to call all And that all
Government but Popular, is Tyranny:
manner of Commonwealths but the Popular, (such as was at that time the state
of Athens,) Tyranny. All Kings they called Tyrants; and the Aristocracy of the
thirty Governors ^et up there by the Lacedaemonians that subdued them, the
thirty Tyrants: As also to call the condition of the people under the
Democracy, Liberty. A Tyrant originally signified no more simply, but a
Monarch: But when afterward in most parts of Greece that kind of government
was abolished, the name began to signify, not only the thing it did before,
but with it, the hatred which the Popular States bare toward it: As also the
name of King became odious after the deposing of the Kings in Rome, as being a
thing natural to all men, to conceive some great Fault to be signified in any
Attribute, that is given in despite, and to a great Enemy. And when the same
men shall be displeased with those that have the administration of the
Democracy, or Aristocracy, they are not to seek for disgraceful names to
express their anger in; but call readily the one Anarchy, and the other,
Oligarchy, or the Tyranny of a Few. And that which offends the People, is no
other thing, but that they are governed, not as every one of them would
himself, but as the Public Representant, be it one Man, or an Assembly of
men thinks fit; that is, by an Arbitrary government: for which they give evil
names to their Superiors; never knowing (till perhaps a little after a Civil
war) that without such Arbitrary government, such War must be perpetual;
and that it is Men, and Arms, not Words, and Promises, that make the Force and
Power of the Laws.

And therefore this is another Error of Aristotle's Politiques, that That not
Men, but Law governs.
in a well ordered Commonwealth, not Men should govern, but the Laws. What man,
that has his natural Senses, though he can neither write nor read, does not
find himself governed by them he fears, and believes can kill or hurt him when
he obeys not? or that believes the Law can hurt him; that is, Words, and
Paper, without the Hands, and Swords of men? And this is of the number of
pernicious Errors: for they induce men, as often as they like not their
Governors, to adhaere to those that call them Tyrants, and to think it lawful
to raise war against them: And yet they are many times cherished from the
Pulpit, by the Clergy.

There is another Error in their Civil Philosophy (which they Laws over the
Conscience.
never learned of Aristotle, nor Cicero, nor any other of the Heathen,) to
extend the power of the Law, which is the Rule of Actions only, to the very
Thoughts, and Consciences of men, by Examination, and Inquisition of what they
Hold, notwithstanding the Conformity of their Speech and Actions: By which, men
are either punished for answering the truth of their thoughts, or constrained
to answer an untruth for fear of punishment. It is true, that the Civil
Magistrate, intending to employ a Minister in the charge of Teaching, may
enquire of him, if he be content to Preach such, and such Doctrines; and in
case of refusal, may deny him the employment: But to force him to accuse
himself of Opinions, when his Actions are not by Law forbidden, is against the
Law of Nature; and especially in them, who teach, that a man shall be damned
to Eternal and extreme torments, if he die in a false opinion concerning an
Article of the Christian Faith. For who is there, that knowing there is so
great danger in an error, whom the natural care of himself, compels not to
hazard his Soul upon his own judgment, rather than that of any other man that
is unconcerned in his damnation?

For a Private man, without the Authority of the Commonwealth, Private
Interpretation of Law.
that is to say, without permission from the Representant thereof, to Interpret
the Law by his own Spirit, is another Error in the Politiques; but not drawn
from Aristotle, nor from any other of the Heathen Philosophers. For none of
them deny, but that in the Power of making Laws, is comprehended also the Power
of Explaining them when there is need. And are not the Scriptures, in all
places where they are Law, made Law by the Authority of the Commonwealth, and
consequently, a part of the Civil Law?

Of the same kind it is also, when any but the Sovereign restrains in any man
that power which the Commonwealth has not restrained; as they do, that
impropriate the Preaching of the Gospel to one certain Order of men, where the
Laws have left it free. If the State give me leave to preach, or teach; that
is, if it forbid me not, no man can forbid me. If I find my self amongst the
Idolaters of America, shall I that am a Christian, though not in Orders, think
it a sin to preach Jesus Christ, till I have received Orders from Rome? or when
I have preached, shall not I answer their doubts, and expound the Scriptures to
them; that is, shall I not Teach? But for this may some say, as also for
administering to them the Sacraments, the necessity shall be esteemed for a
sufficient Mission; which is true: But this is true also, that for whatsoever,
a dispensation is due for the necessity, for the same there needs no
dispensation, when there is no Law that forbids it. Therefore to deny these
Functions to those, to whom the Civil Sovereign has not denied them, is a
taking away of a lawful Liberty, which is contrary to the Doctrine of Civil
Government.

More examples of Vain Philosophy, brought into Religion by the Doctors of
Schoole-Divinity, might be produced; but other men may if they please observe
them of themselves. I shall only add this, that the Writings of
Schoole-Divines, are nothing else Language of Schoole-Divines.
for the most part, but insignificant Trains of strange and barbarous words,
or words otherwise used, then in the common use of the Latin tongue; such as
would pose Cicero, and Varro, and all the Grammarians of ancient Rome. Which if
any man would see proved, let him (as I have said once before) see whether he
can translate any Schoole-Divine into any of the Modern tongues, as French,
English, or any other copious language: for that which cannot in most of these
be made Intelligible, is not Intelligible in the Latin. Which Insignificancy
of language, though I cannot note it for false Philosophy; yet it has a
quality, not only to hide the Truth, but also to make men think they have it,
and desist from further search.

Lastly, for the Errors brought in from false, or uncertain History, Errors
from Tradition.
what is all the Legend of fictitious Miracles, in the lives of the Saints; and
all the Histories of Apparitions, and Ghosts, alleged by the Doctors of the
Roman Church, to make good their Doctrines of Hell, and Purgatory, the power
of Exorcisme, and other Doctrines which have no warrant, neither in Reason, nor
Scripture; as also all those Traditions which they call the unwritten Word of
God; but old Wives Fables? Whereof, though they find dispersed somewhat in the
Writings of the ancient Fathers; yet those Fathers were men, that might too
easily believe false reports; and the producing of their opinions for testimony
of the truth of what they believed, has no other force with them that
(according to the Counsel of St. John 1 Epist. chap. 4. verse 1.) examine
Spirits, than in all things that concern the power of the Roman Church, (the
abuse whereof either they suspected not, or had benefit by it,) to discredit
their testimony, in respect of too rash belief of reports; which the most
sincere men, without great knowledge of natural causes, (such as the Fathers
were) are commonly the most subject to: For naturally, the best men are the
least suspicious of fraudulent purposes. Gregory the Pope, and S. Bernard have
somewhat of Apparitions of Ghosts, that said they were in Purgatory; and so has
our Beda: but no where, I believe, but by report from others. But if they, or
any other, relate any such stories of their own knowledge, they shall not
thereby confirm the more such vain reports; but discover their own Infirmity,
or Fraud.

With the Introduction of False, we may join also the suppression Suppression
of Reason.
of True Philosophy, by such men, as neither by lawful authority, nor
sufficient study, are competent Judges of the truth. Our own Navigations make
manifest, and all men learned in humane Sciences, now acknowledge there are
Antipodes: And every day it appears more and more, that Years, and Days are
determined by Motions of the Earth. Nevertheless, men that have in their
Writings but supposed such Doctrine, as an occasion to lay open the reasons
for, and against it, have been punished for it by* Authority Ecclesiastical.
But what reason is there for it? Is it beca^se such opinions are contrary to
true Religion? that cannot be, if they be true. Let therefore the truth be
first examined by competent Judges, or confuted by them that pretend to know
the contrary. Is it because they be contrary to the Religion established? Let
them be silenced by the Laws of those, to whom the Teachers of them are
subject; that is, by the Laws Civil: For disobedience may lawfully be punished
in them, that against the Laws teach even true Philosophy. Is it because they
tend to disorder in Government, as countenancing Rebellion, or Sedition? then
let them be silenced, and the Teachers punished by virtue of his Power to whom
the care of the Public quiet is committed; which is the Authority Civil. For
whatsoever Power Ecclesiastiques take upon themselves (in any place where they
are subject to the State*) in their own Right, though they call it Gods Right,
is but Usurpation.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the BENEFIT that proceeds from such Darkness, and to whom
it accreweth.
CIcero makes honorable mention of one of the Cass^, a severe He that
receives Benefit by a Fact, is presumed to be the Author.
Judge amongst the Romans, for a custom he had, in Criminal causes, (when the
testimony of the witnesses was not sufficient,) to ask the Accusers, Cuibono;
that is to say, what Profit, Honor, or other Contentment, the accused obtained,
or expected by the Fact. For amongst Praesumptions, there is none that so
evidently declares the Author, as does the BENEFIT of the Action. By the same
rule I intend in this place to examine, who they may be, that have possessed
the People so long in this part of Christendom, with these Doctrines, contrary
to the Peaceable Societies of Mankind.

And first, to this Error, that the present Church now Militant on That the
church Militant is the Kingdom of God, was first taught by the Church of Rome.
Earth, is the Kingdom of God, (that is, the Kingdom of Glory, or the Land of
Promise; not the Kingdom of Grace, which is but a Promise of the Land,) are
annexed these worldly Benefits; First, that the Pastors, and Teachers of the
Church, are entitled thereby, as Gods Public Ministers, to a Right of
Governing the Church; and consequently (because the Church, and Commonwealth
are the same Persons) to be Rectors, and Governors of the Commonwealth. By
this title it is, that the Pope prevailed with the subjects of all Christian
Princes, to believe, that to disobey him, was to disobey Christ himself; and
in all differences between him and other Princes, (charmed with the word Power
Spiritual,) to abandon their lawful Sovereigns; which is in effect an
universal Monarchy over all Christendom. For though they were first invested
in the right of being Supreme Teachers of Christian Doctrine, by, and under
Christian Emperors, within the limits of the Roman Empire (as is acknowledged
by themselves) by the title of Pontifex Maximus, who was an Officer subject to
the Civil State; yet after the Empire was divided, and dissolved, it was not
hard to obtrude upon the people already subject to them, another Title, namely,
the Right of St. Peter; not only to save entire their pretended Power; but
also to extend the same over the same Christian Provinces, though no more
united in the Empire of Rome. This Benefit of an Universal Monarchy,
(considering the desire of men to bear Rule) is a sufficient Presumption, that
the Popes that pretended to it, and for a long time enjoyed it, were the
Authors of the Doctrine, by which it was obtained; namely, that the Church now
on Earth, is the Kingdom of Christ. For that granted, it must be understood,
that Christ has some Lieutenant amongst us, by whom we are to be told what are
his Commandments.

After that certain Churches had renounced this universal Power of the Pope,
one would expect in reason, that the Civil Sovereigns in all those Churches,
should have recovered so much of it, as (before they had unadvisedly let it
go) was their own Right, and in their own hands. And in England it was so in
effect; saving that they, by whom the Kings administered the Government of
Religion, by maintaining their employment to be in Gods Right, seemed to usurp,
if not a Supremacy, yet an Independency on the Civil Power: and they but
seemed to usurp it, in as much as they acknowledged a Right in the King, to
deprive them of the Exercise of their Functions at his pleasure.

But in those places where the Presbytery took that Office, though And
maintained also by the Presbytery.
many other Doctrines of the Church of Rome were forbidden to be taught; yet
this Doctrine, that the Kingdom of Christ is already come, and that it began
at the Resurrection of our Savior, was still retained. But cui bono? What
Profit did they expect from it? The same which the Popes expected: to have a
Sovereign Power over the People. For what is it for men to excommunicate their
lawful King, but to keep him from all places of Gods public Service in his
own Kingdom? and with force to resist him, when he with force endeavors to
correct them? Or what is it, without Authority from the Civil Sovereign, to
excommunicate any person, but to take from him his Lawful Liberty, that is, to
usurp an unlawful Power over their Brethren? The Authors therefore of this
Darkness in Religion, are the Roman, and the Presbyterian Clergy.

To this head, I refer also all those Doctrines, that serve them to
Infallibility.
keep the possession of this spiritual Sovereignty after it is gotten. As
first, that the Pope in his public capacity cannot err. For who is there,
that believing this to be true, will not readily obey him in whatsoever he
commands?

Secondly, that all other Bishops, in what Commonwealth soever, Subjection of
Bishops.
have not their Right, neither immediately from God, nor mediately from their
Civil Sovereigns, but from the Pope, is a Doctrine, by which there comes to be
in every Christian Commonwealth many potent men, (for so are Bishops,) that
have their dependence on the Pope, and owe obedience to him, though he be a
foreign Prince; by which means he is able, (as he has done many times) to
raise a Civil War against the State that submits not it self to be governed
according to his pleasure and Interest.

Thirdly, the exemption of these, and of all other Priests, and of Exemptions
of the Clergy.
all Monks, and Friars, from the Power of the Civil Laws. For by this means,
there is a great part of every Commonwealth, that enjoy the benefit of the
Laws, and are protected by the Power of the Civil State, which nevertheless
pay no part of the Public expense; nor are liable to the penalties, as other
Subjects, due to their crimes; and consequently, stand not in fear of any man,
but the Pope; and adhere to him only, to uphold his universal Monarchy. The
names of Sace^dotes, and Sacri^.


Fourthly, the giving to their Priests (which is no more in the New Testament
but Presbyters, that is, Elders) the name of Sacerdotes, that is, Sacrificers,
which was the title of the Civil Sovereign, and his public Ministers,
amongst the Jews, whilst God was their King. Also, the making the Lords Supper
a Sacrifice, serves to make the People believe the Pope has the same power
over all Christians, that Moses and Aaron had over the Jews; that is to say,
all Power, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, as the High Priest then had.

Fifthly, the teaching that Matrimony is a Sacrament, gives to The
Sacramentation of Marriage.
the Clergy the Judging of the lawfulness of Marriages; and thereby, of what
Children are Legitimate; and consequently, of the Right of Succession to
haereditary Kingdoms.

Sixthly, the Denial of Marriage to Priests, serves to assure The single life
of Priests.
this Power of the Pope over Kings. For if a King be a Priest, he cannot Marry,
and transmit his Kingdom to his Posterity; If he be not a Priest then the Pope
pretends this Authority Ecclesiastical over him, and over his people.

Seventhly, from Auricular Confession, they obtain, for the assurance Auricular
Confession.
of their Power, better intelligence of the designs of Princes, and great
persons in the Civil State, than these can have of the designs of the State
Ecclesiastical.

Eighthly, by the Canonization of Saints, and declaring who are Canonization of
Saints, and declaring of Martyrs.
Martyrs, they assure their Power, in that they induce simple men into an
obstinacy against the Laws and Commands of their Civil Sovereigns even to
death, if by the Popes excommunication, they be declared Heretics or Enemies
to the Church; that is, (as they interpret it,) to the Pope.

Ninthly, they assure the same, by the Power they ascribe to every
Transubstantiation, Penance, Absolution.
Priest, of making Christ; and by the Power of ordaining Penance; and of
Remitting, and Retaining of sins.

Tenthly, by the Doctrine of Purgatory, of Justification by external
Purgatory, Indulgences, External works. Daemonology and Exorcism.
works, and of Indulgences, the Clergy is enriched.

Eleventhly, by their Daemonology, and the use of Exorcisme, and other things
appertaining thereto, they keep (or think they keep) the People more in awe of
their Power.

Lastly, the Metaphysiques, Ethiques, and Politiques of Aristotle,
School Divinity.
the frivolous Distinctions, barbarous Terms, and obscure Language of the
Schoolmen, taught in the Universities, (which have been all erected and
regulated by the Popes Authority,) serve them to keep these Errors from being
detected, and to make men mistake the Ignis fatuus of Vain Philosophy, for the
Light of the Gospel.

To these, if they sufficed not, might be added other of their dark The Authors
of spiritual Darkness, who they be.
Doctrines, the profit whereof redoundeth manifestly, to the setting up of an
unlawful Power over the lawful Sovereigns of Christian People; or for the
sustaining of the same, when it is set up; or to the worldly Riches, Honor,
and Authority of those that sustain it* And therefore by the aforesaid rule, of
Cui bono, we may justly pronounce for the Authors of all this Spiritual
Darkness, the Pope, and Roman Clergy, and all those besides that endeavor to
settle in the minds of men this erroneous Doctrine, that the Church now on
Earth, is that Kingdom of God mentioned in the Old and New Testament.

But the Emperors, and other Christian Sovereigns, under whose Government
these Errors, and the like encroachments of Ecclesiastiques upon their Office,
at first crept in, to the disturbance of their possessions, and of the
tranquillity of their Subjects, though they suffered the same for want of
foresight of the Sequel, and of insight into the designs of their Teachers, may
nevertheless be esteemed accessaries to their own, and the Public damage:
For without their Authority there could at first no seditious Doctrine have
been publicly preached. I say they might have hindered the same in the
beginning: But when the people were once possessed by those spiritual men,
there was no humane remedy to be applied, that any man could invent: And for
the remedies that God should provide, who never fails in his good time to
destroy all the Machinations of men against the Truth, we are to attend his
good pleasure, that suffers many times the prosperity of his enemies,
together with their ambition, to grow to such a height, as the violence thereof
opens the eyes, which the wariness of their predecessors had before sealed
up, and makes men by too much grasping let go all, as Peter's net was broken,
by the struggling of too great a multitude of Fishes; whereas the Impatience of
those, that strive to resist such encroachment, before their Subjects eyes were
opened, did but increase the power they resisted. I do not therefore blame the
Emperor Frederick for holding the stirrup to our countryman Pope Adrian; for
such was the disposition of his subjects then, as if he had not done it, he
was not likely to have succeeded in the Empire: But I blame those* that in the
beginning, when their power was entire, by suffering such Doctrines to be
forged in the Universities of their own Dominions, have holden the Stirrup to
all the succeeding Popes, whilst they mounted into the Thrones of all
Christian Sovereigns, to ride, and tire, both them, and their people, at their
pleasure.

But as the Inventions of men are woven, so also are they ravelled out; the way
is the same, but the order is inverted: The web begins at the first Elements of
Power, which are Wisdom, Humility, Sincerity, and other virtues of the
Apostles, whom the people converted, obeyed, out of Reverence, not by
Obligation: Their Consciences were free, and their Words and Actions subject to
none but the Civil Power. Afterward the Presbyters (as the Flocks of Christ
increased) assembling to consider what they should teach, and thereby obliging
themselves to teach nothing against the Decrees of their Assemblies, made it to
be thought the people were thereby obliged to follow their Doctrine, and when
they refused, refused to keep them company, (that was then called
Excommunication,) not as being Infidels, but as being disobedient: And this was
the first knot upon their Liberty. And the number of Presbyters increasing, the
Presbyters of the chief City or Province, got themselves an authority over the
Parochial Presbyters, and appropriated to themselves the names of Bishops: And
this was a second knot on Christian Liberty. Lastly, the Bishop of Rome, in
regard of the Imperial City, took upon him an Authority (partly by the wills
of the Emperors themselves, and by the title of Pontifex Maximus, and at last
when the Emperors were grown weak, by the privileges of St. Peter) over all
other Bishops of the Empire: Which was the third and last knot, and the whole
Synthesis and Construction of the Pontificiall Power.

And therefore the Analysis, or Resolution is by the same way; but begins
with the knot that was last tied; as we may see in the dissolution of the
praeterpoliticall Church Government in England. First, the Power of the Popes
was dissolved totally by Queen Elizabeth; and the Bishops, who before exercised
their Functions in Right of the Pope, did afterward exercise the same in Right
of the Queen and her Successors; though by retaining the phrase of Iure
Divino, they were thought to demand it by immediate Right from God: And so was
untyed the first knot. After this, the Presbyterians lately in England obtained
the putting down of Episcopacy: And so was the second knot dissolved: And
almost at the same time, the Power was taken also from the Presbyterians: And
so we are reduced to the Independency of the Primitive Christians to follow
Paul, or Cephas, or Apollos, every man as he likes best: Which, if it be
without contention, and without measuring the Doctrine of Christ, by our
affection to the Person of his Minister, (the fault which the Apostle
reprehended in the Corinthians,) is perhaps the best: First, because there
ought to be no Power over the Consciences of men, but of the Word it self,
working Faith in every one, not always according to the purpose of them that
Plant and Water, but of God himself, that gives the Increase: and secondly,
because it is unreasonable in them, who teach there is such danger in every
little Error, to require of a man endued with Reason of his own, to follow the
Reason of any other man, or of the most voices of many other men; Which is
little better, then to venture his Salvation at cross and pile. Nor ought
those Teachers to be displeased with this loss of their ancient Authority: For
there is none should know better then they, that power is preserved by the same
Virtues by which it is acquired; that is to say, by Wisdom, Humility,
Clearness of Doctrine, and sincerity of Conversation; and not by suppression
of the Natural Sciences, and of the Morality of Natural Reason; nor by
obscure Language; nor by Arrogating to themselves more Knowledge than they make
appear; nor by Pious Frauds; nor by such other faults, as in the Pastors of
Gods Church are not only Faults, but also scandalls, apt to make men stumble
one time or other upon the suppression of their Authority. Comparison of the
Papacy with the Kingdom of Fayries.


But after this Doctrine, that the Church now Militant, is the Kingdom of God
spoken of in the Old and New Testament, was received in the World; the
ambition, and canvasing for the Offices that belong thereunto, and especially
for that great Office of being Christ's Lieutenant, and the Pomp of them that
obtained therein the principal Public Charges, became by degrees so evident,
that they lost the inward Reverence due to the Pastoral Function: in so much
as the Wisest men, of them that had any power in the Civil State, needed
nothing but the authority of their Princes, to deny them any further Obedience.
For, from the time that the Bishop of Rome had gotten to be acknowledged for
Bishop Universal, by pretense of Succession to St. Peter, their whole
Hierarchy, or Kingdom of Darkness, may be compared not unfitly to the
Kingdom of Fairies; that is, to the old wives Fables in England, concerning
Ghosts and Spirits, and the feats they play in the night. And if a man consider
the original of this great Ecclesiastical Dominion, he will easily perceive,
that the Papacy, is no other, than the Ghost of the deceased Roman Empire,
sitting crowned upon the grave thereof: For so did the Papacy start up on a
Sudden out of the Ruins of that Heathen Power.

The Language also, which they use, both in the Churches, and in their Public
Acts, being Latin, which is not commonly used by any Nation now in the world,
what is it but the Ghost of the Old Roman Language?

The Fairies in what Nation soever they converse, have but one Universal King,
which some Poets of ours call King Oberon; but the Scripture calls Beelzebub,
Prince of Demons. The Ecclesiastiques likewise, in whose Dominions soever they
be found, acknowledge but one Universal King, the Pope.

The Ecclesiastiques are Spiritual men, and Ghostly Fathers. The Fairies are
Spirits, and Ghosts. Fairies and Ghosts inhabit Darkness, Solitudes, and
Graves. The Ecclesiastiques walk in Obscurity of Doctrine, in Monasteries,
Churches, and Churchyards.

The Ecclesiastiques have their Cathedral Churches; which, in what Town
soever they be erected, by virtue of Holy Water, and certain Charms called
Exorcismes, have the power to make those Towns, Cities, that is to say, Seats
of Empire. The Fairies also have their enchanted Castles, and certain
Gigantique Ghosts, that domineer over the Regions round about them.

The Fairies are not to be seized on; and brought to answer for the hurt they
do. So also the Ecclesiastiques vanish away from the Tribunals of Civil
Justice.

The Ecclesiastiques take from young men, the use of Reason, by certain Charms
compounded of Metaphysiques, and Miracles, and Traditions, and Abused
Scripture, whereby they are good for nothing else, but to execute what they
command them. The Fairies likewise are said to take young Children out of their
Cradles, and to change them into Natural Fools, which Common people do
therefore call Elves, and are apt to mischief.

In what Shop, or Operatory the Fairies make their Enchantment, the old Wives
have not determined. But the Operatories of the Clergy, are well enough known
to be the Universities, that received their Discipline from Authority
Pontificiall.

When the Fairies are displeased with any body, they are said to send their
Elves, to pinch them. The Ecclesiastiques, when they are displeased with any
Civil State, make also their Elves, that is, Superstitious, Enchanted
Subjects, to pinch their Princes, by preaching Sedition; or one Prince
enchanted with promises, to pinch another.

The Fairies marry not; but there be amongst them Incubi, that have copulation
with flesh and blood. The Priests also marry not.

The Ecclesiastiques take the Cream of the Land, by Donations of ignorant men,
that stand in aw of them, and by Tithes: So also it is in the Fable of Fairies,
that they enter into the Dairies, and Feast upon the Cream, which they skim
from the Milk.

What kind of Money is current in the Kingdom of Fairies, is not recorded in
the Story. But the Ecclesiastiques in their Receipts accept of the same Money
that we do; though when they are to make any Payment, it is in Canonizations,
Indulgences, and Masses.

To this, and such like resemblances between the Papa^y, and the Kingdom of
Fairies, may be added this, that as the Fairies have no existence, but in the
Fancies of ignorant people, rising from the Traditions of old Wives, or old
Poets: so the Spiritual Power of the Pope (without the bounds of his own
Civil Dominion) consists only in the Fear that Seduced people stand in, of
their Excommunications; upon hearing of false Miracles, false Traditions, and
false Interpretations of the Scripture.

It was not therefore a very difficult matter, for Henry 8. by his Exorcisme;
nor for Qu. Elizabeth by hers, to cast them out. But who knows that this Spirit
of Rome, now gone out, and walking by Missions through the dry places of China,
Japan, and the Indies, that yield him little fruit, may not return, or rather
an Assembly of Spirits worse than he, enter, and inhabit this clean swept
house, and make the End thereof worse than the Beginning? For it is not the
Roman Clergy only, that pretends the Kingdom of God to be of this World, and
thereby to have a Power therein, distinct from that of the Civil State. And
this is all I had a design to say, concerning the Doctrine of the POLITIQUES.
Which when I have reviewed, I shall willingly expose it to the censure of my
Country.

A REVIEW, and CONCLUSION.
FRom the contrariety of some of the Natural Faculties of the Mind, one to
another, as also of one Passion to another, and from their reference to
Conversation, there has been an argument taken, to infer an impossibility
that any one man should be sufficiently disposed to all sorts of Civil duty.
The Severity of Judgment, they say, makes men Censorious, and unapt to pardon
the Errors and Infirmities of other men: and on the other side, Celerity of
Fancy, makes the thoughts less steady than is necessary, to discern exactly
between Right and Wrong. Again, in all Deliberations, and in all Pleadings, the
faculty of solid Reasoning, is necessary: for without it, the Resolutions of
men are rash, and their Sentences unjust: and yet if there be not powerful
Eloquence, which procures attention and Consent, the effect of Reason will be
little. But these are contrary Faculties; the former being grounded upon
principles of Truth; the other upon Opinions already received, true, or false;
and upon the Passions and Interests of men, which are different, and mutable.

And amongst the Passions, Courage, (by which I mean the Contempt of Wounds,
and violent Death) enclineth men to private Revenges, and sometimes to
endeavor the unsetling of the Public Peace: And Timorousness, many times
disposes to the desertion of the Public Defense. Both these they say cannot
stand together in the same person.

And to consider the contrariety of men's Opinions, and Manners in general, It
is they say, impossible to entertain a constant Civil Amity with all those,
with whom the Business of the world constrains us to converse: Which
Business, consists almost in nothing else but a perpetual contention for
Honor, Riches, and Authority.

To which I answer, that these are indeed great difficulties, but not
Impossibilities: For by Education, and Discipline, they may be, and are
sometimes reconciled. Judgment, and Fancy may have place in the same man; but
by turns; as the end which he aims at requires. As the Israelites in Egypt,
were sometimes fastened to their labor of making Bricks, and other times were
ranging abroad to gather Straw: So also may the Judgment sometimes be fixed
upon one certain Consideration, and the Fancy at another time wandering about
the world. So also Reason, and ^loquence, (though not perhaps in the Natural
Sciences, yet in the Moral) may stand very well together. For wheresoever
there is place for adorning and preferring of Error, there is much more place
for adorning and preferring of Truth, if they have it to adorn. Nor is there
any repugnancy between fearing the Laws, and not fearing a public Enemy; nor
between abstaining from Injury, and pardoning it in others. There is therefore
no such Inconsistence of Humane Nature, with Civil Duties, as some think. I
have known cleernesse of Judgment, and largeness of Fancy; strength of Reason,
and graceful Elocution; a Courage for the War, and a Fear for the Laws, and
all eminently in one man; and that was my most noble and honored friend Mr.
Sidney Godolphin; who hating no man, nor hated of any, was unfortunately slain
in the beginning of the late Civil war, in the Public quarrel, by an
undiscerned, and an undiscerning hand.

To the Laws of Nature, declared in the 15. Chapter, I would have this added,
That every man is bound by Nature, as much as in him lies, to protect in
War, the Authority, by which he is himself protected in time of Peace. For he
that pretends a Right of Nature to preserve his own body, cannot pretend a
Right of Nature to destroy him, by whose strength he is preserved: It is a
manifest contradiction of himself. And though this Law may be drawn by
consequence, from some of those that are there already mentioned; yet the Times
require to have it inculcated, and remembered.

And because I find by diverse English Books lately printed, that the Civil
wars have not yet sufficiently taught men, in what point of time it is, that
a Subject becomes obliged to the Conqueror; nor what is Conquest; nor how it
comes about, that it obliges men to obey his Laws: Therefore for farther
satisfaction of men therein, I say, the point of time, wherein a man becomes
subject to a Conqueror, is that point, wherein having liberty to submit to
him, he consents, either by express words, or by other sufficient sign, to
be his Subject. When it is that a man has the liberty to submit, I have showed
before in the end of the 21. Chapter; namely, that for him that has no
obligation to his former Sovereign but that of an ordinary Subject, it is then,
when the means of his life is within the Guards and Garrisons of the Enemy; for
it is then, that he has no longer Protection from him, but is protected by the
adverse party for his Contribution. Seeing therefore such contribution is every
where, as a thing inevitable, (notwithstanding it be an assistance to the
Enemy,) esteemed lawful; a total Submission, which is but an assistance to
the Enemy, cannot be esteemed unlawful. Besides, if a man consider that they
who submit, assist the Enemy but with part of their estates, whereas they that
refuse, assist him with the whole, there is no reason to call their Submission,
or Composition an Assistance; but rather a Detriment to the Enemy. But if a
man, besides the obligation of a Subject, has taken upon him a new obligation
of a Soldier, then he has not the liberty to submit to a new Power, as long
as the old one keeps the field, and gives him means of subsistence, either in
his Armies, or Garrisons: for in this case, he cannot complain of want of
Protection, and means to live as a Soldier: But when that also fails, a
Soldier also may seek his Protection wheresoever he has most hope to have it;
and may lawfully submit himself to his new Master. And so much for the Time
when he may do it lawfully, if he will. If therefore he do it, he is
undoubtedly bound to be a true Subject: For a Contract lawfully made, cannot
lawfully be broken.

By this also a man may understand, when it is, that men may be said to be
Conquered; and in what the nature of Conquest, and the Right of a Conqueror
consists: For this Submission is it implies them all. Conquest, is not the
Victory it self; but the Acquisition by Victory, of a Right, over the persons
of men. He therefore that is slain, is Overcome, but not Conquered: He that is
taken, and put into prison, or chains, is not Conquered, though Overcome; for
he is still an Enemy, and may save himself if he can: But he that upon promise
of Obedience, has his Life and Liberty allowed him, is then Conquered, and a
Subject; and not before. The Romans used to say, that their General had
Pacified such a Province, that is to say, in English, Conquerea it; and that
the Country was Pacified by Victory, when the people of it had promised
Imperata facere, that is, To do what the Roman People commanded them: this
was to be Conquered. But this promise may be either express, or tacit:
Express, by Promise: Tacit, by other signs. As for example, a man that has
not been called to make such an express Promise, (because he is one whose
power perhaps is not considerable;) yet if he live under their Protection
openly, he is understood to submit himself to the Government: But if he live
there secretly, he is liable to any thing that may be done to a Spy, and
Enemy of the State. I say not, he does any Injustice, (for acts of open
Hostility bear not that name); but that he may be justly put to death.
Likewise, if a man, when his Country is conquered, be out of it, he is not
Conquered, nor Subject: but if at his return, he submit to the Government, he
is bound to obey it. So that Conquest (to define it) is the Acquiring of the
Right of Sovereignty by Victory. Which Right, is acquired, in the peoples
Submission, by which they contract with the Victor, promising Obedience, for
Life and Liberty.

In the 29. Chapter I have set down for one of the causes of the Dissolutions
of Commonwealths, their Imperfect Generation, consisting in the want of an
Absolute and Arbitrary Legislative Power; for want whereof, the Civil
Sovereign is fain to handle the Sword of Justice unconstantly, and as if it
were too hot for him to hold: One reason whereof (which I have not there
mentioned) is this, That they will all of them justify the War, by which their
Power was at first gotten, and whereon (as they think) their Right depends,
and not on the Possession. As if, for example, the Right of the Kings of
England did depend on the goodness of the cause of William the Conqueror, and
upon their lineall, and directest Descent from him; by which means, there would
perhaps be no tie of the Subjects obedience to their Sovereign at this day in
all the world: wherein whilst they needlessely think to justify themselves,
they justify all the successful Rebellions that Ambition shall at any time
raise against them, and their Successors. Therefore I put down for one of the
most effectual seeds of the Death of any State, that the Conquerors require
not only a Submission of men's actions to them for the future, but also an
Approbation of all their actions past; when there is scarce a Commonwealth in
the world, whose beginnings can in conscience be justified.

And because the name of Tyranny, signifies nothing more, nor less, than the
name of Sovereignty, be it in one, or many men, saving that they that use the
former word, are understood to be angry with them they call Tyrants; I think
the toleration of a professed hatred of Tyranny, is a Toleration of hatred to
Commonwealth in general, and another evil seed, not differing much from the
former. For to the Justification of the Cause of a Conqueror, the Reproach of
the Cause of the Conquered, is for the most part necessary: but neither of them
necessary for the Obligation of the Conquered. And thus much I have thought fit
to say upon the Review of the first and second part of this Discourse.

In the 35. Chapter, I have sufficiently declared out of the Scripture, that in
the Commonwealth of the Jews, God himself was made the Sovereign, by Pact
with the People; who were therefore called his Peculiar People, to distinguish
them from the rest of the world, over whom God reigned not by their Consent,
but by his own Power: And that in this Kingdom Moses was Gods Lieutenant on
Earth; and that it was he that told them what Laws God appointed them to be
ruled by. But I have omitted to set down who were the Officers appointed to do
Execution; especially in Capital Punishments; not then thinking it a matter of
so necessary consideration, as I find it since. We know that generally in all
Commonwealths, the Execution of Corporeal Punishments, was either put upon the
Guards, or other Soldiers of the Sovereign Power; or given to those, in whom
want of means, contempt of honor, and hardness of heart, concurred, to make
them sue for such an Office. But amongst the Israelites it was a Positive Law
of God their Sovereign, that he that was convicted of a capital Crime, should
be stoned to death by the People; and that the Witnesses should cast the first
Stone, and after the Witnesses, then the rest of the People. This was a Law
that designed who were to be the Executioners; but not that any one should
throw a Stone at him before Conviction and Sentence, where the Congregation was
Judge. The Witnesses were nevertheless to be heard before they proceeded to
Execution, unless the Fact were committed in the presence of the Congregation
it self, or in sight of the lawful Judges; for then there needed no other
Witnesses but the Judges themselves. Nevertheless, this manner of proceeding
being not thoroughly understood, has given occasion to a dangerous opinion,
that any man may kill another, in some cases, by a Right of Zeal; as if the
Executions done upon Offenders in the Kingdom of God in old time, proceeded
not from the Sovereign Command, but from the Authority of Private Zeal: which,
if we consider the texts that seem to favor it, is quite contrary.

First, where the Levites fell upon the People, that had made and worshipped
the Golden Calfe, and slew three thousand of them; it was by the Commandment
of Moses, from the mouth of God; as is manifest, Exodus 32. 27. And when the Son
of a woman of Israel had blasphemed God, they that heard it, did not kill him,
but brought him before Moses, who put him under custody, till God should give
Sentence against him; as appears, Levit. 25. 11, 12. Again, ( Numbers 25. 6,
7.) when Phinehas killed Zimri and Cosbi, it was not by right of Private Zeal:
Their Crime was committed in the sight of the Assembly; there needed no
Witness; the Law was known, and he the heir apparent to the Sovereignty; and
which is the principal point, the Lawfulness of his Act depended wholly upon
a subsequent Ratification by Moses, whereof he had no cause to doubt. And this
Presumption of a future Ratification, is sometimes necessary to the safety a
Commonwealth; as in a sudden Rebellion, any man that can suppress it by his
own Power in the Country where it begins, without express Law or Commission,
may lawfully do it, and provide to have it Ratified, or Pardoned, whilst it
is in doing, or after it is done. Also Numb. 35. 30. it is expressly said,
Whosoever shall kill the Murderer, shall kill him upon the word of Witnesses:
but Witnesses suppose a formal Judicature, and consequently condemn that
pretense of Ius Zelotarum. The Law of Moses concerning him that enticeth to
Idolatry, (that is to say, in the Kingdom of God to a renouncing of his
Allegiance ( Deuteronomy. 13. 8.) forbids to conceal him, and commands the Accuser to
cause him to be put to death, and to cast the first stone at him; but not to
kill him before he be Condemned. And ( Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 4, 5, 6.) the Process
against Idolatry is exactly set down: For God there speaks to the People, as
Judge, and commands them, when a man is Accused of Idolatry, to Enquire
diligently of the Fact, and finding it true, then to Stone him; but still the
hand of the Witness throws the first stone. This is not Private Zeal, but
Public Condemnation. In like manner when a Father has a rebellious Son, the
Law is ( Deuteronomy. 21. 18.) that he shall bring him before the Judges of the Town,
and all the people of the Town shall Stone him. Lastly, by pretense of these
Laws it was, that St. Steven was Stoned, and not by pretense of Private Zeal:
for before he was carried away to Execution, he had Pleaded his Cause before
the High Priest. There is nothing in all this, nor in any other part of the
Bible, to countenance Executions by Private Zeal; which being oftentimes but a
conjunction of Ignorance and Passion, is against both the Justice and Peace of
a Commonwealth.

In the 36. Chapter I have said, that it is not declared in what manner God
spoke supernaturally to Moses: Not that he spoke not to him sometimes by Dreams
and Visions, and by a supernatural Voice, as to other Prophets: For the manner
how he spoke unto him from the Mercy-Seat, is expressly set down Numbers 7.
89. in these words, From that time forward, when Moses entered into the
Tabernacle of the Congregation to speak with God, he heard a Voice which spoke
unto him from over the Mercy-Seate, which is over the Arc of the Testimony,
from between the Cherubins he spoke unto him. But it is not declared in what
consisted the praeeminence of the manner of Gods speaking to Moses, above that
of his speaking to other Prophets, as to Samuel, and to Abraham, to whom he
also spoke by a Voice, (that is, by Vision) Unless the difference consist in
the cleernesse of the Vision. For Face to Face, and Mouth to Mouth, cannot be
literally understood of the Infiniteness, and Incomprehensibility of the
Divine Nature.

And as to the whole Doctrine, I see not yet, but the Principles of it are true
and proper; and the Ratiocination solid. For I ground the Civil Right of
Sovereigns, and both the Duty and Liberty of Subjects, upon the known natural
Inclinations of Mankind, and upon the Articles of the Law of Nature; of which
no man, that pretends but reason enough to govern his private family, ought to
be ignorant. And for the Power Ecclesiastical of the same Sovereigns, I ground
it on such Texts, as are both evident in themselves, and consonant to the Scope
of the whole Scripture. And therefore am persuaded, that he that shall read it
with a purpose only to be informed, shall be informed by it. But for those
that by Writing, or Public Discourse, or by their eminent actions, have
already engaged themselves to the maintaining of contrary opinions, they will
not be so easily satisfied. For in such cases, it is natural for men, at one
and the same time, both to proceed in reading, and to lose their attention, in
the search of objections to that they had read before: Of which, in a time
wherein the interests of men are changed (seeing much of that Doctrine, which
serves to the establishing of a new Government, must needs be contrary to that
which conduced to the dissolution of the old,) there cannot choose but be very
many.

In that part which treats of a Christian Commonwealth, there are some new
Doctrines, which, it may be, in a State where the contrary were already fully
determined, were a fault for a Subject without leave to divulge, as being an
usurpation of the place of a Teacher. But in this time, that men call not only
for Peace, but also for Truth, to offer such Doctrines as I think True, and
that manifestly tend to Peace and Loyalty, to the consideration of those that
are yet in deliberation, is no more, but to offer New Wine, to be put into New
Cask, that both may be preserved together. And I suppose, that then, when
Novelty can breed no trouble, nor disorder in a State, men are not generally so
much inclined to the reverence of Antiquity, as to prefer Ancient Errors,
before New and well proved Truth.

There is nothing I distrust more than my Elocution; which nevertheless I am
confident (excepting the Mischances of the Press) is not obscure. That I have
neglected the Ornament of quoting ancient Poets, Orators, and Philosophers,
contrary to the custom of late time, (whether I have done well or ill in it,)
proceeds from my judgment, grounded on many reasons. For first, all Truth of
Doctrine depends either upon Reason, or upon Scripture; both which give
credit to many, but never receive it from any Writer. Secondly, the matters in
question are not of Fact, but of Right, wherein there is no place for
Witnesses. There is scarce any of those old Writers, that contradicts not
sometimes both himself, and others; which makes their Testimonies insufficient.
Fourthly, such Opinions as are taken only upon Credit of Antiquity, are not
intrin^ecally the Judgment of those that cite them, but Words that pass (like
gaping) from mouth to mouth. Fifthly, it is many times with a fraudulent Design
that men stick their corrupt Doctrine with the Cloves of other men's Wit.
Sixthly, I find not that the Ancients they cite, took it for an Ornament, to do
the like with those that wrote before them. Seventhly, it is an argument of
Indigestion; when Greek and Latin Sentences unchewed come up again, as they
use to do, unchanged. Lastly, though I reverence those men of Ancient time,
that either have written Truth perspicuously, or set us in a better way to find
it out our selves; yet to the Antiquity it self I think nothing due: For if we
will reverence the Age, the Present is the Oldest. If the Antiquity of the
Writer, I am not sure, that generally they to whom such honor is given, were
more Ancient when they wrote, than I am that am Writing: But if it be well
considered, the praise of Ancient Authors, proceeds not from the reverence of
the Dead, but from the competition, and mutual envy of the Living.

To conclude, there is nothing in this whole Discourse, nor in that I writ
before of the same Subject in Latin, as far as I can perceive, contrary either
to the Word of God, or to good Manners; or to the disturbance of the Public
Tranquillity. Therefore I think it may be profitably printed, and more
profitably taught in the Universities, in case they also think so, to whom the
judgment of the same belongs. For seeing the Universities are the Fountains
of Civil, and Moral Doctrine, from whence the Preachers, and the Gentry,
drawing such water as they find, use to sprinkle the same (both from the
Pulpit, and in their Conversation) upon the People, there ought certainly to be
great care taken, to have it pure, both from the Venime of Heathen Politicians,
and from the Incantation of Deceiving Spirits. And by that means the most men,
knowing their Duties, will be the less subject to serve the Ambition of a few
disco^tented persons, in their purposes against the State; and be the less
grieved with the Contributions necessary for their Peace, and Defense; and the
Governors themselves have the less cause, to maintain at the Common charge
any greater Army, than is necessary to make good the Public Liberty, against
the Invasions and Encroachments of foreign Enemies.

And thus I have brought to an end my Discourse of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, occasioned by the disorders of the present time, without
partiality, without application, and without other design, than to set before
men's eyes the mutual Relation between Protection and Obedience; of which the
condition of Humane Nature, and the Laws Divine, (both Natural and Positive)
require an inviolable observation. And though in the revolution of States,
there can be no very good Constellation for Truths of this nature to be born
under, (as having an angry aspect from the dissolvers of an old Government, and
seeing but the backs of them that erect a new;*) yet I cannot think it will be
condemned at this time, either by the Public Judge of Doctrine, or by any
that desires the continu^nce of Public Peace. And in this hope I return to my
interrupted Speculation of Bodies Natural; wherein, (if God give me health to
finish it,) I hope the Novelty will as much please, as in the Doctrine of this
Artificial Body it uses to offend. For such Truth, as opposes no man's
profit, nor pleasure, is to all men welcome.

FINIS.

