Inaccessible Glory. OR The jmpossibility of seeing GODS FACE, whilst we are in
the Body.

Delivered in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of tha^ honorable and most
excellent learned Person Sir Theodore de-Mayerne, in the Parish Church of St.
Martins in the Feilds, on Friday the 30. of March, 1655.

By Thomas Hodges Minister of Gods word at Kensington nigh London,

Deus est perspicacissima veritas, and verissima perspicacia sive perspectio:
Lux seipsa videns: visus seipso lucens: intellestualis perspicariae Luminisque
fons: cujvs lumine, and cujus lumen duntaxat mentis perspicacia perspicit, etc.
Mars ficin.

Theolog. Platon lib. 1 cap. 6. LONDON, Printed for William Leak, and are to be
sold at at his shop, at the sign of the Crown in Fleet Street, between the two
Temple Gates, 1655.

TO The Honorable the LADY Izabella de Mayerne and to her virtuous daughter
Madam Adriana de Mayerne Baronness of Aubon T. H. wishes all real happinese
both in this life and in the world to come.
LADIES.
WHen I consider how great a loss you have both sufferd, and in how nigh a
relation, I confess (my own share being so large therein) I have not only a
deep sense thereof, but also a great compassion for you. It Is true there is
nothing on this side heaven in my poor opinion able to recompense and fully to
make this up unto you; being not only of a person so eminent in point of
worth, but also of so large, and tender affection and care for both your
welfares: yet is not heaven disfurnished, or scanted in this respect; He who is
the fountain of all creature good, and the source of all relations, being able
by his own presence and emanationes to show himself a Husband to the widow,
and a father to the fatherless: It being a work of dignation, but not of
jndigence that God makes use of any jnstrument to convey comfort, or blessing
to us; He being altogether as able to effect that for our good without as with
their help.

The excellencies parceld out to several beings are nothing but the over
flowings of the great God, in whom they all are after a supereminent manner,
and Infinitely in point of degree: if therefore, what he dealt out by his
instrument heretofore he now dispenceth more imenediately from his own hand,
it must needs prove more sweet, satisfaction, lay a greater engagement upon you
to himself, considering his condescension, affection, sufficiency, and
immutability, herein being wholly free from all those scantnesses and changes
that either render our choicest creature supports and prop^s unable to supply,
or quickly uanishing when we expect the greatest benefit from them. And what
greater wisdom can we show, then when at once we elect to our selves the
greatest and most stable good in whom there is no show nor shadow of change,
and also therein pursue our vltimate safe making end, in the attaining of which
we find a center of ever lasting rest and complete happiness. Now the design
of these curt and confused notes (conceived in the midst of great sadness and
distraction) being to point out and bring to mental veiw this invisible good
and its compleatnesse in reference to our eternal welfare: the weightinesse of
the subject concerns you upon that common account mentioned by holy David as
being of the number of that brood of travailers who seek the face of the God of
Jacob, but after a special manner as stripped of the greatest ornament and
worldly prop, that you may see at once both what higth of Glory and eminent
exaltation our deceased friend is a rived at; and also what mark we ought our
selves to aim at that we may one day meet in the highest pitch of glory
inseperably to solace our selves in our masters joy to all eternity. Which that
you may reach in the only way Christ Jesus and by the only means of a lively
faith that works by love is and shall ever be the hearty prayers of.

LADIES your most faithful humble, devoted, servant Tho. Hodges.

TEXT.
Exodus CHAPTER 33, Verse, 20. And he said unto him, thou can not see my
face, for there is no man shall see me and live.


MOses the man of God and favorite of heaven, being advanced above others in
clear, frequent and familiar manifestations of God to him; the more he enjoys
the more his desire is enlarged to press after a more full fruition of him.
Gusta^ite and esurio retigisti me and exarsiin concupiscentiam tuam. Aug.
The taste of God increasing thirst, and the touch of his goodness setting his
heart on fire to press on toward perfection, Eradiatio huius vitae excitare
non satiare novit. Greg.
for such is the nature of Gods manifestation hac vita lumen est per modum
passionis transenutis at futura vita per modum formae permamentis. etc. Aq 22.
q. 171. art 2
in transient gleams while we are in this valley of tears, that it excites but
satisfies not our Souls, till we come to the Beatifical Vision of himself in
glory. Divinam natu ram ut videret orovi: Theo loret
This is holy Moses his case which makes him thus pathetically verse, 12. 13,
14 muster up so many arguments to attain this happiness; Qui in nube hactenus
ama^ter colloquentem deum cognoverat jam fretus illa fa^ilia^itate intima
clarius deum submeta nabe cognoscere capit Borr^i.
Like an affectionate Lover, making: use of this time of Love and present
enjoyment: Thou say (says Moses verse 12.) Thou have found grace in my
sight, and I know thee by name. Then show me the way that I may know thee; ver.
13 and when he obtained his suit in the behalf of the People, and gained for
himself a repeated discovery of his interest in the most high, verse 17. How
does Moses Cernens uno superat^ grada superessae alium, ad perfectionem scandit
etc. Procop.
grow upon him after this discovery and pour out his whole heart in point of
objective determination, verse 18. And he said I beseech thee show me now thy
glory, to which there is.

First, Gods concession of what he is capable to enjoy, verse 19. I will make
all my goodness Transitus significat visionem exigui temporis non sic ut in
illud figi posset intuitus videntis. Calu Caieta.
pass before thee, and proclaim the name of the Lord before thee etc.

Secondly, Gods denial of something he was not capable at the present to enjoy,
viz. The sight of his face; as if he should say, Moses thou shall see so much
of my goodness as is proportionable to that condition thou art at the present
in, Non videbis me in essentia mea sed per effecta and opera ita Aloysus Lippom
catena in loc. (...). Nozanz orat. 34.
thou shall see my back parts, verse 23. Know me by my effects and
manifestations, and I will measure out so much of this discovery as may be for
thy best advantage, but as for my face, 1. E. The clear manifestation of my
Essence without vailes, I must at present deny it to thee.

First Because it cannot be in respect of thy incapacity, it is not from want of
Love in me but ability in thy self, thou can not see my face.

Second. Think not what I deny to thee i will grant to another; No. Thou stand
on the same level in this respect not only with the meanest but most
eminentest of my favorites, for no man shall see me and live.

So that these words of this Text are a restriction or limitation of Gods
former concession to Moses; my goodness thou shall see, but not my face.

Secondly, A reason from Moses inability; thou can not see it.

3. A double argument by way of satisfaction to any misconstruction that Moses
might make of this restriction, it is the common Lot of all the Saints; and it
cannot be otherwise, for no man can see me and live.

First, I Will begin with the explication, restriction, or limitation of Gods
former grant to Moses; not my face. The face of God is a similitudinary
expression; intending only a cleerer enjoyment of the object as present then
ordinary; of which there be several degrees; as verse, 11. It Is said that Moses
spoke with God face to face, etc. God communicated himself to him after a
familiar manner as a King to some Persons that are near about him, and herein
Moses Claritate and stabilitate visionis vide, R. Maym more Neroch.
outstript other People and Prophets too, for there was none arose like Moses
to whom God was manifesled face to face as to himself, yet this is but spoken
in a larger sense, and comparatively in relation to the clouded vision of others

Alas as Hoc si non petiisset Moyse suctunq. ferendi essent stulti qui putant
per ea quae supra dicta sunt vel gesta sunt substantiam dei oculis ejus fuifle
censpicuam, etc. Aug. lib. 2. de Trinitate. c. 16.
for Face, taken properly for the highest manifestation and apprehention of God
without any vailes in his naked essence, this Text stands firm, thou can
not; For no man can see my face and live; it is reserved for a better place, and
another life, now we see darkely as in a glass; then face to face, 1 Corinthians.
13.
says the blessed Apostle.

Nor are we to restrain the term, see in this text to the eyes of the body,
which are only capable of perceiving Etiam in vita futura nos oculis corporis
tantum corpora vide bimuss Simler
grosser material objects, but not spiritual at all, further then they are
clothed with elemental Garments borrowed In caelo suo modo visionis illius
erit particeps corpus etc. oculi corporis videcunt deum hominem factum and
gloriam dei in creatura fulgentem Aq. in Job, 19. lect. 2.
to render them visible to bodily sight. Thus when God is pleased to make use
of created Images to manifest his extraordinary presence to any particular
Person or in any peculiar place, Aliquid de ipso vides non ipsum Bera sermon 31.
Symb^licae similitudo gloriae divinae Cyril. in John.
that created Image may be visible to eyes of flesh, but not that God whose
presence is testified and perhaps the kind of that presence hieroglyphically
discovered by it, as sitting on a high thron Es 6. etc. drawn in a glorious
Chariot, etc. Ezekiel. 1. Standing on an admirable pavement, Exodus, 24.10, etc.

Neither ought we to restrain this term, see to the sight of our mind, which
is the subject only capable of receiving in divine light the intellectual
manifestation of God in it.

But as Aq. Sum. p. 1. q 67. 1. c.
Aquinas well observes it is taken in the largest latitude extending it self to
all manner of perception, by what sense or way soever.

And in this Text by seeing God is meant certain and full perception and
enjoyment of him.

First as an Infinitely glorious Ps. 16.11.
object perfecting our understanding.

Secondly. As an internal Es. 26.12. Cor. 15.28.
principle advancing to the highest pitch we are capable of our will.

Thirdly. By way of friendship and inutterable familiarity and love expressions
Reu. 3.20. Luke 12.37. Psalm. 16.
satisfying our affections and desires thereby filling us with fullness of joy
and pleasure for ever more.

Thirdly. As for the other expression in the Text. Oblitus Carnis suae moses,
postulat in vita ista quod post illam speramus in futura Hieron. in marc vlt
And live we understand not with some Sensu Mystico Jntelligunt Procop.
Hersent. Rusbr. etc.
contemplative men the fleshly life in sin to be intended for although indeed
we grant that while we are alive in the body and in this world except through
the Cant. 5.4.
rifts of mortification we cannot receive nor partake of any light of life: yet
on the other side we conceive, the intention of the holy Ghost here is that no
man can see God and live Fulgor ille tantae matestatis nos in nihilum redigeret
Quia exitiale foret etc. Calvin.
a bodily life; 2 Cor. 5.6.
but while we are in the body we are absent from the Lord in respect of this
full enjoyment; and therefore says the blessed 2 verse 8.
Apostle, we are willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord for both cannot stand together, as this text eivdently affirms
NO MAN can see me and live. And it is no mervaile: for consider

First; How vast a disproportion there is between the unexpressible glory,
luster, of this object, and our debility, frailty weakness to bear up under it.
He dwells says the blessed 1 Timothy 6.16. Proprium su^m vt omnem cogn it onem
excedat Greg; Nyssen. (...)
apostle in that light that no man can approach unto; whom no man has seen,
nor can see him. This Sun is too full of glory, and the eye of our minds too
weak while we are in the flesh to Quamuis excellens intelligibile non corumpat
intellectum sed co^fortet illum est tamenilli in proportiona tum et excedit
capacitatem illius et hoc est opprimere i^m Ca^etan
gaze upon it.

Therefore we see, that when some manifestation more clear then ordinary of
God has bin made to some of his eminentest servants of the first magnitude,
though exceedingly inferior to this vision of his face spoken of in the text.
They have not bin able to endure it without great disadvantage to their bodies,
and have almost there by bin sunck and reduced to dust and confusion. Witness
Dan. 10.8.
Daniel. I saw says he this great vision, and there remained no strength in
me, for my comelines was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no
strength.

and Hab. 3.16.
Habakucks belly quivered, and rotenness entered into his bones. If you put too
strong liquor into a weak glass it flies in pieces; and this was the case of
holy Moses, who (if we believe the exposition of the R Rast Cum
Jews upon those words. In the last of aliis Deuteronomy. 34.5. (...)
Deuteronomy and the fifth verse conclude) That Moses died by a kiss of Gods
mouth, that is by too clear a manifestation of his goodness and glory
elevating this good man Soul to cleave close and unseparably to him.

Second. That Is not all; but we are impedited also from this blessed Vision of
Gods face by reason of those vnde Aegip^iis mos positus in celebritatibus suis
exelamare cum de deo agere^t (...) Demasc. Philc.
dark shadows that fantasy casts upon our most pure intellectual
apprehensions and conceptions, which a man whilst he is in the flesh can no
more be Deum si aliquando concipere volumus, nobis vti opus est vel Symbolis
externis ejus naturam quoquo modo exprimentibus, aut vccibvs quae eum
declarent, vel certe speciebvs vel similitudinibus quibus dam intelectualibus
quae eundem nobis profacultate sua pro ponant sed haec omnia verae and
perfectae Dei cognitionis inpedimenta sunt Hers ent y mist Theolog
free from then he can out run the shadow of his body. And this is a veil
wherewith in this valley of tears he is covered from our minds so that we may
truly take up the i expression of Job, concerning this vision of God in
himself he goes by me and I see him not, he passes on also, and I perceive
him not.

Thirdly; Indeed how can it be otherways whilst we are in this body, seeing
we can know no more of God then he reveals of himself.

The sun is only visible to us in his own light, and it is only in Psalm. 36.
Gods light that we can see this father of lights. Job. 9 11.


But the medium whereby he manifests himself to his people, Multa de deo
dicimus quia non in venimus me lius quod ^. camus etc, Aug
is proportionable to our present state and weakness, rather then to his glory
and greatness.

In the scriptures being to speak to men he speaks after the manner of men, and
that he may raise us up by degrees unto himself, he condescends in his
expressions beneath himself rather discovering to us his clothing, then his
essence, Judaei Esaiam trucidabanu ob exprobrationem little principum 2. ob.
affirmation nem se vidisse deum Es. 6 1. Hieron in Es ex Rabinis Judaies
So that though his word be a light that brings our view something concerning
him which we knew not, that we may live; yet is it also a clouding medium,
covering his naked essence, and proportioning the object to our ability, for
else we could not see and live, as the text affirms So that where ever we read
that God appeared to, and was seen by any Saint, we are not to understand it of
himself, but the chariot wherein he rod, Si Ju corporalispecio Esai 6. Exodus 24
etc. Tum Est id quod voluntas elegit non quod natura formanit etc. Aug.
not of his essence as it is in it self, but rather clothing, whereby he
modifies his glory to our weak capacity.

And indeed we have great cause highly to prize those irradiations of light,
and lesser inferior discoveries he gives us of himself in this dark place;
being no less useful and necessary to us in the way to bliss, then the sun in
the firmament is in the greater world there fore he manifests himself to us.

First In his Romans 1.20. Psalm. 19.1
works, of wisdom, power and goodness, As a learned man in his books, or an
excellent artist in his products.

Secondly. In his word, as a man's image is, seen in a clear and unspotted 2
Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 3.
mirror.

Thirdly. In his blessings as a Act. 1^.17.
Benefactor in his gifts.

Foruhly. In his Philip. 2 13. Esaias 60.1.2.
Saints, as the sun in his beams.

Fifthly. In his Christ, as a Heb. 1.3. Joh. 1.18 14 9
father in his son.

10 Esa 54.5.62
Sixthly. In his internal operations in our souls as a 2 Cor. 6.16
Master in his family, or a Deus est nobis
Bridegroom in his bed of love.

And by such partial discoveries of himself to us he is in our way to
happiness ^umine vultus ejus dux, in praelio; rupes et Manna in deserto etc.
Bern.
a fountain of consolation Setting us above all Psalm. 27.12. Tranquillus Deus
tranquillat omnia et quietum aspicere est quiescere Bern.
fears, and filling us with transcendent Psalm. 63.5.
joys above the Psalm. 4.6.7.
men of the world when there corn oil and wine increases.

By the discoveries of himself attracting us from all things else after which
we are scattered (like Exodus 5.12.
Jsrael in Egypt gathering trash and stubble for our own souls) unto himself
drawing us by the Jer. 3.3. Claritas in intellectu paritardorem in affectu.
cords of a man even mercy and loving kindness. Hereby transforming us from
glory to glory by beholding of him into his 2 Cor. 3.18 (...)
own imag: which light of life, is the privilege only of Saints here and a
pawn of their future glory, but not the hight of glory that we expect for we
shall see him 1 Cor, 13.12. Math. 5.8.
face to face; and know as we are known. Which being his promise so frequently
made to to his people that they should see his face, and having taught them to
look at this as thrir perfection and Ps. 16.11.17.15.
complete happiness, Rev. 22 3. 2 Cor. 13.12
there are hereby earnest gaspings and desires excited in them, whereby like
Moses in this Chapter, they Psalm. 24.6.
seek the face of the God of Jacob, and Quid Moses votum designat nisi
perfectionem electorum qui jam speculum illi svmmae luci^sus ruentur, sed tameu
ad ipsam lucis veritatem pertingere vehementer cupiant, Ista quidem cognitio
lucis desideria electorum satiare non novit, sed excitare; illa veto and
satiare and excitare, etc. Greg. in lib, 1. Reg.
like bubbles ascending by degrees from the bottom of some Crystal stream,
they never cease ascending till breaking their thin filme of mortality, they
defuse themselves into the open air, this full and free fruition of their
blessed end, from which Psalm. 17.15.
enjoyment of him arises to them fullness of satisfaction Rev. 7.17, 21, 4.
absence of sorrows, Psalm. 16.11.
fullness of joy, Rev. Es. 65.14.
perpetual Halelujahs, Rev. 14.4.
firmness of Adhaesion, Rev. 22.3.
fervency of devotion. Exodus 34.29. 2 These. 1.10.
the bodies glorification in part; as a light in a Lanthorn fills it with
brightness and glory Math. 17.2. Ibi carnem ejus oculis Apostoloram exhibebat
(...) Naz: (...). Cyrill.
or as the Diety of Christ dwelling in the humanity when he pleased showed it
self through his flesh in luster, and resplendency; so when this shall be we
shall says the Apostle Saint John be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
But that is not while we live says this Text, for no man can see God and live.

And this the very heathens confessed, as the Egyptians in their pourtraiture of
Jsis, with that inscription at the entrance of their Temples, (...). Pluta
(...) side. ^ch. lib. de
I am Jsis, and my veil has no man ere lifted up.

1 Job. 3.2.
Therefore when we hear vain men profess they see Gods face, and like the
Epiphan.
Gnostics of old that they know God with the same knowledge wherewith he knows
himself; Seeing them live, we are sure there is no Anima canris hujus maculis
et colluvionibus obumbrata faciem Dei sincere videre non possunt etc. Ambros in
Ps. 118.
truth in the assertion: Because this Text teaches us, that none can see God
and live, and finding them like there predecessors to live a brutish life, what
ever they boast of light, (...). concludit Hierocles.
we are certain the Esaias 8.20.
morning is not to them.

And as for our selves; though we cannot gaze on the Suns orb, because of its
over glorious brightness, yet may we look one its Jmage in the water without
offense. And in that the fish behold the stars; so while we are Videre illum
iam in hoc mundo illumimatus potest, tanquam iam inaliqno Sim ilis, ficuti est,
non omnino potest, quia non dum perfect similis Berne Sermon. 31.
in this earthly Tabernacle let us content our selves to se him in his works,
words, benifits, Saints, Christ, Internal operations; but he that will pry so
much into Gods Majesty shall be swallowed up of his glory; his face being like
Tantum recedit quantum capitur Aristorl Sancti ad de um res^ctum habent put
perfectio i will ad suum prefectiuum Caietan.
Polichritus lake incomprehensible.

Yet because this sight is the end g assigned, and Engaged to us. And because
our complete perfection consists in the attaining of it; let us get as Magnis
spritibus Magnus occurrit sponsus etc. Bern.
nigh it as mortality will permit: And because that death is the common road
whereby all Gods people are brought unto it, let us (yet with holy submission)
wait and pray for it, and groan in our earthly Tabernacle to be uncloathed,
that we may be clothed upon with our house that is from Heaven; and brought to
the sight of that face which is the admiration, 2 Corinthians. 5. Quoniam tui
plenns non sum oneri mihi sum, Aug. vt currat vita wea in amplexus tuos nec
avertatur donec abscondit me in absconde to nultus tui, Aug. Moriar ut te
videam etc. Aug.
adoration of the holy Angels, and the in exhaustible ore flowing fountain of
all real good in full perfection to the Saints, to all eternity.

And now to speak a few words of the occasion of our assembling together at
this time. We are met to bring to the grave the body of a most eminent person,
an ancient inhabitant heretofore of this parish and now brought in respect of
his sheath to rest here with his Mother, his first Lady and five of his
children who are all interred in this place; to name the name of Sir Theodore
de Maierne is enough if I should say no more; he was so well known and of so
clear a fame amongst all degrees and with all persons who had any esteem for
worth, if either by uningenuous and false calumnyes not praepossest and
poisoned; Or by envy and regret at his eminency and deserved esteem corrupted.
He was a stranger in point of birth, but not of affection to this nation;
having a like esteem for worth in both, as very many are able to bear him
witness; And my self after a special manner.

The place of his Birth was Geneva, which City he has not forgot in his will;
Nor, the two congregations of his own nation, Nor the English Congregation
where he inhabited, but has liberally remembered them.

He descended, of protestant Parents, who hardly escaped the Butchery of the
Parisian massacre; His Father a man of eminent Learning, famous for his large
history of Spain.

In this Religon he was educated Lived and Dyed.

He was of an excellent sweet and amicable nature notmorose nor superciliously
proud and maccessible a person so eminently learned that nigh sixty years
since Both learned Quercitan, and many famous men both of France, Germany, and
other places make honorable mention of him; And as a testimoney hereof about
fifty-three years since he was admitted Physician to the King of France,

And about forty three years Since Jnvited, with the promise of an honorable
pension, and an unusual Title and immunity to be chief physician to Learned
King James, his Queen and Issue; in which condition he remained till the death
of King Charles.

He was a person of rare accomplishiments; A quick fancy and yet a solid
profound judgment, and strong memory. For learning a living library so
replenisht with variety; that we may truly say he had a large Soul and
wisdom as the Sand upon the sea shore. I confess I know not any subject
which might be either for necessity or delight whereof he was, ignorant, nay in
which he was not a great proficient, and expert Master; And which is more
admirable; this variety was not attended with the least discernable confusion,
But so methodised and digested, That he readily at his pleasure Commanded it
when occasion required, and brought it forth clothed with such language as
spoke him no less an orator then artist.

In his own art, his great abilityes and long experience made him an oracle;
envyed by some few; But admired by very many both at home and abroad: witness
those many addresses by Letters and visits from all parts continually made to
him by persons of highest quality and ability.

Nor did he deceive their expectation like the Arabian brooks; But through
Gods blessing was his instrument in so many rare and uncouth Cures, as will
make him live in the grateful memoryes of many familyes both in England and
Elsewhere for time to come.

Thus he honorably lived, and Now is dead in a good old age full of riches and
honor. Nor was he blessed be God unfit for this great change of which he gave
large testimony both in life and death; wiping of That censure by somes
miscarriage occasioned, A physician and an atheist as if they were unseparable.

He knew and owned the God of nature in word and deed, conversing daily with
his word and was so much taken with serious discourses of the things of his
Kingdom, that I am his witness we scarce ever discoursed thereof (which was
not seldom) wherein the tears in his eyes did not abundantly speak the
inward apprehension, sense, and Devotion of his soul.

He was very compassionat to those who were not able to retribute ought to him,
refusing none that sought for help, though their condition were never so
loathsome and deplorable, in which his care, tenderness, and liberality were
transcendant, In his last sickness whereof he died, being a complication of many
sad afflicting diseases, he be haved himself so patiently, and devoutly,
preparing for his end with so much resignation to the will of God, as I hope
will never will be forgot by those about him. Drawing nigh his end when his
speech began to fail him he made a Savoury, sound, solid confession of his
faith, giving wholesome council and savoury advice to all about him; which
having finish and done his work, both in relation to others, and to himself,
he desired to be laid in his bed, there to receive deaths last assault (still
retaining the cleerenesse of his understanding and reason, being able to give
directions for himself and to prescribe as well as in health) where after a
few hours I praying by him for Gods Reception of him to behold his face in
glory he closed the prayer with his reduplicated, Amen, Amen; The Last words I
he ard him speak, and shortly after his life. Thus is this honorable person
gone into this blessed vision in the text making good Solomon's assertion Eccl.
7.1. The day of death is better then the day of on esbirth.

FINIS.
Printed or sold by William Leake, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet
between the two Temple Gates:
These Books following
YOrk's Heraldry, Folio A Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 40, Orlando
Furioso Folio. Callis learned Readings on the Stat. 21. Hen. 8. Chap. 5 of
Sewers Perkins on the Law of England, Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs Persons
Law. Mirror of Justice. Topics in the Laws of England. Sken de significatione
Verborum. Delaman's use of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilby's 2d. set of Musiquc,
3. 4. 5. and 6. Parts. Corderious in English. Doctor Fulk's Meteors. with
Obser. Malthus Fire-workes Nyes Gunnery and Fire-workes Cato Major with
Annotations by Will. Austin Esquier. Mel Helliconium, by Alex. Rosse. Nosce
teipsum, by Sr. John Davis Animadversions on Ltllies Grammar The History of
Vienna, and Paris Lazarillo de Tormes. Hero and Leander, by G. Ghapman and
Ghristoph. Marlow. Posin of the Accidence. Guilliam's Heraldry. Herberts
Travels Man become guilty, by John Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl
of Monmouth. Excersitatio Scolastica The Idiot in 4 books; the first and
second of Wisdom; the third of the Mind; the fourth of Starick Experiments of
the Balance The life and Reign of Hen- the Eighth, wrieten by the L. Herbet.
Auilucis, or the house of light: The Fort Royal of Holy Scriptures by I. H. the
3d. Edition A Tragedy of Christ's Passion, waitten by the most learned Hugo
Grotius and Englished by George Sands. Mathematical Recreations, with the
general Horologicall Ring and the double Horizontal Dial, by William
Oughtred. The Garden of Eden, or an Acurate description of all Flowers and
Fruits now growing in Engl. with particular rules how to advance their Nature
and Growth as well in Seeds and Herbs, as the secret ordering of trees and
Plants, by that learned and great Observer Sir Hugh Plat, Knight. the 4th.
Edition. Solitary devotions with man in glory, by the most Reverant and holy
Father Ansolem, arch Bishop of Canterhury.
PLAYS.
Hen. the Fourth. Philaster. The Wedding. The Hollander. Maids Tragide. Othello
Moore of Venice. The gratfull Servant, The strainge Discoevery. The Merchant of
Venice.

