THE LIFE OF Mr. THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY.

Written by himself In a LATIN POEM.

And now Translated into ENGLISH.

LONDON: PRINTED for A. C. and are to be sold in Fleetstreet, and without
Temple Bar. 1680.

THE LIFE OF Mr. Thomas Hobbes OF MALMESBURY.
IN Fifteen hundred eighty eight, Old Style,
When that Armada did invade our Isle,
Called the Invincible; whose Freight was then,
Nothing but Murdering Steel, and Murdering Men;
Most of which Navy was dispersed, or lost,
And had the Fate to Perish on our Coast:
April the fifth (though now with Age outworn)
In The early Spring, I, a poor worm, was born.
In Malmesbury Baptized, and Named there
By my own Father, then a Minister.
Many things worth relating had this Town;
And first, a Monastery of Renown,
And Castle, or two rather it may seem,
On a Hill seated, with a double Stream
Almost environed, from whence still are sent
Two Burgesses to sit in Parliament.
Here lie the Bones of Noble Athelstane,
Whose Stone-Effigies does there remain;
Who for reward gave them the Neighboring Plains,
Which he had moistened with the Blood of Danes.
Here was the Roman Muse by Adelm brought,
Here also the first Latin Schole was taught.
My Native place I Am not ashamed to own;
The Will Times, and Ills born with me, I bemoan:
For Fame had rumored, that a Fleet at Sea,
Would cause our Nations Catastrophe;
And hereupon it was my Mother Dear
Did bring forth Twins at once, both Me, and Fear.
For this, my Countries Foes I ever did hate,
With calm Peace and my Muse associate.
Did Learn to speak Four Languages, to write
And read them too, which was my sole delight.
Six years in the Greek and Latin Tongue I spent,
And at Fourteen I was to Oxford sent;
And there of Magd'len-Hall admitted, I
My self to Logic first did then apply,
And sedulously I my Tutor heard,
Who Gravely Read, althou' he had no Beard.
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, Baralypton,
These Modes has the first Figure; then goes on
Caesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco, Darapti,
This has of Modes the same variety.
Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison,
These just so many Modes are looked upon.
Which I, though slowly Learn, and then dispense
With them, and prove things after my own sense.
Then Physics read, and my Tutor Displayed,
How all Things were of Form and Matter made.
The Aerie Particles which make Forms we see,
Both Visible and Audible, to be
The Effects of Sympathy, Antipathy.
And many things above my reach Taught me.
Therefore more pleasant studies I then sought,
Which I was formerly, though not well Taught.
My Phancie and my Mind divert I do,
With Maps Celestial and Terrestrial too.
Rejoice t'accompany Sol clothed with Rays,
Know by what Art he measures out our Days;
How Drake and Cavendish a Girdle made
Quite round the World, what Climates they surveyed;
And strive to find the smaller Cells of Men.
And painted Monsters in their unknown Den.
Nay there is a Fullness in Geography;
For Nature ever abhorred Vacuity.
Thus in due time took I my first Degree
Of Bachelor in the University.
Then Oxford left; served Ca'ndish known to be
A Noble and Conspicuous Family.
Our College-Rector did me Recommend,
Where I most pleasantly my Days did spend.
Thus Youth Tutored a Youth; for he was still
Under Command, and at his Father's will:
Served him full twenty years, who proved to be,
Not a Lord only, but a Friend to Me.
That my Life's sweetest Comfort was, and made
My Slumbers pleasant in Nights darkest shade.
Thus I at Ease did Live, of Books, whilst he
Did with all sorts supply my Library.
Then I our own Historians did peruse,
Greek, Latin, and Conversed too with my Muse.
Homer and Virgil, Horace, Sophocles,
Plautus, Euripides, Aristophanes,
I understood, nay more; but of all these,
There Is none that pleased me like Thucydides.
He says Democracy's a Foolish Thing,
Than a Republic Wiser is one King.
This Author I taught English, that even he
A Guide to Rhetoricians might be.
To Foreign Countries at that time did I
Travel, saw France, Italy, Germany.
This Debonaire Lord the Earl of Devonshire,
I served complete the space of twenty year.
His Life by Sickness Conquered, fled away,
T'exchange it for a better the last day.
But yet provided ere he di'd for me,
Who lived with little most contentedly.
I left my pleasant Mansion, went away
To Paris, and there eighteen Months did stay,
Thence to be Tutor I Am called back again,
To my Lord's Son, the Earl of Devon then.
This Noble Lord I did instruct when young,
Both how to Speak and Write the Roman Tongue;
And by what Arts the Rhetor deceives those
That are Illiterate; taught him Verse and Prose;
The Mathematick Precepts too, with all
The Windings in the Globe Terrestrial;
The whole Design of Law, and how he must
Judge between that which Equal is and Just.
Seven years to him these Arts I did Explain:
He quickly Learnt, and firmly did retain.
We spent not all this time in Books alone,
Unless you will take the World for to be one;
Traveled through Italy and France, did view
The sweet Retirements of Savoy too.
Whether on Horse, in Coach, or Ship, still I
Was most Intent on my Philosophy.
One only thing in the World seemed true to me,
Though several ways that Falsified be.
One only True Thing, the Basis of all
Those Things whereby we any Thing do call.
How Sleep does fly away, and what things still
By Optics I can Multiply at will.
Phancie's Internal, The Issue of our Brain,
Th'internal parts only Motion contain:
And he that studies Physics first must know
What Motion is, and what Motion can do.
To Matter, Motion, I my self apply,
And thus I spend my Time in Italy.
I scribbled nothing over, nor then ever wrought;
I ever had a Mistress that me taught.
Then leaving Italy, return we do
To Paris, and its stately Fabrics view.
Here with Mersennus I acquainted grew,
Showed him of Motion what I ever knew.
He both Praised and Approved it, and so, Sir,
I was Reputed a Philosopher.
Eight Months elapsed, I returned, and thought good
For to Connect what ever I understood.
That Principles at second hand more clear,
By their Concatenation might appear.
To various Matter various Motion brings
Me, and the different Species of Things.
Man's inward Motions and his Thoughts to know,
The good of Government, and Justice too,
These were my Studies then, and in these three
Consists the whole Course of Philosophy.
Man, Body, Citizen, for there I do
Heap Matter up, designing three Books too.
In The interim breaks forth a horrid War,
Injurious to my Study, and a Bar.
In the year sixteen hundred forty, then
Brake out a Sickness, whereof many Men
Of Learning, languishing, gave up their breath
At last, and yielded to impartial death.
Wherewith when seized, he reputed was
The Man that knew Divine and Humane Laws.
The War's now hot, I dread to see it so,
Therefore to Paris well-belov'd, I go.
Two years elapsed, I published in Print
My Book de Cive; the new Matter in it
Gratified Learned Men, which was the Cause
It was Translated, and with great Applause
By several Nations, and great Scholars read,
So that my Name was Famous, and far spread.
England in her sad Pangs of War, and those
Commend it too, whom I do most oppose.
But what is disadvantageous now, who would,
Though it be Just, ever esteem it Good?
Then I four years spent to contrive which way
To Pen my Book de Corpore, Night and Day;
Compare together each Corporeal Thing,
Think whence the known changes of Forms do spring.
Inquire how I compel this Proteus may,
His Cheats and Artifices to Display.
About this time Mersennus was (by Name)
A Friar Minorite, yet of Great Fame,
Learned, Wise, Good, whose single Cell might be
Preferred before an University.
To him all Persons brought what ever they found
By Learning, if new Principle, or Ground,
In clear and proper Phrase, without the Dress
Of Gaudy Rhet'rick, Pride, Deceitfulness.
Which he imparts to the Learned, who might there
Discuss them, or at leisure, any where.
Published some Rare Inventions, to the Fame
Of their own Author, with each Authors Name.
About Mersennus, like an Axis, here
Each Star wheeled round, as in its Orb or Sphere.
England, Scotland, and Ireland was the Stage
Of Civil War, and with its four years Rage,
Harras'd and wasted was; Perfidious Fate
Exiled the Good, and Helped the Profligate.
Nay, Charles, the Kingdom's Heir, attended then,
By a Retinue of Brave, Noble Men,
To Paris came, in hope Times might amend,
And Popular Fury once be at an end.
My Book de Corpore then I designed
To write, all things being ready to my Mind.
But must desist: such Crimes and Sufferings I
Will not impute unto the Deity.
First I resolved Divine Laws to fulfill;
This by Degrees, and carefully I will.
My Prince's studies I then waited on,
But could not constantly attend my own.
Then for six Months was sick; but yet at length,
Though very weak, I did recover strength,
And finished it in my own Mother Tongue,
To be read for the good of old and young.
The Book at London Printed was, and thence,
Has visited the Neighboring Nations since;
Was Read by many a Great and Learned Man,
Known by its dreadful Name, LEVIATHAN.
This Book Contended with all Kings, and they
By any Title, who bear Royal sway.
In the mean time the King's sold by the Scot,
Murdered by the English, an Eternal Blot.
King Charles at Paris who did then reside,
Had right to England's Scepter undeny'd.
A Rebel Rou^ the Kingdom kept in aw,
And ruled the Giddy Rabble without Law,
Who boldly Parliament themselves did call,
Though but a poor handful of men in all.
Blood-thirsty Leeches, hating all that is good,
Glutted with Innocent and Noble Blood.
Down go the Miters, neither do we see
That they Establish the Presbytery.
The Ambition of the stateliest Clergymen,
Did not at all prevail in England then.
Hence many Scholars to the King did go,
Expelled, Sad, Indigent, Burdensome too.
As yet my Studies undisturbed were,
And my Grand Climacterick past one year.
When that Book was perused by knowing Men,
The Gates of Janus Temple opened then;
And they accused me to the King, that I
Seemed to approve Cromwell's Impiety,
And Countenance the worst of Wickedness:
This was believed, and I appeared no less
Than a Grand Enemy, so that I was for it
Banished both the King's Presence and his Court.
Then I began on this to Ruminate
On Dorislaus, and on Ascham's Fate.
And stood amazed, like a poor Exile,
Encompassed with Terror all the while.
Nor could I blame th'young King for his Assent
To those Entrusted with his Government.
Then home I came, not sure of safety there,
Though I could not be safer any where.
Th'Wind, Frost, Snow sharp, with Age grown gray,
A plunging Beast, and most unpleasant way.
At London, lest I should appear a Spy,
Unto the State my self I did apply;
That done, I quietly retired to
Follow my Study, as I used to do.
A Parliament so called did Govern here;
There was no Prelate then, nor Presbyter.
Nothing but Arms and Soldiers, one alone
Designed to Rule, and Cromwell was that one.
What Royalist can there, or Man alive,
Blame my Defense of the Kings Prerogative?
All Men did scribble what they would, Content
And yielding to the present Government.
My Book de Corpore through this Liberty
I wrote, which proved a constant War to me.
The Clergy at Leviathan repines,
And both of them opposed were by Divines.
For whilst I did inveigh against Papal Pride,
These, though Prohibited, were not denied
T'appear in Print: against my Leviathan
They rail, which made it read by many a man,
And did confirm't the more; it is hoped by me,
That it will last to all Eternity.
'Twill be the Rule of Justice, and severe
Reproof of those that Men Ambitious are.
The King's Defense and Guard, the peoples Good,
And satisfaction, read, and understood.
I, two years after, Print a Book to show
How every Reader may himself well know.
Where I Teach Ethics, the Phantomes of Sense,
How th'Wise with Specter, fearless may dispense.
Published my Book de Corpore withal,
Whose Matter's wholly Geometrical.
With great Applause the Algebrists then read
Wallis his Algebra now Published,
A Hundred years that Geometrick Pest
Ago began, which did that Age Infest.
The Art of finding out the Numbers sought,
Which Diophantus once, and Gheber Taught:
And then Vieta tells you that by this,
Each Geometrick Problem solved is
Savil the Oxford Reader did supply
Wallis with Principles Noble and High,
That Infinite had end, and Finite should
Have parts, but yet those without end allowed.
Both which Opinions did Enrage and Scare
All those who Geometricasters were.
This was enough to set me Writing, who
Was then in years no less than Seaventy two,
And in Six Dialogues I do Inveigh
Against that new and Geometrick way,
But to no purpose, Great Men it does please,
And thus the Medicine yields to the Disease.
I Printed then two Treatises that stung
The Bishop Bramhal, in our Mother Tongue.
The Question at that Time was, and is still,
Whether at God's, or our own Choice We Will.
And this was the Result proceeding thence,
He the Schools followed, I made use of Sense.
Six Problems, not long after, Published I,
A Tract but small, yet pure Philosophy.
Wherein I Teach how Nature does cast down
All weighty Bodies, and huge massy Stone:
How Vapors are exhaled by the Sun;
How Winds engender Cold, when that is done:
The Reason of their Levity, and how
The Barren Clouds do hang on Heaven's Brow;
How move, and when that they are pregnant grown
With Moisture, do in violent Showers pour down.
By what Cement hard Matter is conjoined,
And how Hard Things grow Soft, the Cause do find:
Whence Lightning, Snow, Ice do proceed, and Thunder,
Breaking through watery Clouds, even to wonder:
How Loadstones Iron attract: how, and which way
They the Arctick and Antarctick Poles obey.
Why from the Sea unequal Waves do glide,
In The Year, or Month, each Day a double Tide;
And why a Ship does Sail against the Wind,
In that small Treatise all these things you find,
Which may in time tread with applause the Stage,
As yet unblam'd in such a Carping Age.
The Nature of the Air I do discry
In a small Volume; and most pithily,
Composed on purpose for to obviate
An Inanifick Machin formed of late.
Then, leaving Physics, I return again
To my Beloved Mathematick strain:
For now the Barbarous, Bloody Enemy
Had left the place, where my Estate did ly.
The Truth I could not Teach; for none but Fool
May hope t'Instruct in their declaming Schools.
Another Book of Principles I Print,
Nothing could be more clear than what was in it.
Whereby the Nature of Proportion is
Explained so fully, none can say amiss.
Upon this Subject most agreed that I
Of every one had gained the Victory;
Others seem in it to find Errors store,
But they are crazy grown, and I the more
Press upon them; then do ascend the high
And lofty Summet of Geometry.
The Circles Quadrature I Publish then;
The Pythian God's Porisma Teach all Men.
By a new Method I thought to o'rcome,
Though not by the same Reasons neither, some
Of The Former Demonstrations, but in vain.
Mathematicians Half-Witted complain,
Who blush for to Subscribe; but I Will not lose
My Labor any longer, thinking those
Indocil Brutes will ever master Sense,
Or with good Literature ever dispense.
Then my Rosetum was put forth, which I
Stored with Rare Flowers of Geometry.
Wallis opposes, and I lost the day,
As both Divines and Algebrists do say.
The Army then Discamp'd, and gone, thereby
Wallis of nothing thinks, but Victory;
Who having chosen an unpleasant Field,
Which Thick and Troublesome deep Roots did yield,
Liking the Combat, I turn, scatter quite
All in a moment, Numbers Infinite.
These were my Wars; what more have I to say?
How Rich am I, that is, how wise, I pray?
No matter for my Money or my Land;
If any ask that, let him understand,
A small parcel of Ground I had to show,
My own Inheritance, and let him know,
That This I on my Brother did bestow:
Of small Extent, but a most Fertile Ground,
Which did with store of bladed Wheat abound
Fit for a Prince; and had not every thing
Run cross, I had been counted a great King.
When I the Civil War approaching find,
And people led by every breath of wind,
I sought than this a more commodious place
To live and study in, and that Paris was.
Stocked with five hundred pounds of Coin before
I did desert, or leave my Native Shore;
To these two hundred added, but withal,
A Weighty Lasting Grief did me befall.
(You Are Dead, Godolphin, who lov'dst Reason, true
Justice and Peace, Soldier Beloved, Adieu)
Twice forty pounds, a yearly Pension, then
I from my own Country received; and when
King Charles restored was, a hundred more
Was allowed me out of his private Store.
A Noble Gift: I slight Reproaches, when
I know I Am Good, from other Black-mouthed Men.
Content with this, desire no more Pelf;
Who but a Madman lives beneath himself?
Let my Estate by yours Computed be,
And greater seem; if not, it is enough for me.
My Sums are small, and yet live happy so,
Richer than Croesus far, and Crassus too.
Verdusius, thou know my Temper well,
And those who read my Works, and with thee dwell.
My Life and Writings speak one Congruous Sense;
Justice I Teach, and Justice Reverence.
None but the Covetous we Wicked call,
For Avarice can do no good at all.
I Have now Completed my Eighty fourth year,
And Death approaching, prompts me not to fear.
FINIS.

