THE Creatures Goodness, As they came out of God's Hands, AND THE GOOD MAN'S
MERCY TO THE BRUTE CREATURES, Which God has put under his Feet.

IN TWO SERMONS, The first Preached before the University of Oxford, The second
at the Lecture at Brackley.

By Thomas Hodges, B. D. late Rector of Souldern in OXFORDSHIRE.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside,
1675.

To the much Honored RICHARD WINWOOD, Esquire
SIR,
I Here humbly present to you, and under your Name and Patronage publish to the
World two Sermons, the one concerning the primitive Goodness of the Creatures
as they first came out of God's hand; the other, of the righteous Man's
goodness, kindness, and mercy to the Creatures, which God has put into his
hand, or under his feet. If any question me for preaching on the first Subject,
saying, wherefore is this loss? My answer is, that God himself, Psalm. 8.
who is infinitely wise, did preach on the Creatures goodness and excellency
unto Job, and thereby brought him on his knees, See Job. Chapter 38, 39, 40, 41.
even to abhor himself in dust and ashes. That Solomon, the wisest of Men since
Adam, showed his Wisdom not in Metaphysical Speculations or Notions, not in
Logical Sophisms or Terms of Art, not in Philological Criticisms: But in that
he spoke of Trees, from the Cedar-tree that is in Libanon unto the Hyssop that
springs out of the Wall; he spoke also of Beasts, and of Fowls, 1 Kings.
4.33. etc.
and of creeping Things, and of Fishes. And I have heard of Mr. Wheatly of
Banbury, an eloquent and a famous Preacher, that he made a whole Sermon in
commendation of a Horse. And truly where God gives a Text, and preaches on it
himself, his Ministers have a sufficient warrant to make a Sermon. As for my
choice of the subject of the second Sermon and my Discourse thereon; my apology
is, if it need one, that it has often grieved my Soul, to see how the poor
bruit Beasts have been used, or abused rather, by their inhumane, merciless,
absurd, and unreasonable cruel Masters, who having no understanding became
worse than the Beast that perishes. And I would, if it was possible, put a
stop to the rage of brutish Men, and however hear testimony to the truth,
namely, that it is a good Character of a good Man to be merciful to his Beast.

As for this Address to you; I may say that of all Men living of quality that I
have known, you are most free from this fault. You are like the good Man in the
Text, you do regard the life of your Beast. And I wish all your Servants may be
like their Master, or like Eleazir, Genesis 24.
Abraham's Steward, that had such a care of his Masters Camels. Further, SIR,
give me leave to tell you that I have read a Treatise of Monsieur de la
Chamber, to prove that Beasts have reason; B. M.
and that one of the Ancients says, that Canis is Logicus, Ethicus, Theologus.
Now, if so it be, that Dogs make Syllogisms, and that they do discurrere as
well as currere, discourse as well as course, I presume you may know as well as
most Gentleman in England. Honored SIR, although I never did preach to those
irrational Animals (as the Book of Conformities tells us S. Francis did to the
Wolf, and the Birds,) to teach them their duty to God or Man; nor do I pretend
to preach in these Sermons to stir up Men's Devotions from what is reported of
the great Reverence which S. Anthony's Mule, V. D. S. 2. D. p. 502.
S. Francis his Sheep, and the Cook of Lisbon's Dog showed to the Sacrament;
yet I may and must profess to learn Gratitude to my Benefactours, and
particularly to your Worthy self from Patroclus his Lion, who fawned on him
when thrown to him in the Theater at Rome to be devoured by him, A. G. l. 5. c.
14.
and all this for a good turn the Man had formerly done him in Africa by
pulling something out of the Lions foot that hurt him. SIR, I shall not hold
you long in the porch by prefixing a large Epistle to so small a Piece; I shall
only add one humble and hearty Request unto all Gentlemen who delight in
Hunting, who shall read these Sermons, if any such shall happen to cast their
eyes in them: That they would often think of Amedeus, Duke of Savoy, who was
chosen Pope, but too good to hold it, who showing a Company of poor People
nourished by him, said these were the Hounds wherewithal he did hunt after the
Kingdom of Heaven. And however never to take the Childrens bread to cast it to
the Dogs; I mean, to provide always that the Poor may not fare the worse,
because their Hounds fare so well. And so I conclude with my humble and hearty
Request to the Almighty GOD for you, that he would be pleased long to continue
you a Lover, Practiser, and Countenancer of the true Protestant Religion, a
loyal Subject to his Majesty, a worthy Patriot, a Son of Peace, and like that
great and good Man your Father (when he was Ambassador in Holland remonstrated
against Vorstius) a Lover of the Truth, and a Lover of good Men. So wishing
you, and your virtuous and religious Consort, all happiness, I rest as in duty
bound,

Your obliged humble Servant T. H.
May the 12th. 1675.
Genesis I. Part of the 31. Verse. And God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good.


THE Holy Scriptures, even from the beginning of them, speak of God (...),
after the manner of men; And because it is the ordinary practice of the best
Artificers, often to take a view of the works under their hands, to compare
them with the Idea which they have in their minds, or with the Model or Pattern
which they have before their eyes, to the end to see how well they agree
thereunto; Therefore also does the Text represent to us Almighty God, the great
Architect, Builder, or Maker of Heaven and Earth, and the Sea and all things
therein, having in six days finished this glorious Fabric, now in the close of
the sixth day taking a general survey or review of all his works, (as it were)
to see whether all things were made, according to the Idea or platform of
things which he had in his own mind from all eternity; to see (as it were)
whether there was any necessary Creature wanting, any thing made superfluous or
redundant, how the several particulars did correspond and conspire to adorn the
Universe, whether any Momus or Aristarchus could ever after come forth and
justly criticize upon any of his works, upon any tittle or jota in all the
great Book of the Creatures from the beginning to the end thereof. And God saw
every thing that he had made. And when God had viewed and reviewed, supervised
and revised his whole work, and every particular of it; he passed judgment,
righteous judgment, and that with a Sentence of approbation and commendation
upon every particular thing which he had made. And behold (says the Text) it
was very good.

God's survey of all his Creatures; and his judgment of them upon his survey
and review of them; these two divide the Text. From the words we shall deduce
these two Observations.

1. That God, who is (...), he does look upon again and again, and consider his
works.

2. That it is a true and righteous Sentence or Judgment, namely this which he
passed upon his Creatures at first, as they then were, as they came out of his
hands: Behold they were very good.

The former I shall very briefly dispatch, the latter I shall insist upon.

1. Of the first. It cannot be that ever any thing should be hid from Gods
all-seeing Eye, which is a thousand times brighter than the Sun; Which if it
look on the Sun, the eye of the World, that shines not; yea God who is
All-eye, Totus oculus, sees more than the eye of Faith does, and yet that sees
things that are invisible; and therefore nothing which was registered in Moses's
Natural History of the Creation, could possibly lie undiscovered unto him. No
not the Angels of Heaven above, which because not to be seen with corporal
eyes, much less Minerals hid in the bowels of the Earth beneath, which because
not actually seen without much digging and delving, or because not so soon
perfected by the heat of the Sun, are therefore omitted altogether in the
preceding Narration; I say there was never any thing* either in Heaven above,
in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters either above or under the Earth, which
was not always visible, and actually seen and beheld by him. And yet, if you
look over this Chapter, you will find that it is said that God had seen his
works four times before now. He saw the work of every day in the end thereof,
and pronounced it good, except the second day; which some think was because the
Angels were created that day, and that day fell multitudes of them; Others
because that day was a work of division; for then God made the Firmament, and
divided the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters which were
above the Firmament, verse 7. Or lastly and most probably, because the work
which was begun that day was not so fully perfected until the third day, when
God gathered the Waters under the Heaven into one place, and called it Seas,
when it is said, that God saw that it was good. Verse. 10. I say, God had seen
his works four times before this sixth day; and never looked on any thing that
he had made, but he saw it was good; and yet this satisfies not, but he sees
and surveys them again a fifth time, namely now on the sixth day, God saw every
thing that he had made.

If any wonder at this, and say in their heart, what does this mean? if it was
so, why was it thus? I answer, that it was not done for that it was possible
for God to have overseen himself in any of his works, and to have omitted
either any part or parcel of work which he had designed to do, or any punctilio
of workmanship requisite; It was not because that any thing either actually
did, or possibly could miscarry in his hands, or be marred by him in the making
of it: It was not because there was any want of harmony, or due proportion of
the parts one to another, or because all together they could possibly render
the Universe ugly or monstrous. It was not for any one, nor for all these
causes put together, that God is said thus often to see his works: But it may
be for some such ends as these;

1. To teach us seriously to contemplate, and wisely to consider the operation
of his hands, to study the Book of Nature well, that large Volume of two Tomes,
Heaven and Earth; and therein to see the invisible things of God, even his
eternal Power and Godhead, which being of themselves not seen, yet are manifest
by the things that do appear. In the Sun, Moon, and Stars you may see digitum
Dei; In the inferior or sublunary Creatures vestigia Dei, Gods footsteps, for
quaelibet Herba and quaelibet Bestiola Deum refert. In Man you may see Dei
Speculum and Imaginem, the Glass, Image, and Representation of God. In the
Universe, as in a fair Book and very legible Characters, you may read, yea you
may run and read, the Name and Nature of God; and by reading and studing this
Book only, you may prove good Scholars in Divinity. God would have no Atheist
in the University of the World: But if any such there be, who shut their eyes
against the light of the knowledge of God in the face of the whole Creation,
let them know that God's eye is ever upon them, and that for evil, for this
horrid ingratitude, in that that they would ma^^ him that made them, not allow
him a being who give them, and all things or Creatures else, theirs.

2. To teach us to view and review our own works. If God, who could not err,
surveyed every days work (one excepted) in the end of the day, and the whole
weeks work in the end of the sixth day: Let us go and do likewise; Let Us
consider our ways daily, and again let us consider our ways weekly; Let there be
no man amongst us, but who reviews his works, saying, What have I done? This
was the way wherein David (if we judge him the penman of the 119. Psalm) was
converted, or restored after his fall, he thought on his ways, looked them over
and over again, and turned his feet unto God's Testimonies.

3. To secure to himself his own honor and glory, and to render the Creatures
inexcusable, in case of any future miscarriage. Now if any thing fall, and be
marred, the fault cannot justly and reasonally be imputed unto God; for he was
exceeding careful to make, and overlook, and examine his works, and to make and
leave all well, good, and very good. If therefore there happen hereafter to be
any error, any crack, flaw, spot or blur, any fault in any of the Creatures,
it must be acknowledged to be by some abuse, neglect, miscarriage, or fall out
of our hands: for, before they came out of God's hands, he looked them over and
over again, and found and left them all right and good, and very or vehemently
good.

4. To prevent our carping, quarrelling and finding fault with God's works, Ne
aliter de suis operibus sentire vel loqui quisquam audeat. Calvin. That we say
not, no not in our hearts, Cui bono? Or, Quorsum perditio haec? Concerning any
of the Creatures, that none may say, What is this? Wherefore is that? For all
the works of the Lord are exceeding good; And he has made all things for their
use, says the Author of Ecclesiast. Cap. 39.16, 17, 21. That none might
blaspheme Gods works, as that profane Spaniard did.

That none might speak or think falsely and foolishly concerning God, as the
Jews do, viz. Deum ultima vespera praeventum quaedam animantia imperfecta
reliquisse. Calvin. in Genesis 2.1.

God the Judge of Heaven and Earth, did in the beginning of the World strictly
look and enquire into, truly try and righteously judge all his Creatures; and
he returns Omnia been, I find no fault in any thing that I have made. God
having newly printed the Book of the Creatures in six days, and having compared
it sheet by sheet (as it were) before, with the original in his own mind, and
found no fault in it; he does now again that the whole work is finished, read
it and examine all over again, and sees no jota or tittle amiss in it from the
beginning to the end thereof; no place for the least dash of the pen of Men or
Angels, and no need of the least touch of his own hand, either to correct or
complete it.

And this brings us to the other Observation, that it was a true and righteous
judgment which God passed upon his Creatures, as they came out of his hands at
first, that they were very good. They were good before, and well approved of,
four or five times, by God; but now that all is done and polished by God's own
hand, now it is perfect, very good; nothing need to be added thereunto. When God
saw the parts of this body of the Universe part by part, each was good and
beautiful as he made and viewed it day by day: But now the body being fully
completed, by that which every part supplyeth; and now this body of the
visible World being headed with a visible head, Man, God's Deputy and Viceroy,
made and set to rule and govern all his Creatures here below; Now it is added,
they were very good. God assembled the Creatures before Adam, to see what names
he would give all his Subjects; and Adam gave names to all Cattle, and to the
Fowls of the Air, and to every Beast of the Field, Genesis 2.20. Adam gave them
every one his name; and God gave them all an Epithit^e, very good. I shall
endeavor, with Gods leave and help, to show,

1. How, and in what sense, the Creatures may be said to be good and very good.

2. To prove, that the Creatures are so very good.

3. Whether all the Creatures have always been, and now are so very good, as
when they first came out of God's hands; and, if not, then

4. Whether ever there has been, or shall be, a restoration of the Creatures
to their primitive goodness?

5. What God requires that we should contribute toward the repair of this
great House of the World, and toward the restoring the Creatures to their
first goodness and beauty.

Of the First:

1. The Creatures are all good Metaphysically, as they had a being, Ens and
bonum convertuntur: And so they were drops of that Ocean of goodness that is in
God. It Is good by some participation of his goodness, and conformity to his
Word and Will, without which it could not have been at all. So the Scripture
testifies, that every Creature of God is good, here, and in the 1 Timothy 4.4.
All that was made was every way agreeable to his Will, and contrary to, or
without that was nothing made that was made.

2. The Creatures were all good Morally. There was no Anomy or Ataxy amongst
them all. Nothing prejudicial to God's glory; and, every thing serviceable for
man's benefit. The Creatures were good; that is were goodly, fair, pleasant to
the eyes; Again, they were good; that is, profitable, or commodious: So the
word may import; for that which one Evangelist calls good, Mar. 9.42. another
calls profitable, Luke 17.2.

3. They were Theologically good. They were as so many Letters, out of which
men might spell the Name of God Almighty, Psalm. 19. Yea from these Creatures,
as from so many Teachers, men might learn many profitable Lessons, touching
service and obedience to their Maker. The Creatures proclaim to us God's
goodness, and glory: and again, the homage and duty, which we owe unto God our
Creator. The Creatures are a kind of Ladder, whereby we may always ascend up
unto God. The World is Templum Dei, God's Temple: and in this Temple does every
one of his Creatures speak of his honor.

Of the Second, we shall endeavor to evidence the goodness and beauty of the
Creation.

1. From the various Natures of the Creatures.

2. From the goodly Order of their creation, propagation, and working.

3. From their great Usefulness, and serviceableness unto Man.

4. From their extraordinary Obedience unto God, their Maker.

Of the First.

1. Every Creature of God is good; and it is a pleasant thing to behold or
consider the beauty of them all in their first creation. How much are we
delighted with a good Prospect, yea with a fair Landscape sometimes. The show
which the Devil tempted our Savior withal (for, from the top of an exceeding
high Hill, he showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them)
was of it self a tempting, and would have been a ravishing sight to us. But
alas! this sight was nothing, to that view, which God took of all the Creatures
of the World, and the goodness of them.

Let Us behold God's six days works, beginning from the Angels in Heaven, to the
meanest Creature on the Earth, or in the Waters: and we shall see a delightful
sight, rendered so by the excellent variety of the Creation. Some Creatures, as
Angels, are all spirit, and no bodies: Some again, corporal Creatures, and no
spirits: Some half the one and half the other; as Man. Again, some Creatures
have life; and some are without life: Of those that have life, some are
rational, some are irrational; Of unreasonable Creatures, some are integra
Animalia, some Insecta; and of both sorts, some live in the Air, and some in
the Water, and some on the Earth, and some are (...), as Crocodils, etc. which
live partly in the Water, and partly on the dry Land. Again, there is a
Creature which is partly a Plant, and partly an Animal; and that is a Sponge;
and, what if we say the same of the sensitive Plant? Come we to instance only
in the bruit Creatures, and there we shall see an admirable variety. God has
not filled the World with all great, or all small, or all of a middle size; but
with some of every sort. I shall be beholden to the Naturalist (Franzius) to
show a five-fold observable Variety amongst these; And this is our First.

1. God their Maker has set to all their several quantities, their bounds,
which they shall not pass. The greedy Swine shall never grow to be so big as
the Elephant; nor the Pigeon to be so great as the Swan.

2. They have their several Voices and Tones; the Cuckoo does never crow like
the Cock; nor the Lion grunt like the Hog; nor the Dog neigh like the Horse.

3. They have their several Trades and Employments; The Birds, Nightingals
excepted, sing not in the night; but the Dogs bark in the night, and this
Creature alone betrays the Thief, at what hour of the night soever he comes.

4. They delight in a diverse kind of Diet, feed on several Dishes, and God
gives every one his proper Dish, his Meat in his season; The Sheep does not
feed on flesh; nor does the Horse take pleasure to gnaw the bones like the Dog;
nor the Fish to eat hay like the Ox.

5. They have several Dwellings or Hiding-places; The Hare does not lie down at
the Crib; nor does the Dog delight constantly to abide in the Wood, amongst
Wolves, Tigers, and Lions.

Of the Second.

God first made the Dwelling-houses of the Creatures, before the Inhabitants
thereof; yea he first furnished and stored those several Mansions of the
Creatures, before he made and brought the Creatures into them.

First, God made the grass for the Beasts, and then the Beasts themselves.
First the inferior Creatures, and then Man the Epitome, and under God, supreme
Lord of all. First, God made Vegetative Creatures, then Sensitive, and then
Rational. First the simple bodies, as the Elements, and then compound; and
there first a being, without life; then a being and life, without sense; then a
being, life, and sense, without reason; then altogether, all in one; and that
is Man.

Again, goodly was the order which God set for the propagation of the
Creatures. He gave them a seed, whereby to beget others in their own likeness;
Or, from whence should grow always another to continue and replenish the World.

It is admirable to think, that so much should come of so little; that the seed
of Plants is not quickened except it dye; that when seed is sown in the Earth,
the seed should grow and spring up, and the Sower knows not how; For, The
Earth brings forth fruit of her self; first the Blade, then the Ear, then the
full Corn in the Ear, Mar. 4.27, 28. And all this comes from the goodness and
blessing of God upon it in the first Creation. Genesis 2.11, 12.

Again, it had been a goodly pleasant sight, to have seen the Waters bring
forth Fish and Fowl of themselves first; and so the Earth, to bring forth
Beasts, and all kind of Cattle after their kind, and all at God's Word of
Command at first. And that all these Creatures should have virtue to multiply,
and increase, and to replenish the Sea, and the dry Land; this is very
wonderful.

This is a goodly order too that God has set; namely, that sensitive Creatures
should some bring forth living Creatures; some, eggs only; that the Ostrich
should bring forth eggs, and leave them; And yet God take order with the Beams
of the Sun (as with his wings) to keep them warm and hatch them; That God
should seed the young Ravens, when they cry, and the old one, the Dam, has
left them; viz. (as some tell us) by causing a little worm to grow out of the
dung in the nest and to crawl into their very mouths to feed them.

Again, that the great Creatures are not so fruitful as the small; and that the
wild beasts do not so multiply, as the tame, and more useful Creatures do; this
is also admirable. That the Waters, greater than the Earth, and, at first,
above the Earth, should not overflow it; but be bound in by a girdle of Sand,
and that a light body which the wind can blow too and fro where it lists.
That the Fire does not consume and devour all the other corporal Creatures.
That the Beams of the Chambers of the World should be laid in the Waters, Psalm.
104.3.
and yet not be moved. That the Globe of the Earth and Waters, should hang upon
its own Center only, like a ball in the air; this is indeed wonderful.

Again, a most beautiful sight it is to behold and consider, the good order and
concatenation of Causes, first set by God. God appointed the Heavens, to hear
the Earth; and the Earth to hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil; and these
to hear Jezreel. Hos. 2.22.
This is that sight which the poor Heathens had some glimps of in the night of
Gentilism; as appears by that Poetical Fancy, of the chain fastened to Jupiter's
Chair, and reaching down to the Earth. What should we say more? When God
finished the Heavens, and the Earth, and all the Host of them; he left them
like a well governed Army standing in Battel-aray, every one set in his rank,
every one ordered to march on in his way, and none to break their ranks, no one
to thrust another. So that if the greatness and glory of King Solomon, and the
goodly order of his House, or Court, was a sight which put the Queen of Sheba
to an ecstasy; what a sight had it been to have been with Adam in Paradise, and
to have seen the general muster of the Creatures before him, that he should
give them their names; and to have seen that excellent order, which was
observed in this great House of the World, and in all the Family of Heaven and
Earth; when God looked upon them all, and behold they were very good. Surely a
far greater sight, than that of Solomon's Court, was here; for a greater than
he has said, Mat. 6.29.
That Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

Of the Third.

3. The Creatures are very good, because they are very useful to us. In the
state we are now, some are for food, some for Physic, some for defense, some
for covering, some for ornament, some for our service, some for our delight and
recreation. To instance in some particulars.

The Heavens were made, spread out, and garnished, for Man's benefit, and
advantage. Every Man has his portion in the Stars of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.19.
as well as in the clods or glebe of the Earth. For, as God has determined to
all Nations, and persons the bounds of their habitations on the Earth; so has
he divided unto them all, the Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven.

The third Heaven is the Seat of the Blessed, the Receptacle and Mansion of
Saints and Angels, the Palace and Paradise of the second Adam and his Seed. The
visible Heavens compass the World as a glorious wall of fire, are a goodly
Mount and fence, yea a goodly covering and canopy to the sublunary World and to
the Inhabitants thereof; The Sun, Moon, and Stars, distinguish Times and
Seasons, separate Day and Night, give light to the Inhabitants of the Earth,
render it fruitful by their heat and influences. Job 38.31.
The Meteors in the middle region of the Air, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor,
stormy Winds, Thunder and Lightening, the small Rain, and the great Rain of his
strength; these all set forth the Power of God, are good for the Earth and the
Inhabitants thereof, they all fulfill his Word, and this Word of his, that Lo,
he beheld them, and they were very good. How does the Snow, though cold of it
self, yet keep the Fruits of the Earth warm, like Wool; He gives Snow like
Wool. How do the Winds, as God's Besom, sweep the Air, and carry about the
Clouds which are his Chariots; though these Chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even a thousand thousand of them, yet all these move very swiftly
upon the wings of the Wind.

Come we to the lower region of the Air, and there to the Fowls of Heaven.
Their flight above the Earth, being made most of earth and water, is very
admirable; The Ostrich does partly go and partly fly, makes use both of her
legs and wings; and so (they say) moves as swift as if she did sly. The very
feathers and wings of the Birds are of goodly sight; Gave thou the goodly
wings to the Peacock? Job 39.13. Besides the Fowls are of use, some for food,
some for physic, some for our recreation; Even the very Swallow and the Bat
(some may think useles Creatures) do the one by day, and the other at even,
purge the Air of Flies. The Crows, Ravens, and Eagles, devour those dead
Carkases which lie on the Earth, and else might corrupt the Air, and make it
pestilential. The Crows pick up the Worms after the plough, and so better the
soil; Some Birds are meat for the rest, and they again for us.

Come we to the Beasts of the Field, God has put all these into our hands,
Psalm. 8.7.
yea under our feet. The Horse, and the Cow; Creatures of great, and ordinary,
or daily use; God has not given them so great galls as to other Creatures,
lest being much used, or misused by us, they should wax angry, and turn again,
and rent us. The Horse does not bite, or kick his Keeper, when he gives him
chaff instead of provender. The Beasts are for our food, or physic, or for the
food of other Beasts, who are useful or serviceable to us, either to our
necessities, or our delights; Even venomous Creatures themselves, the
Physicians make good use of; and, they say, these pick up or suck up poison,
which is scattered up and down the Earth; and make the places, where they are,
more wholesome. Again some of those poisonous Creatures are meat for other
Creatures, which are good food for us; as Hens pick up Spiders, and yet yield
us good nourishment. Besides, it may be questioned whether there were any such
thing as poison before Sin came and brought it into the World; we find no
Antipathy then betwixt the Woman and the Serpent; and so, possibly, no venom
neither in the Serpent, until the Devil, that great Poysoner, possessed it;
however, poisons should not have been hurtful. As for Flies and creeping
Things, these are many of them for physic, some for food, so some sort of
Locusts and Snails; for our sport some; with these other Creatures are fed, and
some taken, as the Fishes. Of what admirable use are these to us; to the
Silkworm, we owe our soft raiment; and to the Coche^-^al, our scarlet-dy.

And as for the Air it self, it is a fit Medium for us to breathe in, to move
in, to derive the influences and light of Heaven to us.

Come we to the Earth; our Bodies are made of it; we dwell therein; It brings
forth Grass, and Fruits; and so, food for us, and the other Creatures; It is
our Bed, to sleep in after death. In the Earth; the Valleys and Plains, are sit
conveyances of water, to water the Earth; are very fruitful, stand so thick
with Grass and Corn, that they sing and shout for joy. Psalm. 65.13.
The Mountains are a shadow against the storm and heat; they are for the
grasing of the Cattle; and thence we have our most goodly prospects.

Come we to the Waters; there Fish are useful to us, for food, or delight, or
for other uses. The Waters themselves yield matter of Rains, and Dews, to
refresh the dry and thirsty ground; serve to wash us, and refrigerate us, or to
refresh us. The Ebbing and Flowing of the Seas prevent the corruptions of the
Waters; is very useful for speedy transportation of Men, and Merchandise, and
of the best Merchandise, the Pearl of price.

And now if after all this, there be yet any doubt or scruple concerning the
goodness of God's Creation, or his Creatures: I answer; God knows wherefore he
made them all, and to what use they serve; although we do not. When we come
into a Goldsmiths, or other Artificers Shop, and see many Tools there, which we
know not how to use, In officina non aude^ vituperare fabrum, and audes in hoc
Mundo reprehendere Deum. Aust.
or what they are good for; yet we do not straight way condemn them, as
useless; because the Artificer knows what good use they serve for. Neque in
potestate hominis est indagare quam ob causam produxerit Natura formicarum
alias alis instructas, alias absque alis: Quamobrem etiam vermium alios
pluribus pedibus, alios paucioribus produxerit; quisve sit hujus vermis and
hujus formicae finis. 2. We say, that if there be any deformity, at present in
the whole Creation; if there be any Insects, or other Creatures, which are
noxious; I answer this comes from Man's sin. Creantur quidem a Deo, sed ultore;
says Calvin in Genesis 2. If Man that was good, and very good, (for, till he was
made, God only saw, and said of his Creatures that behold they were good; but
then, very good;) prove Apostate from God, and Rebel against him; no wonder, if
God do begin to pull the house about his ears. If Man himself become a Briar
and a Thorn; no wonder if the Earth bring forth Briars and Thorns to him.
Whilst Adam continued in his goodness, Heaven and Earth was full of God's
goodness, of God's good Creatures. If there be any Creatures which are evil and
pernicious to Man, he must blame the evil of sin for that; that is the fly in
this Box of Ointment. And yet as things now are, in statu quo, we may say, as
the Son of Syrach does; For the Good are good things created from the
beginning, so evil things for Sinners. And a little after, enumerating some of
the principal things for the whole use of Man's life; he says, All these things
are for good, to the Godly; so, to the Sinners, they are turned into evil,
Eccles. 39.

4. And so we come to our Fourth Head, or Topic, from whence we are to
evidence the goodness of the Creatures, namely, their obedience unto their
Maker. It may be said of all God's Creatures, as they were made at first by
him, from the highest Angel in Heaven to Man on Earth, and the meanest Worm in
or under the Earth; that, God commanded and they were created, and they
rebelled not against his Word.

And now since the Angels, so many of them, and Adam sell; they from Heaven,
and he from Paradise; yet the residue of the Creatures, even the whole Creation
(these excepted) keep the Law that their Maker set them, and are still obedient
unto his Word. The Angel destroys Senacharib's mighty Host. The Stars in their
courses sight against Sisera. The Ravens feed Elijah. The dumb Ass reproves the
madness of the Prophet. The Frogs and Flies plague Pharaoh and the Egyptians.
The Lice or Worms devour proud Herod; Aelian. Var. Histor. Lib. 4. Cap 28.
and destroy profane and impious Pherecydes.

And so we are on a sudden fallen on an implicit Answer to our Third Query,
namely, whether the Creatures be all now so good as when they first came new
out of Gods hands. How are the mighty Angels fallen, and become Devils;
multitudes of them. And over Adam and his posterity, we may lament, as David
over Saul, and Jonathan his Son, a little altered; 2 Samuel 1.
The beauty of Paradise is slain upon the high places; How are the Mighty
fallen! There the Shield of the Mighty was vilely cast away; The Shield of
Adam, as if he had not been anointed with the Oil of Sanctity and Sovereignty.
How are the Mighty fallen, and the Weapons of war perished.

Man that was so very good, when God made this general survey of his Creatures,
by sin became so very evil, that, Genesis 6. God repented and it grieved him at
his heart that ever he made him. How is the goodly Picture, marred, the
beautiful Face, deformed, the sweet Instrument, broken! Bethel made a Babel, or
a Bethaven; Light, become darkness; Man that was naturally very good, become by
nature very evil. As for the inferior Creatures; Man's fall exceedingly
crushed them; yea brought a curse on his own head, and theirs too: So that,
now, they are not generally so pleasant, so useful, so serviceable, and
obedient to us, as they would have been, if we had not sinned. Romans 8.20. Romans
8.20.
The Creature it self is made subject to vanity. Which place if we understand
in the most ordinary sense, there is a twofold vanity to which the Creatures
are now subject; 1. To be abused vainly, by sinful Men, to riot, luxury, and
excess; And 2. The Creatures are subject to corruption. And thus far we answer
by way of concession; that the Creatures are not so very good as they were at
first. But yet we say,

1. That the Creatures are still good in respect of their essence, or being,
which they have from God.

2. With the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 4.4. That every Creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving. To the Pure all
things are pure.

3. And again, That all things shall work together for good, Romans 8.28.
to them that love God, and are the called according to his purpose. That if
they touch any deadly things, they shall not hurt them. To them is the promise
made, Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder, and the young
Lion and Dragon shall thou trample under feet. Either there shall no evil
betide us from the Creatures; or, God will turn it unto good to us.

4. We say too, that it is good as things now stand: It Is for the peace and
tranquillity of the Commonwealth of mankind, that God has made some Creatures
instrument wrath and vengeance, upon Disturbers and public Enemies; as, in a
well-ordered Commonwealth, it is good that there be Goals and Gibbets, etc. for
the terror and punishment of Evildoers.

IV. And now if any ask me, Whether the wound, which the Creatures got by the
fall of Adam crushing of them, be incurable? waether the Creatures ever yet
have had, or shall hereafter have, a Restoration to their primitive goodness
and integrity? I answer,

1. That when God, the Builder of this great House of the visible World, had
been so provoked by his Tenant Adam, that he might justly have sworn in his
wrath, that he would pull down this House about his ears; and either make a
Dunghill of it, or consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones
thereof: Then the Lord Jesus Christ, he by whom all things were made which were
made at first; he interposed, stepped in, held the hand of Divine Justice, and
put under his shoulders, to uphold the tottering Creation; He undertook and
covenanted to make God full satisfaction and reparation; and to establish the
World again upon its own Basis; Reconciling, or making all things meet again,
and sweetly kiss each other; Col. 1.20.
Whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven. Thus did Christ become
surety and bound for us, or else a writ of execution had been presently served
upon us, and the Creatures under us, id est, upon us Body and Goods.

2. When we read that God reprieved Adam from execution; and gave him that
great Mother Promise of the blessed Seed; we may rationally suppose, that he
did, in some measure at least, alleviate or mitigate the justly deserved curse
upon the Creatures for his sake and cause: For if God spared not to promise us
his own Son, and to deliver him up for us all; how should he not with him
freely promise to give us all things, even all things richly to enjoy? If he
will promise to give us his Son, the Heir of all things, in Marriage to us;
surely the Inheritance too, that shall be ours. Again, God will not pardon the
Principal, Man; and execute those who are instruments, rather than Accessaries,
to wit the Creatures.

3. If we consult the latter end of the eighth, and the beginning of the ninth
Chapter of Genesis, we shall find that upon Noah's building an Altar, and
offering burnt Offerings unto the Lord, after the Flood, God did covenant and
promise to uphold and establish the World, and did renew Adam's forfeited
Character, by which he made him Lord of the Creatures, unto his posterity:
blessing and restoring Noah, and his Sons, and in them, us, in a great measure,
to that Right and Royalty, which their and our great Grandfather Adam had lost.

4. The Lord Christ, God blessed for ever, by being made actually a curse for
us in the fullness of time, has purchased and given unto us the use of the
Creatures as a blessing, and has utterly taken away the partition wall of
typical uncleanness, as to many Creatures (which stood for a time betwixt Jew
and Gentile) and now every Creature of God is good, being sanctified by the
Word and Prayer; that is, good Men may now have a good and holy use of all
God's good Creatures.

5. We cannot but acknowledge, that the Scriptures of truth, speak of
Gospel Times as of the World to come, Acts 3.21.
Heb. 1. As of times of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. As of times of Restitution of
all things, according to our last Translation; As of a new Heaven and a new
Earth; And sometimes, since Christ, they speak of New Jerusalem coming down
from Heaven, Rev. 22. Of the Paradise of God; of a Tree of Life, and of a Water
of Life, Revel. 2.7.
Rev. 22.12. And this seems to be upon the Earth. And it is observed, that, then
and there, the Tree of Life bears fruit every month; which some think, is a
restoring of it to its primitive fruitfulness; and, for want of which, some
think the Fig Tree was cursed in the Gospel, so Mr. Brightman. And there are
who think that one day Sodom and Gomorrah, now a dead Sea, shall again become a
fruitful and pleasant Land; And for this see Ezekiel. 16.53.55. There are too, who
think that the Creatures waiting, groaning and longing to be delivered into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8. does hint some Restitution of the
Creatures to their first good and sound state. Which whether it do or no, I
leave it to you to judge. Only this I say, that if the visible World shall pass
through a purgatory-fire at the day of Judgment, and if it shall be continued
for the blessed Saints to contemplate God's goodness therein at first, and the
glory of Christ the second Adam, who came to repair the ruins which the first
made; that then it is not improbable, that the Creatures may then attain to
their primitive goodness. However sure I am that the Humane Nature is already,
in the Person of Christ, advanced far above what it was in Adam at first. The
first Adam was of the Earth earthly, the second Adam was the Lord from Heaven,
heavenly: And again, That all those that are Christ's, are already in part, and
shall hereafter in Heaven perfectly, be restored to the Image of God wherein
they were made at first; and to a better and more happy estate then ever Adam
had in Paradise.

V. There Is one Query more to be briefly spoken unto, and then we shall have
done with the Fifth thing propounded in the beginning of our Discourse, and
that is, what is required of us toward the repair of the ruins of the
Creation, to restore the Creatures to their primitive goodness and beauty. To
this I answer,

1. That God does not require, that we should repair the Angelical Nature; that
we should pour Wine and Oil into their wounds, or bind up their bruises; their
stroke is incurable, there is no Balm in Gilead, no Physician for their
disease: Only, we must, by endeavoring to be (...), fit our selves to fill up
those vacant places in the Heavens from whence they fell. God can make of us,
if we duly apply our selves to him, although we be but earthen Pitchers,
Vessels of Grace, and Vessels of Glory; Vessels every way fit for our Masters
use, both in Earth and in Heaven.

Col. 3.9, 10
2. God does expect that we should put off the old Man with his deeds, and put
on the new Man which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that
created him. That, being in Christ, id est, being indeed Christians, we should
become new Creatures, be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and walk in
newness of life, that, as in Adam we all dyed, and became dead in Sins and
trespasses; so in Christ, the second Adam, and by a lively Faith in him, we
should all be made alive. And, because Adam was the Son of God by Creation at
first; that we should all be Partakers of the Divine Nature; be his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works; Live and walk as the Sons
of God; all as the Children of the most High, that the Lord may take pleasure
in us again; as he did in Adam in Paradise, before he sinned.

3. We must make a good use of all God's good Creatures: getting a new right to
use them, (although the old one be not utterly lost) and using them always
aright, according to the Creators will, and for his glory.

Many are the good uses we may make of the Creatures and this Doctrine of the
Creatures usefulness and goodness.

Summum Bonum, yea Goodness it self: but Sin is Summum Malum, the chiefest
Evil; and so bad, that Hell and the Devil cannot make it worse. Ye cannot call
it worse than to call it by an Epithet drawn from its own name, viz. sinful
Sin. This calls the Devil Father, and Author. God, the good Husbandman, sowed
nothing but good Seed in his Field: it is the Devil, that Enemy, that sowed
these tares.

Again, hence we infer that Sin is very evil; because it has poisoned so many
good things; yea has been the cause of all evils in the World. For, at the
first, God made every thing very good. That must needs be bitter indeed, which
has imbittered so many, and so great sweets. Sin is the great Troubler of the
World, this is it which makes God's good things, turn to be evil to us; that
curses our Blessings; that makes a Garden of Eden a desolate Wilderness; that
turns the World upside down; and makes that, when Jeremy looked upon the Land
of Canaan, that Garden of God, Chap. 4.22, 23. He beheld the Earth, and lo it
was a Tohu Vabohu, without sorm and void; and the Heavens, and they had no
light.

Further hence we may learn, that the Lord Jesus Christ is very good: a
Fountain of goodness. For God made all good, Col. 1.16.
and he created all things by Christ. By him, not as a mere Instrument, but a
Co-worker with him. He is the beginning of the Creation of God, in this sense
also. Is there any good in the World, and the Lord Christ has not done it? and
he has done all things* Well; Heaven and Earth are full of the goodness of our
Lord Jesus; and there is No Man good, but one; and that is one who is God and
Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

Lastly, as to information, hence we are taught that the work of Redemption is
very good, exceeding good. For this is a better and greater work than that of
Creation. If that deserve thousands of praises, this does ten thousands. The
song of the Lamb is to be a higher Note, than the song of Moses. Creation was a
work of God's fingers; but in our Redemption there was put forth the strength
of his holy arm; by which he got himself, and us the victory. Behold now a new
Heaven, and a new Earth; the light of the Moon is as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun is sevenfold: Old things are passes away, and all things
are become new. And therefore, if when God laid the foundation, the
Cornerstone of the World, the Morningstars sang together, and all the Sons of
God shouted for joy; No marvel now that Christ, by whom all things were made at
first, and who has restored all things, and redeemed his People to God, by his
blood, out of every kindred; and Tongue, and People, and Nation; If, with the
Apostle John, Rev. 5.11, 12, 13. We behold, and hear the voice of many Angels
round about the Throne, and the Beasts and the Elders, the number of them ten
thousand times ten thousand; and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud
voice, Worthy is the lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing; And every Creature
in Heaven, and on Earth, and under the Earth, and in the Sea, saying, Blessing,
honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb, for ever and ever.

If God had his Sabbath, to celebrate his work of Creation: good reason Christ
should have his Sabbath, wherein we should commemorate his work of Redemption.
And now, this being the Lords day, and our Christian Sabbath, let us do the
duty of the day in the season thereof. Bless the Lord, O our Souls, and all
that is within us bless his Holy Name: Forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all our iniquities, who redeemeth our life from destruction, who
crowns us with loving kindnesses, and tender mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.

Woe to him that striveth with his Maker: Let the Potsherd strive with the
Potsherds of the Earth. Let Us not blame, or find fault with God, for any of all
his works, either of Creation, or Providence: for God has made all things
well, and he has made every thing beautiful in his season. If any of God's
Creatures, or Providence, prove evil and hurtful to us, let us blame our
selves, let us blame our sins: For Sin, that it might appear Sin, works death
in us by that which is good, Romans 7. 2. Let Us admire and adore God. Let Us
bless, and praise, and magnify him for ever, for all his goodness: For his
goodness is in and over all his works. Let Us have high thoughts of God, and low
of our selves. And this is the use the Prophet David makes of this Doctrine,
Psalm. 8.147, 148, 149, 150. Yea this is the use, which God himself would have
Job make of it, when he preached upon part of this Text, in the 38, 39, 40, 41.
Chapters of the Book of Job. And let us say with the Psalmist, Ps. 103. when we
take a survey of Gods works, Bless the Lord ye his Angels, who excel in
strength, ye Ministers of his, that do his pleasure: Bless the Lord all his
Works in all places of his Dominion, and every one of us: Bless the Lord O my
Soul. 3. Let Us learn good from the Creatures. God would have us go to school to
the Creatures, to learn many good Lessons from them. He would have the Sluggard
go to the industrious Ant, to consider her ways, and be wise. Those who are
ignorant of God their Lord, and feeder, are reproved by the bruit Creatures;
For the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib. Those who do not, or
cannot discern the times and seasons, even the times of their Visitation, the
Prophet would that we go to the Stork, the Crane, and the Swallow, for all
these know their appointed seasons. And because Christians, and Ministers
especially, are sent out in the World as Sheep among Wolves, Christ would have
them to be as wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

Last of all, did God look upon daily, and at the end of the sixth day again
review all his works? Did he examine, judge, and find them all very good? Let
us go and do likewise: let us imitate God, we cannot have a better precedent or
example to follow. Let us, every evening, look back upon the works of the day,
and, at the end of the week, upon the works of the week. Let Us examine and
judge them. This has been the practice of many precious Saints, as the Lord
Harington, Mr. Herbert Palmer, and others. (Yea, some such thing as this, viz.
calling himself to an account at night, for what had passed him in the day,
Seneca tells of himself.) These examples we shall do well if we follow, so as
they followed God himself. This is a right method to proceed, from good, to
very good; to have all good, but our latter work better than our former. But,
because that in many things we offend all, whilst we are in this World here
upon Earth, let us look for, and long after, that place and state, I mean for
Heaven, when we shall be made like unto God, and our works like his works: When
from day to day, and Sabbath to Sabbath, even to all eternity, we may look upon
every thing that we have done, and behold it shall be very good.

The END of the first Sermon.
Proverb. 20.10. The righteous Man regards the life of his Beast.

(...)


ACcording to the Hebrew it is, A righteous Man knows, that is, regards,
takes care of the life of his Beast.

If on the one hand we consider the great commendations, which the Holy
Scriptures give of diverse of the bruit and unreasonable Creatures, together
with God's great care of, and cost, about them, himself, and his charge, and
laws to Men, concerning them: And on the other hand compare therewith Men's
vilifying, disregarding, abusing of them: It may seem not unreasonable nor
unprofitable to bestow one lecture about them, namely for this end, to instruct
and teach Men, who have a right to use them, how to use them aright, to make
them good Lords to those good Servants. As he that rules over tnen must be
just, so he that is Lord over these bruit Creatures must not be cruel toward
them. As God will require the life of a Man of the Beast that slays him, Genesis
9.5. Ex. 21.29.
the Beast shall be put to death. So will God call Men to account for the lives
of their Beasts, if they be cruel unto them. For my own part, I would not when
my Lord comes, be found causelessly, or cruelly beating, or misusing these my
Servants and my fellow Servants.

From the words we may observe,

1. That Man has a Right and Title to the Beasts of the Earth; and that not
only in common, but each Man has a particular Right and Propriety in them. The
righteous Man regards the life of his Beast.

2. That a good or righteous Man is good or merciful to his Beast.

3. That unrighteous or wicked Men are unmerciful or cruel to their Beasts.

I. Psalm. 8.6, 7.
Of the First. God the sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Maker of Man and
Beast, has made him Lord over the Beasts; he has put them all under his hand,
or under his feet. Genesis 1.25.26, 28.
He that made the Beast of the Earth after his kind, and Cattle after their
kind, made Man also after his own Image, and gave him dominion over the Fish of
the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the
Earth, and over every living thing that moves upon the Earth. God indeed made
these Creatures, and all things else, for his own glory; but in order thereunto
he made these to be our Servants: Genesis 2.19, 20.
And therefore we find that God assembled before Adam all the Beasts of the
field, to see what he would call them; Genesis 5.2. Luke 1.62, 63.
And his giving Names to them, was a part and proof of his Dominion or Lordship
over them. At first it is thought, that Man's Dominion over the Creatures, the
Fishes of the Sea (the great Whales not excepted) and over the Fowls of Heaven,
was like that of the Centurion which he had over his Soldiers: He might say to
one Go and he goes, and to another Come and he comes, and to a third Do this,
Luke 7.8.
and he does it. They were all ready to come and go at his word of Command: And
this was the Language of their Obedience to Adam their Lord, Lo we are all thy
Servants. Before Sin came into the lower World, Adam commanded without rigor,
and they obeyed with obediential reverence and readiness, without the least
force or compulsion. And since the fall, God, has (in a great measure) renewed
our forfeited Charter, and Men have been able by force or art to subdue and
govern over the greater and wilder sort of Beasts, such as Elephants, Lions,
Leopards, Bears, Tygres, Plin. Hist. B. 8. C. 2.
etc. Elephants have been brought so far under Man's yoke, as to be yoked
together to draw a Chariot, and in some places to draw the Plough, if we will
believe Pliny. But behold a more sure word of Prophecy, St. James tells us
Chap. 3. V. 7. That every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and
things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of mankind. As if he had said,
It was not so only before the Fall; or by miracle, as the Whale not hurting
Jonah, Jonah 2. Dan. 6.
but casting him up on dry Land; and the Lions not hurting Daniel, though cast
into their Den to be devoured by them; or that all the Creatures came tamely to
Noah into the Ark; but as if he had said, Nothing is so violent and noxious by
Nature, but humane art and industry has made it serviceable to Man's use: For
instances and stories, says D. Manton in Loc. Interpreters abound in them; How
Lions have been tamed and brought to hunt as Dogs, or draw the Chariot as
Horses, you may see Pliny in his Natural History Lib. 8. C. 16. and Aelian.
Lib. 15. C. 14. How Birds have been taught; you may see Plin. Lib. 10. C. 42.
and Macrob. Lib. 2. Saturnal. C. 10. Of Elephants, Lipsius Genesis 1. Epist^. 50.
And although we are told by D. Cowel, that wild Beasts, Birds, Fishes, by the
Law of Nature, are not the goods of any one particular person; yet, he that
first gets the possession of them, by the Law of Nature has a Title to them.
And as for the tamer Creatures, we have a right to them ordinarily, either by
Descent, as Heirs to our Parents; or by Donation, as free gift; or by purchase;
or else as found when lost, or gotten in, or by means of a lawful War from an
Enemy. And so it may be said of any particular person, though but a private
Man, (who is by any of these lawful means, Possessour of the Beasts) as God
says of King Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27.5, 6.
I have given him the Beasts of the Field also to serve him. For God made the
Earth, the Man and the Beasts, that are upon the ground, by his great Power,
and his stretched out Arm; and gives it to whom it seems meet unto him.
Though God be the sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all that therein is,
yet the Earth has he given to the Children of Men. He made Man to have
dominion over the works of his hands; He has put all things under his feet;
Psalm. 8.7, 8.
All Sheep and Oxen, yea and the Beasts of the Field; the Fowl of the Air, and
the Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the Seas. From
God, Lord Paramount of all, we have a good ^^tle to, and a propriety in, these
Creatures. Isa. 1.3.
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib. God having granted
and thus settled property in particular persons to the Beasts of the Earth, it is
not in the power of Men or Devils, but by Gods Commission or Permission (at
least) to alter or overthrow it. The Devil could not touch Job's Sheep or
Camels, without leave first had and obtained. And as for Man God has made a
hedge about every Man's Cattle by the Eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal;
And to keep him far from such an evil Matter, he forbids in the X. Commandment
so much as to covet or desire our Neighbors Ox, or his Ass, or any thing that
is our Ne^ghbours.

And now is it so, that we have a Right to and Authority over the bruit
Creatures, yet let us be cautioned against abusing or misusing of them. Say not
in your hearts, Our Beasts are our own, who is Lord over us? May we not do what
we will with our own? and does God take care for Oxen? May we not rather wish
with Balaam, that there were a Sword in our hands to slay them when they stop
or start aside, since they are our own? May we not rather say to them, Our
Fathers made your yoke heavy, but our little finger shall be heavier than our
Fathers loins? To such absurd and unreasonable Men I shall oppose the reproof,
which the Ass gave to his Master Balaam, Number. 22.28.
What have I done to thee, that thou have smitten me these three times? And
again the reproof of the Angel, V. 32. Wherefore have thou smitten thine Ass
these three times? Although God has given us a Right to the bruit Creatures,
and a Dominion over them; yet it is with subordination to himself and his Laws;
yet it is with certain limitations and restrictions. We are Lords over them,
it is true; but we must not play the Tyrants over them. The Israelites, God's
own People, had a good Title to their Beasts or Cattle, and yet he bound them
to their good behavior toward them by sundry Laws and Rules in reference to
them. They might not deal with them as they pleased, as to their meat. Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Cori^. Nor as to
their work, neither for the time when they should work, nor for the manner of
their working. Thou shall keep the Sabbath Day, that thy Ox and thy Ass may
rest as well as thou. And again, Thou shall not plough with an Ox and Ass. God
gave Man the Beasts and other living Creatures for food, but yet with this
condition, provided always they did not eat Membriun de vivo, not like salvage.
Beasts tear and eat of living Creatures, whiles the life was in them, but that
they should first kill them, and pour out their blood before they eat them.
Arise, kill, and eat. Kill first, and then eat. Nor were they at liberty in all
things as to their cooking, or dressing of them. Thou shall not sees a Kid in
his Mothers milk. God most wise, most merciful would have his People not only
abhominate all cruelty to the bruit Creatures, but even to abstain from all
appearance of it. And that he might teach them mercy by his own example, that
they might be merciful to the bruit Creatures as their Father in Heaven is
merciful, He ordained them to be offered up upon his Altar, but not till they
were first slain, and their blood in which their life is, was poured out, at
the foot of it. God would have no Sacrifice no not of a Beast to be burnt alive
upon his Altar.

Accordingly a good Man, who is the Child of God and Image of God, the work of
his Heavenly Father he will do; he will be mild, gentle, merciful, not only to
Brethren, Neighbors, and Strangers, but even to the bruit Creatures, so says
the Text, A good Man, a righteous Man, is merciful to his Beast.

1. He takes care of the life of his Beasts: [ Curat animam jumenti sui,
Vatablus] in providing food convenient for them. He gives them their meat in
due Season. They do not wander for lack of meat, nor low or complain for lack
of sodder. What God gives him sor them, that they gather from his hand. If God
send a Drought and the Fire burn up or devour the Pastures of the Wilderness,
so that the Beasts groan, and the herds of Cattle are perplexed, because they
have no Pasture; the righteous Man, their Lord and Master, sympathizeth with
them, is grieved for them, and modo suo, as God for his People, so he for his
Cattle, in all their afflictions he is afflicted; and therefore when the Beasts
cry unto him, it is not in the power of his hand to help them; what does he but
stretch out his arms and cry unto God for As it is Joel 1.19. O Lord, to thee
will I cry, for the Fire has devoured the Pastures of the Wilderness.

2. A good or a righteous Man provides Physic for them, I mean Remedies for
them, means to cure them when they are amiss. He does what he can to prevent,
or else to remove their sicknesses, ails, and maladies. It was a great sin in
Pharaoh that he mattered not the threatening, and so did not prevent (by letting
Israel go) the grievous murrain on the Cattle in the Field, upon the Horses,
upon the Asses, upon the Camels, Exodus 9.3.
upon the Oxen, and upon the Sheep.

3. A good Man provides Harbor for his Cattle according to their condition,
against the weather. We read of Jacob that as he built himself an House, Genesis
33.17.
so he made Booths for his Cattle. Yea when God threatened a grievous hail upon
Egypt, he commanded them to send and gather the Cattle that were in the Field,
lest they should be slain with the hail; and the Scripture tells us, He that
feared the Word of the Lord amongst the Servants of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.18 19, 20
made his Servants and his Cattle flee into the Houses, and he that regarded
not the Word of the Lord, left his Servants and his Cattle in the Field.

4. As a good Man takes care for Food, Physic, and Harbor for his Cattle, so
he has a care not to overwork them. He does not load, or ride, or drive them
beyond what they are able to bear. Hear how careful and tender Jacob was not
only of his Children, Genesis 33.13 14
but also of his Cattle, My Lord (says he to his Brother Esau) knows that the
Children are tender, and the Flocks and Herds with young are with me, and if
Men should overdrive them one day, all the Flock will die: Let My Lord, I pray
thee, pass over before his Servant, and I will lead on softly, according as the
Cattle that goes before me, and the Children are able to endure, etc.

5. He takes care that the weak and tame Beasts be Kept and Defended from the
violence of the strong, wild, and ravenous. 1 Samuel 17.34, 35.
So David when he kept his Fathers Sheep, in defense of a Lamb or a Kid, slew a
Lion and a Bear.

6. He seeks them, brings them Home, when they have gone astray, and have lost
themselves. So much may be learnt from the Parable Luke 15.4. where we read,
that he that has 100 Sheep, if he lose one, will leave the 99 in the
Wilderness, and go after that which was lost, until he find it; and when he
has found it, lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. A good Shepherd will
gather his Lambs with his arm, will carry them in his bosom, and will gently
lead those that are with young, when they are out of the way, and gone astray,
unto the Fold and to the Flock. Even Saul himself when he found a Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9 20
was busied in seeking his Fathers Asses that were lost.

7. When he is necessitated to kill them, he pitties them and does that office
in mercy. He was a Tyrant that said, he would make his Enemy ut sentiat se
mori: that he might feel or be sensible of dying; And he is but little better
that shall torment the poor Beasts, when he puts them to death. A good Man does
not delight in slaying the Beasts, nor does he seek or use ways to torment
them, It Is to the commendation of Mr. Fox, that wrote the Book of Martyrs, F.
H. Book 9. page 105.
what I read of him in Mr. Fuller, namely that he did not use to pass the
Slaughter-houses without some sense, grief, or trouble of mind. Macellum ipsum
ubi mactantur etiam pecudes vix praetereo, quin tacito quodam doloris sensu
men's refugiat.

If the Question then should be, what say we to hunting of wild Beasts? Is this
cruelty? And may not a good Man delight in such sport or recreation?

I answer, that some of the Ancients held it unlawful. S. Hierom observes that
a Hunter is never taken in a good sense, In Mich. l. 2. c. 5.
and that Ismael and Esau are Hunters. There Is a saying also of S. Austin on
the 102. Psalm, alleged against it: Qui venatoribus donant, non homini donant,
sed arti nequissimae; nam si homo esset and venator non esset, non donares;
honor as in eo vitium, non naturam. But on the other side the reverend and
learned Mr. Perkins allows for recreation the hunting of wild Beasts, alleging
that place, Take us the Foxes, Cant. 2.15.
the little Foxes that spoil the Vines. And another late Writer of Cases of
Conscience says thus, For exercises, such should be chosen, as bring public
utility; as the hunting of such Beasts, as are an annoyance to the Country;
such as Foxes, Badgers, Wolves, etc. Aquinas cites Aristotle for the lawfulness
of Hunting, upon this ground or reason; because thereby a Man challenges to
himself that he has a right to, by Nature. Venatio Sylvestrium Animalium est
justa and naturalis, quia per eam, Homo vendicat sibi, quod est naturaliter
suum. Sariburiensis in his Book called Policratic. 500. years since, brings
Isaac the Patriarch his practice in sending his Son Esau to hunt, to justify
the lawfulness of Hunting. Mr. A. J.
And a late judicious and learned Commentator comparing and considering the
holy Scriptures one place with another, viz. Levit. 17.13. with Prove. 12.27.
does thence conclude that Hunting is lawful; the covering of the blood of the
Beast taken and killed in Hunting, may imply (according to him) the lawfulness
of killing the Creatures in this manner: the covering of their blood signifying
that it should not be imputed unto them that shed it; as may appear by those
places, where the not covering of the blood does imply the contrary. So Job 16.
18. and Ezekiel. 24.7, 8.

The main Objection I conceive against Hunting is this, viz. That the Antipathy
betwixt the Creatures is usually reckoned as an effect and fruit of our Sin,
and therefore is not to be delighted in.

To this Objection I suppose that Huntsmen may answer, that they delight and
recreate themselves in the sagacity and swiftness, etc. of them; and not in
their tearing of one another. And if we will believe Aquinas p. 1. q. 96.
Artic. 1. he teaches us, that there would have been naturalis discordia inter
quaedam Animalia, a natural discord betwixt some Animals although Sin had never
been. Non enim per peccatum Hominis natura Animaliu est mutata. (i. e.) For the
nature of these Creatures is not changed by Man's Sin.

2 Pet. 2.12.
Besides it may be argued and pleaded that the Apostle speaks of some of those
Creatures, that they are made to be taken and destroyed. And our own reason,
and sense, and experience teach us, that there are other Creatures who seem to
be made on purpose for this use, namely to find out, pursue, and take others.

But supposing this Antipathy betwixt the Dog and the Hare, etc. should be a
fruit, effect, or consequent of Man's Sin; I conceive that it does not
necessarily follow, that we may not moderately delight in Hunting: for our
Clothes are a consequent of Men's Sin; and yet we may moderately delight in our
Clothes or Ornaments, Isa. 61.10. Jer. 2.32.
I suppose as well as in our Meat and Drink.

These things then premised, I shall not dare to condemn Hunting as unlawful;
but shall rather apply my self to give such directions and cautions to those
that use this recreation, that they may not offend in it.

1. Men must not make Hunting, Hawking, or any other recreation (how lawful
soever) their calling; not their Meat and Drink; but as their Sauce both to
their meat and to their work to get them a stomach to both. Those certainly are
to be condemned, says learned Rivet on Genesis 11. Qui voluptatem venationis
praeferunt officiis suis, and quid Reipublicae and subditis debeant,
obliviscuntur.

2. Men must not give all their goods to feed their Hounds, their Hawks, their
Horses, and have no ability or charity to feed the Poor. It was well done of
King Stephen, who converted a Rentcharge of 24 sheaves of Oats payable out of
every Plough-land betwixt Trent and Edinburgh-Frith, for the King's Hounds, to
his new built Hospital in York; for though (as the Historian observes) it is
not lawful to take the Children's bread and give it unto Dogs; F. H. b. 3. p.
29.
yet it is lawful to take the Dogs bread and give to the Children.

3. Men must not be lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of God, nor let either
the cares or pleasures of the World hinder the profitable and saving hearing of
the Word of God. It Is observable, that amongst all those that made excuses from
coming to the Feast when invited, although we find one saying, I have bought a
yoke of Oxen, and go to prove them; Lu. 14.18, 19.
Another, I have bought a Form and I go to see it, I pray thee, have me
excused; Yet I find none so hardy, as to say I have bought a pack of Hounds, or
a cast of Hawks, and must go to prove them, I pray thee have me excused.

4. Men must not injure or wrong their Neighbors in their Goods, or Lands, or
Profits, whilst they follow their own pleasures. Our Princes, says Luther, do
grievously sin with their Hunting; they destroy the seeds and grounds of poor
People; And these are to be reproved, says Rivet on Genesis 11. Qui misellis
Rusticis plagas inferunt, sata laeta, boumque labores diruunt, etc. Much more
are they to be reproved and condemned that depopulate Towns and Countries to
make room for Beasts wild or tame, Deer or Sheep. It Is observed in our
Chronicles that William the Conqueror did depopulate 30 or more Parishes to
make his new Forest, and that in that Forest one of his Sons, namely King
William, surnamed Rufus, and one of his Nephews or Grandchildren, came to
untimely ends there.

5. Men must be cautioned to be careful, lest while they pursue their sports,
their game, they lose not, or hazard not their own or others limbs or lives.
Our own Histories tell us of some that shot at Beasts and killed Men: So, one
Tyrel killed King William Rufus, and Archbishop A. the Keeper. And we read
elsewhere of Adrian the Emperor that he broke his shoulder in Hunting. If we
must not be cruel to the bruit Beasts, then surely not to our selves, hazarding
or exposing our own lives, whiles we hunt them to death. And this makes way for
these Third Observations, viz.

III.
That wicked or unrighteous Men are cruel, unmerciful to the bruit Beasts. And
this appears in that,

1. They keep them hardly, provide not carefully and conscientiously Food,
Physic, Harbor, for their hungry, sick, and weary Beasts.

2. They work, drive, lead or burden them immoderatly, and not as they are able
to bear.

3. They will rail at them, be in rage with them, and curse them bitterly;
these poor Beasts which were justly cursed for them, are again cursed by them,
without a cause.

4. They will beat and misuse them shamefully: How often are these poor dumb
Creatures beaten cruelly with many stripes, and that when they know not their
Masters will, what it is they would have them do! How have I heard wicked Men
curse and ban their Beasts! How have I seen them beat and abuse them without a
cause; threatening (with Balaam) if there were a Sword in their hand to slay
them! If these dumb Creatures should have their mouths opened as Balaam's
Asse's mouth was; how might they complain and say, Wherefore have thou smitten
me, it may be, not these three times only, but these threescore times!
Although many Men live on the labor and sweat of their Beasts; yet they care
not in their rage and fury to slay them, to spill their blood. Well may the
whole Creation groan waiting to be delivered from this bondage unto corrupt and
cruel Men. How many unreasonable and cruel Masters are there, which are like
Pharao's Taskmasters to the Israelites, who required brick and gave them no
straw, who demand of their Beasts to labor, to travel, to work, and allow them
no meat, or not meat sufficient! How do Men load their Beasts, more than they
are able to bear, and drive them faster than they are able well to go; and if
they stumble, fall down, or stand still, how are these their Servants beaten,
when the fault is in their cruel Task masters! I confess I have often wished,
that some law might be made for the ease of these poor Beasts, even to bind
their Masters to their good behavior toward them: Good reason I think there
is, as that he that steals his Neighbors Beast should be punished, so, that he
that slays his own Beast, making it a sacrifice to his passion, madness or
folly should not escape unpunished.

Hence we may be informed, that although in our days the etc. be mean and
contemptible, yet they are lawful and commendable Callings. The Angels of
Heaven though they are above us, both in nature and office, yet they are our
Ministers and Servants, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91. Heb. 1.14.
to minister to them that are Heirs of Salvation. And so Men, though they be
above and Lords of these Creatures; yet may they attend on them, look to them,
and provide for them. Job 1.
As the riches of the Ancients consisted mostly in their Cattle, so their
employment was mostly about them. The Patriarchs were Keepers of Sheep, and
they bred up their Sons and Daughters to the same Calling. And Saul lost
nothing by seeking his Fathers Asses, for he found a Kingdom whiles he was
seeking of them. And David was taken from following the Ews great with young,
and anointed King over Israel. God himself appeared to Moses in the Bush whiles
he was feeding Jethro's Flock; when he was a Shepherd, and not when he was in
Pharao's Court, and he made him King in Jesurun. And not only the Poet calls
the King (...), the Shepherd of the People; but the holy Prophets also do the
like. Yea God himself in Scripture is called a Shepherd: Hear O thou Shepherd
of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a Flock. And our blessed Savior as he
is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, so is he also called the good, the great,
and chief Shepherd. Therefore if there be any Shepherds, etc. that hear me this
day, let them go away comforted and encouraged to go on in their callings,
therein abide with God. Consider that David was beloved of God, and pleased
God, not only when he had a Crown and Scepter, and led his People Israel, but
also when he had his Scrip and Shepherds Crook, when he followed the Ews great
with young. Art thou a Shepherd? thou art not a foot the farther off from being
a Sheep of Christ, from Christ's fold. Often think whiles you are keeping your
Flocks by day, or watching them by night, how the glad Tidings of Salvation,
the News of Christ's B^rth, was brought by a multitude of the Heavenly Host,
the Angels of Heaven, to the Shepherds whilst they were keeping their Flocks by
night, saying and singing, Glory be to God in the highest, Behold we bring you
good tidings of great joy which shall be to all People, Luke 2.
for unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord.



(1) Hereby we shall show our selves merciful as our Father which is in Heaven
is merciful; For as he made Man and Beast, Psalm. 36.5.
and is the Owner of them, Psalm. 50. so he preserves Man and Beast. He
provides food convenient for them: Grass for the Cattle for meat, and Water for
them to drink, Water in abundance, Psalm. 104.10, 11.
so that the wild Asses, the most thirsty Creatures, may quench their thirst.

(2) God would that no Man should do them wrong. He reproved Balaam for the
Asse's sake; Jude.
the dumb Ass speaking with Man's voice, rebuked the madness of the Prophet.
Jumentum Balaami semel in omnes aetates os aperuit, ut illo suo sermon
damnaret omnem in muta jumenta saevitiam, Ct. in Prove. 12.10. The Ass opened
his mouth once, to teach all Generations to abhor cruelty to the dumb
Creatures. Yea,

(3) It Is the will of God, that we should be so far from hurting or misusing
cruelly our own Beasts, that he commands us to be friendly to our Enemies Oxen
or Asses, if we find them fallen under their burden we are to help them up. Ex.
23.5.


(4) And as God made the Sabbath, that thy Ox and thy Ass might rest as well
as thou; So he dispenses with the bodily rest of the Sabbath to show mercy to
the bruit Creatures. It is lawful to loose the Ox or Ass from the Stall on the
Sabbath Day, and to lead them to water, etc. So that not only the Priests in
the Temple break the Sabbath, and are guiltles in slaying and offering up the
Beasts in Sacrifice; but Herdsmen and Shepherds, and those that are Keepers of
Cattle, that attend upon them, although they break the outward rest of the
Sabbath; yet are they guiltles and blameles in so doing for the preservation of
the health or lives of their Cattle: and in this case God will have Mercy
rather than Sacrifice. We may omit for a time, or give over praying to save the
life of a Beast, Acts 20
as St. Paul did his preaching to save the life of a Man, of Eutychus. Further;

(5) When God would drown the World for the Sin of Man, and only save eight
Persons alive, he took care also to preserve alive by miracle in the Ark, the
bruit Creatures as well as Men and Women.

(6) And after the Flood, God was pleased to make a Covenant with the Beasts of
the Field, etc. as well as with Man, Genesis 9.
That he would drown the World no more.

(7) Afterward when God spared the great City of Niniveh, he is pleased
graciously and mercifully to take notice of the abundance of Cattle in it, that
must have perished in the destruction of the City, and he speaks of this as a
reason or motive to spare the City. Jonah 4.


If it should be objected; Does God take care for Oxen? Has not God oftentimes
even devoted the Beasts as well as their sinful Masters, Owners to destruction?
And does he not in some cases command the Beast to be put to death, and so to
be sacrificed to justice? And again, Did not God require under the old Law
frequent, yea daily sacrificing of Beasts, making the life of the Beast to go
for the life of a Man? And lastly as to this Objection, Did not our Savior
permit the Devil to go into the herd of Swine, and so they, 2000 of them ran
violently into the Sea, and were choked in the Sea?

Answ. [1] I say that God has a supreme Right and Title to all the Beasts of
the Fold, Psalm. 50.
the Field, or the Forest. All the Beasts of the Field are mine, and the Cattle
upon a thousand hills. And that he may dispose of, or do what he will with his
own. Who may say to him, what do thou? That when God destroys Men's Cattle, he
does it not out of the least hatred to the Beast, but to testify his hatred and
abhorrence of the Sins of the Owners of them, and hereby to punish them; or to
bring them to repentance, to melt (or mollify at least) their hard hearts, and
cause them to say as David, It Is I, or it is we, that have sinned, these Sheep
(or Oxen) etc. what have they done? Or to prove and try them, and do them good
in their latter end; as was the case of Job. If God may justly punish Parents
in their Children, because they are their goods; surely then he may punish
Masters and Owners in their Cattle, because they have a propriety in them; and
the taking away the lives or the loss of their Cattle redounds to them.

As for the Beasts that were offered up in Sacrifice by Gods Ordinance and
Institution: He might as justly do it, as to give Men a Charter or Patent to
Arise, Kill, and Eat, for the preservation of their natural lives: For by the
Sacrifice the Sinner was freed from that temporal death, which the Sin deserved
for which it was offered; And besides, this Sacrifice was typical of Christ the
Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World; and so was of use also,
to the saving of the Soul of the Sinner.

As for the Gergesens Swine, I say:

(1) Our Lord Jesus Christ was Lord of all, and therefore might justly permit
or suffer the Devils to enter into them, and to hurry them headlong into the
Sea.

(2) Thereby their Owners should have learnt, how good and merciful God was to
them, that he did restrain the Devil, and not suffer him to possess their whole
Country; And that goodness and mercy of Christ, that whereas there was a Legion
of Devils in one Man, he suffered them not, when cast out, to disperse
themselves about the Country and possess a Legion of Men, i. e. above 6000 Men;
but only this herd of Swine.

(3) Our Savior teaches us that natural Men value and prefer their Swine
before their Savior.

[2] Let us consider, that we may deal merciful with these Creatures, that they
are Fellow Creatures with us, yea our Fellow Servants to the great Lord of
Heaven and Earth, as well as they are our Servants, and we Lords over them. And
must give an account when our Lord Christ comes, if he find us beating our
Fellow Servants, if he find us drinking with the Drunken, and presently falling
upon these our Fellow Servants.

[3] As they are our Servants, to consider that they are good Servants to us,
who are too often bad Masters to them. If we will use them, they submit their
necks to our yoke; If we abuse them they do not complain; In their mouth is no
reproof. That which usually inflames Masters against Servants is when Servants
will answer again; will contradict or at least dispute it with them: Now these
our Servants they are mute, dumb Creatures; they cannot plead their own cause,
they return not a word for a blow, not a word for many blows, though without a
cause, or a sufficient cause.

[4] Let us consider, these Creatures were partakers of the curse of Man's Sin;
by reason of this they groan and travail in pain; their yoke is harder and
their burden heavier: We should look on their sorrows and sufferings as
occasioned, as merited by us, by our disobedience to our sovereign Lord. How do
they spend their days in our service! end their lives for our service, for
Food, for Physic; sometimes for a Sacrifice, and oftentimes even for a
Pleasure, Delight, or Recreation! They suffer for us; We eat the sour Grapes,
and their Teeth are set on edge: and this justly too, because they are our
proper goods, and we are Lords over them. Many times they suffer with us, as in
War and other public calamities; and let this suffice, let them never suffer
unnecessarily from us. If we do, we make them exceeding miserable: the poor
abused Beast has no knowledge or foresight of death (as Men in misery have) to
put an end ere long to his bondage and misery; nor any hopes of a Resurrection,
or a future reward for his sufferings (as good Men have) to comfort them. The
Turks, I read, hold that the Beasts shall rise again; and although that is no
part of my Creed; yet I dare say, if they should, they will rise in judgment
against those that have cruelly used them here.

[5] We may go to school to them and learn many a good Lesson from them. How
great is the love and faithfulness of Dogs! the meekness of Elephants! the
shamefastness of the adulterous Lyoness! the chastity of the Turtle! the
watchfulness of the Cock! the utility of the Sheep! It Is said of King Porus his
Elephant, that he exposed his own life to save his Masters. How often does the
Holy Ghost send us to school to the unreasonable Creatures! Go to the Ant, thou
Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise. Those who do not know God that has
nourished and brought them up, how are they reproved by the Ox and the Ass!
Isa. 1. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: but Israel
does not know; my People does not consider. Those which know not the day of
their Visitation, may go to school to the Crane and Swallow, who know their
appointed seasons. Those Children who are without natural affection to their
aged Parents, let them go to the Stork, and learn of that Creature to requite
their Parents (...), to feed their Parents when they are old.

[6] Consider, that if we be Friends with God, the very Beasts themselves are
not only our Servants, but our Friends also. Our Lord Christ has reconciled
all things in Heaven and Earth. Whiles we were Rebels and Traitors to God our
sovereign, the Angels of Heaven, and the Beasts of the Earth became Enemies to
us, and in pursuit of their allegiance were ready to fight against us; but now
being reconciled to our Sovereign, and returned to our obedience, these our
Fellow Subjects are again at peace and friends with us. When articles of peace
are made with the General of an Army and published, none of the Soldiers dare
act any hostility against us. The Lord of Hosts has now made a Covenant, viz.
of peace for us with the Beasts of the Field, Hos. 2.18.
and with the Fowls of Heaven, and with the creeping Things of the ground.

[7] Consider, that we stand in more need of God's mercy than the bruit
Creatures do of ours. We have sinned against God, which these Creatures never
did. Man being in honor, understands not, Psalm. 49.20
but is compared to the Beast that perishes. It Is no Sin to be a Beast, but
it is a great Sin to be like a Beast. And yet which of us, but has cause
sometime or other, not only to confess with Agur, Prove. 30.2.
Surely I am more brutish than any Man, I have not the understanding of a Man;
but also with David, So foolish was I, and ignorant, Psalm. 73.22
and even as a Beast before thee. We read that all manner of Beasts have been
tamed by mankind, but yet the same Scripture tells us to our shame, The Tongue
can no Man tame, Jam 3.7, 8.
it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. And hence we may learn, that we
stand in need of more mercy from God, than these Creatures are able to receive
from us, or we to give them. For we stand in need not only of temporal mercies
as they do, but even of spiritual mercy, of grace to pardon us, and of grace to
reform us, and over and above of eternal mercy, or else we shall be more
miserable than the Beast that perishes; For as a Reverend Author says, when a
Dog dies, there is an end of all his misery; but when a Man dies (that is, that
lives and dies in his Sin) there is the beginning of his woe. And so much for the
considerations that should move us to show mercy to the bruit Creatures. I
shall in the next place lay down some cautions for the regulation of our
kindness to them.

1. Let us take care that as we do not depress these Creatures too low, so that
we do not advance them too high: as we must not despise them in any degree, so
we must not deify them in any wise: As we must not tear and worry them without
a cause, so not worship them for any cause. We must not change the Glory of the
incorruptible God into an Image made like (as, not to corruptible Man, so) to
Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things. We must not be Devils,
Tormentors to them; nor make them Gods to us, so as to fall down and worship
them; as the Egyptians did to Apis, from whence the Israelites learnt to
worship the golden Calf.

2. As we must not adore them as Gods, so neither make them our equals. We must
take heed of too much fondness of them, or familiarity with them. Hence comes
that Sin, which the Scripture calls Confusion, viz. Bestiality, a descent nearer
Hell by one degree, than the Sin of Sodom; which brought a kind of Hell, viz.
Fire and Brimstone out of Heaven upon them. And yet some have conjectured, that
some sort of Creatures have come into the World this way, because of their
great likeness to Men. Monsieur de la Chamber tells us that there have been
Beasts discovered, which are so like Men, that there is scarce any difference
as to the outward form. And I read in Mercator's Geography in his Description
of Ireland, page 48. of a Lake there, about 30 miles in length and 15 in
breath, of which, those that live near it, say, it was formerly inhabited, and
Agrum fuisse cultivissimum, but for the Sin of Bestiality was turned into a
Lake, superfusis aquis in Lacum redactum. If so, their Sin being worse than the
Sin of Sodom and Gomorrah, no marvel if their punishment was somewhat like
theirs that were turned into a bituminous Lake, or a dead Sea, and remain so to
this day.

3. Much less must we prefer them before Men: We must not be cruel to Men
pretending to show mercy to the bruit Creatures. The life of a Beast must go
still, to save or preserve the life of a Man. I cannot but condemn the Turks,
who set Birds at liberty out of their Cages, redeeming with money these
Captives, and yet make no conscience of chaining Christians to their Galleys;
As also the hypocrisy, that cheat amongst the Romanists, whose Clergy are
forbid to hunt Beasts, and yet some made Lords Inquisitors on purpose to hunt
down, tear, and devour the harmles Sheep and Lambs of Christ. Surely the good,
the great, and the chie^ Shepherd of the Flock, and the Bishop of our Souls
will count them but little thanks for their so doing, when he shall come to
hold his general Visitation, and to judge the World. These things
notwithstanding, I dare not condemn those (if necessitated to save and defend
their own lives) which in the Civil Wars of France cut off their Horse-legs,
and so made themselves a breast-work of their bodies. Nor dare I judge King
David for houghing his Enemies Horses, thereby to make them unserviceable for
the Wars, 2 Samuel 8.4. Let Us not be superstitiously afraid to use these
Creatures, either for Food, Physic, or Service, no nor for our honest Delight
and Recreation. See your Charter for so doing, if not implicitly given to
Adam, yet expressly to Noah; and again renewed Act. 10. under the Gospel, in the
Vision and Voice to Peter, Arise Peter, Kill, and Eat. And though it is said,
the Disciples of the Nazarites may be known by their abstinence from the flesh
of all living Creatures; Genesis 9.
yet our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and he that in substance though not in
vow and ceremony was the true Nazarite, gave his Disciples no such Commandment.
Those who refuse altogether to eat the flesh of living Creatures, when duly
killed, deserve the name of Pythagoreans, Followers of Pythagoras the
Philosopher, rather than to be called Christians, or Disciples of Christ our
Savior. So then, use these Creatures we may, we must, without scruple, for our
meat; yea and we may use these Creatures for our work, to plow and harrow the
Ground, and to carry our Corn into the Barn, and for any other necessary use.
And although many condemn those Persons who promote the generation of Mules, so
does Maimonides in his More Nev. p. 3. cap. 4. and our own Writers on Genesis
36.24. Yet we may use them lawfully; for we find them brought to Solomon, 1
King. 10.25. 2 Chronicles. 9.24. and amongst the Israelites at their return from
captivity, Ezra 2.66. and Nehem. 7.68. And we no where find that ever they were
commanded to put these away, though Monsters in Nature, as they were to put
away their outlandish Wives.

4. Then hence may be condemned the horrible cruelty of the old Sicilian
Tyrants; Phalaris, etc.
of the Roman Emperor Caligula, who was called for his cruelty, Lutum sanguine
maceratum, dirt or clay soaked in blood; and of the rest; as also of the Popes
of Rome; The first sort against Men, the second against Christians, the third
against Protestants, or such as concurred in Doctrine or Tenets with them. The
truth is, Rome was, and is, a bloody City, and well set out in the Revelations
by a Woman clothed in Scarlet, a bloody color. It was at first planted, and
afterward watered with blood. The ten persecuting Roman Emperors slew so many
Christians, as that we are told 5000 Martyrs may be assigned to every day in
the year except one. And the learned Mr. Mede tells us, that the Persecution of
the Beast, or of the Papacy, was as great as that of the Roman Heathen
Emperors. And here, Qualis Rex, talis Grex, as were their Rulers and
Governors, such, so cruel and bloody were the common People; witness the great
delight the Roman Citizens took, in beholding the Sword-sights, where sometimes
out of an opinion, that it was good against the Falling Sickness, they sucked
the reaking blood out of the fresh wounds (as well as bathed their hands in the
blood) of the slain. D. H. from Pl.
They were void of natural affection; they had no Bowels for them that came out
of their own Bowels; for they sometimes exposed, and sometimes murdered their
own Children, if Females, if deformed, or if the Parents were poor, etc. Yea
sometimes they offered their own Children in Sacrifice to their Idol-Gods, as
also did the Carthaginians, the Gauls, and some of the ancient Britains; Thus
they became more brutish, more savage than the very wild Beasts; for which of
these does not love, embrace, nourish, and cherish their Young, the fruit of
their own Bodies?

And well it were if only Heathens were guilty of such cruelty, and liable to
such reproof. How many Christian Parents are there, of whom it may be said, as
the Emperor said of Herod, that it was better to be his Swine, than his Son?
Better to have been their Beasts, than their Children? I cannot excuse King
Philip the II. of Spain, that delivered up, or at least permitted his own Son
Prince Charles, the Heir of the Crown to be put to death in the Inquisition.
Beloved, these things ought not so to be; If you must be kind to you Cattle,
then much more to your own Children, you must not hide your eyes from your own
flesh; you must not make their lives bitter to them, bitter as death, by reason
of your harshness and severity.

Again, hence be convinced of your duty, and persuaded to it. Ye that are
Masters of Servants, be kind not cruel to them. If we must not be cruel to the
Beasts, much less to our Brother, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone.
Your Servants, if Christians especially, are your Brethren, your
Fellow Servants; you and they have one and the same Master in Heaven.

To draw toward a Conclusion, Let Us not be cruel to our own selves, our own
Souls or Bodies. Let not any Man lay violent hands upon himself. Let not any
Man that is a Christian be felo de se. Let not suicide or self-murder be once
named among Christians. We are Soldiers, have our place and station set us,
and must not stir off the Guard till our General, the Lord of Hosts, call us
off again. We must not break Prison to set our Souls at liberty, but stay till
death come with power and authority from the Lord of liberty, life, and death
to let them out. Who ever hated his own flesh?

Lastly, Let Us be kindly affected one toward another, every Man to his Brother
and his Neighbor; be not Men-eaters in the worst sense; do not bite and devour
one another; do not eat one another as one eats Bread. If we must not rent
Christ's seamles Coat, surely we must not tear and devour Christ's living Body.
Let not our Swords any more eat one another flesh, or drink one another blood
any more. The Sword has a mouth, the edge of the Sword in the Hebrew signifies
the mouth of the Sword. If we do thus eat up one another, or cruelly shed one
another blood any more, know, that the voice of thy Brothers blood will cry to
Heaven for vengeance, as the blood of Abel did against Cain, and the Souls
under the Altar in the Revelations, How long Lord, Holy and True, will it be,
before thou avenge our blood upon them that have unjustly shed it! or rather,
spilt our blood, like water upon the Earth! Does God take care for Oxen or
other Beasts, in this Text? Doubtless as unto us, so for our sakes chiefly and
ultimately was this written: A good Man is merciful to his Beast, but the
mercies of the wicked are cruel: As if the Wiseman had said, A just or good
Man is merciful to the Beasts; but a wicked Man is cruel and merciles to
Mankind. And take this along with you; That, to use to show mercy to our
Beasts, is a way and means to make us merciful to our Brother and Neighbor. Si
quis Conscientia Divini mandati ad cruentandum jumentum, tardior suerit; eum
certe ad Hominem violandum, multo magis aversum and alienum habebimus. So
Chrisost. in Loc. It Is thought that God most merciful forbad to eat Blood after
the Flood, to prevent the violence that did overflow the earth before the
Deluge came; for those two go together, Genesis 9. He that sheddeth Man's blood,
by Man shall his blood be shed; And, Ye shall not eat the blood of the Beast,
because, or for, the life is in the blood Those who are used to shed blood
though the blood of Beasts, and though for necessity and public good, as
Butchers amongst us, are forbidden by the Law (or may be excepted against) if
impannel'd upon a Jury of life and death; because their calling, as is
conceived, does harden their hearts, or at least make them less inclined to
mercy and pity than other Men. Even doubtless the cruel Spectacles at Rome did
render the People less merciful. It Is very probable that the custom there, of
casting Malefactors to the Lions and other wild Beasts, to be devoured by
them; and the custom of setting Beasts to sight with, and kill one another in
the Theater, might dispose them the more easily to delight in the Sword-sights,
wherein Men slaughtered one another, to the great content, satisfaction and joy
of the Beholders, and so though their hands were not, yet, they had their eyes
in blood, and as he that lo^ks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed
Adultery with her already in his heart; so he that looked on these bloody
Spectacles with a desire that one should kill the other, and delighted therein
when done, committed Murder against his Brother in his heart: And as it is said
of some that they had eyes full of Adultery, so we may say of the Spectatours
of these bloody Fights, that they had eyes full of Murder; Their eyes were
blood shot in the worst sense, their eyes were full of blood.

Beloved, let it not be so amongst you; you are Christians, Children of the
Father of Mercies; your Bosoms are the nest of the Heavenly Dove; and you
expect to follow the Lamb where ever he goes. You who before your call and
conversion were as Lions, Tygres, Wolves, Bears, as cruel as such one to
another, Put on as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness, gentleness; you
who formerly lived in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another; now that
the kindness and love of God our Savior toward man has appeared; see that
all bitterness, wrath, clamor and evil speaking be put away from you, with all
malice; and be ye kind one to another, tender hearted like the good Samaritan,
not only kind to your Neighbors, but even to Strangers, and like to the
righteous Man in the Text, whose character is, that he is merciful to, or
regards, the life of his Beast.

FINIS.

