INNOCENCE, Though under a Cloud, CLEARED.

By P. H. a poor Prisoner, when almost sunk under pretended Friends Censures in
the day of his Sufferings.

And also, A Discovery of the Comforts that attends Innocence in a Prison.

As also, Twenty four Useful Particulars left by him for his Children and
Friends, and being left in a Friends hand for his Relations, I could not but
make them public; judging it will be no loss to the Author, and great gain to
the Reader, and justly give offense to none.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just; but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

Isa. 66.5. The Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my Name sake,
said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
shall be ashamed.

Isa. 33.3. At the noise of the Tumult, the People fled; at the lifting up of
thy self, the Nations were scattered.

London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

To the Reader.
IN all Ages Duties of Love to the Zion of God, from them that have been able
and faithful, has and will be truly embraced by every Son and Daughter of God,
as useful, profitable, and necessary; And I having the perusal of many of the
Author's Papers, finding this little Piece amongst them, judged it worthy a
conveyance into the world; finding in it such glorious breakings-forth of
Divine and Heavenly-Light, I do not in the least question its acceptance of
every truly gracious Heart, who loves Truth for Truth's sake.

And Reader, thou art here presented with the living Experiences of a poor
Prisoner for Christ, who at this day lies under very hard and sad Sufferings;
one who has in former years been very useful in his Generation in the Work of
God, and also has been an Instrument to bring in, and to bring up many
Spiritual Children to God. And thou may see by this little Piece, that his
heart and soul is yet alive to the Work of his God, That notwithstanding his
Sufferings from the Common Enemies on the one hand, and Pretended Friends on
the other, by their foul, filthy, and lying Reproaches, and false Censures,
which God (I am confident) will in his due time (...) away; and then shall
those false Accusers blush for shame: True it is, the Author might have (...)
more useful, had it not been to the spirit of Envy which is rise^ up against
him in pretended Friends and open Enemies, (without any just occasion given on
his part). The dear Lord pardon them in their irregular proceedings with him
and others.

I do verily believe to see the day wherein God will make him as useful to
Saints as ever in Go^^ work; I mean, the Work of the Ministry of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ; then shall his Innocence be as the Sun at Noon, and this Candle
shall again be lighted, to the amazement of his Adversaries, and they will
blush that have sh^^ at the Innocent without ac^use: In the mean time, let not
^he ill favor of dirty spirits hinder thee from imbraceing this clean piece of
Truth held forth to thee. The Phrases are clear, the Matter suitable, as to the
day wherein we live, that though I were silent, the Book it self would speak
enough for its acceptance.

Now all my desire is, that it may be of use to thy souls health and prosperity
of the inward-man: And that it may be so, by Heaven's blessing, give me leave
to give a few words of advice.

1. Do not take that with the left hand of prejudice that is offered to thee
with the right hand of true sincerity and singleness of heart; Endeavor
therefore to put a candid and fair construction, as in charity thou are bound,
on his endeavor, who has nothing more in his eye, than God's glory, and the
good of souls.

2. Beg the leading of God's dear Spirit, which alone searches and discovers
the things of God to the Children of men, 1 Cor. 2.10. and so on. Oh it is this
Spirit that can unriddle the Divine Mysteries of the Gospel. Never think to
read this Piece in the worlds wisdom, for if thou do, it will contribute
very little to thy satisfaction, but rather occasion thee to stumble at the
things written, 1 Cor. 1.18. and so on to ver. 26. See 1 Cor. 2.14.

3. Be not offended at the short and brief passages through some particulars
treated of in it.

4. Consider all the Scriptures and Arguments to prove any one point; I say,
weigh them altogether, and not apart one from the other; for if there be but
two or three Texts or Arguments amongst five or ten to prove the truth of any
one point, that are substantial and to the purpose, it is sufficient, though
the rest are not so strong, or of equal strength.

5. Take heed of a heart rising in pride; for it is the humble ones the Lord
stands engaged by promise to teach, Psa. 25.9. Jam. 4.6.

6. And lastly, Beg Heavens blessing in thy reading of it, and then I question
not but it will be of much benefit to thee. Thus having premised these few
things, I shall forbear to trouble thee any further, only begging the Father of
Mercies, and God of all Consolation, to make this following Piece effectual to
the enriching thy soul in the Divine Mysteries of God, and a bringing thy heart
to a real embracing of these blessed Truths of God unfolded in it, and to the
accomplishment of all the good ends for the which it is intended, shall be the
constant prayer of him, who begs the Exaltation of God's Glory, and Saints
Happiness, above all things.

R. E.

To the READER.
THis ensuing Treatise being by the Author left in a Friends hand at his
Removal, and it coming to the view of some that it has been useful to, they
thought it worthy to be put in print for a more public benefit, being
persuaded it will prove so to them that can without prejudice read and consider
of it: It Is true, there have been so many Censures cast upon him by them that
profess to fear God, that it may make many, who search no further, but believe
Reports coming out of such mouths that they think dare not lie, to believe all
is, as they say it is; but he that knows all things will one day justify him
before Men, Angels and Devils: And his Innocence would appear in some things
already, did persons believe the sad sufferings he is still in; though censured
to be there, but under a cover to betray some in those parts, but prove not
what they say, or have said, and yet they have from one time to another
promised to do it; by which means his Name has been murdered, the Name of
Christ wounded, and many a poor heart grieved that knows and has found it so,
though others cannot or will not yet see it: but it has been no small comfort
unto him, and some that love him for what they know is of Christ in him, to
consider that the most precious People of God of old were led in that path; as
Job, how deep did he drink of that cup? and that by them that pretended most
high for God, and seemed most zealous against sin; And Paul, David, and others;
nay our blessed Lord Jesus, that pure and spotless Lamb, that did nothing but
good, how was he reviled, reproached, scorned, and almost every action, though
it was never so much for their good, was turned by them as a charge against
him? and it was not only by the rude mutitude, but they that professed to walk
closest to God's Will, and were in his outward Institutions: So it is no wonder
that such in this day deal so with his Servants, that desire to follow him
according to his Will, as blessed be God this poor man does, though it is like
he may not in all things walk up to men's customs, (that in this day is very
much a rule of peoples consciences) but according to the just Law of God, to
whom he can with Job and David appeal for Justification; it is He that searches
all hearts, and knows all actions, and nothing can be hid from his eyes, by
all the covers that imitations, performances and applause of men can make and
put on any to make them appear holy, nor yet clouded by all the Censures that
can be cast on the sincere, but will judge righteously, and render to every one
according to their deeds: but its no strange thing that these last days bring
forth such deceitful dealings by them called Brethren; for it was foretold by
the blessed Scripture, that must be fulfilled every jot and tittle of it.

And being it is so, we ought not to be too confident of the truth of a
Reports, because the Reporter may have fame among some men, but let us search
and see whether it be so or no; and not condemn any man before we hear his
cause, for that is so far below a Christ-like Spirit, that the Romans Law does
not admit of such a thing: therefore let all that look on themselves to be
Saints, that may come to read this little Piece, be warned to take care that
they hear the Accused as well as the Accuser, and weigh things man equal
balance, before they pass sentence, lest by rash judging, they come under
reproof by the justness of the Romans Law.

And in reading, let not thy eye be upon that dirt which is (though unjustly)
cast upon him; if so, thou art like to reap but little benefit by it: for God
does use to answer persons according to the Idols and Imaginations of their
hearts: but if thy soul be willing to embrace Truth for the sake of the Father
of Truth, without respect or disrespect to any man's person, I question not but
what is here presented to thee by a poor suffering censured Prisoner, may be
found by thee worth the treasuring up in the Cabinet of thy Experiences, and in
a day of straits it may prove of great advantage to thee, as blessed be God I
can say it has done to my soul; and that not only in point of comfort, but in
finding out many deceits that attend poor souls in this world, and in the may
they may think leads only to Heaven; and it will be enough for those souls
(that through all the deceits, censures and sufferings that attend them in this
life) that do but arrive at that Haven of Rest, where is nothing but a living
in unity to all Eternity, which will make amends for all their sorrows, though
never so great.

But were the Author of this Book as he is rendered, I think it should be the
work of those that revile him (were they what they profess to be) rather to
pity and pray for him, and endeavor his Restoration, than to do as they do and
have done by him: for the punishment due to what they charge on him will be so
great, that any truly gracious heart can do no other but pity one that is like
to undergo it, and not envy any happiness that he has in this world, nor do
what they can to deprive him of it, as some have done by him: but I shall say
no more to that, nor no longer detain thee from what follows, but leave thee
to the guidance of the Spirit of Truth: and if thou and I do but so walk that
we may be justified by God, it is no great matter what men judge of us; which is
and shall be the desire of thy Friend, that loves all, but desires to delight
in none but for their likeness to Christ Jesus.

Thine in Him, H. F.

To the AUTHOR and READER.
REnowned be they Name, worthy of Praise;
And may it last the longest length of days:
And Praises to the Lord, who only gives
That Grace whereby thy soul in fuffering lives.
By which true Grace thy Spirit higher climes
Than all Aspersions, falsifying crimes;
Nor can they take that Honor from thy head.
If Christians truly understand and read;
Who reads, will find thy heart is not departed
From Grace, if weighing the Truth herein asserted:
Which Demonstrations from thy suffering soul
To all Accusers gives a grand Control.
Come forth Aspersion, Truth does give a Challenge;
Thou can not hold in such a weighty balance:
It Is to no purpose, let Revilings cease:
Who seeks his shame, will make their own increase.
Nothing drops from his mouth and contemplation,
But what is by every soul worth acceptance.
His words are sav'ry, speaking prudently;
His nature's kind, full of humility;
Worthy of prizing: All his works are tending
To good; His actions, always well ascending.
Who can but own his Offering and Oblation
Touching his Work done in his Generation?
To whom be given, for his industrous pains,
All Preservation, where true Grace remains;
With Grace to undergo his Fiery Trials,
To see the end of pouring forth the Viols;
And also of all Powers that are infernal;
And that exalt'd, which only is Eternal.
I take my leave; God's Blessing thee attend.
From him who cannot cease to be thy Friend.
R. J.

To all that in Truth fear the Lord, and are faithful Followers of the Lamb; or
any other that shall read what I have in this time of my Imprisonment writ.
BEloved, it is below a Natural Noble Spirit, much more below Grace, to stumble
or startle at that which must be, and what is daily looked for; And lest my
weakness in that matter may uphold others in that way and work, I shall forbear
to enumerate my unheard of Sufferings and Censures, and how much my heart,
though innocent, was brought down by it, lest it may be an occasion of some
weak ones stumbling at the Truth. It is the duty of all and every one of Gods
People, especially in this day, to be a bearer of burdens, but not a layer on
of burdens upon others, and in this to do it in uprightness without deceit.
There is much deceit attends the Truth, that if Souls that walk in the
profession of the Truth, be not careful to watch, they may (as many do) embrace
that for Truth, that is but an imitation and likeness, and not the Truth it
self.

That souls may have a little help in this work, could not but lend my small
mite of Experience and write down in this day of my Restraint, what Experience
I have had of the Deceits that attend God's dear Appointments, through men's
mistakes; and also the Deceits that attend Prayer, and Sorrow for Sin, or at
least so pretended; and the Deceit in Love; and that grand Deceit that attends
Souls in Duty, calling the heat and warmness, and elivations they gain from
thence, Experiences and Refreshments from Presence.

These, and many more, has my soul met with in my day; which for the help of
others I have (as I said before) asserted in this day of my Restraint: Though,
my beloved Friends, if any such read this, I must tell you, that I am
sensible, although this time of my Imprisonment be a season fit for this
service upon my account, yet by reason of that Cloud that is cast upon me out of
pretended ends to bring honor to God; And how much dirt, is not only by them
cast in my face, but in the face of all that show tenderness and love to me; so
that it is a bad season: for sure I cannot expect but that even what I have here
writ, shall meet with many repulses, and little acceptance; therefore I wish it
might have come from some other hands than mine, being willing to suffer any
thing, so the Truth may be at liberty, and not suffer for my sake. But yet
sure, some sons of Truth will embrace the Truth for the Truths sake, to them I
principally recommend this.

And I have set down some of those dear refreshing Upholds, I have enjoyed from
God since I came into this Prison; that others may through the knowledge of
Prison-mercies, learn, not to fear a Prison. O my Friends, a Prison is not to
be feared, if we suffer not as evildoers, and do but enjoy God there; for Gods
Presence makes a Prison a Palace. None knows the worth, power and riches of
Presence, till it be enjoyed; and when enjoyed, the less of creature comforts
attend it, and the more of sufferings and crosses accompany it, the more
glorious and sweet it is.

Now, my dear Friends, I beg of you, in reading what by me is here writ, To let
your eyes be off from the dirt, which is (though unjustly) cast upon me, when
you read any of Gods Love and Beauty; and let not the Clouds that lie on me,
hinder you from searching and embracing what is here asserted, in faithfulness
and love for your service, That you may by others mistakes, learn to stand
fast, and to keep close to God, to Christ, and to his Truth; following of the
Lamb in this latter day, with that Love, Faith and Patience, that the Day, and
Work of the Day calls for. That you may be so, I commend you, and my own soul,
to God, and the Word of his Grace, and remain,

Yours in that Love of which Christ is the Life. P. H.

A TABLE of the Particulars that in this Book I have spoken to.
1. THe first is, to show the Condition I was in when I first came into Prison,
and how God did meet me and support me; and from what Scriptures God did hand
out Comfort to me when I came in first; and the particular Censures that were
cast upon me, Page 1. to 12 2. The second general head, is the gain and
advantages Saints reap by Sufferings; which was by the Lord showed me from
Matthew. 16.25. laid down in nine particulars. Page 9 to 12 3. Grounds why Saints
have no cause to fear Suffering for Christ and his Cause. page 14-16 4. When
men are said to suffer, and yet not truly suffering as Saints; And when, and
who are true Sufferers; with the Grounds for Saints to suffer, rather than to
save themselves by accusing others. p. 17-20 5. The movings of my going beyond
Sea, and the cause of my Return, inserting the sad Scandals that were cast upon
me, with my Answers to them. p. 21, 22 6. Is eight Queries relating to the
primitive Appointments of our Lord, whether they are now, as then, to be
enjoyed. p. 23-27 7. Is five Queries as to the spirits and principles of men in
this day, whether they are fit to meet God in his dear Appointments, yea or no:
and the sad evil improvements some made of these Queries, and my Grounds why I
did propound them. p. 27-29 8. The Character of a Covetous-minded Rich-man, in
five particulars: with the Description of a covetous mind in poor men, in four
particulars. p. 31-33 9. Several useful Observations for all that fear God; and
in particular to my Children, both as to the nature of Prayer, and resisting
Sin, and the deceit of false-love, and the properties of true Love; and who
they are that are to be loved, and what Love is. p. 34-46 10. Directions for my
Children, how to love, and who to trust, and with what Prudence they should
behave themselves in the world. p. 49, 50 11. What deceit there is in Mourners
or in Mourning, though it may seem to be for Sin, with the true properties of a
true Mourner. p. 50, 51 12. A Discovery of false Joy and Peace, and listings
up, from heat of Duties and Eloquence, etc. and not from Presence. p. 52-55 13.
The true signs of a souls enjoying the promised Spirit, and they are ten in
number. p. 55, 56 14. How a soul may know when God withdraws, whether it be
only the Dissertion that is proper to Saints, or finally forsaking. p. 57, 58
15. A Discovery of the sad Deceits that attend Conversion, what they are, and
who they are that are deceived, and that in seven Soul-destroying Deceits are
laid down. p. 58-60 16. Some Deceits that attend men and women in their
external Walking or Worship. p. 60, 61 17. Is an Answer to a Christian Friends
Letter, as to four things: 1. The heads of what I did deliver from John 3.16.
About God's Love, in giving Christ. 2. Was to prove the Soul immortal. 3.
Whether the Peace that was purchased by Christ, be a particular Grace, or a
state. 4. Is the difference between the two Covenants, viz. the Covenant of
Works, and the Covenant of Grace.
p. 62-104 18. Is fifty one Texts of Scripture that I formerly spoke from, with
the Doctrine that was observed, and my Grounds why I did insert such a Breviate
of them in this Book. p. 105-116 19. Is to show a way to prove there is a God,
without making use of the blessed Scriptures, in Answer to some Atheists. p.
117, 125 20. Is an Answer to another Letter in Answer to three Questions. 1.
How to answer the Roman Catholics in point of Transubstantiation. 2. How to
prove to the Jews, and that unanswerably, that Christ is come. And 3. how many
ways the word Gospel is taken, and what is in truth the Gospel. p. 126-132
21. I have inserted one of the Hymns I made and did sing fince I came hither,
and my Grounds why I did insert it. p. 133-138 22. A little brief Account of my
Imprisonments, with the sorrows and censures that do attend me in these
Sufferings. p. 138-140 23. Some Account of my Imprisonment in the Tower, and of
my being brought before the King, and the business relating to his Fathers
Will, left with me. p. 140-142 24. The Grounds of my Willingness to go beyond
Sea, if I might. p. 143-147 25. A Letter from a Friend, and my Answer. p.
148-151
ERRATA
Reader,
IN regard of the Authors condition and distance from the Press, some Faults
have escaped, the greatest whereof is the Title over the heads of the pages,
viz. [INNOCENCY, though under a Cloud, cleared] which relates only to some
parts of the Book; the proper Titles for each matter, being (through the
misunderstanding of some who put it to the Press) omitted. The rest of the
Faults are more obvious, which thou art desired to correct, as follows.

Page 15. line 16. read, no ground. P. 28. l. 18. for fear 1. tear. P. 34. l.
17. f. worth r. watch. P. 42. l. 28. f. passionate r. patient. P. 50. l. 1. r.
In a word. P. 86. l. 7. f. 10. r. 18. P. 101. l. 28. f. Phil. r. Ephesians. P. 111.
l. 7. f. Proviso r. Prophecy. P. 136. l. 16. f. And r. May.

Ebenezer Ebenezer; The Lord Jehovah is my strength, Christ alone is the
Foundation of all my Consolation, in this day of my trouble and sad rebuke.
IT was the eleventh day after my Imprisonment, before I attained this Book;
And I rejoice I have it, that the daily Supports I have from God's Promises,
and his Presence may be by me recorded; that if I live I may look over them,
and remember Prison-Mercies, as others who faithfully love the Lord, and wait
for his Appearance, may see and bless God, and not fear (...) Prison, but trust
God upon his Word, for (...) is faithful, and to be trusted: The first day and
night that I came in, I was in a maze, (...) well knowing where I was; and
^^king within, I found my heart like Ephraim, Jer. 31.18. but I had not long
moaned my self, but God appeared; (...) in the 20. verse of that chapter, and
(...) next day, after I had for some time sought ^^d, and searched my own
heart, and and as to Men I was innocent, and did judge God would not have
called me here, but he had some work for me to do, For Affliction comes not
out of the dust, Job 5.6. At last God moving the people of the house to lend me
a Bible, the first Scripture I cast mine eye upon, just as I opened the Bible,
was Jer. 18.12. to the latter part of the 18th verse. at which the Lord did
exceedingly appear to refresh my Soul, especially for what I saw in the 12, 13,
14, 17. and 18th verse, it is too long to insert it; only upon the 12th verse, I
set it down in my Concordance.

O let all that fear the Lord, bless him for his Scripture, much more for its
life; which God keeps and lets down to whom and when he pleases; Parts, may
draw and observe good teachings from them, to serve others^ but not its own
Soul; unless God give in that Light, Life and Spirit, that first penned them.

What Parts can draw may serve Profession, but not a Prison and the sights of
Death But O, when God unlocks the Scriptures and says to the Soul, Behold
what is her^ there is Life, there is Love, there is a feast all good things. And
now see the difference between being brought by common gifts (...) the Truth,
and the promised Spirit leading us into Truth, as our Lord promised, Jo^^
15.26. chap. 16.13. And I must say a witness to this, that God's way to
accompli^^ this, is by causing the Soul to stand in God's Fear, and out of its
own wisdom; and as to its own state in it self, to shrink down into its own
emptiness, hating all listings up, but that by the Son of God, in the pure
single Wisdom, Love and Grace of the Father. O had not this Foundation been
laid, I must have been left, being a man of sorrows, surrounded on every side,
and every window is shut, but this of the Lord's Love; O blessed (...) his
Name. O all you Saints that love and fear the Lord, bless him, and seek no
Foundation but what God has laid. But more of this hereafter.

The next Scripture by which God did appear to refresh my heart, was in John
18.11. it is the words of Christ in answer to Peter, who in his mistaken Love,
tenders Christ's Person more than God's Pleasure; and in answer to that, Christ
lets him know, that is Fathers Pleasure was by him higher pri^ed, than his own
preservation; and says, The Cup which my Father gives me, shall I not ^^ink
it? He does not say, the Cup my Father lays upon me; but that the Father gives
^^e. All suffering Cups to Christ or his ^embers, are Kindnesses, they are
God's ^ifts, Phil. 1.29. they are not to be rejected, ^^t prized and esteemed.
David in the 118th ^sal. takes the Cup, blessing God.

But some will say, that was not the Cup of Suffering, but of Salvation; and
it is true, but it was through the Cup of Christ's Sufferings: But all the Cups
of Suffering to the Saints in the Primitive Times, behold how cheerfully they
embraced them; Acts 5. with Heb. 11. and Romans 5.1, 2, etc. Therefore Christ
does not tell Peter, I must be forced to take it, or drink it, but says, Shall
I not (...) he does not, in propounding this, inquire, if he should, or should
not? but it is to show his resolution, that he should do it, and would do it;
judging it a higher honor and duty to embrace God's Pleasure, than to seek and
embrace self-preservation contrary to God's Pleasure. That made those in Heb.
11.35. not accepting deliverance, that was on terms wherein God's Pleasure and
Honor should be crossed. In this case it wa^ Christ's; and it ought to be the
generous spirit of all the Sons of Zion, to slight, nay loath, nay hate their
own lives, when it thus comes in competition with the will of God's now to do
God's Will, in many ways Hypocrites in Imitating-Grace may delight fully do
it; Isa. 2.58. Mat. 13.20, 21. But the chiefest Testimony of true Grace, is to
live in the Will of God; so that if a Cup of Crosses comes, the very sight and
senc^ that the Fathers hand presents it, and that his heart is in it, so that
his Purpose and Pleasure is to be accomplished by it; no sooner say is this
seen, but the heart is silently satisfied, and cries out, not only like old
Eli, ^t's the Lord, let him do it, but as Christ in the Text, It is my Fathers
Cup, and his Gift, I am contentably willing to embrace it. O the very sight and
sense of this Truth! ^^om this place in John 18.11. God made so refreshing,
that the Cup which the Lord, not only in this Imprisonment, but before and
since the sad unheard of suffering by Censures on my Name from professed
friends, which was the saddest trial that ever befell ^e, was made dearly sweet,
by seeing it to ^e a Cup that my Father gave me: to flesh and blood it was very
sore; for though my innocence was enough to bear me up; For ^here declare it in
the Presence of my Father, by whose Love I live, that I was, and am as innocent
Meaning the Reports that are of me to be a Trapanner, etc.
as the child unborn; ^^t that which made it hard (...) bear, was;

First, It came from such ^^at I deserved better, and expected better, and God
required better from.

Secondly, Not one of them that did report (...) or believe that Report, though
I believe ^ere were a thousand, most of which professed to walk by a rule, yet
not six ever came ^^e a Brother or Sister to answer the Rule, seeking
satisfaction from me, or to restore (...) if it had been true.

Thirdly, It made many, that I hope fear God, though mistaken, and out of their
Duty, to be so full of anger at me, that they have called me behind my back
strange names, and wished that God had taken me away seven years before; so sin
begot sin at a high rate.

Fourthly, They did by this add to the National sins, that great Sin the
Prophet mentions in Jer. 20.10. Report, and we will report; O the sense of this
Sin! and that I must be the object, did even sink my soul, till God let me see
his Pleasure, and that this suffering did most answer my sins, having more
worded away my day, than workt it away; besides, I had a great Name, and was
highly esteemed among many, in which I did triumph; and in all this my Name was
great, but my Nature as to Grace but little, upon which wing I flew high: Now
God saw good for me to drink this Cup, as the way to meet with my sin, and to
bring down to Name to be as little as my Grace. As soon, ever God showed me
this, I kissed the Cup.

Fifthly, Before I saw this, my heart wi^^ restless, judging my self so
wronged, being innocent, that I found it a hard thing to kee^ my heart in a
right frame, but reasoning an^ rising up, and when I reproved my ow^ heart, the
reply was, Am I not innocent, a^ so wronged? then God replied, and said, Is it
good to be angry? and my reply was, It is not Anger, but Zeal; for God's Name
suffers also: but when I saw, as David did, God bid them curse, I was dumb; and
for the reasons aforesaid, I lay down and kissed the Cup.

Sixthly, The Evil that did attend this, was, I seeing such unfaithfullness and
disorder in professing People, was ready to say, Is there any faithful or
upright? that I began to question all Societies in that kind; and after I had
sent to many, because they would not orderly send or come to me; and most of
all I sent for, went away, as they said, satisfied; and at last I began to
slight giving satisfaction, to avoid many things that I might not otherwise
avoid, that may give offense, which if I failed, it was in that; and though
their disorderly ways was the cause, the sense of which may very well make
them bear it, yet their thus dealing, was no just ground in God's eye for me to
be s careless: and since God has brought my heart to see his just ends in
their unjust ways, and to bring ^e into a satisfactory silence; I have been
wounded for it; and I do beg of God for my self, and all that fear God, that in
and under all such Sufferings, our eyes may be kept close to eye God, and not
Men, and to ^o our duty, not because others do it, but because God commands it,
knowing the righteous God will embrace his season to reward every one according
to their way and work.

So now I bless God, my desire is to im^brace the Cup my Father has given me,
an^ to prefer his Pleasure, before the preservation of my own Person.

If any who are ignorant, should say, What is this you mean, that you have been
thus falsely reproached in?

I answer, it is so well known not only here but beyong Sea; for he or they who
begun it and have sinfully devised it, did send it up and down from Sea to Sea,
and City to Country, that I need not repeat it, but say again in the fear of
God, and as I expect merc^ at the hands of the God of Mercy, I am a little
guilty as the Child unborn, both in principles and practice: but I leave it;
and if they who have so bloodily murdered m^ Name, have or shall have as much
peace i^ this Murder, as I have now in the bearing o^ it, they will not want
peace.

Secondly, Should I further rip up the matter, by repeating it, the Sin of the
Author might as much tend to God's dishonor, a^ they have caused God's Name to
be dishonored in what they have done; so silence i^ my duty, lest also I
return evil for evil, contrary to my Lord's will, Mat. 5.11, 12, 39.

The next Scripture God did bring refreshment to my heart by, since I came into
my close confinement, is Mat. 16.25. from whence I was made to see, that it is
an imprudent way for any Christian, to go to save himself when Christ calls to
suffer for him.

And it also shows the safety and profit of having a generous spirit for
Christ. If a soul does freely so render it self up to Christ's disposal, not
minding its own safety, but Christ's Service, that soul shall not lose, but
gain: Each word Christ here speaks, is upon certainty; If he will save, he
shall lose; if he will lose, he shall find it.

To save life, and in a special manner, a man's own life, is in it self a duty
the Law requires, yet here it seems to cross it: no no, Christ only shows a new
way to save life, and that not upon uncertainty, but certainty, and direction
how to do it; it is but leave, and live; that is, leave all to Christ's dispose,
in his calling or disposing of us in his Service and Suffering; if we so love
Him, his Interest and Cause, we shall not, we cannot lose, but gain.

Now that there is no loss by losing all on this side Christ for Christ, you
will see, if we consider these things;

First, All that we lose in this sense, in it self is nothing; Prove. 25.5. it
is said there, It is not; that is, it is nothing; and in Amos 6.13. it is said to
be a thing of naught; that is, it is nothing; and in 1 Cor. 7.31. it is said to
be a fashion; now fashions they change, and that which is to day, is not to
morrow, but passes away; so that if this be lost, when as in it self it is
nothing, what can be lost out of nothing?

Secondly, Consider that whatsoever is lost, or laid down for Christ, cannot be
a loss; because it is only lent, and God and Christ have given sufficient
engagement, to repay with an hundred fold improvement. See Mat. 19.29.

But this Text assures us, of not only freedom from loss, but a finding or gain.

If any should say, Wherein is a Saints gain in thus suffering?

Answer, First, mind this; no sooner is the soul upon the wheel of suffering
for Christ, but God and Christ is upon their motion to rise and serve them: And
that,

First, By inquiring into their state and condition; as he did in the old time.

Secondly, By giving forth a suitable proportion of Grace to carry them through
it.

Thirdly, By debating with the trial, and waiting it out, that it may be in
measure, Isa. 27.8. Jer. 30.11.

Fourthly, When its gone forth and seized upon a Saint, God stands by it, and
if it appears too heavy, he makes it lighter, by giving the heart a lift into
the higher Life and strength, or by taking some of that away; See Psalm. 138.3,
7.

Fifthly, While that is on, that he in his Wisdom sees best to be on, Christ
stands in so great a sympathy with them, that he is afflicted in their
affliction, Isa. 63.9. and it is such a sympathy, that causes Christ not to
stand silent, but to sympathize with the soul, so as to send it and carry it
answerable comforts.

Sixthly, The Grace that God gives souls in such a suffering day, is not only
so much as may and does answer their troubles, but it does overbalance and
transcend all their sorrows; See 2 Cor. 1.4, 5.

Seventhly, God does not only keep Saints in suffering, and bring them out
without loss, but he makes even their affliction, to increase profit and gain
to the Soul, Romans 5.2, 3, 4.

Eighthly, God is so indulgently tender of Saints, and their good and gain in a
suffering day, that rather than they shall want what is in his hand or heart,
he will with his own Presence be with them, and abide with them, Isa. 43.1, 2.
if they go, he goes, if they be put into the water and fire, so will he too:
See the three Children, Dan. 3.24, 25. and if shut up in prison where they are
kept dark, there God will show them more than before, Jer. 33.3, 8. whatsoever
they want or are, in point of comfort deprived of, God presently makes it up,
Micah 7.7, 8.

Ninthly, And to make up all, after his often coming down to them, and
enriching them, by his giving forth, Light, Love, Life, and all, that they may
be fully gainers, he will take them up to himself, and so to live in eternal
Glory with them for ever, where sin, and sinners, suffering and sickness shall
trouble them no more, but all sorrow and sighing shall pass away, and all tears
shall be wiped from their eyes, Isa. 25.8. Rev. 7.17. chap. 21.4. O come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen.

O now my Soul, what loss is there by loseing for Christ, his Cause and
Interest? Ah, happy is the soul that is employed in this work! O who would not
leave it self, and its all, to Him and his disposal, and never chose, or refuse
its own Cup that the Father mixes and gives to us? O my soul, trust God, he is
Faithful, and will make good every tittle of his Promises. See 1 Kings 8.56.
Isa. 34.16.

Now the next Scripture God brought comfort to my Soul by, was Rev. 2.10. Fear
none of these things which you shall suffer: behold, the Devil shall cast some
of you into prison, that you may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten
days; but be faithful, etc. These ten days is an uncertain time; and that the
word Ten is taken for an uncertain time, is clear, if you mind Genesis 31.7, 41.
and Numb. 14.22. and Job 19.2.

Object. The Ten Horns in Dan. 7.7. sure is a certain number.

Answ. Yes, it is so; but mind, the word Ten is not barely expressed, and so
left, but it is expounded verse 24. These Ten Horns are ten Kings; so that it
is not there left as in the other places, but when it is expressed, and not
fixed to a certain number, it is to be minded as an uncertain time; so that by
ten days, must be meant an uncertain time. Some say 'its to be meant, a day
for a year, and the longest time of persecution that ever was since Christ's
time, was but Ten years; but I judge it best to mind this as in other places,
many days.

But from it I am made to see, that to persecute Saints is the Devils work; God
makes use of the Devil to do his drudgery. Sufferings is God's way to scour
and rub the rust off from his Servants: it is work fit for Satan; but the profit
of it is fit for none but Saints. O I have cause herein to bless God, for I
have cause to say, there was much rust got in my lazy time upon my heart, and
over my Experiences and Graces, and acquaintance with God and his ways; O if
this be God's rubbing and clearing day, I must say as Peter, Not only my hands,
but all over. O my God, did my Estate gather or cause rust? thou tooks away
that, and thou did see my Name dead. Did thou see my Name, being too large
for my Nature, caused rust? thou have suffered that to be blasted; and thou
see that both my Liberty and Life, gather rust? will thou also take that? Do
Lord, do Lord what thou will, so thou will bring me out as Gold, like Job, Job
23.10. and that is the next words in the Text; and see what follows in this,
Rev. 2.10. Be faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life:
Saints faithfulness is to be such, as not only to hold out in some dangers, but
to death; O there is a sufficient reward, a Crown, and that a Crown of Life;
all earthly Crowns are dead, or dying Crowns, this a living Crown, or a Crown
of Life: O who would but strive, wait and work for such a Crown! well might
Christ exhort Saints not to fear any thing that shall befall them of this nature.

Now the chiefest word that God made of weight to my Soul from these words, was
these first words, Fear none of these things; O there is not only one sort of
Sufferings, but all sorts must attend Saints; but none is to be feared.

Now upon my minding this, these considerations did follow me.

First, There is no cause of fear where the object of fear is removed. Now the
matter of Fear or Fearfulness is Evil. The Evil of all afflictions on Saints,
is removed by God through Christ, Isa. 27.8. That made David say, Psalm. 23.4.
Though in the valley of the shadow of death, not to fear Evil.

Secondly, There is no cause of Fear of that or them which come either to serve
us or save us; Now al Suffering on Saints as Saints, comes to serve them, and
so to save them, sometimes from sin, Isa. 27.9. and sometimes from the evil to
come, Isa. 57.1.

Thirdly, There is no cause of fear of that which accomplisheth no Evil, but
always Good; if all does, Romans 8.28. then Sufferings ^o being part.

Fourthly, There is ground of fear of them, or that which is conquered before
we encounter with it, as all sufferings and censures, ^^e, Romans 8.33, 35, 39.

Fifthly, There is no fear to walk in that way, which Christ our Captain has
gone before us in and tried it, and not only so, but he holds us by the hand,
nay, heart, all the way.

Sixthly, There is no fear of that, though never so great a cross, if it be the
eminent way to the Crown, as Sufferings are; See Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12.

Seventhly, There is no fear to meet with God in the way, and day of his
favors: for Saints suffering season is God's observing season to give forth
his Loves, it is his very high market days; See Psalm. 43.2, 3, 4. Jer. 33.3.

Eighthly, What cause of fear is there of that, which does not, nor can destroy
the Foundation of Faith? O it is so far from that, that it is rather an
opportunity for the Foundation to give forth it self like a Fountain full of all
fresh Springs. See I pray, see David see the three Children, see Daniel, what
streams of Light, Love, nay Life, was given forth at such suffering seasons,
Psalm. 23.4. and 27.1, 2, 3. and 138.3, 7.

Ninthly, What cause is there of fear of that which is appointed to testify
and seal to our Faith, and our Interest in God's Love and eternal Life?

Tenthly, What cause is there to fear that which is but the opening the door to
let us into converse with God? as all Sufferings of Saints is no more, but
God's turning the key to unlock the door, and let Souls into a living converse
with God; for where the world shuts Saints out, God takes them in, Psalm. 25.

The worlds frowning time is God's smi^ling time; when the comforts of the
world seem to be silent, then God opens the e^^ for instruction; Job 36.15.
Hab. 3.17, 1.19. Micah 7.8.

Eleventhly, What cause is there to fear be employed in that, or of that, which
is the way not only to follow Christ, but it is that by which the soul is made
conformable to Christ, and to his Death, and the Power of his Resurrection,
it is what Paul groaned for, Phil. 3.10.

Twelfthly, What cause is there to fear to meet with that, which is to
accomplish the end of our Faith, to wit, the Salvation of our souls, and
eternal Glory with God and Christ, and all the Assembly of Saints, the
Firstborn, and Angels for evermore. See Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.

O these considerations did follow me many days and nights, till my Soul cried
out, Lord, where am I, Lord what am I, that I should be thus honored? O
blessed be God for ever. After, this or upon this consent from these
considerations there was a question did arise in me, which was to this purpose,
Why men may suffer much and long and yet be nothing. Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.3.
of a man give his body to be burnt, it will not do without Charity: So then the
question was, who are true Sufferers, or when does a soul suffer rightly, and
when not?

Answer, A man may suffer, that is a Professor of Christ, and yet not for
Christ, but is an evil doer or busy body, and his profes^ession will not make
his sufferings good.

Secondly, A man may suffer for the Profession of Christ, and yet not for
Christ: as ^^us:

First, When men will suffer, because they will suffer, and not because God
wills it.

Secondly, When men suffer because others suffer, and suffering is cried up as
honorable; so in the crowd of this cry, with the rest in this crowd, some men
crowd in.

Thirdly, When men are by providence brought into a state, or strait, that if
they go back they shall un-man themselves: so more out of the resolution of an
heroic nature than from the exercises of Grace, they suffer; this is not to
suffer as a Saint, but as a man.

Fourthly, When men's interest is so interwoven with the Interest of Christ,
that if they do not stand by Christ, they will lose their own, so to gain their
own, they stand by him this is not right.

A soul is said to suffer as a Saint, and (...) becomes a Christian, so as God
and Christ will own it and crown it.

First, When they singly suffer for being Saints, and rather than they will
deny it (...) forsake it, they will forsake all: As in H^^^ 11.35. They
accepted not deliverance.

Secondly, When they suffer for their owning or standing by God's and Christ's
Ca^^^ or Interest, and rather than they will forsake either, they will forsake
their lives, or (...) that is dear to them in the world. So David suffered; so
did Daniel suffer, and the thre^ Children, and the Apostles, Acts 4. and Acts
5. and so Paul.

Thirdly, When souls are brought to such state, that unless they willingly
suffer, some other of God's People must suffer; now rather than they should
suffer, the soul is willing to suffer: this is that which God will own; and it
is what Christ did for us; and ^erefore we ought, says the Apostle, to lay own
our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. and this it is that Christ intends in
that, John 13.14. chap. 15.12. It was Paul's joy (...) suffer for the
Colossians, Col. 1.24.

These Scriptures are a sufficient ground to suffer, rather than to free our
selves from it; the manner of some is by accusing others, ^^d bringing others
to suffer, to free themselves, and say, Charity begins at home; these ^^uls
have little acquaintance with Christ's ^^w Command, and they will one day see,
(...) the way to lose and not to save; as Christ ^^th, Mat. 16.25.

And now if any will demand by what rule ^^ey should rather suffer, than save
themselves (...) putting others upon suffering, let them ^^^k well upon those
blessed Scriptures afore^entioned, and they will see it a duty and ^^^nt-like
to suffer for the Brethren; and it not the action of a Saint, but of Satan, to
(...) themselves by accusing others.

(...) blessed be my dear Father, that of all the Evils that attend me, thou
did never suffer that to come into my heart.

Fourthly, To suffer as a Saint, is when the World out of their envy against
Saints, Holiness and Piety, as being contrary to them, they are carried out in
envy to hate them, and to do all the hurt they can against them, though they
cannot in particular charge them with any thing justly, not so much as against
their own Law, yet cannot love them.

Now thus to suffer willingly, not for any thing we have done to the World,
only because we are called out of the world, thus to suffer is to suffer as a
Saint: therefore Christ makes provision for this, when he tells his Disciples,
that the World hated him, and so would hate them, in that they were not of the
world; for the World can only love its own.

But mind further what dear provision Christ's makes, John 16. ult. And O my
soul, do thou therein rejoice, that thou have an interest in this suffering,
and thought worthy to be enriched with that Provision of Peace in the Prince of
Peace, there rest in the God of Rest. Amen, Amen.

About this time some Friends coming (...) see me, desired to know my Judgment
as (...) Gods Appointments, or Gospel Ordinances and why of late I did not walk
with them I used to do, and desiring my Judgment; which I did give them; and
cannot omit, but insert it here, and shall faithfully speak to both, and to the
last.

First, It Is true, I did for many years walk with these Friends in P.F. and
the ten last years with them at Newcastle and Durham, and my care and pains
there to attend both them at Newcastle and Durham I shall not declare, but
leave it to them that were eye witnesses; and the rather, because some here in
London are pleased to reproach me, and affirm the contrary: Now since that I
came to London, at or about which time, I for the most part did use to employ
my Gifts among the People that walk with Mr. K.

Now as to my not continuing with them as before, there be many causes, that if
any unbyassed hearts will judge, they will not condemn me as they do. It was
not long after this, but under trouble of mind, I desired to live at peace; I
went beyond Sea to Holland, and had no evil intent, as God knows and bears me
record; but as soon as I was gone, those, or some of those I most prized,
raised a report, That I was gone to carry on Designs against the People of God;
at the hearing of which I was exceedingly grieved; and though I writ over, and
employed friends to inquire the cause; yet to this day I could not find out the
reason; only a sad malicious spirit raised it.

So I came over with a desire, though I dyed, to vindicate my self, but as I
and many friends endeavored it, this spirit privately went up and down to
carry it on, and promised in so many weeks it would be made good; those weeks
we stayed; then in three months it would be made good; we stayed three times
three months, but still it was as it was; and though he that was by them
employed to devulge it, saw his and their evil, as some faithful Friends can
witness, yet these parties did still persist in their way; and the Report was
all over the Nations, to the wounding of my soul, and many more: I did by some
send privately to see if I might come to their Private Meetings; this was the
return, they should be afraid of me if I did come; and all this time, of all
these thousands that did report this, not six ever came either to reprove me,
or to exhort me to my duty: And when them of P. F. left their place for fear, I
sent a Letter to them to keep together, and desired that if they would not,
that they would let me appear there; it was not accepted: and when they all
left it, I did once go and appear, and for so doing, how I was censured, many
can witness. I knew not what to do, but began to think, whither should I go; I
saw a People that was come out from them, and joined with N. S. that had kept
themselves more clear than the rest; but searching the Scriptures, I could not
find clearness for their coming off as Members from a Church or Churches, till
a Church had unchurched themselves, and I could not see that they had, by what
they had then done; and for Members to reassume the power of withdrawing, which
is only in a Church, and not in particular Members to act so toward a Church,
was so strange, that there I could not join if I might, so that my way was
stopped up from all such way of Society.

Then I only pressed some friends that lay under trouble for others miscaryings
to keep together, and for us to pray, and to exhort and to edify each other;
and this I did, not daring to miss an opportunity, as they can witness, for all
the fears that did attend us. Now if any soul without prejudice, would but take
up the matter, in the true fear and love of God, they cannot justy condemn me:
though they which were most near, or ought to be so, do condemn me, I bless God
I have peace.

I but, says some, You appear to be against Ordinances.

Answ. It Is not so; but I have and do very much question these things.

First, Whether a Spirit be yet given down to fit men so largely for that work
as is professed?

Secondly, Whether God does or will own men carrying on such a work, or as
others calls it, Kingdom-Work without, before it be carried on within?

Thirdly, I have very much ground to question that spirit, that is so high to
carry it on in days of prosperity, and draws back in times of persecution,
and closes in with men to save their Person and Purse, more then to venture
their All for what they do profess: If herein I am ignorant, God knows it is
not willingly. Besides, there were some Queries propounded by me, which made
some censure me, though it was but by my faithful inquiries; which were these;

First, Whether there was not a season for the settled being of the Primitive
Church, according to the Primitive Institution, to cease for a season, and that
from these grounds, which I beg of all without censuring, to consider and weigh
well.

Query 1. When the Church went into captivity, they were without the enjoyment
of the settled Administrations, and that by God's ow^ order; whether I say was
not that then a Type (...) If so, when fulfilled, it must have an Antytype When
and where was that Antytype? (...) must answer the Type.

Query 2. When did the Woman, spoken of Rev. 12.6. go into the Wilderness? and
when came she forth? or is she to come forth? and though God did provide a way
to feed her there, yet it is very much to be queried, Whether Primitive
Institutions, as to Church-Ordinances, can be or could be enjoyed in that state?

Query 3. was, Whether in the time the seven Plagues were by the seven Angels
pouring forth, as in Rev. 15. Any man could enjoy Church-Ordinances, or
Temple-Duty, seeing that, till all the seven Plagues was poured forth, no man
could enter into the Temple, verse. 8. If no man could enter into the Temple for
that season, then where or how Temple-Duty could be enjoyed or performed, till
that season was past?

Query 4, was from Rev. 21.9. where it is clear, that one of the seven last
Angels having seven Viols full of the seven last Plagues, who was the Messenger
that said, Come hither and I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife, was he
not the first Messenger that presented the visible Glory of the Church, and her
Primitive Purity and Order, after her be-wildered state? If so, as it does
appear by the words, then it is to be queried,

First, Whether the visible Glory, Purity and Order of the Church, was not
obscure and lay hid for some season before? If so, When and what that season
was, or is?

Query 5. was from Rev. 11.2. This action of God's to measure any place or
state, imports one of these two things, either a destroying; as in 2 Samuel 8.2.
Hab. 3.6. or it imports a renewing or restoring; as in Jer. 31. 39. Ezekiel. 40.3,
4, 5. chap. 43.10. Now my first Query is, Whether the Temple or Temple-Worship
be here under measuring, in order to destroy or to restore? Then I query
further, Whether or no when the Temple or Temple-Work, is under measureing in
either sense, it be then in a capacity to be enjoyed or practiced, yea, or no?

Query 6. was, Whether the bare restoring of the Knowledge, with Conviction on
the Judgment of Men, of the Truth of the Gosple-Order or Ordinances, be
sufficient to authorize any to be Administrators, or embrace the
Administrations without the same Power and Spirit that at first did attend
them, and fit souls for them, yea or no?

Query 7. was, Whether the restoring or enjoying so many or so much of the
Primitive Order or Ordinances, that Men, as Men, may do with natural parts, or
imitating-grace, and not the Order or Ordinances, that had their immediate
dependence upon Gods Power, Spirit and Presence, be that promised restoring of
Zions Primitive Purity, which Saints pray for and wait for, nay that which so
many glorious Promises point at, yea or no?

Query 8. is, If the Ordinances that Saints now enjoy, in the Order they enjoy
them, be the same Orders, or Ordinances and Institutions that were in the
Primitive times: Then what is that Primitive Restoring of Zions Power and
Purity we daily wait and pray for?

The other were Queries, upon the Spirits and Principles by which some embrace
God's Appointments in this day.

1. Query Is from the Consideration, that God's Work in this latter day, is an
overturning Work; as in Ezekiel. 21.27. by which great mutations must be made in
and among men and things, as the only way to usher in that that there is
intended; then my Query is, Whether such Principles and Spirits, which gives
men liberty to change with the times and turn with turns to save themselves and
interest, be a Principle, or Spirit, or frame of heart, that is a fruit of
God's Latter-day-Promises, or such a Principle or Spirit that is fit to meet
God in his Appointments, or follow him in Latter-day-VVork, yea or nay?

2. Query Is from the words of Paul, in 2 Timothy 3.5. where the Apostle tells us
of the evil Properties of Men in the latter days; and as to Professors, he
says, they embrace the Form, but they deny the Power; from such turn away; my
Query is,

If Men in the embracing God's Ordinances or Appointments, do only separate
from the worlds (...) and publik gross ways, yet live in their old nature, and
answer their constitutions in Covetousness, Anger and Pride, etc. and there
abide, without growing into a New Life, as to change of natural constitution
and custom, crying up the Temple of God or the VVayes of God; and there they
differ from others, but else no difference.

Quest. Is not this an embracing the Form without Power, and so opposive, if
not an actual denying the Power: If not, Where among men in this latter day, is
there any that do so, seeing the Form embraced is a Form of Godliness, and the
Power wanting is the Power of that Godliness?

3. Query, Whether that Spirit or Principle in Men that cannot bear or abide to
be questioned or tried, but if it be, it will be so far from lying down in
patience, as that it will rather fear men and their names; who so try or
question whether this, I say, is or can be the property of the Spirit that is
promised to be given forth in the latter day, seeing in all the Prophets, in
their prophesying of the Ppoperties of that Spirit, set it forth to be a quiet
Spirit, etc. as you may see in Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. chap. 65.25, etc?

4. Query, Whether that Principle or Spirit which does and can only know and
own Grace in men and women, as they are one with them in the external
Profession and Form, and as they come up to them there in height, length and
breadth, so far they can and do own men or women to be Saints, or gracious; but
out of that, though never so eminent, they cannot give them their hand or
heart, in the Fellowship, Love, and delightful owning, as Grace in all calls
for?

Whether or no, I say, is this the Proprety of true Grace, or that Spirit
that is promised to be given down to men in the latter day, and especially
seeing that the Spirit of God and Christ, is like God, and Christ knows his own
Grace wheresoever it be: and so did the Spirit in the Saints in the Primitive
Times, and did then not know nor own men after external appearances, but
according to internal Graces; even as Christ, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. and Christ
himself so knows and owns men, Heb. 2.11.?

Query 5. was from the consideration, that where Grace and the Spirit is,
either of old promised or prophesied of, or enjoyed, as in the Primitive Time,
or to be enjoyed in the latter day, wheresoever it is spoken of, it is declared,
as the true Property of the Spirit to carry on moral Duties, as well and as
much as instituted Appointments or Worship; as you may see in these Scriptures,
Micah 6.8. Mat, 22.37, 38. Jam. 1.26, 27.

If so, What shall we judge of such who are forward to profess and practice
instituted Worship beyond others, and yet as to Morality, as to Justice and
Righteousness, not only as to God, but between man and man, are more backward
than others, and in seven years progress in the one, yet not one of alteration
in the other; Is there I say ground to believe they have the promised Spirit
fit to embrace Gospel-Appointments, yea or no?

These Queries may by some be looked upon weak and simple, and not convenient to
be here inserted; to such I answer;

I do it upon this account; They being Queries that I did in tenderness at some
time propound to be satisfied in them: I did not affirm this or that from them;
but some were pleased to run up and down, and from thence affirm, That I did
deny Churches, and God's Appointments; and it coming out of the mouths of
Professors, it goes, as always it does, for truth; and this was the ground of
that Report; though God knows, I never prized Scripture and God's Appointments
more, nor so much, in all my life; only as I said before, It is not Service,
but a Sin, to carry on Kingdom-Work Without, before God carries it on Within;
and so embrace the Form before the Spirit, or Power possess us; a Deludge in
which thousands of souls are lulled asleep, and are kept from heart-work,
thinking all is right within, because they are judged, and do judge themselves
to be right without; and that it is so, see Mat. 8.11, 12. chap. 12.43, 44.
Mat. 13.20, 21. Luke 13.25, 26, 27. and Isa. 58.1, 2.

Because in some of my Queries I mentioned the Sin of Covetousness, which is a
Sin that is as secret, as dangerous, I shall briefly here set down the
Characters of a covetous-minded man, either in rich men or poor men.

In answer to which, first, Mind what Covetousness is in the Eye of the
Scripture; it is an inordinate desire of Gain or Increase.

Now the Characters must be drawn, either from the nature of Covetousness, or
from a frame of heart not contented with its state; for Contentation is set by
the holy Ghost in a direct opposition to Covetousness, Heb. 13.5. Now in
minding what has been said of Covetousness, the Characters of such a mind will
the better appear.

First, When they do by unjust and unrighteous Ways, labor to increase their
Estates; Hab. 2.9, 10, 11, Micah 2.2. Jer. 6.13. chap. 8.10. chap 22.17.

Secondly, When they do by any action declare their love to, or longing after
that which in another; Deuteronomy. 5.21. Jos. 7.21.

Thirdly, When the wants of poor Saints are seen by them, or made known to
them, yet they are not free to communicate to their wants suitable to what God
has blessed them with, Prove. 21.26. suitable to that in 2 Cor. 9.5. compared
with 1 John 3.17. with Romans 13. last part of the 9th verse.

Fourthly, When they toil and labor after Riches, as by it they are made to
lose their life and favor in their language and service of God, turning their
Christian savor into sadness, and losing their former forwardwardness and life
in God's ways, by posting after the things of this life; 1 Timothy 6.10 2 Timothy
4.10. contrary to Psalm. 119.36.

Fifthly, When the love of the world does not only hold men in, but take men
off from the Service of God, 2 Pet. 2. and the last part of the 14th verse
joined with the 15th, suitable to Isa. 57. apply the 9th and the 10th verse with
the 17th verse; Ezekiel. 33.31. These five are to try Rich and Poor, but
especially the Rich: And the Characters of a covetous mind in poor men follow.

First, When they are not cheerfully contented with what they have, but would
have what they have not, Heb. 13.5. with a restless mind, rising and reasoning
against Providence.

2. When they appear complaining or repining at their own Poverty, by comparing
their Poverty with others Riches: This is well as the first, is contrary to
content, and so therein Covetousness.

3. When they are not free and willing to go on in any way or work for God,
unless they are by the rich so supplied, that they may be wholly freed from
bodily labor, Acts 20.33, 34. suitable to such in 1 These. 4.11. 2 Th. 3.10, 11,
12. Now this relates to some, but not to all.

4. Mind what has been said from ^oth, and you will mind, that
strait-hearted^ess in a Rich man, is Covetousness; and Discontent in a Poor man
at or with his Estate, is no less; for that which is contra^y to Contentation,
is Covetousness, by the Lord so decided, Heb. 13.5, etc.

Disquieted, or troublesome, or discon^ented demands of Poor men to be supplied
^y the Rich, is as sure a Character of Cove^^usness as Strait-handedness in a
Rich man ^e supply the wants of the Poor; and both are (...) be judged
Covetousness.

O how much does this Sin reign in the ^earts and lives of men and women, that
pretend much for God, and are cryers down of others sins and persons for
sinning, and at the same time harbor this sin; that is no less than Idolatry
in their own breast: Few or none but will say, that it is a sin to own an
Idolater in fellowship, and that all true Believers are bound to withdraw from
them; and though Covetousness be the same, yet how are poor souls satisfied, or
at least silent. But I shall leave this, and say no more to it.

Some Observations useful for all that fear God; but in particular, left for my
Children.
When ever a heart has a sensible enjoyment of God, and his Love in Christ,
especially as a return of Prayers, mind these things.

First, Expect a fresh assault of Satan, with high attempts to draw the soul
aside, either to looseness under that love, or some other evil improvements.
When Christ was in the Wilderness, and was enriched with high Inrichments of
God, he was presently set on by Satan, Mat. 4.1, 3, 5, 8. And as soon as
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.5. was delivered and enriched with God's Love, was presently
set on to be tempted, Isa. 39.1.

So let all that fear the Lord, at all seasons, but in an especial manner, then
double their worth.

Secondly, Sin and Satan never gets into us, and is embraced, but as Sin comes,
God goes, and so Sin gets strength, and the Soul gathers weakness. If so,

Thirdly, That Soul that does not so much as resist Sin in its first attempts,
he may be confident he will be overcome: O then take this from a soul that has
had experience; Keep the watch most over thy heart, thy eyes and words.

Fourthly, It is easy to sin God out of sight, but not so easy to pray him
in: If so, O stand fast in God's Fear; and when most enjoyed, let him be most
prized, and Sin most feared.

Fifthly, Sin least seen, is the most futile and hardest conquered: Then watch
and mourn most for that which is least seen. Heart-Sin, as to men, seems
least, but as to God, hated most.

Sixthly, No soul seeks for Pardon suitably, unless he is as much and as
eagerly desirous of Power against Sin, as Pardon.

Seventhly, Sins of Constitution are most to be feared, Heb. 12.1. But when
Sins of Constitution get into custom, then Sin has got both its wings, and
only a mighty Power of God can conquer it. O fear the Sin of Constitution, as
Death; and Custom, as Hell: for if they once join, they will cause the soul to
fly out of sight of Presence, and sight of Experience, and all ability to
return. If so, mind;

When a soul is there, to go back it cannot, to go forward is death and Hell,
so then all it can do under its loss, is to shrink down into its empty nothing
state, and lie low in it self with its eye singly on Free Grace in Christ.

Eighthly, No heart thus truly lying low, but is lifted up; when up; stand in
fear, sin no more.

Observations as to Duty.
1. Lie low, and pray till God come in; but pray most when he is come in; for
the soul prays best when he injoys God most: Call while he is near, Isa. 55.6.
Psalm. 21.13. Cant. 1.4.

2. A Soul does not gain, but lose, by keeping from Duty, for the want of the
Life of Duty.

Observe,

It Is good to lie at the side of the Pool, though we want strength to go in.

3. It Is proper for the soul when it prays bests to judge it self to pray
worst.

Observe,

Pride in Prayer, eats out the heart of Prayer.

Experience is a good concomitent of Prayer, but no way safe to be a Foundation
of Faith or Prayer; God's promised Word is only a fit Foundation for that work.

In a word, Nothing can or is a fit Foundation, but this which does stand when
all falls.

Prayer is a Duty God calls for, and it is a way to acknowledge God; but it was
never intended to change or alter God, but to change us, and not force God, but
fit us for what is promised and purposed of God for us.

That heart prays best, that appears least in its own name or nature.

And that heart prevails most, that prays most in the Name, that is to say, in
the true Nature of Christ.

Then we may describe Prayer thus;

Prayer is the exercise of God's Spirit in us, pouring out the Soul to God, in
the Name, that is to say, in the Nature of Christ, and in his Interest,
pleading with God for supply of wants, in answer to his Will.

Observe,

So Prayer is the Language of God in us, not to alter God, but us; not to beget
new Grace in God, but from his old Grace, to bring down renewed supplies to us.

Observe,

He prays best that stands least in his own will.

Observe,

The way to keep a heart from sinful listings up in Prayer, is truly to know
the Life of Prayer is not its own, but comes down from God before it is in him.

Observe,

Nothing prevails with God but what is his own; therefore prevailing Prayer is
not ours, but God's: The true sense of this lays down, what the Devil by duty
would lift up; that heart seldom prevails by Prayer under temptatation,
straits and difficulties, that keeps its eye upon the Difficulties, and not on
a Promise. That Faith or Prayer honors God best, that trusts and eyes God
most in the face of a seeming impossibility. That soul is most prevalent with
God in Prayer, that sees nothing out of God capable to help or answer Prayer.
So much concerning Prayer.

Let me now speak a word of Advice to my Relations and Friends, as to the
Deceit that attends men and women in their Affection of Love.

1. Be careful in loving Sanits, that you love them as Saints; if so, you will
love them best in whom you see most of Christ and Grace, though strangers other
ways to you.

2. They that are most faithful, and downright in reproving you for sin, or
neglect of duty to Christ, are the fitest objects of a Christians Love; and
when there is least Deceit in thy love, these will be, not least, but most
beloved.

3. That Love is commonly the best, that loves that most that is seen least;
and that is not so much for acts without, as Grace within.

4. If it be a true Love, it is a lasting Love, and holds out in times of
danger, as well as in times of prosperous duty.

5. True Love is seen most and known best, when as the party beloved is in a
low suffering condition; for the Life of true Love lies much in sympathizing
with that it loves; So then that Love that only loves while and when the object
beloved can communicate or answer its Love with a reciprocal good or profit,
but when the object lies under sufferings, or censures, or wants, it draws back
and dies, it is a false Love; for true Love does principally manifest it self in
Unity, Community, and Sympathy, and in the last is seen most.

6. Where true Love is, there is a Spirit that attends it, that is the Life of
it; and where this Love does God-like, and Christ-like, go forth to love, the
Spirit of that Love goes forth into the object beloved, indearing and uniting
the heart and life of each other; As Jonathan and David.

7. True God-like and Christ-like Love, is not only a sympathizing and uniting
Love, but it is a bearing and covering Love, it is nimble eyed to see Beauty, but
very dim to see Deformity.

But because there is so much deceit in Love, let me advise you to take heed of
false Love, or imitating Love, that will deceive.

1. That Love will deceive, that loves Parts more than Principles, yet think it
is for Principles they love.

2. When as their Love to the party beloved, is very high and violent while the
party is in credit, but if under reproach, or clouds, or censures, their
seeming Love, is with great ease and readiness, turned into censuring, and for
the most part, without either examination or reluctance: but in true Love where
Life goes out, it is not so easily called in, but will turn and search, and
search before it will shift.

3. A third deceit rides only upon, or most upon the wing of Oneness in
Judgment, as to the visible ways of God and Christ, or in other ways; but
others that have more Grace, are not so much beloved, unless they be of the
same length, breadth and height in point of Judgment: this sort of Love is the
most universally deceivable in this day; and yet the most sad threed-bare Love
that ever the Devil spun.

4. It is, when Souls love only so long as they are beloved.

5. Another Deceit in Love is, When men in their Love, under the notion of
Religion or Grace, are more to women than to men; and in women to men more than
to women; all Love ought to be looked after, but this to have a double watch.

Now because the best way to try the Truth of Love, is by the Properties that
the Scriptures witness to be in true Love, I shall say no more as to the Truth
or Deceit that is in Love, by the rule of my own experience; but beseech my
Relations and Friends to mind well what the Apostle says of true Love in 1
Cor. 13.4. to the 8th verse; where the very natural and essential Properties of
Love is asserted; and so asserted, that they that can witness what is there
said, may assuredly know their Love is true; and if the contrary be found in
you, or any, you may with the same assurance know, your Love, though it appear
never so high, yet it is but false deceitful imitating Love.

It is good to consider well what Love is; true Spiritual Love springs out of
God; and what it truly is; it returns to God, carrying the heart where it is
truly placed, along with it to God, and there it is fixed and centered.

And though it may shake hands in its passage with an inferior good; yet it is
not at home, but as it is, and when it is with God; for in that Union is its
being, and in communion with that good is its well being. If you take Love in
its Parts, you will see more of is Excellency.

Observe a good man's description of Love.

Desire is Love in motion: persuit after good the continued sails of Love.
Delight is Love in rest, or acquiescing in the ^^ssession of it. Delight is
the Sabbath of Love.
Fear is Love in awe of the beloved.
Hope is Love in expectation.
Zeal is Love in fire or flame.
And so Zeal is most properly attributed to God. This was a good Friends
description of Love. And now mind,

True Love never dies to what it truly loves; for it never so loves but where
it lives: it lives in union and communion with the Good it loves. Now that you
may the better see the Nature and undeceivable Properties of true Love, or
Charity, see 1 Cor. 13.4. to the 8th verse, see the 4th verse. Charity, or Love,
suffers long; that is, it is not easily provoked; or a better reading is, It Is
slow to anger; so that a heart truly enriched with this Grace of Love, is a
mild and meek heart, not full of fire and fury, but if occasions be offered, it
is drawn, as the God of Love is, to afflict, but not willingly.

2. Not only slow to anger, but kind; the word may be read Bountiful; that is,
the heart thus loving, is not only bound up from fury of one hand, but it is on
the other hand at that season full of Kindness or Bounty; that is to say, it is
not only backward to answer evil with anger, but to conquer it with Kindness,
and readiness to do good against evil.

3. It envies not; that is to say, it does not only cease from acts of fury,
showing it self passionate, but at that time it does not so much inwardly envy
or wish hurt to any, o^ grude or repine, or envy the good of others though it
self may want that good; in that sense it is quietly contented with its own
portion, and God's dispose to enemies and friends.

4. Love vaunteth not it self; that is, as you may see in the Margent of your
Books, it is not inconsiderate, but weighs all things, and is serious and
considerate, in doing, and loving, and saying, it does not do things rashly.

5. It Is not puffed up; that is, it is not the property of a heart enriched
with true Love, to swell, and to be frothyly filled with the wind of it is own
conceits, as bear gifts or imitating-grace upon every occasion of its own
advance, will be.

6. In the 5th verse, It does not behave it self unseemly. This may, as an
ancient Father well observed, be taken two ways; As, First, Love will not
suffer a soul to do unseemly or uncomely things; So Secondly, It accounts no
service unseemly wherein it is to serve the party beloved, though it be below
it self as to men; therefore God imbrates an opportunity to love and serve his,
when in their blood, and loathed by others, ^e he then washes and binds them
up: So Christ washed his Disciples feet, and counts ^t no way unseemly.

7. Love seeks not her own; a true Property of Love indeed; for it is the nature
of true love delightfully to seek the good of what, or of that it loves; The
word imports, as if it were dim-sighted as to self-interest, or self-seeking;
and its great pursuit is delightfully to do good, and seek the good of others,
as if that only practice were its proper posture: O this is God-like and
Christ-like; all self-love and false-love is quite of another nature.

8. It is not easily provoked. Some read, it is not easily imbittered, or
sharp; that is to say, it is not full of biting and cutting words, but
manifests it self smoothly and sweetly, though it meets with provocations.

9. It thinks no evil; that is, it is not imagining or contriving evil against
any, nor easily drawn to think evil of others; but as it lives in a harmless
way it self, so it is ready to judge others do so too; not like the spirit of
jealousy and the eye of gilt, which is always either imagining evil against
others, or judging others; and yet for jealousy, it will tell you, love makes
it do so: but true Love is of another nature than either.

10. From the 6th verse; It rejoices not is iniquity. Some read, and its most
properly to be read, Rejoices not in injustice, but in the Truth, as the words
follow, or with the Truth, that is, it cannot rejoice in any unjust proceeding
in afflicting any, but its delight is to have the Truth heard and vindicated,
and Justice to be done justly, and for none to suffer without just cause; quite
contrary to Hypocrites love, which if it has a prejudice against one, or if
one stands in its way of profit or honor, how ready are they to asperse, and
cast dirt in their faces; and if any other cast dirt upon them, and bring
unjust reproaches or suffering upon one that so stands in their way, O how they
rejoice. O sad property of professing Love in this day!

11. In verse the 9th; Love bears all things. Now if we will believe the best
Grecians in the reading of these words, it is not then so to be read, but it
covers all things; that is, if it meets with some evil usage, or if it sees a
brother fall into some evil, it is so far from being prone to blaze it and
report it, that its naturally prone to cover, and with all lawful-wise ways to
hide it with one hand, whilst it helps the fallen soul with the other; quite
contrary to the way of some in this day, though they profess, and that highly,
to Love, yet so soon as they hear of an infirmity, or that a brother or a
sister is fallen, they are presently on fire to devulge it, even so hasty and
greedy, that they cannot spare time to search and see whether the report be
true or no; but as the Prophet says, Jer. 20.10. Report and we will report:
these Souls in this work, do rather think to make themselves Saints, than judge
themselves to fin: but alas, though they profess Love, they know it not, in the
day of God they will see themselves mistaken.

12. It believes all things; that is, it is ready to believe all good, and good
of all; though there be some evil in others, or against it self, yet Love is
very dark-sighted as to aggravate it, and is very hardly brought to believe it,
but is ready to think all is like it self.

13. It hopes all things; that is, it is very hardly brought off from expecting
of good where good should be, or is professed to be; and though some contrary
evil arises, yet a heart filled with Love is still hoping the best, and making
the best of it.

14. It endures all things. In this much is to be minded; it endures any
hardships to serve what or that it loves; it will and does endure very harsh
and hard dealings from others for its loving; one censures and another frowns,
and another throws dirt in its face, as they did in the face of Christ for
loving of poor souls: And again, it will endure much hardship and hard usage
from that or them it loves, before it will leave off loving; nay, it will
rather endure hard dealings, and conquer them with Love, than leave off loving.
Did not Christ do so with the Spouse, Cant. 5. And what hard usage did God
receive from his People, as you may see in Jer. 2d. and 3d. chapters? yet God
follows them with Love. O what hard usage did Paul receive for and in the way
of his Love from them he loved! and yet he loved still; a sweet lesson for
Saints in this day to learn. O that God would give me, and all his People,
power seriously to try our Love by these Rules. Love is laid down in Scripture,
as one of the chiefest signs of our Sonship; O therefore we had need be
careful we are not mistaken, especially in this day, wherein there is so much
imitation of Love, and yet not Love; the Lord help us to try, that we may be
found in the Truth, and the Love of the Truth, and true Love may be found in
us. O if ever the lesson that Christ preached to his Disciples in the 14.15.16.
chapters of John, and that John preached in 1 John 2, 3, 4, 5, chapters, as to
this great Duty of Love, there was never a season that called for that service
like this; and never was the dear Appointments and Service of God, less
honored with this Saint-honouring Grace of Love, than now in this day: the
Devil knows it is the sinews and nerves that keeps Saints one: and he also
knows the way to destroy the People of God, is to devide the People of God:
They are very blind that in looking back, cannot see, that so long as the
People of God kept in ^nity, they were kept in prosperity, and when ^hey
divided, they soon fell. O that God ^ould give his People hearts, to know from
^hence they are fallen, and to do their first works, and to remember their
former Virgin-Love, which formerly appeared to bear blossoms, till the sad
frost of a revolting spirit, caused it to be nipt with cold blasts of God's
Northern winds.

O would any souls recover Love, labor to be acquainted more with the God of
Love, and live more under the sense of the want of Love, and covet to be first
in that work; and where you see a want of Love, love them into Love. And the
God of all Love, Peace and Grace live with you. Amen, Amen.

I have done with speaking of true God like Love: I might speak something of
natural Love, and also the Love of Friends, of Relations, or Neighbors, upon a
natural account, but of that I shall forbear; only,

Brief Word or two to my Children; which mind as follows.
When and wheresoever you find shows of Love, take a longer time (...) try it,
than to trust it: Meet with no friend^^ Love, but answer it with Love; and
where (...) intend to continue in Friendship and love, stay not from loving
till you are belo^ed, but love that you may be loved; know that love that your
Love begets, will not only ^^st longest, but will end most honorably.

2. Take heed of a pleasant smooth lan^age, where there is an evil life.

3. Trust none that speaks fair to you, if ^^u find them prone to speak evil of
others.

4. Look well behind men and before men, ^ore you entrust any secret in men or
wo^en.

5. If you would gain and receive a friend^^ esteem of all, walk humbly toward
every ^in; for the best way to be honored as a ^^^ster, is to be to all like a
Servant, to the ^^ants, but not to the carnal wills of men.

6. If you would retain friendship among (...), what ever you hear, speak evil
of none.

7. To retain Friendship long, take heed (...) leave not your interest loose
among any.

In word, my dear Children, if you wisely and friendly and profitably live in
the world as to the world, mind this rule:

So live among men, that you may overse^ all men, learn something from every
man but confide in no man; and yet so, as to suffer no man to lose, but rather
to gain by you.

In the next place, I shall speak a wordt the nature of Sorrow or Mourning,
seeing there are so many promises annexed to tru^^ Mourners. And in this mind
two things.

1. What Deceits attend Mourning, tha^ we may not be deceived. 2. The
Properties of true Mourning.
1. Deceit is when we take the sudden motion of a natural tender affection, for
the exercises of true conviction or a heart trus^ affected from Grace; for some
nature is such that upon the least sudden motion of any sorrow, or sometimes
from sudden joy, they cannot but mourn; and if this come at a season of praying
or preaching, without care it may be, and I fear, is taken as a fruit of Grace.

2. When a soul mourns more for peace than for the want of presence. So did
Sa^^ and Judas, etc.

3. There is a hidden occult quality (...) some natures, that they cannot but
in a w^^^ of sympathy, weep and mourn when they se^^^ another mourn; it may be
those that they see mourn, may mourn from true conviction, and then in a way of
sympathy they cannot but mourn too; and so being among true Mourners, they and
others may conclude it true.

4. Deceit is, when any ones mourning is produced from a sad reflection of
guilt, (...) crossing Light, more than for their dealing ^nkindly with God and
his Love.

Quest. What are the truest Signs of a true ^ourner?

Answ. These; 1. True Mourning in real ^ourners, brings or draws up the soul
into a ^ore single closing in with God, or it raises (...) the heart to a more
special expectation ^^^d choice compliance with God: see and ^ind well Isa. 38.
last part of the 16, verse. 2. Such prize deliverance from sin, much ^^re then
freedom from sorrow, Isa. 38.17. ^^al. 40.1, 2. 3. They are a people that are
as seriously ^^ected with their unsuitable frames of heart their mourning, as
for the matter they ^^urn for. 4. Answers from God in their mourning; ^^ess
their answer brings Power, as well as ^^don, it will not satisfy, Psalm. 51.
(...). A true Mourner, mourns most kindly, (...) freely when he injoys God, in
sealing up ^^^on must fully, Luke 7.38. and 47.48. (...). Such a heart mourns
for that most, that is seen least; I mean more for heart-sins unseen, than for
sins without, that are seen. See Job 42.3, 6. see David, Psalm. 19.12. and 51.5,
6, 7. and Isa. 6.5. 7. The property of such a soul is, The nearer it draws to
God, the more the work of mourning and shame does increase: See Jer. 3. and
last verse, and see Job 42.2, 3, 6.


Besides these Deceits, there are yet some Deceits that are harder to be
discerned; and that is, in point of joy, and boldness, and appearance of life
in duties: For know,

There are many, that from eloquence duty and some concurrents of natures
abi^^^ty, joining with imitating sorrow or joy do so heat and warm, and lift up
the soul that it concludes that joy, heat and lifting up, must be from
presence; and yet sometimes this heat, joy and liftings up, may only arise from
the unity of Light and Life for do but mind how Peace does arise from a bare
union of Light and Life; if the Li^^^ be but one with the Light, and does not
cr^^^ it, that soul must needs have peace; thou^^ the Light may be but a
deceivable Light, (...) if the Life cross it not, Peace is maintained and many
times such souls in such condi^^ons, do conclude, that their joy and peace from
Presence: Therefore it does concus to know the Truth or Deceit of such J^^^
Peace, Confidence and liftings up; you (...) see the Truth, and also the
Deceits, in what follows. As,

1. When the increase of Confidence and Comfort does not crucify or mortify
sin, but leaves the soul, or gives the soul as little power against sin, as
when it first found it, unless it be restraint of sin, not mortification. 2.
When the joy and comfort they in joy ^^^y it, does not increase more care in
their ^atch, but the heart grows higher and loo^er to that work: both which
you will see by ^^e difference Christ makes, between the ^eart the Devil is
cast out of, and that the ^evil went out of, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. 3. When their
peace and comfort by it, ^^n and does allow of private sins, and both ^^^n
subsist and stand together; and if at any ^^e there be any trouble for such
sins, a lit^^^ sorrow, with some performance of duties (...) lick it whole,
will end it, without fresh ^^plication of Jesus Christ; when as ano^^er heart,
cannot after so sinning, have any ^ace but from a true manifestation of God's
^^ve in him, Psalm. 51.8, 9. Job 34.29. 4. When the sense of propriety in God,
^^kes them high and confident in mercies in ^^es of prosperity; but in crosses
or time of ^ress, their confidence, comfort and strength ^^es, Prove. 24.10. 5.
When the soul only takes comfort from, or rejoices in that part of Gods Word
which speaks out comfort, but not in that which crosses corruption, and
requires duty. Now a true Joy, Comfort and Confidence, arising from a true
sense and sight of propriety in God, makes the soul to love and delight in each
and all God's Words, as well one as the other: See Psalm, 119.57, 70, 72, 77,
97. Apply 114. with 127, 128, 167. 6. If it be true, such a soul is made abl^
by it, to distinguish between the comfort^ that flow from Presence, and that
which flow^ from other things, though it have an angelical stamp upon it: Do
but see and apply Exodus 33.23. with 13, 14, 15. and chap. 34.9. And so David.
7. All false Joy and Comfort begins at wrong end, as thus; all that Joy and
Comfort arises from sense, and it is sense onl^ that gives light; But true Joy
and Comfor^ arises from sight, and that sight bege^sence: So Moses, Exodus
33.15, 16. So D^vid, Psalm. 116.10. and 43.5. That Christ intends, John 10.4, 5.
A stranger they will (...) hear. 8. False Comforts and Joy will trium^ over
unseen sufferings, but when seen a^^ felt, it fails and falls; But true Joy,
Comfort and Confidence from fight of Presenc^ is most weighty and serious, and
chearfu^ when suffering for God, is seen and felt. S^^ David, and the three
Children, and Daniel, and Paul, and those in Acts 5. ult. Romans 5.1, (...), etc.
Now because some have, with their false ^iftings up, great gifts and parts, and
so not ^o easiely discovered, I will add a few more to ^o these.

9. Though they may be employed in hear^ng or declaring such and such Truths,
yet do not in themselves savor what is said, or what they say or declare: See
John 6.60. 10. What ever such have that looks like ^ife, yet it lasts not
long, but is in a decli^ing posture, like Ephraim, Hos. 7.8, 9. and Mat. 13.20,
21. 11. It Is more troubled at negatives, than ^or want of affirmatives; that is
to say, it is ^roubled sometimes at things that are contra^y to life, but seldom
or never troubled for ^he want of life; like the Pharisees, Luke 4.^, 39, 40. So
much to this particular.
In the next place I would lay down some ^rue signs or discoveries, whether or
no we ^ave the true promised Spirit the Scripture ^peaks of; and they are as
follows.

1. That heart that is truly enriched with ^he Spirit of God, is very
cheerfully carried ^ut, to comply and close with God in all its ^^ence and
sufferings; as Job, Job 1.31. ^hap. 40.5.and 43.5. So David. 2. That heart by
it is made capable to distinguish and know God or Christ's Call, from all false
calls or discoveries, though in a night-season: See Cant. 5.3, 4. 3. To such a
heart, Presence is always precious; but most precious when it gives most power
against sin, Psalm. 40.1, 2, etc. 4. It enjoys nothing in its own account,
livingly and lovingly, but when it enjoys Presence clearly, Psalm. 73.25, 26. 5.
It fears no damage nor danger, when sin is from it, and Presence is with it,
Psalm. 23.4. and 27.1. and 112.7. 6. It makes the heart to make sweet
applications of God's Love, in and from the bitterest lashes; and out of
darkness, applications of Light; See Micah 7.8. see David, 1 Samuel 30.6. 2 Samuel
15.24, 25. 7. It Is that which leads the Soul not only to, but into the Spirit
and Life of all Truth, John 16.23. imitating-light, life and grace, only leads
to, but not into any truth. 8. It never gives the soul a fresh view of Christ,
but it gives the soul a renewed participation of what is communicable by
Christ, John 16.13, 14. 2 Cor. 3. ult. 9. It never brings the soul sensible
comforts, but it livingly sets the soul at liberty; not only to live, and to
love God, but it transforms the heart into the Glory of what it injoys or
beholds, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. 10. That heart that is truly enriched with it, it
cannot live without it; and if without it, it is as a body without a soul: and
mind this, that when that lies hid, all comforts on this side God, cannot make
it live till it returns, Job 34.29.
There is many more, but I do but hint at them, and that by which God has in
measure satisfied my sold with.

If any shall object and say, that they have felt these, or most of these, but
they are so often eclipsed, that they fear it cannot be right, and they are
often fearful, that they had only a sight and taste of it, and that God has
finally forsaken the soul; I shall only let you know what has been a comfort
to my soul, and is a testimony, that it is only Gods hiding his face, and not a
final forsaking. Mind these things.

1. If the soul be finally forsaken, that soul is willing to be forsaken, and
not troubled at it, but rather rejoices in it. 2. If finally forsaken, there is
an evil spirit presently possesses it; as in Saul. 3. That heart that is finally
forsaken, is not, nor cannot be sensible that it is so; but the contrary; as
Psalm. 13. and 77.6, 7. 4. They are not tender in point of sin, but sin without
sense; As they in Romans 2. 5. They do not nor cannot long for the returns of
Presence; for mind, God never leaves a love and longing after Presence in a
soul that is finally forsaken; if that be there, there is Gods pledge to show he
will return; it is that that keeps possession for God till he comes; see Isa.
54. at large, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.
There is many more, but these also are such, by which God has comforted my
soul in a time of dissertion.

Now there be some general Deceits, relating to Conversion, and the very body
of Religion, that I desire to leave to my Children and Friends; and those
Deceits are as follow.

1. Deceit is, When souls rest satisfied with something that is like it, and yet
at that time, and also before, never passed under, or know what it is to be
enriched with the nature of the thing: as thus; Because Conversion is a change,
therefore any change; because it is a turning, therefore any turning; because
it is light, therefore any light; and because there is life and joy, therefore
if any, it must be that.

Here was the young man in the Gospel deceived, Mat. 19, 20. And so the
Pharisees, Luke 18.11, 12. And so at the last day, Mat. 7.22.

2. Deceit is, the resting satisfied with some thing that does, and must of
necessity accompany the truth of the thing, and at that time not see nor know;
it does truly arise from the truth in them, as the only cause; as whether that
love, that comfort, that zeal, that sorrow, that joy, does arise from the truth
in them, suitable to John 4.14. Romans 5.4. 2 Cor. 3.18. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. 3. Deceit
is, When the soul does rest satisfied, in a bare saying or sight of the Truth,
both in nature, causes and effects, and yet then cannot witness either of them
truly in themselves, only things to be, but not in himself in being: like them
in Jer. 8. apply 5, 7, 8, verses, and Jer. 23.25, 26, 27. Romans 2. 4. Deceit is,
When souls rest satisfied with their state, though without witnessing the Truth
truly within, yet comparing them with themselves, or some others that do more
differ from the truth than they; suitable to Jehu, 2 Kings 10.15. and Luke
18.11, 12. 2 Cor. 12. to the 17. 5. Deceit is, When souls confidently affirm,
and are persuaded, that they are truly enriched with the Truth, and yet at that
time they cannot witness those things that are unseparable concomitants of
truth; As First, An universal conformity to Truth; as David, Psalm. 119.6. Luke
1.6. Secondly, An universal Antipathy to all things contrary to it; as in Psalm.
97.16. Psalm. 119.104, 128.113. Thirdly, A living growth in, or growing up in
the Truth, Psalm. 92.12. Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Pet. 1.22. 2 Pet. 3.8. Fourthly, A
feeding upon it; not that there is or will be a perfection in action, or else
no truth; but where Life is in the principle, there must be a growth in it, and
feeding on it; these concomitants are, or else, that soul that lives in sense,
as it judges of having truth in it, is deceived. 6. When souls rest satisfied
in the increase of some thing that does accompany the Truth of Grace, but see
not, nor have not an increase in the Power or Principle of Truth, only in gifts
or profession, or outward conformity in their lives without, or in language,
and rest there as if all were right. 7. When a soul is brought to a sight of
the want of Truth, and a sight of the worth of Truth, and so cries down the
living without it, and cries up the riches and glory of it, and so rests
satisfied in a bare seeing the want and crying up the worth, and so contents
its self in a bare sight and saying, without witnessing that Power, Riches and
Glory in its own soul.
These Deceits are some of them that attend souls in relation to Conversion,
and the work of Grace within. But there be some Deceits that attend Men and
Women in their external Walkings or Worshippings. I will only hint a few: As,
1. When things, though false, yet in their outward appearance are named, as God
names such things in Scripture that are his true Appointments, and so rest
satisfied with the customary titles given to it, and never search into the
nature or truth of it; as Preaching, Praying, Singing, Baptism, and breaking
Bread, etc. because it is called so, therefore it is so. 2. Deceit is, When the
soul does enjoy a true appearance or appointment, and is taken up there in the
bare appearance or appointment, yet does not know the true nature of it, in its
Life and Power. 3. Deceit is, When the satisfaction of, and love to, or delight
in the nature of truth, is only produced by, and measured suitable to the
measure of their performance, or eloquence in it, or the warmth and heat they
draw from it, and not from the light, sense, and true enjoyment of Presence.
But no more at this time.


Just at this time having a Letter from a Friend, I shall leave off what I was
going on in, and in the next place answer that, and therefore I think it
necessary to write down the Letter it self, and so go on in answering of it.

October. 9th 1663. Dear and precious Brother,
YOU whom God has made instrumental of much good to my soul; for which I do
bless God; and do daily pray, that God would give you suitable upholds to carry
you through all your sufferings, with such patience as your sufferings call
for: I must confess, in some sense they differ from most; for not only I, but
many were at a stand, to hear what Censures were passed upon you, by such who
appeared eminent for God: But since I searched, and saw they were false, I am
ashamed of my readinss to receive them.

These are to entreat your pains, now you are confined, to mind your promises,
in giving me the Heads of what you preached from John 3.16. and that from Phil.
1.23, 24. about the Immortality of the Soul; and a word or two what that Peace
is that is purchased by Christ for Christians, and whether a peculiar Grace or
State; and a word or two of the Difference between the Old and New Covenants:
In doing of which, you will refresh the heart of

Your loving Friend in the Lord.


Now in answer to this Letter, I shall begin with the Heads of what I declared
of my apprehensions from John 3. the first part of the 16th verse;

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son.

From the words many rich Truths may be observed; but I shall first observe
something in general.

You must mind that these words is a reason of what in the 15th verse is
affirmed; viz. That whosoever believes, shall not perish, but have everlasting
Life. Now that the Comfort of these words may be discovered, I shall first
observe this general Truth from these words, God So loved. The word [So] is so
unexpressible, so admirable, so matchless, so that,

Observe Doct. The Love of God in giving Christ, is a rich, admirable, and
unexpressible Love.

For the opening of this, mind,

1. Scriptures to prove it. 2. We shall by way of illustration, lay down many
things to make good this Truth.
As for Scriptures, mind these, Romans 5.8. But God commends his Love toward
us, in that, while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us; Ephesians. 2.4. But God
who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he has loved us, even when
we were dead in sins, etc. chap. 3.19. And to know the Love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the Fullness of God: In 1
John 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God! chap. 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the
Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the
world, that we might live through Him; verse 10. Herein is Love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our
Sins. See John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one; and that the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them
as thou have loved me. And you may see what is said of Christ's Love in that
sense, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and the Life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me: Joh. 13.14.
Greater Love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his Friend.

Now for Illustration, mind.

1. Consider in what relation Christ stood with God, when God gave Christ. 2.
Consider to what God gave him. 3. How God gave him. 4. For whom God gave him.
5. God's Ends in that work. Lastly, The Improvements.
1. In what relation Christ stood with God there was the bond of nature in the
highest degree; for he was his Son, Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the Decree; the
Lord has said unto me, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee: Heb.
5.5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but Him
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

2. There was the tie of singularity and peculiarity, his Son, nay his only
Son; as in this 3d of John; had God had another Son in that sense, though the
giving up had been (...) high token of Love, yet not so much as in ^his sense,
his only Son.

3. As there was such an high Affinity in Nature, so there was an unexpressable
height (...) Unity of Affection: See upon God's ^^de, in Mat. 3.17. And lo a
Voice from Hea^^en, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom (...) am well
pleased; and chap. 12.18. Behold ^y Servant whom I have chosen, my Beloved, in
whom my soul is well pleased; I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show
Judgment to the Gentiles; and chap. 17.5. While he yet speak, ^ehold a bright
Cloud overshadowed them, and ^ehold a Voice out of the Cloud, which said, This
(...) my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, ^ear ye him: and in Mark 1.11.
And there ^ame a Voice from Heaven, saying, Thou art my ^eloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased: and in 2 Pet. 1.17. For he received from God the Father,
Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the excellent Glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So you may see in Christ,
what a high unexpressable Love he had to his Father, his Fathers Will was his
Will; and to answer his Fathers Pleasure, was so great a pleasure to him, that
Life and all must go, as little enough to speak out his Love.

Now consider all this, and you will see, that the one might have restrained
God, and have tied up his hands from giving up his Son; and Christ might have
pleaded on the other side, Why me, Father? why me that am thy only Son, etc.?
but God looks over all in this act.

4. There were bonds of Honor, both on one Throne, in one Glory. It might seem
in the eye of carnal reason, to be below God thus to abase Christ, and that in
relation to a point of Honor. O what Love must there be to overlook this!

5. He stood related to God, as the chief est and eminentest object of his
Delight Prove. 8.30. Then I was by him as one brough up with him, and I was
daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him; Isa. 42.1. Behol my Servant
whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights; I have put my Spirit
upon him, and He shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. O now, reason from
all, and you will not be able to express this Love of God, in giving the Lord
Jesus Christ as he did; O admirable Love!

Secondly, Consider to what God gave him.

1. To Death; Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. O could
not he have given him to suffering, and not to death? O what Love must that be,
that did and could cause God thus to overlook, as it were, the Love and care of
Christ's Life, and thus to give him to death.

2. The Death of the Cross; Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross;
and Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree; the
most contemptible Death that could be, a cursed Death, a shameful dishonorable
Death. O see what blessed Love was here showed, in this cursed and shameful
Death.

3. Not only to death, and the death of the Cross, but to all the Aggravations
that could possibly accompany either. As thus;

1. He suffered as a Sinner in the highest sense: 1 Cor. 15.3. For I delivered
unto you, first of all, that which I also received, How that Christ dyed for
our Sins, according to the Scriptures; and in the 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. Sins make suffering unsufferable, else it is but a chastisment
if sin be not in it; but if it be, then it is a punishment: yet even so must
our dear Christ suffer as a fruit of the Fathers Love.

2d Aggravation, was the exercise of God's Rage, Fury and Wrath in the Law
against Sin; this, O this in the highest of it, was Christ given up to in his
Death; Isa. 63.3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and there was none to
help; for I will tread them in mine Anger, and trample them in my Fury, and
their Blood shall be sprinkled upon my Garments, and I will stain all my
raiment.

3. It was to, and by, the worst of Executors: For First, They were his
Enemies. Secondly, Their envy was in them, as Professors under the Notion of
Religion; Wrath covered with Zeal is implacable, and such are the worst of
Enemies; that Envy is the worst, and where that is, there is no pity: no more
had they of our dear Savior; Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to the Smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame and
spitting: Apply Mat. 27.

4. In the highest of his Sufferings, when he was on the Cross, in the sense of
his Sufferings, God did appear to forsake him; Mat. 27.46. And about the ninth
hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani; that is to say,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O to lose sight and sense of
Presence, is sad: Suffering in it self is sufficient to sink down a soul; but
to lose Presence in the midst and height of Sufferings, does sadly aggravate
it: yet this must dear Christ be given up to. O what Love is there in God! O
unspeakable Love to poor Sinners! that to accomplish their good and safety, his
Son must thus suffer, and be thus forsaken.

The third thing in order is, How God gave him up.

1. Freely; for he was not sought to by any for Christ thus to be given up, nor
no purchase should have been given, if he had been so offered; but God does it
freely: In Isa. 50.2. Wherefore when I came, there was no man; when I called,
there was none to answer. Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or
have I no power to deliver? etc. And chap. 63.5. And I looked, and there was
none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own
Arm brought Salvation unto me, and my Fury it upheld me. Besides, all his
Terms in his Tenders of this dear Christ, are free.

2. As he did it freely as to us, so he did it with the greatest severity as to
him; and that you will see, if you consider these Scriptures; Isa. 53.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. applied with Mat. 27. from the 29, to the 50, verse, and Romans
8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all; how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? And in that 8th of the
Romans, consider what it is; for God not to spare his Son, as the Word is, He
Spared not his Son.

1st. Not to Spare, implies or signifies the highest Severity of Justice; Deuteronomy.
13.8. Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall
thine eye pity him, neither shall thou Spare, neither shall thou conceal him;
Isa. 13.18. Their Bows also shall dash the young men to pieces, and they shall
have no pity on the Fruit of the Womb, their eyes shall not spare Children.

2dly. It Is to let out Justice upon one without the least exercise of pity, or
any reluctance, or roulings of bowels of compassion. See Jer. 13.14. And I will
dash them one against another, even the Father and the Sons together, I will
not pity, nor Spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them; Ezekiel. 7.4, 8, 9. In the
4th verse, And mine eye shall not Spare thee, neither will I have pity, but I
will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abomination shall be in the
midst of thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. In (...) Now will I
shortly pour out (...) and accomplish mine Anger upon (...) ^^dge thee
according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thy abominations. In
the 9th verse, And mine eye shall not Spare thee, neither will I pity thee; I
will recompense thee according to thy ways, and thine abominations that are in
the midst of thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smites: And in
Ezekiel. 9.5. And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after them through
the City, and smite; let not your eye Spare, neither have ye pity.

3dly, It implies a laying aside all regard or respect to the party suffering.
See this word so expressed, Job 30.10. They abhor me, they flee far from me, they
Spare not to spit in my face. And as it was there with Job, so it was with
Christ. Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to the S^^irters, and ny cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair; I h^^ not my face from shame and spitting. Apply to this
Mat. 27.

From all this, if you consider it, you will see, it was from God upon Christ,
with the greatest Severity that could be.

3. God did not only give him unto us freely (as to Christ) with the greatest
severity, but he did it delightfully: Isa. 53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul, an
offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
Pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand (...) to give up the Son (...)
death, to accomplish (...) Life for poor Sinners.

4. He did it self-(...) (...) himself and to Christ; and he did it so, as
admitting of no reasoning from himself, or any way of repining, or minding the
loss of his Sons Life; and as to Christ; he might have said as David, O my Son,
my only Son; O shall I give my Son for Sinners, my Friend for my Enemies! he
never seems to give way to any such discourse or reasoning, but denies all to
accomplish his Love for lost Creatures. Nay, Christ might have said to his
Father, What do thou find in me word (...) Death? if not, how can it stan^
(...) 24.16. The Fathers (...) Death for the Children; neither shall (...) put
to Death for the Fathers, every (...) shall he put to Death for his own sin. 2
Kings 14.6. But the Children of the Mu^^^ (...) according unto that which is
w^^ (...) of the Law of Moses, wherein (...) ^^^ded, saying, The Father s^^^^
(...) for the Children, nor th^^^ (...) death for their Fathers; but every man
shall be put to death for his own sin. Besides Father, there is rouling of thy
Bowels to others; as in Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall
I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together: And
in Jer. 31.20, 21. Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Verse 21.
Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps, set thine heart toward the
Highway, even the Way which thou wentest; turn again, O Virgin of Israel, turn
again to these thy Cities. What! is there none for me? None of this is
mentioned, but all laid aside to accomplish this rich admirable and
unexpressible Love; so it was done self-denyingly,

The fourth thing is, For whom he gave him.

1. He gave him for Sinners; Romans 5.8. But God commends his Love toward us,
in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us: And in 1 Timothy 1.15. This
is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came
into the world to save Sinners; of whom I am the chief.

2. Ungodly; Romans 4.5. But to him that works not, but beleiveth on him that
justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness

3. For Enemies; Romans 5.10. For if while we were Enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the Death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his Life.

4. The worst of sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sinners; of whom
I am chief.

5. It was for the Rebellious, and Blasphemers, and such as caused others to
blaspheme; Psalm. 68.18. Acts 26.1, 8.1 Tim. 1.13. O this heightens God's Love:
O rich Love! God loves them that hate him.

The fifth thing is, God's End in giving his Son.

1. It was to reconcile poor lost Sinners to himself; 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. To wit,
that God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us, the Word of Reconciliation.
Verse 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. And in Col.
1.20. And having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in Earth, or
things in Heaven. Surely God does highly prize this, that he does purchase it
at so high a rate. O see, see poor Sinner; it was not only to accomplish
Reconciliation with him, but us to him; it was not his gain, but our gain, and
his loss; O what rich Love is here! God seeks a way for us, and then seeks to
us.

2. His End was to overcome and conquer, that or them, that would have
destroyed us: As first, Sin; Romans 7.24, 25. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? and in verse 25. I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the mind I serve the Law of God, but with
the flesh the Law of sin. Secondly, The Law; Gal. 2.19. For through the Law, I
am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God: Romans 8.2. For the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death. Thirdly, Death; 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the
Law. Fourthly, The World; John 16.33. These things have I spoken unto you, that
in Me ye might have peace; in the World ye shall have tribulation: but be of
good cheer, I have overcome the World. Fifthly, The Devil. In 1 John 3.8. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of
the Devil. O what an End is that! O reckon every End, and they all end in one
End for us poor Sinners.

3. His End was, To bring up poor Souls as into Union, so into Communion with
himself, and Son, in all their Light, Life, Love and Glory; John 17.21. That
they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also
may be one in us; that the World may believe that thou have sent Me: ver. 22.
And the Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one as
We are one: verse 23. I in Them, and Thou in Me, that They may be made perfect
in One, and that the World may know that Thou have sent Me, and have loved Them
as thou have loved Me. Apply 1 John 1.3. and 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, etc.

4. His End was, That we might have nothing to hinder our Faith and Confidence
in Him, in our appeals and approaches to him. Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come
boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to
help in time of need. And in Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness, and access
with confidence by the Faith of him. O mind these Scriptures, poor Soul; if
thou want Faith, go, O go, in the Faith of Jesus. It is and was God's great
care, that poor souls, though never so poor, might come to him with boldness
without fear.

If any should demand the Reasons why God takes this way, to manifest his rich
Love by.

Answer, For these Reasons.

1st. Reason. There was an absolute necessity lay upon it; for there was not
another way to accomplish Salvation for Sinners, and satisfy divine Justice.
Isa. 63.5. And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there
was none to uphold: therefore mine own Arm shall bring Salvation, etc. And by
this, Free Grace is displayed gloriously.

2d. Reason. That it might appear, as to be an act of God's Wisdom, so
singularly an act of Love; which other ways could not have been, had not all
other things in the world have been lost and overlooked.

3d. Reason. That all flesh may be silent and brought to lie down and confess
it to be a work only of God, in that none but God could have done it: See Romans
3. at large; and see chapt. 4. at large, where this rich Work of Love is fully
related, and debated; and this as a Reason asserted.

Now for the Improvements of this rich Soul-supporting Truth, mind in these
Uses.

1st. Use, To inform us of the great Wisdom, Love and Grace of God to poor
Sinners, which is so fully made out in this Act of God, in giving his Son in
this manner. O go over all the Particulars, and you must say with the Apostle,
O the height and depth of God's Love! Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Romans 11.33.

2dly, To inform us what poor Man had been, had God left him in his lost
estate, or left him to have found out a way to have saved himself.

3dly, If this be so, as has been fully proved, of this rich admirable and
unexpressible Love of God in giving his Son; then this may assure us in
general, That God cannot, nor will not, withhold any good thing from us, but
with Christ will give us all things: It Is the very use Paul makes of this
Truth, in Romans 8.32. where he says, He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? O poor souls, consider this, and mind it well, in all states and
straits, believe what God says: and consider and reason with thy soul thus,

Do I want this or that? well, did God give me his Son, the greater, and will
he withhold the lesser? No, no.

Now mind some Particulars: As, 1. We may from this be certain, of God's
Satisfaction by Christ for all Sin; for sure God would never have done this,
had or could there have been a Dis-satisfaction to have over-ballanced his
Satisfaction. Mind these Scriptures, Mat. 13.11, etc. Ephesians. 5.27. O see Heb.
10.10, 12, 14, 17, verses; and you will see this made clear. 2. To assure us of
the certainty of poor Souls Salvation, Romans 5.10. it is there fully asserted
from this foundation. 3. To assure us, That there is no Enemy left unconquered;
for had any thing been too strong for God, this work could not have been
accomplished; but nothing could, nor was too strong for God, neither Sin, as
Romans 7. nor Law, nor Death, nor World, nor Devil; and if so, look upon, and
encounter with all these as conquered before, you encounter. 4. It Is to assure
us, That the Foundation of Salvation is more sure, than to stand upon such a
weak changeable foundation as our duties or goodness is; It Is done only and
singly by God, and the Foundation is as sure as he is; it is alone his rich Love
and unchangeable Grace in Christ. See the Text, etc. 5. It Is to assure us, and
that with all clearness, That God's Love to the worst of Sinners, is as great
as to Jesus Christ: Seeing all this God gave up Christ to, was to accomplish
not his, but their good, see John 17.23, 24, 26.1 Tim. 13.14. O what Comfort is
here to a poor soul! consider what dear, what rich, what delightful Love was
there, and is there in God for Christ; and what will this Love carry God to do
for Christ? do but mind it, and then consider, that that Love, the same Love,
with all its Riches, with all its Strength, with all its movings, is in the
heart of God for me. O soul, lie down and admire this Love! 6. To assure us,
That as God's Love was not caused by us, nor moved, or brought forth from any
cause in us, so it cannot be changed or destroyed by us; certainly if Sins
foreseen, would not, nor could not keep God from giving Christ, sure when they
are brought forth, they cannot turn God and Christ from loving of us. 7. To
assure us, in way of Comfort, That the whole, and full, and sole work of
suffering for Sin, and satisfying of Justice for Sin, is done by Christ; so
that, what sorrows and sufferings do attend Saints, there is no such end
produced by it, as to satisfy unsatisfied Justice; but all that befalls Saints,
are Fruits of Love, to put away Sin, Isa. 26.9. and to give down more Grace,
Romans 5, etc. 8. It is furthermore to assure us, and that of Certainty, from all
that has been said, That there is a willingness in God, not only to save, but
to receive poor Sinners into his Grace and Favor, or else he would never have
given so much to accomplish it: all his Cost and Labor declares this; which
you will fully see, if you go over all that has be said. And further, to
convince a poor sad sighing Soul of this Truth, consider; 1st. Upon what terms
God tenders his Love in Christ, see Prove. 9.4. Isa. 55.1. Joh. 7.34. Rev.
22.17, etc. all is Free. 2dly, See how God does beseech and entreat, and woo
souls to entertain and accept this Love in Christ, Isa. 65.2 Cor. 9.10. Mat.
23.^7. 3dly. Consider how long God waits upon poor souls for their receiving
and entertaining of this Love, though he meets with many Repulses, Isa. 65.2
Cor. 5.5. Jer. 15.6. 4thly. Consider how much God bemoans the creature that
neglects to embrace this Tender, Jer. 2.14. Mat. 23.37. 5thly. Consider, that
after souls have slighted God's Grace, and turned their back upon his Tenders,
and abused his Long-suffering and Forbearance; yet if at last they return, how
joyfully does he entertain them, and not upbraid them. See Jer. 31.20. Luke
15.20. Jam. 1.5.



Further, If thou would see God's willingness to meet with thy desire and
willingness, mind these Considerations.

First, Consider, God is so willing, that he woos us to be willing, as I said
before.

2dly. No soul is willing so soon, but God's willingness was before him, and
his willingness is a fruit of God's.

3dly. No soul was ever willing, and God or Christ unwilling; Joh. 6.37. If
an^^^^ come unto Christ, he will in no wise cast hi^ ^ut.

4thly. God is willing when we are not willing.

5thly. Consider, That when God's willingness has begun to beget in a so^^^
willingness, if the souls willingness makes him go, God runs; and if it makes
the soul only say, I will, God says, I do, Psalm. 32.5. O know, soul, that it
is not possible for a soul to be really willing to be saved, and God not to
save it! Did we know what is in God, by what is done by God, especially in
giving of his Son, we should believe more, and fear; and sin less.

There were many more Particulars that I observed from this Text, but I have
not time now to relate them; only these I thought good, in this my time of
Confinement to write over, in answer to your desire; And I wish God may afford
you as much comfort from them, as he has to me. Amen, Amen.

In Phil. 1. 23d verse. with its dependence on the 22d verse. and relation to the
24th v. The words are these, ver. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having
a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better.

I shall not stand to open the words, but take from them in general three
Observations; As thus;

Doct. 1. The true sense of the great Privileges Saints enjoy by Christ, when
separated from the body of flesh; with the consideration of the duties they owe
to Christ in the flesh, puts the heart in its desires to a great stand. Doct.
2. In point of Privileges, it is best for Saints to depart and be with Christ;
or, to be with Christ is a Saints best being. Doct. 3. That heart who does
truly affect its duty to Christ, is willing to abide in it, though by it he may
for a season be deprived of part of his Privilege.
And first of the first; and in it mind.

First, I shall show you the certainty of the Souls separation from the body,
and that it dies not with the body, as some say, but when it is separated, it
does enjoy Privileges with the Lord Jesus Christ, as is employed in this word.
After I have done that, I shall let you know in what sense the Soul is taken;
and also give you the Scriptures and Reasons that some have to prove the Soul
to be mortal; with a brief Answer to that: And then we shall give you
sufficient Scriptures and Reasons, that there is a Soul or Spirit in man that
lives, though the body dies; and also give you a hint of some of the
Privileges that the Soul enjoys after its separation from the body, and then
make some improvement.

Now in the first place, I shall let you have some Scriptures to prove that
there is a separation betwixt Soul and Body, according to the Doctrine, and
show some Reasons for it; the Scriptures to prove it are these, Genesis 35.18. 18.
Job 34.14, 15. to them apply Psalm. 22.26. Ezekiel. 12.7. Act. 7.59, 60. Luke
16.21. and so much for Scriptures; the Reasons follow.

The first Reason, Is from God's Appointment. The second Reason, From the the
very nature of Soul and Body, the one Spirit, the other Flesh and Dust: As it
is unnatural for a Spirit naturally to dye, so it is as unnatural for dust and
flesh for ever to live, without being changed from a Natural to a Spiritual, as
in 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
If it be objected, That by this, Adam must have dyed if he had not sinned.

Answer, It is a Question that the best cannot answer; for there is more ground
to believe that if he had not sinned, yet his fleshly body must have had a time
to have changed, because it was dust, and so natural, and not of the nature of
Eternity; and to that end do not only mind the Natural Reason, but this
Scriptural Ground.

Whatever was a fruit of Sin, Christ by his Death freed Saints from; but Christ
frees no soul from a Natural Death; Ergo, A Natural Death is not a bare and
only fruit of sin: if it were, every Saint through believing in Christ would be
freed from it: but none are, Ergo, etc. But this is a dispute amongst the
greatest of the Learned, and I shall enter no further into it.

Secondly, I shall let you know in what sense the Scripture represents the Soul.

1. Sometimes it is taken for the whole man, as Genesis 17.14, etc. Lev. 5.2, 3.
and chap. 7.19.

2dly. It is taken only for fleshly and natural blood, and so the common life
of man; Genesis 46.26.

3dly. It Is taken for the affection of the soul: as first for Love, as 1 Samuel
18.1. Secondly, for Grief and Sorrow, Jer. 13.17.

4thly. It is taken figuratively, for the Stomach, Prove. 27.7.

5thly. It is taken for the breath of a man, Jam. 2.26.

6thly. It is taken for the natural life distinct from the body, and also from
the soul or spirit of a man.

7thly. It is taken for that Soul or Spirit which was breathed by God into
Adam, by which he became a living Soul; this is that that never dies.

And that there is such a Spirit, or Soul, that never dies, I shall give you
the Reasons and Scriptures, to prove, That there is something in a man, that is
part of man, that lives and never dies; and that I shall prove from these
Scriptures and Reasons following, and then shall give a brief Answer, to the
Scriptures, and Reasons, of such as are of a contrary mind.

The first Reason is grounded on Genesis 35.10. we reason thus, Had there been
nothing to have lived and gone to God, it could not have been a departure, but
a cessation; but it is said, Her Soul departed, and she dyed, that is to say,
her body dyed: But had her soul dyed, there had been nothing to depart from the
body.

The second Reason is from 1 Kings 17.21, 22. And he stretched himself upon the
Child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray
thee, let this Child's soul come in to him again: v. 22. And the Lord heard the
voice of Elijah, and the soul of the Child came in to him again, and he
revived. Had the Child's soul been dead, the Prophet would not have prayed that
it might return to the body, but that it might live again; But God heard him,
and returned the soul of the Child, and then the body revived. Had the soul
been dead, both must have revived; but the one returns, the other revives; so
they were not both in one capacity.

The third Reason is from Eccles. 3.21. Who knows the spirit of a man that
goes upward, and the spirit the of beast that goes downward to the Earth? The
Reason lies clear; did the soul of a man dye, when the body dies, it dyed as a
beast; but here is a distinction, so that there is a difference. And where lies
it? the Text tells you, That dust goes to dust, but the Spirit to God that gave
it; so that it is clear that there is a part of a man that departs, and lives
when the body dies.

The fourth Reason is from Mat. 10.28. And fear not them that kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul and body in Hell. A good ground to prove this, for Christ
said, Fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.
Now, if the soul dyed with the body, then he that killed one, must of necessity
kill the other, but Christ says plainly, they may kill the body, but not the
soul: So there is a Soul, or part of man, that lives though the body dies.

The fifth Reason is from Act. 7.59. And they Stoned Stephen, calling upon God,
and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: If there had been nothing in Stephen
but what was to dye, his Prayer had been needless; but when his body was to
dye, he prays, that God would receive his spirit; so there was a spirit or
soul to depart, and be received, though the body dyed.

The sixth Reason is from 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not, but though
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day; From whence
we reason thus, If all in man, that is one with man, dyed when the body dies,
then when the body had on it any part of death or decay, all in the body that
is its own, must be so too; but here you see, there is something that increases
and gets up, when the body decreases and goes down.

The seventh Reason is from 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. Therefore, we are always confident,
knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
and in v. 8. We are confident I say, and willing, rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord. In which words you may see, that there
is some part of man, which when the body dies, is absent from the body, and at
that present is present with the Lord: now if all in man, that is of man, did
dye with the body, then there was nothing to be present with God; but you may
here see it is, and it was that which the Apostle groaned for.

The Eighth Reason is from Heb. 12.9. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our
flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverance: shall we not much rather
be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? and Mat. 22.31, 32. But as
touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken
unto you by God, saying, I Am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Now mind the
words: There you see a great difference between the Father of Spirits, and the
father of bodies or flesh: Now if the Spirit or Soul in this sense, were as the
body, then the fathers of the body or flesh were also Fathers of the Soul or
Spirit: besides, you may see two distinct properties, father of the fleshly
part, and Father of the Spirit or Soul: the same is seen in this also, Mat.
22.31, 32.

Now take a few Natural Reasons.

Reason 1. Without this there can be no Resurrection; for though God works by
his mighty Power in that, yet the Mean is thus; The Spirit of the body is that
which revives and quickens the body; as in all seeds, so in this; it is the very
Reason the Apostle uses in 1 Cor. 15.38. Now that seed that is cast into the
ground, if the seed so dies as that its life and spirit dies, it never comes
up, nor nothing of it; but though the body dies and rots, yet if the virtue and
life abides, it springs up again and receives its own body; so here: though the
power by which it is done is the Power of God.

Reas. 2. That which at no time in its being, desires or stands in need of rest
or cessation from motion, does not in its being admit of alteration or
cessation, as to being: but the Soul or Spirit that we mind, at no time stands
in need of rest or cessation from motion; Ergo, etc.

Object. The mind cannot always be attentive on one thing, but requires
alteration.

Answ. Though it does, yet it is not from motion, but from one object to
another; as sometimes, from Religion to exercise it self in Physic; and from
that, sometime to Music, and so from one to another, to be employed in
something; but it never desires or stands in need of a cessation from motion;
so that though the body sleeps, yet, even then there is some moving and motion
that is kept on foot, which tells us there is an unwearied part in man, that is
of a nature different from the dying part of man.

Reas. 3. Whatsoever is in man, not comprehended by man, is above, and so far
beyond man, that it is not of that nature that is dying. Now this Spirit or
Soul of a man that lives in the Mind, and is truly the mind of a man, is not,
nor cannot, be comprehended by man; but the mind of a man reaches to Heaven,
when he is upon the Earth, and to the uttermost part of the World, when the
body is but in one part: And the mind of man, though it may apprehend, yet it
cannot comprehend it self: Now this mind, or spirit of the mind, is that part
that never dies; Paul calls this, Romans 7.25. his Mind, and Romans 1.9. he calls
that his Spirit, which in chap. 7. v. 25. he calls his mind, this is that which
is in a man, and lives when the body dies.

Rea. 4. When the body sleeps it is in asence as dead, yet at that time there
is something in man that is capable of receiving Instruction; as in Job 33.15,
16. In a Dream, in the Visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men,
in slumberings upon the bed; then he opens the ears of men, and seals their
Instruction. Now mind, did all sleep, or cease from motion, or a living
capacity alike, then when one ceases, sleeps, or dies, all would dye too; but
you see from thence that there is some part capable of Instruction; (Ergo.)

Quest. If any should enquire, and say, Is not this Soul, or Spirit, something
that came from God, and is really part of God, and so goes to God again?

Answ. No; Though it came from God, yet it is no part of God. If you cast your
eye on those words of Christ, Mat. 10. 28. you will have an answer. 1. Were it
God, it could not be capable, to be cast by God into Hell, etc.

Answ. 2. If that in man which is immortal, were part of God, it needed not to
be sanctified; but not only the body, but the soul, and also the spirit stands
in need of being sanctified, and kept blameless; see 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Let me add
one thing more, and that is this, I mean as to the immortality of the Soul

Answ. 3. There is nothing in the world, that is of a dying nature, does, or
can satisfy the soul or spirit of a man: Now every thing naturally is satisfied
with its like. Now were the soul of man, or all in man, of one nature, dying
contents would satisfy it; but it cannot. (Ergo.)

I would have you but a little mind the sad consequences that must, and does
attend the owning, and holding the Soul to be mortal, and dye with the body.

1st. If the Soul be mortal, Then as its Nature is, so is its Property, or
Quality, and Ability in its movings, and natural motions; and so it cannot move
toward Immortality, but quite contrary. Now though we do hold, That man has
not power, savingly to act Godward and Heavenward, but by the help of Grace,
yet we know, there is principles in every man to act Godward, and to seek
after Immortality, even in very Heathens: Now were there not something of that
nature, there would be no such enquiries, nor movings; neither would, nay
could, God judge the Heathens ( Romans 2.14, 15.) by a Law that is in their
natures, were not this so.

2dly. As we said before, The Resurrection is denied, upon the ground before
expressed.

3dly. It naturally tends to make men Epicures; see Isa. 22.12.

4ly. It takes off the great expectation of Saints in their longing and
groaning for their departure, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8, for, what need they
groan for a departure, if nothing at the departure were to be enjoyed?

5ly. It denies God to be the Father of Spirits, a Prerogative proper to God,
distinct from men, Heb. 12.

6ly. It denies that dear and near Affinity and Communion of Spirits, which is
the Joy of Saints, the Rejoicing of Angels, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.

In the next place we would show you in part, what are the Privileges souls
enjoy after they are departed;

Mind a few of the Privileges that Saints enjoy when departed from the body.

1. They are present with God, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are confident, I say, and
willing, rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

2. We are by it freed from our House, or sad rotten Tabernacle.

3. We shall be freed from our Groanings, 2 Cor. 5.2, 4. For in this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven:
For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened, not for that we
would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that Mortality might be swallowed up of
Life. And now see a little what is at home, Phil 3.20. But our conversation is
in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. O!
what Sorrows, Sins, Sighings and Complainings do attend us here? But there is
freedom from all; There is glorious Sights without sinning; There is Smiles
without Frowns: There is Love without Envy: There is eternal Embracings
without disputings: There is all things New, and never grows old: There is no
weariness in that way: There is the answer of Faith without Fears; There is all
delightful Joys without Tears: In a word, we shall know as we are known; and
see God, and sin no more: O come Lord Jesus, come quickly, my soul longs for
this Love.

Quest. Now if any should say, Why then was Paul, or any in a strait? if this
be so, they need be in no strait in this debait, how could Paul be in a strait?

Answ. From these Causes;

Cause 1. There is a great union and near relation, between soul and body,
being espoused together by God himself, and when the soul groans and longs to
be dissolved, then Interest and Propriety in this affinity puts in its appeals,
and so makes a stop or a stand, and so produces a Strait.

Cause 2. Is taken from the nature of Heaven and Glory; which is far above, and
beyond the low capacity of the Soul, that though the soul loves it, yet when
it is a going it fears, and is at a stand or strait.

Cause 3. Is because the dispute in the Case lies between the Affection and
Judgment: Now where Affection carries, and Judgment joins in Spirituals, it
goes delightfully; and where Judgment carries, and Affection stoops, or joins
in with Judgment, there it goes on powerfully; but when they are divided, and
there is ground for both, both ways there is great struglings and straits; so
is there in this Case, Judgment and Affection look upward and downward.

Cause 4. Is a point of Interest or Propriety on both sides, as in the Text; To
dye is gain, to live is Christ: Now you must know, that Propriety divided will
cause great debates, and make the mind thus employed to be at a stand.

Cause 5. It is a reasoning between Love and Loyalty: Love is a fire or
affection that ascends and flies high; Loyalty looks to its duty, though it be
to go backward or forward: Now when this comes in competition, they will, as in
this Text, cause a stand or strait.

Cause 6. An unaccustomed Change in any thing will cause a stand or stop; and
so a strait, as the departure of the soul from the body is.

Cause 7. You must mind, that Death is compared to a sleep, and no man is
willing to go to sleep till he be fully weary; and for the most part Death
comes to take us from the world before we are fully weary of the world. And
sometimes there is some work to do, and men are not willing without some
reasonings to go to sleep before their work is done; Some Child to bring up, or
some Wife to love a little longer, or Husband, etc.

These are some of the Causes why Souls are at a stand or strait when Death
comes. I should now show you some of the Scriptures and Reasons, that some
bring to prove the Soul mortal, but they are not worth the mentioning; only
mind their Scriptures, Genesis 2.17. Josh. 2.13. 1 Kings 2.2. Job 4.19, 21. Chap.
14.1, 2. and 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and chap. 34.15. Psalm. 89.46. Psalm. 103.15,
16. and 115.17. Eccles. 3.19. 1 Cor. 15.18. these be the most of their
Scriptures, and the Reasons they draw, are from them; and they have some
natural Reasons, but in truth they are not worth the mentioning: And as for
their Scriptures, and their Reasons from thence, do but read the verses before
and after, and you will soon see the deceit; and in all your minding of any
thing they say seems of force, do but well mind the Reasons, and the Scriptures
I have here laid down to prove the Soul immortal, and you will see the Truth;
and also the falsehood of that sad Opinion of holding the Mortallity of the
Soul. Now we should make some improvement of this Truth, but being straightened,
I shall leave that, Beseeching God, to do you as much good in the knowledge of
this Truth, as he has done to my soul; and so the LORD JEHOVAH be your
Strength.

Now in answer to your desires, because I cannot get time to write at large, my
apprehensions of the difference betwixt the Old-Covenant, and the New, as the
Scripture calls them, or the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace: Take
a brief hint of a few Particulars of the different Property, and that thus;

1. The Condition of the Old Covenant was such, that it did lay an
Impossibility of attaining the promised Good by it, and that you may see by
viewing these Scriptures, Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.11. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.

2. It kept souls in Fears, without any grounds of Certainty, or Assurance; for
that which was done as it might be to day, was to do again to morrow, as if it
had not been before. See Heb. 7.19, 27. chap. 9.9. and chap. 10.11.

3. It was exceeding Costly, even so that the Cost did exceed the Comforts; all
their Service did so declare it: see 1 Chronicles. 21.24.

4. The Word or Declaration of it, was, in comparison with the Declaration of
the Gospel, but a bare voice or sound of words, Heb. 12.9. compared with Act.
15, 24. The Promises belonging to it could not take place, till the Condition
made way, and the Condition depended upon an impossibility, so that both
together in it self, did signify, but little more than a sound of words, in
comparison of the Declaration of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace.

5. It begat great Fear in all that heard it; but the Spirit and Saving-Faith
in none, see Heb. 12.21. Gal. 3.2. Now blessed be God this is ended and taken
out of the way (...) And that it is so, you may be assured from Heb. 7.12, 18.
chap. 8.7, 13. 2 Cor. 3.17. etc.

Now the Comforts of this Change lies in the removing of the evil that did
attend us in that. And 2dly. In the Fruition of the Good that is brought in by
the New Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace. If you enquire after that Good, I
must tell you, it is not to be in its fullness, expressed by the tongue of Men
and Angels: but take a few Particulars that have been of great use and comfort
to my soul: and they are these,

First, In that the Condition, as well as the Promises of Good, have their
immediate dependence as to performance, only upon God, Jer. 31.32, 33, 34.
chap. 32.39, 40. Ezekiel. 11.17, 20. chap. 36.25, 26, 27. etc.

Secondly, The Good of Promises, are not caused, but causes of Performance; so
that the good of Promises is the life of Duties: So that the life in Duties,
does not intail to the good of Promises, but we are to draw the life of Duties
from our Interest in the good of Promises, Psalm. 116.1. Gal. 2.19.

Thirdly, The want of performance of the Condition, through want and weakness,
is not, nor cannot be a just ground to take away, or weak^ our Comforts and
Confidence: See 2 Samuel 23.5. Psalm. 89.33, 34. Psalm. 106.45. Isa. 43.22, 25.
etc. Isa. 54. apply 7, 8, 9 verses, and Ezekiel. 16.61, etc.

Fourthly, In a word, There is no mutations in us that do, or can make an
alteration in it, but what it was, it is, unalterable in Christ, our Lord and
King, 2 Cor. 1.20. Heb. 8.6. with chap. 6.17, 18. etc. I shall say no more as
to that;

But shall speak in answer to your desire a word or two, what that Peace is
that we have by Christ, and this Covenant of Grace, whether it be a bare Grace,
or a State.

Now as to the Peace that Christ purchased for Saints, whether it be a bare
particular Grace, or a State, I shall let you know my sense; and for that end,
mind how the word Peace in a Scriptural sense is to be taken. Peace in
Scripture is taken many ways; As

1. Sometimes it is to be taken naturally; as when men's natural constitution is
to be Quiet, Patient, and Peaceable; so was Moses accounted a Patient man, or a
man of Peace. 2. It is taken diabolically, or devilish: As first, when men make
a League or Covenant with the Devil, Hell, and Death, or Sin, as those, Isa.
28.15. secondly, As when men are stupefied in sin, and so unsensible, as Nabal
was. 3. Its taken spiritually, and that these ways; first relatively, that is
when the frame of a Christians heart or behavior is quiet and peaceable, as
Romans 14.19. 1 Cor. 7.15. Heb. 12.14.
2dly. Its taken vertually, that is, all that Peace which Saints enjoy and
receive by and through believing in Christ, called Peace of Conscience, as in
Romans 5.1. chap. 8.6. etc.

3dly. It is taken essentially; and that peace is not a bare Grace of Peace,
but it is a state of Peace; though it be hard to define, yet we shall speak a
little of it, and give you a description of it suitable to what we find it in
Scripture; and that is as followth.

It is a state of Favor and Grace, purchased by Christ according to an
Agreement and Covenant made between God and Him, into which Christ does instate
all his, in which state they have a perfect acceptance, and are complete in the
sight of God; and there they have a friendly Amity, and sweet Harmony, and full
Agreement, not only with God and Heaven, but also with the Earth and all things
therein. For the proof of this, mind, 1. It is not a bare act of Grace, but a
state of Grace and Favor; which shall by and by be proved by Scriptures, and
grounds from thence. 2. That it is procured or purchased by Christ, see Dan.
9.24. Zech. 9.11. etc. 3. That there was an Agreement or Covenant between God
and Christ, see Psalm. 89.3. and 28.34, 35. Mal. 2.5. 4. That in this state
Saints are complete and perfect in the sight of God, see Phil. 5.27. Col. 2.10.
John 17.23, 24. 5. This peace does not only relate to God and Heaven; but the
Earth and all things therein, as you may see Job 5.23. Hos. 2.8.


Now that it is a state; for the proof of that, mind these Considerations,
wherein you will see that whatsoever was, or is proper to a state, is to be
found there. As

1. There is a Governor or Prince of it, Isa. 9.6, 7. 2. It is that in which
Saints shall be found of God at the last, as in 2 Pet. 3.14. which will not
barely admit of peace for us in another, nor yet of peace in us, but it is a
state in which Saints are found at last of God. 3. All things that do accompany
a state, as a state, do accompany this; as thus, 1st. There is in it a
Govenment, Isa. 6.7. 2dly, There are Laws or Rules, or Rulings or Leadings,
Isa. 55.12. 3ly, Declarations, or Proclamations go forth from it, Isa. 52.7.
Romans 10.15. 4thly. Ambassadors or Messengers belonging to it, Isa. 33.7. 4. If
you lay aside all these Particulars, and only mind this Reason, It must of of
necessity be a state, because it must be something that is the contrary of what
sin by Adam brought souls into: Now that was not a bare curse, but a cursed
state of darkness and death; and that sin did bring souls into such a state,
you may clearly see, in Ephesians. 2.1, 23. applied with the 5, and 6. verses; and
ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 19. the case is clear, for the Scripture is clear in the
proof of this: If so, then God's Grace by Christ, must of necessity bring souls
through believing, into a state that is contrary to that state; then this peace
must needs be a state. 5. Consideration; If you mind all Prophecies and
Promises throughout the holy Scripture, you will see this to be a truth: We
might, if I had time, make very choice improvements of this truth.
First, Were Saints truly informed of this Truth, and did really believe it,
their comforts would be more sure and firm than now they are. Now poor souls so
look upon it, that what peace is to day, is many times gone to morrow, and
looks upon it sometimes lost by sins and miscarriages, and gained again by
Repentance, and exact Performance, and never looks upon this to be a state, a
standing state; the sense of which is to recover souls that are fallen, and to
spirit souls that grow cold and dead, even the sense and consideration, that
though they fall, this state stands, and stands with its doors of Grace opened,
and with its Ambassadors woing and beseeching sad sinners to come in, and
fallen souls to return into that rich unalterable State purchased by Christ,
and stands upon the unchangable Foundation of God's Free Grace, and the full
and perfect Purchase of Christ our Lord and Prince of Peace. Oh! that my soul,
and the souls of all them that fear God, could always believe this Truth, this
soul-satisfying-Truth; this sinner-converting-Truth; this
fallen-souls-recovering-Truth; this Grace-raising Truth: This God and
Christ-exalting Truth. Oh my dear Friends, let us study to walk worthy of this
unchangable state: And there is nothing will so much enable us to walk like it,
as the true knowledge and belief of it. O believe thou art kept by it, as in
Phil. 4.7. And when thou fallest, look on this standing State believingly, thou will find it like the Brazen Serpent to heal and restore thy soul. To this God
and Prince of Peace I leave thee; and in that state I love thee, and hopes
through Grace for ever to live with thee; Amen, Amen.

NOw for the satisfaction of some few Friends, I shall in the next place set
down some of the Scriptures, that I can well remember, that in my time I spoke
from, with the bare mentioning of the Text, and the Doctrine I observed from
thence; without any more but only the Text and Doctrine, and though I cannot
mention them in order, yet as many as I can remember, I shall, wishing God may
make proof and improvement of them, to them that read them. And the first I
shall mention is this, in

Genesis 48.21. (But it was not the first that ever I spoke from, for I cannot,
nor shall not set them down in order, as I told you)
Doct. 1. It is the portion of the best of our Relations here below, to dye and
be deprived each of other. Doct. 2. The loss of the best Relation cannot
deprive a soul of the Privilege of God's promised Presence. Doct. 3. The sense
of the enjoyment of God's presence, bears up and balances the Soul under the
loss or separation of outward Relations.
1 Cor. 3.18.
Doct. 1. Those that will be wise in a Gospel-sence, must become Fools. Doct.
2. Those that are yet in the worlds wisdom, and not yet become Fools in a
Gospel-sence, their state is a state of deceit: We raised all into one
Doctrine; Those that are not in a Gospel-sence become Fools, but are yet in the
worlds wisdom, their state is not standing, but a state of deceit,
Isa. 30.15.
Doct. It is God's way to crown and confirm his great works of Restoration by
the pouring forth of his Spirit; and it is good for Saints to expect and wait
for it: -- This minding the time when, and the end.
Mark. 13.37.
Doct. Watching is a Duty proper for Saints always to be employed in.
Ezekiel. 22.14.
Doct. 1. There is a day when God will deal with men. Doct. 2. There is no
hearts nor hands of wicked men can endure that Day. We reduced both into one
Doctrine. Notwithstanding Gods Long-forbearance, and men's foolish-confidence or
security; yet he has a day to deal with wicked men, in which day hands and
hearts, that is to say, all supports will fail them, or they will not be able
to endure.

Cant. 2.15.
Doct. There are little, yet subtle evils attend the People of God, and hinder
their growth, the sense of which should make them seek to Christ for a removal.
Zeph. 3.18.
Doct. In the latter days there will be in the Solemn Assemblys great cause of
sorrow; and to be really and heartily employed in it, is kindly taken of God.
Matthew. 12. latter end of ver. 44.
Doct. To have a fair appearance as to Form, yet in the heart to be empty as to
Life and Power, does not free but further the miserable state of that soul.
Isa. 22. part of the 14. v.
Doct. Not to be employed in the present work of our Generation, but neglect to
answer God's Call to the present work of the day, is a sad sin, that God will
surely punish.
1 Cor. 1.27. first part of the verse.
Doct. It was the great design of God in his great and Gospel-Work, to make
choice of, or choose that which the world does most undervalue.
Psalm. 69.32.
Doct. 1. God's Goodness to particular Saints, especially upon Zions account,
is matter of great joy and gladness. Doct. 2. That Humble souls are only fit to
meet God in such employment. Doct. 3. It is not only propper to, but the
Privilege of Humble Souls to bless, or rejoice in God's Goodness to particular
Saints, or Zion in general. All was reduced to one Doctrine; The rejoicing at,
or in the Goodness of God to particular Saints, especially upon Zions account,
is a Privilege and Employment proper only to Humble Souls.

Luke 21. first part of the 8th ver.
Doct. 1. It was Christ's care to forewarn Saint of Deceits. Doct. 2. There is
and will be variety of Deceits, or Deceivers. Doct. 3. The sense of the many
Dece^ts or Deceivers should cause Saints to take heed. We reduced all into one
Doctrine, Doct. Saints as well as Sinners from the advice of Christ, and the
sense of Deceits, ought to take heed.

Psalm. 119.1.
Doct. There is a blessedness annexed to God's Ways, but properly applicable
to none but they that are Pure and Undefiled in them.
Isa. 61.3.
Doct. 1. Though it be Christ's work to Proclaim and bring forth Comfort to all
sensible sinners, yet most eminently to Mourners in Sion. Doct. 2. It is a
commendable and comely Posture for Saints in Sion to be Mourners. Doct. 3. It
is not a Saints present enjoyment, either of countenance or outward
accommodation, but a future change, that is a Saints gain or ground of Comfort.
Doct. 4. What Saints appear to be, and are, in their outward condition, in
their Sorrow and Sufferings; the quite contrary they will be when God appears
to dispense his promised Grace and Glory. Doct. 5. It is a great part of a
Saints Portion to bring glory to God.
Col. 4.2.
Doct. 1. It is the Duty of Saints not only to pray, but to continue in Prayer.
Doct. 2. Watchfulness in Prayer is, and ought to be a Saints practice. Doct. 3.
Thankfulness is part of a Saints complete Performance of the duty of Prayer.
First, Supplication. 2dly. Watchful Observation. 3dly. A thankful Application
is comprehended in prayer.

Act. 15.30.
Doct. It was, and ought to be the Practice of the Members of Sion, especially
Ministers, to enquire after the state and condition of particular Souls.
Jer. 6.16.
Doct. They and they only prosecute, or seek Truth truly, that stand in the way
of Truth while they seek after it.
Gal. 6.2.
Doct. 1. Among the People of God there are some that are under burdens. Doct.
2. The Burdens of particular Saints are not only to be born by themselves, but
ought to be born by all. Doct. 3. The Law of Christ is not performed, if that
Duty be neglected.
Rev. 3. last part of the 1. v.
Doct. 1. Even in the Church of Christ there are some that have a name to live,
and yet are dead. Doct. 2. To have a name to live, and not have the Power and
Life, but to be dead, is that which exposes the creature to the sad sense of
Gods displeasure. We reduced all into one Doctrine; To have a name to live,
and yet have not the power of Life, but are dead; their outward propriety
amongst Saints will not free, but does rather further their sad censure from
God's displeasure.

Psalm. 23.4.
The presence of God is a sufficient support to Saints in the lowest state, or
the greatest affliction: This in general, but in particular see Doct. 1.
Afflictions and Death is the portion of Saints. Doct. 2. Not the least, but the
lowest state in Affliction is a Saints portion. Doct. 3. This state to Souls is
but a shadow. Doct. 4. In the lowest state of Affliction Saints have no cause
of fear. Doct. 5. God's presence with Saints in the greatest Afflicton removes
fears: or, It is enough for souls in any state, if God be with them. Doct. 6.
The true sense not only of God's strength in his Love, but souls profit by his
lashes, does in times of trouble sweetly uphold them.

Psalm. 135.4.
Doct. 1. There is a choice application of Gods chosen Ones to himself. Doct.
2. The Chosen of God, or God's People are God's Treasure.
Col. 2.6.
Doct. It is the duty of all that have received Christ, in all their walkings
to walk in him.
2 Col. 1.9.
Doct. 1. It is the portion of the precious People of God sometimes, not only
to be under the sight, but the very Sentence of death. Doct. 2. God's special
end in laying his People so low is to keep them low in themselves, and not to
trust in themselves, but singly in God.
Psalm. 94.19.
Doct. God's Comforts and Consolations, puts an end to man's distractions.
Genesis 49.11.
Take it as a Proviso and Promise to the Church in Gospel Times. Doct. There is
high and glorious enrichments comprehended in or under simple appearance in
Gospel-Appointments.
Romans 8.6.
Doct. 1. Death dwells in, and is the portion of a Carnal mind. Doct. 2. Life
and Peace is a portion that does accompany a spiritual mind.
Phil. 3.20.
Doct. All true Subjects of Heaven have their conversation in Heaven, whilst
here on Earth; the sense of which should cause them to walk as Saints amongst
Sinners. Mind the foregoing verses.
Psalm. 66.16.
Doct. That heart which does regard iniquity, can make no improvements in his
approaches to God by Prayer.
Psalm. 37.28.
Doct. Near society with God, is a safe seat for Saints.
Cant. 1.2.
Doct. The nearest communion with Christ is dearest, and most desired by that
soul that is acquainted with him.
Psalm. 119.165.
Doct. 1. The People of God are enriched with a great and admirable peace.
Doct. 2. They that are enriched with the true Peace of God, are lovers of his
Law. Doct. 3. So far as souls are enriched with God's Peace, and so become
lovers of his Law, so far they live above offenses or stumblings.
Luke 14.28.
Doct. It is commendable in all especially any that undertakes work for God, to
take in future dangers with present duties.
Jer. 2.14. first part.
Doct. For the Friends of God so to give way to sin, as by it to bring
themselves into the state of Servants, is a state and condition that is sad in
God's sight.
Cant 5.9.
Doct. The spiritual enrichments Saints enjoy from Christ, and by them declared
to bare professors, makes them to be at a stand. Or thus, The glorious Riches
Saints see in Christ, and their raised affections toward Christ being
declared, makes bare professors be at a stand.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Doct. 1. It is the duty of the People of God to try before they trust. Doct.
2. It is also God's Peoples duty in their trials, whatsoever they find to be
truth, to hold it fast.
Psalm. 45.3.
Doct. 1. Christ is Sions King. Doct. 2. There is effinity betwixt Christ and
Christians. Doct. 3. Those that are in union with Christ, are all glorious.
Doct. 4. The Glory of Zion, or Saints, is within.
Hos. 8.2. depending upon the first verse, and relating to the third verse.
Doct. 1. There was, and so there may be, a People among the Israel of God,
that appear to lay claim to him, and affirm they know him, and yet live not
with him, nor are owned by him. Doct. 2. It is not men's Affirmation that can
hinder God's Determination, in bringing his Judgments upon them that are false
to him.
Psalm. 4.8. last part of ver. 11.
Doct. 1. There is nothing retained by God, from the People of God, that is
good for them. Doct. 2. It is not the bare Form, but the Uprightness, or
upright frame of heart in the Form, that the Goodness of God in his Promises
runs out to.
Nahum 1.7. Mind the time when it is spoke, and to whom, and what.
Doct. 1. The highest exercise of God's Wrath upon his Enemies, does not nor
cannot hinder his Love and Goodness to his own. Doct. 2. There is no danger so
desperate, but here is security and safety in God for his own. Doct. 3. What
soever God is in himself, he is the ^^me to his People in the worst of times.
Dan. 6.10.
Doct. 1. Saints assurance of Sufferings should not hinder or keep them off
from their Service. Doct. 2. Circumstances in and about Saints Service in a
Suffering-day, in some cases may become Substances or Duties. Doct. 3. Changes
in men's minds, and Determinations or Conclusions in Councils, should not make a
stop or change in Saints way Godward.
Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Doct. 1. God's People are a happy People. Doct. 2. The Excellency of God's
People is a matchless Excellency. Doct. 3. God's People are a Saved People:
Orthus; The Salvation of Gods People is in God. Doct. 4. The Strength, or Life,
or Excellency of all that belongs to Saints, is so, because God is the same in
that to them. Doct. 5. As Saints are a People of Excellency upon God's account,
so they are Objects of Envy to their Enemies. Doct. 6. The Enemies of Gods
People are Liars, and they shall in God's season find them so. Doct. 7. Though
it be the portion of the Saints in a suffering-day to be low; yet there is a
season for Saints to be exalted above their Enemies.
2. Chron. last part of verse. 9.
Doct. For any Person or People to be enriched with the experiences of the
prosperous enjoyment of Gods Presence; and to leave that, and follow or ^leave
to any other thing, is to do foolishly.
Jer. 30.17.
Doct. 1. It Is Saints or Zions portion, to be under wants or wounds. Doct. 2.
As it is Zions portion to be under Sufferings, so sometime in the eye of
Reason, to be lost, or cast off by it. Doct. 3. When Zions Deliverance is most
out of the eye and also the affections of men, its nearest the accomplishment,
in answer to Gods Purpose and Promise. Or thus: Doct. 4. When Zion is by men
most forsaken, it is Gods season to save.
2 Chronicles. 20. last part of ver. 15.
Doct. It is an encouraging comfort to a People or Nation, in any great
Trouble, Tumults or Wars, sensibly to know God is engaged therein.
John 27.17.
Doct. It Is an high Testimony of Love to Christ, and it is kindly taken by him,
to be employed in feeding or serving Christ's Lambs.
Job 23.10.
Doct. When Saints suffer under the Hand of God, and also under the Censures of
men, then to be so sensible of their own integrity, as to center their
satisfaction of it in the Knowledge of God, is a Comfort that will hold out in
the worst of times.
Mark 5.39, 40.
Doct. 1. It is that which sometimes accompanies the work or undertakings of
Christ, before they are accomalished, to appear dead in the sight or sense of
men. Doct. 2. There is no cause to distrust or doubt of ^he Accomplishment of
Christ's undertakings, though (...) seem dead in the sight of men. Doct. 3. When
Christ's Undertakings appear ^ead in men's sight, they are but asleep in
Christ's sense.
Dearly beloved Friends, whoever you are that shall read these Texts of
Scripture, lest you should wonder why I insert so many here, seeing they can be
of no great use; I must tell you the reason why I do it; It is, because some
have, as to these, labored to incense many poor precious souls against me, as
if I had abused the Scriptures in what I had observed; rendering me in that, as
they have done in most things, as odious as they can, to the ears of many that
never knew me; so I did intend to have inserted more if I could, but these few
I thought good to leave, in answer to some Friends desires, for the ends
aforesaid; desiring what weakness you find here, to cover it; and what good you
find here, to improve it: and I beg that God may give you as much comfort in
reading them, as I had in declaring them. And as for the Proofs and Uses, the
dear Lord make them for you, and to you: And God forgive them, who out of envy
to me have not spared to throw dirt in the face of the Truth as well as me; But
if God forgive them as freely as I do, as I beg he may, this sin ^^ill not be
laid to their charge. Amen, Amen.

In the next place, after mentioning some of the particular Scriptures, from
which I have formerly spoke; I am engaged in my heart to leave a few Reasons
and Considerations to prove there is a God, without making use of Scripture, to
convince Atheists; many of which I have met with both beyond Sea and here: and
these Considerations may be of use to some who may meet with such spirits, as
well as I have done.

Now the way to prove that, without Scriptures, by bare Natural Reasons, is as
follows.

First, Consider that all things that are, must be considered under these four
heads. As,

First, Such things as have only a being, and no more; as the Earth, Air,
Water, and the Sky, etc.

Secondly, Such things as have being and life, but not sense; as Herbs, Trees,
Plants, etc.

Thirdly, Such things that have being, life and sense, and no more; as all
Beasts, Birds and Fishes, etc.

Fourthly, Such things that have being, life, sense and reason; as Men and
Women.

Now under these Four is considered all the World: and if so, let us reason
from all, and use but Reason truly, and you must confess, There must be a Power
above each, as the only Cause of all; and that none of each is the cause of it
self, nor the cause of each other; and that you will see if you consider these
things.

First, That which has only a bare being, cannot be the Author and Causer of
the rest, and that for these Reasons.

1. Every Effect is answerable and like the Cause; but here they are not alike,
but differ in their very nature: for one has a bare being; the rest have being
and life; or, being, life and sense; or, being, life, sense and reason. Now for
the Effect to be so differing from its Cause in Nature, is contrary to Reason
and Nature. For in all Causes there must be a unity between the Cause, and the
thing or things caused.

2. It is against Nature, for any Cause naturally to cause or produce any
Effect, to be a Lord over it self. Now that which has a being and life, is
above that which has a bare being; and that which has being, life, sense and
reason, is made higher than either, and that is the creature Man, unto whom all
these three former are servants, and he a Lord over each.

3. This is a maxim, That Bodies of themselves have no movings. Now where there
is no more in a thing than a bare being, it is but a bare body, and its motion
is from the power of Life elsewhere; As for example, in a Clock, it cannot move
without weights; and these weights, that have also a bare being or body, they
must have a hand to put them on: and so all bodies that are bare beings, in
their motions still must relate to a power and life elsewhere. Now without
motion there can be no propagation; so that a bare being, which is a body
without life, cannot produce sense and life, much less life, sense and reason.

And now that which has not only being, but life, that, or them, cannot be the
chief original Cause, and that from these Considerations.

1. That which is the first Cause can subsist of it self, without that which it
does produce; But Grass, Herbs, and Trees or Plants cannot subsist, though they
have being and life, without that which has a bare being and no life, as the
Earth, Air, Water, etc.

2. That which has a bare being gives daily strength and life to this that
has being and life; Now had that begun it self, it would have had power to
maintain it self without that help.

3. That Grass, Herbs, Trees, etc. were not the Beginners, but had a beginning,
you may see clear; If you see the nature of one, you may see the nature of all:
As thus; Is there a branch? it leads thee to the body from whence it came, and
from the body of the Tree thou art led to the root, though it be within the
ground; and from the root you are led to mind the kernel that fell to the
ground from another Tree, etc. as the Cause of that Root; If no Kernel, no
Root; if no Root, no Body; if no Body, no Branch: And then consider from whence
came that Kernel; and go backward, and what was it before it was a Tree? It was
a Kernel; and a Kernel cannot be without a Tree: And then how came the first
Tree? So there must be another Cause besides themselves, to be their Cause.

Now as to that, or them, that have being, life and sense, That, or they,
cannot be the Cause of other things, for the grounds first laid down: As to
prove that which has a bare being could not be the Cause, consider those
grounds, and that will also prove this, I mean the first of the Reasons. And
now that they are not the Cause of themselves you will clearly see, if you
mind.

First, Had those been the first Cause of themselves, they would have power to
preserve themselves, and not suffer themselves to be slaves and servants to
that or them, that for power or strength are inferior to them; as Man is
inferior to the Beasts for strength and power, yet is as Lord and Master over
them, which must be from a power above, that does subject the stronger to the
weaker, and that is God.

2dly. If ever they had power to make themselves they have it still, and if
still, why do they not still do it? what needs there to be pairs or couples
carried from place to place for generation? And besides, do in this as you did
by the Herbs and Plants, etc. go backward, and see what or who was the Cause of
the first.

4. That which had being, life, sense and reason (to wit) Man, was not the
chief Author and Cause of the other Three, is clear from the Reason first laid
down, in relation to that which has but a bare being, in that there is and
must be a congruity and likeness between the Cause and it self, but here is
none. Besides,

If Man be the Cause of that which has only a bare being, and that which had
being, and life, and sense, why does he not do the like? and why does he
sometimes perish for want? etc.

And that he also was not the first Cause of himself, will appear from these
Grounds.

1. If he had made himself, he would have had power to have kept himself from
being unmade: for that power that has ability to make, has power to preserve
and keep it self from being unmade, or dissolved.

2. He would make men when he had a mind, if this were so. No Men and Woman
that have a mind to have Children, would be without them; And when they would
have a Son, they would not have a Daughter.

3. They would not have had defects and weaknesses, but would have been all
complete without weakness and sickness; and the longer they had been employed,
the more complete they would have been.

4. They would have known themselves before brought forth: for in making,
always knowing goes with power, and power with understanding; and then before
it is, it is known: but the contrary is seen daily.

5. There is something in Man, that shows there is something above him.
Consider what is the chiefest part in man, or of men; it is his Mind, that is
above all the rest in him; his Mind runs out to varieties, and goes up to the
Heavens, and to the furthest part of the World, and yet sits at home in the
body; and this Mind of man that is above all other parts of man, and knows all,
yet it does not know it self, so it is only knowable to something above it; and
there is nothing above it in man; therefore that above it is a power beyond it,
and that is God. Besides, the whole man cannot satisfy the mind, nor the mind,
as the mind, cannot satisfy it self, but it must be something besides it, and
beyond it, and above it, that is better and higher, and that is God.

6. Many of the Reasons which were expressed before in relation to the other
three, if minded, will prove this, That man is not the chief Cause or first
Original of himself.

Besides these Reasons from each particular there are and may be Reasons drawn
from all together, to prove that they are not their own Cause, nor the first
and chief Original Cause of each other; but it must be from a higher, above
all, before all, who is the Original Cause and Maker of all, and each; and the
Considerations that will clearly prove it are these: 1. The admirable Congruity
and Harmony that is between those varieties of bodies; and though very
different each from other, yet agree; which cannot be from themselves, but from
something above them. 2. The admirable submission each to other, both in power
and property, the greater to the lesser, the higher to the lower; which cannot
be from themselves, but something that is not them, but above and beyond them,
and that is God. 3. The unexpressible subsistence each by other, and each from
other, and so each considered in self, which in such contrary natures and
varieties of properties could not naturally do it, were there not something
that is supernatural above all, and that is God. 4. A fourth Consideration is
upon the account of the furthest end of the least and lowest, and the ultimate
end of the highest and chief.


From all which rightly minded and considered you must conclude, some power
before all, and above all, as the Cause and chief Lord over all, and that is
God.

Let us go over these Four a little larger in way of Contemplation, As

1. Of the Congruity and sweet Harmony in those varieties of Bodies. If you
look upward you will see their infinite movings different, and yet not troubled
each at other, nor to each other. If you look downwards you see the Sea
continually moving above the Earth, and yet not passing there its bounds, but
abides as two espoused each to other. We also behold all the Creatures of
different kinds and properties; and yet how do they concur and agree together!
the tame ones abide in flocks among men for their use the wild ones that have
strength to destroy men they abide in Deserts, as if they were agreed so to do.
Sure this must be from a power beyond and above all these. And now go to Man,
or into Man, that is an Abridgment of the whole Universe, a Body fit for all
sorts of movings, and a Soul without removing, makes the Body move which way it
pleases, and by Reason guides and governs all in such an admirable Congruity
and Harmony, that it is clear that something above all, must thus guide, lead
and order all, and that is God.

2. Consider the Strength and admirable Submission each to other, though of
great difference both in power and property, yet all acting as if each were
servant to the rest; the Heavens submissively serve the Earth, and the Earth
the Herbs, Plants and Grass, and these serve the Cattle, and the Cattle serve
Man, and Man serves the Ground by tilling and the Cattle by looking and
providing for them: O the strong reciprocal submission and servitude! this must
be from a power beyond and above all, and that is God.

3. The unexpressible Subsistence. You see the Seas about the Earth, which
seems continually to threaten the Earth, and yet keep within their bounds; the
Earth heavy and massy, and yet notwithstanding settled, or rather hangs in the
Air: The Winter seems to destroy the Herbs, etc. the Summer again revives them;
the Beasts stronger than Men, and able to destroy them, and would do so, did
not a higher power keep them in; and yet they submit, and all subsist together:
O this must be from a power above all, and that is God.

4. Consider the furthest end of the least, and the ultimate end of the chief;
What is or can be less than a bare being; as Earth, Air, Water, etc. they have
only a bare being: Now what is next to that but a not-being, and that is
nothing; now this is a mixim, That between something and nothing, let it be
never so small, yet there ^s an infinite space; And nothing but an infinite Power
can bring something out of nothing. Now before being, no being cannot cause a
being, but it must be from another cause. Now go to the highest above Being, is
Life, and above that is Life and Sense, and above that is Life, Sense and
Reason, and that is in Man, etc. So he is the Chief. And what is chief in him?
it is his mind and understanding, by which he knows all that is to be known; it
can go up to Heaven and judge what is there; and to the furthest parts of the
World, and to all parts at once, and yet sit at home in the Body; this is the
highest of all four: Yet this Mind, so high, so noble, knowing all things, yet
cannot know it self: If so, there must needs be something above that is more
chief, more noble, to order and guide, and that is God.

Object. If any should object and say, All things are caused by the Sun.

Answ. That cannot be; For, Man is made of the four Elements, each of which is
directly contrary to each other; as Fire to Water, etc. Now that four
contraries should join all in one peaceably to make one, shows something above
them to command them.

Obj. And if any shall say, that the Air, which is between Fire and Water, does
reconcile these in one.

Ans. What power is it that does cause them to be subject to the Air? it self
cannot do it, for it is inferior to either; therefore there must be a power
above each, to incline the Air to that work, and them to that subjection, which
power must be God. So that from all that has been said, Reason it self shows
there is a God, had we not the blessed Scriptures, which blessed be God we
have. And so much for this Question.

Dear Brother, for your soul-refreshing Letters I thank you; The Lord increase
your Prison mercies, and bear you up under all your trials, which I know are
very great; but God can, and I hope does, make them very easy. Now dear
Brother, if it might not be too much trouble to you, I could heartily wish that
you would, either in your Book that you are writing, or in some other Papers,
leave your thoughts to these few. Questions following, by which you will engage
him that is yours in the best bonds of Love.

Quest. 1. The first Question relates to the great difference between the Roman
Catholics and Us, and that is to beg your chief grounds from Scripture, to
prove, That after the Consecration by the Priest, it remains still bread, and
is not become really, but representatively, the flesh and blood of Christ.

Quest. 2. What is your chiefest and most satisfying ground, to prove, and that
from the Old Testament, That Christ the Messiah is come, in answer to the Jews
profession?

Quest. 3. Seeing that in the Scripture, the Gospel is so diversely expressed,
as sometimes it is called Gods Gospel, and Christ's Gospel, and the Apostles
Gospel; and sometimes the Word is called, the Gospel, and sometimes God's Power
is so called: So the Question is, What is truly and really the Gospel?

Your brief and exact Answer to these will refresh the heart, not only of me,
but of many more of your Friends. Farewell.

My hearty endeared Friend, I shall do what I can to give you a brief Answer to
these Questions: Though I have not much freedom to meddle with that, yet I
shall briefly set down my Grounds and Reasons from. Scripture, which has fully
satisfied me, and I hope it may satisfy you and others.

Quest. 1. In answer to the first Question, as to the business of
Transubstantiation; it is clear, that after the Consecration by the Priest it is
still bread; And you will see it, if you mind what is the Ground of the Roman
Catholics judging it otherwise: The mistake is from this word, Mat. 26.26,
etc. This is my Body. Now say they, Christ said so, and he cannot lie.

In answer to that we say so too. But you must mind how that word [this is] is
in Scripture taken: it is taken two ways, 1. It Is taken Really, as in John
20.31. This Jesus is the Christ, that is, Christ is really Jesus. 2. It is
taken Representatively, representing a thing, and is not really the thing,
though the word, this is, be there used; as in Rev. 1.20. The seven Stars are
the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks are the seven
Churches. Now none will say, because the Spirit cannot lie, that the Churches
be Candlesticks, etc. But see yet more clearly, in 1 Cor. 10.4. And they did
all drink of that Spiritual Rock; and that (or this) Rock was Christ. Now none
will be so foolish as to affirm, that Christ was a Rock of Stone. So here, This
is my Body, that is, it does really represent my Body. Now they have no way to
answer, but will object and say, O but this is a Miracle that Christ then did
work, and still does, by turning the real bread into real flesh.


Answ. God and Christ never did work a Miracle in all the Scripture, that you
or any can prove, but in the working of the Miricle it was so wrought, that it
did convince the outward senses of all that saw it, or believed it: Did he turn
Water into Blood? The sense of Seeing was convinced, by seeing the color
changed. Did he turn Water into Wine? The sense of Tasting was satisfied, and
convinced by the taste, as you may there see. And so, never was any Miracle
wrought but the outward senses were and must be satisfied and convinced. Look
over all the Scripture and it was and must be so: but in this it is not; for as
before, so after the Consecration, the eye did see it Bread and does so still;
and the Taste did taste it Bread, and so it does still. They, and all the wit
of man cannot answer this.

Quest. 2. In answer to the second Question, how to prove Christ to be come in
answer to the Jews Objection. Much may be said both from Scripture and Reason,
too large for me to assert; therefore I shall only mention one ground from the
9th of Daniel, beginning at the 24 ver. to the end of the chap. It being that
which I never could see either here or beyond Sea by any Jew answered. There
the Angel tells Daniel the set time of Christ's coming and dying, and tells him,
It Is seventy weeks from the day that the Command went out to rebuild the
Temple. Now that day Daniel knew, and from that very day to Christ, or the
Messiah death, as it is there expressed, is to be seventy weeks; seven weeks,
and sixty two weeks, and the week in which he dyed; sixty two, and seven, and
one week, make seventy weeks. Now first enquire of the Jews, If they do not own
Daniel a true Prophet? they will say, yea, they do: Then enquire, if that
Prince or Messiah spoken of in Dan. 9.25, 26, 27. be not the Messiah they look
for? they must and will say, it is: Then enquire, If they have in all their
Records any other accounts of weeks, than two, that is, a week of days, and a
week of years? they must and will say, they have not: Then reason what King
reigned, and what time of his Reign it was when the Command came forth to
rebuild the Temple, which is openly by them and us known? Now till Christ's
Death from that time, must be but seventy weeks; and if they should say,
seventy weeks of days, then Christ had come before the Temple had been built;
but it must be seventy weeks of years, accounting seven years for a week, that
is, seventy times seven years, which is, four hundred and ninety years; and
just so long, and no longer it was, from the Command to build the Temple, to
Christ's Death, and he dyed in the middle of the last week, that is, in the
middle of the last year. This no Jews can truly answer, and it being so
unanswerable as to them, and so full of clear satisfaction, as to any doubting
Christian; I shall say no more in answer to this Question, but beg of God it
may satisfy you as it has done me.

Quest. 3. Now in answer to the third and last Question, consider these
Particulars as to the Gospel.

1st. Consider whose it is called; God's; Mark 1.14. 2 Cor. 11.7. 1 Thessalonians. 2.2,
8, 9. 1 Timothy 1.11.

2ly. Christ's; Mark 1.1. Romans 15.19, 29. 1 Cor. 9.12, 18. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Thessalonians.
1.8.

3dly. The Apostles, Romans 2.16. chap. 16.25. 2 Timothy 2.8. 2 Cor. 4.3.

Secondly, What is relatively called Gospel.

1. God's Power, Romans 2.16. that is to say, his Grace, or that wherein his
Power is made manifest or implied.

2. The Word of God is called Gospel, Act. 8.^5. Heb. 4.2.

3. The Doctrine of Grace or Justification is so called, apply Gal. 1.6, 8, 9.
with chap. 2.14. and 3.1, 2, 8.

4. Preaching Doctrine whether true or false, (...) it relates to, or pretends
Justification, is called Gospel, Gal. 1.6, 8, 9. apply chap. 2.14. chap. 3.1,
2, 8.

5. Preaching, and other Ministrations or employments, for Christ or his
Church, is relatively called so, see Phil. 2.22. chap. 4.3. 1 Thessalonians. 3* 2.

Quest. What is really the Gospel?

Answ. It is the Deliverance or Salvation of poor souls through the Free Grace
of God by the ^eath and Resurrection of his Son Jesus: The ^^^ath of which will
appear by Act. 15.7. apply chap. 10.30, to v. 44. and chap. 11.1. chap. (...).
24. Ephesians. 1.13. chap. 3.6. apply Ephesians. 6.19, 20. with 1 Cor. 5.20. 2 Timothy
1.10. see 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 18, 19, 20. by applying Tit. 2.20.11, 12. with Col.
1.5, 6. see Col. 1.23, 24, to ver. 28. you will see this Truth by applying
God's Promises, Isa. 61.1, 12. with Luke 4.18, 19.

So much in answer to the Queston, What the Gospel is: Search the Scriptures
and you will see it plain. So I shall say no more to that, but beg of God we
may believe, and walk worthy of it, Amen, Amen.

Now seeing God was pleased after a small time that I had been close Prisoner,
to refresh me so much, that after many days of Prayers and Tears, I was made
to sing, although for so doing, I was condemned by some; though what I did sing
was that which was given in suitable to my Condition, and God's dear and
gracious Dealing with me; and because some did so censure me for it, I thought
good to insert one o^ those Hymns I did make since I came here, which is as
follows.

An Hymn I made upon my being taken and carried to Prison, with the Matter and
Manner, August 20. 1663.
AS I in Bed asleep did lie
A Messenger steps in,
And says, Arise even by and by,
Here Is Warrant from the King,
Your House to search, and you to take, Nehem. 6.8, 12.

You must no longer lie:
I soon did see what plot they make,
To take my Liberty.
When I before the Great One came, Mat. 10.18

He asked why I did smile? Luke 21.12

Good Sir, I said, do not me blame,
You Will find in me no guile.
Away, said he, to the Tower him take,
And him there close let lie; Job 35.12.

No words nor excuse must I make, Prove. 21.13

But leave my Liberty.
When I came here I was amazed; Psalm. 46.1. and 86.5.

But God did me soon meet,
And bid me not to be afraid; Isa. 41.10 and 66.5.

Rejoice, but do not weep.
^y foes, though fair, I will declare,
Thy patience I will try; Rev. 2.10.

(...) joyce in me, do not despair, James 1.2.

In me's thy Liberty.
No sooner did this Grace appear Psalm. 42.4, 5, 6, 7.

But I cried out amain,
O Lord, Let me not now come here,
And go away in vain. Psalm. 79.9.

But let thy hand now show thy heart, Isa. 27.9.

And let me live on High; Psalm. 86.16.

And from my soul let sin depart, Isa. 33.16.

For that is true Liberty.
Then did I sing, Act. 16.25.
and sat me down,
Letting them shoot their darts
At him, Psa. 126.10.
who ever wears the Crown,
And reigns in all Saints hearts.
It Is he that is now Zions King, Psalm. 2.6.

And does the world defy;
It Is he which light and life does bring, Joh. 14.16.

In him's my Liberty.
The Lamb of God, Rev. 5.12. and 1.5.
our King will come
In Righteousness to Reign,
His glorious Kingdom is begun, Isa. 32.1. and 52.7.

He Will all his foes disdain.
And he himself will soon declare Rev. 19.6.

That, Psalm. 91.13.
he alone is He,
Whom Kings and Nations must now fear; Jer. 10.7.

In him's their Liberty.
His Wedding Day with men he will keep Rev. 19.7. and 21.9. and 3.4, 5. and 4.4.
and 7.14.

And Promises fulfill;
With garments white he will cloth his
This is his Father's will,
That they should all now live with Sheep; Joh. 17.21, 22, 23, 24.

In union for to be,
And see themselves redeemed from sin him Phil. 3.20.

To perfect Liberty.
And I in Christ shall now be blessed Phil. 3.8, and 1.23.

He unto me did say,
Now enter thou into thy Rest Romans 8.1.

That none can take away: Psalm. 37.7.

Until my Wrath on men be past Isa. 26.20.

I Will shut thee up in me;
Though into Prison men thee cast,
I Will be thy Liberty.
A Work for thee I have to do, Act. 26.16.

In which I Will thee maintain; Isa. 41.10.

My Truth thou must bear witness to Act. 23.11.

Whilst life in thee remain.
Unto my Truth now set thy seal Rev. 20.4.

My Name to Magnify, John 3.33.

I will then sure to thee reveal Jer. 33.3.

What Is Truth and Liberty.
Prisons of old, were Prophets Schools, Psalm. 94.12 and 119.71

And there were taught by Me
To learn my Statutes and my Rules,
And eke my Majesty.
And there did I them strength afford Psa. 138.3.

For all Extremity, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5

And I who was their only Lord Psalm. 37.39 and 27.1.

Did give them Liberty.
When I beheld this Glory bright Psa. 118.14.15.

Shining in me so clear,
I then did sing, and also write, Isa. 12.1, 2.

That others might him fear: Psalm. 34.11

And also may awake and sing, Isa. 26.19.

Tho in the dust they lie
In Christ their Dew on them falling,
By whom's their Liberty.
In all the world he will this declare ^sal. 89.10.

To all, both great and small,
His Holy Arm he will make bare ^sa. 63.12.

Before the Nations all.
And they that will his Scepter own
Must to themselves now dye:
For He alone that is on the Throne, Mat. 16.24 25.

Gives Life and Liberty
Now I true Liberty do know Isa. 61.1.

To Christ I Will praises sing, 2 Cor. 3.17.

For he through Death will bring me
No more to sigh and sin; Rev. 2.7, 17

I wish this news abroad may spread, home, Isa. 25.8.

That all my foes may see, Rev. 7.17. and 21.4.

And Saints with understanding read,
And know my Liberty.
What if false Witness should arise Jer. 6.13.

And labor to betray
My Innocence by their lies, Mat. 24.9. and 10.21.

My life to take away?
Yet Christ's Cause I will witness to, Luke 21.16

Tho for the same I dye, Act. 20.24. and 21.13.

I shall not fear what man can do
Against my Liberty.
For now my soul has sweet support Psalm. 27.1

Through Christ my Rock and Tower, Micah 7.8.

In whom's my peace, joy and comfort,
With fresh supplies each hour: Hab. 3.19.

His Love is now my whole delight, Psa. 138.7.

His Presence stands me by; Isa. 43.2.

I have him always in my sight,
O here is my Liberty.
God is my Witness and my Guide Psalm. 23.1.2, 3, 4, 5.

My conscience to keep clear;
I know the Lord is on my side,
Therefore I need not fear. Jsal. 118.6.

Through Christ I am now freed from Jer. 10.11.

And Hypocrites cruelty, Romans 8.1, 38

So soon as God receives my breath death Act. 7.59.

My Soul gains Liberty.
Patience with Balm my sores supplys Psalm. 37.3, 4, 5, 7.

I live above control,
In Prison though my body lies, Job 34.29.

They cannot inslave my Soul:
My free converse with Christ is sweet Cant. 5.13.

Which brings in choice supply, Psa. 104.34

That they which now my body keep Joh. 14.17.

Knows no such Liberty.
God did for me this place appoint Genesis 45.7, 8

Before they brought me here,
And does my soul with Grace anoint, Mica. 7.8, 9

That cheerfully I bear. Hab. 3.18.

And now his Will and Pleasure's mine, Act. 21.13.

He does my soul make free Psa. 11.2, 6, 7, 8.

To live above, though they combine
To take my Liberty.
I know my sufferings will have end; Job. 23.10.

Till then I Will them endure, Hab. 3.2.

A Savior he to me will send, Heb. 10.37

My Freedom to procure; Isa. 19.20.

And though there is some that it withstand Psa. 91.14.

He Will make them know and see Isa. 43.4.

That he alone by his own Hand Dan. 3.17.

Will gain my Liberty.
But some Sanballats still do plot Nehem. 6.5, 8, 12.

My Body to keep here,
Ye ( Judas-like) say they let not,
But rather would me clear. Isa. 24.16.

But God will one day make them know 1 John 3.12.

And they shall not deny,
That they (like Cain) have alone
Haeted my Liberty.
Till then I shall with sweet content Job 14.14.

Attend on God, and say, Psa. 27.14.

That tho their evil bows are bent, Psalm. 62.5, 6, 7. and 21. 8, 9, 10, 11.

God does the Scepter sway:
And he will turn them upside down,
And my soul satisfy, 2 Timothy 4.8.

And he will give me The Eternal Crown Jam. 1.12.

In perfect Liberty. Rev. 2.10.

Amen, Amen. Come my Lord and Life, come quickly, says the groaning soul of P.
H.

I did intend to have inserted my Reasons, that I gave for not taking the
Covenant; And the Reasons I gave against the Armies signing the Address to make
O. C. Protector; because, as I said before, they were such things which some
spirits did very much reproach me for: But I do not upon second thoughts think
it fit to insert here; lest by it, I throw dirt in the face of some, who did
out of uprightness of heart in the point of the Covenant follow God, in hopes
of the Accomplishment of the Latter-Day-Reformation. And though the Covenant
was a step too low t^ follow God, in the breaking forth of that great Light and
Power, by which God will usher-i^ the Accomplishment of those Prophecies and
Promises that relate to Latter-Day-Work; ye^ surely there were many who in
uprightness o^ heart did aim at God and his Interest, in that Work, seeing no
better, or larger, at that time It Is good to love all God's Lambs, and not t^
throw dirt at any of them; though we should judge them lame Lambs, yet (if
Lambs) the^^ are to be beloved.

Now as to the other, that is to say, my Reasons against the Signing of the
Address, they were publicly known, and so were the dealing^ of some with me
for that matter; But lest I should be thought to cast dirt in the face of such
tha^ have dealt so with me, I shall forbear; I shall rather cross my own heart,
and follow my Lord in blessing, when cursed, and in being silent under
censures. It Is an evil day, but yet that which the Scriptures of Truth have
told us of, that such things must be, not only betwixt Saints and Sinners, but
between professed Brethren; And it is good for all that love and long for the
coming o^ our Lord, not only to pray for it, but be willin^ to face, and
embrace such sorrows, censures, and sufferings that attend Latter-day-Work,
seeing its that which must be, and it is that (though i^ crosses) which
ushereth-in the prayed-for and ^onged-for Crown. To which Grace and Crown of
Glory, I leave my self, and all who in faithfulness wait for the coming of our
Lord.

Amen, Amen. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
In the close of this that I have writ, it will be convenient to give some
account of my Imprisonment, now in the Tower; and the rather, in that one cause
of somes censuring me, as was and ^s pretended, relates to my former Liberty,
and my present Imprisonment; For before I was imprisoned, that was (as some
said) the ground of their Jealousy, In that so many were imprisoned, and yet I,
that was so notoriously known, should be at liberty; Though it was well known I
was a Prisoner in the Marshal-Generals house, I got out only upon 1000 l. bond
to appear when sent for. What charges I was at, and what hardships I underwent,
I shall forbear to assert: but my long Liberty was by some judged a ground of
their Jealousy of me.

And now when I was taken out of my bed the twentieth day of August 1663, and
carried before the Secretary, Sir Henry Bennet, who would ^dmit me to speak but
little for my self, but sent me to this place; [And when I told him I must
starve if he sent me thither, having no means to keep me; he did assure me that
the King did allow Maintenance for all and each Prisoner; though to this day,
which is twenty five weeks, I have not had one bit of bread or drop of drink
allowed me] And had it not been for the goodness of God, and some few Friends,
I must have starved. Now after I had been here about seven weeks, I was sent
for by the King, upon the earnest request of a Kinsman of mine; and when the
King heard my name, he remembered that he was told, his Father had left
something of his Will with me: so sent for me as I said, and a Guard of
Musketeers carried me to Whitehall, and after a long time of staying, I was
carried before the King, who had my Articles (as I judge) in writing; after a
little mentioning of them, he asked me, If I had not some Message from his
Father? I answered, I had. So he caused all there to withdraw; and then I
begged pardon of his Majesty that I might either not speak any thing, or to
have liberty to speak all; for, said I, If I speak all, it may offend some; and
if I speak not all, I shall offend my own Conscience. So the King very freely
told me, I had liberty to speak all. I then did, and I bless God my memory did
not fail me, but I spoke all and each particular as I received it; His Majesty
was so far from taking it ill, that he did kindly embrace it, and told me Had
not Parliaments bound up his hands, he had answered his Father's Will in these
things before now and said, he hoped to do it.

Now what the particulars were, I had not before, nor now, liberty to declare
to others, But I hope it will be by his Majesty; for there is not any man
living, let him be of what persuasion he will, but would have good thoughts of
the old King for it; and good thoughts of his Majesty for accepting of it;
unless they be such that will believe nothing: for if it were the last word I
should speak, [It was that which did so much tend to the good of the Nation in
general, and to all that fear God in particular, that if the best and wisest
men in the Nation should have liberty to have drawn up their desires in general
heads for good to this Land, they could not have desired better: Although I am
for this, as I have for all things else, been censured and condemned, some
affirming that I had said something to the King, that was against the Interest
of all Gods People; A thing which I had rather die than do. It Is in this, as in
all the rest; for before I was in Prison, that was a ground, that I was
carrying on designs for his Majesty, And now I am brought to Prison, the same
parties said, I put my self in Prison as a Cover; And with this they have
filled the ears both of City and Country: And though I had not a bit of bread,
nor drop of drink allowed me, yet they affirmed I had such an Allow^nce, that
it was ill for any to bring any thing to me: and if any did come to me, they
were sadly ^udged and condemned for it; Should I but in^ert the dealings of
this sort of people, no Re^ords make mention of the like dealing. Had I ^een,
or were I what these sort of people say I am, knowing what I knew, sure I
should do something to answer their Evil with Evil: but blessed be God, for
ever blessed be God, I have learned better; And I will leave my Cause for God
to judge, and my Innocence to him, to bring out as Gold, as Job did, Job 23.10.
and shall rather study to follow my dear Lord, and rest quiet in his Will: If
he will by this Cross bring me to the Crown, I beg no more. Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly. Amen, Amen.

I Having a little longer time, cannot but add a word to answer some Friends
who seem troubled at the report of my being to be sent beyond Sea, and the
rather, in seeing my willingness: Now I cannot but say, that if they should
send me away to any close Imprisonment, I had (if God see it good) rather they
would put me to death here, being not in a capacity to help my self: But should
God move their hearts to send me to any foreign place where I might do any
thing to get bread, and live, enjoying God's presence, though in a Wilderness,
I should much more rejoice to embrace it, than to live here: My Grounds are,

First, I see an impossibility to reconcile or satisfy these Spirits that God
has suffered to be incensed against me, and raised these Reports of me: for
although I was and am as innocent as the child unborn from wronging or
betraying any man; and I have by my self and friends, labored to satisfy all
I can come near, yet all comes to nothing, but they that first begun it do
still foment it: The sense, that not only I, but God's Name suffers by it, with
the sense of their unheard-of-Evil, makes me willing to be where I may rather
mourn away my days in private, where I may not see and hear those Reproaches,
than to bear the heart-breakings, under the daily hearing of it.

2dly. It was formerly, but much more now, the desire of my heart, to do some
service for God, and bring honor to his Truth and Name, by life or death: but
these sort of people have, and do so daily revile me, and present all I do to
be wicked, that whatever I say, or do, or suffer, it is turned to my Reproach,
and the dishonor of Truth; the sense of which makes me willing to rest in
silence, and rather to live and die in secret, than to be public; for so long
as I am, I see I am not only the object of their reproach, but an occasion of
their sin.

3dly. I am sensible, as the case stands, that if I were at liberty, let me
walk never so carefully, yet it would not be long before I should be imprisoned
again; for there is such an evil spirit in some, that to save themselves, they
value it not to betray the Innocent; And I have now fresh reason to say so, for
it is plainly seen and found out, that some who were, and still are, the
instruments to incense Friends against me, as being (as they affirm) one that is
not fit to be believed or trusted, nay, to live, for carrying-on designs for
the present Authority: These (I say) have, and that at this very time, as can
be proved, gone and informed them in Authority, that I am such an Enemy to
them, that I am not fit for their favor, nor to be set at liberty. All which
considered, if I were at liberty, I am not like long to abide so.

4thly. Although I can say, That I am willing and desirous to rest silently
satisfied in the will of God; yet I judge it no sin, but rather a duty, to be,
as much as a man can, out of the noise of such Cries and Reproaches, which does
not only make my life a dying life, But it does by the daily suggestions of
Satan, stir up trouble and disquietment in the mind, which sin adds so much to
the sorrow, that often my soul would sink, did not God support me.

5thly. Wheresoever I did, or do live, it has been, and is my desire to be
doing any service or office of love for any; and to be bound up from that, is
death to my very natural disposition: But as the case stands with me under this
sort of suffering by professing friends, whatever I do is converted to evil
improvements; as, witness, since I came into this place, though I had no
allowance, yet by the solicitation of a Kinsman, ^n Order was procured for my
walking sometimes i^ the Tower with my Keeper, I being sickly: Pr^sently these
People gave it forth, that I had Liberty to do what, and go where I would, and
so affirmed it as an evidence, that my being here was but a cover; and yet
having this liberty, I could (...) but improve it to do any service of love for
(...) of the Prisoners that were in want, or sick; and that not to my pain, but
loss, as is well knower (and although not we^ab^^ to bear it, yet did tak^
great delight in it;) when they that did, and d^ carry on this Reproach against
me, saw it, they daily sent in Messages and Messengers to those Prisoners, To
take care of me, and to have nothing to do with me, as they told me themselves:
And so, though I see some in want of that Help which I can afford, and do
delight in the doing of it, the Lord knows, yet I must forbear doing of it, or
else in doing, I must have my ears filled with such sad sinful Reproaches, the
sense of which ^ends not only to break my heart, but bind up my bands from
doing that, which is life for me to do. (...). I am not only made sensible of
these (...) dangers, but senbsile of this present day, that (...) the time the
Scriptures of Truth have to (...) at, Brethren shall betray Brethren, a^ (...)
^^port, and we will report, Je^^ (...) (...) Division now, is not so much in
P^^^^ (...) ^ut it is as much and more in Spirit and (...) ^^^ple, that to
unite, must be alone the Work (...). Almighty God, and that in an admirable
(...). But before this uniting, there must and (...) be a great of dividing and
breaking; And be^^^^ the promised Gathering, there will be a greater
Scattering, in answer to what the Promises and Prophecies in the Scripture hold
forth, but I shall not enter into that, lest I become a new object of somes
Reproach; but the sense of what I see makes me sensible, that it is beyound the
art and power of man to turn this stream, and should it be by them turned out
of one channel into another, the Current will be the same, till the promised
Power brings the matter into a new Model: Till which, I heartily wish, That all
the Sons of Sion would sit still, and lie at rest in the Will of God. And for
my own part I am made so incapable by these sad Reproaches, to help forward the
Work of Union, that I am made a Cover for the dividing Spirit, and to see the
present Distractions, and the unavoidable Ruin, my soul is not able to bear
it; I had rather, if my Father see it good, to be enriched with a Jeremiah's
frame of spirit, to weep alone, and to be as a Pelican in the Wilderness,
mourning away my days; but in this, as in all things, I am at the Lords
dispose: And let him order them to dispose of me as they please. So thy
pleasure be done, O Lord, into whose hands I commit my Life, and recommend all
my Relations, and those endeared Friends that faithfully fear thee. Amen, Amen,

P. H.

A Letter from a Friend.
Dear Friend,
I Have heard of your Sufferings and Censures, and have by the hand of some
Faithful Friends seen something of your Vindication, the truth of which I
believed before I saw it: Only in faithfulness I cannot but tell you, that
besides what is publicly reported, there is something else that is some
trouble to some that dearly love you; and that is, your appearance to withdraw
your Affections from some of your Old Friends, and your too much love to
others; which I pray you, let me for my satisfaction, before. I go into the
Country, have an answer to; and not only for my own satisfaction, but also to
enable me to satisfy any where I come. I shall, and do daily pray for, and
sympathize with you, as a man of Sorrows, for so you are: But hoping you will
not be troubled at my request;

I remain, Sir, yours in the Faith, and Patience of Jesus, E. D.
March the 10. 1663.
The Answer.
My Choice Friend,
YOurs I received, and do rejoice to see so much of Christian ^e^derness
toward me, and to the Name of Christ; it is more than thousands have done that
readily believe, and readily report, but never came to inform, or to reform:
And as to what you say, I have heard the same; but if you will as heartily
hear, and consider, as you have heartily writ, I think you will be satisfied.
Now that I have forsaken my Old Friends, it is in a measure true, and I must
needs forsake them that will not come near me, nor suffer me to come near them,
and have been, and are the chief Instruments in wounding my name, and Christ's
Name through me; and will neither come near me, nor suffer others to come, but
will cast dirt in their faces, and must go with it abroad if they show me any
countenance, or do me any service: this is publicly known, and by some felt.
Now consider, and put your self in my condition; to forsake where, and with
whom I am forsaken, is no just crime, the Righteous God will so judge, and my
tears for that will witness my Innocence before him, to (...) leave my Cause.
And as for my too much love or too great to some, which is so sadly censure,
(...) answer, and that in faithfulness before the Lo^^ There were so few that
did, or still do either faithfully love me, and in my state and straits
faithfully tender or sympathize with me, that where I did or do find it, I am
even overcome with it, and it is with me toward them, as it was with David's
love to Jonathan; for sure it was Jonathans sympathizing love which begat that
endearedness between them, and made them as one soul; so it was, and is with
me: It Is true, at first in my sad and unheard of Sufferings and Censures, I
looked about me, and saw as David did, Psalm. 142.4. and then I was too ready to
embrace love, and show love to some whose Principles I could not own when I
came to see them, but til then, I fear I showed too much love because they
appeared to pity me in my sad trials; but God knows, I was soon made sensible
of that, and if I sinned it was there, and it has cost me many tears: For I
desire to own none but such who live truly in the Life of that Love which lives
in Jesus. But as for that little Remnant whose soul did and still does truly
sympathize with me, and with Tears and Prayers wait at God's Throne for me; and
for their love to me are Hated, and Reproached for my sake, I have not, nor do
not repent of my loving them; and had I ten times more than I have, it should
freely go to reward them for their service and sufferings for me (after my
Relations were provided for) and all is too little, my Life cannot answer their
love: And I know God will not reprove it; for, as for their Innocence God
knows, and I know, in their love to my soul and body. This is a true account of
my condition and Affections in this matter. So desiring God may keep me and
you, and all that fear Him, faithful, owning God's Judging, more than man's
Censuring, walking so, that we my render up our Account with joy, I Remain,

Sir, Yours in the Truth, Tribulation and Travel of Christ Jesus. P. H.

FINIS.

