A SCRIPTVRE-Catechisme, Toward the confutation OF Sundry ERROVRS; Some of
them of the present times,

By THOMAS HODGES B. D. Rector of Soulderne in Oxfordshire.

Mat. 22.29. Ye do err, not kowing the Scriptures.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL Printer to the University For T. ROBINSON. 1658.

To my very much Honored Friend JOHN NORTON of Cotherstock in the County of
Northampton Esquire
Sr,
A double account may possibly be expected from me, namely, of the following
Treatise and of the present Application. A threefold exception may perhaps be
made to that, that it is a Catechism, that it is an Elenchtical Catechism or a
Catechetical confutation of Errors, and that it is such a Scripture Catechism,
or the Answers to the Questions mostly the very letter of the Scripture. If any
blame me, saying it is below a Preacher to publish a Catechism now in these
days wherein even some of the people are got up above the highest Ordinances.
My Answer is, that as I have not been ashamed to practice the despised duty of
Catechizing at home in my own Congregation, so I shall not blush to countenance
and avouch it to the world. I know and consider that our Lord and Master, the
great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, gave in charge to the Apostle Peter to
feed his Lambs as well as his sheep, and that it is the part of a faithful
Steward or dispencer in God's family not as the Papists say to dispense with,
but to dispense or administer the Ordinances of God, and to provide for every
one of the family his portion in due season, to see that the Babes have Milk as
well as Strong men Meat. I do not here set before Christ's little ones whole
sheep or whole joints, as is done in large Tracts or Volumes of such subjects,
but these dishes cut up and carved out, and it may be minced too, that very
children or Babes in knowledge may feed themselves.

Besides, I dare say that there is even in these times but need of Catechizing:
for want of laying this Foundation how many foolish Builders have fondly built
Castles in the air to no purpose: for want of this Ballast how many have been
tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine: And now if we would Regulate
men's foolish high-towring fancies, one way sure, is to lay, not to raze
Foundations. If we would make an everlasting Separation 'twixt these fond
lovers and their newfangled Errors, one way is, to Reconcile and bring them
home again to, and in love with their old first and best Principles.

For the second exception, that it is a Catecheticall confutation of Errors; I
say, such an Enemy as Error is, may lawfully be driven out any way: and that
it is but reasonable to use the same method to confute error, that others have
done to confirm it. I shall herein imitate the skillfull Physician, who
endeavors to expel the poison out of the body the same way by which it was
first taken in.

And now if any be dissatisfied that it is a Scripture-Catechisme; I say, the
Enemy has in a sort compelled us: have they Scripture in their Catechismes
seemingly for them, so have we really for us: have they appealed unto
Scripture, unto Scripture shall they go. They say the Scriptures are theirs,
and we say nay; but the Scriptures are ours: what then? is the Scripture
neither ours, nor theirs, but is it divided partly for us and partly for them?
or have we ten parts in it, and they two? I answer, No in no wise, there is no
such matter, It is all ours, it is our own and not Strangers, not our enemies
with us. I confess such has been the Injustice and violence of erroneous
Persons, as to take away sundry Scriptures by force to put them upon the rack
and torture them, and lay to their charge things they know not, to make them
confess against themselves, and the truth, and us. But if this witness may be
permitted to speak for it self, to speak freely and fully, to speak out, to
speak all it will say, it will testify only to the truth, and when the
Scripture has so spoken, Error must either stop it is ears or stop it is
mouth. For the Scriptures may then say as Paul, we can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth: or that may be the language of the written word which
was of the Essential Word of God, I came to bear witness of the Truth.

Now, if it was an honorable achievement in Abraham to rescue his Nephew Lot,
and in David to rescue the men of Ziklag out of the hands of them who had
carried them captive; I hope such an Attempt as this to rescue so many
Scriptures out of the hands of them who have carried them captive and spoiled
them, and set them some of them in the front of the battle against the truth
and us, shall have the countenance, good will, and good wishes of them that
love the truth.

For my part whether the world smile or frown, commend or condemn, I resolve
to go out against, set upon, and grapple with this great Goliath of Error, I
desire to go out against him in the name of the Lord of Hosts, endeavoring to
sling these smooth stones (chosen out of this crystal brook the holy
Scriptures) so, as to smite this Philistine in the forehead and cause him to
fall.

And Sr, if I may be a champion for truth, and by the sword of the Spirit
defend the crown upon the head of it against that Arch Rebel and Traitor,
Error, which would depose it from it is throne and Sovereignty, I shall (I hope)
therein rejoice and triumph although the world should laugh at and trample upon
the undertaking.

I do not profess my self the first or only discoverer of these Monsters, D.
Owen. D. Bailye.
nor that dared to fight with these beasts I have two eminent Captains and
Champions who have gone before and entered the lists, one in a like, and the
other in the same quarrel, to both which I acknowledge my self indebted, and
although I do not pay the one in the same coin (his Treatise being latin)
yet I hope in plain English (in part at least) to satisfy my engagement to
them both: For (as one well says) the Scriptures are a Mine where there will
be ever found some oar so long as there is any to dig: or like the Widdow's
oil which never ceased running so long as there was ever an empty vessel to
receive it.

I dare not say I have found out any new truths, yet perhaps have made some
further hue and cry after new Errors. And if it is a commendable thing to
discover a new Island or Continent, let me not be censured if I point out other
Rocks, shelves, or Sands, togeither with a passage to avoid them; I mean new
found Errors, so as to prevent my own and others making shipwreck of Faith and
a good Conscience by them.

Now if in any place I have given, in answer to an objection from Scripture,
another text of Scripture only, I would not be thought to endeavor to set the
Scriptures together by the ears, but to compare them, to bring them together
face to face, and by a friendly enterview and conference to reconcile them,
though when they are asunder they seem to be at odds and difference, yet when
they are brought together and we hear both speak they may easily be
reconciled: They seem obscure perhaps single, but set together they give light
to each other. So true is that Rule, Scripture is the best Interpreter of
Scripture.

And Farther, as the seed of the Serpent the Generation of Vipers, Heretics
and seducers have learned of the Devil that old Serpent to urge Scripture
against Scripture, that is, the letter of Scripture against the true sense,
scope and meaning of it. So may the children of Abraham learn of Christ the
seed of the Woman to answer Scripture with Scripture, and therefore when they
plead and object as the Devil did, It is written; we may answer or reply as our
Savior did. It is written again. Math. 4 6, 7.

Sr, Amongst other Errors that I contest withal both ancient and modern, at
home and abroad, there is one, I hope, you will not censure me for engaging
against, because in my own defense, and that is the Error of those who would
extirpate Ministry root and branch, that say of such men and their maintenance,
wherefore is this loss; when they cry out upon us as Priests of Baal, it is
high time for us to prove our selves the Ministers of Christ, and when they say
of us or to us as Pharaoh to the Israelites, ye are idle, ye are idle; it is but
our duty to busy our selves with both hands, to build with the one and strive
with the other to hold a sword in one hand, and a trowel in the other. Ne.
4.17, 18. Can builders, Soldiers, husbandmen, laborers in harvest, workers
and Fellow workers together with God be justly taxed and censured for idle
Persons or men of no calling? And yet such are the Ministers of the Gospel: a
lazy Monk may indeed have good cause to abandon his profession, because if his
Cowle do not, his calling will not, or is not like to make him sweat; Yet that
Preacher who puts his hand to God's plough and follows it hard therewith to
break up the fallow ground of his own and others hard hearts, will make
furrows in his own face.

I know the pretense and practice is to undermine the maintenance, but the plot
is to blow up the Ministry. The glorious lamps of our Tabernacles are not like
to burn long if the golden oil be presently taken away. I know we may say that
the hand of Joab is in all this, and it is this wicked Haman which has done it,
the Devil or the Pope is the Father of this Monster: They know that the
Ministers are the Chariots and horsemen of Israel, and that if these be
discomfited, the Infantry are in danger to be scattered.

Oh that men were so wise as to consider the designs of these enemies. The
Popish Emissaries would exclude us, that you might affect them; would diet or
starve us, that they might fill, if not surfeit themselves. The Devil would
allow the false Prophet Balaam to ride with his two men, and yet would force
the true Prophets to go afoot. Antichrist would have his own Priests many of
them Princes, but the Ministers of Christ all of them the meanest and lowest of
the people.

But what godly heart should without sorrow see Christ's witnesses prophesy in
sackcloth, when the Priests of Antichrist russell and rant it in satin. In
Italy besides the temporal estate of the Popes of Rome the Clergy are
conceived to have in some places a third part of the whole; but in most a
moyetie. In Spain the certain rents of the Archbishopric of Toledo are said
to be no less than 300000 crowns per annum, which is far more than all the
Bishops, Deanes and Prebendaries do possess in England. Treleinie of tithes
page 12.13. In France the Ecclesiastics alone possess one third part of the
total Revenue of the Kingdom. v. State of France. page 69. The Nobles and
Commons Assembled in Parliament signified to King Henry the fourth, that the
temporal possessions of Abbots, Priors etc. would suffice to find and sustain
150 Earls, 1500 Knights 6200 Esquires, 100 Hospitals more than there were.
Full. Chapter History lib. 6. page 302.


For my own part, I would much rather choose (if my heart deceive me not) to
live and dye a poor Minister, than a rich man or Grandee, whose aim and
endeavor should be to make the Ministry poor. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked.

If they that Ministered under Moses Law were feasted Such and so many
Allowances had the Priests and Levites, that setting by the tithes of their
corn and cattle and of all manner of increase, their maintenance had far
exceeded that of the English Clergy, and adding unto these the Tithes of all
Creatures tithable, it does more than double it. Treleinie* of tithes. page 4.
5. If a Husbandman amongst the Jews had 6000 bushels growing in a year when
all sorts of tithes and dues were paid there remained to him but 4779. vid.
Weems Christian Synag. page 154. ex Scalig. opusc.
he would not have the Preachers of his Sons Gospel famished.

If David took it so ill that his Ambassadors were evil entreated by Hanun, 2 Samuel 10.4. when their garments were cut off by the halves, God will not take it
well to have his Ministers his Ambassadors of peace cut short of their
maintenance.

And now Sr, if I should for want of other matter be indicted and arraigned for
want of an exact Artificial method, my hope is, that either every ordinary
Jurie will not be able to find me guilty, or if I be found, that an Ingenious
Judge perhaps may procure my pardon when he considers that it is in part
confessed already, and again that such an exact and curious chain of method
might possibly more credit the Author then profit the ordinary Reader, or be a
greater ornament than advantage to the book, and yet painful to the Compiler.
And wise men may consider that pearls are pearls although they be not
curiously strung or made up into bracelets and chains, and that gold in the
oar or coin is not to be thrown away, because it is not formed into a chain
of so many curious and equal linkes. And Sr, As for this present Address unto
you, those who know and consider what a friend you have been to Religion, what
a Father to your Country, what a Patron to Ministers, what a Benefactor to
Scholars, and to my self in particular, may rather wonder that I did it no
sooner than that I have done it now. And my hope is, that you will not think
your self slighted or disparaged to have your name inscribed or prefixed to a
book of this nature. I am persuaded Sr, you prefer old truths before new
Errors, and old foundations before new fancies, and that you delight rather to
walk on a rock, than to dance upon ropes, and therefore that these old and
great truths of this new and small piece will not be to your palate as dead
drink, nor in your ears as stale news, nor to your eyes as an old Diurnall or
Almanac out of date.

And Sr, since I had my Birth and Baptism in Cotherstock, let me not be
condemned for making this confession of Faith, or profession of my Principles
to you there.

It remains only that I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and power out my soul for you, your Religious Consort, and dear Son, at the
throne of Grace, that God would bless you with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ, and recompense into your bosom seven fold all the
kindness that you have showed to his Ministers, and particularly to

Sr, Your very humble Servant in the Lord T. H.

To the Reader.
READER,
IF thou art Learned and a Critic, thou may perhaps accuse or censure this
Catechism, as in some things defective, in some redundant, or superfluous, in
some without order: and I shall not here go about to answer the charge, or
traverse the indictment. I rather choose to entreat thee, if thou art as well
as knowing so also Ingenuous, Courteous, charitable, either to correct or
pardon all the faults of this piece; So far at least as to accept and favor
the Essay, rather than to carp at the Errors, whether they have proceeded from
the Author, the Transcriber, or the Printer.

If thou art a Catechumen, and one desirous to learn, two things I entreat of
thee: the one is, to read it (if it may be with thy convenience,) wholly; so
possibly thou may the better understand the several parts of it. The other
is, not to be offended because sometimes thou find in thy way Yes or No in
the Porch or Entry of the Answer, and sometimes not; Where this Porter stands
at the door, I would not you should take his bare word for answer, and so pass
along, and go your way; but that he may open you the door to go in, and view
the places themselves, to see whether it be indeed so or no, as is pretended;
and that you may believe, not because I told you, but because you have heard
the Scriptures themselves. Where there is no such at the door of the Answer to
let you in. I desire you now once for all, not to stay there, but without
farther Ceremony to walk in, and to go round about the places, to tell the
towers thereof, and to mark well her bulwarks, I mean the strength of those
texts of Scripture set there for the defense of the Truth.

Whosoever thou art, who shall please to peruse this Catechism, I say to thee
before hand, I will not, I dare not avouch it (so far as it is mine) to be free
from all error. I am but a man, and if thou will forgive me, I will promise
when opportunity serves to correct, or retract such mistakes. But this I dare
say, I do not err wilfully and maliciously, out of mere opposition to any
party or person; I am a Christian, and if I should so err my self (whilst I
confute the errors of others) I assure thee (if I know my own heart) without
repentance and amendment, I should not forgive my self. And now to prevent
mistakes and misconstructions concerning my self and others, be pleased to
take notice, that I will not undertake to justify my self to have been in this
Catechism an exact or complete Herald, and to have marshaled the several
errors under their proper Commanders and colors, and to have ranked them all
in their right place and due order. And if the Quakers renounce any of the
following errors, ranged under the Head or Chapter which bears their name,
let them know I desire not to do violence to erroneous persons; or to accuse
them falsely, and therefore premise this, that the Title of the Chapter may not
be produced for a sufficient evidence to charge them with them, and I here
allow them liberty (provided they do it truly) to disowne them, or to refuse
to father them with a non obstante to any thing therein contained.

Reader, if thou reapest benefit from this Catechism, if it shall please God
by this means to show thee his ways, and teach thee his paths, to lead thee
in his truth, and teach thee in the way, wherein thou should go, bless God
who has showed us light, and pray with me for those who yet wander in dark and
bypathes of error, forsaking God's Ordinances and our solemn Assemblies. O
send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead them, let them bring them unto
thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles: and for me, that I may do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth.

Thy servant in and for the Lord T. H.

Books lately Printed for THO: ROBINSON.
OF Communion with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each Person distinctly,
by JO. OWN D. D. in 4o. The True nature of Schism, with a vindication of the
Congregationall Churches in England from the imputation thereof, in Ans: to Mr
Cawdry by JO. OWN. D. D. in 8o. Of the Mortification of sin in Believers, the
second edition by JO. OWN D. D. 8o. A Treatise of Fruit Trees, showing the
manner of Grafting, pruning, and ordering of them in all respects according to
the new and easy rules of Experience, the 2d edition enlarged by RALPH AUSTEN.
in 4o. The Spiritual use of an Orchard or Garden in diverse similitudes between
natural and spiritual Fruit Trees according to Scripture, and Experience by
R. Austen in 4o. Observations one some part of Sr F. Bacon's Natural History
as it concerns, Fruit Trees, Fruits, and Flowers, by R. Austen in 4o. The
Young Divine's Apology for his Continuance in the University with his serious
meditation on the sacred calling of the Ministry in 8o. Historical Memoires on
the Reigns of Q: Elizabeth and King James in 12o.
A Preface to those of the Church of Rome.
IT is the saying of a very learned and ingenious Person, D. Cudw.
Truth and Love are two the most powerful things in the world; and that the
golden beams of Truth, and the silken cords of Love twisted together, will
draw men on with a sweet violence, whether they will or no. I desire for my
part I may both in word and deed, conference and conversation, in preaching,
printing and practicing, experiment the truth of this Testimony; and in all to
be so happy my self, as to make others happy also: in all undertakings to
follow the practice and pattern of the blessed Apostle Paul, viz. (...), to
truth it in love, so to inlighten men, who sit in the region of darkness, as not
to inflame them; so to convince the^ of error, that they may not say I am
become their enemy; when I tell them the truth, that they may see that I aim
at and endeavor their conversion, and not their confusion. I know the Apostles
themselves had a zeal, but not according to knowledge, when they were so
earnest to have called for fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans: the Sons
of Thunder would have been Sons of Lightning too, but they had not so learned
of Christ: ye know not, says he of what spirit ye are of. And afterward, when
the Spirit of Christ came down upon the Apostles in the days of Pentecost,
though with a rushing mighty wind, and sat upon each of them in the likeness
of fiery cloven tongues, yet neither did that wind smite the corners of any
house, that it fell; nor those fiery tongues singe a hair of their own or
others heads. Instead of calling for fire from heaven to consume you, I pray,
and endeavor that I may show you a light from heaven shining round about you,
above the light of the Sun at noonday: I mean clear and evident Scriptures to
inlighten, convince and convert you.

If I desire to be sometimes a Boanerges indeed, yet it is in order to be a
Barnabas: If I heap coals of fire on your heads, I seek to melt you, not to
burn you: when I thunder against error, I desire my speeches and actions may
be like that lightning, which breaks or melts the sword, and does not hurt the
scabbard; I desire to melt your souls, but not do the least hurt to your
bodies, the sheath of your souls.

That there is a God, and this God is to be worshipped, is, I hope, written in
your hearts, as with a pen of iron, or point of a Diamond, that is, with a
lasting or indelible, and as with a Sunbeam, that is, with a legible character.

And if you say, wherewithal shall I come before God, and bow my self unto the
most high? shall I make an Image or likeness of him, or shall I come to him by
the Mediation of Saints and Angels? I answer, He has showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, and what thou
should believe and do. Thou need not say, who shall ascend up into
heaven, to bring Christ down from above? But the word is nigh thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart: and this is the word which in this Treatise is made
known unto you.

Since men therefore err, because they know not the Scriptures, the
manifestation of the Scriptures thus to every man's conscience may possibly
prove a good way and means to reclaim them from error. God has magnified
his word above all his name, and therefore it is but reason that men should
advance it above all humane Testimony; and if you will plead the Testimony of
men, surely the Testimony of God is greater.

Yea if you would be but Reasonable, if you would show your selves men, and act
as Religious men, and good Scholars, men of the purest and highest Reason, I
might boldly plead with you thus, and show you what I have to say on God's
behalf: I might desire you to hear God speak in the Scriptures, and say,
whether it be fit to believe and obey God or man, Judge ye.

If you plead Scripture, pretending that your Church of Rome was once true; I
may justly allege Scriptures to show from whence you are fallen, and to prove
that you have greatly erred.

Is the Scripture of force to prove that she was once a true Church, and a
chaste Spouse of Christ; and is it not to be pleaded in evidence that now she is
become a Mother of Fornications, and has committed Adultery with stocks and
stones?

For our parts, we are willing to stand and fall by Scripture, to be weighed in
the same balance of the Sanctuary with you, to have our Gold tried by the same
touchstone of the word, and to be measured by the same bushel or Epha, by which
we measure you or others.

If you appeal from a higher to a lower court, from God to Man, from
Scriptures to Fathers; besides that it is against the mind of God, against right
reason, and the Methods of wise men; so it is against the Desire and Doctrines
of the Fathers. I dare say, if they should arise again from the dead, they
would rather say, we be Judges of no such matters, or who made us a judge over
the Scriptures? yea being dead, they yet speak in their writings against such
positions and practices; they make the Scriptures their Judges, and make not
themselves judges of the Scripture: yea if the Fathers might be heard out,
testifying fully to the perfection and sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures, that
one sentence of theirs will prove a condemnation of Popery, of the body and
soul of it, the Fathers themselves being Judges.

Possibly it may be said by some of you, that the Protestant Religion is but of
yesterday, and knows nothing of the Fathers, nor the Fathers of it; and that
such a novel faith, as it may be pretended to be, dares not appear at the
Tribunal of the Fathers. The truth is, if there were no Scripture, the
Protestants durst adventure the Ordeal, or trial by Fathers and Councels: and
saving always the Honor of the Holy Scriptures, and our just Liberty of
appeal unto them, the Protestants golden Faith does not fear the silver
hairs of the Ancient Fathers. The truth is, we would not be cheated or gulled
with moldy bread, and old shoes, and a mere pretense of Religion, that came
to us from far, from many ages ago: when as indeed, and in truth, ask the
Primitive Fathers, and they will tell you another Story, that we are the
children of the Primitive and most ancient Church. If you will hear the
Protestants judgment, plea, and evidence in this matter, let me produce three
or four to speak for the rest.

Mr Perkins reckoning up diverse points of Popery, as that the Pope or Bishop of
Rome is the Vicar of Christ, and the head of the Catholic Church, that there
is a fire of Purgatory after this life, that Images of God and Saints are to be
placed in Churches and worshipped, that prayers are to be made to Saints
departed, and their intercession to be required, that there is a propitiatory
sacrifice daily offered in the mass for the sins of the quick and the dead,
observes, that the Apostles creed has not any of these points, nor the
expositions made thereof by the Ancient Fathers; nor any other creed or
confession of faith, made by any Council or Church for the space of many
hundred years. Mr Perkin's Advertisement to all favorers of the Romish
Religion.

Yea the same Author undertakes to prove, that for 1200 years no Father or
Council held all the points of Doctrine of the Trent Faith. Demon: of the
Problem.

Sometimes, says Dr Fern, we meet with phrases in the Fathers favoring some
Romish Doctrine; but then we show by Argument and Reason that those do not
speak indeed the Romish sense: and again, the Romanists have the shadow, the
shell, the name, the phrase many times, but we carry the substance, show, the
thing, the sense, the judgment, the Deeds of Antiquity. Against some high
expressions magnifying the Church of Rome we bring deeds, and those upon
contestation, as the standing out of Polycrates, and all the Asian Bishops
against the sentence of Pope Victor: Also in the contestation betwixt Cyprian
and Pope Stephen: Also in the contestation between the Roman See and the
African Bishops (amongst whom Austin was one) in the business of Appeals, see
Dr Fern, p. 229. 230.

The infallibility of the Pope, or the Roman Church, was never acknowledged by
the Ancient Churches, or Fathers, for 600 years after Christ, therefore it is
not now to be received. Baxter against Pop. p. 277. There are as it were three
principal parts in Religion; namely, points of Belief, of Ceremony and of
Discipline: we shall run them over lightly all three: that so we may let the
world see that in every one of these three parts they have both abolished and
established many things expressly against the Authority of the Ancients. Mons.
Daille of the Fathers. lib. 2. page 143: when he has instanced in particulars,
he adds page 177. Certainly should we but speak the truth, it is the plainest
mocking of the world that can be, to cry out as these men do continually, The
Fathers, the Fathers, and to write so many whole volumes, as they have done
upon this subject, after they have so dealt with them as you have seen, And
page 141. nd 142. Do but read their Commentaries, their Disputations, and
their other discourses, and you will find them almost in every page, either
rejecting or correcting the Fathers. And further he adds as follows.

But I must not pass by the Testimony of Cornelius Mussus Bishop of Bitonto,
viz. for my own part (that I may speak my mind freely) in things that belong to
the testimony of Faith, I had rather believe one single Pope, than a thousand
Augustines, Hieromes, or Gregory's.

If you will appeal from the holy Scriptures, and from the Authority of the
Catholic Church to the Roman, or Church of one denomination, from the
Primitive to the Present, or from the ancient to the modern, and dare not, or
will not be judged by any body but by your selves, besides that you are guilty
of high presumption thus to advance your selves into the chair above all, so
is it a strong presumption of guilt in you, that you dare not abide the trial
of the most impartial and unbyassed Judges; and hereby you declare, that the
Authority of the Fathers is not supreme in your account, and why then should
you expect it should be authoritative with us; and if you appeal from the
Fathers here to the present Church, why may we not rather to the Scriptures? I
shall add also, that when you appeal to Churches, or Fathers, or Councels,
from Scripture, you do show your selves more subtle than the Pharisees, who to
all Christ's allegations of Scripture never put in such an answer, that there
is but one true Church; we are the true Church, we are the Interpreters of
Scripture. Yea I shall go a step farther with you, and tell you, that if you
appeal from Scripture testimony to your present Church, or to some visible and
infallible judge of all controversies, you do therein out-goe that old
Sophister the Devil, who when he disputed with our Savior, and Scripture was
urged against him, had not the Jewish Churches Authority, the Interpretations
of Scribes and Pharisees, no, never a such reserve, or castle to fly unto.

There are two great Errors, mother-errors of you the children of the Church of
Rome, concerning the holy Scriptures: the one is, that you will not go to it
as to your last judge on earth: and the other, that you endeavor to bring this
to you, to speak for you what it never thought.

And here in two things you greatly err.

The promises in Scripture made to the Church in general, you apply to a
particular Church, or to a part of the Catholic Church, namely, to the
Roman: Not sufficiently considering what became of Jerusalem, where our Lord
preached, and where the Apostle Peter preached, and founded a Christian Church
(before ever, if ever, he saw Rome) notwithstanding all the promises made
either to the Church in general, to the Jewish Church, or to the Apostle
Peter, or to the Church founded by him in particular.

The promises made to Peter (and, that it is said, before he was Pope) you
apply, in part at least, to the Bishops of Rome; yea will have them reach the
Apostle Peter's Successors, and stand them in steed, and in some things too
wherein they did not secure Peter himself (to keep him from falling) namely,
for their making always an outward confession of the Faith: for ye know Peter
did in word deny his master.

The truth is, diverse Popish Doctrines, such as the Communion in one kind,
prayers and service in an unknown tongue, making Images of the Trinity,
worshipping of them, etc. are so plainly contrary to the Scriptures, that it is
your carnal interest if you will maintain those Doctrins, to deny, or at
least to undervalue the Authority of these in comparison of the present Church.

As for us, as we highly and above all extol the testimony of Scripture, so
neither do we think our selves obliged to suppress or silence the Fathers of
the 1st three or four hundred years; only we would not admit supposititious
writings, or testimonies, the base brats of latter times, for the true children
of the ancient Fathers; nor would we have the present Church of Rome, by her
expurgatory Index's and corrupt glosses, etc. to teach the Fathers to speak
now, and that what they never meant. And as you dishonor the Fathers in laying
bastard-works at their doors, so have you wronged the Canon of the Scriptures,
by advancing the Apocrypha books into the same chair and throne with them: and
in this how you have forsaken the Ancient Fathers and Councels, D.C.
a late Author has showed very well.

And yet this is remarkable, that the pretended Council of Trent have made a
rod for their own backs: I mean, they have added the book of Baruch, and the
Epistle of Jeremiah in the 6th of Baruch, to the Canon: and there, as in a
glass, they may see what a whores forehead the Church of Rome has, to commit
Idolatry with stocks and stones, doing diverse the same things to their Images,
that the Heathens, the old Babylonians, did to their Idols or Images.

Hear Dr Westfield; The Gentiles were wont to bow down to their Images, so do
the Papists: the Gentiles were wont to pray to them, so do the Papists: the
Gentiles were wont to render thanks to them, so do the Papists: the Gentiles
were wont to dedicate themselves, and all that they had, to their Idols, so do
the Papists: the Gentiles nuncupated vows to them, so do the Papists: the
Gentiles were wont to swear by them, so do the Papists: the Gentiles were
wont to set up candles to them, so do the Papists: The Gentiles were wont to
burn incense to them, so do the Papists. So he; and I do not know that there
is any one, who has answered this charge since extant. See Dr Westfields Sermon:
p. 64. 65. Such like it is not improbable, is the modern practice of the common
people under the Papacy. I have heard to this effect, that when the late King
was in Spain, reasoning against worshipping of Images with a Priest, who
denying the charg, it was agreed betwixt them, to take the next Person they
found at devotions in their Churches for an experiment: The Priest bespake the
Person, a woman, to this purpose, Good Woman, you do not pray to this Image or
Saint, but to God in it: I but I do, says the woman, and will do, till you
show me a better.

Till the year 788. Images were never appointed publicly to be worshipped in
the Churches, and this was done in the second Council of Nice Charles the Great
sent this Act of the Counciil to the Bishops of England, to know how they liked
it: they said, Alas for woe! we find in those acts many things against
Christian Religion, especially this, that the worshipping of Images is decreed,
which the Church of God curses, Dr Westfeild page 60. 61.

If you say then, where was our Church, or Religion before Luther? and call us
to give a catalogue in all ages of men professing our Faith and way of worship,
and that the Fathers and all Antiquity were yours; Hear I pray you, the saying
of Mr Du Moulin; This reproach of novelty ill becomes the mouths of those
persons, which hide the true Antiquity from the people, which is the word of
God; and which maintain, that yet at this day, the Church may, and can make new
ordinances touching Faith; and which by the Church understand no other than the
Romish Church; that in the first ages after the Apostles, cannot produce one
man that was of their Religion; and which know that in all Antiquity there is
no mention made of excluding the people from the cup, of prohibiting them the
reading of the Holy Scriptures, of reading the Scriptures to the people in a
language they understand not, of painting the Trinity, of worshipping Images,
of adoring the host with the worship of Latria, of private Masses, of the
Bishop of Romes Court, etc.

If you will have us tell more particularly who were of our Religion before
Luther, know that Christ and the holy Apostles were; and as for other names of
particular persons, who held with us in the Doctrines above named, or diverse
other material Doctrines, the Protestants refer you to Dr Field of the
Church, Birckbeck's Protestant's Evidence; and let me send you also to the
Martyrologies in England and France, etc. and I shall add one more, and that
is a testimony of your own, which I find cited formerly and lately.

And that is of Raynerus the Monk concerning the Waldenses, c. 4. where he
says, that they have continued (say some) from the time of Sylvester; others
from the time of the Apostles, that there is scarce any land where they are not;
that they live righteously before all men, been omnia de Deo credunt, and omnes
Articulos qui in Symbolo continentur, solummodo Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant,
and clerum i.e. they believe althings well concerning God, and all the Articles
that are contained in the Creed, only they blaspheme the Roman Church and the
Clergy.

And what if there were some 1000^ of true Worshippers in the Church of Rome
before the Reformation, as there were 7000 in Israel, who had not bowed their
knees to Baal? or what if we be the same Church now, that we were before, only
then Apostaticall, Idolatrous, Leprous as white as snow, but now professors of
the true Faith, without corrupt mixtures, and of the pure worship, and so cured
of our Leprosy?

If you ask what Authority we had to reform our selves, I refer you to Dr
Bramhal for satisfaction, who shows it was done in England by King and Priest,
and that the Popish Princes, upon occasion claim a right and power to do what
indeed we have done: i. e. to reform the Churches under them, or to the like
effect. See Bramhal of Schism.

There was a Reformation desired before Luther, and the Princes of Germany
represented their hundred grievances to the Emperor. But what mighty men could
not, God has brought about by mean men: nor needed Martin Luther and the rest,
any Commissions extraordinary sealed with the broad seals of new miracles, to
authorize his, or their proclaiming the laws and edicts of the great God, the
King of Heaven. We judge it lawful for men to obey the commands of God, doing
the duties of their places, without a license from men so to do. Besides,
seeing that the Reformers did preach the same Doctrine, which Christ and his
Apostles did, and set up the same way of worship which they did, all which was
formerly confirmed by miracles, it is not reasonable to demand, that they
should show by new miracles that they had Authority to reform the Church of
God. And herein Luther and the rest showed themselves to be of the truth,
because they went not about to deceive me^ with lying wounders or miracles, to
get credit to their persons or Doctrine, such as the Romish Legends have for
the honor of their Saints, and confirmation of their new Articles of Faith. In
my opinion he must have a monstrous Faith, who believes but one half, or the
moiety of their miracles, if the whole dose be like that taste of them Mr Baxter
gives us out of Dr White, and he out of Baronius; as that Francis turned a
capon into a fish, and water into wine; made the rock send forth water, and
anchors to swim; converted a Lamb by preaching to him: that he caused
Swallows, Grasshoppers, and a wild Falcon to join with him in the praises of
God. That Bernard by blessing their ale, and giving it some lewd persons to
drink, caused God's grace to enter into them; that he killed (...) by
excommunication, etc. Baxter out of Francis Whites defense of his Brother, page
147, 148. And again, that their Nicolas, while he lay in his cradle, fasted
Wednesday and Friday, that Patrick caused a ^^ollen sheep to bleat in the belly
of him that had eaten him; that Friar Andrew to correct his appetite of eating
birds at the Table, by the sign of the Cross commanded them to fly away after
they were roasted. Mr Baxter page 167. 168. from Dr ^^eatly.

If you object against us our differences and divisions, Protestants may
return, Are there not divisions in opinion, even amongst you also? and with
you more intolerable, because you pretend you have an infallible visible judge
of all controversies.

How have you differed about the conception of the blessed Virgin, about the
supremacy of the Pope, or a general Council, etc. What ado was there 'twixt
Watson and Parsons here in the days of Queen Elizabeth; and of latter times
'twixt the Jansenians and Jesuits abroad.

2ly, It may be said, that for our present ruptures, either you have made, or
else maintained and continued diverse of our breaches.

3ly, That when we come to heaven, and not before, we may expect that all men
should be of the same opinion in every thing.

4ly, That the Protestant Churches do agree in the maine and fundamentals of
our Religion. See the Harmony of Confess: and wherein we differ, I, and 1000 s
other Protestants, desire to use Scripture, Prayer, and sound reason, to
convince those who are otherwise minded. We desire to use soft words and hard
reasons, to draw men with cords of love, and not to burn, and consume them
with coals of fire. Yea I dare almost put it to your selves to be Judges,
whether there have not been in Queen Mary's days in four years more
Protestants put to death in England, than there have been Papists in fourscore
since.

And now if you object against the Protestant Churches for want of a right
ministry, pretending their want of succession, or a right ordination, or a
right Government and jurisdiction; to these it may be replied.

1, That succession in pure Doctrine is a better mark of a true Church, than
succession into the seats, and places of former Orthodox Pastors.

2ly, That it is almost, if not utterly, impossible for you Papists to know,
who is the true Pastor, the Bishop of Rome, whom you pretend you must follow;
considering the many Schisms, and the indirect and corrupt ways whereby
diverse have advanced themselves into the chair.

3ly, Our first Reformers were ordained Ministers by your Church, and Mr Mason
shows you a succession since.

To him you may add a little piece of Sr John Harrington, as a supplement to
Mr Mason; and Dr Fern has justified the consecrations of our first Bishops
against those frivolous allegations made against them.

4ly, If you should quarrel with us now, because Bishops are in a great
measure laid aside, as if no ordination could possibly be valid, except by
Bishops; and therefore that if now we have true Ministers, yet without
Restoration of Bishops, we can have none, no Ministers long: I answer, that
although I am not yet plerophorized, that a Primitive Bishop, or Episcopus
praeses, is utterly unlawful, yet I am not fully convinced, that they are an
Institution of Christ, and essential, or absolutely necessary to the very
being of a Church or ministry. I dare not so easily unchurch those of the
Reformed Religion abroad, who have no Bishops, name or thing, Bishops or
Superintendents: and in this I am not alone, the late Reverend Dr Usher,
sometimes an Archbishop himself, was of the like judgment. See his life and
death by Dr Bernard. Yea in the Church of Rome, sometimes there has been
allowed Ordination by other hands, than by Bishops, if I mistake not. And the
Master of the Sentences holds but two orders jure divino, Presbyters and
Deacons. See Pet: Lumb: And, if I misremember not, I have read that the
Spaniards hindered it in the Council of Trent, that it did not pass, that all
Bishops, except the Bishop of Rome, were jure humano, or to that effect.

And Medina, who disputed at the Council of Trent touching the Superiority of
a Bishop above a Priest, affirms, that Jerome was in this point of Aerius his
opinion: and that not only he, but also Ambrose and Austin, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostomus, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact maintained all
of them the same Heresy. So he.

If the Charity so some Protestants be a stumbling block, which lies in your
way to hinder you from leaving your Errors, and professing the truth; I shall
endeavor briefly to remove that out of your way.

First, Were I in your case, and did not I resign up my Judgment to the
Scriptures, according to that infallible rule to judge which is the true
Church, I would avoid that Church most, where is professed and practiced the
greatest cruelty, and join to that soonest, where is professed and practiced
the greatest charity. You profess, at least many of you, that it is impossible
for us to be saved; that it is absolutely necessary to salvation to be a member
of the Roman Church, to believe the Articles of the Trent faith, and to live
and dye in the communion of the Roman Church in subjection unto the Bishop of
Rome, whom you call Christ's Vicar and Peter's Successor. Hear what a learned
and religious Person says to this point. Must Paul be damned because he was
not one of Peter's subjects? do not your consciences know (he writes to the
literate Romanists) that swearing obedience to the Pope of Rome was a thing
unknown for many hundred years, yea that it is a novelty in the world.

Again, when I read so many plain promises in the Scriptures, that whoever
believes in Christ shall not perish; and that if by the Spirit we mortify the
deeds of the body we shall live; and that if we repent our sins shall be
forgiven; yea that Godliness has the promise of this life and that to come:
and then when I find that the Papists for all these certain promises do
unchurch and damn us all, because we believe not in the Pope of Rome, as well
as in Christ, this satisfied me as fully that you are audacious Schismatics,
as I am satisfied that you are Papists. So he, Mr Baxter against popery.

The Papists will sometimes brag of their Charity; they give perhaps a piece of
bread to some of our poor, and yet unchurch us poor and rich: they would not
stick (I fear) had they power in their hands, to burn our bodies, saying, we
are Heretics; and they do as much as in them lies to damn our souls: and if
this be their charity, Oh my soul come not thou into their secrets.

And yet do not the Papists lay too great a stresse on the charity of some
Protestants, considering the Assertion of Mr Perkins, which says, that A
Reprobate may in truth be made partaker of all that is contained in the
Religion of the Church of Rome; and a Papist by his Religion cannot go beyond
a Reprobate. Perk. Vol. 1. p. 396. and 404.

And what Dr Usher said, namely, to this effect (being asked by a Papist
whether a Papist may be saved (that one that holds all the Tenets of the
Council of Trent, and lives accordingly without Repentance, cannot be saved; he
said there were two plain places for it: the places I did not hear, but
suppose them to be 2 These. 2.11, 12. And for this cause, God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be
damned, who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And
Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever;
And they have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his image, etc.

Mr Baxter says, if a Papist be saved, it must be as a Christian, and not as a
Papist: as if a liar might be saved, it must not be by lying, but by Faith and
Repentance: he thinks it not impossible for some one or more to be saved, as
it is possible for here and there one to escape of a raging pestilence: but if
so, it is not by his disease or plague of Popery, but by the wholesome remedy of
Faith and Repentance. Vid. Baxt.

Oh that God would persuade your hearts to come to have out of Romish Babylon,
that ye partake not of her sins, and of her plagues at the last. Depart, depart
from the tents of these men, come over I beseech you unto us, and be safe, if
you believe and obey. Be not deceived, be not blindfolded, search and try
whether the holy Scriptures, whether the Lord Christ, the Apostle Paul to the
Romans, or the Apostle Peter in his Epistles to the Hebrews, ever made the
Church of Rome the mother and mistress of all Churches, and to whom we must
come, and whom we must believe, even without the word, or we cannot possibly be
saved. See whether it be expressly laid down in Scripture, that ever Peter was
at Rome; but judge in your selves, if he sat Bishop there 25 years, whether or
no it was not very probable that Paul would in some of his Epistles, which he
wrote thence, have made mention of him: and what did the Apostle Peter forsake
Paul* when he was at Rome, and stood for the defense of the Gospel (if Peter
was there at that time) for Paul complains saying, All men forsook me, 1 Timothy
4.16.

Or if Peter was Bishop of Rome, what then could none be saved for 3, or 4, or
600 years after Christ, because the Pope was not 'till then owned as the
Universal Pastor of the Church, no nor did 'till then claim the title of
Oecumenicall Bishop?

Were there not three Popes at a time, and all three deposed by the Council of
Constance? yea it is a commonly cited saying of Gregory the Great, Bishop of
Rome, that he that had that title was praecursor Antichristi, or forerunner of
Antichrist. Yea how came the Bishop of Rome to claim a power over other
Bishops, more than Peter did over the other Apostles? or how come Peter's
successors (suppose the Bishop of Rome be so) to succeed Peter in his power and
privileges, and not other Bishops, who succeeded the other Apostles in their
Churches, to have the power and privileges, which those Apostles had whom they
succeeded? yea how came the Church at Jerusalem, where Christ himself preached
in person, where Peter had a special hand in laying as it were the foundation,
or planting of the Christian Church, after Christ was ascended, Act. 2.37, 38,
41. how comes that Church to err, to fall away, and yet the Church of Rome to
be infallible?

Show us if you can, either plain Scripture, or Father, or Council for 4 or 500
years, that interpreted Scripture so, that Rome was infallible, and all were
for ever to receive their faith from her mouth under pain of a curse and
damnation, and that too when she commands contrary to the Institutions of
Christ, and to the Doctrine contained in the Scriptures, as she does in her
denying the cup to the people, in latin service, where the people do not
understand it, in forbidding Priests marriage, etc.

Oh that ye would lay aside prejudice and disaffection, and apply your selves
to the study of the holy Scriptures; think never the better of Mahumetanisme,
because it must not be questioned, nor of Popery, because it is death in Italy
or Spain without recantation, to read a Spanish or Italian Bible without a
license: how absurd are these men to hinder children from looking into their
Fathers Testament, or to forbid men to obey God, except they have first got
men's leave so to do. Let not your Priests persuade you to lay out of your
hands the holy Scripture, and to fill them with Legends and Fables, to put out
the Sun in the firmament, that, you may see with their candles or glow-wormes.

Oh! do not throw away the light of the Word, nor put out your own Reason,
that candle of the Lord, to follow your blind guides in the darkness of error,
as ye would not fall into the ditch, and into the pit. Oh! that you would not
despise the day of small things, that you would please to read and consider
this plain Catechisticall confutation of your errors (I hope) by pat and
pertinent Scriptures. I have read how a plain countryman with one text of
Scripture convinced an erroneous Person, when great Scholars, and much
disputing and reasoning could not do.

My desire and prayer is, that this Treatise may have the like effect, that the
Scriptures here cited may convince those who have erred from the truth, and may
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan and of Error
unto God. Oh! how glad should I be, if I could but undeceive and save some of
you by this means, if I could pluck you as firebrarnds out of the fire.

Truly my desire and prayer is, and shall be (if the will of God be so) that ye
may be in God's way, i. e. read his word, believe and obey it, that ye may be
saved. And one thing let me say, think to be saved by your own Faith, and not
merely by believing as the Church believes: do not trust in God for salvation
by an Attorney, as ye would not be contented to be saved only by a Proxey. And
be not amused with a great noise, and great names of Fathers, and Councils,
which they that boast do it (says one) because they know you cannot, or have
not leisure either to read or understand, and so cannot disprove them; see
Moulin: but to the Law and to the Testimony, and the word is near thee: and of
the Bible I am sure I may say, Blessed is he that reads, and that
understands the sayings of this Book.

I seek not yours but you, and oh that you could or would away with your dungie
and drossy errors, and that you might keep your gold and silver; and on
condition you would part with two parts of your errors, I hope I should not
envy you your whole estates.

Yet say not that our Religion is cruel, and that you are Martyrs for yours;
because it is the cause, not the punishment, or suffering, makes a Martyr; and
you suffer in your purses for the Error of your Consciences. I hope we
Protestants shall never be put to try, yet we could have no such bargain, if
the law was in your hands; although the truth is, you pay too dear for a false
Religion: for I may say of Religion, as of the Prophet Jeremys figs, the good
is very good, and the bad very bad: if it be true, a man cannot pay too dear
for it; if false, he cannot buy it too cheap.

Now who would be of such a Religion, which may cost him the certain loss of
a temporal, and much hazard his eternal estate; that will ruin his estate;
and endanger his soul.

Now consider what I have said in this preface, and what I say in the following
Treatise, and the Lord give you understanding in all things,

So prays (really desirous of your conversion and salvation) THO: HODGES.

Chap. 1. Of this way or Method of proceeding by such Questions and Answers,
or, The Introduction.
Q. MAY we say yes to a Question, that is asked us, when we answer it
Affirmatively, or must we necessarily say yea?

Ans: Math. 17.24.25. They that received the Tribute money came to Peter, and
said, Does not your Mr pay tribute? He says, yes.

Q. When we answer a Question Negatively, must we always say Nay? or may we
say No?

A. Joh. 21.5. Then Jesus says unto them, children have you any meat? they
answered him, No.

Q. Does that place Jam. 5.12. forbid the saying Yes and No? when it says, Let
your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay.

A. The Apostle dehorts from customary swearing, and advises them to be true
and faithful in performing their word and promise: he would not have men be I
Sr, no Sr, (as we say:) not yea and nay, but one and the same in word and deed,
in our promises and performances: and if we would do so, there would be no
need of such common oaths to gain credit or belief.

And farther I say, that the Translators, if they had pleased, might have
rendered the Original thus, Let your Yes be Yes, and your No No; as in the
places above cited.

Q. Is it lawful to set down, or ask questions about points or matters of
Religion, and give answers thereunto, for the instruction of the ignorant, or
teaching of those, who are as yet babes in knowledge?

A. Yes, Luke 7.19, 20, 22. And John calling unto him two of his Disciples,
sent them to Jesus saying, Art thou he that should come, or look we for
another? when the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist has sent us
unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come, or look we for another? Then
Jesus answering said unto them Go your way, and tell John what things you have
seen, and heard, how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, the dead are raised, the deaf hear, to the poor the Gospel is
preached. So Mat. 11.2, 3, 4, 5. Hag. 2.11, 12, 13. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the Law, saying, If one bear holy flesh
in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the Priests answered and
said, No. Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of
these, shall it be unclean? And the Priests answered and said, It shall be
unclean. Mat. 13.51.

Q. May a man ask or propound a Question about that which he knows himself,
and make an objection, which he can answer himself?

A. Yes, Mark. 12.35, 36, 37. And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in
the Temple, How say the Scribes that Christ is the Son of David? for David
himself said by the holy Ghost, The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand, 'till I make thine enemies thy footstool. David therefore himself
calls him Lord, and whence is he then his Son? So Matthew. 22.41. etc. Romans
6.1. what shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?
God forbid. And verse 15. what then, shall we sin, because we are not under
the Law, but under Grace? God forbid. So chap. 7.7. what shall we say then, is
the Law sin? God forbid. and chap. 9.14. what shall we say then, is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

Q. May we ask what are the opinions of men concerning Christ or Christianity,
and give answers to them?

A. Yes, Matthew. 16.13, 14. when Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi,
he asked his Disciples saying, whom do men say that I the Son of man am? And
they said, some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. But whom say ye that I am? v. 15th, etc.

Q. Is it lawful to propound objections for the clearing of the truth?

A. Yes, Luke 20.41, 42, 43, 44. And he said unto them, How say they that
Christ is David's Son? And David himself says in the Book of Psalms, The
Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, 'till I make thine enemies thy
footstool. David therefore calls him Lord; how is he then his Son? So Mat.
22.41, etc. Mar. 12.35, 36, 37.

Q. May a man repeat and answer the objection of adversaries, made against the
truth? or propound such as he thinks the wisdom of the flesh will, or may
possibly make against the truth?

A. Yes, Romans 9.19, 20. Nay, but O man who art thou that replyest against God?
shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
in v. 19. thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who has
resisted his will?

Q. Is it in any case lawful to set down the objection, or Argument of
erroneous, or heretical Persons?

A. Yes, Luke 20. from 27th, to 33. Then came to him certain of the Sadduces,
which deny that there is any Resurrection; and they asked him, saying, Master,
Moses wrote unto us, if any man's Brother dye, having a wife, and he dye
without children, that his Brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto
his Brother: there were therefore seven brethren, and the first took a wife,
and dyed without children, etc. therefore in the Resurrection, whose wife of
them is she? for seven had her to wife. So Mat. 22.23, etc.

Cap. 2. Of Error.
Q. ARE there any Errors and Heresies destructive to the faith, and damnable?

A. Yes, 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even
as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who
concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the Resurrection is past already,
and overthrow the Faith of some.

Q. Are there any blasphemous opinions?

A. Yes, 2 Timothy 2.16.17, 18. But shun profane and vain bablings, for they will
increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a canker, of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, etc. 1 Timothy
1.19, 20. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwreck; of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom
I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

Q. May we receive erroneous teachers into our houses, or must we avoid them?

A. 2 John 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed.

Q. What Is the cause of Error?

A. Matthew. 22.29. Jesus answered and said unto them, ye do err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

Chap. 3. Of the Holy Scriptures.
Q. BY What Rule must we judge of the Doctrines we hear, we must we judge by
the Scriptures?

A. Yes, Isai. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. Act. 17.11, 12. These were more noble than those
in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind,
and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: therefore many
of them believed.

Q. Are we to believe God speaking to us in the Scriptures, as if he spoke to
us audibly by a voice from heaven?

A. 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day-dawn, and the daystar arise in your hearts.

Q. Are we to believe even an Angel from heaven contrary to the Scriptures?

A. Galat. 1.8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Q. Ought we to believe the Scriptures rather than one who should come from the
dead?

A. Luke 16.27, 28, 29. I pray thee Father, that thou would send him to my
Fathers house, that he may testify unto them: Abraham says unto him, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

Q. Would it be more effectual to have our friends rise from the dead, and
warn us, lest we come to the place of torment, than to have the Scriptures
read and applied?

A. Luke 16. last. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

Q Did the Prophets of old speak and write the Holy Scriptures by any private
motion, or by the incitation or inspiration of the holy Ghost?

A. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, etc. 2 Pet. 1.20.21. Knowing this first, that no
prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Q. Did the Apostles of Christ preach the word of God, or the word of man?

A. 1 The. 2.13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when
ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the
Word of men, but as it is in truth, the Word of God, which effectually works
also in you that believe.

Q. Did our Savior Christ and the Apostles allow their Hearers no try their
Doctrine by the Holy Scriptures?

A. Yea. Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of
me. Act. 17.11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so.

Q. Did Christ and the Apostles, who had the greatest measure, and who were
full of the Holy Ghost, cite Scripture, and prove by Scripture, or appeal
constantly to private Revelations, or to a light or word within them, or say
always, Thus says the Spirit within us?

A. Luke 10.26. What is written in the Law? how read thou? Mar. 12.29. And
as touching the dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the book of Moses,
how in the bush God spoke unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

Q. Are the Scriptures and the Spirit joined together, and does the Spirit of
God go along with the Scriptures?

A. Isai. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My
Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy feeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Joh. 6.63. It
is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I
spoke unto you, they are Spirit and they are life.

Q. But are the Scriptures able to make us perfect, and wise unto Salvation,
without attending to visions and Revelations?

A. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. And that from a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith,
which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works.

Q. Are the Scriptures of the old Testament of use unto us, now in the days of
the Gospel?

A. Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written before time, were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. 1 Cor. 10.1, to the 6th. Moreover brethren, I would not that ye should be
ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through
the Sea, etc. Now these things were our Examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted, etc. So. v. 11. Now all these
things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Q. May the common people read the Scriptures.

A. Yea, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of
me. Act. 17.11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so. Act. 8.30. And Philip ran thither to him,
and heard him read the Prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou
read? 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures. Isai. 34.16. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read. Deuteronomy.
17.18, 19. And it shall be when he sits upon the throne of his Kingdom,
that he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book, out of that which is
before the Priests, the Levites: And it shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them.

Q. May the Scriptures be translated out of the Original languages into those
tongues, which the people understand?

A. 1 Cor. 14.18, 19, 27, 28. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than
you all: yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let one interpret; but
if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, and let him
speak to himself and to God.

Q. May we quote a translation of Scripture?

A. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. Wherefore, when he comes into the world, he says,
Sacrifice and offering thou would not, etc, then said I, Lo! I come to do
thy will O God. Which is a passage taken out of the 40th Psalm. verses 6.7, 8.
secundum Interpret: 70, etc.

Q. Are the Scriptures to be read in the Church?

A. Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, and as his custom was, he went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. Act. 15.21. For
Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day.

Q. In which book, that of the Creatures, or that of the Scriptures, may we
learn to know God best?

A. Psalm. 138.2. I will worship toward thy Holy Temple, and praise thy Name
for thy loving kindness, and for thy truth; for thou have magnifyed thy Word
above all thy name. Psalm. 19.1, 7, 11. The Heavens declare the glory of God,
the firmament shows his handy work: the Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple:
moreover, by them is thy servant warned, and in keeping of them there is great
reward. Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
path.

Q. May Nations know any thing of God by his works or Creatures?

A. Romans 1.19, 20. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them: For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse.

Q. Is it a special blessing to have the word of God?

A. Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them, praise ye the Lord.

Chap. 4. Of God, and of the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead.
Q. ARE the Gentiles in an Error, who worship many Gods?

A. Yea. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Heave O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 1 Cor. 8.4,
5, 6. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world; and that there is none
other God, but one: for though there be that are called Gods, whether in
heaven, or in earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many) but to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Q. How does the Scripture set out converts from the worship of false Gods, or
dead Idols, which the Gentiles worship?

A. 1 These. 1.9. For they themselves show of us what manner of entering in we
had unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols to serve the living and true
God. Jer. 10.10. But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an
everlasting King, etc.

Q. Is it possible for us to know God comprehensively, or perfectly to
comprehend his infinite being and perfection?

A. Job. 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as heaven, what can thou do?
Deeper than hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the
earth, and broader then the Sea. So chap. 26.14. Lo these are parts of his
ways, but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power
who can understand?

Q. To speak after the manner of men, is God a Spirit?

A. Yea, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit and in truth.

Q. What does the Scripture teach us to conceive of the nature of a Spirit? or
how does a Spirit differ from a body?

A. Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me
and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

Q. What Scripture have you to prove that God is invisible to corporeal eyes?

A. 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, 17. Take ye
therefore good heed unto your selves, (for ye saw no manner of similitude on
the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fires)
lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any
figure, the likeness of male or female, etc. compared with Romans 1.21, 23.
Because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, and they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image,
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and foure-footed beasts, and
creeping things.

Q. What proof do you bring that God is without Passion?

A. Act. 14.11, 15. When the people saw what Paul had done, they lift up their
voices saying, the Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men, etc. Sirs,
why do ye these things, we also are men of like passions with you, and preach
unto you, that you should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which
made heaven and earth, etc.

Q. Give us a text to show the unchangeablenesse or Immutability of God.

A. Mal. 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not: therefore the Sons of Jacob are
not consumed. Jam. 1.17. Every good and perfect gift is from above and comes
down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow
of turning.

Q. What text of Scripture is there to prove, that God cannot be contained in
any place, or that he is Immense?

A. 1 King. 8.27. But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven
and the Heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this house that
I have builded. Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at hand says the Lord, and not a
God a far off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him
says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord?

Q. How do you prove that he is Eternal?

A. Psalm. 90.2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had
formed the earth, and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God. 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, etc. be honor and
glory for ever.

Q. Where is it proved that his greatness is Incomprehensible or unsearchable?

A. Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable.

Q. What text have we that God is Almighty, or Omnipotent?

A. Genesis 17.1. And when Abraham was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
appeared to him, and said, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou
perfect. Rev. 4.8. -- And they rest not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

Q. How do you prove God is only wise?

A. Romans 16.27. To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. 1 Timothy
1.17. To the King eternal, etc. the only wise God be honor and glory for ever
and ever.

Q. How do you prove God is most holy?

A. Isai. 6.3. And one cried unto another and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. Rev. 4.8. And they rest
not day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and
is, and is to come.

Q. How do you prove that God is most free in all he does?

A. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in
earth; in the Seas and all deep places.

Q. How prove you that God is absolute?

A. Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he said, Thus
shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I Am has sent me unto you.

Q. How prove you that God Works all according to the counsill of his own will?

A. Ephesians. 1.11. In wom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsill of
his own will.

Q. What text of Scripture proves God does all for his own glory?

A. Prove: 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the
wicked for the day of evil. Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and to
him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.

Q. Is the Atheist, or he that denies there is a God, called a Fool in Scripture?

A. Psalm. 14.1. The Fool haith said in his heart, there is no God.

Q. Where have we ground in Scripture for such expressions as these, the nature
of God, the Godhead, the Essence of God, the Person of the Father.

A. Gal. 4.8. Howbeit then when ye knew not God ye did service unto them which
by nature are no Gods. Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am;
Thus shall thou say unto the Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you.

Rev. 1.4. Grace be to you and peace from him which is, and which was, and
which is to come. Col. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his
power, etc.

Q. What say you to those many Scriptures, which say that God is in heaven?

A. The Reason why God is said to be in Heaven, is not because his Essence is
included in a certain place, called Heaven, but he may be said to be in Heaven
in regard of the more eminent manifestation of his glory there to Saints and
Angels, and in respect of some more eminent dispensations and works of his
manifested from thence.

Q. What say you to those Scriptures, that testify that God came down from
heaven, or appeared on Mount Sinai, etc.

A. The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men, condescending to our
capacity: and God is, or may be, said to be, or appear, or come to such a
place, when either some glorious appearances are seen there, or some more
glorious dispensations are there, M. Mede.
or when the Angels or Courtiers of Heaven are there, or when there are some
eminent signs of his favor there. God who in his own being and Essence is
infinite and immense, D. Ow.
is by reason thereof present in, and to the whole creation equally, not by a
diffusion of his Substance or mixture with other things, heaven or earth, in or
upon them, but by an inconceivable indistancy of Essence to all things; though
he exert his power, and manifest his glory in one place more than another, as
in Heaven, in Sion, at the Arc, etc.

Q. How prove you that God has no corporeal, visible figure, and shape, or
similitude?

A. Is. 40.25. To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal, says the
Holy one?

Q. When the Scripture says that man is made after the image and likeness of
God, does it intend that God has a bodily figure or shape like a man?

A. Col. 3.9, 10. -- Seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds;
And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of
him that created him.

Q. What means the Scripture by attributing unto God parts like a man, eyes,
cares, nostrils, arms, hands, fingers, are we to understand that God has a
body of flesh, and parts fleshly like us?

A. No, but they are spoken of him after the manner of men, for it is written,
2 Chr. 32.8. With him is an Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to
help us, and to fight our battles. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusts
in man, and makes flesh his Arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord.
Job. 10.4. Have thou eyes of flesh, or see thou as man sees?

Q. How must those Scriptures be understood, which attribute Affections and
Passions to God, as Anger, Fury, Zeal, Wrath, Love, Hatred, Jealousy,
Repentance, Grief, Joy, etc?

A. They are Metaphorically assigned unto him, and spoken of him only in
reference to his outward works and dispensations, correspondent and answering
to the actings of men, D. Ow.
in whom such affections are, and under the power whereof they are in those
actings.

Q. How prove you that these are spoken (...), and to be understood, (...),
metaphorically?

A. Mal. 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not. Is. 27.4. Fury is not in me. 1 Samuel 15.29. And the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not
a man that he should repent. To instance in Anger, that may denote either God's
vindictive justice whence punishments flow; or else the effects of it, in the
punishments themselves, either threatened or inflicted.

Q. What is meant when it is said that Moses should see the Similitude of the
Lord, etc. Exodus 34. Number. 12.8. Does it mean that God has any real, visible
shape?

A. No: but it may be possibly he shall see an Angel, or some glorious light. 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see. 1 John 4.12. No man has
seen God at any time.

Q. What do the Scriptures say concerning God's Omniscience, or Knowledge of
all things past, present, and to come, how contingent soever they are in their
own nature, or wrought by Agents free in working?

A. Act. 4.27, 28. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature that is
not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of
him, with whom we have to do. Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4. Thou know my down sitting,
and mine uprising thou understandest my thought afar off: thou compassest my
path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways: For there is not
a word in my tongue, but lo O Lord thou know it altogether. Ps. 147.5.
Great is our Lord -- his understanding is infinite. Is. 40.28. There is no
searching of his understanding.

Q. How are those Scriptures to be expounded, which speak of God's proving and
trying men, that he may know what is in their hearts, etc. such as Deuteronomy. 8.2.
and 13.3. 2 Chr. 32.31. And what means that other place Philip. 4.6. Let your
request be made known unto God?

A. These things are ascribed to God figuratively, discovering the kind of his
works and dispensations, not his own nature and properties; and so they must
have a figurative interpretation. D. Ow.
God deals with men much like or proportionably to what we would do, when we
would really find out what we do not know.

Q. Does the Scripture teach that there is but one only true God?

A. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. For
though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there
be Gods many, and Lords many) but to us there is but one God the Father, of
whom are all things, and we in him, etc.

Q. What says the Scripture concerning the Trinity, or the three Persons in
the Godhead?

A. 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bare record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Matthew. 28.29. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. Are we by the Word to understand Christ the Son of God?

A. Joh. 1.14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and
truth.

Q. Is Christ God?

A. Romans 9.5. Of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever. Amen. John. 20.28. And Thomas answered, and said unto
him, my Lord and my Ood. Col. 2.9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. Heb. 1.3, 8. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his Person, and upholding all things by the word of his
power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand
of the majesty on high. But unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O God, is for
ever and ever: a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. 1 Timothy 3.16.

Q. Is he equal with the Father?

A. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God.

Q. Is he one with his Father?

A. Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one.

Q. How do you prove that the Holy Ghost is God?

A. Act. 5.3, 4. But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to
lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? while it
remained was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart? thou have not lied unto
men, but unto God. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you? So chap. 6.19. What, know you not that
your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of
God, and ye are not your own? 2 Cor. 6.16. and what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God; as God has said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. Is. 6.1, 9. In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw also the
Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the
Temple. And he said, Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed but understand
not, and see ye indeed but perceive not. Compared with Acts 28.25, 26. And when
they agreed not among themselves they departed, after that Paul had spoken one
word, well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet unto our Fathers, saying,
Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand,
and seeing ye shall see and not perceive.

Q. Is the holy Ghost a distinct person, or subsistence in the Godhead?

A. Joh. 16.7, 8. For if I go not away the comforter will not come unto you,
etc. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of Judgment. Mat. 3.16. And Jesus when he was baptized,
went up straightway out of the water, and lo the heavens were opened unto him,
and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.
Act. 13.2. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

Q. Are we baptized into the faith, and worship of one God in three Persons?

A. Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13.14. The
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

Q. Is not God the Father called the only true God in Joh. 17.3. How then is
Christ God?

A. Christ and the Holy Ghost are one and the same God with the Father; and
some expound this text by 1 John 5.20. where of Jesus Christ it is said, D. Chapter
Beza. in loc. D. Chapter
This is the true God, and Eternal life. These terms, one and only, exclude
all Idols, not the Son, and the Holy Ghost; no more than in Jude. v. 4.
According to our Translation the word only Lord God, being applied to Christ,
does exclude God the Father from being God.

Q. Does not Christ say Joh. 14.28. My Father is greater than I. And again Joh.
10.29. My Father is greater than all?

A. Presently after Christ had said, My Father is greater than all, he adds, I
and my Father are one, (i.e.) one in nature, and yet in regard of his manhood,
and in respect of his office of Mediator, about which he was sent into the
world, his Father was greater than he.

Q. Are not God the Father and God the Son said to send the Holy Ghost? And is
not he that sends greater than he that is sent?

A. M. Perk.
One Equal may send another by consent.

Q. Does not Christ say concerning the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. -- he
shall not speak of himself -- and he shall receive of mine, etc?

A. The Holy Ghost has his subsistence from the Father and the Son, but this
by nature; and he imparts to every one of us as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. and the
Church is commanded to hearken unto him. Rev, 2. Yet the mercy, grace, D. Ow.
his Ans. to Bid.
light, guidance, direction, comfort, peace, gifts, that he should communicate,
were no other but what were procured and purchased for them by Christ himself,
according to that dispensation that the Trinity is pleased to proceed in, to
accomplish the work of our Salvation.

Q. May we give praise and glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost?

A. Is. 6.1, 2, 3. I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted
up, and his train filled the Temple. Above it stood the Seraphims -- And one
cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole
earth is full of his glory. So verse. 8.9. And I heard the voice of the Lord
saying, -- go and tell ye this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not,
compared with Act. 28.25, 26. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet
unto our Fathers, saying, Go unto this people and say, Hearing ye shall hear
and shall not understand. Rev. 7.9, 10. After this I beheld, and lo a great
multitude -- And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

Q. May we lawfully pray to any particular Person of the Holy Trinity? And may
we give glory to a particular Person?

A. Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. Act. 7.59, 60. And they stoned Stephen calling upon God, and saying,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and he kneeled down, and cried with a loud
voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. 2 Cor. 13. last. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be
with you all Amen. Rev. 5.13. And every creature -- heard I saying, Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever and ever.

Q. May we lawfully in a continued prayer, wherein we have many petitions, put
up one to God the Father by name, another to the Son, and a 3d to the Holy
Ghost?

A. 2 Cor. 13. last. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God,
and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all Amen. 2 These. 2.16, 17. Now
our Lord Jesus Christ himself: and God even our Father -- comfort your hearts,
etc.

Q. Which Person of the Trinity is most frequently named in the prayers of holy
men, recorded in Scripture?

A. Ephesians. 2.18. For through him we both have an access, by one Spirit, unto the
Father. Ephesians. 3.14, 21. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout
all Ages world without end Amen.

Cap. 5. Of God's Decrees.
Q. HOW prove you that nothing can come to pass in time, but what God did most
wisely and freely, decree, and ordain unchangably from all eternity?

A. Ephesians. 1.11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the
counsel of his own will. Romans 11.33, 34. O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
Counselor? Heb. 6.17. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs of promise the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an oath.
Romans 9.15, 18. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion: Therefore
has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

Q. How prove you that for all this decree God is not the Author of sin?

A. Jam. 1.13, 17. Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted of God: for
God cannot bete^pted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Every good gift,
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. 1 John 1.5. This
then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God
is light, and in him is no darkness at all.

Q. How prove you that God's Decrees, or eternal predestination, or
foreordaining of all that comes to pass in time, does not take away man's
liberty, or offer violence to him, and consequently free man from sin?

A. Act. 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. So Chap. 4.27, 28. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom
thou have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the
people of Israel, were gathered togeither for to do whatsoever thy hand and
thy counsel determined before to be done. Math. 17.10, 11, 12. Why then say
the Scribes that Elias must first come? And Jesus answered and said unto them,
Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things: But I say unto you, that
Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever
they listed; likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of the^. Prove. 16.33.
The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
Joh. 19.11. Jesus answered, thou could have no power at all against me,
except it were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee
has the greater sin. The power of the Magistrate being from God, therefore the
Jews sinned grievously in making use of the Magistrate to condemn the
innocent, and the Son of God. Beza.

Q. How prove you that God knows all that comes to pass?

A. Act. 15.18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world.

Q. How prove you he knows what may, or can come to pass upon such and such
conditions?

A. 1. Sam. 23.11, 12. Will Saul come down as thy Servant has heard, O Lord
God of Israel, I beseech thee tell thy Servant? And the Lord said, he will come
down. Then said David, will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the
hand of Saul? and the Lord said, they will deliver thee up. Matthew. 11.21, 23.
Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty works which
were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down unto hell, for if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this
day.

Q. How prove you that God did not decree such and such things, because he
foresaw they would come to pass, or come to pass upon such conditions?

A. Romans 9.11, 13, 18. For the children being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
not of works, but of him that calls: As it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens.

Chap. 6. Of the Creation, and of the first estate of Man.
Q. WAS the world Eternal, or did God make heaven, and earth, and all things
therein in the beginning?

A. Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth. Heb.
11.3. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of
God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.

Q. In what state did God make man at first, did he make him after his own
image, in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness; upright, having the law
written in his heart, induing him with power to fulfill the Law, with dominion
over the creatures?

A. Genesis 1.27, 31. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge after the image of him that created him. Ephesians. 4.24. and that ye put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. Eccles. 7.29. Lo! this only have I found, that God has made man
upright. Romans 2.14, 15. These having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves,
which show the work of the Law written in their hearts. Genesis 1.28. And God
said unto them -- replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over
the fish of the Sea -- and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.

Q. Did man continue in that state wherein God made him, or did he hearken to
the Devil, that old Serpent, and disobey God, and so fell?

A. Genesis 3.6, 13, 23. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food --
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband
with her, and he did cate. And the Lord God said unto the Woman; what is this
that thou have done? And the Woman said, the Serpent beguiled me, and I did
eat: Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden to till the
ground from whence he was taken. Eccl. 7.29. But they have sought out many
inventions. 2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

Q. Was Adam the first man, or were there any before him, or was he a common
Father, from whom all Persons descended?

A. 1. Cor. 15.45, 47. The first man Adam was made a living soul. -- The first
man is of the earth, earthy.

Chap. 7. Of sin, and of the bitter fruits of it.
Q. VHAT is sin?

A. 1 John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of the Law.

Q. Did all mankind sin in, and fall by the sin or transgression of our
first Parents?

A. 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all dye, etc. Act. 17.26. And has made of one
blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth. Romans 5.12,
18, 19. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Therefore as
by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, etc. For as
by one man's disobedience all were made sinners, etc.

Q. Can the Act or deed of the Father be imputed to the children? is this as
it is the manner of men, is it also agreeable to the Scriptures?

A. Heb. 7.9, 10. Levi also who received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham: For
he was yet in the loins of his Father when Melchisedec met him.

Q. Did Adam after the fall beget children after the image and likeness of
God, in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness, or after his own likeness?

A. Genesis 5.3. And Adam -- begat a Son in his own liknesse after his image; and
called his name Seth. Job. 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one. Job. 15.14. Joh. 3.5, 6.

Q. Is man since the fall born pure, and righteous, or is he conceived and
borne in sin?

A. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me. Job. 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.
chap. 15 14. What is man that he should be clean; and he which is borne of a
Woman, that he should be righteous? Joh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit.

Q. Can a man by nature, now since the fall, savingly know God, without being
spiritually enlightened?

A. 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. 1 John 5.20. And we know, that the Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true. 2
Cor. 4.6. For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ.

Q. Can a man by the strength of nature now fulfill the Law of God?

A. To. 8.7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans 7.18. For I know that in
me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For to will is present with
me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. Joh. 15.5. For without
me ye can do nothing. 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God.

Q. Should our first Parents have dyed, if they had never sinned? did actual
death come in by sin?

A. Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death. Romans 5.12. As by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. Genesis 2.17. For in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye.

Q. Are we become now children of wrath by nature, and in that state shall we
never (except we be borne again) see the Kingdom of God?

A. Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. Joh. 3.3, last. Except a
man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And he that believes
not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Q. Are sinners, or those that transgress the Law, accursed?

A. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the Law, to do them. Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, etc. But if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
commandments, and his Statutes, which I command thee this day, that all these
curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee, Cursed shall thou be in the
City, etc.

Q. Does the soul outlive the body, and is it immortal?

A. Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Phil. 1.23. For I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Ecl. 12.7. Then shall the
dust return to the Earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God
that gave it. Matthew. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul.

Q. Shall the body rise again from the dead?

A. 1 Cor. 15.13, 14. But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is
Christ not risen. And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and
your faith is also vain. Mark. 12.25, 26, 27. Joh. 11.24.

Q. Shall the condition of the Devils, and wicked men, be cursed and miserable
at, and after the day of Judgment?

A. Mat. 25.41, 46. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment.

Cap. 8. Of Redemption by Christ.
Q. DOES God leave all mankind in a sinful, cursed, and miserable condition,
to perish therein everlastingly?

A. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
Salvation by Christ. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us. Romans 3.21, 22. But now the Righteousness of
God without the Law is manifested -- even the Righteousness of God, which is
by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe, etc.

Q. Will God acquit and justify the ungodly and unrighteous for the
righteousness of Christ, if they believe and repent of their sins?

A. To. 5.19, 21. -- So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
That as sin bath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
Being justified freely by his grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
etc. That he might be just, and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

Q. Did God lay our sins upon Christ, and did he bear them on the Cross?

A. Is. 53.5, 6. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every
one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. 1
Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were
healed.

Q. Did Christ dye only to leave us an Example, or to confirm his Doctrine, or
to be a Sacrifice or Offering for sin?

A. Ephesians. 5.2. -- As Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us
an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. 2 Cor. 5.21.
For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. Is. 53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an
Offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

Chap. 9. Of Predestination.
Q. HOW prove you that it was not the foresight of faith, good works, or
perseverance, or of something else in the creature, which were either as
causes, or conditions moving God to ordain some men unto eternal life?

A. Ephesians. 1.9, 11. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according
to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself. In whom also we have
obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him,
who works all things after the counsel of his own will. Romans 9.11, 16. For
the children being not yet borne, neither having done good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him
that calls; As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. So
then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.

Q. How prove you that God, who has ordained them to the End, eternal life,
has also ordained them to the means to attain thereunto, Faith and good
works?

A. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through
Sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him
in love chap. 2.10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.

Q. How prove you that all God's Elect children, being fallen in Adam, were
redeemed by Christ?

A. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.

Q. How prove you that the Elect are in due time justified, adopted,
sanctified, have their sins pardoned, are made the children of God, and made
holy?

A. Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom
he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. 2 These.
2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved
of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth.

Q. How prove you such shall be certainly kept and preserved unto Salvation?

A. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. John. 10.27, 28, 29.

Chap. 10. Of God's Providence.
Q. HOW prove you that God's Providence reaches over all things, Creatures,
and their actions, from the greatest to the least?

A. Dan. 4.35. And all the Inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and
he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the Inhabitants
of the earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?
Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth,
in the seas and all deep places. Act. 17.25, 28. Seeing he gives to all life,
and breath, and all things: For in him we live, and move, and have our being.
Mat. 10.30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Prove. 16.33. The
Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Psalm
94.11. The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

Q. How prove you that God orders the actions of men, and the events of all
their actions, beyond whatever came into their hearts?

A. Deuteronomy. 19.5. compared with Exodus 21.13. And if a man lie not in wait, but
God deliver him into his hand, etc. As when a man goes into the wood with his
neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the axe, to cut down
the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his
neighbor, that he dye, etc. 1 Kin. 22.34, compared with verse. 28. And a
certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the King of Israel between the
joints of the harness. Isai. 10.6, 7. I will send him against an hypocritical
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take
the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets: Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so; but it is
in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

Q. Can you prove that God, who is omnipotent, and can work without means,
that he uses means to bring about his purpose?

A. Act. 27.31, 44. Paul said unto the Centurion, and to the Soldiers. Except
these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved. And the rest, some on boards, and
some on broken pieces of the ship: and so it came to pass that they escaped
all safe to land. Isa. 55.11. For as the rain comes down, and the snow from
heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: so
shall my word be, that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto
me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in
the thing whereto I sent it. Hos. 2.21, 22. And it shall come to pass in that
day, I will hear says the Lord: I will hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn and the wine, and the
oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.

Q. What Scriptures teach that God does not only barely permit, but most wisely
and powerfully bound and order sinful actions to his own holy ends, and yet
neither is, nor can be, the Author or approver of sin?

A. 1 King. 22.22, 23. And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And he saidt thou shall persuade him,
and prevail also; go forth and do so. Now therefore behold, the Lord has
put a lying Spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophets. Psalm. 76.10. Surely
the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.
Genesis 50.20. But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto
good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive. Jam.
1.13, 17. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness neither shadow of turning. 1 John 2.16. The lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life, is not of the Father.
Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thine eyes.

Q. What Scriptures prove that God blinds and hardens some men's hearts for
former sins?

A. Romans 11.8. God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should
not see, and ears that they should not hear unto this day. To. 1.28. And as
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient.

Q. How may God be said to harden men's hearts for former sins?

A. Romans 1.24. Wherefore God gave them up unto uncleanness, through the lusts
of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves. Ps.
106.15. And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul. 2
These. 2.11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie. Exodus 7.3. And I will harden Pharaoh's heart: compared
with chap. 8.32. And Pharaoh hardened his heart, etc.

Q. How is it proved that God does blind and harden men by withholding his
grace to enlighten their understandings, and to work upon their hearts?

A. Mat. 13.13. Therefore speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing see
not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

Q. Does God sometimes withdraw the gifts which men have had, for their not
using, or abusing of them?

A. Math. 25.29. From him that has not shall be taken away even that which he
has.

Q. Is it a means of blindness and hardness, that sometimes they are exposed
to such objects, as their corruption will make occasion of Sin?

A. 2 King. 8.12. And Hazael said why weepeth my Lord? and he answered, because
I know the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel, their strong
holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword,
and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child. verse. 15. And
Hazael reigned.

Q. What Scriptures prove that God's Providence especially does reach his
Church, and that he disposes all things to the good thereof?

A. 1 Timothy 4.10. Who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that
believe. Amos. 9.9. I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, etc. Yet
shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. Is. 43.3, 4, 5. I am the Lord
thy God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior. I gave Egypt for thy ransom,
Ethyopia and Seba for thee: -- therefore will I give men for thee, and people
for thy life. Fear not, for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the
East, etc.

Chap. 11. Of Faith, and Repentance, a holy life, and assurance of Salvation.
Q. IS faith in Christ required of those who shall be saved?

A. Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and
thine house. Joh. 3.16, 36. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he
that believes not the Son shall not see life.

Q. What is that great truth to which the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost bear
witness?

A. 1 John 5.11. And this is the record that God has given to us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son.

Q. Is it necessary that we should repent of our sins, and reform or amend
our lives, and forsake our sins, if we will have mercy?

A. Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

Q. Are any so predestined, or did our Lord Jesus Christ so lay down his life
for any particular Persons, that although they live and dye in impenitency and
unbelief, yet they shall surely be saved?

A. Romans 8.1, 13, 30. There is therefore now no condemnation to the^ which are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For if ye
live after the flesh ye shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. Moreover, whom he did predestinate them he
also called, and whom he called them he also justified, etc.

Q. Does the Scriptures hold out any such preterition, or Non-election, or so
hold forth the death of Christ, that some persons although they believe with
all their heart, and repent, and forsake all their sins, yet shall not be saved?

A. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the Son shall not see life. Act. 10.34, 35, 43. Of a truth I
perceive, God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears
him and works righteousness is accepted with him. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of Sins.

Q. May we be sure if we believe, that we were ordained to eternal life?

A. Act. 13.48. And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. 2 These.
2.13. But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you brethren, beloved of
the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth.

Q. What manner of Persons are those, living and dying, who were of old
ordained unto condemnation?

A. Jude. 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. May our Election be known?

A. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure, for if ye do these things ye shall never fall. 2
These. 1.4. Knowing brethren, beloved, your election of God.

Q. Does God elect or choose men out of Grace, and that they might he holy?

A. Romans 11.4, 5, 6. There is a remnant according to the Election of Grace. And
if by Grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more Grace.
Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. 2 These.
2.13. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth.

Q. Are we commanded to believe in the name of the Lord Christ?

A. 1 John 3.23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the
name of his Son Jesus Christ. Joh. 6.29. Jesus answered and said unto them,
This is the word of God, that ye believe on him, whom he has sent.

Q. Have we power of our selves to believe, and to do good works?

A. Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. Phil. 1.29. For unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

Q. Who is the Author and finisher of our Faith?

A. Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, etc.
Mar. 9.24. Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

Q. Seeing we cannot believe and do good works by our own power, may we be
exhorted to both?

A. Phil. 2.12, 13. Wherefore my beloved, as you have always obeyed, etc.
Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling; For it is God which
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

Q. Is there an Almighty power put forth to make us believe?

A. Ephesians. 1.19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power.

Q. Is it our duty to convert and turn to God, etc.?

A. Isa. 1.16, 17. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the opressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Act. 3.19.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.
Joel. 2.12. Turn ye even to me says the Lord with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

Q. Are we able of our selves to turn, or must we pray unto God to turn us?

A. Psalm. 85.4. Turn us O God of our Salvation, and cause thine anger toward
us to cease. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the
Lord my God. 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.

Q. Is the word of God a means or instrument which God uses to convert men?

A. 1 These. 1.5, 6. For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but in power
also, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance: and ye became followers of
us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction with joy of
the Holy Ghost. So v. 9. For they themselves show of us what manner of entering
in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living
and true God.

Q. Is the word a means to work Faith?

A. Romans 10.17. So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God.

Q. Is a man justified partly by Faith, and partly by works?

A. Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, without
the deeds of the Law.

Q. How is that of James chap. 2.24. to be understood?

A. Jam. 2.17, 18. Even so Faith, if it has not works, is dead, being alone,
yea a man may say, Thou have faith, and I have works: show me thy Faith without
thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works, i.e. Faith, that does not
show it self by good works to be alive, is a dead faith.

Q. Shall any that are elected, justified, and sanctified, ever fall wholly, and
finally from Grace?

A. Math. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, etc.
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they shall deceive the very Elect. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of
God, through Faith, unto Salvation. Joh. 10.28, 29. I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand. My Father which gave them me is greater than all: and no man is able to
pluck them out of my Father's hand.

Q. Shall any regenerate person, any child of God, continue in sin, allow
himself to go on customarily in any way of sin and wickedness?

A. 1 John 3.9. Whatsoever is borne of God does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God. Psalm. 139.23,
24. Search me O God, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

Q. Did our Lord Christ dye that sinners being justified, might live as they
list, or that they should live holily, etc.?

A. 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil
sins from the beginning: For this purpose the Son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Act. 3.26. Unto you first, God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities. Luke 1.74, 75. That he would grant unto us,
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life.

Q. Is the Gospel, or the Doctrine of salvation, as it is taught in the
Scriptures, a Doctrine according to Godliness?

A. 1 Timothy 6.3. If a man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according
to godliness. 1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness. Tit. 2.11, 12. For the grace of God, that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

Q. Is any man in this life so perfect, that he is without all sin?

A. 1 John 1.8, 10. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar,
and his word is not in us. 1 Kin. 8.46. If they sin against thee, for there
is no man that sins not, etc. Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin? Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon
earth that does good, and sins not. Jam. 3.2. For in many things we offend
all.

Q. May we know, that if a man prove an Apostate, and fall wholly, and for ever
away, that he was never truly justified and regenerated?

A. 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out,
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Mat. 7.24, 25.
Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a
wise man, which built his house upon a rock; and the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon the house, and it fell not, for
it was founded upon a rock.

Q. Can any man come to Christ except the Father draw him?

A. Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent me,
draw him, and I will raise him up at the Last day.

Q. May we pray to God to draw us?

A. Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into
his chambers.

Q. What Scripture grounds have men to listen after, to prize, to be in love
with the Gospel, and to esteem it as worthy of all acceptance, and so to
hunger and thirst after the good things contained in it?

A. Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief: Howbeit
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth
all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him
to life everlasting. chap. 4.10. For therefore we both labor and suffer
reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men,
specially of those that believe. Joh. 6.37. And him that comes to me I will in
no wise cast out. He. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives, etc.

Q. If a man really hunger and thirst after Christ to be his Savior, and to be
his Sovereign, is he then under any conditional promise?

A. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.

Q. If any man hearing of the God of Israel, that he is a merciful God, and
that he will save some of the chiefest of sinners, and all that being weary and
heavy laden with the burden of their sins, coming unto him, do thereupon come,
and lay himself as a beggar at a rich man's door, and wait there as the Cripple
at the Pool of Bethesda, and ask, and seek, and knock for mercy and grace,
has he then any promise of being heard?

A. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. chap. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Is. 55.1, 3. Ho! every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy,
and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. Incline
your ear and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Deuteronomy. 4.29. But
if from thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him; if thou
seek him with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. Rev. 22.17. and the
Spirit and the bride say come, and let him that hears say come, and let him
that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let him take of the water of life
freely.

Q. May we pore upon predestination, and look, to see our names written in the
book of life, before we set our faces and hearts to look after a Savior, the
Lord Christ?

A. Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those
things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we
may do all the words of this Law. 1 John 3.23. And this is his commandment
that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.

Q. Is there any ground to stay the soul upon, if it seek after the true
knowledge and fear of God, that it shall find it?

A. Prove. 2.3, 4.5. Yea if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for understanding. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for hid treasures. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
find the knowledge of God.

Q. If Judas had repented and believed should he have been saved?

A. Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that, whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Q. If Peter had never repented and believed, should he have been saved?

A. Joh. 3.18. -- But he that believes not is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. verse. 36. He
that believes not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on
him.

Q. What if a man had a revelation from heaven that he should be saved, might
we say, that Except he believed, and repented, and walked holily, he could not
be saved? what says the Scripture?

A. Act. 27.31. Except these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved compared with
verse. 23, 24. There stood by me this night the Angel of God -- saying, fear
not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo! God has given thee all
them that sail with thee.

Q. What if a Prophet should come and tell thee, yet 10, or 20, or 40 days and
thou should dye, and be damned; if thou should thereupon turn unto the
Lord with all thy heart, and believe in the Lord Christ, should thou be
saved?

A. Jer. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and pull down, and to destroy it. If that
nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil; I will repent
of the evil that I thought to do unto them. Matthew. 11.23. If the mighty
works that have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day. Is. 38.1, 2, 5. -- Thus says the Lord, Set thine
house in order: for thou shall dye, and not live. Then Hezekiah turned his face
toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord; Go and say to Hezekiah, thus says
the Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears: Behold I will add unto thy days 15 years. Jonah. 3.4, 10.

Q. Shall any man be condemned at the last day because he could not, or because
he would not come unto Christ, but put the Gospel away from him?

A. Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not. Joh. 5.40. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

Q. May a man be fully assured of his Salvation?

A. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens.

Q. Will Assurance make Saints Libertines in their lives?

A. Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much: but to
whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

Q. Is Assurance inconsistent with a filial, reverentiall, obedientiall fear
of the divine majesty?

A. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. Psalm.
2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

Q. What is the true meaning of that place. 1 John 4.18?

A. Either perfect love casts out all slavish base fear, or if we love
Christ in sincerity, and with all our souls, we shall not through fear deny
him, but confess him before men, although they persecute us for his names sake.

Q. May true Faith consist with some doubting?

A. Mat. 14.31. O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

Q. Ought not Christians so to rejoice always in God, as yet to be sorry for
their sins, and to weep with them that weep? Are these things inconsistent,
Sorrow and Joy?

A. 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. So chap. 7.9. Now I
rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to Repentance: for
ye were made sorry after a godly manner. Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

Q. Shall men who live in gross sins without Repentance and Reformation ever
come to heaven?

A. 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, etc. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God.

Q. Are we commanded to make us a new heart, and a new Spirit?

A. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye
have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye
dye O house of Israel? for I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says the Lord God: wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Q. Has God any where promised that he will do this for us?

A. Jer. 24.7. And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord,
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: For they shall return
unto me with their whole heart. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put
my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep
my judgments and do them.

Cap. 12. Of Prayer.
Q. IS prayer a means to obtain these spiritual blessings at God's hands?

A. Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me. Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.

Q. May we call upon an unregenerate man to repent and pray?

A. Act. 8.22, 23. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee: For I perceive that thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

Q. Is there any hopes that God will hear the prayer of an unregenerate man,
can you give an instance in Scripture of God's hearing an unregenerate man's
prayer?

A. 2 King. 13.2, 4. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord,
and followed the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin,
he departed not therefrom. And Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord
hearkened unto him: For he saw the oppression of Israel, because the King of
Syria oppressed them.

Q. What means then John. 9.31?

A. By a sinner may here be understood a grievous Sinner, such as an Impostor
and open Sabbath-breaker: compare that text with Luke 7.37, 39. If a man be an
Atheistical, notorious, profane wretch or an Impostor, and go on to sin
presumtuously, saying, God is with him, God uses not to hear such an one, so
as to work miracles at his prayer or entreaty, so as to cure one that was born
blind: But yet he that hears the cry of the young Ravens, and is found of
those men sometimes that seek him not; may if he please, and sometimes does
hear and answer the prayer of an unregenerate person.

I no where read that it is an abominatio^ to God for an unregenerate man to
pray for Grace: the sacrifice of the wicked is said indeed to be an abomination
to the Lord, as (...), but if God put it into a man's heart, if he prepare his
heart to pray for peace with God and sanctifying or regenerating grace from
God, I think it is not impossible he should prepare his ear to hear: he has
not said, he would not hear, it is not necessary he should stop his ears to
such prayers. And as for Prove. 28.9. I say it proves, God will not ordinarily
hear profane, obstinate and presumtuous Sinners when they are in necessity or
distress, but yet he may notwithstanding hear the prayer of an Unregenerate
Person when he prays to have his law written in his heart, he may not hear one
that has no grace when he prays for gold, but yet may hear him when he
prays for Grace.

Chap. 13. Of Marriage.
Q. ARE the Laws formerly delivered by Moses concerning Marriage, so
abolished, that now a man may marry to his near kindred?

A. Mat. 14.3, 4. For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him
in prison, for Herodias sake, his brother Philip's wife. For John said unto
him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.

Q. In what case is divorce lawful?

A. Mat. 5.32. Whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of
Fornication, causes her to commit Adultery. Romans 7.2. For the woman, which
has an Husband, is bound by the law to her husband, so long as he lives.

Q. Are second Marriages lawful?

A. Romans 7.3. -- But if her Husband be dead, she is free from that Law, so that
she is no Adulteress, though she be married to another man.

Chap. 14. Of Mothers nursing their own children.
Q. DID good women of old time nurse their own children?

A. Psalm. 131.2. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child, that is
weaned of his Mother. Genesis 21.7. And he said, who would have said unto Abraham,
that Sarah should have given children suck?

Q. Did ever any Queen or Noble person nurse her own child?

A. Can. 8.1. compared with chap. 1.1. The song of songs, which is Solomon's. O
that thou were as my Brother, ^^^at sucked the breasts of my mother. 1 Kin.
11.20. And the Sister of Tahpenes bare him Jenubath his Son, whom Tahpenes
weaned in Pharaoh's house. Genesis 23.6. compared with 21.7. Hear us my Lord,
thou art a mighty Prince amongst us. And he said, who would have said unto
Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck?

Q. Was it reputed a curse or punishment for women to have dry breasts?

A. Hosea. 9.14. Give them, O Lord: what will thou give? give them a
miscarrying womb, and dry breasts.

Q. Shall a mother who is a nurse be dispensed with all, from some outward acts
of piety, from doing of which she is hindered by that means or occasion?

A. 1 Samuel 1.21, 22, 23. And the man Elkanah and all his house, went up to
offer unto the Lord the early sacrifice and his vow: But Hanah went not up; for
she said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be weaned, and
then I will bring him that he may appear before the Lord, and there abide for
ever. And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seems thee good, tarry
until thou have weaned him, only the Lord establish his word: so the woman
abode, and gave her Son suck until she weaned him.

Chap. 15. Of Women's painting themselves.
Q. IS the face the chief part, by which we are commonly known one to another?

A. Galath. 1.22. And was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea, which
were in Christ.

Q. Is the face one of our comely parts, which has no need, as others, of any
superadded honor?

A. 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. And those members of the body, which we think to be less
honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant honor, and our uncomely parts
have more abundant comeliness. For our comely parts have no need, but God has
tempered the body together, having given more abundant honor to that part
which lacked.

Q. Did lewd Women use to paint?

A. Ezekiel. 23.40. And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far,
unto whom a messenger was sent, and lo they came, for whom thou did wash thy
self, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thy self with ornaments.

Q. Was that Queen a good or a wicked Woman, who stood in a window painting her
self, when Jehu came to Jezreel?

A. 2 Kings. 9.30. And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it, and
she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.

Q. Were the daughters of men, in the old world, really fair, that the Sons of
God were so taken with their beauty, or did they paint, and so only seem
beautiful?

A. Genesis 6.2. The Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fair,
and they took them wives, etc.

Q. Were Job's three Daughters naturally fair, or were they painted so?

A. Job. 42.15. And in all the land were no women found so fair as the
Daughters of Job.

Q. Was it usual for the Blackamore to chang his skin by painting it white,
any more than for the Leopard to chang his spots? or was it usual for men to
change their hair white or black from it is natural color?

A. Jerem. 13.23. Can the Ethyopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
Mat. 5.36. Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black.

Q. Is it probable that Christ was naturally of a beautiful countenance, that
the Son of David was like David, yea fairer then the children of men?

A. Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than the children of men, grace is powered into
thy lips. Cant. 5.10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand.

Q. Was our Savior's countenance much marred by reason of sorrows and
sufferings, that he seemed older than he was, and not so lovely as he was
before?

A. Isa. 53.2. -- He has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him.

Q. When Christ's countenance was so marred, did he recover his complexion and
beauty by art? or when our Savior's countenance was transfigured, and made
outwardly glorious, was it done by any art of man, and did that brightness of
his countenance continue?

A. Mat. 17.1, 2, 9. And after six days Jesus takes Peter, James, and John
his brother, and brings them up into an high mountain apart, and was
transfigured before them, and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment
was white as the light: And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged
them saying, tell the vision to no man, until etc.

Q. Do we find Vermilion, or the paint, amongst all the store and furniture,
for ornament and bravery, which the delicate dames of Judah had in the days of
the Prophet Isaiah?

A. No: Isa. 3.18. to the 24. In that day, the Lord will take away the bravery
of their trinckling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their
round tires like the moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the head-bands, and the
tablets, and the earrings, the rings and nose-jewels, the changeable suits of
apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses,
and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vailes.

Q. How did religious women of old time adorn or beautify themselves? did they
paint to gain or keep the affections of their husbands?

A. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Whose adorning let it not be the outward adorning, of
plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: but
let it be the hidden man of the heart -- For after this manner in old time the
holy women also who trusted in God adorned themselves.

Q. Is it probable that Christian women, to whom the Apostle Peter wrote, or
concerning whom the Apostle Paul wrote to Timothy, did use painting, as well as
gold and silver and plaiting the hair?

A. 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting
the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel. 1 Timoth.
2.9. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefastness and sobriety, not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly array.

If painting had been used then by Christian women, that had been liable to
have been abused too, and if so, it is not improbable that the Apostles would
have mentioned it, as well as other things wherein were excess. Q. Would it be
better for a religious Woman to come into the Congregation veiled or painted?

A. 1 Corinthians. 11.5. But every woman that prays or prophesies with her head
uncovered, dishonors her head: for that is even all one as if she were
shaven.

Q. Is it expedient for a religious woman to paint?

A. Philip. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

Q. Were common Harlots usually known, or distinguished from sober and modest
women by their clothes or outward Garb?

A. Prove. 7.10. And behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an Harlot,
and subtle of heart.

Q. In case religious women should not be dissuaded from painting, would it not
be expedient that they should do it either with other colors, or in some
other manner then lewd women use to do; that so they might be known to be
honest and modest women?

A. Romans 12.2. And be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, etc.

Q. Will painting or auxiliary beauty certainly, and continually win, or
conquer others affections?

A. See Jerem. 4.30. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? though thou
clothest thy self with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of
gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting; in vain shall thou make thy
self fair; thy Lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.

Q. What is the best means for a woman to have and hold her husbands
affections? is not the fear of God, and meek and discreet carriage toward her
husband?

A. Prove. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that
fears the Lord she shall be praised. 1 Pet. 3.1, 3, 4. Likewise ye wives be
in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also
may without the word be won by the conversatio^ of the wives, whose adorning
let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of
gold, or of putting on of apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the heart,
in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.
Pr. 11.22.

Q. Had the Virgins who were prepared for, and presented to Ahasuerus any
paint, as well as perfumes, allowed them?

A. Esther. 2.12. Now when every Maids turn was come to go into King
Ahasuerus, after that she had been 12 months, 6 months with oil of myrrh,
and six months with sweet odours, and with other things for the purifying of
the women.

Q. But does not the Scripture say Psalm. 104.15. And wine that makes glad the
heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine. And Eccles. 9.8. Let thy
garments be always white, and let thy head lack no ointment.

A. In those Eastern hot countries they did use oil frequently to anoint
themselves withal, possibly to make their skin smooth and clear, free from
being too much dried and parched, and so wrinkled before 'its time, and to
make them have a cheerful countenance; they took oil perhaps inwardly, and
they used it outwardly, anointing their heads, and perhaps their faces too for
the purposes aforesaid, and it may be too, to perfume themselves, and this was
the practice of men, and of good men too. 2 Samuel 12.20. Of David.

And we read that one powered out a box of precious ointment on our Savior, and
was commended for it.

This use of oil was common to men, but who ever heard of a man's face laid in
oil colors? of such a picture of a man you may have heard.

The Picts I suppose painted their whole bodies, see Camde^. If of natural
surely of auxiliary beauty we may take up that saying, favor is deceitful,
and beauty is vain, etc. Prove. 31.30.

Q. Should Christians do well to conform themselves to the modest fashions of
good people where they dwell?

A. See 1 Cor. 11.16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. 1 Pe. 3.3, 4, 5. Whose adorning, let it
not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or
of putting on of apparel. But let it be the hidden man of the heart. -- For
after this manner in old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned
themselves.

Q. Is it not fitting by any art to paint, or counterfeit the fruit of
repentance, or to hide, or hinder the evidence of it in our countenance Is it
then expedient to paint our faces?

A. Ezrah 9.5, 6. And at the evening sacrifice, I arose up from my heaviness,
and having rent my garment, and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread out
my hands unto the Lord my God, and said, O! my God, I am ashamed, and blush to
lift up my face to thee, my God, Jer. 6.15. and chap. 8.12.

Q: If a woman have no evil intention, or design in painting her face, or in
going with naked breasts, does that certainly free her from all fault, blame,
and punishment for her so doing, in case this be an occasion of sin and fall to
others, that behold her?

A. 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while
the world stands. Exodus 21.33.

Chap. 16. Of Children, with respect to holy things.
Q. DID ever God make a Covenant with Parents and their children, so as that
the children being yet Infants were involved and interested in the covenant
with their parents?

A. Genesis 17.7, 8. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God
unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan,
for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God.

Q. Did God ever ordain any seals of his Covenant, and that the children so
in Covenant, whilst Infants, should be sealed with the seal of the Covenant?

A. Genesis 17.10, 11, 12. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and
you, and thy seed after thee: every man-child among you shall be circumcised.
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of
the Covenant betwixt me and you. And he that is 8 days old shall be
circumcised among you, every man-child in your generations, etc.

Q. Is there by Christ's appointment any other new seal now to be administered
in place of the old? And is Baptism now to be administered in the room of
circumcision?

A. Gal. 5.2. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised Christ
shall profit you nothing. Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Col. 2.11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ; Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen
with him through the faith of the operation of God.

Q. Are any now to be admitted to any seal of the Covenant, who were formerly
excluded?

A. Act. 8.12. But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning
the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men
and women.

Q. Has Christ any where excluded Infants under the Gospel, either from the
Covenant, or the signs and seals of it? or has our Lord expressed good will
and Affections to them, declaring his will to have little ones brought to him?

A. Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. Then there were brought unto him little children, that
he should put his hands on them, and pray; and the disciples rebuked them. But
Jesus said, suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me, for of
such is the Kingdom of heaven. And he laid his hands on them, and departed
thence. Mar. 10.16. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them,
and blessed them.

Q. Are believing Gentiles concerned in the Covenant and promises made to the
Patriarks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and David?

A. Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 13, 14. Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith,
the same are the children of Abraham. And the Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then, they which be
of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, etc. that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ: that we might receive the promise of the spirit through
Faith.

Q. Do Believers, Jews and Gentiles, make up one Church, and one body,
whereof Christ is Savior and head?

A. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who has made both one,
and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us. chap. 4.4. There
is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling.

Q. Are believing Gentiles ingrafted into the same olive, out of which the
unbelieving Jews were cut off?

A. Romans 11.17, 18, 24. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou
being a wild olive tree were grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest
of the root and fatness of the Olive tree, Boast not against the branches --
For if thou were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were
grafted contrary to nature into a good Olive tree: how much more shall these,
which be the natural branches, be grafted into their own Olive tree?

Q. Were Infants with their Parents ever so much as figuratively baptized?

A. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. -- All our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed
through the Sea, And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea,
compared with Exodus 10.24. -- Let your little ones also go with you. Number.
14.31. But your little ones which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring
in, etc.

Q. Did God enter into a Covenant not only with grown men and women, but with
little ones also?

A. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God
your captains of your tribes, your Elders, and your officers, with all the men
of Israel, your little ones, your wives, etc. That thou should enter into
Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy God
makes with thee this day.

Q. May we lawfully engage children with us in holy duties?

A. Joel. 2.16. Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the
Elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts, etc.

Q. May we teach or instruct children in the meaning of holy ordinances, or
Institutions?

A. Exodus 12.26, 27. When your children shall say unto you, what mean you by
this service? ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord's Passover, who
passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt. etc. Josh. 4.6, 7.
That when your children ask their Fathers in time to come, saying, what mean
you by these stones? Then ye shall answer them, that the waters of Jordan were
cut off before the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, when it passed over
Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off.

Q. Did our Lord Christ ever make use of any significant rite, or ceremony, to,
or upon children, and accompany the same with Prayer?

A: Mark. 10.13, 16. And they brought young children to him, that he should
touch them, and his disciples rebuked those that brought them: And he took them
up in his Arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

Q. Were ever any children dedicated, or consecrated unto God from the womb?

A. 1 Samuel 1.27, 28. For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my
petition, which I asked of him: Therefore also have I lent him to the Lord; as
long as he lives, he shall be lent to the Lord. Chap. 3.1. And the child
Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli. Judge. 13.5. For lo, thou shall
conceive, and bear a Son, and no rasour shall come on his head, for the child
shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb.

Q. Did the Holy Ghost ever sanctify any child from the womb? or did ever any
Infant receive the Holy Ghost?

A. Luke 1.15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord -- and he shall
be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his Mothers womb.

Chap. 17. Of Baptism.
Q. IS Baptism with water to be used as an ordinary means of Salvation?

A. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. -- And lo, I am
with you always even unto the end of the world. Tit. 3.5. -- According to his
mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost. 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto even Baptism does also now save
us, etc. Act. 2.38, 41. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the
same day there were added unto the^ about 3000 souls. Act. 22.16. And now why
tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord.

Q. What if a man believe, and have the spirit, is it to any end to baptize him?

A. Act. 8.36, 37, 38. And the Eunuch said, See here is water, what does hinder
me to be baptized? And Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart,
thou may. And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus is the Son of God.
-- And they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he
baptized him. Act. 10.47, 48. Can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we: And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

Q. May those whom Christ sends forth to preach, also Baptize?

A. Math. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to
observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world.

Q. Did John Baptist baptize of his own head? or the baptism of John was it
from heaven? did God send him to baptize with water?

A. Joh. 1.33. And I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with water,
the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit descending, and
remaining on him, the same is he, which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

Q. Did John baptize in his own name, or in the name of Christ the Messiah?

A. Act. 19.4. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which
should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

Q. Is preaching or baptizing the chief work to be attended?

A. 1 Cor. 1.14, 17. I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and
Gaius. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

Q. Is Baptism a way and mean of admitting disciples or scholars to Christ?

A. Math. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Act. 2.41. Then they
that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were added
unto the^ about 3000 souls. Joh. 4.1, 2. When the Lord knew how the Pharisees
had heard that Jesus made and baptized mo disciples than John (though Jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples) Act. 19.4. John verily baptized with
the baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on
him, which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

Q. Is it a Scripture argument or motive to be Baptized, because the promise
belongs to us?

A. Act. 2.39. For the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Q. Does the promise belong to the children of believing parents?

A. Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says
not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one: And to thy seed which is Christ.

Q. Are those who have received the Holy Ghost, capable of Baptism?

A. See Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we?

Q. Is there any difference 'twixt the children of believing parents, and of
heathens, or Infidels?

A. See 1 Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy, see Galath. 2.15. See Romans 11.16.

Q. Has God any praise or glory from babes and sucklings?

A. Psalm. 8.2. compared with Math. 21.15, 16. Out of the mouth of Babes and
sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger. And when the chief Priests and
Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the
Temple, and saying* Hosanna to the Son of David, they were sore displeased; And
said unto him, Hear thou what these say? And Jesus says unto them, yea;
have ye never read, Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou have perfected
praise?

Q. Was it ever the custom of the Jews according to Gods own command to
present Infants to the Lord at his Temple or place of public worship?

A. Luke 2.22, 23. And when the day of her purification, according to the Law
of Moses, were accomplished they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to
the Lord. As it is written in the Law of the Lord, every male that opens the
womb shall be called holy to the Lord.

Chap. 18. Of time for public worship.
Q. DID ever God require any set day weekly for his worship, and service?

A. Exodus 20.8, 9, 10. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days
shall thou labor and do all thy work: But the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God.

Q. Had our Lord Christ power to alter the weekly Sabbath from the seventh day
of the week to the first?

A. Luke 6.5. And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the
Sabbath.

Q. Was the first day of the week observed a day of meeting of Christians for
the worship of God by the primitive Christians?

A. Joh. 20.19, 26. Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the
week, when the doors were shut, where the disciples were assembled for fear
of the Jews, came Jesus, etc. And after eight days again his disciples were
within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, etc. Act. 20.7. And upon the
first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul
preached unto them. 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week let every one
of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come.

Q. What day was it when the Apostle John was in the spirit?

A. Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a
great voice, as of a trumpet.

Q. Were the Jewish Sabbaths shadows of things to come, and to end in Christ?

A. Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are
a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

Q. Are the prayers and Administrations of the Elders of the Church more
desirable than of others?

A. Jam. 5.14. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with the oil in the name of
the Lord.

Q. Is it lawful for Christians, delivered from the Jewish observation of
days, to have a set day, or time, appointed for any duty?

A. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Now concerning the collection for the Saints -- upon the
first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.

Q. Should Christians Assemble themselves together to worship God?

A. Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves togeither, as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another, etc. 1 Cor. 11.20, 33, 34. When
ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's
supper. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. And if any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come not together
unto condemnation.

Q. Is there to be teaching in the Church, when the Church meets?

A. 1 Cor. 14.19, 28. Yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue. But if there be no Interpreter let him keep silence
in the Church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.

Q. Are women to be public teachers in the Church?

A. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. But I
suffer not a woman to teach -- but to be in silence. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Let your
women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak.
And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it
is a shame for women to speak in the Church.

Q. Does 1 Cor. 11.5. Philip. 4.2, 3. Joel. 2.28. Do all these together
authorize Women to be public teachers in the Church of the Saints?

A. Prophesying may perhaps be found taken three ways in Scripture: first for
foretelling things to come, by an extraordinary spirit, and so we read of
Huldah a Prophetess, and Deborah in the Old Testament, and of Anna in the New.

2ly. For singing, or framing, or both, of Psalms, Hymns, or spiritual
songs, and so I suppose the word is taken 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 2. And so both Miriam
and Deborah prophesied, and perhaps Women did so too in the Church of Corinth,
whilst they had the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.

3ly. For teaching, and instructing, by expounding and applying some part or
portion of God's word, and I dare not say, because of those Scriptures above
named, that it was never lawful for Women to teach in the Christian Church;
namely, whilst those extraordinary gifts lasted and they were not prohibited by
the Apostle Paul: but I dare not embolden a Woman to be a public teacher in
the Church.

Q. Do we read of a Woman, who pretended her self a Prophetess, and would
have this pre-eminence to be a teacher of others in the Church, who did really
seduce Christians?

A. Revelat. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because
thou suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls herself a Prophetess, to
teach, and to seduce my servants to commit fornication.

Q. May a Woman teach her children at home the Principles or mysteries of
religion?

A. Prove. 31.1. etc. The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother
taught him. Prove. 1.8. My Son -- forsake not the law of thy Mother. So chap.
6.20.

Q. May not Women as well teach authoritatively in the Church, as Govern in a
Commonwealth?

A. See Isa. 49.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
nursing Mothers. etc.

Q. If a crown be her Patrimony descending to her by inheritance, in the want
of sons, querie why she may not inherit? and whether the French Salique law,
forbidding women to inherit the Crown, be contained in Scripture?

A. Jos. 17.4. And they came near before Eleazar the Priest, and before Joshua
the Son of Nun, and before the Princes, saying, The Lord commanded Moses to
give us an inheritance among our brethren: therefore according to the
commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of
their Father. Job. 42.15. -- And their Father gave them an inheritance among
their brethren.

Chap. 19. Of an Oath.
Q. MAY we swear at all?

A. Heb. 6.16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife. 2 Cor. 1.23. Moreover, I call God
for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth.

Q. Must we swear by the Creator?

A. Is. 65.16. -- He that swears in the earth, shall swear by the God of
truth. Jer. 4.2. And thou shall swear, the Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment,
and in Righteousness.

Q. May we not swear by our Lady, our Faith, or Troth, and such like oaths?,

A. Mat. 5.34, 35, 36. Swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne: nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it
is the city of the great King: Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because
thou can not make one hair white or black. Jam. 5.12. But above all things
my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any
other oath.

Q. What think you of that expression, As I live, is it God's oath? should we
swear, As we live, or As the Lord lives?

A. Ezekiel. 17.19. Thus says the Lord, As I live, surely mine oath that he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head. Romans 14.11. For it is written, As I live says the Lord, every
knee shall bow down, and every tongue shall confess to God.

Q. What ceremony is it fittest then to use in swearing, Kissing the book, or
lifting the hand up to heaven?

A. Rev. 10.5, 6. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the
earth, lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and
ever, who created Heaven, etc.

Q. Does one maine end of an oath yet continue?

A. Yes. Hebr. 6.16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for
confirmation is to them an end of all strife.

Q. If a man swear to bind his soul under a curse to sin against God,
either by omitting what is his duty to do, or by committing or doing what God
forbids, is he bound to keep that oath?

A. No. 1 Samuel 25.22. compared with 32. and 33. So and more also do God unto
the enemies of David, If I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning
light any that pisseth against the wall. And David said to Abigail, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy
Advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand.

Q. Does Math. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. James. 5.12. Forbid and condemn as utterly
unlawful all oaths, though in weighty matters, and before a lawful
Magistrate?

A. No, those Scriptures condemn rash customary swearing, particularly by the
Creatures; and imply, the one, that in ordinary speech we should content our
selves with simple affirmations and negations; and the other perhaps may imply
farther, that our affirmations and negations should be plain, and sure grounded
on a mere truth: that with us there should not be yea and nay, but that as
there is yea in our promise, so there should be yea in our performance: we
should be as good as our word. Consider first, that the third commandment
forbids taking God's name in vain, and not simply the taking up of his name.
2ly. That an oath is the end of strife. 3ly. That the Apostle Paul calls God to
witness, 2 Cor. 1.23.

Chap. 20. Of burial of the dead.
Q. WHERE did the Lord's people of old use to bury their dead, did they bury
sometimes in a cave in a field, sometimes in a garden, and sometimes in the
city?

A. Genesis 25.9. And his Sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the Cave
Machpelah, in the field of Ephron. Joh. 19.41, 42. Now in the place where he
was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulcher, wherein
was never man yet laid: There laid they Jesus etc. 1 King. 2.10. So David slept
with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David.

Q. Have godly people taken care of their burial, and especially to be buried
in the sepulchers of their Fathers?

A. Genesis 49.29, 31. I am to be gathered unto my people, bury me with my
Fathers, in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite. There they
buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebeckah his
wife; and there I buried Leah.

Q. Was it a part of the Priest's office under the Law to bury the dead?

A. Number. 19.11. He that touches the dead body of any man shall be unclean
seven days. Lev. 21.1, 2, 10, 11. Speak unto the Priests, the Sons of Aaron,
and say unto the^, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people;
But for his kin that is near unto him etc. And he that is the High Priest
among his brethren -- shall not uncover his head, nor rent his clothes,
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his Father,
or for his Mother.

Q. Has Christ laid his commands on the Ministers of the Gospel to bury the
dead?

A. Luke 9.60. Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead; but go thou
and preach the Kingdom of God.

Q. Is it lawful for a minister to take occasion from Providence, and the
opportunity of the peoples meeting, to preach, or give a word of Exhortation,
preaching to their ears, as God does th^^ to their eyes?

A, Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver. 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine. Luke 14.15, 16.
And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said
unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. Then said
he unto him, A certain man made a great supper etc.

Q. Is it lawful to make a funeral oration, or Elegies for the dead?

A. 2 Samuel 1.71, 19. And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and
over Jonathan his son. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places, how
are the mighty fallen, etc. So verse. 23. Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided; they were
swifter than Eagles, they were stronger than Lions. 2 Chr. 35.25. And Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah
in their lamentations to this day etc.

Chap. 21. Of Angels, and particularly of Evil Angels.
Q. WERE the Angels, the inhabitants of heaven, created as well as men, and
things on earth?

A. Col. 1.16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, or
principalities, or powers; all things were created by him and for him.

Q. Have Angels bodies, or are they Spirits?

A. Heb. 1.7. And of the Angels he says, Who makes his Angels Spirits, and
his Ministers a flame of fire.

Q. Did some of the Angels sin, and so fall from their first happy state
wherein God made them?

A. 2 Pet. 2.4. For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them
down into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved
unto judgment. --

Q. What is the present, and what shall be the future state and condition of
those Angels which fell?

A. Jude 6. And the Angels, which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto
the judgment of the great day. Mat. 25.41, 46. And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels:

Q. If the Devil should appear to a man in a visible shape, would it be our
wisdom to speak to him, and confer with him, if he speak to us?

A. Genesis 3.2, 13. And the woman said unto the Serpent, we may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden. -- The Serpent beguiled me.

Q. Are there Devils and Witches?

A. Luke 8.30. And Jesus asked him, saying, what is thy name? And he said,
Legion, because many Devils were entered into him. 1 Samuel 28.3, 7. -- And Saul
had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
Then said Saul unto his Servants, seek me a woman that has a familiar spirit,
that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him,
Behold, there is a woman that has a familiar spirit at Endor.

Q. Is it possible that a godly man, or woman, should be possessed bodily of
the Devil, or obsessed, that is, have any part or member possessed by him?

A. Luke 13.16. And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom
Satan has bound lo these 18 years, be loosed etc.

Q. Is it possible there should be any places haunted with evil spirits?

A. Rev. 18.2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird.

Q. What would you advise to do to keep our houses from being so haunted?

A. Ps. 30. Preface, A psalm and song at the dedication of the house of David.
Compared with 1 Timothy 4.5. For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

Q. What means would you have us use to expel, or drive out the Devils out of
our persons or houses possessed?

A. Mar. 9.29. This kind can come forth by nothing but by prayer and fasting.

Q. May a man when he has losses, or is sick, or has his house haunted with
evil spirits, go or send to wise men, or Star-gazers, wizards, or Conjurers
for help?

A. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12. There shall not be found among you any one that makes
his Son or his Daughter pass through the fire, or that uses divination, or an
observer of times, or an Inchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consulter
with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a Necromancer; for all that do these
things are an abomination unto the Lord. Is. 47.13, 14. Let now the
Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save
thee from these things, that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as
stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the
power of the flame.

Q. May we without a good call or necessity live or lodge in such places?

A. Psalm. 91.11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways. Mat. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Chap. 22. Of Ministers.
Q DID ever God appoint men to minister to him in, and about holy things?

A. Yes. Ex. 28.1. And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his Sons with
him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the
Priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's Sons.

Q. Were the Priests of old called God's Ministers?

A. Yes. Jer. 33.21. Then may also my Covenant be broken with David my servant,
that he should not have a Son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites,
the Priests, my Ministers. Joel. 1.9. The meat offering, and the drink offering
is cut off from the house of the Lord; the Priests, the Lord's Ministers,
mourn.

Q. Did our Lord Jesus, the high Priest of our profession, the great or chief
Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, did he ordain any men, and send them forth
to preach?

A. Yes. Mar. 3.14. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and
that he might send them forth to preach.

Q. Did he call these 12 Preachers Apostles?

A. Yea. Luke 6.13. And when it was day he called unto him his Disciples, and
of them he chose twelve, whom also he named Apostles. Math. 10.2. And now the
names of the twelve Apostles are these, the first Simon, who is called Peter,
etc.

Q. Did Christ never send any to preach but the twelve Apostles, did not he
also send 70 disciples?

A. Yes. Luke 10.1, 9, 16. After these things the Lord appointed other 70 also,
and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he
himself would come. And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, the
Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that
sent me.

Q. But were not these all the followers of Christ, had he any that believed on
him besides the 12. and the 70?

A. Yea. 1 Cor. 15.6. After that he was seen of above 500 brethren at once.

Q. Did the Apostles give power to others to ordain Elders?

A. Yes. Tit. 1.15. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should
set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as
I had appointed thee. 2 Timothy 2.2. And the things that thou have heard of me
among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able
to teach others also.

Q. Are Preachers of the Gospel to be called and accounted Ministers of
Christ, or of the State?

A. 2 Cor. 11.23. Are they Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more.
1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God. Col. 4.17.

Q. But ought not Ministers to be of some other calling beside, must not they
necessarily work at some trade on the week days, and preach on the Lord's day?

A. No. 1 Cor. 9.6. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear
working? Matthew. 4.20. And they straight way left their nets, and so followed
him. So verse. 22. And they immediately left the ship and their father, and
followed him.

Q. If Ministers do not work etc. How shall they live or be maintained?

A. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things
live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Let the Elders
that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the word and Doctrine: For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the
Ox that treads out the corn: and the Labourer is worthy of his reward.

Q. What, may ministers take wages or hire for their preaching?

A. Mat. Yes. 10.9, 10. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your
purses, nor skrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet
staves (for the workman is worthy of his meat) 2 Cor. 11.8. I robbed other
Churches, taking wages of them to do you service. 2 King. 8.9. So Hazael went
to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus,
forty Camels burden, and came and stood before him, etc. 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes
a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not
of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock?

Q. Did our Lord Jesus Christ ever receive any thing while he went up and down
preaching?

A. Yes. Luke 8.3. And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's Steward, and many
others, which ministered unto him of their substance.

Q. Did the Church of old ordain officers with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition
of hands?

A. Yes. Act. 6.3, 5, 6. Wherefore brethren look ye out among you seven men of
honest report, full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over
this business. And the saying pleased the whole multitude; and they chose
Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, etc. whom they
set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on
them. 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee
by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. So chap. 5.22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. 2 Timothy
1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God
which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

Q. Did the Apostle Paul labor in his calling always, and in all places
preach gratis; or did he take hire or wages of some Churches, although he
preached freely among the Corinthians?

A. 2 Cor. 11.8. I robbed other Churches, taking wages of them to do you
service.

Q. Was that commandment of Christ to the Apostles, Mat. 10.9, 10. only
temporary, or perpetual? was it only for the first expedition, and afterward
reversed by the same power that made it?

A. Yea. Lu. 22.35, 36. And he said unto them, when I sent you without purse,
and skrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. Then said
he unto them, But now he that has a purse let him take it, and likewise his
scrip; and he that has no sword let him sell his garment, and buy one.

Q. How did godly ones of old carry themselves to the Prophets of the Lord?

A. 1 King. 18.3, 4. Now Obadiah feared the Lord greatly: For it was so when
Jezebel cut off the Prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an 100 Prophets,
and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.

Q. How did Idolaters carry themselves to their Priests?

A. 1 King. 18.19. Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto Mount
Carmel, and the Prophets of Baal 450, and the Prophets of the groves 400, which
eat at Jezebels table.

Q. Did God provide for those that fed any of his Prophets?

A. Yes. 1 King. 17.15, 16. And she went and did according to the saying of
Elijah; and she, and he, and her house did eat many days, and the barrel of
meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of
the Lord, which he spoke by Elijah.

Q. Was it the custom of the Nations in extremity to sell the Priest's portion?

A No. Genesis 47.22. Only the land of the Priests bought he not: for the Priests
had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh
gave them, wherefore they sold not their lands.

Q. How did the Saints of the new Testament entertain the Preachers of the
Gosple?

A. Gal. 4.14, 15. And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor
rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. I bear you
record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes,
and have given them unto me.

Q. Were tithes ever given or received any other way, then by virtue of the
Leviticall law?

A. Yes. He. 7.1, 2, 9. For this Melcheisedeck, King of Salem, Priest of the
most high God, who met Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and
blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all. And as I may so
say, Levi also, who receives tithes, paid tithes in Abraham.

Q. May a Son or Daughter of Abraham without sin pay tithes, or shall not a
man subject his neck to the yoke of legal ceremonies, in case he pay tithes?

A. Heb. 7.1, 2. For this Melchisedeck etc. Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in
the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things.

Q. Were tithes first paid to the Priesthood of Aaron, or to him, of whose
order Christ was a Priest?

A. Heb. 7.1, 2. For this Melchisedeck, King of Salem, Priest of the most high
God, who met Abraham, returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed
him: to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all. Heb. 5.5, 6.

Q. Suppose a man think himself not bound by the law of God or man, may a man
lawfully pay that, from which he is free by right, provided that he be not
bound by oath to the contrary?

A. Mat. 17.25, 26, 27. What think thou Simon, of whom do the Kings of the
earth take custom or tribute? of their own children or of strangers? Peter
says unto him, Of strangers: Jesus says unto him, the^ are the children free:
notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the Sea etc. That give
for thee and me.

Q. May a Minister lawfully have a set manitenance?

A. 1 Timothy. 5.17, 18. compared with Math. 20.1, 2. Luke 10.7. Let the Elders
that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the word and Doctrine. For the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzle the
Ox that treads out the corn: and the Labourer is worthy of his reward. For
the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out
early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. And when he had
agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

Q. Is it lawful to preach in a Pulpit?

A. Neh. 8.4. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of wood, which they had
made for the purpose etc.

Q. Is it lawful to read in the book of the Lord, although no exposition
immediately follow?

A. Jer. 36.6. Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou have
written from my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people in the
Lord's house upon the fasting day: and also thou shall read them in the ears
of all Judah, that come out of their cities.

Q. Is it lawful to read and expound in the Congregation, or make them to
understand what is read?

A. Neh. 8.8. So they read in the book, in the law of God distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. Act. 28.23. -- to whom he
expounded, and testified the Kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus,
both out of the law of Moses, and out of the Prophets. Mark. 4.34. Luke 24.27,
Act. 8.30.31, 35.

Q. Is there any warrant to pray before reading and expounding?

A. Neh. 8.6. And Ezra blessed the Lord the great God: and all the people
answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands; and they bowed their heads,
and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground.

Q. What warrant is there for the people to say Amen at the end of the
Ministers prayer?

A. Ne. 8.6. And all the people answered Amen, Amen, with lifting up their
hands. Psalm. 106.48. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to
everlasting: and let all the people say Amen.

Q. May we pray the Lord's prayer?

A. Luke 11.1, 2. And it came to pass that as he was praying in a certain
place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to
pray, as John also taught his disciples. And he said unto them, when ye pray
say, Our Father etc.

Q. May we pray other prayers?

A. Act. 4.24. And when they heard that, they lift up their voice to God with
one accord, and said, Lord thou art God, which have made heaven and earth, and
the Sea, and all that in them is etc.

Q. Is there any thing to be said for the lawfulness of writing of Sermons
after the minister?

A. Jer. 36.4. And Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the
Lord, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

Q. May we preach upon a text?

A. Luke 4.20, 21. And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the
Minister, and sat down, and the eyes of all them that were in the Synagogue
were fastened on him. And he began to say unto them, This day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your ears.

Q. May Ministers make use of books and give themselves to reading?

A. 2 Timothy 4.13. The cloak when thou come bring with thee, and the books, but
especially the parchments.

Q. Is it lawful for a Minister to make use of humane learning?

A. Tit. 1.12. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own, said, the
Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellyes. 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not
deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners. Act. 17.28. For in him we
live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own Poets have
said, For we are also his offspring.

Q. Had any of the Prophets or Apostles any humane learning?

A. Act. 7.22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and
was mighty in words and in deeds. Act. 22.3. I am verily a man, which am a Jew,
borne in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of
Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the Fathers
etc.

Q. May a Minister marry, and take care of wife and children?

A. 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his own house, having his children in
subjection with all gravity.

Q. May a Minister keep a Servant?

A. 2 King. 5.20. But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha, the man of God, said, my
Master has spared Naaman this Syrian etc.

Q. Is it lawful for a Minister to suffer himself to be called Sr, or Mr?

A. 1 King. 18.7. -- That my Lord Elijah -- Act. 16.30. Sirs what must I do to
be saved? 1 Samuel, 1.16. And she said, oh my Lord! as thy soul lives my Lord, I
am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the Lord.

Q. What say you unto Mat. 23.10. Neither be ye called Masters, etc?

A. i. c. Do not ye ambitiously affect great titles of Fathers and Masters, or
Governors, or Guides, as the Pharisees do; but account God your Father in
heaven, and me your master on earth, and be ye content with the title of my
disciples.

Q. Does the holy Scripture ever give any titles of respect unto the disciples
or Ministers afterward?

A. Yes. Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock,
over the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders
that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the word and Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves, for they watch
for your souls, etc.

Q. Is the title or office of a Preacher dishonourale for any?

A. No. Eccles. 1.12. I the Preacher was King over Israel in Jerusalem. Romans
15.8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers.

Q. Was it a disparagement among the Jews to match with a Priest?

A. 2 Chr. 22.11. So Jehoshabeath, the Daughter of King Jehoram, the wife of
Jehoida the Priest, for she was the Sister of Ahaziah, hid him.

Q. May Preachers lawfully suffer themselves to be taken up into the coaches of
Nobles? did not Elijah gird himself, and run by Ahab's chariot?

A. Act. 8.28, 31. And sitting in his charet, etc. He desired Philip that he
would come up, and sit with him. verse. 38. And he commanded the charet to stand
still, and they went down both into the water.

Q. Might the Priests of old have any temporal estate in Lands of their own?

A. Act. 4.36, 37. And Joses -- a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus, having
land sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the Apostles feet.

Q. What may be done with Scandalous Ministers if they will not reform?

A. Mat. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth, but if the salt have lost his
savor wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. 1 Samuel 2.30, 35. Wherefore the
Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy
Father, should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says, be it far from
me; for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. And I will raise me up a faithful Priest, that shall do
according to that which is in my heart and my mind, and I will build him a sure
house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. 1 King. 2.27. So
Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, that he might
fulfill the word of the Lord, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in
Shiloh.

Q. May we allow those who are deprived a fifth part to live on?

A. 2 King. 23.9. Nevertheless the Priests of the High places came not up to
the Altar of the Lord in Jerusalem: but they did eat of the unleavened bread
among their brethren.

Q. May Another lawfully be put into the place of such as are lawfully thrust
out?

A. 1 Kin. 2.35. And the King put Benaiah the Son of Jehojada in his room over
the host, and Zadok the Priest did the King put in the room of Abiathar. Act.
1.20, 25. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be
desolate, and let no man dwell therein, and his Bishopric let another take.
That he may take part of this ministry, and Apostleship, from which Judas by
transgression fell.

Q. Who did put in and put out under the old Testament?

A. 1 King. 2.35. And the King put Zadok the Priest in the room of Abiathar.

Chap. 23. Of public worship, Churches, and Ordinances.
Q. HAD the Jews Synagogues generally in their cities to worship God in, and
was there reading the Law in them constantly on the Sabbath day?

A. Act. 15.21. For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him,
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. Acts 13.14, 15.

Q. Was it the practice of Christ, and his Disciples and followers, the
primitive Christians, to worship God on the Sabbath days at their own home,
or in private houses, or in the Synagogues?

A. Luke 4.16. And he came to Nazareth, and as his custom was, he went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. So Chap. 6.6. And
it came to pass also on another Sabbath, that he entered into the Synagogue,
and taught. Joh. 18.20. Jesus answered, I spoke openly to the world, I ever
taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort,
and in secret have I said nothing. Act. 9.20. And straightway he preached
Christ in the Synagogue, that he is the Son of God. Act. 13.5. And when they
were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews.

Q. Did the Apostles rob the Temples or Idols of the Heathens of their riches?

A. No: Act. 19.37. For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither
robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of your Goddess.

Q. Was it held lawful in the Apostle's days to alienate that part of a man's
estate, which he had once vowed or dedicated unto God?

Ans. No. Act. 5.3. But Peter said; Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart
to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?

Q. May we meet and preach in places commonly called Churches?

A. Yes: Mar. 1.21. And they went into Capernaum, and straightway on the
Sabbath day he entered into the Synagogue, and taught. Luke 4.15, 16. And he
taught in their Synagogue, being glorified of all. And he came to Nazareth, --
and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and
stood up for to read. Joh. 18.20. I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the
Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing.
Act. 13.14, 15. They came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the Synagogue on
the Sabbath day, and sat down: and after the reading of the Law and the
Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of Exhortation for the people, say on. Act. 18.4.
And he reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the
Greeks. Act. 19.8, 9. And he went into the Synagogue, and spoke boldly for the
space of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the
Kingdom of God. But when diverse were hardened etc. he departed from them, and
separated the disciples, disputing daily in the School of one Tyrannus.

Q. Is it an evidence of right Zeal to pull down Churches?

A. No: Psalm. 74.8. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together:
they have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land. Luke 7.5. For he
loves our nation, and he has built us a Synagogue.

Q. Have we any warrant for reading the Scriptures, as it is used to be called
first and second lesson, before the minister begin his Sermon?

A. Act. 13.15. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers
of the Synagogue sent unto the^, saying, ye men and brethren, if ye have any
word of Exhortation for the people, say on etc.

Q. Is the spirit given that we may live without or above Gods commandments
and ordinances?

A. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new
spirit within them, -- that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine
Ordinances, and do them.

Q. Are Gospel Ordinances and dispensations a ministration of the letter or of
the Spirit?

A. 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also has made us able ministers of the New Testament, not
of the letter, but of the spirit.

Q. Is this ministry of the spirit to continue?

Ans. 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 11. But if the ministration of death written and graven in
stones was glorious, -- which glory was to be done away; how shall not the
ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? For if that which is done away
was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious.

Q. What if a man have the spirit, be filled with the spirit, be a strong
Christian, is he to cast off ordinances, and offices in the Church?

A. Act. 6.5. And the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose
Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the H. Ghost. Act. 10.44, 47, 48. While
Peter yet spoke these words the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
word. Then answered Peter, can any man forbid water that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

Q. What Answer shall we give to those Scriptures, Heb. 8.10, 11. 1 John 2.27.
2 Pet. 1.1, 9?

A. To that place in the Hebrews, I say, 1 That it must not be interpreted to
forbid the use of all ordinances, and teaching by men; for the Apostles
themselves did notwithstanding this promise go on teaching, and ordaining
teachers in the Churches. 2 That if this text of Scripture should be taken, as
it seems to sound in the express words and letter of it, it will make void and
needless not only public teaching, and by ministers or Church Officers, but
also private instruction, and by private friends, neighbors, brethren, not
ministers. 3ly, I say, that the sense and meaning may be, that they shall have
not only the outward teaching of men, but the inward teaching of the spirit;
and this teaching of God by his spirit they shall have in such a manner and
measure, that the other outward shall be nothing or needless in comparison: or
4thly, They shall in Gospel times from the least to the greatest know God the
Lord to be the Lord, and they shall not teach them, as if they were to teach a
heathenish unknowing people: but the ministers shall then teach a more knowing
people; as it is said, the Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, as
the waters cover the sea, (i. e.) there shall be abundance of knowledge beyond
what there is now generally.

To that in 1 Epistle of John, the meaning is either this, You are sufficiently
already instructed in this, that Jesus is the Christ, you need not a farther
proof in that matter; the seducers, Antichrists, or false Christ's, shall not
be able to draw you away from this great truth. Or else, ye that are the
children of God, have the gifts and graces of Gods spirit in such a measure,
that ye shall not be carried away from the Christian Religion, or the truth as
it is in Jesus, but this Spirit shall teach you in all necessary and saving
truths. And that notwithstanding this place, this Apostle writes this Epistle
to inform them, and to edify the^.

To that in 2 Ep. of Peter, the sense and scope of the words may be this, that
you may find the knowledge of God, and of his Christ, if you will read, and
consider, and compare the prophesies of the old Testament: for those Scriptures
testify of him. The meaning is not, that when you have got the knowledge of
Christ, you need not further to take heed to the Scriptures: when the godly Ps.
123.2. profess to look or wait on God until he have mercy on them, do you
think that they meant to look or wait on him just so long, and no longer?

Q. May ministers press Saints, who live and dwell in God, and who are taught
of God, to hearken to a word or commandment without them?

A. Yes. 1 These. 4.9. But as touching brotherly love, ye need not that I write
unto you: for ye your selves are taught of of God to love one another: compared
with the 2d. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. Ephesians.
6.1, 2. Children obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honor thy
father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise) compared with
chapter 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the Saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. Jam. 2.8, 11. If ye
fulfill the royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, ye do well. For he that said, do not commit Adultery,
said also, do not kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou
art become a transgressor of the Law.

Q. May a believer that is in God come himself to any Church, do we read of a
church in God and the Lord Christ?

A. 2 These. 1.1. Paul, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. Is there a Catholic, or Universal Church, and may a man be said to be a
teacher, or ruler in that?

A. 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, etc.

Q. Had God a Church, ordinances, and ministers in the days of Antichrist?

A. Rev. 13.11. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he
had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon etc. compared with chapter
14.1, 3. And I looked, and lo a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his fathers name written in their
foreheads: and they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before
the four beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn that song, but the
hundred forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.

Q. When the glorious times of the Church, spoken of by Isaiah chapter last. come,
will there be use of Ministers and Ordinances?

A. Isa. 66.21, 23. And I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites,
says the Lord. And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,
and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me,
says the Lord.

Q. If a Minister, intending to be short in a point, say, to conclude this in a
word, and after does use more words then one, or one or more sentences, does he
lie?

A. Galat. 5.14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Q. May Ministers be bred up in Colleges under Tutors, in order to the
Ministry; or are Colleges to be Nurseries only for the Commonwealth and
Schools, and not for the Church?

A. 1 Samuel 19.19, 20. And it was told Saul, saying, David is at Naioth in
Ramah. And Saul sent messengers to take David, and when they saw the company of
the Prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them. 1 Samuel
10.10. And when they came thither to the hill, behold a company of Prophets met
him, and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among the^.

Q. Had the Apostle Paul Hebrew and Greek, and did he ever make any use of it?

A. Acts 22.2. And when they heard that he spoke in the Hebrew tongue to them,
they kept the more silence. And Acts 21.37. And as Paul was to be led into the
Castle, he said unto the chief Captain, may I speak unto thee? who said,
can thou speak Greek?

Q. May we hear Ministers, if they be, as they are charged, proud and covetous?

A. Math. 23.1, 2, 3. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,
saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat: all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their
works: for they say and do not.

Q. If Ministers have the spirit of God, does it follow therefore that they
must know all things perfectly?

A. 1 Cor. 13.9. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part.

Q. Were the Prophets and Apostles, who had the spirit in an extraordinary
manner, beyond what ministers in these days pretend unto, in every of their
apprehensions and actions so guided, that they were infallible, and unblameable?

A. 1 Samuel 16.6, 7. And it came to pass when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, surely the Lords anointed is before him. But the Lord said
unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature,
because I have refused him: for the Lord sees not as man sees; for man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. Gal.
2.11, 14. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before the^ all, If
thou being a Jew live after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the
Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?

Q. How may we prove that those motions, which are contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, are not from the holy spirit?

A. Joh. 16.13, 14. Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself. -- He shall glorify me,
for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. 1 Cor. 12.2, 3.

Q. How did Christ approve of Churches and Ministers, their continuance, after
he was gone to heaven?

A. Rev. 1.4, 5, 20. John to the 7 Churches in Asia, grace be unto you, and
peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to come. -- And from Jesus
Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: -- The mystery of the 7 Stars, which thou
saw in my right hand, and the 7 golden Candlesticks. The 7 Stars are the
Angels of the 7 Churches, and the 7 Candlesticks which thou saw, are the 7
Churches.

Q. How long are there to be Churches, and Ministers, and Ordinances?

A. Math. 28. last. And lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world. 1 Cor. 11.22. -- despise ye the Church of God? -- shall I praise you in
this, I praise you not, v. 26. for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come.

Q. May men administer ordinances, viz. Baptism and the Lords supper, who have
not extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost?

A. Joh. 10.41. And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but
all things that John spoke of this man were true.

Q. Is the gift of tongues or miracles among the requisite qualifications of a
Bishop or Minister?

A. No. 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A Bishop then must be blameless, the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality,
apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but
patient, not a brawler, not covetous, one that rules well his own house,
having his children in subjection with all gravity, not a novice, lest etc.
moreover he must have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall
into reproach, and the snare of the Devil. Tit. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. If any be
blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of
riot, or unruly: for a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not
selfe-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to
filthy lucre, but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just,
holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that
he may be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and convince the gainsayers.

Q. May a man receive the Sacraments, who has not the extraordinary gifts of
the holy Ghost in abundance?

Ans. Yes. Act. 8.14 15, 16, 17. When the Apostles -- heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; who when they
were come down prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, for as
yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were babtized in the name of the
Lord Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the H. Ghost.
Math. 26.26. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the disciples, etc. compared with Act. 2.4. And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as
the Spirit gave them utterance.

Q. Is the word of God to be read in the Church?

A. Col. 4.16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read
also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle
from Laodicea.

Q. Is the Sacrament of the Lords supper yet to be administered in the Church?

A. 1 Cor: 11.20, 21, 33, 34. When ye come together therefore into one place,
this is not to eat the Lords supper; for in eating every one takes before
other his own supper: and one is hungry, another is drunken. Wherefore my
brethren when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another. And if any man
hunger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto condemnation.

Q. May the Church meet for holy conference?

A. 1 Cor. 14.31, 34, 35. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may
learn, and all may be comforted. Let your women keep silence in the Churches,
-- for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.

Q. May the Church deny to have communion with brethren, if they are scandalous
persons?

A. 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater,
or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no, not to
eat: -- do not ye judge them that are within.

Q. May particular congregations, who ordinarily meet together for worship, be
called Churches?

A. Act. 14.23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had
prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord. 1 Cor. 4.17. For this
cause have I sent unto you Timotheus -- who shall bring you into remembrance of
my ways, which be in Christ, as I teach every where, in every Church. chapter
14.23. If therefore the whole Church be come together into one place, and all
speak with tongues etc.

Q. May the believers of one city or country, although they have many several
Pastors or teachers over them, be called a Church?

A. Act. 20.17, 28. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders
of the Church. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over
which the H. Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood.

Q. Do all the Churches, or believers in them, make up one Church of Christ?

A. Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the body the Church, who is the beginning,
the first borne from the dead.

Q. May the Elders and brethren of several churches meet and confer together
about questions, or matters of difference, which may arise amongst them, or any
of them?

A. Act. 15.1, 2, 6, 7. And certain men which came down from Judea, taught the
brethren, and said, except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved. When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and
disputation with them, they determined that Paul, and Barnabas, and certain
others of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about
this Question. And the Apostles and Elders came together, for to consider of
this matter. And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said
unto them etc.

Q. Are the multitude of believers to be satisfied, if it may be, in those
matters in question?

Ans. Act. 15.30, 31. So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch, and
when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the Epistle;
which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.

Q. May the multitude have a hand or voice in the choice of church officers?

A. Act. 6.2, 3, 5. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto
them, and said, etc. wherefore brethren look ye out among you 7 men of honest
report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this
business. And the saying pleased the whole multitude; and they chose Stephen,
a man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost etc.

CHAP. 24. Of Singing of Psalms.
Q. ARE we to sing with the voice, or are we only to make melody in our hearts
to the Lord?

A. Acts 16.25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto
God, and the prisoners heard them.

Q. Is it lawful to sing a psalm, which contains a history of others, and
whose case was not every way as mine is at this present? or may Psalms be sung
as the Scriptures are read for instruction and comfort?

A. Colos. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Moreover
Hezekiah the King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to sing praise unto
the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer: and they sang praises
with gladness. Psalm. 22. Compare title and Psalm. So Psalm. 51, 52, and 54.
titles and Psalms compared. 2 Chronicles. 35.25. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah,
and all the singing men and the singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel, and behold they
are written in the Lamentations.

Q. Were women allowed to sing?

A. Exodus 15.20, 21. And Miriam the Prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a
timbrell in her hand, and all the women went out after her with timbrels and
with dances. And Miriam answered them, sing ye to the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously etc. 2 Chr. 35.25. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and
all the singing men, and the singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day.

Q. May an Unregenerate man sing a Psalm?

A. Exodus 15.1. Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the
Lord, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea.

Q. May many join to sing a Psalm together? and may a Godly man or woman
join with those who are not truly Godly in singing of a Psalm?

A. Exodus 15.1, 20, 21. Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song
unto the Lord. -- And Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, took a
timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after her with timbrels etc.

Q. May we sing on a day of Humiliation, or in a time of sadness? Is it not
said, Jam. 5.13. If any be merry let him sing Psalms?

A. See the title to the 102. Psalm. A prayer of the afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before the Lord. Besides, as we may
pray when we are not afflicted, so we may sing, although we have no present
extraordinary cause of mirth: but whereas others, ungodly men, when they are
filled with wine and carnal mirth, burst out into singing vain, and often times
wild songs; Christians when they are filled with the spirit, with joy
unspeakable and glorious, may express their joy seasonably in Psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Times of mirth are fit and
seasonable times for this duty, but not the only times. Paul and Silas sang in
prison; and so our Savior and his Apostles immediately after his last supper,
not long before he was betrayed into the hands of sinners: as times of
affliction are special times of prayer, but not the only times; Christ
himself being in an Agony prayed the more earnestly: so times of mirth or
rejoicing are special, but not the only seasons of singing of Psalms.

Q. Is singing of Psalms to be allowed in the Church?

A. 1 Cor. 14.26. How is it then brethren, when ye come together, every one of
you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an
Interpretation: let all things be done unto edifying. Psalm. 95.1, 2. O come let
us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our
Salvation. Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with Psalms. Mar. 14.26. And when they had sung an
hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.

CHAP. 25. Of Church Discipline.
Q. OUght men first to be admonished once, twice, or thrice, before they be
cast out of the Church, or that men are bound to separate from their society?

A. Math. 18.15, 16, 17. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: -- but if he will not
hear thee, then take with thee one or two more: -- and if he shall neglect to
hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear the Church, let
him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican. Tit. 3.10. A man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject.

Q. If a man, that has given offense, profess true repentance, may not he be
readmitted to fellowship both in civil and sacred things, at our own tables,
and at the Lords table?

A. 2 Corinthians. 2.6, 7, 8. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which
was inflicted of many. So that contrariwise, ye ought rather to forgive him,
and consider him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with over much
sorrow: wherefore I beseech you, that you would confirm your love toward him.
Luke 17.3, 4. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he
repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee 7 times in a day, and 7
times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him.

Q. Has the Church or her Officers power to admonish, and censure, and stop
the mouths of false teachers?

A. Rev. 2.20. Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee; because thou
suffer that woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach,
and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed
unto Idols. Tit. 1.10, 11, 13. For there are many unruly, and vain talkers, and
deceivers, specially they of the Circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped.
-- wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. Tit.
3.10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject.

Q. Was Excommunication, or any thing like it, used in the Church of the Jews?

A. Joh. 9.22. These words spoke his Parents, because they feared the Jews:
for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was
Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. And 12.42. Nevertheless, among
the chief Rulers also many believed on him: but because of the Pharisees they
did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue.

Q. Was Excommunication, or casting out of the Church, used in the Christian
Church in the Apostles days?

A. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 13. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered together -- to deliver such an one unto Satan, for the destruction of
the flesh: -- Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. 3 John 10. Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds which he does: --
neither does he himself receive the brethren, and forbids them that would,
and casts them out of the Church.

Q. If the Church neglect to do her duty, is it lawful for a Christian
Magistrate to punish false teachers, by silencing, or suspending them from
their office, or ejecting them out of their places?

A. Is. 49.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their Queens thy
nursing Mothers; they shall bow down to thee with their faces toward the earth,
and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord: for
they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. To. 13.4. For he is the minister
of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he
bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. Compared with Phil. 3.2. Beware of
dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. and Gal. 5.19, 20. Now
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, -- wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies.

CHAP. 26. Of Civil Magistrates, and the Commonwealth.
Q. IS the title of King lawful for a supreme Magistrate, or Governor?

A. Deuteronomy. 33.5. And he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the people, and
the Tribes of Israel were gathered together. Math. 1.6. and Jesse begat David
the King, and David the King begat Solomon. 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme.

Q. May a lawful Sovereign call the land over which he is head and governor
his land?

A. Judge. 11.12. And Jephthah sent messengers unto the King of the children of
Ammon, saying, what have thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to
fight in my land?

Q. Have Subjects a property in their lands and goods?

A. 1 King. 21.1, 2. Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in
Jezreel, hard by the Palace of Ahab King of Samaria: And Ahab spoke unto Naboth
saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because
it is near unto my house, and I will give thee a better vineyard for it than
it, or if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money. Mat.
22.21. Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God
the things which are Gods.

Q. May the King take away the subjects lands, to bestow them on his own
children?

A. Ezekiel. 46.18. Moreover the Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance
by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession, but he shall give his
sons inheritance out of his own possession, that my people be not scattered
every man from his possession.

Q. Ought Kings or other supreme magistrates to set bounds to their desires of
greatness, state, and riches?

A. Deuteronomy. 17.17. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart
turn not away; neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.

Q. Are Kings and supreme Governors so high, that Ministers may not reprove
them?

A. 2 Chr. 25.16. And it came to pass as he talked with him, that the King
said unto him, Art thou made of the King's counsel, forbear; why should
thou be smitten? then the Prophet forbear, and said, I know that God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened
unto my counsel.

Q. May Ministers admonish or reprove Kings by letters or writings?

A. 2 Chr. 21.12. And there came a writing to him from Elijah the Prophet
saying, Thus says the Lord God of David thy Father, Because thou have not
walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy Father etc. verse. 14. Behold with a
great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives,
and all thy goods.

Q. Are Ministers more than others exempted from subjection to civil
Governors?

A. Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; For there is no
power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

Q. Ought all, without exception, to obey and submit themselves to be guided by
Ministers in the things of God, according to the word of the Lord?

A. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves,
for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may
do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

Q. To whom did Christ promise power to forgive sins, to his Apostles, or
civil Rulers?

A. Joh. 20.22, 23. He breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost, whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Q Has Christ promised his more especial presence with the Commonwealth to
the end of the world, or with the Church?

A. Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you even
unto the end of the world.

Q. May the supreme Magistrate tax the people at his pleasure?

A. Neh. 5.15. But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of
silver, yea even their servants bare rule over the people, but so did not I,
because of the fear of God.

Q. Is it possible for a wise Prince to overshoot himself in oppressing the
people?

A. 2 Chr. 10.4. Thy Father made our yoke grievous, now therefore ease thou
somewhat the grievous servitude of thy Father, and his heavy yoke, that he put
upon us, and we will serve thee.

Q. May good Governors suffer their servants, officers, or courtiers, how
great friends or favorites soever, to Lord it over the people?

A. Neh. 5.15. -- Even their servants bare rule over the people: but so did not
I, because of the fear of God.

Q. May not a good and wise King have some one of his servants or principal
officers, who may be esteemed his especial friend?

A. 2 Samuel 15.37. So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came
into Jerusalem. 1 King. 4.5. And Zabud the son of Nathan was principal
officer, and the King's friend.

Q. Ought not godly magistrates to take care that their servants, and great and
rich men, do not oppress or devour the poor, and men of lower rank?

A. Neh. 5.2, 4, 7, 11. For there were that said, we, our sons, and our
daughters are many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat and
live. There were also that said, we have borrowed money for the Kings tribute,
and that upon our Lands, and vineyards. Then I consulted with my self, and I
rebuked the Nobles and the Rulers, and said unto them, you exact usury every
one of his brother. Restore I pray you to them, even this day, their lands,
their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, etc.

Q. May the civil Magistrate punish evil doers, or evil workers without
exception?

A. To. 13.34. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil:
will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same. For he is the minister of God to thee for good.
But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in
vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.

Q. Are heretics, or seducers to error evil workers?

A. Philip. 3.2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the
concision.

Q. Is heresy reckoned amongst the works of the flesh?

A. Galath. 5.19. -- 20. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery -- Seditions, heresies.

Q. What was God's law by Moses concerning Seducers to Idolatry, and concerning
Blasphemers?

A. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer
of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder: And the sign or the wonder
come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other God's
(which thou have not known) and let us serve them. And the Prophet or dreamer
of dreams shall be put to death: so shall thou put the evil away from the
midst of thee. If thy brother, the Son of thy mother, or thy Son, or thy
daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thy own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods: Thou shall not
consent unto him nor hearken unto him: neither shall thine eye pity him,
neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him. But thou shall
surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hand of all the People.

Q. Had the Jews after the Captivity Urim and Thummim, whereby to enquire of
the Lord in all difficult matters, and to have infallible resolution? had they
any other constant ordinary means to know and Judge of what was blasphemy, then
we have in these days, namely, the holy Seriptures? had they Urim and Thummim
to inquire by concerning blasphemy as perhaps at first they had, Levit. 24.12,
13. etc.

A. Ezrah. 2.63. And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of
the most holy things, till there stood up a Priest with Urim and with Thummim.

Q. If it be once ill with the Church, will it be always or likely long well
with the Commonwealth?

A. 2 Chronicles. 15.3, 4, 5. Now for a long season Israel has been without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law: But when they in
their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was
found of them. And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
countries.

Q. Do people say well, that it was never well since there was so much
preaching? or that the olden time, as they speak, was better than these times?

A. Eccles. 7.10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were
better than these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.

Q. If it should be granted that there was more peace and plenty in times of
Popery than since the Reformation, does it therefore necessarily follow, that
God was pleased with that Religion, or that that was the true way of worship?

A. Jer. 44.17, 18, 20, 21. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
forth out of our mouth, to burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, and to pour
out drink offerings unto her, as we have done. -- For then had we plenty of
victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But since we left off to burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we
have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by the famine.
The incense that ye burnt in the cities of Judah -- did not the Lord remember
them, and came it not into his mind? so that the Lord could noe longer bear,
because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye
have committed: therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a
curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

Chap. 27. Concerning Soldiers.
Q. IS the calling of a Soldier lawful?

A. Luke 3.14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him saying, and what
shall we do? And he said unto them, do violence to no man, neither accuse any
falsely; and be content with your wages.

Q. Must Soldiers necessarily go to war at their own charges?

A. No. 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges?

Q. May they plunder and carve for themselves what they please?

A. No. Luke 3.14. And he said unto them, do violence to no man, and be
content with your wages.

Q. When Abraham by God's blessing on his sword delivered the oppressed, and
them who were carried captive, namely, his Nephew Lot, and the King of Sodom,
etc. their persons and goods, did he seize all for himself and Soldiers, as
their own by right of conquest?

A. No. Genesis 14.21, 22, 23, 24. And the King of Sodom said to Abraham, give me
the persons, and take the goods to thy self. And Abram said to the King of
Sodom, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord the most high God, the possessour
of heaven and earth, that I will not take from thee a thread even to a
shoo-latchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou
should say, I have made Abram rich: save only that which the young men have
eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre
let them take their portion.

Q. How did the people of God, the Jews, when they stood for their lives, and
slew thousands of their enemies in the days of King Ahasuerus, did they take
all they could get for themselves?

A. No Esth. 9.10, 16. The ten sons of Haman, the Son of Hammedatha, the Jews
enemy, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand. But the other
Jews that were in the King's provinces gathered themselves together, and stood
for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes 75
000, but they laid not their hands on the prey. See also verse. 15. but on the
prey they laid not their hand.

Q. Ought not those whose lives and goods are saved to reward the instruments
of their deliverance, who have jeoparded their lives for them in the high
places of the field?

A. Yes. Genesis 14.21, 24. And the King of Sodom said unto Abraham, Give me the
persons and take the goods to thy self. Save only that which the young men
have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol and
Mamre, let them take their portion.

Q. May we put all to the sword who shall be taken in war?

A. 2 King. 6.22. And he answered, thou shall not smite them, would thou
smite those whom thou have taken captive with thy sword, and with thy bow? set
bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink.

Q. What if the case be so that our brethren forsake the Lord, and become
Idolaters, and fall out with us, and there happen to be war betwixt us, and we
conquer, how then? how did the Lord's people demean themselves in such a case
after a victory, or when they had their brethren in their power?

A. 2 Chronicles. 28.9, 10, 15. But a Prophet of the Lord was there, whose name was
Oded, and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them.
Behold, because the Lord God of your Fathers was wroth with Judah, he has
delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reaches
up to heaven. And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and
Jerusalem for bondmen and bond-women unto you; but are there not with you,
even with you, sins against the Lord your God, etc. And the men which were
expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed
all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them
to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them
upon Asses, and brought them to Jericho the city of Palm Trees to their
Brethren.

Q. What say we to the seventh of Deuteronomy. 2. and chap. 20.16. in relation to the
Canaanites; and to the 13 of Deuteronomy. 15. in reference to the Apostate Israelites?

A. These people were by God devoted to destruction: the former expressly; and
the other upon evident proof of their breaking Articles with God the Lord of
Hosts.

Q. What means Jer. 48.10: concerning Moab?

A. In case God have a work to do, suppose to destroy his implacable enemies,
the Moabites, if God make known his mind by his Prophets, as to Saul concerning
the Amalekites. 1 Samuel 15.3. It must be done: if it be, God will reward the
executioner, as he did Jehu; if it be not done, he will punish the negligent,
as he did Saul, and that other mentioned 1 Kin. 20.25, 26.

Q. May a private man, Soldier or other, kill an Idolater, a seducer to
Idolatry, or a false Prophet, or other offender, without being tried according
to law, because of Deuteronomy. 13.9. and Zech. 13.3.

A. Deuteronomy. 17.6, 7. At the mouth of 2 or 3 witnesses shall he that is worthy of
death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to
death; the hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death,
and afterward the hands of all the people: so thou shall put the evil away
from among you i. e. They may be witnesses against such offenders, and be
causers of their death in a legal way.

Q. Did not Phinehas out of zeal kill Zimri and Cosbi in the act of
uncleanesse? and is he not commended and rewarded for so doing?

A. Either Phinehas was an officer, or had commission from Moses, the chief
Magistrate, as the Levites had formerly in another case: or he was moved and
carried to this execution by a special motion and instinct of the spirit of
God. Exodus 32.26, 27. Number. 25.4, 5.

Q. Did not Elijah slay the Priests of Baal 1 King. 18.40?

A. Elijah was an extraordinary Prophet, wrought many miracles, and at that
time God had answered him by fire from heaven to consume his sacrifice, and to
confute the Idolatrous Priests of Baal, and this in the sight of Israel
gathered together by the command of King Ahab: and possibly the King too might
be present at this time; because in the next verse, immediately after mention
is made of Elijah's slaying the Prophets of Baal, it follows verse. 41. Get
thee up, eat and drink, for there is a sound of abundance of rain: and who
knows but the King might tacitly consent, if not expressly and openly, to this
execution of Justice, and the people might be ayding thereunto; having
professedly acknowledged the Lord to be the God, in v. 39. and if the King, and
people at least, had not assented, and some of them assisted, how could one
Elijah have slain 400? Besides, whether he, or they, they did but execute upon
them the judgment written, Deuteronomy. 13.5. and chap. 18.20. A like execution did
Jehu by his Captains and Guards upon the worshippers of Baal, 2 Kin. 10.25.
And now I desire all Quakers and Antiministe rialists, who account the
Ministers of the Gospel as Priests of Baal, would hold their hands from blood,
until all the people be gathered together, and before them it be tried whether
they or we be in the right. Besides, Elijah the Prophet called for fire from
heaven to consume two Captains and their fiftyes, 2 King. 1.10, 11, 12. Will
any therefore conclude wildly, that we may call for fire from heaven to consume
all the Captains and their companies, when they come to apprehend us? The
Apostles were mistaken in misapplying this instance of Elijah, Luke 9.55. And
therefore no so great marvel if light heads be soon on fire against us from
their miscarrying such a spark of truth as this, and therewith (if let alone)
hazard to burn to Ashes the present Churches and Ministers, and think they do
God good service.

Q. Is it not said Rev. 16.6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy?

A. This was a Prophetical vision of destruction to persecutors; and possibly
it might be in part fulfilled when Priests were adjudged to death, either in
Popish countries for ill-living, or else according to the Laws made against
them by the supreme powers amongst Protestants. But what warrant is this for
private persons, and that against Law, to fall upon the persons or estates of
the true Ministers of Christ? Oh that men would consider that this Judgment is
here denounced against men for shedding the blood of Prophets and of Saints!
and observe, there is a distinction of Prophets and Saints, and that Prophets
are put in the first place. Besides, I say further, that the precepts of holy
Scripture, not the Prophecies, are to be our guide, and if we follow this light
it will guide our feet into the ways of peace.

Q. Was it required by the Law of Moses that the Priests should be consulted
withal, or made any use of, when they went forth to war?

A. Numb. 10.8, 9. And the sons of Aaron the Priest shall blow with the
trumpets, etc. And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that
oppresses you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets, and ye shall be
remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.

Q. May Ministers go along and encourage their brethren when they are going to
fight the Lord's battles, to help the Lord against the mighty?

A. Deuteronomy. 20.2, 3, 4. And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the Battle,
that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the people, and shall say unto
them, Hear O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against your enemies,
let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye
terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goes with you, to
fight for you against your enemies to save you.

Q. Was that a Centurion, or Captain of a 100, of whom the Jews said unto
Christ, he has loved our nation, and built us a Synagogue?

A. Yes. Luke 7.2. And a certain Centurions Servant, who was dear unto him,
was sick and ready to dye etc. he has loved our nation, and built us a
Synagogue.

Q. Did there ever a College or company of Prophets live quietly and peaceably
by a Garrison of Soldiers?

A. Yes. 1 Samuel 10.5. After that thou shall come to the hill of God, where is
the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come
thither to the city, that thou shall meet a company of Prophets, coming down
from the high place with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp
before them, and they shall prophecy.

Q. What will make Soldiers fly before their enemies in a day of battle?

A. Psalm. 78.9, 10, 11. The children of Ephraim being armed, and carrying
bows, turned back in the day of battle: They kept not the Covenant of God,
and refused to walk in his law, and forgate his works, and his wonders that he
had showed them.

Q. What effect had John Baptists preaching upon the Soldiers?

A. Luke 3.14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what
shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, etc.

Q. Ought Soldiers to enquire of Ministers the way of Salvation?

A. Act. 10.22, 23. Cornelius the Centurion, a just man, and one that fears
God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from God
by an holy Angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.
Then called he them in, and lodged them, and on the morrow Peter went away with
them.

Q. Do we ever read that the Soldiers dedicated ought of their spoils to
Religious uses?

A. 1 Chr. 26.26, 27. Which Shelomith and his brethren, were over all the
treasures of the dedicate things, which David the King, and the chief Fathers,
the Captains over thousands, and hundreds, and the Captains of the host had
dedicated. Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain the
house of the Lord.

Chap. 28. Of the Errors of Quakers.
Q. HOW came man at first to have a right to the earth, and the fruits
thereof, and creatures therein?

A. Psalm. 115.16. The Heaven, even the Heavens are the Lord's, but the earth
has he given to the children of men.

Q. Have particular nations or Families lawfully distinct lands and
territories? did they obtain it by order from the first borne, or by choice in
order, beginning at the first borne, or by Lot? did God allow of such
distinction?

A. Act. 17.26. And has made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on
all the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and
the bounds of their habitation. Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the most high divided to the
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the
bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

Q. Has a man a right to that which is gotten from a common enemy in a lawful
war?

A. Genesis 48.22. Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.
Judge. 11.24. wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God gives thee to
posses? so whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out before us, them will we
possess.

Q. Did Christ ever because he was Lord of all, put any one man out of
possession of any foot of ground?

A. Luke 12.13, 14. Mr, speak to my Brother, that he divide the inheritance
with me. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge, or a divider over you?
Mar. 12.17. And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's --

Q. Has Christ given power to his Church or Saints to rule them that are
without?

A. 1 Cor. 5.12. For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? --
verse. 13. but them that are without God judges --

Q. Must not all ministers and Christians sell what they have, and live upon a
common stocks must not Mine and Thine cease in the Church and Commonwealth?

A. Act. 5.4. Whiles it remained was it not thine own, and after it was sold
was it not in thine own power? 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Now concerning the collection
for the Saints upon the first day of the weeek, let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God has prospered him.

Q. May a godly man, he that is an heir of heaven, purchase land upon earth?

A. Genesis 23.20. And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure
unto Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons of Heth.

Q. May a Christian buy or sell with or for money?

A. James 4.13, 15. Go to now ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go
into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain.
For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that. Luke 22.36. John. 4.8. compared with John. 13.29.

Q. May we say Sr or Ld to any man, and especially to a Minister?

A. Genesis 23.14, 15. And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him, my Ld,
hearke^ unto me. Joh. 20.15. She supposing him to be the gardener says unto
him, Sir, if thou have born him hence tell me etc. Act. 27, 10. Sirs, I
perceive that this voyage will be with hurt etc.

Q. May Saints give the title of Sirs to Idolaters.

A. Act. 14.15. Sirs, why do ye these things? we also are men of like passions
with you, and preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto
the living God. etc.

Q. May we say Honorable, or write Most excellent, to any?

A. 1 Samuel 9.6. And he said unto him, Behold, now there is in this city a man
of God, and he is an honorable man, all that he says comes surely to pass.
Act. 1.3. It seemed good to me also etc. to write unto thee in order most
excellent Theophilus.

Q. May a Minister, or private Christian, say or write to any man, your servant
in the Lord?

A. 2 Cor. 4.5. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

Q. May we say good morrow, good even, or I wish you good speed?

A. Ruth 2.4. And behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the Reapers,
the Lord be with you; and they answered him, the Lord bless thee. Psalm. 129.8.
Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we
bless you in the name of the Lord. 2 John 10, 11. If there come any unto you,
and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God speed: For he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.

Q. May we crave a blessing, or, as we call it, give thanks for our meat and
drink?

A. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. For every creature of God is Good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer. Joh. 6.11. And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given
thanks he distributed to the Disciples etc.

Q. May a Christian bear the office of a civil Magistrate?

A. To. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for
there is no power but of God: The powers that be are ordained of God; whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation: For Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil, etc. For he is the minister of God to thee for
good etc.

Q. May Christians lawfully live under any King but Christ?

A. Romans 13.5, 6, 7. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake: for for this cause pay you tribute also, for they
are God's ministers etc. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom
honor. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well.

Q. Is it lawful to pay tribute and custom?

A. Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom tribute is
due, Custom to whom custom.

Q. Is it lawful to salute, honor, and bow down before men?

A. Genesis 23.12. And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
Mat. 5.47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more than others?
do not even the Publicans so? c. 10.12. And when you come into an house salute
it. 1 Samuel 10.4. And they will salute thee, and give thee etc.

Q. What say you to 2 King. 4.29. salute him not. And Luke 10.4. salute no man
by the way?

A. When the Prophet Elisha's servant Gehazi was sent upon life and death, as
we say, it was no time then to stay or hinder his business in giving or taking
courtesyes; our Lord would not have his disciples distracted or hindered in
their work with civilities: and besides, the less they courted the world with
comity, and as we say, complementing, the more was God's power seen in making
way yet for their entertainment: and yet civility was not altogether forbidden
them, verse. 5. Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this
house.

Q. May we write books, inscribing the name of any particular person,
especially in the beginning?

A. Luke 1.3. It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of
all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most Excellent
Theophilus.

Q. Are some persons honorable, and more honorable than others?

A. Luke 14.8. When thou art bidden of any Man to a wedding, sit not down in
the highest room, lest a more honorable man than thou be bidden of him.

Q. May we call those Noble, or most Noble, of whose Religion or godliness we
have small evidence?

A. Act. 26.25. I am not mad most Noble Festus.

Q. May Women be styled Honorable?

A. Act. 17.12. Therefore many of them believed, also of honorable Women which
were Greeks, and of men not a few.

Q. May a Christian be a servant to any man, seeing he is the Lord's servant,
yea the Lord's freeman?

A. 1 Cor. 7.21. Art thou called being a Servant? care not for it: but if thou
may be made free, use it rather. 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. Let as many servants as are
under the yoke count their own Masters worthy of all honor. And they that have
believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren, etc.

Obj. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

A. Christians should not when they are free, choose to serve Idolatrous
Masters, lest that should prove a snare unto them. Again, I say Christians
must obey God rather than men; the servants of God may serve the persons of
men, but must not serve men's lusts contrary to the Law of God.

Q. Must Mr and Servant sit down to meat together? or may one sit, and the
other stand and serve?

A. Luke 17.7, 8. Which of you having a Servant -- will say to him, go and sit
down to meat? and not rather, make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy
self, and serve me etc.

Q. Does not the scripture condemn Respect of persons, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Jam. 2.1,
3, 9. Prove. 24.23. and 28.21.

A. It is written also in the Scripture (and the Scripture cannot be broken)
Render honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13.7. And again, Thou shall rise up
before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, I am the Lord, Lev.
19.32. We must not so expound one place of Scripture as to make it clash with
another. The holy spirit of truth does not cross and contradict himself. We
must necessarily therefore distinguish of Respect of Persons, and show what
manner of honor or respect is sinful and condemned, and what is warrantable
and allowed: we acknowledge that the Scripture forbids to respect persons in
judgment, whether rich or poor, Lev. 19.15. The Judge must not pervert judgment
for fear of the rich man, or out of pity to the poor man, but must judge
righteous judgment, every man's cause not according to the person that mannages
it, and whom it concerns, but according to the merit of it.

Again, Christians must not as in the administration of justice, so neither of
Ordinances, admit rich men because they are rich, however unbelieving,
unworthy, and altogether unqualified; and exclude or refuse the poor, how rich
soever in Faith, prepared, and fitted, merely because they are poor. It seems
when James wrote his Epistle there were some in the Church, who were to be
blamed, because they did prefer and honor rich men; though unbelievers and
oppressros, and in the mean time did contemn and despise poor believing
Christians for their poverty. Though we may honor men for those outward
excellencies which God has bestowed or put upon them, yet we must never so
honor the rich, as to slight and despise the poor, especially the poor
Believer.

Q. May we take these words Respect and Honor the one for the other?

A. Lev. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shall not
respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in
Righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor. To conclude this matter, that it
is absolutely necessary to distinguish of respect of persons, will appear by
comparing amongst others these two places of Scripture, Ephesians. 6.9. -- knowing
that your Mr also is in heaven neither is there respect of persons with him,
with Genesis 4.4, 5. -- And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering:
But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. To reconcile the^ these
Scriptures, that seem thus to cross one another. I say God does not regard men
more for their beauty, place, estate, or such outward things: nor will he for
any such by-respect go a hairs breadth from justice, and in this sense there
is no respect of persons with God. And yet God does righteously and holily
accept the faces of his people, that fear, and serve, and call upon him, Lev.
26.9. For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply
you and establish my Covenant with you.

Q. May Christians when they are asked where they dwell, give any other answer
than this, they dwell in God?

A. Yes. Joh. 1.38, 39. They said unto him Rabbi, where dwell thou? he says
to them, come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt and abode with him that
day. Act. 28.30. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him.

Q. May a Christian without sin call persons or things by the names which
Heathens or Idolaters have given them, especially if they have been the names
of Idols?

A. Act. 28.11. -- we departed in a ship, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.
Romans 16.1. I commend unto you Phebe. verse. 14. Salute Hermas etc. 1 Cor. 16.12.
-- Brother Apollos. Act. 17.1. When they had passed through Apollonia.

Q. Is it lawful to call the days of the week and the months of the year by
any other names then the 1st, 2d, 3d etc.

A. Est. 9.17. On the 13th day of the month Adar etc. Luke 23.54. And that day
was the preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. Rev. 1.10. I was in the spirit on
the Lord's day. Deuteronomy. 16.1. 1 King. 6.37, 38. 1 King. 8.2. Ezr. 6.15. Neh. 1.1.
and 2.1. and 6.15.

Q. May we interpret the word of God?

A. Math. 1.23. They shall call his name Emanuel; which being interpreted, is,
God with us.

Q. May we not only translate, but also give the sense or meaning?

A. Joh. 7.37, 38. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water; this spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive, etc. Neh. 8.8.

Q. May one man be helpful to another toward the understanding of the
Scriptures, or must we depend upon, and wait for the immediate teachings of
the Holy Ghost?

A. Act. 8.30, 31. And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the
Prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou read? And he said,
How can I, except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would
come up and sit with him.

Q. Is that said to be in the Scripture, which is no where word for word now to
be found, but only in the sense and scope?

A. Jam. 4.5. Do ye think that the scripture says in vain, the spirit that
dwells in us lusts to envy. Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me, as the
Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.

Q. May that be said to be grounded on Scripture, which is founded on Scripture
consequences?

A. Mar. 12.26, 27. And as touching the dead that they rise, have ye not read
in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spoke unto him, saying, I am the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: He is not the God of
the dead, but the God of the living.

Q. May those who have the Spirit, and are guided by the Spirit, yet attend
unto the Scripture, or the outward writing?

A. 1 Chr. 28.11, 12, 19. Then David gave to Solomon the son his pattern of
the porch -- And the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the courts
of the house of the Lord -- All this, said David, the Lord made me understand
in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

Q. Did our Lord Christ give the Apostles any prohibitions which were but ny
thing only for a time? temporary? or did he prohibit them a-

A. Mat. 10.5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying, Go
not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye
not. Compared with Acts 8.14. When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard
that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto him Peter and John.
Math. 10.9, 10. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,
nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves
-- compared with Luke 22.36. Then said he unto them, But now he that has a
purse let him take it, and likewise his scrip; and he that has no sword let
him sell his garment and buy one.

Q. May we without sinuse the singular number when we speak to or of many, and
the plural when we speak to or of but one?

A. See Mat. 21.2, 7. Go into the village over against you, and straight way ye
shall find an Ass tied, and a Colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto
me. And they brought the Ass and the Colt etc. compared with Mar. 11.2, 7. --
Go your way into the village over against you, and as soon as ye be entered into
it ye shall find a Colt tied, whereon never man sat, loose him, and bring him.
And they brought the Colt to Jesus etc. Tit. 2.7, 8. In all things showing thy
self a pattern of good works -- that he that is of the contrary part may be
ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you. See Luke 22.31, 32. Jud. 12.7.
It Is said of Jephthah, he was buried in the cities of Gilead (...) for in one
of the cities of Gilead. Med. Opusc. Annot. in Apocal. p. 66.

Q. May there be Landlords, and those that hire houses or Lands?

A. Cant. 8.11. Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard
unto keepers: every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a 1000 pieces of
silver.

Q. May there be buying and selling of houses and lands, and conveyances and
writings or evidences written, and witnesses of purchases?

A. Genesis 23.15, 16. The land is worth 400 shekels of silver: what is that
betwixt me and thee -- And Abraham weighed unto Ephron the silver, which he had
named in the audience of the sons of Heth. Act. 4.34. For as many as were
possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things
that were sold. Jer. 32.44. Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe
evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in
the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah etc.

Q. Are wicked men true owners of their estates? Or are all things so the
Saints by a title founded in grace, that they may without sin before God out
mere natural men of their possessions at pleasure, if they had the power?

A. Psalm. 115.16. The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords: but the earth
has he given to the children of men. Acts 20.33. I have coveted no man's
silver, or gold, or apparel. Josh. 24.4.

Q. May we now, call any man Good because it is said Mark. 10.18. There is no
man good but one, that is, God.

A. Act. 11.24. For he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and of
Faith. Romans 5.7. yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye.

Q. May we call the master of the house the Good Man of the House?

A. Mar. 14.13, 14. -- Go ye into the city and there shall meet you a man
bearing a pitcher of water: follow him. And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye
to the good man of the house, The master says etc.

Q. May we say we will do such and such things, if God will?

A. Heb. 6.3. And this will we do, if God permit. Act. 18.21. I must by all
means keep this Feast that comes, in Jerusalem, but I will return again unto
you, if God will.

Q. What if Christians, who in the maine bent, purpose, and design of their
souls resign and submit themselves and ways wholly to the will of God, do
sometimes omit those expressions, do they sin?

A. Romans 15.24. Whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you:
for I trust to see you in my journey etc. 3 John 10. Wherefore if I come, I
will remember his deeds, which he does prating against us with malicious words.
etc.

Q. What if Christians not through lightness or vanity, but upon new
emergencies, accidents, or occurrences, and other weighty considerations happen
to change their purpose, and not to do as they said, do they sin?

A. 2 Cor. 1.15, 17, 23. And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you
before etc. When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the
thing that I purpose, do I purpose, according to the flesh, that with me there
should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? I call God for a record upon my soul, that
to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth. Genesis 19.2, 3. Behold now my Lords
turn in I pray you into your servants house, and tarry all night -- And they
said Nay, but we will abide in the street all night. And he pressed upon them
greatly, and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house.

Q. Is there any mere man that lives, who is perfectly holy, without the least
sin?

A. 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. Math. 6.11, 12. Give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses.

Q. Does not the Scripture speak of some that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6?

A. Some are said to be perfect in Scripture who are sincere, whose hearts are
right to follow God fully, who take heed to observe and do God's will, though
in some thing they are wanting: for instance Noah. Genesis 6.9. it is said was a
just man, and perfect, or upright in his generation: and yet we find in the 9th
chap. that he was drunken. And as for this place cited in the Question, it must
either be understood, that they were sincere; or else it is spoken
comparatively, they were as strong men in Christ, as old Disciples, when others
were but Babes in knowledge, and had not their senses exercised to discern
'twixt good and evil.

Q. What shall I say to that which is written 1 John 3.6, 9?

A. I answer with our Savior, it is written again, and that too by a man after
God's own heart. Ps. 19.12, Who can understand his Errors, cleanse thou me from
my secret faults. A true child of God does not, dares not allow himself to go
on in a constant course or trade of any known sin, he does endeavor to keep
himself from his iniquity, he hates every false way: you may hear the language
of his soul in the complaint of Paul, Romans 7.15. For that which I do, I allow
not: For what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. He does not
willingly tug at the Devils oars. Sin remains in him, but does not reign
over him; it may captivate him as a Tyrant, he ownes it not as his lawful King
and Sovereign.

Q. Was it the practice of Christ, the true Messiah, and of his Apostles, to
teach publicly in usual places of concourse and worship?

A. Joh. 18.20. Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world: I ever taught
in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in
secret have I said nothing. Act. 18.4. And he reasoned in the Synagogue every
Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks.

Q. Do false Christ's and false teachers draw people away from the public
worship of God into chambers, corners, and deserts?

A. Math. 24.26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the
desert, go not forth: behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.

Q. Do Ministers prove by Scripture when they prove by deductions, and
consequences, and comparing one place with another, although they do not bring
what they say in so many words out of the Scriptures?

A. Act. 18.28. For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly showing
by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

Chap. 29. Of sundry Popish Errors.
Q. MAY we call those of the Church of Rome, who subject themselves to the
Pope, and follow him, Papists?

A. Rev. 2.15. So have thou also them that hold the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.

Q. Are we to believe the Scriptures because the Holy Ghost speaks in them, or
chiefly for the testimony and authority of the Church?

A. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God etc. 1 John 5.9.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater.

Q. Are the Scriptures so hard and obscure, that none but Ministers may read
them profitably, or to edification?

A. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in
thine heart; And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way,
and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Joh. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures etc. Psalm. 19.7. The law of the Lord is perfect converting the
souls, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

Q. Are all things necessary to salvation contained in the Scriptures? or have
we need of unwritten traditions, that the man of God may be perfect?

A. 2 Timothy 3.15, 17. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through Faith, which is in
Christ Jesus etc. that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works.

Q. How prove you that the books commonly called Apocrypha, are no part of the
Canonical Scripture? is this an evidence, because the Jews did not receive
them into the Canon?

A. Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage then has the Jew? -- much every way: chiefly
because unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Luke 16.29. And Abraham
says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Luke
24.44. And he said unto them, These are the words which I spoke unto you, while
I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the
law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me.

Q. Are the holy Scriptures to be lastly appealed unto, as the Supreme Judge
in controversies of Religion?

A. Is. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Q. Are we to believe them that sit in Moses chair, or the Apostles
Successors, when they teach contrary to Moses and the Prophets, or to the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles?

A. Act. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more
than unto God, judge ye.

Q. Ought people to try and examine by the holy Scriptures whether those things
be so, as the Church or Ministers thereof teach?

A. Act. 17.11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily whether those things were so.

Q. Where did our Lord Christ and the Apostles first preach the Gospel? in
Italy, or Judea? at Rome, or at Jerusalem?

A. Luke 23.5. He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Jury,
beginning from Galilee to this place. Act. 5.28. Did not we straightly command
you that you should not teach in this name? and behold ye have filled Jerusalem
with your Doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon us.

Q. Where, at Antioch or at Rome, were the Disciples first called Christians?

A. Act. 11.26. And it came to pass that a whole year they assembled
themselves, with the Church, and taught much people, and the Disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch.

Q. What is that City which is called Mystical Babylon in the Revelations?

A. Rev. 17.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 18. The 7 heads are 7 mountains, on which the
woman sits, and there are 7 Kings, 5 are fallen, and one is, and the other
is not yet come etc. And the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the 8th,
and is of the 7th, and goes into perdition. And the 10 horns which thou
saw are 10 Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet; but receive power
as Kings one hour with the Beast. These have one mind, and shall give their
power and strength unto the Beast. And the woman which thou saw is that
great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth.

Q. If the Apostle Peter was at Rome when he wrote his Epistle, does he not
call it Babylon?

A. Yes, 1 Pet. 5.13. The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you,
saluteth you.

Q. Are there any prophecies in the new Testament of a great Apostasy or
falling away from the Faith? Or was it ever prophesied or foretold that there
should be a great defection or Apostasy in the Christian Church?

A. 2 Pe. 2.1, 2. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies -- And many shall follow their pernicious ways. Rev. 11.2. But the
Court which is without the Temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is
given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty
and two months. 2 These. 2.3. For that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away 1st, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of perdition etc.
1 Timothy 4.1, 3. Now the spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some
shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrines of
Devils, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats etc.

Q. Can you give an instance of God's threatening to remove his Candlestick from
any place or people, where it was once set?

A. Yes. Rev. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

Q. Was Timothy Bishop or Minister at Ephesus or at Rome, when the Apostle
Paul taught him how he ought to behave himself in the house of God, the Church
of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth?

A. 1 Timothy 1.3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine.

Q. Was it possible that when once Ephesus was called the house of the living
God, the pillar and ground of truth, that ever Ephesus should be un-churched?
or that the Gospel should be removed from them?

A. Revel. 2.1, 5. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, etc.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick
out of his Place, except thou repent.

Q. What learn we from those words, the pillar and ground of truth, if applied
to the Church?

A. That it is the duty and privilege of the Church to hold forth the Truth,
that men may know it; and to uphold, maintain, and defend it against those who
oppose it. Pillars do hold forth, and uphold the Orders and proclamations of
Magistrates, which are hanged on them, or affixed to them. If this Scripture
had been of as much force and signification, applied to Ephesus, as the
Romanists would have it to the Church of Rome, Ephesus had remained to this day.

Q. Can any man really and properly by his own power and authority forgive
sins?

A. Mark. 2.7. Who can forgive sins but God only? compared with Is. 43.25. I,
even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins. Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God merciful and
gracious -- keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression,
and sin. Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage?

Q. Had Christ God-man power on earth to forgive sins?

A. Mark. 2.5, 10. When Jesus saw their Faith, he said unto the sick of the
palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. -- But that ye may know that the Son
of man has power on earth to forgive sins.

Q. Did our Lord Christ give power to his Apostles, and their successors, to
declare forgiveness of sins to penitent and believing sinners?

A. Joh. 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Q. Had the other Apostles power, and their successors, as well as Peter, and
in the same sense and manner to forgive sins, or to declare unto man
remission? Were the Keys given to the other Apostles besides Peter?

A. Yes. Joh. 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit etc.

Q. Does the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans mention any such privilege of
the Roman Church, that to her were committed the Holy Scriptures, and the
Interpretation of them? or were the Holy Scriptures of old committed to the
Jewish Church?

A. Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage has the Jew? -- Unto them were committed the
oracles of God.

Q. When the Apostle Paul writes to the Corinthians, and charges them with
schism, faction, and division, was it because they did not hold of Cephas or
Peter? or was it because some held of Paul, and some of Apollo, and some of
Cephas, and some of Christ; that they cried up one to the decrying and
undervaluing of another?

A. 1 Corinthians. 1.12. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul,
and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.

Q. Did the Apostle Paul acknowledge Peter's Supremacy? or did Peter challenge
any Jurisdiction over Paul? or was it agreed when there was a distribution of
their Ministry, that one should apply himself to the Jews, and the other to
the Gentiles?

A. Galath. 2.7, 8, 9. But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was
unto Peter (for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the
circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.) And when James,
Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given
unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we
should go unto the Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision.

Q. When the Apostle reckons up the several Orders that God has set in the
Church, does he say first Peter, then the Apostles, after them Prophets, then
Peter's Successor, the Bishop of Rome, under Christ and the Apostle Peter the
chief Pastor and Teacher of the Church?

A. Ephesians. 4.11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.

Q. When the Apostle Peter his death approaches, and he undertakes to mind
those to whom he writes to make their calling and election sure, and tells them
if they do those things which he exhorts unto, they shall never fall, but have
an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Christ: And when
he treats of the Holy Scriptures, and foretells false Prophets to come, who
shall bring in damnable heresies, does he tell them they must follow the Bishop
of Rome when he is gone, and hear him, that he must interpret Scripture, be
Christ's Vicar, and oppose heretics and seducers?

A. No. 2 Epist. of Peter. 1.10, 11, 13, 15. Wherefore the rather Brethren,
give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these
things ye shall never fall. For so an entrance shall be administered unto you
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Yea I think
it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in
remembrance. Moreover I will endeavor, that you may be able after my decease
to have these things always in Remembrance. 2 Pet. 3.1, 2, 17, 18. This second
Epistle (beloved) I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds
by way of remembrance. That ye may be mindful of the words, which were spoken
before by the holy Prophets, and of the commandment of us the Apostles of the
Lord and Savior. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own steadfastness: but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Q. Did the Apostle Paul ever oppose and admonish the Apostle Peter?

A. Galath. 2.11, 12, 14. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him
to the face, because he was to be blamed. For before that certain came from
James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew, and
separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision. But when I saw
that they walked not uprightly, -- I said unto Peter before them all, If thou
being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, etc.

Q. Did the Apostle Peter quote and commend the Apostle Paul's Epistles,
notwithstanding he speaks nothing in them at all of Peter's supremacy, or of
his pretended Successor the Bishop of Rome?

A. 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. And account that the long-suffering of the Lord is
Salvation, even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom
given unto him, has written unto you. As also in all his Epistles, speaking in
them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction.

Q. Ought prayers for the congregation to be made in a known tongue in the
Congregation?

A. Yea. 1 Cor. 14.9, 14. Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken. For if I pray in an unknown
tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is unfruitful.

Q. Is it good to have Images in Churches, as Laymens books?

A. Exodus 20.4, 5. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, nor any
likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth
beneath, or that is in the water under the earth, thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them. 2 Cor. 6.16. And what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols.

Q. May we pray to Images?

A. Hab. 2.18, 19. What profits the graven image, that the maker thereof has
graven it? the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work
trusts therein, to make dumb Idols? Woe to him that says to the wood, Awake:
to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach: behold, it is laid over with gold
and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.

Q. May we make an Image of God, and worship God in, at, or before such Images,
using these as helps or means to worship him the better?

A. Is. 40.18. To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye
compare unto him? Act. 17.29. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or stone,
graven by Art, and man's device. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed
unto your selves (for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord
spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) Lest ye corrupt your
selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the
likeness of male or female etc.

Q. May Christians worship Images?

A. Exodus 20.5. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them.
Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of Idols. 1 John 5.21. Little children, keep your selves from Idols.

Q. Were ever any so stupid, as to worship Images or Idols?

A. Hab. 2.18, 19. What profits the graven image, that the maker thereof has
graven it: the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work
trusts therein, to make dumb Idols? Woe unto him that says to the wood,
Awake, to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach: there is no breath at all in
the midst of it. Is. 44.15, 17, 19. For he will take thereof, and warm
himself; yea he kindles it, and baketh bread; yea he makes a God, and
worshippeth it: he makes it a graven image, and falls down thereto. And the
residue thereof he makes a God, even his graven image, he falls down unto
it, and worshippeth it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou
art my God. And none considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge or
understanding to say, I have burnt part of it in the fire, etc. And shall I
make the residue thereof an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a
tree?

Q. Is Christ corporally present in the sacrament especially is the bread and
wine transubstantiated into the very body and blood of Christ?

A. No. Act. 3.21. Whom the heaven must receive, until the times of
restitution of all things. Joh. 16.28. Again I leave the world, and go to the
Father.

Q. Do those words Mat. 26.26. this is my body, prove that the bread is
transubstantiated into the very body of Christ, so that it is no longer bread,
but that very same body which suffered upon the cross, and as truly, really,
and substantially changed into his body, as the water was into wine. Joh. 2.9

A. No. Either as in 1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ, that is, did represent
Christ, or was a figure of Christ: so, This is my body, that is, this does
signify, or represent my body: or as circumcision which was a sign and seal
of the Covenant, is called the Covenant Act. 7.8. Genesis 17.10, 11. So these
words, This is my body, signify, that this bread does seal the benefits of my
broken body, or of my death unto you.

Q. Is the body of Christ so in one place, that it is not in another at the
same time?

A. Math. 28.6. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said, come see the place
where the Lord lay. Heb. 2.14, 17. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers
of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, etc. Wherefore in
all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren. etc.

Q. Ought not all the people, as well as the Minister, to drink of the cup at
the Lord's table?

A. Yea. Mar. 14.23. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks he gave
it to them, and they all drank of it. Math. 26.27. -- drink ye all of it.

Q. If we have not the body of Christ corporally in the Sacrament, have we then
any spiritual communion with his body and blood in that Sacrament?

A. Yes, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body:
for we are all partakers of that one bread.

Q. Did the Apostles receive the Sacrament Fasting, or after Supper?

A. Mat. 26.26. And as they were eating Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.

Q. Did they receive the Sacrament in a table gesture, or did they kneel?

A. Mar. 14.18. And as they sat, and did eat etc. verse. 22. Jesus took bread,
and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat; this is my
body.

Q. If the wine had been as really and truly turned or transubstantiated into
blood, as the water at the wedding was by Christ into wine, is it not probable
it would have tasted like blood?

A. Joh. 2.9, 10. When the Ruler of the Feast had tasted the water, that was
made wine, and knew not whence it was, etc. says, Every man at the beginning
does set forth good wine, and when men have well drunk then that which is
worse; but thou have kept the good wine until now.

Q. Is it the eating of, or feeding on Christ by Faith in the Sacrament, or is
it the corporal eating or manducation of his very flesh, which is available to
feed the soul unto eternal life?

A. Joh. 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing:
the words that I speak unto you they are Spirit, and they are life.

Q. May we lawfully say that the elements remain untransubstantiated, and that
they are really still and substantially bread and wine (only changed as to the
use) after consecration, because we see with our eyes, handle them, and taste
them to be such?

A. Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my Feet, that it is I my self: handle me
and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. John. 20.27.
Then says he to Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and
reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not Faithless etc.

Q. Does our Lord Christ use any other figurative expressions in the
institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper?

A. Yes. 1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.

Q. But are unlearned people able to understand such figurative expressions?

A. Yes. If a man was in a room, where are diverse pictures or Images, and
should hear one say, this is Peter, and this is Paul, he would understand his
meaning to be, this is the likeness, representation, Picture, or Image of
Peter and Paul.

Q. Has Christ given as much power to every true Church of God ordinarily to
forgive sins, as he did to Peter, or the other Holy Apostles?

A. Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Q. Is it more evident by Scripture that the Apostle Peter was the Apostle of
the Jews or circumcision, than of the Gentiles?

A. Gal. 2.7, 8. When they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter: For he
that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Circumcision, the
same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.

Q. Suppose the Apostle Peter was Bishop of Rome, does that make it more
impossible for the Church of Rome to err, or fall from the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, than for the Jews?

A. Romans 11.17, 18, 20, 21. And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou
being a wild olive tree were graffed in amongst them, -- boast not against the
branches, -- because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
Faith: be not high minded, but fear.

Q. Did God promise his presence of old with the Church of the Jews?

A. Romans 9.4. Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the Promises.

Q. May those who are God's children and people be unchurched?

A. Act. 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary
that the word of God should first have been spoken to you, but seeing ye put it
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo! we turn to
the Gentiles.

Q. Was the true Church of God amongst the Jews always a congregation of true
worshippers visibly and notoriously distinct from Idolaters? or were the true
worshippers sometimes hid amongst Idolaters, as wheat in a heap of chafe?

A. 1 King. 19.18. Yet I have left me 7000 in Israel, all the knees which have
not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him.

Q. Is it possible that the Protestants should be of the true Religion, if they
grant that their Church was in spiritual Babylon or Egypt, that is, in the
Romish Church, before the Reformation?

A. Yes. Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you.

Q. Who is the chief rock and foundation upon whom the Church is built, is not
Christ?

A. 1 Cor. 10.4. For they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and
that rock was Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can no man lay, than
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Q. Are any of the Apostles called foundations, or especially any besides Peter?

A. Yes. Re. 21.14. And the wall of the City had 12 foundations, and in them
the names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb. Ephesians. 2.20. And are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone.

Q. Are any of the Apostles besides Peter, accounted Pillars, Columns, or
supporters in the Christian Church, that spiritual building?

A. Yes. Gal. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars,
etc.

Q. May Sovereign Princes with the Advice of the Ministers of the Gospel in
the Churches within their dominions reform abuses and errors crept into the
Churches?

A. 2 Chr. 29.5, 16. Hear me ye Levites, sanctify now your selves, and
sanctify the house of the Lord God of your Fathers, and carry forth the
filthiness out of the holy place. And the Priests went into the inner part of
the house of the Lord to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that
they found in the Temple of the Lord into the court of the house of the Lord;
and the Levites took it to carry it out abroad into the brook Kidron. 2 Chr.
34.30, 31. And the King went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Priests, and the Levites, and
all the people great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the
book of the Covenant, that was found in the house of the Lord. And the King
stood in his place, and made a Covenant before the Lord to walk after the
Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes,
with all his heart, and with all his soul etc.

Q. Is that a true Church where the word is truly and duly taught? or is it
the true mark of a sheep of Christ to hear the voice of him the great
Shepherd?

A. Yes. 1 Timothy 3.15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar
and ground of the truth. Joh. 8.13. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed. Joh. 10.27. My sheep hear my voice.

Q. Do the Papists abstaining from flesh 40 days every Lent, fast as Christ
for 40 days in the wilderness? or did our Savior fast from all manner of
food during that time?

A. Mat. 4.2. And when he had fasted 40 days and 40 nights, he was afterward
an hungered.

Q Did our Savior and his disciples keep any set weeks of fast yearly, or any
set days of fasting weekly in remembrance of this all the while Christ was
with them?

A. No. Mar. 2.18. Why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but
thy Disciples fast not.

Q. Is it lawful for Christians to fast upon extraordinary occasions?

A. Mar. 2.20. But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days. 1 Corinthians. 7.5. -- that ye
may give your selves to fasting and prayer etc.

Q. Is every Christian a vessel fit for his Masters use, as to this duty of
fasting? are ordinary servants fit for extraordinary service?

A. Mar. 2.22. And no man puts new wine into old bottles: else the new wine
does burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be
marred. But new wine must be put into new bottles.

Q. Is fish holier than flesh, because these perished not by water, when the
old world was drowned?

A. Exodus 7.20, 21. And he lift up the rod, and smote the waters that were in
the river in the sight of Pharaoh; -- and all the waters that were in the river
were turned to blood. And the fish that was in the river dyed: and the river
stunck, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river.

Q. Were fish, or the beasts and fowls preserved in a more wonderful manner
in Noah's Ark at the flood?

A. Genesis 8.17. Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of of
all flesh both of foul, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth, that they may breed abundantly.

Q. Were there any kinds of fish reckoned unclean according to the Law?

A. Yes. Lev. 11.10. And all that have not finnes nor scales in the Seas, and
in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is
in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you.

Q. Is it a duty then in imitation of Christ's 40 days fast, to abstain from
flesh 40 days in a year?

A. No. Mat. 15.9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men.

Q. Is it a Doctrine of Apostates to command to abstain from some sort of
meats?

A. Yes. 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. Now the spirit speaks expressly that in the latter
times some shall depart from the Faith, -- forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the truth.

Q. Do the Saints departed know our wants? should we pray to them, or to God
for supply?

A. Is. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer.
Job. 14.20, 21. Thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away; his Sons
come to honor, and he knows it not: and they are brought low, but he
perceives it not of them.

Q. Ought we to pray for the dead, since we must not pray to them?

A. 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. And he said, while the child was yet alive I fasted and
wept: for I said, who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the
child may live. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him
back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Q. Are all damned who dye without Baptism?

A. No. Luke 23.42, 43. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom; And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Q. May Women without scruple or fear administer the Sacrament of Baptism?

A. 1 Timothy 2.12. But I suffer not a woman to teach -- but to be in silence.
compared with Math. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. Will full Assurance of life cause Christians to neglect the use of all good
means?

A. Act. 23.11, 16, 17. Be of good cheer Paul, for as thou have testified of me
in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome. And when Paul's Sisters
Son heard of their laying in wait, he went and entered into the Castle, and told
Paul. Then Paul called one of the Centurions unto him, and said, Bring this
young man unto the chief Captain, for he has a certain thing to tell him.
Act. 27.24, 31. Fear not Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo!
God has given thee all them that sail with thee. Paul said to the Centurion,
and to the Soldiers, except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.

Q. Were any of the Apostles married, especially was the Apostle Simon Peter
ever married?

A. Yes. 1 Cor. 9.5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well
as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. Mar. 1.30. But
Simon's Wives mother lay sick of a fever.

Q. Did our Savior Christ command that the Apostles should forsake their
Wives, and that other Ministers their successors should not marry?

A. No. 1 Cor. 9.5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well
as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. 1 Timothy 3.2, 4.
A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife -- one that rules
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity. Heb.
13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled, but whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge.

Q. Is it necessary that those who live a long time in their sins, repent late,
and do not suffer much in this world, should suffer in purgatory after death,
to expiate their sins?

A. Lu. 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.

Q. Is Heaven called Paradise?

A. Yes. 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. I knew a man in Christ -- such a one caught up to
the third Heaven: and I knew such a man, -- how that he was caught up into
Paradise, etc.

Q. Can any mere man by his own good works merit heaven or eternal life?

A. Lu. 17.10. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things, that
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants. Romans 6. ult. For the
wages of Sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Q. Is the Church of Rome or the Pope infalible, because of the promises made
to Peter, Mat. 16.18. Luke 22.32.

A. As Herod might and did err in cutting off John Baptists head,
notwithstanding that he succeeded into the place of David and Solomon, Kings of
the Jews, and notwithstanding the saying that is written, Prove. 16.10. A
divine sentence is in the King's lips, his mouth transgresses not in judgment.
So the Bishop of Rome, or the Church of Rome, or any other particular Church or
person, may now err, notwithstanding what was once said to Peter. Secondly,
Jesus Christ prayed that Peter might not fall from his Faith in Christ totally
and finally, or that the Devil might not prevail over him, notwithstanding he
foresaw he would shake him and winnow him sore: and this latter promise was
made good to Peter in his own person; for although through temptation he denied
Christ outwardly, yet it came not from his heart, and he repented of his
denial, and professed and preached Christ afterward. And if this promise should
reach or belong to the Bishop of Rome, as Peter's Successor, it should only
prove, that the Bishop of Rome should not fall away utterly from the Faith,
although sometimes he should deny it outwardly: For nothing can reasonably be
thought to be obtained for Peter's pretended Successor, which was not prayed
for, and obtained for Peter himself.

As for the former promise, Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter etc. Understand it thus,
that thou Peter shall lay the first notable foundation of the Christian Church
amongst Jews and Gentiles, and this Christian Church thus founded (by thee in
a more especial manner) shall never be destroyed: and we read Act. 2. that
Peter did most eminently and successefully first preach to, and convert the
Jews to Christianity: and we read again Act. 10. that he did most eminently
and successefully first preach the Gospel to, and convert the Gentiles to
Christianity: and accordingly there shall be a Christian Church thus, and in
this sense begun to be founded by him, so long as the world endures; nor shall
the gates of hell be ever able wholly to root out Christianity: but it is not
promised that any particular Church, whether amongst Jews or Gentiles, and
whether that of Antioch or of Rome, founded by him under Christ, shall never
wholly Apostatize from the Faith. This we Protestants confess, that the
Christian faith or Doctrine was built or founded upon the preaching of the
twelve Apostles of Christ, whereof Peter was one of the most eminent Pillars,
or subordinate Founders or Foundations; and yet it must be remembered, that the
rest of the Apostles are called Foundations in Rev. 21. v. 14. And that our
Lord Christ himself is the chief Foundation, the Fundamentum fundamentorum,
and other such foundation can no man lay, 1 Corinthians. 3.11.

Q. Was Peter's Successor the Bishop, or by any good consequence, the Church
of Rome, the Foundation stone to which all must be joined and cemented, or else
they will prove but loose stones, or built on the sand, or but foolish
builders? or (to use the expression of Mr Baxter) must Paul be damned, because
he was not one of Peter's subjects?

A. No. 1 Pet. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious,
to whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of
God and precious, ye also as lively stones are built up a spiritual house, an
holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ: wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold I lay in Sion a
chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded.

Q. Did Christ make Peter King, or Lord, and Ruler over the rest of the
Apostles?

A. Lu. 22.24, 25, 26. And there was also a strife amongst them which of them
should be accounted the greatest. And he said unto them, the Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon
them are called Benefactors: But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest
among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does
serve. Joh. 21.21, 22. Peter seeing him says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall
this man do? Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry 'till I come, what
is that to thee? Follow thou me. Gal. 2.6, 9. But of these who seemed to be
somewhat (whatsoever they were it makes no matter to me, God accepts no
man's person) for they who seemed to be somewhat, in conference added nothing
to me. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be Pillars etc.

Q. Did not Christ say to Peter, feed my Lambs, and feed my sheep, Joh. 21.15,
16. And does not this give Peter the power and privilege of Universal Pastor,
and consequently give the Pope power of Universal Bishop over the whole Church
of God?

A. Mat. 28.16, 19, 20. Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee, etc.
Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always. Act. 20.28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the flock of God, which is
among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not
for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being Lords over God's
heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

Q. Was the Church of Rome appointed the Head and Mistress of all Churches by
Christ? And did the Apostle John, the last surviving Apostle, apply himself to
(...) and write Epistles to her, or to the 7 ^^urches in Asia?

A. Rev. 1.4. John to the 7 Churches of Asia, Grace be unto you etc.

Q. Should it scare a Protestant from his Religion, because the Papists say it
is heresy?

A. Act. 24.14, 16. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers. -- And herein do I
exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men.

Q. Does the Church of Rome at this day thwart the practice of the Primitive
Church, recorded in Scripture?

A. Yes. In their service in an unknown tongue they contradict the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.18, 19, 27, 28. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than you all;
yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by
my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue. If any man speak in an unknown tongue -- let one interpret: but if
there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the Church, and let him speak
to himself and to God.

In the peoples communicating in one kind only, namely, partaking of the bread,
but not of the cup, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. After the same manner also he took the
cup, when he had supped, saying, This is the new testament in my blood, this
do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death 'till he come.

In worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in
a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels etc. Rev. 22.8, 9. And I John
saw these things, and heard them, and when I had heard and seen, I fell down to
worship before the feet of the Angel, which showed me these things. Then says
he unto me, see thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow servant, and of thy
brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship
God.

And in worshipping of Images, Ex. 20.4, 5. Thou shall not make unto thee any
graven image, or any likeness of any thing, that is in heaven above, or that
is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; Thou shall
not bow down thy self to them, Robert Whitgift, Abbot of the Monastery of
Wellow in Lincolneshire, said, that they and their Religion could not long
continue, because (said he) I have read the whole Scripture over and over, and
could never find therein, that our Religion was founded by God. Leigh out of
the life of Archbishop Whitgift by Sr. George Paul.
nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, etc.

Q. Have the Ancient Fathers, Councils, and Churches, held all points of
belief, of ceremony, and of Discipline, as the Church of Rome now does?

A. No. The present Chuch of Rome notwithstanding their great boast of
Antiquity, does hold some points of Doctrine which the Ancients did not, and
does not hold some which the Ancients did. Again, they practice at this day
diverse ceremonies which the Ancients did not, and have left off the use of
diverse Ancient ceremonies. And lastly, the present Church of Rome has laid
aside the exercise of diverse points or matters of Discipline which the
Ancients used. See all this proved by Mr Dallie's Treatise of the Fathers. l.
2. p. 143, 144.

Q. Were there any before Luther, who dissented from the doctrine of the
present Romish Church, and who would not subject their necks to her yoke and
government, or who thought her fallible?

A. Yes. Before Luther there were diverse eminent and famous witnesses to the
truth of that Religion and Doctrine for the main, which the Protestants hold
diverse from the present Church of Rome. See for the proof of this in Scultetus
his Medulla Patrum, of the judgment of the Fathers for the first 300 years. Dr
Field of the Church. Birckbeck's Protestant Evidence. Mr Perkin's his
Demonstration of the Problem: and concerning worshipping of Images, See Dr
Westfield's Sermons on the Calfe.

Q. Do the Pagans and Papists agree in the manner of worshipping Images?

A. See Bp Westfield's Sermons: where out of an Apocrypha book, yet such as the
Church of Rome accounts canonical, he shows, that there are diverse things
done to the Popish, that were by the old Babylonish Idolaters done to their
Images: as before in the Preface.

Q. May a man be surely saved if he exercise Repentance toward God, and Faith
in our Lord Christ, although he be no member of the Roman Church, or Disciple,
or subject of the Pope, or Bishop of Rome?

A. Joh. 3.16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes
to me, I will in no wise cast out. Gal. 6.15, 16. For in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as
many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God.

Q. Is it a safer way to come to the Church of Rome, than to those commonly
called Protestants, or Reformed Churches?

A. No, by no means. 2 These. 2.11, 12. And for this cause God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned,
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Rev. 14.9,
10, 11. And the 3d Angel followed them saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever.
And they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image,
whosoever receives the mark of his name.

Q. Is the Pope, Church of Rome, or any like them, described there? How can
they be said to exalt themselves above all that is called God? etc. 2 These.
2.4. etc.

A. Psalm. 82.1, 6. God stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges
among the Gods. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the
most High.

FINIS.
A Table showing the contents of the several Chapters in This Treatise.
Cap. 1 The Introduction. Page 1 Cap. 2 Of Error. Page 7 Cap. 3 Of the holy
Scriptures. Page 9 Cap. 4 Of God, and the Trinity. Page 18 Cap. 5 Of God's
Decrees. Page 40 Cap. 6 Of the Creation, and first estate of man. Page 45 Cap.
7 Of sin and it is bitter fruits. Page 48 Cap. 8 Of Redemption by Christ. Page
5^ Cap. 9 Of Predestination. Page 56 Cap. 10 Of God's Providence. Page 59 Cap.
11 Of Faith, Repentance, and Assurance of Salvation. Page 66 Cap. 12 Of Prayer.
Page 87 Cap. 13 Of Marriage. Page 90 Cap. 14 Of Mothers nursing their own
children. Page 91 Cap. 15 Of Women's painting themselves. Page 93 Cap. 16 Of
Children with respect to holy things. Page 104 Cap. 17 Of Baptism. Page 111
Cap. 18 Of public Worship. Page 117 Cap. 19 Of an Oath. Page 124 Cap. 20 Of
Burial of the dead. Page 128 Cap. 21 Of Angels. Page 131 Cap. 22 Of Ministers.
Page 135 Cap. 23 Of Churches and Ordinances. Page 155 Cap. 24 Of Singing of
Psalms. Page 176 Cap. 25 Of Church Discipline. Page 180 Cap. 26 Of
civil-Magistrates, and the Commonwealth. Page 185 Cap. 27 Of Soldiers. Page
196 Cap. 28 Of Quakers. Page 208 Cap. 29 Of Popish Erours. Page 233
Errata.
PReface, page 22. lin. 2. for others r. flies. l 7. r. stolen. l. 14. r.
Featly. p. 35. l. 10. r. subsistent. p. 92. l. 12. r. yearly. p. 10 (...).
last. r. Since it is not. p. 122. l. 17. r. but now p. 79. l. 4. r. vild. p.
181. l. 16. r. comfort. p. 209. l. 1. r if they did.


