THE HOARY HEAD CROWNED.

A Sermon Preached at BRACKLEY at the Funeral of FRAN: WALBANK, A Very Aged
and Religious MATRON.

BY Thomas Hodges B. D. Rector of Souldern, and lately one of the Sen: Fellows
of St John's Coll. Cambridge.



OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for THO.
ROBINSON. Anno Dom. 1652.

TO HIS VERY AGED AND MUCH HONORED Grandfather JOHN MORLEY.
Sir,
GOD having multiplied your days to Fourscore years and upwards, and your
Seed to above an hundred, and in both respects honored you; Give me leave I
pray you, (who under God, had my being from you at first, and many blessings
since) according to my bounden duty; to Endeavor (so far as I am able) to
honor You before the people. The truth is this Text I designed to have
preached upon to your ears; but that purpose miscarrying, I am bold to present
it here into your hands. And because, through distance of place and other
Impediments, I cannot hope to Preach often to you, or speak with you face to
face; I shall not content my self with the bare tender of one single Sermon to
your eyes; But shall take upon me, with your favor, to direct you how to
Preach to your self daily, when other preachers are absent, or silent, or
cannot through your age be heard; And how to Commune with your own heart, and
speak to your self, when you have none else with whom you may converse, or when
your self may be speechless. To this purpose, that the Preacher in your bosom
(your own conscience) may never want a seasonable Text, and matter for a
soul-saving Sermon, let me Commend to your most serious study and daily
meditation especially three Scripture-Dialogues, or Conferences, and two
precious promises. The Conferences are these.

1. That which you read in the 2. of Samuel: 19:34, 35, 36. which was betwixt
King David and Barzillai; wherein you may see the vanity of all earthly
delights, especially in old age.

2. That of Christ, and Nicodemus a master in Israel John: 3.4, 5, 6, 7. verse:
Wherein is taught the necessity of regeneration to all, old and young, before
they can enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and where is made good that other
saying, which is written 2. Corinthians: 5.17. If any man (whether young or old) be
in Christ he is a new creature.

3. That betwixt our Savior and Martha concerning her brother Lazarus: John
11:21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. where we find, that believing in the Lord Jesus
(which in Ioh: 7:37, 38. is expounded to be a coming unto him) is the only way
to attain to life in and after death, even to attain to the resurrection of the
dead.

The Promises are First, that which is recorded Esaiah: 46:4, 5. which although
it be propounded to the house of Jacob in general, yet it truly and
particularly belongs to every one that is an Israelite indeed: Hearken unto me,
O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are born by
me from the belly, which are carried from the womb, and even to your old age I
am he, and even to hoarie hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will
bear, even I will carry, and I will deliver you.

The other is written Hos: 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the
grave: I will redeem them from death: O death I will be thy plagues: O grave I
will be thy destruction. I know it is true, that it is appointed to men once to
dye, Heb. 9.27. Notwithstanding this promise. Yet the blessed Apostle Paul
assures us that at last, This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality, and that the time will come when shall be
brought to pass, the saying that is written, death is swallowed up in victory.
1 Cor. 15.53, 54.
These two promises, laid hold on by faith, may serve as two staves, and both
of them staves of beauty, wherewith to support your old age, and to stay you
when you walk through the valley of the shadow of death, and near the mouth of
the pit, that you fall not. I shall no further preach to you, but leave the
application to the Preacher within you above mentioned. Yet I shall not let you
go till I pray for you, and bless you. It Is more usual for Parents to lay up
prayers and blessings for their Children, then Children for their Parents: Yet
I remember that Melchizedech, the Priest of the High-God, blessed Abraham the
father of the faithful: And consider that it is one part of the Priests office
to bless the people; And therefore I hope, that (being a preacher descended
from your own loins, and having in this Epistle and Sermon thus taken upon me
to preach to you) I shall not be offensive, if herein I come unto you too, as a
minister, in the fullness of the blessings of the Gospel of Christ, if I bless
you also, O my father. The Lord convince you more and more of the need of a
Savior, of the worth of Jesus: The Lord help you to roll your self living and
dying upon the mercies of God and the merits of Christ: You have a double Crown
already, that of a hoary head, and that of a Grandfather, (for Childrens
Children are the Crown of old men: Prove: 17:6. But both these are Corruptible:
Oh that you may have a Crown of righteousness, that Crown of Glory which
fades not away, reserved in heaven for you: May your Gray hairs never come
with sorrow to the grave: but that after God has added to your days (if it be
his will) many more years, your good old age (in which, Solomon says, we shall
say, we have no pleasure) may be swallowed up in a happy and blessed Eternity:
And that you may for ever there in joy God our and your first and last father,
and live with him; In whose presence is fullness, of Joy, and at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore.

So prays, Your most Dutiful and Affectionate Son Thomas Hodges.
November. 23: 1652.
Prove. 16.31. The Hoary Head is a crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness.

(...)


THE Text is the old man's Patent of Honor. The hoary head, that is old age, or
the old man, is a crown of glory, that is, is honorable and glorious, is to
be reverenced and honored by us: As we reverence those upon whose heads men
set crowns and Diadems of silver and gold; so especially ought we to honor
those men, whom the God of heaven (the first fountain of all Honor) does
crown with a Hoary head, or white hairs, by reason of age. The latter part of
the verse is diversely translated; some have it thus, it is found, or shall be
found in the way of righteousness: and then the sense is this, honorable old
age is to be attained in the way of righteousness, or to live well is the way
to live long. Our last translators have put in the word if which is not in the
Original, to note that then old men are most to be honored when they are
religious, when they walk in the way of righteousness. according as the Geneva
translation has it. Age is a Crown of glory when it is found in the way of
righteousness. Both these translations hold forth a truth, viz: that God does
give long life to godly and Religious men: and that we ought to give more
especial honor to holy and religious old men. Those men, who besides the
silver crown of old age, have upon their heads the golden crown of religion,
are most honored by God, and ought so to be by men. The sum of all may
amount to thus much. viz. That a good old age which God usually, or ordinarily,
bestows upon good men, is honorable, and glorious; or ought to render them
very honorable in our eyes.

I shall take occasion from this Text to treat of the honor of old age, and to
that purpose I shall endeavor to show, 1. That old age is honorable and
glorious. 2. Why old age is so honorable. 3. How we are to honor old age. 4.
By what means we may attain to the honor of old age. 5. What is that old age
upon which God and good men, bestow the most abundant honor.


1. Of the first. Old age is truly honorable, Whether we consult the law of
Scripture, or the law of anture; either God's or man's Heraldrie.

1. God has commanded us to honor the hoarie head; thus shall it be done to
the man whom the King of heaven delights to honor. Levit. 19.32. Thou shall
rise up before the hoarie head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear
thy God; as ever thou fear the Lord thy God, see that thou reverence age;
yea it is the first commandment with promise. Ephesians: 6:7. That which requires us
to honor old age under the name of father and mother, it is the first
commandment which has any special promise annexed unto it; old men are
comprehended within this commandment as fathers, and old women, as mothers. 1.
Timoth: 5.1, 2. rebuke not an elder, but entreat him as a father and the
younger men as brethren: the elder women as mothers etc. And, because the
mother is usually most despised, therefore it is thought that in Levit: 19:3.
God commands the fear of the mother, in the first place, saying, Ye shall fear
every man his Mother and his Father. Again, because the devil will teach us to
break over the hedge where it is lowest, namely to slight our mother in her old
age, because of the weakness of her sex, and of the infirmites of old age
concurring together: therefore has God not left himself without witness, nor
us without warning against this sin; But has made especial provision to stop
this gap and to make up, and make strong this fence, with that saying Proverbs
23:22. Hearken unto thy father that begat thee and despise not thy mother when
she is old:

2. The Scripture makes this an argument of the dissolution of all polity and
good government in a Kingdom or State, when the aged are not duly honored.
So much is intimated: Esa: 3:5. the child shall behave him felfe proudly
against the ancient, and the base against the honorable. And indeed when once
it comes to this, that every boy, or young stripling, dares demean himself
insolently toward the ancient, whom he ought to reverence and honor; then
behold confusion in every state according as is threatened Esa. 24:2, 3. Then
farewell all good order and distinction and regard of persons in Church and
State, It was a sad presage of the mine of the Jews, that they respected not
the persons of the Priests, and that they favored not, or accepted not, the
elders, or ancients. Lament: 4:16: If we understand the place of the Jews, as
some: Or else it is accounted barbarousnesse even in an enemy, not to respect
calling, or age, not to respect the Priests, not to favor the Elders, if we
understand the place of the Chaldeans, as others. Agreeable hereunto we read in
2: Chron: 37:17: that the King of the Chaldees had no compassion on young man
or maiden, old man or him that stooped for age.

3. We find in 1: Sam: 2:30: that when God threatened Eli's house to degrade
them from their honor; he presently adds v: 31, 32, 33: (once and again)
there shall not be an old man in thy house: and a third time: all the increase
of thine house shall dye in the flower of their age: But on the contrary, to
dye in a good old age, is spoken of as a blessing, Job 5:26: thou shall come to
thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in in his season:
that is, as the corn stands against all storms of wind and rain until it be
fully ripe, and then is gathered into barn, (being first made up in shocks,) so
shall thou stand upon the earth, and not be ruined, or reaped whilst thou art
green, till thou art ripe and full of days; and then, and not till then, shall
thou come to thy grave as ripe corn into barn. Yea it is promised to
Jerusalem, after the return from the Captivity, Zachar: 8:4: that there should
yet old men and old women dwell in her streets, and every man with his staff in
his hand for very age. Let me add that Romans 9:4. it is reckoned amongst the
honorable privileges of the Israelites (as that Jesus Christ was their
brother according to the flesh, so) that theirs were the Fathers. And thus much
may suffice for the Blazoning of this ancient Coat of Honor according to
Scripture Heraldrie.

I might also show, how the Gentiles, who had only the light of nature, yet did
reverence and honor old age. Plato in his Commonwealth, ordered, that the
Elders should be honored. Ovid tells us how of old time they were reverenced
amongst the Romans. Lib: 5. Fast.

Magna fuit quondam capitis reverentia cani,
Inque suo precio ruga senilis erat.
Juvenal says, that in the golden age, they counted it a capital crime if a
young man, (though a rich man, did not rise up to an old man, though a poor
man,) Juve: Sat. 13. Credebant hoc grande nefas and morte piandum,
Si Juvenis vetulo non assurexerit. etc.
And this may suffice to have been spoken for the proof of the first thing
propounded, namely, that old age is honorable and glorious

II. Of the second. viz: Why old men are so honorable.

1. Because they are an honor to the place where they live: living monuments
of Honor. They honor us, and therefore it is but reason we should honor them.
Antiquity is very attractive; that side old men go on usually bears the
greatest sway and authority: Old men are loadstons to draw younger ones their
way. And truly there was not so great a contest about the young child before
Solomon whose it was; as there is to this day betwixt us Protestants and the
Papists, about the ancient fathers of the Primitive Church: The Romanists say,
the fathers are theirs; and We say; Nay, but the fathers are ours: nor without
marvel for non sum melior patribus (I am not better then the fathers,) is a
Motto well becoming the best man, and greatest Scholar.

2. Because they are an help to the societies, whereof they are members, in
respect of their wisdom and prudence, much increased by their long experience
in humane affairs. As they are the Crown of a people, so they are their
council. The great court of the Jews was called the council of the seventy
Elders: and the great court of Rome the Senate, and their Counselors Senators
(from senes old men,) and Fathers, Patres conscripti; and in the New Testament,
the Church consistory is called the Eldership; and the Church Officers,
Presbyters or Elders. From all which, we may gather, that the Judgment of old
men, is usually better then of younger men: according to that Job Ch: 12:12.
with the ancient is wisdom and in length of days is understanding. This is
likewise intimated Levit: 11:32. where instead of thou shall rise up before the
hoarie head: the Chaldee Paraphrase has it, thou shall rise up before the
wise. And Esa: 3.2. God threatens to take away from Judah and Jerusalem, as the
mighty man and the man of war, so the prudent and the Ancient: The prudent and
ancient are equivalent terms. It Is very remarkable that when Rehoboam forsook
the advice of the old Counselors, he soon lost ten tribes at a clap.

3. Because old men are, in a sort, God's deputies and viceroys here in the
world. They seem nearer to approach to the ancient of days, then the young
generation do. I know indeed that, properly and strictly, God is not old: for
vetus Deus aliquando non erit: as novus Deus aliquando non fuit: for that which
waxes old, says the Scripture, is near unto vanishing away, yet he is styled
in Scripture the Ancient of days; the Everlasting Father; the God of Eternity.
And it is an argument, that the religion of the Gentiles was not the most
ancient, because their Gods were but younglings: their genealogy and pedigree
was known. It was objected by Arnobius to the heathen, that not only recens
nata erat eorum religio, sed et dii ipsi erant infantes and parvuli and such as
had need of milk, and not of strong meat, such as were their sacrifices of
sheep, etc.

III. Of the third, How we are to honor old men.

1. We must rise up before the hoarie head. Levit. 19:32. God proclaims before
them, as Pharaoh caused to be proclaimed before Joseph, Abrech i.e. Bow the
knee: Or not much unlike to that which was proclaimed before Mordecai, by the
commandment of Ahasuerosh; Lo thus shall it be done to the good old man, who^
the King of heaven delights to honor. God who is himself no accepter of
Persons, or faces, yet commands us to respect the Person, or face of the old
man.

2 We must speak honorably of them, and reverently to them. 1 Timoth: 5.1, 2.
rebuke not an elder, but entreat him as a father. etc. In the 2 of Kings:
13.14. We find even wicked King Joash, King of Israel, coming to visit the old
Prophet Elisha when he was sick; weeping over his face, Oh my father, my
father; the Charets of Israel and the horsemen thereof: bewailing Elisha, with
the same words, wherewith he had, above 50 years before bewailed his master
Elija: Ch: 2: v. 12. of the same Book.

3: Give old men the honor of speaking first, and the honor of due attention.
Job 32.7: I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom. Let old men in Civills be your Oracles: the Poets fain young Phaeton,
to have set the world on fire: You will find it, for the most part, no fiction,
that young men are the hotspurs the Incendiaries, which set Church and state on a
flame:

IV Of the fourth, How we may attain to the honor of old age.

I answer, We may find it in the way of righteousness; Seek the kingdom of
God and his righteousness. Get part in the righteousness of Christ; and, as
he is righteous so be ye righteous in all manner of Conversation; and this is
indeed Via recta ad vitam longam, the right way to long life, yea to
everlasting life; for godliness has the promises of this life, and of that
which is to come. 1 Timothy: 4:8. And again, the fear of the Lord prolongeth days,
but the years of the wicked shall be shortened, Prove: 10:27. add to this, that
of the Psalmist Ps: 55:23. the bloody and deceitful man shall not live out
half his days: His Sun shall go down before it is noon: But more particularly:
I Get spiritual saving wisdom, that is, get Christ, and he will give thee
long life, Prove: 16:3. and 4.20, 21, 22. And truly Christ the wisdom of the
father, he has life, to bestow, and to whomsoever he will he gives it. I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, (says Christ) that is, I am the true way
unto life. With Christ is the wellspring, the fountain of life, of natural,
spiritual, and eternal life: Ask of him, and he will give thee living water.
He has living water and living bread, and a tree of life to give thee: and he
that eats or drinks of these, shall live for ever. David says, This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him; and for what did he ask, and did God hear him?
He asked life of him, and he gave him life, even length of days for ever and
ever. Psalm 21:4: verse.

2 Long life is to be attained by our honoring of and obedience to our parents
and elders. Exodus: 20. Honor thy father and thy mother, that they may lengthen
thy days: (...) prolongabunt dies tuos. Obedient children are children of many
prayers, and the parents prayers, are the means under God, whereby is procured
to them long life. Hence Parents prayers are called blessings. Besides it is
equal, (says one) that such as honor those by whom they receive life next
under God, should have their life continued and prolonged.

3 If thou desire life and love many days, that thou may see good, keep
thy tongue from evil and thy lips from speaking guile, Ps: 34:12, 13. 1 Peter
3, 10. Again, the wise man speaks expressly, Prove: 18, 21. death and life are in
the power of the tongue, and he that keeps his mouth keeps his life, Prove:
13.3. Many men's tongues are such sharp swords and razours, as to cut their own
throats.

4. Live much in heaven, if thou would live long upon the earth. Ps: 91.14,
15, 16. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him; I
will set him on high because he has known my name: He shall call upon me and I
will answer him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor
him: with long life will I satisfy him and show him my salvation. When God sees
men earthly minded, it is just with him to bring them speedily to the earth, to
say unto them Earth Earth Earth hear the word of the Lord: Earth thou art and
unto Earth shall thou return; I see thou art an Earthworm, and to the worms of
the Earth shall thou go: Thy flesh shall be for meat unto the worms of the
Earth. Oh get more and more, nearer and nearer acquaintance, with God; who is
our life and the length of our days: In his favor is life; the sense and
assurance of his love is a Cordial will renew our strength and renew our youth,
like the Eagles. Moses who talked with God as a man with his friend, Oh how
vigorous fresh and lively was he how green and flourishing was he to, and in,
old age. Deuteronomy: 34.7. it is said his eye was not dim, nor his natural force
abated: Enoch walked with God, and was translated and saw no Corruption.

The beloved disciple John, who lay most in the bosom of Christ, and had
afterward the greatest revelations of the mind of Christ concerning his
Church; He it was who survived all the rest of the Apostles upon earth. Paul
likewise, who whilst he lived upon earth was rapt up into the third heaven, He
was such an one as Paul the aged (so he styles himself) before he dyed: he had
the Crown of old age before the Crown of Martyrdom.

But you will say, many times the best and towardliest children, and most
righteous young me^, dye soonest, and never attain to old age: are cropped either
in the bud or blossom, or whilst they are green and flourishing, whilst their
breasts are full of milk, and their bones of marrow. We usually say, of those
who are remarkably forward in Religion and goodness above their fellows, they
are not like to live long, they are too good for this world. (...), whom God
loves best he takes first. How is it then, you teach us, that Religion and
righteousness, holiness, and heavenly-mindednesse, are the way to attain to a
good old age? especially, when it is sometimes notoriously known that wicked men
have the largest portion, as of the things of this life, so of life it self.

Ans. As concerning religious children which dye soon: I answer, It may be
their Parents doat too much upon them; It may be, they Idolize them: As the
wicked Israelites sometimes offered their children unto Idols, unto devils; So
too often it is seen, that good Parents are too too apt to make little gods,
that is indeed Idols of their children. And hence God is provoked to take from
such Parents the desire and delight of their eyes, and the dearly beloved of
their souls. Parents, you may kill your children with overmuch kindness: You
may kill the child with overloving it, as the Nurse does sometimes with
overlaying it. If you lay or hang too great a weight, or lean too hard, (that
is trust too much) upon one of these young and tender branches, you will soon
break it off the Tree of life. Children are flowers; if you carry them too much
in your bosom, they will wither and dye. Oh then forsake not the living God;
If you would have right to the living child, least God call this sin to
remembrance, and slay your child even the choycest of them.

Or, 2. I say it may be, God takes away such children from the evil to come;
either from temptations which they are likely to be exposed unto, and in danger
to be overcome by; or from the evil day coming upon the place where they
lived. God says in such cases, oh my son, or oh my daughter, enter into thy
chamber, shut the door, till these calamities be overpast. When there is danger
abroad, then Parents look out and fetch home their little ones; and so does God.

Or, 3. I affirm, that these children live much in a little time; that these
children are young in years as Josias was, 2 Chronicles: 34.3. but old in grace;
that these are the children which dye an hundred years old, as it is Es: 65.20.
these are like nimble Racers, who run as far in an hour as some heavy heeld
horses will go in a day: these are apt scholars, who having betimes learnt
their lesson, may have leave to go home the sooner: their work is soon done,
and the Lord of heaven and earth call them home to receive their reward.

Or 4. It may be said, that these children's loss of temporal life is
abundantly recompensed with eternal life. God promised long life, and he gives
them everlasting life, does he do them any wrong? he promised them a penny in
silver, and pays them a pound in Gold, yea a talent of gold, and is he not as
good, and better then his word? he promised such the silver crown of old age,
that corruptible crown, and he gives them the crown of glory, of everlasting
life, a crown which is incorruptible, and fades not away.

As for good men who dye young, those who are the glory of their time, and yet
dye in the flower of their age; I say, it is either because of some
disobedience, or unrighteousness before grace, or after grace received, for
which God pleases thus temporally to correct them; of this latter sort were the
unworthy Communicants at Corinth. 1. Cor. 11. to whom the bread of life became,
through their default, the bread of death. Or because men do at too much upon
these men, and begin to give the glory of God unto these, upon whom they see
his image and superscription. Or, where it is otherwise, the cases and examples
are very rare; a few exceptions from the general rule; and such as have,
although a short life, yet a sweet; such as have the life of life, that is, the
comforts and blessings of life in abundance, whilst they live, such as have
enough of the things of this life, and of life it self as much as is good for
them, and of the favor of God very much, which is better then life it self:
and when they dye, they are paid with usurie in heaven for the loss of a
temporary life here. Of whom I may say, in a sense, as it was said of Enoch,
they are not, because God has taken them; they walked with God, and they are
translated to him.

As for wicked men, who sometimes attain to a long life, it may be said that
they are a great while, rather then that they live a great while, as it was
said of one, diu fuit, non diu vixit: and, as we say of a ship, which has been
a long time tossed too and fro by storms and tempests, but has not all that
while tended toward the harbor, that she has been thus long driven to and
fro, but has not thus long sailed: So we may say of wicked men, they have been
a great while tossed to and fro in the sea of this world, but they have not
sailed long, because they have come never the nearer to the haven of rest,
after all their toil and labor. Whilst wicked men live they are far from
God, in whose presence is life, from whose favor is the comfort and crown of
life, they have bitterness in their greatest sweets, and death in their life.
The longest life of the wicked is but a moment, compared to eternity; the
sinner of an hundred years old lives not so long, but he may be truly and
properly said to dye eternally.

To dismiss the objection briefly, know that this is a general rule of Gods
own making, that godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is
to come. With long life will God reward and satisfy the righteous man; and at
last show him his salvation in heaven in the life everlasting. When it falls
out otherwise, as to temporalls, it is either rare, and that loss abundantly
repayed in eternal life; or else it is a Chastisement for some irregular and
exorbitant demeanor of our selves, or others in relation to us. It Is true as
the Preacher says, that all things fall alike to all; that is, frequently it is
so, and that sometimes it is worst in outward and worldly respects with the best
of men, of whom the world is not worthy; Yet when it is so, the fault is in
good men themselves, God is as it were constrained, for the love he bears
their precious souls, to make exceptions from his general rule, which is do
well and have well both here and hereafter. Say ye to the righteous, It shall
be well with him: and here the hoary head is a crown of glory, and it is found
in the way of righteousness.

V. And thus are we come to our fifth head, to show, what is that old age which
is most honorable. Although all old men (as old men) are in that respect
honorable, yet they are not all Peers of the Kingdom of heaven. Some
Translations render the Text, When it is found in the way of righteousness.

Surely the Elders that live well are worthy of double honor; honor these
Elders for they are honorable indeed. It Is recorded Act: 21.16. to the honor
of Mnason, that he was an old Disciple. Seniority in the society of Saints, as
Saints, should have honor. The Apostle Paul makes honorable mention of the
Elder Converts, Rom: 16.7. Salute Andronicus, and Junia my kinsmen, and my
fellow Prisoners, who are of note among the Apostles, who also were in Christ
before me. But on the other side, the sinner of an hundred years old is
accursed, Esa: 65.20. Or as the Wiseman says, Though a sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged: yet surely I know, that it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before him: But it shall not be well
with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days which are as a shadow,
because he fears not before God, Ecclesiastes 8.12.13. Sinners may say,
though never so hoary headed, the crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us
that we have sinned.

If you ask why Religious old men are worthy of the greatest honor: I answer,

1. Because these fathers are all, the sons of the most high, every one the
Son of a King, of the great King of heaven and earth: and they resemble their
heavenly Father, they who are holy as he is holy. And although Gods children
are an assembly of first borne; yet the elder any one is in grace, the greater
portion of honor ought he to have from, and above his brethren. If the elder
by natural generation and birth be to have double honor, surely the elder by
regeneration and a spiritual new birth much more. We find that good Shem and
Isaak and Jacob, though younger ones, got the birth-right-blessing and honor,
before their elder brethren.

2. Because religious men are the truly wise men, and the longer and greater
experience any one has had in religion, he is the more wise, and therefore
more honorable. We read Mat: 2.1. that there were wise men came to seek Jesus,
to worship him, truly they are deservedly called wise men, who ever seek
Jesus, and when they find him, worship him. They say the Turks account all
fools, Saints; and many amongst us Christians, account all Saints fools. But
the holy Scriptures, which alone are able to make us wise unto Salvation, teach
otherwise. Hear the word of the Lord, Job 28.28. And unto man he said, Behold
the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is
understanding. And if we will believe the wisest of men (Solomon) the Godly man
is the wise man, but the Sinner is the fool; as appears by his opposing the
sinner, and the wiseman Eccles: 9.18. One such wise man may be a means to
deliver a City. Eccl. 9.16. and upon that account ought to be honored. Yea 2 Samuel: 20.16. etc: It Is recorded that a wise woman saved the City Abel, that it
perished not in the Rebellion of Sheba the son of Bichri.

3. Because these religious old men are most beneficial, are the greatest
blessings, to the persons with whom, and to the places where they live; they
are the Walls and Bullworks of a City, they are the foundations and pillars of
a Nation, they are the Shields of the earth.

Q. But what is the special honor, which we must do religious old men?

A. We must reverence them inwardly, in our hearts, and outwardly, not in word
and in tongue only, but in deed and in truth. Whilst these precious Sonns of
Sion, our Fathers, and Elders, go on in heaven-way before us, Let us stand by
them, and stand for them, and in nothing be wanting to them: and when any of
them goes up to heaven before us, let that be the language of our hearts, which
was spoken by Elisha at the taking up of Elijah, my father, my father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.

2. We must obey these men's Counsels, and directions. Let Us make them, under
God, and the Scripture, our Oracles: Let the counsel of the Elders, be our
great and supreme Council: Let Us honor these as good Job was honored. Ch:
29.21. etc: Let Us give ear to these, let their speech drop upon us, let us
wait for them (...) man better then his mother, ( viz: his wife) but he must
honor still his mother before his wife. Consider her grievous pangs in
bringing us forth at first, and her great pains in bringing us up: and she
that bare with the thousand infirmities, weaknesses and follies of our infancy
and childhood; Let her be borne withal for some weaknesses of her sex, in her
old age: according as it is written Prove: 22.22. despise not thy mother, when
she is old. And now to conclude this Use, Oh that the great peacemaker, after
that our families have been divided, Father against Son, and Son against
Father, the Daughter against the Mother, and the Mother against the Daughter,
would (according to his promise once made to the Jews, Mal: 4.) Convert or
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the children to their
fathers, left he come and smite our land with a curse.

3. Then honor old men, especially religious old men. It was Idolatry, to
fall down and worship the golden Image, that Nebuchadnezzar had set up; but
it is Religion, to fall down and worship, with Civil worship or reverence, the
religious old man, whom God has set up. Go forth, O ye sons and daughters of
Jerusalem, and behold the good old man, with the Crown wherewith his heavenly
father has crowned him, in the day of his hoary head.

4. Is a good old age to be found in the way of religion and righteousness? Oh
then let the young generation, who desire to live long, and to see good days,
let them hence be exhorted to piety and holiness. Come ye children, hearken
unto me, and I will teach you the way to live to be honored old men; live well
if you would live long, The more you live to God, the longer you will live in the
world. the Papists have a saying, that Nemo senescit dum interest Missae, that
is, that no man is never the older for the time he spendes in hearing Mass.
Truly the time we spend in religion, and religious exercises, is time well
saved, is time redeemed. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength,
their youth shall be renewed like the Eagles. Ps: 103. But as for evil doers,
the Lord shall wound the hairie scalp, and the hoarie head too, of him that
goes on in his wickedness if he live to age. Well therefore does the wise man
advise, Ecclesiastes 7.17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, why
should thou dye before thy time? Men naturally desire to prolong their
days: To this end, what diet will they not keep? what exercises will they not
use? what Medicines will not they take? skin for skin and all that a man has
will he give for his life. The Princes and Potentates of the earth have their
Physicians to counsel them always what course to take, that they may live long
upon the earth: But behold I show unto you all this day a more exellent way;
and that is the way of the text, the way of righteousness. Get the Crown of
religion, if you would have that other crown of a hoarie head. The same way
that leads to Eternal life, leads to a long life.

More particularly; as ever you would live to a good old age, Beware of those
special sins, which ordinarily cut the thread of men's lives before the time;
which either as thieves do wast, or as winds blow out the candle of life
before it is burnt half to the socket.

1. As first, If thou desire to live to be old, take heed of Cains sin, the
sin of blood-guiltinesse: he that is guilty of of blood, may Justly fear, least
every one that meets him should slay him. The Hue and Cry, the blood-hound,
the Avenger of blood, does ordinarily overtake such before old age. Justice
says, Give him blood to drink for he is worthy.

2. The sin of uncleanesse, whether natural, or unnatural. For Onan's sin the
Lord slew him. God rained down fire from heaven upon the unclean Sodomites and
destroyed them speedily; the Lord made a short work with them: and Prove: 7.22.
it is said, He that follows an harlot, goes as an Ox to the slaughter.
Shechems sin of uncleanness with Dinah, cost him, his father and the
Shechemites their lives. So Amnon's incest with his sister Tamar cost him his
life.

3. Disobedience to Parents. When Hophni and Phinehas hearkened not to the voice
of their father, it was a sign and presage that the Lord would slay them.
Absolom's rebellion, against his father David, caused his sun to set at noon.
When the children of Bethel mocked the Prophet Elisha, saying, go up thou bald
head etc, (that is, why do not thou go up to heaven after thy master) two
she Bears tore 42 of them. 2 King: 2.24.

4. Covetousness, especially if dyed in oppression, and injustice. Immoderate
cares, fears, and excessive turmoyling, the usual concomitants of them that
will be rich, do naturally shorten the life of man: but besides an untimely
death seems to be the penalty denounced against this sin, according to the
Statute Law of the great Lawgiver, Jerem: 17.11. As the Partridge sits on
eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that gets goods, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool. As the
Partridg gathers eggs together to sit on, and to hatch, but hatcheth them
not, her eggs either proving windy and addle, as they say it often falls out
with those eggs which she has produced (as she does frequently) without the
company of the male, or otherwise miscarrying, (the male many times breaking
them that he may have the company of his mate.) Or else (as some others think)
the Partridge, or Heb: (...) Kore, having got together the eggs of other
Fowls; and sitting on them as her own, until they be hatched, they then leave
her, and keep with, and follow those of their own kind. So Covetous men
desirous to enrich themselves by oppression, and taking from others that which
is not their own, and sitting brooding upon the eggs, or baggs, which they
have thus gathered together, at last these their riches take themselves wings
and fly away. Prove: 23.5. or they are taken from them. Luke 12.20.

5. Is the hoarie head a crown of glory, if it be found, or when it is found,
in the way of righteousness? then hence we learn, that want of religon in an
old man is a great abatement of honor in his Coat. The best flower in his
garland, the choycest pearl of his crown, is wanting, The old sinner, together
with his crown, has a curse upon his head; the sinner of a hundred years old
is accursed. As God and man love an old Friend, so they hate and abhor an old
Enemy. Old sinners are like old toads, and old serpents, the fullest of
poison, and therefore most abominable. He is an old Thief, (says the Judge)
away with him, Away with him, it is not fit such an one should live. So says
God, he is an old Idolater, drunkard, unclean person, swearer, etc: I have
borne with him these forty, fifty, or sixty years and upwards, I crowned every
one of those years with my goodness, but (ungrateful, unworthy, wretch!) he
has gone on to rebel against me, and goes on to this day and will not turn;
Now therefore, oh ye evil angels, this night, or this week, or this year, see
ye that ye require his soul of him; or else, oh death let not his hoarie head
go down to the grave in peace, (as David charged Solomon concerning Joab, 1
King: 2.6.) or, oh thou sword of the Lord, his hoar head bring thou down to the
grave with blood (as David charged Solomon concerning Shimei. 1 King: 2.9.)

Oh consider this, ye old men, that have forgotten God, days without number,
even to this day and hour, consider this your cursed latter end, if you will
not turn your feet into the way of righteousness; least God tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you. For know it for a truth, that the
wicked and unrighteous, be they old or young, shall be turned into hell, and
all the people that forget God.

Again, Is old age then honorable when found in the way of righteousness?
Then hence young men may learn how far they may honor their Fathers and
Elders with the honor of imitation, how far they may follow their steps,
viz: no farther then they walk in the way of righteousness, then they follow
Christ. The old Prophet at Bethel deceived the young Prophet, the Devil, in
the habit of an old man, in Samuel's mantle, deceived Saul: the Gibeonites
deceived Josuah, and the Princes of Israel, with their old moldy bread, old
shoes, and old garments. And alas, how many thousands amongst us have been
seduced, even to oppose and fight against reformation, upon no other account
but this, these men will change our old customs, and our old conversations, or
manner of conversation received by tradition from our Fathers. And here let me
freely speak unto you old men of this generation: God would have had off your
bark of unprofitable Ceremonies, and have made you white and straight staves,
even staves of beauty in his hand, and this would not be done without putting
you in the flames of a Civil War a while.

And now be wise ye old men, and as you love your selves see that you oppose
not reformation; if you stand in Gods way, now that he comes as a Refiners fire
to purify his Churches from all their tin, and all their dross, he will burn up
the old oaks of Bashan, as very briers and thorns.

6. And therefore let me, in the next place, entreat all you old men, to suffer
a word or two of exhortation from this Text. Be hence persuaded, oh all ye
Elders of the congregation, to be righteous, to be holy. Take unto you the
Crown of Religion, better then a crown of stars, all you that have the crown
of a hoarie head. To persuade you hereunto, let me commend to you these ensuing
Considerations.

1. That the case of a wicked old man is very dangerous and dreadful; if he
dye in his sins, he shall receive greater damnation: the Furnace of Hell
shall be seven times hotter for these, then for young sinners. Oh these bundles
of Tares fully ripe, these old rotten Faggots of Briars and Thorns, (so wicked
men are called) how suddenly, how terribly, will they burn? Certainly it
shall be more tolerable for Er and Onan, (who were cut off betimes in their
sins) in the day of Judgment then for the sinners of a hundred years old.

2. The case of a wicked old man, although it be very dangerous, yet it is not
desperate: Some old festered soars have been healed; some old Chronick
diseases have been cured; it is not impossible to bow an old oak, yea to bend
the very heart of oak; art can do that God is a Surgeon can heal old
soars, a Physician can cure old Diseases; he has an Arm can bow the heart of
Oak; he that can of stones raise Children to Abraham, can if he please, and
when he please, of old sons of Belial, make Children of God. He that raised
up Lazarus, after he had been dead four days, can raise up sinners, who have
been dead in sins and trespasses, to the life of grace, to the life of faith,
after they have been spiritually dead fourscore years. The hour comes and
now is, says Christ, Joh: 5.25. When the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live. Note, it is said, the dead without
any limitation or restriction to any number of days, months, or years, how
long they have been dead: The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God
and live. Again the possibility of the conversion of an old man seems to be
granted, or supposed, by our Savior, in his conference with Nicodemus, Joh:
3.4, 5, 6, 7. where our Savior denies not the Regeneration of an old man, but
taxes Nicodemus his gross ignorance, in thinking an old man, if he be borne
again, must needs enter into his mothers Womb, when he is old.

3. Although the conversion of an old sinner is not absolutely impossible, yet
it is a hard work; it is a rare and mavelous work: If a Bone be many years out
of joint, it is exceeding difficult to set again, now sinners are Members out
of joint, as is intimated Galath: 6.1. (...) set such an one in joint again.
When our Savior Christ raised Lazarus, Joh: 11. we find that it cost him more
then to raise Jairus Daughter newly dead, or the Widow of Naims son carried
forth toward burial, he wept, he groaned in spirit, he prayed, he called upon
Lazarus with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, and he troubled himself, (...),
to teach us how hard a matter it is to raise an old sinner from the death of
sin to the life of grace. I have read that about three hundred and sixty
years after Christ, there was an old man, who had been a Pagan all his days
before, who in his old age hearkened after Christ, and said he would be a
Christian. Simplicianus hearing him say so, would not believe him; but when the
Church saw him a Christian indeed, there was shouting for gladness, and
singing in every Church, Caius Marius Victorinus is become a Christian! An old
sinner to become a young Saint is a great wonder. But yet because the
Conversion and Salvation of old sinners is not impossible, let me persuade and
direct the oldest sinners of all, that hear me this day, to turn their feet
into the way of righteousness, to accept of Salvation inter pontem and fontem,
(betwixt the bridge and the water, as we say,) to accept of a pardon when they
are just turning off the ladder; to accept of life now they are at the point of
death; hear all ye old men and your souls shall live: Our Lord Jesus Christ is
able and willing and ready to save old sinners; if you will accept of him for
your Savior upon his own (that is upon very honorable) terms.

Beloved, there is yet hope concerning your souls: God is willing to pluck you
yet as firebrarnds out of the burning; to rescue you out of the mouth of the
Lion, the roaring lion; to save you out of the belly of hell, that is, out of
the belly of that great Leviathan, who in his thoughts has already swallowed
you up. Oh therefore, now God calls to you, saying, How long! How long! When
will it once be? Return, return, why will you dye? Let every soul of you Echo
back again, surely this is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners of which I am Chief, and
again, How shall I escape, If I neglect such great salvation? God forbid but
that this goodness of God should lead me to repentance. Thus reason or commune
with thy own soul, before it be too late. Lo I have given the devil (God's
and my soul's enemy) the most generous refined wine, my young and sprightly
days; and will God now accept, can God find in his heart to accept of dregs?
of my old age? The devil has had the the finest flower, and will God be
contented with the bran? the devil and my sins have had a full harvest, and
will God to whom first fruits and all is due, be satisfied with gleanings the
devil has had the first-lings the best and fattest of the flock, and will God
accept of the halt, the lame and the blind in sacrifice? Oh the height, and
depth, and breadth of the mercy of God! Oh my soul, my soul thou Shulamite,
return, return. I beseech thee by these mercies of God, that henceforth thou
give up thy self a holy and living sacrifice unto God, which is but reasonable
service, that thou redeem the time; and do much for God in a little time: And
now oh that my age might he renewed like the Eagles, that God would add unto my
days many years! that the Sun of my life might stand still, and not have to
go down for many years! till I might be avenged on my lusts, the Enemies of my
God, and of my soul! till I that have done God a great deal of disservice and
dishonor, might do him a great deal of service and honor! Till I have been
as Eminent for holiness, as ever I have been notorious for Profaneness! And
now, oh all ye that pass by, tell me, tell me, what such an old sinner as I
should do to be saved?

To this question I answer, that old men must be saved the same way that young
men are saved, and that is, by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord our
righteousness. Whosoever believes on the Lord Jesus Christ, although he be
never so old a sinner, shall certainly be saved, shall in no wise perish but
have everlasting life. Do thou see thy self lost in old Adam? do see thy
self, as thou art growing up out of that old stock, out of that root of
bitterness, fit fuel for Hellfire? do see a necessity of being born
again now thou art old, or else thou must dye eternally? Art weary of the body
of sin and death, that old man of original sin which thou carriest about
with thee? Would with all thy heart have this old man with his deeds
crucified together with Christ? does it repent thee withal thy heart that thou
have lived so long to so little purpose? that thou art ready to go out of the
world before thou have done almost any thing of the work for which thou came
hither? Can find in thy heart to come to Christ for salvation, from the hell
that is in sin, as well as from the hell that sin deserves, before thou go
out of the world? Dare venture thy soul upon this crucified Jesus, and know
it is no venture? Is there none in heaven or earth, no other Savior, none that
thy soul desires in comparison of him? Art resolved in the strength of Christ,
to live in him whilst thou live, and to dye in Christ, or for Christ when
thou dyest? Do desire in the matter of Justification, to be found not having
on thy own righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ, and thereby to
appear righteous before God; and for the glory of God, and to the Justification
of thy Faith before men, do resolve to endeavor that thy hoary head may be
found in the way of holiness and righteousness? If these things and such holy
motions, resolutions and qualifications as these be in thee and abound; Blessed
art thou that ever thou wa'st borne; thou shall not dye, but live; this day I
assure thee salvation is come unto thy soul: Jesus Christ has given thee life,
a new life in thy old age. Men it may be, think it almost impossible, that a
valley of dry bones should live; and say as it is Ezekiel: 37. can these dry bones
live? who would ever have said, that such an old sinner should ever have proved
a young convert? But God that quickneth the dead, he says to his Prophets,
Prophecy upon these bones, and say unto them, oh ye dry bones, hear the word
of the Lord; and who knows but that some of these dry bones may live? Truly my
prayer for these old men shall be, to the God of my life and theirs, that they
might all live in his sight, that they might all live for ever: And for you all
that hear me this day, oh that God would bind up all your souls in the bundle
of life! oh that ye might have part in the first resurrection, that on you the
second death might have no power! oh that ye might be changed from nature to
grace, before your change by death come, that your change may be for the
better, and not for the worse! But least any from the possibility of the
salvation of the oldest and chiefest sinners take heart to put off their
repentance to old age, least any suck poison from so sweet a flower, take by
way of Caution or Antidote these two or three Observations.

1. That old sinners, who have all their time enjoyed the means of grace, have
rarely been known to return and repent in their age, when there is but a step
betwixt them and death, and so betwixt them and hell.

2. That those laborers in the Parable who came into the vineyard to work at
the eleventh hour, were not called until the eleventh hour. Math: 20. The
Question was put by an old Indian Sagamore, or governor in New England, to one
of the English Ministers; Whether our God and Savior would receive an old
sinner, such as he was? The Minister answered, doubtless he would, considering
this old man had never heard of Christ 'til his old age, and came in when
called.

3. That there was a time, when wisdom stopped her ears at their cry, who
refufed to hear when she called. Prove: 1.24. Let not young sinners go on in
their sins, thinking to return when they are old, for that is the way never to
live to be old, or if they do, they rarely repent in age. Yet let not old
sinners despair, whoever comes unto Christ, he will in no wise cast out. And
as for you old men, whose hoarie heads are found in the way of righteousness,
Go on and prosper, and the Lord be with you; Be, as Noah was, Preachers of
righteousness in your generation; See that ye shine as lights in the midst of
a crooked generation. Be examples of holiness to younger ones; call upon them:
to remember their Creator betimes, in the days of their youth; teach them the
way they should go, that they may not forsake it when they are old. And
especially ye who are fathers and mothers, let the souls of your children be
precious in your eyes: do not offer your sons and daughters unto devils, and
bring them forth and up to the great Abaddon, or murderer of souls for want
of religious education, Be earnest with God, night and day with tears and
Prayers, and with your children by instruction, reprehension, correction,
exhortation, that so your children may rise up and call you blessed, may bless
God for you, and with you. Oh what a joy and rejoicing, ye pious fathers and
mothers, will it be to you, to meet Jesus Christ at the great day with such
like words as he used to his father, Lo here are we and the children thou have
given us; of all thou have given us, have we lost none; there is never a son or
daughter of perdition amongst them; thine they were, thou gave them us, and
they have kept thy word.

To conclude all, men, brethren, and fathers, I beseech you to suffer the word
of exhortation, I speak unto you Young men, and exhort, saying, Be ye
righteous, that ye may be old; this will be your crown, and the length of your
days. I speak unto you old men, and exhort saying, Oh be ye righteous and
religious, this will be your crown, and glory, better then that of a hoarie
head; be holy, and ye shall be happy; live well, and live for ever. And ye that
have been young, and religious, and old and religious too, young Saints and old
Saints, Oh be not weary, faint not, hold out, ye are not far from the kingdom
of heaven, you are near the Goal, your labor and travail is almost at an end,
you shall have crown for crown, for this corruptible crown of glory of old age,
you shall have a crown of glory, which is reserved in heaven for you, which is
incorruptible: your old bodies shall be new cast in the grave, as in a new
mould, and all the wrinkles, cracks, and flawes, shall be mended: and whereas
you have now a crown of glory upon your head in your old age, you shall then
have a body all glorified, and all glorious, you shall be made like unto the
glorious body of Christ, that is, you shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom
of your Father. Instead of long life on earth, you shall have eternal life in
heaven: You shall sit down with the holy Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the kingdom of heaven. Yea thus blessed and glorious shall ye all be, both
young and old, who are found, living and dying, in the way of righteousness.

FINIS.

