THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF Sr. THOMAS MORE, Lord High Chancellor OF
ENGLAND IN King HENRY the Eights time.

Collected by J. H. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for George Eversden, and Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at
the Maidenhead, and Grayhound in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

To my worthily most honored Kinsman, C. HODDESDON Esquire
DEAR SIR,
BEsides the Obligation I have to you by Nature, your Goodness has given you
the greatest interest that may be in my Time and Studies; of which if I have
made any improvement, it is purely the Product and Influence of your Favor:
The sense hereof has made me prefix your Name to this Endeavor of mine, upon
no other design then to make a public profession that my self and studies hold
of you as of the chief Lord. And if the pettinesse of what I tendr you here, be
apt to disable the justice of mine acknowledgments, you can inform your self
that a Rose or a pound of Cummin, has often been all the Rent-service that
has been reserved upon Estates of no inconsiderable value.

That, that I here present you with, is the Life of Sir Thomas More, one of the
greatest Ornaments of the Law, a man of those high employments, and so great
parts to go through them, that he can be no stranger to you, nor doubt of a
kind reception, especially seeing you are of as eminent courtesy as parts. I
shall not venture to give any further Character of him, or commend him to you,
but rather on the contrary expect that he will plead the boldness of my
Dedication, and assure my self a favorable acceptance of my poor labors from
his vast worth.

Sir I have dealt with him as his Nurse did, thrown him over the hedge into
your Arms, lest his memory should perish in the waters of Lethe: Or as some
common Soldier, who, if he have but common civility, finding some person of
great quality lying amongst the dead bodies and ready to become one of them,
will make a shift with a rude charity to lugger him out of the field, und think
himself sufficiently rewarded with the honor of preserving his life: I, (as I
traveled over the Memorials of the ancient Heroes) met with this worthy Knight
breathing his last in the field of honor; and an ordinary sense of humanity
engaged me (though unworthy that office) to rescue him from oblivion;
unhandsomely I confess, but excusably, because I could no better, my weak
capacity, in the very beginning of this enterprise, being overwhelmed with the
plenty and copiousnesse of the subject.

I am confident, King Henry the Eighth was not so much his enemy, as to forbid
posterity to think well of him; nor his Sentence, so severe, as to condemn his
Name as well as his Body, to an execution; his Name no more deserved to die,
then my pen does to preserve it; yet (which affords me some comfort,) what the
Reader wants in this Book, he will find in his Life: with which also (I hope) I
have a good plea for the inconsiderablenesse of any thing, which I can offer in
return of all those obligations you have been pleased to lay upon me; which
since I am never able to wipe off by strict and punctual satisfaction, I
presume your goodness will by a favorable acceptance hold me discharged in
Chancery:

I am Sir your most affectionate Kinsman, to serve and honor you, J. H.

The Heads of the following Chapters.
CHAP. I 1 SIr Tho. More's parentage. 2 The place and year of his birth. 3 His
education, first studies and employments of youth.
CHAP. II 1 SIr Thomas More his Marriage. 2 His first preferment. 3 His danger
in King Hen. 7. Reign.
CHAP. III 1 His integrity in his profession of the Law. 2 The beginning of his
favor with King Henry the eight. 3 The first honors bestowed by K. Henry the
eight on Sir Thomas More. 4 He is made Speaker of the lower House of Par.
CHAP. IV 1 CArdinal Wolsey his preposition in Parliament frustrated by Sir
Thomas More. 2 Sir Thomas More made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. 3
His gentle disposition on all occasions.
CHAP. V 1 SIr Th. M. prompt and ready Wit. 2 His Charity to his Neighbors. 3
His friendship with learned men at home and abroad.
CHAP. VI 1 SIr Thomas More's home entertainments and devotions. 2 His
behavior to his Wife and Children. 3 His miraculous cure upon his daughter
M^rgaret by prayer.
CHAP. VII 1 THe ambition of Cardinal Wolsey. 2 King H soruple concerning his
marriage communicated to Sir Th. More. 3 Sir Thomas More's prediction of the
alteration of his Religion in England. 4 His Embassy for peace, and happy
success therein.
CHAP. VIII 1 THe Cardinal degraded of his Office. 2 Sir Thomas More made Lord
Chancellor of England.
CHAP. IX 1 SIr Thomas More's affable behavior and integrity in his
Chancellorship. 2 His wise remedying of long delays in suits of law. 3 His
humble behavior toward his Father. 4 His admirable zeal in the cause of his
Religion.
CHAP. X 1 SIr Thomas More's penances continued in the midst of his honors. 2
His charity to his poor neighbors of Chelsey. 3 He refuses to allow of Kin.
Hen. divorcement. 4 He sues to depose his Office. 5 The death of Sir John More
his Father. 6 Such incredible poverty in so eminent a person, a sure sign of
incomparable integrity.
CHAP. XI 1 SIr Th. More's contempt of honor declared in deposing the great
dignity of Chancellorship. 2 His resolution to live poorly. 3 He prepares
himself for his sufferings as foreseeing them. 4 He refuses to be present at
Q. Annes marriage.
CHAP. XII 1 THe beginning of the Kings indignation. 2 Sir Th. More. disposes
himself more immediately to suffer death. 3 Diverse accusations procured against
Sir Thomas, alle^sily avoided by his innocence. 4 The Nun of Canterbury, first
occasion of calling Sir Thomas More in question concerning Queen Anne. 5 His
first examination before the Kings Deputies 6 His merry heart and gallant
^esolution after his examination.
CHAP. XIII 1 SIr Tho. More refuses the Oath of Supremacy and succession. 2
Sir Th. More's imprisonment, first in Westminster, then in the Tower. 3 His
discourse with his daughter Margaret. 4 A Dialogue between him and his Wife the
Lady More. 5 Mr. Rich his Case. 6 His Books taken from him.
CHAP. XIV 1 SIr Tho. More's Arraignment. 2 His answer to their indictment. 3
Mr. Rich's Oath against Sir Tho. clearly rejected. 4 Sentence of death
pronounced against Sir Thomas More.
CHAP. XV 1 THe manner how Sir Th. More was led back to the Tower. 2 His
daughter Margarets great expression of love to him now condemned. 3 How
devoutly and resolutely Sir Tho. expected his execution. 4 Notice of the time
of his death sent him by the King. 5 The manner and form of his Death. 6 The
Kings sadness thereupon. 7 Physiognomy of Sir Tho. More.
AView of Sir Thomas More's Wit and Wisdom. SOme few of Sir Tho. Apothegms
collected out of Dr. Stapleton. AN Apology for Sir Tho. More's pleasantness
of Wit.
THE HISTORY OF Sr. THO. MORE.
CHAP. I.
1 Sir Thomas Mores Parentage. 2 The place, and year of his birth. 3 His
education, first studies and employments of youth.
S. Thomas Mores parentage.
SIR Thomas More was the only son of Sir John More Knight, and one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, a man singular for his many rare perfections,
which are set down by his son in his Epitaph extant extant among his Latin
Works Cambden reports of him for proof of his pleasantness of wit, that he
would compare the great number of women to be chosen for wives unto a bag full
of Snakes, having amongst them but on^ Eel; now if a man puts his hand into
this bag, he may chance to light on the Eel, but it is 2 hundred to one if he be
not stung with a Snake. Many such witty similitudes he used both in his private
discourses and publiqu^ auditory, by which and many other his perfections of
wit and grace, one might guess that thi^ child was likely to prove singular,
having so worthy a father.

The place and time of his birth.
Sir Thomas More was born at London in Milkstreet, (where his father for the
most part dwell) in the year of our Lord, one thousand four hundred and eighty,
and in the twentieth year An evident danger strangly escaped in his infancy.
of Edward the fourth: Shortly after whose birth, was there this presage of his
future eminency. His Nurse riding with him over a water, the Horse stepped aside
into a deep place, and put both her and the child in great danger of their
lives; but she endeavoring suddenly to prevent the harm of the Infant, threw it
over a hedge into a field near adjoining, and afterward by Gods assistance
escaped safe herself. When she came to take him up again, to her amazement she
found him to have no hurt at all, but the Babe sweetly smiled upon her.

His first studies, and employment.
Wherefore his father (as supposing him sent into the world for some great end)
was much the more careful of his education, and so put him to the Free School
of London, In S. Anthonies School in London.
called St. Anthonies: where after he had been brought up in the Latin tongue,
his father shortly after procured him to be recived into the house of the Right
Reverend Prelate Cardinal Moorton Archbishop of Canterbury, In Cardinal
Moortons house.
and Lord High Chancellor of England: where though he was young of years, yet
would he in the Christmas time suddenly sometimes step in among the Players,
His towardliness in the Cardinals retinue.
and never studying for the matter, make a part of his own there presently,
amongst them which was so witty and full of Jests, that he alone made the
lookers on more sport then all the Players beside: in whose wit and towardness
the Cardinal much delighting, would often say of him to the Nobles that several
times dined with him, This child here waiting at the Table, whosoever shall
live to see it, will prove a mavelous man.

The Cadinal sends him to Oxford.
Whereupon for his furtherance in learning he placed him in Canterbury College
in Oxford, (now called Christ Church) where when he was both in the Greek and
Latin tongue sufficiently instructed; he was then for the study of the Law put
to an Inn of Chancery called New-Inne, He is sent to New-Inne.
where for his time he very well prospered.

To Lincolus-Inne.
And from thence was admitted to Lincolns-Inne with very small allowance,
continuing his study there until he was made and accounted a worthy Utter
Barrister. His public Lectures upon S. Austin, De Civitate Dei.
And then to his commendation he for some time read a public Lecture of S.
Austin, De Civitate Dei, in the Church of S. Laurence in the Old Jury,
whereunto there resorted Dr. Groyein an excellent man, and others of the most
learned of the City of London. Then was he made Reader of Furnivals-Inne, so
remaining by the space of three years and more, after which time he gave
himself to devotion and prayer in the Charter House of London, religiously
living there without vow about four year.

CHAP. II.
1 Sir Thomas Mores marriage. 2 His first preferments. 3 His danger in King
Henry the sevenths Reign.
Sir Thomas More his marriage and first wife.
NOw about this time there lived a pleasant Gentleman (and of an ancient
Family) of New-hall in Essex, by name M. John Colt, who several times invited
him to his house, being much delighted in his company, and proffered him the
choice of any of his daughters, three young Gentlewomen of very good carriage
and complexion; whose honest conversation and virtuous education inclined him
there especially to set his affection: and although he most desired the second
daughter, Chosen out of a charitable compassion against his own inclination
for that he thought her the fairest and most handsome, yet when he considered
that it would be both a great grief, and some blemish also, to the eldest to
see her younger sister preferred before her; ^he then of a kind compassion
framed his fancy toward her, and soon after married her, never the more
discontinuing his study of the Law at Lincolns-Inne, His rare knowledge in the
law.
but still plying the same until he was called to the Bench and had read twice,
which is as often as any Judge of the Law does read; and to which few but rare
and singular Lawyers do ever attain. His children by her.
Before which time he had placed himself and his wife in Bucklersbury in
London; where he had by her one son and three daughters, in virtue and learning
brought up from their youth: whom he would often exhort to take virtue and
learning for their meat, and play but for their sauce.

K. Henry the 7. offended with Sir Tho. More.
In the latter end of King Henry the sevenths Reign a Parliament was called,
wherein Sir Thomas More, ere ever he had read in the Court, was chosen
Burgess: there was then demanded by the King one Subsidy and three Fifteens
for the marriage of his eldest daughter the Lady Margaret, that then should be,
(as indeeed she was shortly after) the Queen of Scots; when the consent of the
Lower House was demanded to these impositions, most of the rest either holding
their peace, or not daring to speak against them (though very unwilling to
grant them) Sr Thomas making a grave speech, He crosses the K. in Parliament
in an unjust imposition.
argued so strongly why these exactions were not to be granted, that thereby
the Kings demands were clear overthrown and his request denied, so that one Mr.
Tyler of the Kings Privy Chamber being present thereat, went immediately from
the House and told his Majesty, that a beardless boy had frustrated all his
expectations: whereupon the King being very much incensed at him, would not be
satisfied until he had some way revenged it.

Sir John More the father imprisoned to be revenged on the son.
Now forasmuch as he nothing having, nothing could lose; the King devised a
causeless quarrel against Sir John More his father, keeping him in the Tower
until he had made him pay to him a hundred pounds fine: hereupon it sell out
that Sir Thomas More coming in a suit to Doctor Fox Bishop of Winchester, Bad
counsel given by a politic Bishop.
one of the Kings privy Council, the Bishop called him aside, and pretending
great favor to him, promised him that if he would be ruled by him; he would
not fail to restore him again into the Kings favor; meaning (as it was
afterward conjectured) to cause him thereby to confess his offense against the
King, that so his Highness might with the better color have occasion to
revenge his displeasure against him: Avoided by counsel of the Bishops
Chaplain.
But when he came from the Bishop he fell into discourse with one Mr. Whitford
his familiar friend, (then Chaplain to that Bishop, and after a Father of
Sion,) and related to him what the Bishop had said, desiring his advice
therein; who for the Passion of God, prayed him in no wise to follow his
Counsel; For my Lord, my Master (said he) to serve the Kings turn, will not
stick to consent to his own fathers death. So Sir Thomas returned to the Bishop
no more, and had not the King soon after dyed, He retires to his quieter
studies.
he was determined to have gone over Sea, because that being in the Kings
indignation he thought he could not live secure in England, and therefore he
studied the French tongue at home, sometimes recreating his tired spirits on
the Viol, where he also got most of the liberal Sciences, as Music,
Arithmetic, Geometry and Astronomy, and grew to be a perfect Historian.

CHAP. III.
1 His integrity in the profession of the Law. 2 The beginning of his favor
with King HENRY the eighth. 3 The first honors bestowed by King HENRY the
eighth upon Sir THO. MORE. 4 He is made Speaker of the Lower House of
Parliament.
He is made one of the Under-Sheriffs of London. His plentiful but honest gains
AFter this he was made one of the Under-Sheriffs of London (some say,
Recorder; but most the other) by which Office and his learning together (as he
has been heard to say) he gained without grudge of conscience at the least 400
l. per annum: Since there was at that time in none of the Kings Courts any
matter of importance in Controversy wherein he was not of Council with one of
the parties, His integrity in his profession of the Law.
choosing the justest side, and therefore for the most part he went away
victorious: and such was the estimation which (for his learning, wisdom,
knowledge, and experience) men had of him, that before he was come to the
service of King Henry the eighth, at the suit and instance of the English
Merchants, he was by the Kings consent made twice Ambassador in certain great
causes between them and the Merchants of the Steel-yard; whose wise and
discreet dealing therein, The beginning of Sir Tho. More's favor with K. Henry
the 8.
to his high commendation, when the King understood, he caused Cardinal Woolsey
(then Lord Chancellor) to procure him to his service, which although the
Cardinal according to the Kings request, labored earnestly with him to effect;
among many other his persuasions alleging unto him, how dear his service must
needs be unto his Majesty, who could not with his honor allow him less then
he should yearly lose by changing his former estate; but that rather he would
enlarge his fortunes, and recompense him fully. Warily ae the first declined by
S. Tho. More.
Yet he loath to change his condition, made such means unto the King by the
Cardinal to the contrary, that his Majesty for that time was well satisfied to
forbear him.

Now it fortuned shortly after that a great Ship of the Popes arrived at
Southampton, which the King claiming for a forfeiture, the Popes Ambassador by
suit unto his Grace, obtained that he might for his Master the Pope have
Council learned in the Laws of this Kingdom, and the business in his own
presence (being himself a singular Civilian) in some public place be openly
heard: At which time there could none of our Law be found so fit to be of
Council with this Ambassador as Sir Thomas More; By pleading for the Pope
against the King, he makes him one of his Privy Council.
who could report to the Ambassador in Latin all the reasons and arguments by
their learned Council on both sides alleged. Upon this the Counselors on
either part in presence of the Lord Chancellor and other the Judges in the
Star Chamber had audience accordingly. Where Sir Thomas More not only declared
to the Ambassador the whole sense of all their opinions, but in defense on the
Popes side argued so learnedly, that both the foresaid forfeiture was restored
to the Pope, and himself among all the hearers, for his just and commendable
demeanor therein, so greatly renowned, that now for no entreaty would the King
any longer be induced to forbear his service: at whose first entry thereunto,
he made him Master of the Requests (having then no better place void) and
within a Month after Knight, Sir Thomas More knighted.
and one of his privy Council, and so from time to time advanced him,
continuing still in his singular favor and trusty service twenty years and
above: during a good part whereof the King used upon Holy days, The familiarity
of K. Henry with Sir Thomas.
when he had done devotions, to send for him into his Travers, and there
sometimes in Astronomy, Geometry, Divinity, and such other faculties, and
sometimes of his worldly affairs to sit and confer with him; and at other
whiles in the night would he have him up into his leads, there to discourse
with him of the diversities, courses, motions and operations of the Planets.
And because he was of a very pleasant disposition, it pleased the King and
Queen after the Council had supt, to call for him to be merry with them, whom
when he perceived so much to delight in his talk, Discreetly lessened by Sir
Thomas himself
that he could not once in a month get leave to go home to his wife and
children (whose company he most desired) and that he could not be absent from
the Court two days together, but that he must be sent for again; He much
misliking this restraint of his liberty, began thereupon somewhat to dissemble
his nature, and so by little and little to disuse himself from his former
mirth, that he from thenceforth at such times was no more so ordinarily sent
for. Sir Thomas made Treasurer of the Exchequer.
Then one Mr. Weston Treasurer of the Exchequer dying, the King of his own
offer, without any asking, freely gave his office unto Sir Thomas More.

He is by the K. chosen Speaker of the Lower House of Parliament.
In the fourteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, was there a Parliament held,
whereof Sir Thomas More was chosen Speaker: who being very unwilling to take
that place upon him, made an oration (not now extant) for his discharge
thereof. Whereunto when his Highness would not consent, he spoke unto him in
manner following.

A Summary of his First Speech in Parliament.
SInce I perceive (most renowned Sovereign) that it is not your Majesty's
pleasure to reform this Election and cause it to be changed, but have by the
mouth of the Right Reverend Father in God the Legate your High Chancellor, Who
was then Cardinal wolsey.
thereunto given your assent, and have of your great goodness determined far
above my deserts or abilities, to repute me worthy this so weighty Office,
rather then you should seem to impute unto your Commons that they had unmeetly
chosen me; I am therefore, and always shall be ready obediently to conform my
self to the accomplishment of your high Commands, His first request to the King.
most humbly beseeching your most noble Majesty, that ^may with your Graces
favor, before I further enter thereinto, make my humble intercession to your
Highness for the grant of two lowly Petitions, the one privately concerning my
self, the other this whole Assembly. For my self, (gracious Sovereign) That if
I should chance hereafter in any thing that is in the behalf of your Commons,
to mistake my Message, and for lack of good utterance, by my mis-reporting,
pervert or impair their prudent instructions; It may then please your most
Noble Majesty, of your abundant grace to pardon my simplicity, giving me leave
to repair again to them, to confer with them, and to take their more serious
advice what thing, and in what manner I shall on their behalf speak before your
Highness; that so their prudent advises and affairs be not by my folly hindered
or prejudiced: which thing if it should happen (as likely it were in me) if
your graces goodness relieved not my oversight, it would not fail to be during
my life, a perpetual grudge and heaviness to my heart. The help and remedy
whereof in manner aforesaid remembered is (most gracious Sovereign) my first
humble suit unto your Majesty.

His second request.
My other humble request, (most excellent Prince) is this, Forasmuch as there
be of your Commons here (by your high Commandment) assembled for your
Parliament: a great number which (after the accustomed manner) are appointed to
treat and consult of the common affairs amongst themselves apart; and albeit
(most dread Sovereign) that according to your prudent advise, by your
honorable Writs every where declared, there has been as due diligence used in
sending up to your Highness Court of Parliament, the most discreet persons out
of every quarter that men could esteem worthy thereof; whereby it is not to be
doubted, but that there is a very able Assembly of wise and politic persons:
yet (most victorius Prince) since among so many wise men, neither is every man
wise alike, nor among so many men like well-witted, every man like well-spoken:
And it often happens that as sometimes much folly is uttered in painted
polished Speech; so many, though rude in language, are of sound judgments, and
prove the wisest Counselors: And since also in matters of greatest importance
the mind is often so taken up in them, that a man rather studies what to say
then how; by reason whereof the wisest man and best spoken in a whole Country
fortuneth sometimes, his mind being fervent in the business, somewhat to speak
so, as he he could afterward wish to have been uttered otherwise, and yet no
worse will had when he spoke, then when he would so gladly change. Therefore
(most gracious Sovereign) considering that in all your High Court of Parliament
nothing is treated of but matter of weight and importance concerning the
Kingdom and your own Royal estate, it could not fail to hinder and put to
silence many of your discreet Commons from giving their advice and counsel, to
the great hinderance of the common affairs, except that every of them were
utterly discharged of all doubt and fear how any thing spoken among them should
be taken of your Highness. And in this thing your well known and approved
clemency puts every man in very good hope; yet such is the weight of the
matter, such the reverend dread that the timorous hearts of your natural
Subjects conceive toward your Highness, (our most undoubted Sovereign) that
they cannot in this point rest satisfied, except your gracious bounty therein
declared, put away the scruple of their timorous minds, and animate and
encourage them from all doubt: may it therefore please your Majesty (our most
gracious King) of your great goodness, to pardon freely, without doubt of your
dreadful displeasure, whatsoever shall happen any man to speak in the
discharging of his conscience, interpreting every man's words, how unseemly
soever couched, yet to proceed of good zeal to the prosperity of the Kingdom,
and the honor of your royal person; the happy estate and safety whereof, (most
excellent Soveriagn) is the thing, all we your most humble loving subjects,
according to the most bounden duty of our natural allegiance, most highly
desire and pray for.

CHAP. IV.
1 Cardinal Wolsey's proposition in Parliament frustrated by Sir THO. MORE. 2
Sir THO. MORE made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. 3 His gentle
disposition on all occasions.
Cardinal Wolsey's entry into the Parliament.
AT this Parliament Cardinal Wolsey was much offended with the Burgesses
thereof, for that nothing was so soon done or spoken therein, but that it was
immediately blown abroad into every Alehouse. It fortuned after this, that a
very great Subsidy was demanded, which the Cardinal fearing it would not pass
the lower House, resolved for the furtherance of it, to be there present
himself: before whose coming, after long debating, whether it were better but
with a few of his Lords, (as the general opinion of the House was) or with his
whole train royally to receive him there among them: Masters, said Sir Thomas
More, for as much as my Lord Cardinal not long since, as ye all know, laid to
our charge the lightness of our tongues, for things spoken out of this House;
it shall not, in my judgment, be amiss to receive him with all his pomp; his
Maces, his Pillars, his Pole-axes, his Crosses, his Hat and Great Seal too;
that so if he blame us hereafter, we may be the bolder to excuse our selves,
and lay it upon those that his Grace brings hither with him. Whereupon the
House wholly agreeing, he was received accordingly; His motion to the lower
House.
where after he had in a solemn Oration, by many reasons, proved how necessary
it was the demands there moved should be granted, and further, showed that
less would not serve the Kings turn; who seeing the House silent, answering
nothing thereunto, and contrary to his expectation, showing in themselves no
inclination toward his request, he said unto them, Masters, You have many wise
and learned men among you, and since I am by the Kings own person sent hither
unto you for the preservation of your selves, and all the Kingdom; I think it
fit you give me some reasonable answer. But when every man still held his
peace, then he spoke in particular to one Mr. Murrey, afterward Lord Murrey,
who making him no answer neither, he severally asked the same question of
diverse others accounted the wisest of the House: to whom when none of them all
answered any thing, being before ahreed, as the custom was to make answer by
their Speaker. Masters, said the Cardinal, Frustrated by Sir Th. More.
unless it be the manner of your House (as very likely it may) by your Speaker
only in such cases to express your minds, here is without doubt a mavelous
obstinate silence: and thereupon he required answer of Mr. Speaker, who first
reverently upon his knees excused the silence of the House, a^ abashed at the
presence of so noble a personage; and after by many probable arguments proved,
that for them to make answer, was neither expedient nor agreeable with the
ancient liberty of the House: in conclusion for himself he declared, that
though they all had trusted him with their voices, yet except every of them
could put their several wits into his head, he alone in so weighty a matter
was not able to make his Grace sufficient answer. Who pleasantly and wittily
diverteth the Cardinals displeasure.
Whereupon the Cardinal displeased with Sir Thomas More, that had not in this
Parliament in all things satisfied his desires, suddenly arose and departed;
and afterward in his Gallery at White Hall in Westminster, uttered unto him
all his grief, saying, Would to God Mr. More you had been at Rome, when I made
you Speaker: Your Grace not offended, so would I too my Lord, said Sir Thomas:
and to put it out of the Cardinals head, he began to talk of that Gallery of
his, saying, I like this Gallery of yours, my Lord, better then your other at
Hampton Court. With which so wise digression, he broke off the Cardinals
displeasant talk, so that at that time he said no more to him.

He obtains against him not to be sent Lieger Ambassador into Spain.
But yet afterward in revenge of his displeasure, he counseled the King to
send him Ambassador Lieger into Spain, commending unto his Highness his
wisdom, learning, and fitness for that employment, and the difficulty of the
Cause considered, he said there was none better able to serve his Grace
therein; which when the King had broken to Sir Tho. More, and he had declared
unto his Majesty how unfit a journey it was for him to undertake, the nature of
the Country, and disposition of his complexion so disagreeing, that he was
never likely to do his Grace acceptable service therein, knowing for certain,
that if his Grace sent him thither, he should send him to his grave; yet
nevertheless showing in himself a readiness according to his duty (although
with the peril of his life) to fulfill his Majesty's pleasure therein: the King
allowing well his answer, said unto him, It is not our meaning Mr. More to do
you hurt, but to do you good we would be glad; we therefore will think of some
other, and employ your service otherwise. And such entire favor did the King
bear him, He is made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
that he made him Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, upon the death of Sir
Richard. Wingfield who had that office before.

Sir. Tho. More's judgment of K Henrie's extraordinary favor.
King Henry took so great pleasure in Sir Thomas his company, that he would
suddenly sometimes come to his house at Chelsey to be merry with him; whither
on a time unlooked for, he came and dined with him, and after dinner in a fair
garden of his, walked about an hour, holding his arm about his neck: As soon as
his Grace was gone, his son-in-law Mr. Rooper, rejoicing thereat, told him how
happy he was whom the King had so familiarly entertained, as he had never seen
him do to any before, except Cardinal Wolsey, whom he saw his Majesty once
walk with arm in arm: I thank our Lord, son Rooper, said he, I find his Grace
my very good Lord indeed, and I believe he does as singularly favor me as any
subject within this Kingdom; yet son Rooper, I may tell thee, I have no
cause to be proud of it, for if my Head would win him a Castle in France,
(for then there was war between us) it would not fail to go off: By which words
he evidently showed how little he joyed either in the Kings favor, or in his
worldly honor, who knew well King Henrie's nature, that what show of
friendship soever he made to any, yet he loved none but for his own ends.

His courteous behavior in the midst of his honors.
Sir Thomas More though in great honor and favor with his. Prince, was not
therefore puffed up with pride, disdain, or arrogance, but was of such a mild
behavior and excellent temper, that he could never be moved to any passion or
anger, as his son-in-law witnesses, who affirms, that in sixteen years time
and more, that he dwelt in his house, and was continually conversant with him;
he could never perceive him so much as once in a passion: and one Margaret Gigs
(who was brought up with Sir Thomas his children, and used no otherwise then
one of them) being a singular learned woman, says, that sometimes she would
commit a fault for the nonce, to hear Sir Thomas chide her, he did it with such
gravity, such moderation, His meekness in reprehending.
such love and compassion. His meekness also was very perspicuous in this; if
it had fortuned him with any learned men resorting to him from Oxford,
Cambridge, or elsewhere (as there did diverse come for desire of his
acquaintance; some for the famous report of his wisdom and learning, and some
for suits of the Universities) to have entered into disputation (wherein few
were comparable to him) and so far to have discoursed with him therein, that he
might perceive they could not without some inconvenience hold out much further
argument against him; then lest lie should discourage them, as he that sought
not his own glory, ever showing himself more desirous to learn then to teach,
he would by some witty invention break off into some other matter and give over.

Patience joined to perfection.
Upon a time the Water-bailiffe of London (sometime his servant) hearing, where
he had been at dinner, certain Merchants liberally to rail against his old
Master, was so discontented at it, that he hastily came to him and told him
what he had heard, and; Were I, said he, in such favor and authority with my
Prince as you are, such men surely should not be suffered so villainously, and
falsely to misreport and slander me: wherefore I could wish, you would call
them before you, and to their shame for their malice punish them: who smiling
on him, said, Why Mr. Water bailiffe, would you have me punish those, by whom I
receive more benefit, then by you all that be my friends? let them a Gods name
speak as basely as they please of me, and shoot never so many arrows at me, so
long as they do not hit me, what am I the worse? but if they should once hit
me, then indeed would it not a little trouble me; yet I trust by Gods help
there shall none of them all be able to touch me; I have more cause I assure
thee Mr. Water-bailiffe to pity them, then to be angry with them. Such height
of perfection had he now attained, that he was neither allured by hopeful
gains, nor deterred one whit from his duty by evil tongues, still carrying one
and the same alacrity in all crosses and adversities, as in the following
discourse it will more appear.

CHAP. V.
1. Sir Thomas Mores prompt and ready wit. 2. His charity to his neighbors. 3.
His friendship with learned men at home and abroad.
His readiness of wit upon all occasions.
SIR Thomas More was a man of such readiness of Wit, that at such time as he
attended upon his Highness in his progress either to Oxford or Cambridge,
where he was received with very eloquent Orations; his Majesty always
appointed him to answer them extempore, as he that was most prompt and ready
for it. Sir Thomas being Chancellor of the Duchy, was made Ambassador twice
joined in commission with Cardinal Wolsey, once to the Emperor Charles into
Flanders, the other time to the French King into France, whose manner was,
whenever he had occasion to be in any University, not only to be present at
their Readings and Disputations, but also learnedly to dispute himself amongst
them, to the great admiration of all the Auditory, for his knowledge in all
sciences: who being once at Burgess in Flanders, an arrogant fellow had set up
a Thesis, that he would answer any question could be propounded unto him in
what Art soever: Sir Thomas made this question to be put up for him to answer,
whether Averia capta in Withernamia sunt irreplegebilia; adding that there was
one of the English Ambassadors retinue, that would dispute with him thereof:
This. Thraso, or Braggadochio not so much as understanding those terms of our
common Law, knew not what to answer to it, and so he became ridiculous to the
whole City for his presumptuous bragging.

His charity to his neighbors.
On a time (whilst the divorce was so hotly pursued by the King, (as you shall
understand hereafter) he walking with his son-in-law Mr. Rooper along the
Thames side near Chelsey, among other discourse, said unto him, Now would to
our Lord (son Rooper) upon condition that three things were well established
in Christendom, His three wishes for the good of Christendom.
I were put into a sack, and here presently cast into the Thames: What great
things be those Sir, said he, that should move you so to wish? Would thou
know what they be (son Rooper) said he? in says they be these: The first is,
That where most part of Christian Princes be now at mortal, Unity in Peace.
war they were at an universal peace. The second, That where the Church of
Christ is at this time sore afflicted with many errors and Heresies, Unity in
Religion.
it were settled in a perfect uniformity of Religion. An end of the Kings
controversy.
The third is, That whereas the Kings marriage is now brought in question, it
were to the glory of God, and quietness of all parties well concluded: whereby
(as this Mr. Rooper thought) he judged that otherwise it would be a disturbance
to a great part of Christendom.

He never asked any thing of the King.
Thus did it by his doings, throughout the whole course of his life, appear
that all his labor and pains, without respect of earthly profit either to
himself or any of his, were only and wholly bestowed and employed to the
service of God, the Prince, and the Kingdom, who (as this Mr. Rooper has
heard him in his latter time to say) never asked of the King for himself the
value of one penny.

His friendship with learned men.
Now as he did not regard proud and vain men, so was he an entire and special
good friend to all the learned men in Christendom, with whom almost, he had
continual intercourse of Letters; but of all strangers, Sir Thomas More's
acquaintance with Dr. Erasmus Roterodamus.
Erasmus challenges unto himself his love most especially, which had long
continued between them by mutual letters expressing great affection, and it
increased so much, that he took a journey on purpose into England to see and
enjoy his personal acquaintance; at which time (it is reported) how that he
who conducted him in his passage, procured that Sir Thomas More and he should
first meet together in London at the Lord Majors Table, neither of them knowing
each other, where in the dinner time, they chanced to fall into disputation,
Erasmus still endeavoring to defend the worser part, but he was so sharply set
upon and opposed by Sir Thomas More, that perceiving he was now to argue with a
readier wit then ever before he had met withal, he broke forth into these
words not without some choler, Aut^tues Morus aut nullus: whereto Sir Thomas
readily replied, Aut tu es Erasmus aut Diabolus: because at that time he was
strangely disguised, and had endeavored to defend impious propositions, for
although he was a singular Humanist and one that could utter his mind in most
eloquent phrase, yet had he always a delight to scoff at religious matters,
and find fault with all sorts of Clergymen, which is the reason that he is
called by some Errans-mus.

CHAP. VI.
1 Sir Thomas More's home-entertainments and devotions. 2 His behavior to his
Wife and Children. 3 His miraculous cure upon his daughter Margaret by prayer.
Sir Tho. More's home entertainments and devotions.
NOw although Sir Thomas More lived a Courtier, yet when he came home, as his
daily custom was, besides his private prayers with his Wife and Children, to
say the seven Psalms and the Letany; so was he wont also every night to go to
his Chapel with his wife, children, and household, and there upon his knees
ordinarily to say certain Psalms and Collects with them. And because he was
desirous for godly purposes to be solitary, and sequester himself from worldly
affairs, he builded a good distance from his mansion house a place which he
called the New-building, wherein there was a Chapel, a Library, and a
Gallery, in which as his custom was upon other days to busy himself in
prayer and meditation, so on Fridayes he used to continue there from morning
till evening, spending his time only in devout prayers and spiritual exercises.

His servants discipline.
He would not suffer any of his servants either to be idle, or to give
themselves to games; but some of them he appointed to look to the Garden,
assigning to every man his several plat, some he set to sing, and some to play
on the Organs: the men abode on one side of the house, and the women on the
other, seldom conversing together: Erasmus says, that there was a fatal
felicity fallen on the servants of that house, that none lived but in better
estate after Sir Thomas Mores death, then before, and none of them touched with
the least aspersion of any evil fame.

His table talk.
He used to have one read every day at his table, which being ended, he would
ask some of them how they understood such and such a place; whereupon proceeded
friendly communication, recreating all men that were present, with some jest or
other. When he observed any of his to spend much time in dressing themselves to
be fine in their apparel, Against too much curiosity in dressing.
he would tell them, That if God gave them not Hell, he should do them much
wrong; for they took more pains to please the world and the Devil, then many
even virtuous men did to cleanse their souls and please God.

His counsel given to his wife and Children.
And to stir up his Wife and Children to the desire of heavenly things, he
would sometimes use these words unto them; It is now no mastery for you
Children to go to heaven, for every body gives you good counsel, To desire
heavenly things.
and good example: you see virtue rewarded and vice punished, so that you are
carried up to heaven as it were by the Chins: but if you live the time, that no
man will give you good counsel, nor good example; when you shall see virtue
punished, and vice rewarded, if you will then stand fast and firmly stick to
God; upon pain of my life, though you be but half good, God will allow you for
whole good. If his Wife or any of his Children had been diseased or troubled,
he would say unto them, To bear afflictions patiently.
We may not look at our pleasure to go to heaven in feather-beds, that is not
the way, for our Lord himself went thither through great pain, and by many
tribulations, and the servant may not look to be in better condition then his
Master. And as he would thus animate and encourage them to bear their
afflictions patiently, so would he also persuade them to withstand the Devil
and his temptations valiantly; To resist the temptations of the Devil.
comparing that our ghostly enemy to an Ape; for as the Ape not well looked to,
will be busy and bold to do shrewd turns, and contrarily being spyed and
checked for them, will suddenly leap back and adventure no further: so the
Devil finding a man idle and slothful, and without resistance, ready to
receive his temptations, grows so hardy, that he will not fail to follow him
until he has thoroughly brought him to his purpose; but on the other side, if
he see man with diligence persevere to prevent and withstand his temptations,
he grows so weary, that in conclusion he utterly forsakes him: for as the
Devil in his disposition is a spirit of so high a pride, that he cannot endure
to be mocked; so is he of nature so envious, that he is more afraid any should
assault him, lest he should thereby not only be shamefully foiled himself, but
also procure more matter of merit to his opposer.

A happy household.
Many such words tending to devotion and care of their souls, had he every day
at dinner and supper, after the aforesaid reading was done, and without all
doubt (waving their principles) such a family as this, might be a fit pattern
of imitation for the most religious Protestant, where every one was busied
about somewhat or other no carding, no dicing, no wanton company keeping, but
as it were some in religious house, all chaste, all courteous, all devout:
Their recreations was either music of voices or Viols, for which cause he
procured his Wife to play thereon to draw her mind from the world, to which by
nature he perceived her to be much addicted. Their ordinary recreations.
Thus delighted he evermore not only in virtuous exercise to be employed
himself, but also to exhort his Wife and Children to follow the same.

On a time his daughter Margaret, Wife to Mr. William Rooper, fell sick of the
sweating sickness, (of which many that year dyed) who lying in so great
extremity of that disease, His miraculous cure upon his daughter Margaret.
as by no inventions or devises of Physicians (of whom she had diverse, both
expert, wise, and well learned, continually attendant about her) she could be
kept from sleep; so that both Physicians and every one about her despaired of
her recovery, and gave her utterly over: her father (as he that most entirely
tendered her) being in no small heaviness for her, sought to get her remedy
from God by Prayer: whereupon going up, as his custom was, into hit foresaid
Newbuilding, he there in his Chapel upon his knees most devoutly, and with
many tears besought Almighty God, that it would please him of his goodness,
(unto whom nothing was impossible) if it were his blessed will, at his
mediation to vouchsafe graciously to hear his petition: where presently it came
into his mind, that a Glyster was her only remedy; which when he told the
Physicians, they by and by confessed, if there were any hope of health, that
that was the very best help indeed, much wondering that of themselves they had
not before remembered it. Then was it immediately applied unto her sleeping;
which she by no means could have been brought unto waking: and although after
she was thereby thoroughly awaked, Gods marks and evident undoubted tokens of
death plainly appeared upon her; yet she (contrary to all their expectations)
miraculously recovered, and shortly after was restored to perfect health again;
whom if it had pleased God at that time to have taken to his mercy, her father
solemnly protested that he would never have meddled with worldly affairs more.

CHAP. VII.
1 The Ambition of Cardinal Wolsey. 2 King Henrie's scruple about his marriage
communicated to Sir Thomas More. 3 Sir Thomas More's Prediction of the
alteration of Religion in England. 4 His Embassy for peace and happy success
therein.
Cardinal Wolsey his ambition.
WHile Sir Thomas More was Chancellor of the Duchy, the Sea of Rome chanced to
be void, which was cause of much trouble: for Cardinal Wolsey, a man of
unsatiable ambition, having crept up in favor of Charles the first, hoped now
by his means to aspire to that dignity; but perceiving himself disappointed of
his expectations by means of the Emperor Charles, so highly commending one
Cardinal Adrian sometime his Schoolmaster to the Cardinals of Rome in the time
of their Election for his virtue and worthiness, that thereupon he was chosen
Pope: Pope Adrian's humility.
who from Spain, where he was then resident, coming on foot to Rome, before his
entry into the City, did put off his hose and shoes, barefooted, and bareleg'd
passing through the streets toward his Palace with such humbleness, that all
the people had him in great reverence. But Cardinal Wolsey was so enraged at
it, and so stomach'd the Emperor for ever after, that he studied all ways how
he might possibly revenge himself against him; which as it was the beginning of
a lamentable. Tragedy, so some part thereof as not impertinent to my present
purpose, I suppose requisite here to insert.

This Cardinal therefore not ignorant of the Kings unconstant and fickle
disposition, upon every light occasion soon inclined to withdraw his devotion
from his own wife Queen Katherine to fixit upon others, who either in nobility,
wisdom, virtue, favor, or beauty, were nothing comparable unto her, intending
this fickleness of his an instrument to bring about his ungodly design,
endeavored all he could to allure the King to fancy one of the French Kings
sisters, the King being already (though unknown to the Cardinal) fallen in
love with the Lady Anne Bullen; which thing, because of the enmity and war,
that was at that time between the French King and the Emperor (whom for the
cause before mentioned he mortally maligned) he was desirous to procure.

And for the better accomplishing thereof, he requested Longland Bishop of
London, and ghostly father to the King, to put a scruple into the Kings head,
Longland B. of London Wolsy's instrument.
the it was not lawful for him to marry his brothers wife: which the King not
sorry to hear of, opene^ it first to Sir Thomas More, whos^ counsel he required
therein, K. Henry communicates with Sit Thomas More his scruple concerning his
first marriage.
showing certain places of Scripture tha^ somewhat seemed to serve hi^ turn:
which when he had seriousl^ perused and thereupon excuse^ himself, (as one that
never h^^ professed the study of Divinity) t^ be many ways unfit to meddle i^
such matters: The King not sat^^fied with this answer, still presse^ upon him
so sore for it, that i^ conclusion he condescended to h^^ Graces request. And
further, because the business was of suc^ weight and importance, as required
good advisement and deliberation: he besought his Grace tha^ he would give him
sufficient ti^^ serio^^ly to consider it; where with the Kng very well
contented, told him that Tunstall an^ Clark Bishops of Durham and Bath with
other the most learned of his privy Council, should also confer with him
therein.

So Sir Thomas More departing compared those places of Scripture with the
expositions of diverse of the old holy Doctors; and at his coming next to the
Court, in talking with his Majesty of the foresaid matter, he said, To be plain
with your Grace, neither my Lord of Durham, nor my Lord of Bath (though I know
them both to be wise, virtuous learned and honorable Prelates) nor my self
with the rest of your Council (being all of us your Majesty's own servants, so
much bound unto your Highness for your great favors daily bestowed upon us)
be, in my judgment, meet Counselors for your Grace herein; but if your
Highness please to understand the very truth, you may have such Counselors
devised, as neither for respect of their own worldly profit, nor for fear of
your Princely authority will be inclined to deceive you: and then named S,
Hierome, S. Austine, and diverse other holy Doctors, both Greeks and Latins,
and also showed what authority he had gathered out of them; which although the
King, as not agreeing with his desires, did not very well like of, yet were
they by Sir Thomas More (who in all his communication with the King in that
business, had always most discreetly demeaned himself) so wisely tempered,
that both at that present he took them in good part, and often afterward had
thereof conference with him again.

The beginning of K. Henrie's separation from the Church of Rome.
After this, were there certain questions propounded among his Council,
Whether the King in the case of his first marriage needed to have any scruple
at all; and if he had, what way were best to remove it. The most of his Council
were of opinion that there was good cause: Scruple of his marriage with Queen
Katharine
because Queen Katherine being married before to Prince Arthur King Henrie's
elder brother, was not to be wife to two brothers; and therefore for
discharging of this, suit was to be made to the Sea of Rome where the King by
liberality hoped to obtain his desires: wherein, as it appeared afterward, he
was much deceived.

Commissioners from Rome about it.
Then was there for the trial and examination of this matrimony procured from
Rome, a Commission in which Cardinal Campegius and Cardinal VVolfey were
joined Commissioners, who for the determination thereof sat at the Blackfriars
in London, where a Libell was put in for annulling the former Matrimony,
alleging, that marriage between the King and the Queen to be utterly
unlawful: but, on the other side, for proof that it was lawful, there was
brought in a Dispensation. In which after diverse disputations thereupon held,
there appeared an imperfection, The dispensation questioned.
which by an instrument or brief, (upon search found in the Treasury of Spain,
and sent to the Commissioners into: England) was supplied, And supplied by a
new confirmation.
and so judgment should have been given by the Pope accordingly, had not the
King upon intelligence thereof before the said judgment appealed to the next
general Council, after whose appellation the Cardinal upon that matter sat no
longer.

He foresaw the fall of his Religion in England.
It fortuned before the business of the said Matrimony was brought in
question, when this foresaid Mr. Rooper in discourse with his father-in-law (of
a certain joy) commanded unto him the happy estare of this Kingdom, that had so
Catholic a Prince, that no Heretic durst show his face; so virtuous and
learned a Clergy, so grave and sound a Nobility, so loving and obedient
Subjects, all agreeing together in one faith and dutifulness, as though they
had Cor unum and Animam unam, one Heart and one Soul: Sir Thomas replied, In
truth it is indeed son Rooper as you say: and in commending all degrees and
estates of the same far exceeded him: and yet son Rooper I pray God, said he,
that some of us, as high as we seem to it upon the mountains, treading
Heretics under our feet, live not the day, that we gladly would wish to be at
a league and composition with them, to let them have their Churches quietly to
themselves, so that they would be content to let us have ours quietly to, our
selves. When his son had told him many reasons why he had no cause so to
express himself, Well, said he, I pray God ( son Rooper) some of us live not
till that day: yet showing him no reason why he should put any doubt therein.
To whom he said, By my troth, Sir, it is very desperately spoken (but withal
recants that term:) who by these words perceiving him in some choler said
merrily unto him, Well, well, son Rooper, it shall not be so, it shall not be
so: whom, as I have said before, in all the time of continual residence with
him, he could never perceive so much as once disturbed with anger.

But now to return again where I left; after the supplying of the imperfections
of the Dispensation sent, as is before related, to the Commissioners into
England, Sir Thomas More's Embassy for peace and his happy success therein.
the King taking the matter for ended, and then intending to proceed no further
in it, assigned the Bishop of Durham, and Sir Thomas More to go Ambassadors to
Cambray, a place (then) neither Imperial nor French, to treat of a peace
between the Emperor, the French King, and him. In the concluding whereof, Sir
Thomas More so worthily behaved himself (procuring in our league far more
advantages unto this Kingdom, then at that time by the King or his Council was
thought possible) that for his good service in that employment, the King made
him Lord Chancellor, and caused the Duke of Norfolk openly to declare unto the
people (as you shall see here hereafter more at large) how much all England was
bounden unto him.

CHAP. VIII.
1 The Cardinal degraded of his Office. 2 Sir THOMAS MORE made Lord High
Chancellor of England.
Now upon the coming home of the Bishop of Durham, Bishop Stokely his quirk in
Queen Katharines marriage.
and Sir Thomas More from Cambray, the King was as earnest in persuading Sir
Thomas More to agree to his second marriage as before, by many and diverse ways
provoking him thereunto, for which cause (as it was thought) he the rather soon
after made him Lord Chancellor; and further told him, that though at his going
over the sea to Gambray he was in utter despair thereof, yet he had conceived
since some good hope to bring it about: for although his marriage being against
the positive Laws of the Church, and the written Laws God, was helped by the
Dispensation, yet was there another thing found out of late, he said, whereby
his marriage appeared to be so directly against the Law of Nature, that it
could in no wife be dispensable by the Church, as Dr. Stokely (whom he had then
preferred to be Bishop of London, and in that case chiefly credited) was able
to inform him, with whom he prayed him in that point to confer; But for all
his conference with him, he saw nothing of such force as could induce him to
change his opinion therein; His conference with Sir Thomas about it.
yet the Bishop relating to the King their conference so favorably reported of
Sir Thomas More's carriage therein, that he said he found him very desirous to
find some matter in his Highness cause, wherein he might truly serve his
Grace to his contentation.

This Bishop Stokely being by the Cardinal not long before openly disgraced,
Stokely undermines the Cardinal.
and awarded to the Fleet, not brooking this contumelious usage, and thinking
that (forasmuch as the Cardinal for lack of such forwardness in setting forth
the Kings Divorce as his Grace expected, was out of his Highness favor) he
bad now a good occassion offered him to revenge himself of him; He yet more to
incense the Kings displeasure against him, endeavored all he could to invent
some colorable device for the Kings furtherance in that behalf, The Cardinals
fall.
which (as is before mentioned) he revealed to his Grace, hoping thereby to
procure the Kings greater affection to himself, and disaffection to the
Cardinal, Sir Thomas More elected Lord Chancellor.
whom his Highness therefore soon after displaced of his Office; and (the
rather to move him to incline to his side) committed the same to Sir Thomas
More in his stead who between the Dukes of Norfolk, and Suffolk being brought
through Westminster Hall, to his place in the Chancery, The honorable Ceremony
with which he was enstald.
the Duke of Norfolk in audience of all the people there assembled, showed that
he was from the King himself straightly charged by special commission there
openly in presence of them all, to make Declaration how much all England was
beholding to Sir Thomas More for his good service, and how worthy he was of the
highest preferment in the Kingdom, and how dearly his Grace loved and trusted
him.

A Copy of the Oration.
The Duke of Norfolk's Oration in behalf of Sir Thomas More.
THE Kings Majesty (which I pray God may prove happy and fortunate to the
whole Realm of Engl.) has raised to the most high dignity of Chancellorship
Sir Tho. More, a man for his extraordinary worth and sufficiency well known to
himself and the whole Realm, for no other cause or earthly respect, but for
that he has plainly perceived all the gifts of Nature and Grace to be heaped
upon him, which either the people could desire, or himself wish, for the
discharging of so great an Office. For the admirable wisdom, Of his worthiness
for so great an employment.
integrity, and innocence, joined with most pleasant facility of wit, that this
man is endued withal, have been sufficiently known unto all English from his
youth, and for these many years also to the Kings majesty himself. This has
the King abundantly found in many and weighty affairs, which he has happily
dispatched both at home and abroad, in diverse Offices which he has borne, in
most honorable Embassies, which he has undergone, and in his daily Counsels
and Advices upon all other occasions. He has perceived no man in this Realm to
be more wife in deliberating, more sincere in opening to him what he thought,
nor more eloquent to adorn the matter which he uttered. Wherefore because he
saw in him such excellent endowments, and that of his special care he has a
particular desire that this Kingdom and people might be governed with all
equity and justice, integrity and wisdom: he of his own most gracious
disposition bath created this singular man Lord Chancellor, that by his
laudable performance of this Office his people may enjoy peace and justice, and
honor also and fame may redound to the whole kingdom. The first Layman that
ever was made Lord Chancellor.
It may perhaps seem to many, a strange and an unusall matter that this
Dignity should be bestowed upon a Layman, none of the Nobility, and one that
has wife and Children, because heretofore none but singular learned Prelates,
or men of greatest Nobility have possessed this place; Good reasons why that
old custom was now salt red.
But what is wanting in these respects, the admirable virtues, the matchless
gifts of wit and wisdom of this man, does most plentifully recomPense the
some; for the Kings Majesty has not regarded how great, but what a man he was,
he has not cost his eyes upon the Nobility of his blood, but on the worth of
his Person; he has respected his sufficiency, not his profession finally, he
would show by this choice that he has some rare subjects amongst the row of
Gentlemen, and Laymen, who deserve to manage the highest Offices in the Realm,
which Bishops and Noblemen think they only can deserve. The rarer therefore it
was, so much both himself held it to be the more excellent, and ^o his people
he thought it would be more grateful. Wherefore receive this your Chancellor
with joyful acclamations, at whose hands you may expect all happiness and
content.

Sir Thomas More according to his wonted modesty, Sir Tho. Mores modest and
discrete reply.
was somewhat abashed at this the Dukes Speech in that it sounded so much in
his praise, but recollecting himself as that place and time would give him
leave, he answered in manner following.

Although, most Noble Duke, and you Honorable Lords and Worshipful Gentlemen,
He acknowledges his own unworthiness.
I know all these things (which the Kings Majesty, it seems has been pleased
it should be spoken of me at this time and place, and your Grace has with most
eloquent words thus amplified) are as far from me as I could wish with all my
heart they were in me for the better performance of so great a charge: And
although this your Speech has caused in me greater fear then I can well
express in words, yet this incomparable favor of my dread Sovereign, by which
he shows how well, yea how highly, he conceives of my Weakness, having
commanded that my Meanness should be so greatly commended, cannot be but most
acceptable unto me. The Dukes love.
And I cannot choose but give your most noble Grace exceeding thanks, that what
his Majesty has willed you briefly to utter, you of the abundance of your love
unto me, have in a large and eloquent Oration dilated. The Kings favor and
bounty.
As for my self, I can take it no otherwise, but that his Majesty's
incomparable favor toward me, the good will and incredible propension of his
Royal mind (where with he has this many years favored me continually) has
alone without any desert of mine at all caused both this my new honor, and
these your undeserved commendations of me. For who am I, or what is the House
of my Father, that the Kings Highness should heap upon me by such a perpetual
stream of affection those so high Honors? I am far less then any the meanest
of his benifits bestowed on me; Which he esteems beyond his deserts.
how can I then think my self worthy or fit for this so peerlesse dignity? I
have been drawn by force, as the Kings Majesty often professes, to his
Highness service to be a Courtier: but to take this dignity upon me, is most
of all against my will; yet such in his Highness benignity, such is his
bounty, that he highty esteems the small dutifulness of his meanest
Subjects; and seeks still magnificently to recompense his Servants, not only
such as deserve well, but even such as have but a desire to deserve well at his
hands: in which number I have always wished my self to be reckoned, because I
cannot challenge my self to be one of the former; which being so, you may all
perceive with me how great a burden is laid upon my back, All which increase
in him a resolution to discharge well this so great charge.
in that I must strive in some sort with my diligence and duty to correspond
with his Royal benevolence, and to be answerable to that great expectation,
which he and you seem to have of me. Wherefore these so high Praises are by so
much more grievous unto me, by how much I know the greater charge I have to
render my self worthy of, and the fewer means I have to make them good. This
weight is hardly satable to my weak shoulders, this honor is not correspondent
to my poor deserts: it is a burtheu, not a Glory; a care, not a Dignity; the
one therefore I must bear as manfully as I can, and discharge the other with as
much dexterity as I shall be able. The earnest desire which I have always had,
and do now acknowledge my self to have to satisfy by all means I can possible
the most amplebenefits of his Highness, will greatly excite and aid me to the
diligent performance of all; which I trust also I shall be more able to do, He
desires favorable interpretation of his endeavors.
if I find all your good wilt and wishes both favorable unto me, and
conformable to his Royal munificence: because my serious endeavors to do
well, joined with your favorable acceptance will easily procure that
whatsoever is performed by me, though it be in it self but small, yet will it
seem great and praiseworthy; for those things are always achieved happily,
which are accepted willingly; and those succeed fortunately, which are received
by others courteously. As you therefore do hope for great matters and the best
at my hands, so though I dare not promise any such, yet do I promise truly and
affectionately to perform the best I shall be able.

A wise consideration of his predecessors example.
When Sir Thomas had spoken these words turning his face to the high Judg-ment
seat of the Chancery he proceeded thus:

But when I look upon this seat, when I think how great and what kind of
personages have possessed this place before me, when I call to mind who he was
that sat in it last of all, a man of what singular wisdom, of what notable
experience, what a prosperous and favorable fortune he had for a great space,
and how at the last he had a most grievous fall and diedinglorious: I have
cause enough by my predecessors example to think honor but slippery, and this
dignity not so grateful to me as it may seem to others for both is it a hard
matter to follow with like paces or praises a man of such admirable wit,
prudence, authority and splendour, to whom I may seem but as the lighting of a
Candle when the Sun is down and also the sudden and unexpected fall of so
great a man as he was, The dange^s of high honors.
does terribly put me in mind that this honor ought not to please me too much,
nor the luster of this glistering seat dazzle mine eyes. Wherefore I ascend this
seat as a place full of labor and danger, void of all solid and true honor;
the which by how much the higher it is, by so much greater fall I am to fear,
as well in respect of the very nature of the thing it self, as because I am
warned by this late fearful example. And truly I might even now at this first
entrance stumble, yea faint, but that his Majesty's most singular favor
toward me, and all your good wills (which your joyful Countenance does
testify in this most honorable Assembly) do somewhat recreate and refresh
me: otherwise this Seat would be no more pleasing to me then that Sword was to
Damocles which hung over his head tied only by the hair of a horses tail, when
he had store of delicates before him, seated in the chair of state of Denis the
great Tyrant of Sicilie; this therefore shall be always fresh in my mind, this
will I have still before mine eyes, that this state will be honorable, famous,
and full of Glory unto me, if I shall with care and diligence, fidelity and
wisdom endeavor to do my duty, and shall persuade my self, that the enjoying
thereof may chance to be but short and uncertain; A warning to use them well.
the one whereof my labor ought to perform, the other my predecessors example
may easily teach me All which being so, you may easily perceive what great
pleasure I take in this high Dignity, or in this most noble Dukes praising of
me.

And he further declared to this effect, that as they had in the Kings name
charged him uprightly to do indifferent justice to the people, without
corruption or affection; so did he likewise charge them again, that if they saw
him at any time in any thing digress from any part of his duty in that
honorable Office, even as they would discharge their own duty and fidelity to
God and the King, so should they not fail to inform his Grace of it, who
otherwise might have just occasion to lay his default wholly to their charge.

CHAP. IX.
1. Sir THOMAS MORE's affable behavior and integrity in his Chancellorship. 2.
His wise remedying long delays in suits of law. 3. His humble behavior toward
his Father. 4. His admirable Zeal in the cause of his Religion.
Sir Thomas Mores behavior to all suitors, especially to the poorer sort.
NOw upon Sir Thomas More's entrance into this honorable Office, every one
might perceive a very strange alteration; for whereas the precedent Chancellor
Wolsey, would scarce look or speak to any, into whose only presence none could
be admitted unless his fingers were tipp'd with gold; on the contrary, this
Chancellor the poorer and meaner the Supplyant was, the more affably he would
speak unto him, the more attentively he would hearken unto his cause, and with
speedy trial dispatch him; for which purpose, he used commonly every afternoon
to sit in his open Hall, that if any person whatsoever had any suite unto him,
they might the more boldly come to his presence, and open their complaints
before him.

No access to Bribery.
Which custom of his extraordinary favor to all, one Mr. Dauncy his
Son-in-law on a time seemed merrily to find fault with, saying, that when
Cardinal Wolsey was Lord Chancellor, not only diverse of his privy Chamber, but
such also as were his Door-keepers got great gain by him; And since he had
married one of his Daughters and gave still attendance upon him, he thought he
might of reason expect something too; but because he was so ready to hear every
man, poor and rich, and kept no doors shut against them, he could get nothing,
which was to him a great discouragement; and whereas else some for friendship,
some for kindred, some for profit, would gladly use his furtherance to bring
them to his presence, if he should now take any thing of them, he knew (he
said) he should do them much wrong, because they might as freely prefer their
causes to him themselves; which thing, though he thought it in Sir Thomas very
commendable, yet to himself (he said) being his Son, he found it nothing
profitable. When he had told him this, Means how great men may do favors in
justice.
You say well Son (said he) I like well that you are of Conscience so
scrupulous: but many other ways be there Son, that I may both do your self
good, and pleasure your friends also; for sometime may I by my word stand your
friend in stead, and sometimes may I by my Letter help him; or if he have a
Cause depending before me, at your request I may hear him before another; or if
his Cause be not all the best, yet may I move the parties to fall to some
reasonable end by a bitrament; howbeit Son this one thing I assure thee on my
says, Notable integrity.
that if the parties will at my hands call for Justice, then all were it my
Father whom I loved dea^ly, stood on the one side, and the Devil, whom I hate
extremely, stood on the other, his Cause being good, the Devil should have
right. So offered he his Son, he said, as much favor as with reason he could
possibly require.

And, that he would for no respects digress from justice, Even against his own
kindred.
well appears by a plain example of another of his son^-in-law, Mr. He^en by
name: for when he having a Cause depending before him in the Chancery, and
presuming too much on his favor, would in no wise be persuaded by him to agree
to any indifferent composition, he in conclusion made a flat decree against him.

Long delays in Law the misery of poor Clients, remedied by Sir Tho. More.
Now as sew Injunctions as he granted while he was Chancellor, yet were they by
some of the judges of the Law misliked, which his son-in-law the foresaid Mr.
Rooper understanding, told his Father of it, who answered him that they should
have little cause to find fault with him for that: and thereupon he caused Mr
Crook chief of the fix Clerks to make a Docket containing the whole number and
causes of all such injunctions, as either in his time had already passed, or at
that present depended in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster before him:
which done he invited all the Judges to dine with him in the Councell-chamber
at Westminster; where after dinner when he had broken with them what complaints
he had heard of his Injunctions, and farther showed them both the number and
causes of every one of them, in order so plainly, that upon full debating
thereof, they all confessed that they in like case could have done no otherwise
themselves; Then offered he this unto them, that if the Justices of every Court
unto whom the Reformation of the rigor of the Law (by reason of their Office)
most especially appertained, would upon reasonable considerations by their own
discretions, (as they were, as he thought, in conscience bound) mitigate and
reform the rigor of the Law themselves, there should from thenceforth by him no
more Injunctions be granted: Whereunto when they resused to condescend, then
said he unto them: For as much as your selves (My Lords) drive me to that
necessity, for awarding out Injunctions to relieve the peoples injuries, you
cannot hereafter any more justly blame me. After that he said secretly to Mr.
Rooper, I perceive, Son, why they like not so to do, for they see that they may
be the verdict of the Jury cast off all quarrels from themselves upon them,
which they account their chief defense, and therefore am I compelled to abide
the adventure of all such reports.

A pleasant Tale of a Tub.
After this he took order with all the Atturneys of his Court, that there
should no Subpoena's go out, whereof in general he should not have notice of
the matter with one of their hands unto the Bil, which bearing a sufficient
cause of complaint worthy a Subpoena, he would set his hand to, or else cancel
it. And when on a time one of the Atturneys, whose name was Mr. Tub had brought
unto Sir Thomas the sum of his Clients Cause, and requested his hand unto it;
Sir Thomas reading it, and finding it a matter frivolous, he added thereto in
stead of his own name these words, A Tale of a Tub: the Attorney going away as
he thought with Sir Tho. his name unto it, found when his Client read it, but a
jest.

Now was it a great wonder for any one to behold, how two great places of
Westminster Hall were taken up, one with the Son, the other with the Father;
which surely never was heard of before, or since; the Son to be Lord
Chancellor, and the Father Sir John More to be one of the antientest Judges of
the Kings Bench, if not the eldest of all, for he was then near ninety years
old. Sir: Thomas More's humble behavior toward his Father the antientest Judge
of the Kingdom.
Nay what a grateful spectacle was it to see the Son every day as he passed
through the Hal to his place in the Chancery by the Court of the Kings Bench,
(if his Father had been setere he came) to go into the Court, and there
reverently kneeling down in the sight of them all duly ask his Fathers
blessing. And if in fell out that his Father and he at reading in Lincolns-Inne
met together, (as they sometimes did) notwithstanding his High Office, he would
still offer the preheminency to his Father though he for his office sake would
refuse to take it: such was the piety and submissive mind of this humble man,
such again was the provident care of the Father toward the Son, that one can
hardly guess which of the two were more worthy, the father of such a son, or
the son of such a Father.

And as little leisure as he had to be busied in the study of holy Scriptures,
Controversies upon Religion, His admirable zeal in the cause of his Religion.
and other such like virtuous exercises, being in a manner continually employed
about the affairs of the King and the Kingdom, yet such pains took he early
and late in setting forth diverse learned books in defense of his Religion, that
the Bishops to whose pastoral care such businesses principally appertained,
thinking themselves by what he had done (wherein by their own confession they
were not able to compare with him) of their duties in that behalf discharged,
and considering that for all his Princes favor, he was no rich man, nor
advanced in yearly revenews. as his worthiness deserved; therefore at a
Convocation amongst themselves and other of the Clergy, they agreed together
and concluded upon a sum of four or five thousand pounds to recompense him for
his pains. A liberal reward proffered him nobly by the Bishops of England
To the payment whereof every Bishop, Abbot, and the rest of the Clergy were,
according to their abilities, liberal contributaries; hoping this sum would
content him. Whereupon Tunstal Bish. of Durham, and Clark Bishop and as is
supposed Vessey of Exeter repaired unto him declaring how thankfully they
esteemed themselves bound to consider him for his labors (to their discharge
in Gods) bestowed, and that albeit they could not according to his deserts so
worthily would, but must refer that only to the goodness of God; yet for a
small part of recompense, in respect of his estate so unequal to his
worthiness, in the name of their whole Convocation they presented unto him
that sum, which they desired him to accept of: who forsaking it, said, That
like as it was no small comfort to him that so wise and learned men so well
accepted of his doings, As nobly and magnanimously refused by him, only for
Gods caused.
for which he never intended to receive reward but at the hands of God only, to
whom alone was the thanks thereof chiefly to be ascribed, so also he most
humbly thanked their honors for their bountiful consideration. When they for
all their importunate pressing upon him, (that few would have supposed he could
have refused it) could not for all that fasten any upon him; Then they d^sired
him that they might bestow it upon his Wife and Children: Not so (My Lords)
said he, I had rather seen all cast into the Thames, then I or any of mine
should have the worth of one penny of it: For though your offer, my Lords, be
indeed very friendly and honorable, yet set I so much by my pleasure, and so
little by my profit, that I would not in good faith for so much and much more,
have lost the rest of so many nights sleep as was spent upon the same: and yet
wish would I for all that upon condition all Heresies were suppressed, that all
my books were burned, and my labor utterly lost. Thus departing, were they
fain to restore unto every man his own again.

CHAP. X.
1 Sir THOMAS MORE's penances continued in the midst of his honors. 2 His
charity to his poor neighbors of Chelsey. 3 He refuses to allow of King
Henry's Divorcement. 4 He sues to depose his Office. 5 The death of JO. MORE
his Father. 6 Such incredible poverty in so eminent a Person, a sure sign of
incomparable Integrity.
THis Lord Chancellor for the avoiding of singularity, Sir Thomas More his
penances.
would appear no otherwise then other men in his apparel and outward
behavior, and though outwardly he appe^red honorable like one of his calling,
yet inwardly he was no such; for secretly next his skin he wore a shirt of
hair, which his daughter More a young Gentle woman in the summer as he sat at
supper single in his doublet and hose, Hair-shirt.
wearing thereupon a plain shirt without ruff or collar, chancing to espy,
began to laugh at it; which her sister Margaret (not ignorant of his Custom)
perceiving, privily told him of it, and he being sorry that she had seen it
presently amended it. He used also sometimes to punish his body with whips, the
cords knotted, which was known only to his eldest daughter Margaret Wife to the
foresaid Mr. Rooper, whom for her secrecy a-above all other he especially
trusted; causing her as need required to wash the same shirt of hair.

His mer^ciful works to his poor neighbors.
He seldom feasted Noblemen, but his poor neighbors often; whom he would
visit in their houses, and bestow upon them his large liberality, not groats,
but crows of Gold; and more then that, if their wants required it. He hired a
house also for many aged people in Chelsey, whom he daily relieved; and it was
his daughter Margarets charge to see them want nothing: when he was a private
Lawyer, he would take no fees of poor folks, widows, or pupils.

Liberality to his parish Church.
Somewhat before he was Lord Chancellor, he built a Chapel in his Parish at
Chelsey, where the parish had all ornaments belonging thereunto abundantly
supplied at his charge, and he bestowed thereon much Plate, often using these
words: Good men give it, and bad men take it away.

K. Henry desires Sir Thomas to allow his divorce.
Now shortly upon his entry into the high Office of Chancellorship, the King
often again importuned him to weigh and consider his great business, supposing
that he had now so strictly obliged him that he could no way have gainsaid him;
but he valuing more the quiet of his conscience, then any Princes favor in the
world, fell down upon his knees before his Majestly, and humbly besought his
Highness, to stand his gracious Sovereign, as ever since his entry into his
Graces service he had sound him: adding withal, that there was nothing in the
world had been so grievous unto his heart, as to remember he was not able (as
he willingly would with the loss of one of his limbs) to find any thing in that
matter, whereby with integrity of his Conscience he might truly serve his
contentation, as he that always bore in mind those godly words that his
Highness spoke unto him when he first admitted him into his Noble service, the
most virtuous lesson that ever Prince taught his Servant, willing him first to
look unto God, Sir Thomas Mores refusal for the time accepted by the King.
and (after God) unto him, as in good faith he said he did and would, or else
might his Grace well account him his most unworthy servant. To this the King
courteously answered, that it he could not therein with his Conscience serve,
he was content to accept of his Service otherwise, and use the advice of other
his learned Council, whose consciences would well enough agree with it; yet
that he would nevertheless continue his wonted favor toward him, and no more
molest his conscience with that business.

A Parliament called for Q. Annes marriage.
But Sir Thomas More when afterward he saw the King sully determined to
proceed further in the marriage of Queen Anne, and that a Parliament was called
for that purpose, wherein he with the Bishops and Nobles of the upper House
were, for the furtherance of that marriage, commanded by the King to go down to
the Commons, to show unto them both what the Universities as well of other
parts beyond the seas, as at Oxford and Cambridge, had done therein, and their
seals also testifying the same: All which at the Kings request (not showing of
what judgment himself was therein) he declared unto the lower House; yet
doubting lest further attempts should after follow, Sir Thomas sues to depose
his Office.
which contrary to his Conscience (by reason of his Office) he was likely to be
put unto, he made suit unto the Duke of Norfolk his singular dear friend, to be
a means to the King, that he might with his Majesty's favor be discharged of
that chargeable office of Chancellorship, wherein for certain infirmities of
his body, he pretended himself unable any longer to serve.

Sir Thomas More's humbleness in the height of his Honors.
This Duke coming on a time to Chelley to dine with him, happened to find him at
the Church singing in the Quire with a Surplice on his back: to whom after
Service as they went homeward hand in hand together, the Duke said, Gods body,
My Lord Chancellor, what a Parish Clerk, a Parish Clerk! You dishon our the
King and his Office: Nay, said Sir Thomas, smiling upon the Duke, Your Grace
may not think your Master and mine will be offended with me for serving of God
his Master, or thereby count his Office dishonored.

A remarkable Record, that no Cause was left undecided in the Chancery.
When Sir Thomas had behaved himself in his office of the Chancellorship, for
the space of two years and a half, so wisely, that none could mend his doings;
so uprightly, that none could take exception against him or his just
proceedings; and so dexterously, that (it is to be supposed) never any man before
or since did that which he did: for he had taken such order for the dispatching
of all men's causes, that on a time sitting as Judge there, and having finished
one cause, he called for the next to be heard: whereto answer was made, that
there was not one cause more depending. This he caused to be set down upon
Record.

The death of Sir John More.
About this time it happened Sir John More to fall sick (as some say) of a
Surfeit of grapes: in his sickness, his Son whom he had now seen Lord
Chancellor (according to his duty) often came and visited him, using many
comfortable words unto him, and at his departure our of this world, with tears
taking him about the neck, most lovingly kissed, and embraced him, commending
his Soul into the merciful hands of Almighty God, and so departed from him: who
left him now bettered but with a small increase of estate, because his chief
house and Lands at Gubbins in Hartfordshire, his last wife enjoyed, who
outlived Sir Thomas some ten years, Sir Tho. never enjoied his Fathers
inheritance.
and therefore Sir Thomas never enjoyed almost any inhericance from his Father;
insomuch, that he affirmed in his apology which he wrote about this time, that
in all his revenues and pensions, except that which had been granted by Letters
Patents from the King of his mere liberality; viz. the Manours of Duckingtan,
Frinkford, and Barly-park, in Oxfordshire, all the rest he says amount not to
above fifty pound per annum, as those which he had either by his Father, or by
his Wife, or by his own purchase. Surely a most rare saying, Rare poverty in a
Lord High Chancellor.
and as honorable to him as his profession: that one of the Kings Council who
had gone through so many Offices for almost twenty years should not be able to
purchase one hundred pounds land.

CHAP. XI.
1 Sir THOMAS MORE's contempt of worldly honor declared in deposing the great
Dignity of Chancellorship. 2 His Resolution to live poorly. 3 He prepares
himself for his sufferings as foreseeing them. 4 He refuses to be present at
Queen Anne's Marriage.
Upon Sir Thomas his suite to resign up his Office, the King graciously
accepts his desire.
NOw when the Duke being often solicited by Sir Thomas More had at length
obtained of the King a clear discharge of his Office: then at a convenient time
by his Highness appointment, here-paired to his Grace to yield up unto him the
Great Seal of England; which as his Majesty (with thanks and praise for his
worthy service in that Office) courteously received at his hands; so also he
said more unto him, that for the good service he before had done him, in any
suit which he should after have unto him, that either should concern his honor
or his profit, he should find him very good unto him.

Of his Children living with him.
After he had thus given over the Chancellorship, and placed all his Gentlemen
Yeomen with Bishops and Noble men, and his eight Watermen with the Lord Audly
who succeeded him in his Office, to whom also he gave his great Barge: Then
calling all his Children unto him, All his Children hitherto dwelt with him.
and asking their advice how they might now (in this decay of his ability, so
much impaired by the surrender of his Office, that he could not now (as he was
wont, and gladly would) bear out the whole charges of them all himself, so that
from henceforth they should not be able to live and continue together, as he
wished they might: when he saw them all silent, and none of them ready to show
their opinions therein: Then will I, said he, show my poor mind unto you. I
have been brought up at Oxford, at an Inn of Chancery, at Lincolns-Inne, An
incomparable resolution after so great an honor to bear cheerfully so low an
estate.
and also in the Kings Court, and so forth, from the lowest degree unto the
highest, and yet have I now in yearly Revenues left me little above one hundred
pounds by the year, so that we must hereafter (if we will live together) be
contented to become contributaries: but by my counsel it shall not be best for
us to fall to the lowest fare first; we will not therefore descend to Oxford
fare, nor to the fare of New Inn, but we will begin at Lincolns-Inne diet,
where many right worshipful and of good years do live full well; which if we
find our selves not able the first year to maintain then will we the next year
go one step down to New-Inne fare, wherewith many an honest man is well
contented: If that exceed our ability too, then we will the next year after
descend to Oxford fare, where many grave, learned, and ancient fathers are
continually conversant; which if our purses stretch not to maintain neither,
then may we yet with bags and wallets go a begging together, and hoping that
for pity some good people will bestow on us their Charity, at every man's door
sing a Salve Regina, and so still keep company, and be merry together. Truly a
worthy resolution, wherein he seems to express much love to his Children, but
more to God; taking so patiently whatsoever might befall him: for surely he that
provides for the worst, will be much the better prepared to endure lesser
afflictions.

Honorable poverty in so great a personage.
And whereas you have heard before how he was by the King from a very handsome
livelihood, 400 l. per annum, taken into his Graces service to deal in the
greatest and weightiest Causes that concerned his Highness and the Kingdom in
which so painful cares and trouble, as well beyond the seas as at home, he had
spent and consumed in effect the whole substance of his life; yet with all the
gain he got theeeby, being never a wastful spender thereof, was he not able
after the resignation of his Office of the Lord Chancellor, for the
maintenance of himself and such as necessarily belonged unto him, sufficiently
to find meat, fuel, drink, apparel, and such other necessary charges. All the
land that ever he purchased (which also he purchased before he was Lord
Chancellor) was not, says Mr, Rooper, above the value of twenty mark a year.
And after his debts paid, (as the same Mr. Rooper testifies) he had not (his
Chain excepted) in Gold and Silver left him the worth of one hundred pounds,
and therefore all his Children went to live of themselves.

And whereas upon the holy days, during his High-Chancellorship, one of his
Gentlemen, when service at the Church was done, always used to come to his
Ladies pew, and said, Madam, My Lord is gone: the next holy day after the
surrender of his Office and departure of his Gentlemen, he came to his Wives
pew himself, and making a low congy, said unto her, Madam, My Lord is gone. She
imagining all this to be but some humor of his in order to some design, took
little notice of it; but when upon the way as they were going home, A pleasant
jest to divert his wife from sorrow.
he sadly affirmed unto her that it was true what he said; for he had resigned
up his Office, and the King had graciously accepted it: she being very sorry to
hear it said unto him, Tille valle, What will you do, Mr. More? will you sit
and make Goslings in the Ashes? Is it not better to rule, then to be ruled? But
to requite her brave mind, he began to find fault with her dressing, for which
she chiding her daughters that none of them could espy it, they still saying
they could find none: Sir Tho, merrily said, Do you not perceive that your
Mothers nose stands somewhat awry? At which words she stepped away from him in
a rage. All which he did to m^ke her think the less of her decay of honor,
which else would have much troubled her.

His remote preparations for suffering.
In the time somewhat before his troubles, he would discourse with his wife and
children, of the joies of Heaven, and pains of Hell: of the lives of holy
Martyrs, what torments they endured for the love of God: Continual talking of
spiritual matters.
of their mavelous patience, and of their passions and deaths, rather then
they would offend God, and what a happy and blessed thing it was, for the love
of God, to suffer loss of goods, imprisonment, loss of lands and life also:
adding with all, that upon his faith if he might perceive his wife and children
would encourage him to die in a good cause, it would make him merrily run to
death. He told them before hand what troubles were like to befall him; wherewith,
and the like virtuous discourse, he had so long before his troubles encouraged
them, that when he after fell into them indeed, their afflictions were a great
deal the less: Quia spicula praevisa minus laedunt.

A good lesson for a Statesman.
Within a while after the resignement of his Office, came Sir Thomas Cromwell,
(then in the Kings high favor) to Ghelsey to him in a message from his
Highness, wherein when they had thoroughly conf^r'd together, Sir Thomas said
unto him, Mr. Cromwell, You are now entered into the service of a most noble,
wise, and liberal Prince; if you will follow my poor advice, you shall in your
Counsel giving unto his Majesty, ever tell him what he ought to do, but never
what he is able to do; so shall you show your self a true faithful Servant, and
a right worthy Counselor: for if the Lion knew his own strength, hard were it
for any man to rule him.

The marriage concluded at St. Albans to be lawful.
Shortly hereupon, was there a Commission granted under the Great Seal, and
directed to Cranmer then Bishop of Canterbury, to determine the marriage
between the King and Queen Katharine at St. Albans: where, according to the
Kings mind, it was thoroughly concluded; who pretending he had no justice at the
Popes hands, from thenceforth sequestered himself and his Kingdom from the Sea
of Rome, and so married the Lady Anne Bullen: which Sir Thomas More
understanding, said unto Mr. Rooper, God give grace, son, that these matters
within a while be not confirmed with Oaths.

It fortuned not long before the coming of Queen Anne through the streets of
London, Sir Thomas More refuses to be at Q Anns marriag.
from the Tower to Westminster, to her Coronation, that Sir Thomas received a
letter from the Bishops of Durham, Bath, and Winchester, desiring him to keep
them company from the Tower to the Coronation, and also to take twenty pounds
that by the Bearer thereof they had sent him to buy him a Gown: which he
thankfully receiving (yet tarrying still at home) at their next meeting said
merrily unto them, My Lords, in the letters which you lately sent me, His
counfell and prediction to the Bishops his friends
you requested two things of me, the one whereof since I was so well content to
grant you, the other therefore I thought I might be the bolder to deny you. And
like as the one, because I took you for no beggars and my self I knew to be no
rich man, I thought I might the rather fulfill; so the other did put me in
remembrance of an Emperor that had ordained a Law, A notable story
prophetically applied.
that whosoever committed a certain offense (which I now remember not) except
it were a Virgin should suffer death, such a reverence had he to Virginity. Now
so it happened, that the first that violated this Law was a Virgin, whereof the
Emperor hearing was in no small perplexity, as he that by some example would
fain have that Law put in execution: whereupon when his Council had sat long
solemnly debating this Case, suddenly there rose up one of his Council, a good
plain man amongst them, and said, Why make you so much ado my Lords about so
small a matter? Let her first be deflowred, and then after may she be devoured.
And so though your Lordships have in the matter of the Matrimony hitherto kept
your selves pure Virgins, yet take good heed, My Lords, that you keep your
Virginity still: for some there be that by procuring your Lordships first at
the Coronation to be present, and next to preach for setting forth of it, His
resolution rather to be devoured then deflowred.
and lastly to write books to all the World in defense thereof, are desirous to
deflowr you, and then will they not fail soon after to devour you. Now My Lords
(said he) it lies not in my power, but that they may devour me; but, God being
my good Lord I will provide that they shall never deflowr me.

CHAP. XII.
1 The beginning of the Kings indignation. 2 Sir THOMAS MORE disposes himself
more immediately to suffer death. 3 Diverse accusations procured against Sir
THO. all easily avoided by his innocence. 4 The Nun of Canterbury first
occasion of calling Sir T. M. in Question concerning Qu. Anne. 5 His first
examination before the Kings Deputies. 6 His merry heart and gallant resolution
after his Examination.
IN continuance when the King perceived that he could by no means win him to
his side; then behold the fair sunshine day of his favors became overcast, The
kings displeasure
and there followed a notable storm; for now he went about by terror and
threats to drive him thereto: But see how Sir Thomas prepares himself for this
valiant combat; Sir Thomas his more immediate preparation for death.
having given over his Office of Chancellorship he never meddled with State
matters any more, but gave himself wholly the year before his troubles not only
to write books in defense of his Religion as I have said, but also addicted
himself to great acts of Mortification, prayer, and piety: he lessened his
family, he fold his household stuff to the value of one hundred pounds, he
disposed his Children into their own houses, and many nights he slept not for
thinking the worst that could happen unto him: he hired a Pursevant to come
suddenly to his house when he was one time at dinner, A Christian stratagem.
and knocking hastily at his door to warn him the next day to appear before the
Commissioners, to arm his family the better for future calamities.

The first occasion of calling him in question for Q. Anne.
And now begin his troubles first by occasion of a certain Nun dwelling in
Canterbury, for her virtue and holiness not a little esteemed of among the
people in those days: unto whom for that cause many religious persons, Doctors
of Divinity, The Nun of Kent warned by revelation to rebuke K. Henry.
and diverse Laymen of good repute used to resort: who affirming that she had
revelations from God to give the King warning of his wicked life, and of the
abuse of the sword and authority committed to him, and understanding the Lord
Rochester, Bishop Fisher, She conferreth her revelation with Bish. Fisher.
to be a man famous for his virtuous life and learning, went to Rochester, and
there disclosed unto him all her revelations, desiring his advice and counsel
therein: who thereupon advised her (as she before had warning, and intended) to
go to the King her self, and to let him understand the whole circumstance
thereof: whereupon she went to the King and told him all her revelation and so
returned home agan to her Cloister.

Her talk with Sir Tho. More.
Not long after, she making a journey to the Nuns of Sion, by means of one Mr.
Reynold a Father of that house, it happened that she fell into discourse with Sir
Thomas More concerning such secrets as had been revealed unto her. Sir Thomas
(as it after appeared) in all his communications with her, had so discreetly
demeaned himself that he deserved not to be blamed, but contrarily commended
and praised.

Accusatians procuredagainst Sir Tho. More. That he impugned the Kings marriage.
After the Divorce was pronounced, there was a book put out by authority from
the Council, which laid down the reasons why this divorce was done: straight
after, it was rumoured abroad, that Sir Thomas More had answered and confuted
this Book. Of which slander Sir Thomas cleared himself by a letter to Mr.
Cromwell then Secretary, and in the Kings great favor; showing by many
Arguments, that he neither would nor could confute that Book: whi(...) large in
the latter end (...) mas his works. Butler to

^rrels picked against his Chancellorship.
But for all his purging in (...) accusation came thick and (...) fell upon
him; and, had he not been one of singular integrity, (that in all his great
offices and doings for the King and Kingdom so many years together, had from
all corruption, wrong doing, or bribes taking kept himself so clear that no man
was able once to blemish him therewith) without doubt every light matter (in
this troublesome time of the Kings indignation to him) had been deeply laid to
his charge, and of the King at that time most favorably accepted, as in the
Case of one Parnel it most manifestly appeared. This Parnel grievously
complained against Sir Thomas More, because, when he was Lord Chancellor, at
the suit of one Vaughan his adversary, A supposed Bribe pleasantly confuted
he had made a decree against him; for which at his wives hand (Mr. Vaughan
himself being unable for the Gowt to (...)) Sir Thomas had re^eat gilt Cup as a
bribe: ^learing of which accusati(...) Thomas by the Kings appointment being
called before the whole Council, where that matter was hainously laid to his
charge, presently confessed, that forasmuch as that Cup was long after the
foresaid decree brought him for a new^ years-gift, he upon her importunat
pressing on him, therefore of courtesy refused not to receive it. Then the
Lord of Wiltshire (Queen Anns father and preferrer of this suit) (who hated Sir
Thomas More, because he had not consented to his daughters marriage) with much
joy said unto the Lords, Lo my Lords, did not I tell you that you should find
the matter true? Whereupon Sir Th^mas desired their honors that as they had
courteously heard him tell the one part of his Tale, so they would vouchsafe of
their honors indifferently to hear the other: which being granted, he further
declared, that although he had indeed with much urging received that Cup, yet
immediately thereupon he caused his Butler to fill it with Win^, and therein
drank to her; and when she had pledged him, Then as freely as her husband had
given it to him, even so freely gave he the same unto her again to give unto
her husband for his New-years-gift: which at his instant request, though much
against her will, yet at length she was fain to receive, as her self and
certain others before them there presently deposed. Thus was the great mountain
converted (scarce) to a little molehill.

A courteous refususal of an honest reward.
At another time, upon a New-years-day too, there came unto him one Mistress
Croaker a very rich Gentlewoman, for whom with no small pains he had made a
Decree in Chancery against the Lord Arundel (never fearing in an act of
justice, any nobility of blood or greatness of personage) who presented him
with a pair of Gloves and forty pounds in. Angels in them for a New-years-gift,
of whom he thankfully received the Gloves, but refusing the Money said unto
her; Mistress, Since it were against good manners to forsake a Gentlewomans
New Years gift, I am content to take your Gloves; but as for the lining I
utterly refuse it: and so caused her to take her gold again; though much
against her mind.

Another of like nature.
And one Mr. Gresham having at the same time a Cause depending in the Chancery
against him, sent him, for a New-years-gift, a fair gilded Cup: the fashion
whereof pleased him so well, that he caused one of his own (though not in his
fancy of so good a fashion, yet better in value) to be brought out of his
Chamber, which he desired the messenger in recompense to deliver to his Master;
and under no other conditions would he in any wise receive it.

Many things more of like effect for the declaration of this man's innocence and
clearness from all corruption or evil affectionm might be here rehearsed,
which for tediousness sake are purposely omitted, it being referred to the
Readers by those few forementioned examples wisely to weigh and consider:

Sir Thomas his first examinations.
At the Parliament following there was a Bill put into the lower House to
attach the Nun, and diverse other religious persons of high treason; and the
Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas More, and some other of misprision of treason;
The King presupposing that this Bill would be so grievous and terrible unto Sir
Thomas More, that it would force him to relent and condescend to his request:
wherein his Highness, as it afterward appeared, was much mistaken: for Sir
Thomas More sued that he might be admitted into the Parliament to make his own
defense personally; which the King not liking assigned the Bishop of
Canterbury, The kings Deputies to attach Sir Thomas More.
the Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk, and Mr. Cromwell, at a day and place
appointed, to call Sir Thomas More before them.

Their fair words to win him.
At whose appearance according to their appointment, they entertained him very
friendly, desiring him to sit down amongst them, which in no wise he would do.
Then began the Lord Chancellor to declare unto him, how many ways the King had
showed his love and favor to him, how fain he would have had him continue in
his Office, how glad he would have been to have heaped more favors upon him;
and lastly, how he could ask no worldly honor and profit at his Highness
hands that were likely to be denied him, hoping by the declaration of the Kings
kindness and affection tomards him, to cause him to recompense his Grace with
the like again; and unto those things the Parliament the Bishops and
Universities had already subscribed, to add his consent also. Fairly answered
with a mild and constant refusal.


To this Sir Thomas More mildly made answer, saying, No man living is there (My
Lords), that would with better will do anything that should be acceptable to
the Kings Highness then my self, who must needs confess his great favors and
bountiful goodness most liberally bestowed on me; howbeit I verily hoped that I
should never have heard of this matter more, considering that I have from time
to time always from the beginning so plainly and truly declared my mind unto
his Grace, which his Highness to me ever seemed, like a most gracious Prince to
accept, never intending (as he then said) to molest me more therewith: since
which time any further thing that was able to move me to any change, could
I-never find: and if I could, there is none in all the world could have been
gladder of it then I.

The Deputies threats.
Many speeches more concerning this were uttered on both sides, but in the end
when they saw they could by no manner of persuasions remove him from his former
determination, then began they more terribly to threaten him, telling him that
the Kings Highness had commanded them if they could by no gentleness win him,
in his name to charge him with his great ingratitude, that never was there
servant to his Sovereign so villainous, nor subject to his Prince so traitorous
as he: For he by his subtle sinister sleights (most unnaturally procuring and
provoking him to set forth a book of the assertion of the seven Sacraments and
maintenance of the Popes Authority) had caused him to his dishonor throughout
all Christendom to put a sword in the Popes hands t^ fight against himself.
Sir Thomas More accused for Author of the Kings Bo^k for the Pope. His evident
refutation.
When they had thus laid forth all the terror they could against him.

My Lords (said he) These terrors be arguments for Children, not for me; but
to answer that wherewith you do chiefly charge me, I believe the Kings
Highness of his honor will never lay that to my charge; for none is there
that can in that point say more in mine excuse then his Highness himself, who
right well knows that I never was Procurer nor Counselor of his Majesty
thereto: but after it was finished, by his Graces appointment, and consent of
the makers of the same, I was only a sorter out and placer of, the principal
matters therein contained; wherein I found the Popes Authority highly advanced,
and with strong Arguments highly defended. I said unto his Majesty, I must put
your Highness in remembrance of one thing, and that is this; The Pope, as your
Grace knows, is a Prince as you are, Wise and wary counsel of Sir Tho. to the
King.
and in league with all other Christian Princes; it may hereafter so fall out
that your Grace and he may vary upon some points of the league whereupon may
grow breach of amity and war between you both: I think it best that that place
be amended and his authority more slenderly touched. Nay, said his Grace, that
shall not be; we are so much bounden to the Sea of Rome, the King acknowledges
the obligation of his Crown to Rome.
that we cannot do too much honor unto it. Then did I further put him in mind
of the Statute of Praemunire, whereby a good part of the Popes pastoral cure
was pared away. To that answered his Highness, Whatsoever impediment be to the
contrary, we will set forth that Authority to the uttermost: for we received
from the Sea of Rome our Crown imperial: Which till his Grace with his own
mouth told it me, I never heard of before. So that I trust, when that his
Majesty shall be truly informed of this, and call to his gracious remembrance
my dealing in that behalf, his Highness will never speak of it more, but clear
me thoroughly therein himself. With which words in great displeasure they
dismissed him and departed.

His merry heart after his examination.
Then took Sir Thomas More his Boat toward Chelsey, where by the way he was
very merry; which Mr. Rooper much rej^iced at, supposing that he had got
himself discharged out of the Bill. When he was landed and come home they
walked in his Garden, where Mr. Rooper said unto him, I trust Sir all is well
because you are so merry. It is so indeed son I thank God. Are you then put out
of the Parliament Bill, said Mr. Rooper? By my troth Son I never remembered
that: Never remembered it! Sir, said he, a Case that touches your self so near,
and us all for your sake! I am very sorry to hear it, for I verily trusted,
when I saw you merry, that all had been well. Then replied Sir Thomas, would
thou know son, why I was so merry? A fall given to the Devil.
In good faith I rejoiced that I had given the Devil so foul a fall, and that
with those Lords I had gone so far, as without great shame I coul'd never go
back again.

The Kings indignation against Sir Tho. More.
Now upon the report made by my Lord Chancellor and the other Lords to the King
of Sir Thomas Mores examination, the King was so much offended with him, that
he plainly told them, he was fully determined that the foresaid Parliament Bill
should certainly proceed forth against him: to whom the Lord Chancellor and the
rest of the Lords said, that they perceived the upper house so powerfully bent
to hear Sir Thomas make answer in his own defense, that if he were not put out
of the Bill, it would without fail be an utter ^overthrow to all: but for all
this, the King would needs have his own will, or else he said he would be
personally present himself at the passing of it. Then the Lord Audley and the
rest, seeing he was so vehemently set upon it, on their knees most humbly
besought his Grace to forbear, considering, that if he should in his own
presence receive an overthrow, Prudent and politic advine in so bad a Cause.
it would not only encourage his Subjects ever after to contemn him, but also
redound to his dishonor for ever throughout all Christendom: telling him,
that they doubted not in time to find some better occasion to serve his Graces
turn; for in this case of the Nun, he was accounted, they said, so innocent and
clear, that for his dealing therein men thought him worthier of praise then
reproof. Whereupon at length, through their earnest persuasion, he was content
to condescend to their Petition, Proceeding against Sir Tho. More deferred.
and on the morrow after, Mr. Cromwell meeting M. Rooper in the Parliament
House, wished him to tell his Father, that he was put out of the Parliament
Bill, who because he had that day appointed to dine in London, sent the message
by his servant to his Wise at Chelsey, whereof when she informd her father, In
faith Meg, said he, Quod differtur, non aufertur.

After this the Duke of Norfolk and Sir Thomas More chanced to sal in discourse
together, A gallant answer to a friends fear.
and amongst other talk, the Duke said unto him, By the mass, Mr. More, it is
perilous striving with Princes, and therefore I would wish you somewhat to
incline to the Kings pleasure: for, By Gods Body Mr. More, Indignatio Principis
Mors est. Is that all? (My Lord) said Sir Thomas: Then in good says is there
no more difference betwixt your Grace and me, but that I shall dye to day, and
you to morrow.

CHAP. XIII.
1 Sir THOMAS MORE refuses the Oath of Supremacy and succession. 2 Sir THOMAS
MORE's imprisonment first in Westminster, then in the Tower. 3 His discourse
with his daughter Margaret. 4 A Dialogue between him and his Wife the Lady
MORE. 5 Mr. Rich his Case. 6 His Books taken from him.
The Oath of supremacy.
NOw it fell out within a month or thereabouts, after the enacting of the
Statute for the Oath of the Supremacy and Matrimony, that all the Priests of
London and Westminster (yet no temporal man but Sir Thomas More) were summoned
to appear at Lambeth before the Bishop of Canterburry, Sir Tho. cited to take
it.
the Lord Chancellor, and Secretary Cromwell, Commissioners appointed there to
tender the Oath unto them.

His preparation before his going.
Then Sir Thomas More, as his custom was always, ere he entered into any
business of importancy, (as when he was first chosen one of the Kings privy
Council, when he was sent Ambassador, appointed Speaker of the Parliament,
made Lord Chancellor, or took any such weighty matter upon him) first to go to
Church and be confessed, to hear Mass and receive the Sacrament, so did he
likewise in the morning early the very day that he was summoned to appear
before the Lords at Lambeth: and whereas he used always before at his
departure from his Wife and Children whom he tenderly loved, to have them bring
him to his Boat, and there he kissing them all bad them sarewell, now he would
suffer none of them to come forth of the Gate, but pulled the wicket after him,
and with a heavy heart (as by his countenance it appeared) with his Son Rooper,
and their four servants, he took boat toward Lambeth, wherein sitting still
sadly a while, at last he rounded his Son in the ear, and said, Son Rooper, I
thank our Lord, the field is Won. What he meant thereby his Son wist not, yet
loath to seem ignorant, he answered, Sir I am very glad of it.

His discreet behavior in that cause.
How wisely he demeaned himself before the Comissioners at the ministration of
the Oath unto him may be found in certain letters of his sent to his Daughter
Margaret, which are printed at the latter end of his English works, the effect
whereof is this: After he was called before them, he requested of them to see
the Oath, which when he had read unto himself, he answered, That he neither
would find fault with the Oath, nor with the Authors of it, He resuseth the
Oath for conscience sake.
nor would blame the Conscience of any man that had taken it, but for himself
he could not take it without endangering his soul of eternal damnation; which
if they doubted of, he would swear unto them that that was the chief cause of
his refusal; in which second Oath if they doubted to trust him, how could they
then trust him in the former? Which he having said, my Lord Chancellor replied,
That all there were heartily sorry he should make such an answer, for they
constantly affirmed that he was the first man that denied to take it, which
would greatly aggravate the Kings displeasure against him. And forthwith they
showed him a Catalogue of the Nobility, and many others who had taken it, and
had subscribed their names thereunto.

All the Clergy but Bish. Fisher and D. Wilson did take the Oath.
Yet because he would not blame any man's conscience therein, he was commanded
to walk into the Garden a while, then presently all the Clergy men, some
Bishops, many Doctors, and Priests, were called in, who all took it, except
Bishop Fisher, and one Doctor Wilson) without any scruple at all.

Upon what conditions Sir Tho. offered to set down his reasons of refusal.
After all these had soon dispatched the business for which they were sent
for, Sir Thomas was called in again, and the names of all that had taken the
Oath were showed him, whereunto for himself he answered as before: then they
often objected unto him obstinacy, because he would neither take it, nor give
any reason why he refused it; to which he replied, That his denial only would
provoke the Kings indignation sufficiently against him, and therefore he was
loath any further to aggravate his displeasure, showing what urgent necessity
drew him unto it; howbeit if his Majesty would testify that his expressing the
Causes wherefore he refused it would not provoke against him his further anger,
he would not stick to set them down in writing, and if any man could satisfy
those reasons to the content of his conscience, he would take the Oath most
willingly. Then Cranmer Lord Archbishop urged unto him, that seeing he was not
certain of his Conscience, Sir Tho. More's offer proceeds not of uncertainty,
but because he was sure his reasons were unaswerable.
but that it was a thing certain, he must obey his Prince, therefore was he to
reject that doubtful conscience of his, and stick to the latter which was
undoubted.

And when the Abbot of Westminster had said, that he might very well suspect
his own conscience to be erroneous, because he alone would seem to control all
the Wisdom of the whole Realm, who had made and taken it: Thereto Sir Thomas
answered, All Christendom of more authority then all England.
That if he alone should stand against so worthy a Kingdom, he had great cause
to fear his own conscience: but, if that on his side he could produce a far
greater number, of as learned men as they; he thought himself then not bound to
reform his conscience by following the consent of one Kingdom against a
general received opinion of the whole Christian world.

The Oath of succession.
Then asked they him whether he would swear to the succession: to which he
answered, That he was willing enough to do that, if the Oath were set down in
such words as he might safely take it. Then said the Lord Chancellor, See Mr.
Secretary, he will not swear to that neither, but under a certain form of
words. No truly, replied Sir Thomas, except I find that I may swear it without
danger of perjury, and with a safe Conscience.

When he had thus behaved himself, he was committed to the custody of the Abbot
of Westminster for four days, Sir Tho. More's imprisonment first in
Westminster.
during which time the King consulted with his Council, what order were best to
be taken with him; and although at first they resolved he should be discharged
with an Oath not to be known whether he had sworn to the Supremacy or no, or
what he thought thereof, yet Queen Anne by her importunate clamor did so sore
exasperate the King against him, that contrary to his former resolution, Then
by Q. Annes importunity in the Tower.
he caused the said Oath of the Supremacy to be ministered unto him: who
although he made a discreet qualified answer, nevertheless was presently
committed to the Tower: who as he was going thither (wearing as he commonly did
a chain of Gold about his neck) Sir Rich. Wink field that had the charge of his
conveyance thither, advised him to send home his Chain to his Wife or some of
his children, Nay Sir, said he, that I will not, for if I were taken in the
field by mine enemies, I would they should somewhat fare the better for me.

At his landing Mr. Lieutenant at the Tower-gate was ready to receive him, The
upper garment the Porters Fee.
where the Porter demanded of him his upper garment, Mr. Porter, said he, here
it is, and took off his C^p and gave it him, saying, I am sorry it is no better
for thee. No Sir, said the Porter, I must have your Gown; which he gave him.
And so was he by Mr. Lieutenant conveyed to his lodging, where he called unto
him one John Wood his servant there appointed to attend him, who could neither
write nor read, and swear him before the Lieutenant, His man's Oath.
that if he should hear or see him at any time speak or write any manner of
thing against the King, the Council, or the State of the Realm, he should tell
it to the Lieutenant that he might presantly reveal it to the Council.

His discourse with his daughter Margaret.
Now when Sir Thomas had remained in the Tower something more then a month, his
daughter Margaret longing to see him, at length got leave to go to him; at
whose coming, Prevented with Prayers.
after the seven Psalms and Letany said (which whenever she came to him,
before he would talk of any worldly affairs, The comfort he found in his
impri^onment.
he used to say with her;) among other discourse he said unto her, I believe
Meg that they which have put me here think they have done me a high
displeasure, But I assure you on my Faith, (mine own good daughter) that if it
had not been for my wife and you my children whom I account the chief part of
my charge, I would not have failed long ere this, to have closed my self in as
straight a room as this and straighter too: But since I am come hither without
my own desert, I trust that God of his goodness will discharge me of my care,
and by his gracious help supply the want of my presence among you: I find no
cause (I thank God) Meg to reckon my self in worse case here, then in mine own
house. For me thinks God makes me a wanton, and sets me on his lap and
dandleth me. Thus by his gracious demeanor in his troubles, it evidently
appeared, that all the calamities that ever befell him, by his patient
sufferance of them were to him no painful punishments, but rather profitable
exercises of his patience.

And at another time, when he had first enquired of his daughter concerning the
order of his wife, Sir Thomas More. foretells Q Annes death.
and children, and state of his family in his absence, he asked her how Queen
Anne did, In faith father (said she) never better, there is nothing else in the
Court but dancing, and sporting. Never better Meg! (said he) Alas, Meg, Alas,
it pitti^th me to remember into what misery poor soul she shall shortly come,
but in the mean time these dances of hers will prove such dances, that they
will spurn our heads off like foothals.

His pleasant answer to his Keepers honest excuse.
After this Mr. Lieutenant coming into his Chamber to visit him related unto
him the many favors and friendships he had often received at his hands, and
therefore how much bound he was friendly and nobly to entertain him, which
since (the Case standing ^s it did) he could not do without the Kings
displeasure, he trusted, he said, he would accept of his good will, and such
poor fare as he had: Master Lieutenant (said Sir Thomas More again) I verily
believe, as you may, so are you my good friend indeed, and would, as you say,
with your best cheer entertain me; for which I most heartily thank you; and
assure your self, Master Lieutenant, I do not mislike my cheer, but whenever
I do, then thrust me out of your doors.

The ignorance of the Oath makers.
Now, whereas the Oath of Supremacy, and Matrimony, was in the first statute
comprised in few words, the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary did of the^r own
heads add more words unto it, to make it appear unto the Kings ears more
pleasant and plausible; and that Oath so amplyfied, they then caused to be
tendered to Sir Thomas More and others throughout the Kingdom: which Sir Thomas
perceiving, said unto his daughter, I may tell thee Meg, they that have
committed me hither, for refusing of this Oath not agreeable with the Statute,
are not able by their own law to justify my imprisonment: and surely daughter
it is great pity that any Christian Prince should by a flexible Council ready
to follow his affections, with flattery so shamefully be abused. But at length
the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary espying their oversight in that business,
were fain afterward to cause another Statute to be enacted for the
confirmation of the Oath so amplyfied with their additions.

As Sir Thomas (looking out of his window) chanced to see one Mr. Raynolds a
Father of Sion, and three Monks of the Charter House, His meditation on death
upon the execution of 24 Religious men.
for the business of the Matrimony and Supremacy going out of the Tower to
their execution, he, as longing to accompany them in that journey, said unto
his daughter, then standing by him, Lo, do thou not see (Meg) that these
reverend Fathers are as cheerfully going to their deaths as bridgrooms to their
marriage; wherefore hereby may thou see (mine own good daughter) what a great
difference there is between such as have in effect spent all their days in a
straight hard, painful, and penitential life religiously, and such as have in
the world like worldly wretches (as thy poor father) consumed all their time in
pleasure and ease, licentiously: for God considering their long continued life
in most sore and grievous pain, will no longer suffer them to remain here in
this vale of misery and iniquity, but speedily takes them hence to the
fruition of his everlasting Deity: whereas thy silly Father (Meg) that like a
most wicked Caitiffe has passed forth the whole course of his life most,
sinfully; God thinking him not worthy to come so soon to that eternal felicity,
leaves him here yet still in the world further to be prolonged and turmoiled
with misery.

A while after Mr. Secretary coming to him into the Tower from the King,
Secretary Cromwell hi^ visit.
pretended much friendship toward him, and for his comfort told him, That the
King was his good and gracious Lord, and intended not any more to trouble his
conscience with any thing, wherein he should have cause of scruple. As soon as
Mr. Secretary was gone, to express how much comforted he was by his words, he
wrote with a coal, (for then he had no ink) these verses following. Eye
flattering fortune, look thou never so fair,
Nor never so pleasantly begin to smile,
As though thou would my ruin all repair,
During my life thou shall not me beguile
Trust I shall God to enter in a while.
Thy haven of Heaven, sure and uniform,
Ever after thy Calm look I for no storm.


A pretty dialogue between Sir Tho. More and his Lady
When Sir Thomas More had continued a good while in the Tower his Lady obtained
leave to see him, who, at her first coming, thus bluntly saluted him: What the
good year Master More, said she, I marvel that you that have been always taken
for so wise a man will now so play the fool, as to lie here in this close
filthy prison, and be content thus to be shut up amongst mice and rats: and too
when you might be abroad at your liberty, and with the favor and good will
both of the King and his Council, if you would but do as all the Bishops and
best learned of the Realm have done; and seeing you have at Chelsey a right
fair House, your Library, your Gallery, your Garden, your Orchard, and all
other necessaries so handsome about you, where you might in the company of me
your Wife, your Children, and household be merry: I muse what a Gods name you
mean here still thus fondly to tarry. His answer.
After he had a while quietly heard her, with a very cheerful countenance he
said unto her, Good Mrs. Alice tell me one thing. What is that? (said she) Is
not this house as nigh heaven as mine own? The pris^n as near heaven as his own
house.
To whom she (as not liking these words) answered after her manner, Tille
valle, Tille valle. How say you, Mrs. Alice, said he, is it not so? Bone Deus,
Bone Deus man, Will this gear never be left (said she.) Well then, Mrs. Alice,
if it be so it is very well; but for my part I see no great cause why I should
much joy in my gay house, or of any thing belonging thereunto, when if I should
but seven years lie buried under ground, and then arise and come thither again,
I should not fail to find some therein that would bid me get me out of doors,
and tell me it were none of mine What cause have I then to like such a house as
would so soon forget his Master? Again, tell me Mrs. Alice, how long do you
think may we live and enjoy it? Some twenty years, said she. Truly, said Sir
Thomas, if you had said some thousand years, Eternity to be preferred before
Temporality.
it had been somewhat, and yet he were a very bad Merchant, that would put him
self in danger to lose Eternity, for a thousand years; how much the rather if
we are not sure to enjoy it one day to an end? And thus her persuasions moved
him but little.

Not long after came there to him, Another visit.
the Lord Chancellor, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, with Secretary Cromwell,
and some others of the privy Council at two several times, to procure him by
all means, either precisely to confess the Kings Supremacy, or plainly to deny
it; whereunto as appears by his examination set out in his English works,
they could never bring him, because he was unwilling to aggravate the Kings
displeasure against himself, saying only, That the Statute was like a two edged
sword; if he spoke against it, he should procure the death of his body; if he
consented to it, he should purchase the death of his soul.

Shortly hereup on Mr. Rich, (afterward Lord Rich) then newly made the Kings
Solicitour, Sir Ri. Southwell and one Mr. Palmer the Secretaries servant, were
sent by the King to take away all his Books: Mr. Rich pretending friendly
discourse with Sir Thomas, said unto him (as it proved after) of set purpose:
Forasmuch as it is well known Mr. More, that you are a man both wise, and well
learned, as well in the Laws of the Realm as otherwise, I pray you Sir let me
be so bold as of good will to put unto you this case: Mr. Rich his Case
Admit there were an Act of Parliament made, that all the Realm should take me
for King, would not you (Mr. More) take me for King? Yes Sir, said Sir Thomas
More, that would I. I put case further, said Mr. Rich, That there were an Act
of Parliament, that all the Realm should take me for Pope, would not you then
take me for Pope? For answer, said Sir Thomas, to your first Case, the
Parliament may well meddle with the state of Temporal Princes; but to make
answer to your other case, I will put you this Case: Suppose the Parliament
would make a Law that God should not be God, would you then Mr. Rich say that
God should not be God? Surely a poor ground for an Indictment of Treason.
"No Sir, said he, since no Parliam. "may make such a Law: No More (as Mr. Rich
reported Sir Tho should say, but yet he made no such inference as he vouchsafed
after to M. R. his face) could the Parliament make the King supreme head of the
Church. Upon which report of Mr. Rich's Sir Thomas was shortly after indicted of
high treason upon the new Statute of Supremacy, in which it was made treason to
deny the King to be the Supreme head of the Church, into which judgment were
put these heinous words, Maliciously, traitorously, and Diabolically.

An accident very remarkable if true at the taking away of his Books.
He had a little before this begun a Divine Treatise of the passion of Christ;
and as some write, when he came to expound those words of the Gospel, (And
they laid hands upon him, and held him) these Gentlemen took from him all his
Books, Ink, and Paper, so that he could go on no further. Which being done he
applied himself wholly to meditation, keeping his Chamber windows fast shut and
very dark, the occasion whereof the Lieutenant of the Tower asking him: His
merry jest upon it.
He answered, When all the wares are gone the shop windows are to be shut up.

When Sir Thomas More was brought from the Tower to Westminster Hall to answer
the indictment, and thereupon arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, The substance
of the indictment.
where he had often asked his Fathers blessing, he openly told the Judges that
he would have abidden in law and demurred upon the indictment but that he
thereby should have been driven to confess of himself that he had denied the
Kings Supremacy, which he protested he never did: wherefore he thereto pleaded
not guilty, and reserved to himself advantage to be taken of the body of the
matter after verdict, to avoid that in ditement: adding withal, that if only
those odious terms, Maliciously, Traitorously, and Diabolically were taken out
of the Indictment, he saw nothing in it that should justly charge him of any
Treason.

CHAP. XII.
1 Sir THOMAS MORE'S Arraignment. 2 His answer to the Indictment. 3 Mr. Rich
his Oath against Sir Thomas More clearly rejected. 4. Sentance of Death
pronounced against Sir Thomas More.
The Arraignment of Sir Tho. More.
NOw when the King had endeavored all means possible to get Sir Thomas his
consent to his laws, (as knowing that his example would draw many more after
him, being a man so eminent for wisdom and rare virtues) and could no way
obtain his desire, he commanded him to be called to his arraignment at the
Kings-Bench-Barre, having been prisoner at the Tower somewhat more then a
twelvemonth: whither he went leaning on his staff, because he had been much
weakened by his imprisonment, his countenance showing much cheerfulness and
resolution. His Indictment (which was very long and odious) was read by the
Kings Atturny: His Indictment. The Judges charges.
which being ended, the Lord Chancellor and the Duke of Norfolk, spoke to this
effect unto him. You see now how grievously you have offended his Majesty yet
he is so merciful, that if you will but leave your obstinacy, and change your
opinion, we hope you may obtain pardon of his Highness.

His resolution.
Whereunto Sir Thomas resolutely replied thus: Most noble Lords, I have great
cause to thank your Honors for this your courtesy; but I beseech Almighty God
that I may continue in the mind I am in through his Grace unto death.

After this he was permitted to say what he could in his own defense in answer
to his Indictment, Sir Thomas his answer to the indictment.
who thereupon began as follows.

When I think how long my accusation is, and what heinous matters are laid to
my charge, I am stricken with fear lest my memory and wit, both which are
decaled together with the health of my body through a long impediment
contracted by my imprisonement, be not now able to answer these things on the
sudden, as I ought, and otherwise could.

After this, there was brought him a chair, on which when he was sat he
proceeded thus.

1. How sincerely he had always told the King his mind concerning the marriage.
There are four principal heads if I be not deceived, of this my Indictment,
every one of which (God willing) I purpose to answer in order. To the first
that is objected against me, to wit, That I have been an enemy of a stubborness
of mind to the Kings second marriage; I confess that I always told the King
my opinion therein as my conscience dictated unto me, which I neither would or
ought to have concealed; I am so far from thinking my self guilty of high
Treason, as that, on the contrary, I being demanded my opinion by so great a
Prince in a matter of such importance, whereupon the quietness of a Kingdom
depends, If I should have basely flattered him against my own Conscience, and
not uttered the truth as I thought, then I should worthily have been accounted
a wicked subject, and a perfidious traitor to God.

Herein I had offended the King (if it can be an offense to tell ones mind
plainly when our Prince asks us) I suppose I have been already punished
enough for this fault with most grievous afflictions, The continuation of his
imprisonment and afflictions.
with the loss of all my goods, and committed to perpetual imprisonment, having
been shut up already almost these fifteen months.

2. Why he refused to tell his judgment of the law of Supremacy.
My second accusation is, that I have transgressed the Statute in the last
Parliament, that is to say, being a Prisoner and twice examined by the Lords of
the Council, I would not disclose unto them my opinion (of a malignant,
perfidious, obstinate and traitorous mind) whether the Ki. were Supreme head of
the Church or no but answered them that this Law belonged not unto me, whether
it were just or unjust, because I did not enjoy any benefit from the Church;
yet I then protested, that I never had said or done any thing against it,
Laymen not concerned in this Law.
neither can any one word or action of mine be produced, to make me culpable;
yea this I confess was then my speech unto their Honors, that hereafter I
would think of nothing else, but of the bitter passion of our blessed Savior,
and of my passage out of this miserable world. I wish no harm to any, and if
this will not keep me alive, I desire not to live. By all which I know that I
could not transgress any Law, or incur any crime of treason; for neither
this Statute nor any Law in the world can punish any man for holding his peace;
No law can punish silence that is without malice.
for they only can punish either words or deeds God only being Judge of our
secret thoughts.

At which words, because indeed they were very urgent, the Kings Attorney
interrupted him, Whether his silence were malicious.
and said Although we have not one word or deed of yours to object against you
yet have we your Silence, which is an evident sign of a malicious mind, because
no dutiful subject, being lawfully asked this question, will refuse to answer.
To which Sir Thomas answered;

My silence is no sign of any malicious mind, which the King himself may know
by many of my dealings, neither does it convince any man of breach of your Law.
For it is a Maxim amongst the Civilians, and Canonisty: Qui^acet, consentire
videtur, He that holds his peace seems to consent. And as for that you say,
Obedience first to God, then to man.
No good subject will refuse to answer directly I think it verily, the duty of
a good subject, except he be such a subject as will be an evil Christian,
rather to obey God then man, to have more care of offending his conscience then
of any other matter in the world; especially if his conscience procure neither
heavy scandal nor sedition to his Prince or Country, as mine has not done;
for I here protest unfeignedly, that I never revealed it to any man living.

3. That he never counseled or induced B. Fisher.
I now come to the third capital matter of my Indictment, whereby I am accused,
that I maliciously attempted, traitorously endeavored, and perfidiously
practiced against this Statute as the words thereof affirm, because I wrote
eight sundry packets of letters whilst I was in the Tower unto Bishop Fisher,
by which I exhorted him to break the same Law; and induced him to the like
obstinacy. The contents of his letters to the said Bishop
I would have these letters produced and read against me, which may either free
me or convince me of a lie. But because you say the Bishop burnt them al I will
here tell the truth of the whole matter: Some were only of private matters; as
about our old friendship and acquaintance; one of them was in answer to his,
whereby he desired of me to know how I had answered in my examinations to this
Oath of Supremacy: Touching which, this only I wrote unto him again, that I had
already set led my conscience, let him settle his to his own good liking; and
no other answer I gave him, God is my witness, as God I hope shall save this my
soul and this I trust is no breach of your Laws.

4. The law of Supremacy like a two-edged sword.
The last objected crime is, that being examined in the Tower, I did say that
this Law was like a two-edged Sword; for in consenting thereto I should
endangen my soul, in refusing it, I should lose my life: Which answer, because
Bishop Fisher made the like, it is evidently gathered, as you say, that we both
conspired together. Whereto I reply, that my answer there was but conditional;
if there be danger in both either to allow or disallow this Statute and
therefore like a twoedged Sword, it seems a hard thing, that it should be
offered to me, that never have hitherto contradicted it either in word, or
deed. These were my words; what the Bishop answered, I know not. If his answer
were like mine it proceeded not from any conspiracy of ours, but from the
likeness of our wits and learning. To conclude, I unfeignedly avouch that I
never spoke word against this Law to any living man; although perhaps his
Majesty has been told the contrary.

To this full answer the Atturny replied no more, but the word Malice, was in
the mouth of all the Court, but no man could produce either word or deed to
prove it, Mr. Rich his Oath against Sir Tho. More.
yet for all this, for proof to the Jury that Sir Thomas More was guilty of
this Treason, Mr. Rich was called forth to give evidence unto them upon his
Oath; which he did affirming that which was spoken of before in their discourse
in the Tower: against whom now sworn Sir Thomas began in this manner to speak:
If I were a man, my Lords, that did not regard an Oath, I needed not at this
time in this place (as it is well known to you all) stand as an accused person.
Disproved by Sir Th. Oath to the contrary.
And if this Oath (Mr. Rich) which you have taken be true, then I pray that I
may never see God in the face, which I would not say, were it otherwise to gain
the whole world.

Then did he recite before the Council the whole discourse of all their
communication in the Tower, according as it was truly, His exception against
the witness as unworthy of credit.
adding this:

In good faith Mr. Rich I am more sorry for your perjury then for mine own
peril, and know you, that neither I nor any man else to my knowledge ever took
you to be a man of such credit, as that I or any other would vouch safe to
communicate with you in any matter of importance. You know that I have been
acquainted with your manner of lite and conversation a long space even from
your youth to this time; for we dwelt long together in one parish, whereas your
self can well tell, (I am sorry you compel me to speak it) you were always
esteemed very light of your tongue, a great dicer and gamester, and not of any
commendable fame either there or at your house at the Temple, where has been
your bringing up. Can it therefore seem likely to your Honorable Lordships,
that in so weighty a cause I should so unadvisedly overshoot my self as to
trust M. Rich, a man always reputed of me for a man of so little truth and
honesty, so far above my Sovereign Lord the King, to whom I am so deeply
indebted for his manifold favors, or any of his noble and grave Counselors
that I would declare only to Mr Rich the secrets of my Conscience touching the
Kings Supremacy, the special point and only mark so long sought for at my
hands; which I never did nor ever would reveal after the statute once made
either to the Kings Highness or to any of his noble Counselors, as it is well
known to your Honors, who have been sent, for no other purpose, at sundry
several times from his Majesty's person to me in the Tower. I refer it
therefore to your judgments My Lords, whether this can seem a thing credible to
any of you.

If it had been true there had been no Malice.
And if I had done as Mr. Rich has sworn, seeing it was spoken but in familiar
secret talk affirming nothing, but only in putting of Cases, without any
unpleasing circumstances, it cannot justly be taken for Maliciously, and where
there is no malice there ^an be no offense. Besides this (My Lords) I cannot
think that so many worthy Bishops, so many honorable personages, and so many
worshipful, virtuous, and well learned men, as were in the Parliament assembled
at the making of that Law, Malice in Law.
ever meant to have any man punished by death in whom there could be found no
malice, taking Malitia for Malevolentia, for if Malitia be taken in a general
signification for any sin no man is there that can excuse himself thereof, Quia
si^dixerimus quod pecatum non habemus, nosmetipsos seducimus, and verit as in
nobis non est. Wherefore this word Maliciously is only material in this
Statute, as the word forcible is in the Statute of Forcible Entry: for in that
Case if any enter peaceably and put his adversary out forcibly, it is no
offense; but if he enter forcibly, he shall be punished by that Statute.

Besides this, the unspeakable goodness of the Kings Highness toward me, who
has been so many ways my singular good Lord and gracious Sovereign; He, The
improbability of Mr. Rich's deposition.
I say, who has so dearly loved and trusted me, even from my first coming into
his Royal service, vouchsafing to grace me with the honor of being one of his
privy Council, and has most liberally advanced to offices of great credit
and worship: finally with the chief dignity of his Majesty's High Chancellor,
the like whereof he never did to any temporal man before, which next his Royal
Person is the highest Office in this noble Rea^m, so far above my merits and
qualities honoring and exalting me of his incomparable benignity by the space
of these twenty years and more, showing his continual favors toward me; and
now at last it has pleased his Highness at mine own humble suit to give me
license with his Majesty's favor to bestow the residue of my life for the
better provision of my soul in the service of God, to discharge and disburthen
me of that weighty dignity, before which he had still heaped honors more and
more upon me; all this his Highness goodness so liberally extended to me,
were in my mind matter sufficient to convince this slanderous accusation so
wrongfully by this man surmised and urged against me, which I commit to your
Lordships honorable considerations whether this Oath be likely to be true or
no.

Mr. Rich his witnesses do fail him.
Mr. Rich seeing himself so evidently disproved, and his credit so foully
defaced, caused Sir Rich. Southwel and Mr. Palmer, who in the time of their
communication were in the same Chamber with them, to be there sworn what words
had passed betwixt them: whereupon Mr. Palmer upon his deposition said, that he
was so busy in the trussing up of Sir Thomas his Books into a sack that he
took no heed to their talk. Sir Rich. Southwel said likewise, that because he
was appointed only to look to the conveighing of the Books, he gave no ear unto
them. And after this Sir Thomas alleged many other reasons in his own defense
to the discredit of Mr. Rioh his foresaid evidence, and for proof of the
clearness of his own conscience.

But for all that ever he could do or say the Jury found him guilty. The Jury
verdict, guilty.
Wherefore the Lord Chancellor as chief judge in that matter began presently to
proceed to judgment; Excepted against by Sir Tho.
which Sir Thomas hearing said unto him: My Lord when I was toward the Law,
the mannet in such Cases was to ask the prisoner before Sentence, whether he
could give any reason why judgment should not proceed against him: Upon which
words the Lord Chancellor staying his Sentence, wherein he had already partly
proceeded, asked Sir Thomas what he was able to say to the contrary, who
presently made answer as follows.

Forasmuch as, my Lords, this Indictment is grounded upon an Act of Parliament
directly repugnant to the Laws of God and his holy Church, The Act of
Parliament against Gods Law.
the Supreme Government of which or of any part thereof no Temporal person may
by any Law presume to take upon him, No Layman may be head of the Church.
as rightfully belonging to the Sea of Rome, it is therefore in Law among the
Catholic Christians insufficient to charge any Christian man to obey. He also
further declared for proof of his assertion, that like as this Realm alone
being but one member and a small part of the Church, might not make a
particular Law disagreeing with the general Law of the universal Catholic
Church, no more then the City of London being but one poor member in respect of
the whole Realm, might make a law against an Act of Parliament to bind the
whole Realm So also he further showed that this law was contrary to the laws
and statutes of the land yet unrepealed, Against the Laws of the Kingdom.
as they might evidently perceive in Magna Charta, Against the Kings own Oath
where it is said, Quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat libertates
suas illaesas: And also contrary to that sacred Oath which the Ki^^ Highness
himself and every other Christian Prince always with a great solemnity
received at their Coronations. Against the peculiar Obligation of England to
Rome.
Alleging moreover that no more might this Kingdom refuse obedience to the Sea of Rome, then might the child to his natural father.

To these words the Lord Chancellor replied, The Lord Chancellors reply
that seeing all the Bishops, Universities, and best learned men of this Realm
had agreed to this Act, it was much marvelled that he alone should so stiffly
stick thereat, and so vehemently argue there against it. To which words Sir
Thomas answered. That if the number of Bishops and Universities were so
material as his Lorship seems to make it, then do I, my Lord, see little
cause why that thing in my conscience should make any change; for I do not
doubt but of the learned and virtuous men that are yet alive, (I speak not only
of this Realm, but of all Christendom about) there a^e ten to one that are of
my mind in this matter. But if I should speak of those learned Doctors and
virtuous Fathers that are already dead, of whom many are Saints in Heaven. I am
sure, that there are far more, who all the while they lived thought in this
Case as I think now: And therefore, my Lord, I think my self not bound to
conform my conscience to the Council of one Realm against the general consent
of all Christendom.

The condemnation of Sir Th. More.
Now when Sir Thomas had taken as many exceptions as he thought fit, for the
avoiding of this Indictment, the Lord Chancellor having bethought himself,
being unwilling now to have the whole burden of his condemnation to lie upon
himself, asked openly there the advice of the Lord Chief Justice of England Sir
John Fitz James, whether this Indictment were sufficient or no, who answered
thus: My Lords all, by S. Gillian (that was ever his Oath) I must needs
confess, that if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful then in my Conscience
the indictment is not insufficient: Whereupon the Lord Chancellor said to the
rest of the Lords, Lo my Lords, lo, You hear what my Lord Chief Justice
says: and so immediately he pronounced this Sentence.

The Sentence.
THat he should be brought back to the Tower of London by the help of Will.
Bingston Sheriff, and from thence drawn on a hurdle through the City of London
to Tiburn, there to be hanged till he be half dead, after that cut down yet
alive, his privy parts cut off, his belly ripped, his bowels burnt, and his
four quarters set up over four Gates of the City, his head upon London bridge.

Mitigated by the King.
This Sentence was by the Kings pardon changed afterward into only beheading,
because he had born the highest Office in the Kingdom: Of which mercy of the
Kings, word being brought to Sir Thomas, he answered merrily, God forbid, the
King should use any more such to any of my friends, and God bless all my
posterity from such pardons.

Sir, Thomas More's charity to his Judges.
After his Sentence pronounced, the Judges courteously offered him, that if he
had any thing else to allege in his defense, they would grant him favorable
audience: who answered, I have nothing to say, my Lords, butthat, Like as the
Blessed Apostle St. Paul, as we read of in the Acts of the Apostles, was
present and consented to the death of S. Stephen, and kept their clothes that
stoned him to death, and yet be they now both twain holy Saints in Heaven, and
shall continue there friends for ever: So I verily trust and shall therefore
right heartily pray, that though your Lordships have been now judges on Earth
to my condemnation, we may yet hereafter all meet together in Heaven merrily to
our everlasting salvation. And so I pray God preserve you all, and especially
my Sovereign Lord the King, and send him faithful Counselors.

CHAP. XV.
1 The manner how Sir THOMAS MORE was led back to the Tower. 2 His daughter
Margarets great expression of love to him now condemned. 3 How devoutly and
resolutely Sir T. expected his execution. 4 Notice of the time of his death
sent him by the King. 5 The manner and form of his death. 6 The Kings sadness
there pon. 7 Physiognomy of Sir THOMAS MORE.
NOW after his condemnation he was conducted from the Bar to the Tower again
(an Axe being carried before with the edge toward him) and was led by Sir
William Kingston who was then Constable of the Tower and his very dear friend,
The manner of Sir Th. his return to the Tower
who when he had brought him from Westminster to the old Swan on his way to the
Tower, Great constancy, courtesy, and chari^y.
he there with a sad heart, the tears running down his cheeks took his leave of
him: Sir Thomas M. seeing him so sorrowful, with a cheerful countenance, began
to comfort him saying, Good Mr. Kingstone trouble not your self, but be of good
cheer, for I will pray for you and my good Lady your Wife, that we may meet in
Heaven together, where we shall be merry for ever and ever. A little after
this, Sir William talking with Mr. Rooper thereof, said, In good faith Mr.
Rooper I was ashamed of my self, that at parting with your Father, I found my
heart so weak and his so stout, that he was fain to comfort me, who should
rather at that time have comforted him. But a conscience clear and at ease, is
a comfort which no earthly power can either give or take away; the which, by
his demeanor and expressions, it does plainly appear he had.

A great experiment of love in the only son of Sir Th. More.
Now, that I may not omit, what before I should have spoken of, I will here
mention a great experiment of love in the only Son of Sir Thomas More, who upon
his fathers landing at the old Swan like a most dutiful child did cast himself
down at his feet, humbly craving his blessing, not without tears whom he
therefore blessed and kissed most lovingly.

When Sir Thomas More, was now come to the Tower wharf, his best beloved
daughter Margaret, wife to Mr. Rooper, being very desirous to see her father,
The great passion of his daughter Margaret.
whom she thought she should never see in this world more, diligently attended
his coming at the Tower-wharf, where she was certain he must pass by, whom as
soon as she had espied (after she had on her knees received his fatherly
blessing) she ran hastily unto him, and (without consideration or care of her
self, passing through the midst of the throng and guard, who with Bills and
Halberts compassed him about) there openly in the sight of them all, embraced
him, took him about the neck and kissed him, not able to express any words but
these: My Father, O my Father! He liking well this most natural and dear
affection of hers toward him gave her his blessing, and told her, That
whatsoever he should suffer, though he were innocent, yet it was not without
the will of God, and that she knew well enough all the secrets of his heart,
counselling her to conform her will to Gods blessed pleasure, and bad her be
patient for her loss. From whom after she was departed, she not satisfied with
the former Farewell, like one who had forgotten her self ravished with the
entire love of so worthy a father, having neither respect to her self nor the
press of people about him, suddenly ran to him, took him about the neck and
many times together most lovingly kissed him; whereat he spoke not one word,
but carrying still his gravity, tears also fell from his eyes, nay they were
but sew in all the throng, who at the sight of this could refrain from weeping,
no not the guard themselves, yet at last with a most sorrowful heart she was
forced to depart from him.

A consideration of this mutual passion of father and daughter.
O what singular act of affection was this, for a woman of nature bashful, by
education modest, to express such excessive grief, as that love should make
her shake off all fear and shame! which sad fight piercing the hearts of the
beholders, how do you think it moved the fathers! surely his affection and
forcible love had now daunted his courage, if that a divine spirit of constancy
had not inspired him to behold this most generous woman his most worthy
daughter, endued with all good gifts of Nature all sparks of Piety, which are
wont to be most acceptable to a loving father: O strange: to press unto him at
such a time and place where no man could have access, hanging about his neck
ere he was aware of her, holding so fast on him, as she could scarce be plucked
off, uttering no other words but, O my Father! O my Father! surely this could
not but be a sword to his heart: and then at last being drawn away by force, to
run upon him again, without any regard either of the weapons wherewith he was
encompassed, or of the modesty becoming her own Sex. What comfort did he want?
what courage did he then stand in need of? and yet he resisted all this most
valiantly, remitting nothing of his steady gravity, speaking only what is
before recited, and at last of all desiring her to pray for her fathers soul.

How devoutly and cheerfully he attended his execution.
Sir Tho. M. remained in the Tower more then a seven-night after his judgment,
arming himself with prayer and meditation against the day of his execution
walking about he chamber with a sheet about him like a corpse ready to be buried.

His pleasant comceit upon a Courtier.
In which time came to him one of the Court, whose whole disourse was nothing
else but urging Sir Thomas to change his mind, who at last being wearied with
his importunity, answered him that he had changed it; whereupon presently he
went and told the King: and being by him commanded to know wherein h^s mind was
changed, Sir Thomas rebuked him for his leightnesse, in that he would tell the
King every word that he spoke in jest, meaning, that whereas he had intended to
be shaven that he might appear to the people as before he was wont, now he was
fully resolved that his beard should take such part as his head did: which made
the Courtier blank, and the King very angry.

His last letter to his daughter Margaret.
Now last of all, the day before he was to suffer, being the fifth of July, he
wrote a most loving letter with a coal to his daughter Margaret, sending his
Blessing to all his children, in which he writes very affectionately,
expressing also the great desire he had to suffer on the morrow after, in these
words: I cumber you good Margaret much, but I would be sorry if it should be
any longer then to morrow, for to morrow is S. Thomas Even, and the Uras of S
Peter, and therefore to morrow long I to go to God, it were a day very meet and
convenient for me. I never liked your manners better then when you kissed me
last. For I like when daughterly love and dear charity has no leisure to look
unto worldly courtesy. Farewell, d^ar daughter, pray for me, and I will pray
for you and all your friends, that we may meet together in Heaven. Commend me
when you can to my Son John; His blessing to his heir.
his towardly carriage toward me pleased me very much. God-blesse him and his
good wife and their Children. With this Letter he sent also his shirt of hair,
His hair-shirt and Discipline
and his whip, as one that was unwilling the world should know that he used
such Austerity. For in his life time he by his mirth had hidden from the eyes
of others his severity to himself.

Notice given him from the King of of the day of his death.
So upon the next day being Tuesday St. Thomas even, and the Vtas of his
special Patron St. Peter (for whose Supremacy he suffered) in the year of our
Lord God one thousand five hundred thirty and seven (according to his desire
expressed in his Letter the day before) early in the morning came to him Sir
Thomas Pope his singular friend, Most welcome unto him.
with a message from the King and his Council, that he should before nine of
the clock the same morning suffer death, and that therefore he should presently
prepare himself for it. Mr. Pope, said he, I most heartily thank you for your
good tidings, I have been much bound to the Kings Highness for the benefits of
his Honors that he has most bountifully bestowed upon me, yet am I more bound
to his Grace (I assure you) for putting me here, where I have had convenient
time and space to have remembrance of my end. And, so help me God, most of all
I am bound unto him that it has pleased his Majesty so shortly to rid me out
of the miseries of this wretched world. He must use but few words at his
execution.
" The Kings pleasure farther is, said Sir Thomas Pope, That you use not many
words at your execution: Mr. Pope, (said he) You do well to give me warning of
the Kings pleasure herein, for otherwise I had purposed at that time somewhat
to have spoken, but no matter wherewith his Grace or any other should have
cause to be offended, howheit whatsoever I intended, I am ready obediently to
conform my self to his Highness Command: and I beseech you good Mr. Pope be a
means to his Majesty, His wife and children permitted to be at his burial.
that my daughter Margaret may be at my burial. The King is contented already,
said he, that your wife, Children, and all other should have liberty to be
present at it. O how much beholding then am I ( said Sir Thomas) to his Grace,
that unto my poor burial voucheth to have so gracious consideration.

Then Sir Thomas Pope taking his leave of him, His comfortable courage.
could not refrain from weeping, which Sir Thomas perceiving comforted him in
these words: Quiet your self good Mr. Pope, and be not discomforted, for I
trust we shall once see each other full merrily, where we shall be sure to live
and love together in joyful bliss eternally. And further to put him out of his
melancholy, Sir Thomas took his Urinal in his hand, and casting his water said
merrily: I see no danger but that this man might live longer, if it had pleased
the King.

He puts on his best apparel that day.
After which words, they parted, and when he was gone, Sir Thomas (as one that
had been invited to a banquet) changed himself into his best apparel. The
Lieutenant of the Tower seeing him prepare himself to his death, advised him
for his own benefit to put them off again, saying, he who was to have them was
but a Javel. What Mr. Lieutenant, said Sir Thomas, shall I account him a Javel,
who will do me this day so singular a benefit? Nay I assure you were it cloth
of God, His liberality to his executioner.
I would think it well bestowed on him. But the Lieutenant so pressed him, that
at last for his friendship sake being loath to deny him so small a matter, he
altered his apparel, and put on a Gown of Freese, but yet of that little money
that was left him, he sent an Angel in gold to his Executioner, in token that
he maliced him nothing, but rather loved him exceedingly for it.

And so was he brought about nine of the clock out of the Tower, The manner of
his death.
and from thence led to the place of execution, where going up the scaffold,
which seemed to him so weak that was ready to fall, he said merrily to the
Lieutenant, I pray you Mr. Lieutenant see me safe up, His words at his death.
and for my coming down let me shift for my self. Then desired he all the
people to pray for him, and to bear witness with him that he should then
suffer death, in, and for the faith of the holy Catholic Church, a faithful
servant both of God and the King. Which done, His prayers.
he kneeled down, and after his prayers ended, he turned to the Executioner,
and with a cheerful countenance, Words to the Executioner.
said, Pluck up thy spirits, man, and be not afraid to do thine office: my neck
is very short, take heed therefore thou strike not awry for saving thine
honesty: He covers his eyes himself.
when the executioner would have covered his eyes, he said, I will cover them
my self, and presently he did so with a cloth he had brought with him for that
purpose: then saying his head upon the Block, he bad the Executioner stay
until he had removed aside his beard, saying, That that had never committed
any treason. So with great alacrity and spiritual joy he received the fatal
blow of the Axe, which at once severed his head from his body: Thus passed Sir
Thomas More out of this world on the very same day on which himself had most
desired. His death


The K. sadness at the news of his execution.
When news of his death was brought to the King, who was at that time playing
at Tables, Queen Anne looking on, he cast his eyes upon her, and said, Thou art
the cause of this man's death: and presently leaving his play, he betook himself
to his chamber, an there fell into a melancholy fit. But whether this were from
his heart, or to seem less cruel then he was indeed, it is hard to
conjecture; for on the one side, the remembrance of his faithful service so
many years employed for the good of the whole Kingdom, could not but make the
Kings heart somewhat to relent; and on the other side, his unmerciful dealing
with his son and heir, his small allowance to his wife, his cruelty against all
his children, showed that he had an implacable hatred against him for the cause
aforesaid. His daughter Margaret was the most gently dealt with, The
imprisonment of his daughter Margaret.
and yet very sore threatened both because she kept her fathers head for a
relic, (which being to be thrown off London Bridge into the Thames she had
procured) and that she intended to publish her fathers works, yet for all that
after a short imprisonment she was at last sent home to her husband.

Sir Thomas More was of a mean stature, well proportioned, his complexion
tending to phlegmatic, The favor and physiognomy of Sir Thomas More.
his color white and pale, his hair neither black nor yellow, but between
both, his eyes gray, his countenance amiable and cheerful, his voice neither
big nor shrill, but speaking plainly and distinctly; it was not very tunable,
though he delighted much in music, his body reasonable healthful, only that
toward his latter end by using much writing, he complained much of his breast.
In his youth he drank much water wine he only tasted of when he pledged others,
he loved salt meats, especially poudred beef, he was a great lover of milk,
cheese, eggs, and fruit, and usually he did eat of brown bread, The judgment of
Charles the fifth Emperor and King of Spain concerning Sir Th. More's death.
which he rather used to punish his taste, then any love he had unto it.

Now when intelligence of Sir Thomas More's death was brought to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, he sent for Sir Thomas Eliot Ambassador there resident, and
said unto him, My Lord Ambassador; we understand that the King your Master has
put his faithful Servant and grave Wise Counselor Sir Thomas More to death:
but Sir Thomias Eliot seeming to excuse the matter by some doubt of the report,
the King told him, It was too true, and this will we say, (said the Emperor)
that if we had been Master of such a Servant, (of whose doings our selves have
had these many years no small experience) we would rather have lost the best
and strongest City of our Dominions, then have lost so worthy a Counselor.

Circumstances worthy some consideration in his death.
To conclude, if with more care we look into the story of this worthy man's,
life, it will not appear to us that his death could any way redound to the
honor of the King: for first he was put to death by a statute wherein he had
never offended, either by word or deed; and that too, which concerned not
temporal policy but religion only: which (as being fearful to offend his
conscience) though he refused to approve of himself, yet did he never reprove
it, or any other m^n for taking it. Secondly, that he would have no respect
unto his eminent qualities, who was a man of known humanity, of mild behavior,
affability, bounty, eloquence wisdom, innocence of life, wit, learning,
exceedingly beloved and admired of all men: all which might be motives
sufficient to pardon a guilty offender. Thirdly, that he would not consider him
that had done him so much good service, and the whole Kingdom such good
offices, his faithful Counselor for twenty years together; his wise
Ambassador, his just Lord Chancellor, and indeed the very flower of the
Kingdom, who at last drawing toward old age, obtained an honorable
dismission from his Office, and lived privately at home with his Wife,
children, and nephews, never committing the least offense against any,
burdensome to no man, but of such courtesy to all, and of such excellency of
nature, that he would not suffer any one to part from him, (if any thing
qualified) without some gift; none was so great a stranger to him whom he would
not seek to do some favor for. To be short, his bounty had so engraven him in
every ones hearts that at his death there was a general lamentation for his
loss; Nay Erasmus says, that he saw tears come from those men who never had
seen Sir Thomas More, nor received any benefit from him; and he professes, that
while he was writing of him, the tears gushed from him whether he would or no.
Now Reader I will keep thy eye no longer upon this doleful Subject, which as
it made the Spectators weep, so it cannot but fetch a Tear or two from thee, if
thou art any friend to an innocent worth, yet I would not send thee away sad
neither: wherefore I have (after this Tragical story) prepared an
entertainment in the following Chapter, which looks like a Comedy, and may
serve as Wine and Biscuit at a Funeral, to allay thy sadness.

A view of Sir THOMAS MORE's Wit and Wisdom.
SIR Thomas More, (whose only merry jests and witty sayings, A witty
reprehension.
were they all together, were sufficient to fill a Volume) when he lived in the
City of London, being one of the Justices of peace, he used to go to the
Sessions at Newgate; where it fell out, that one of the antientest Justices of
the Bench was wont to chide the poor men, (whose purses had been cut) for not
being more careful, telling them that their negligence was the cause that so
many Cutpurses were brought thither: which, when Sir Thomas More observed him
so often to repeat, at one time especially, the night after he sent for one of
the chief Cutpurses that was in prison, and promised him to save him harmless,
and stand his friend too, if he would cut the foresaid Justices purse, the next
day as he sat on the Bench, and then presently make a sign of it to him. The
fellow very gladly promises him to do it: The next day therefore when they sat
again, that thief was called among the first, who being accused of his fact,
said, That he did not doubt but he could sufficiently excuse himself, if he
were permitted to speak to some of the Bench in private, he was therefore bid
to choose one, whom he would, and presently he chose that grave old man, who
then had his Pouch at his girdle, (as they wore them in those days) and
whilst he whispered him in the ear, he cunningly cuts his purse, and then
solemnly taking his leave, returns to his place: Sir Thomas knowing by a
private sign that the business was dispatched, presently took occasion to move
the Bench to distribute some alms upon a poor needy fellow that was there, and
for good example, began himself to do it, when the old man came to open his
purse, he sees it cut away, and, much wondering, said, he was confident he
brought it with him when he came thither that morning: Sir Thomas replied
pleasantly, What? will you charge any of us with felony? but his choler rising,
and he being ashamed of the thing, Sir Thomas calls the Cutpurse and bids him
give him his purse again, and withal advised the good old Justice, hereafter
not to be so bitter a censurer of innocent men's negligence, when as himself
could not secure his purse in that open assembly.

An unmannerly reprehension, mannerlyreturned on the reprehender.
Another time, when he was Lord Chancellor, one of the house of the Manors,
whom the King had then lately preferred to a great Honor, who before that had
been a great friend of Sir Thomas Mores, but, perceiving now that the world
began somewhat to frown upon him, because he was not so forward as other men to
persuade the King to the Divorce, and being desirous to pick some quarrel
against him, he said unto him, My Lord, Honores mutant Mores. Sir Thomas
readily replied, It is so indeed, my Lord, but Mores, signifies in english
Manners, not More: he was with this so put out of countenance that he had
nothing more to say.

A bold debtor handsomely told his own.
So also, he wittily twitted another to whom he had lent money, of whom when
afterward he demanded his due, he bad him remember he must die, and God knew
how soon; and, that then he would have little use of money, adding the sentence
in Latin, the better to please Sir Thomas, Momento Morieris: to which Sir
Thomas presently replied: What say you Sir, Me thinks you put your self in mind
of your duty herein, saying Memento Mori aeris, remember Mores money:

A pleasant arbitrament between his Lady and a beggar.
It happened on a time that a beggars little Dog which she had lost was sent to
the Lady More for a Present, and she had kept it about a week very carefully,
but at last, the beggar having notice where her dog was; presently came and
complained to Sir Thomas as he was sitting in his Hall, that his Lady kept her
dog from her. Presently my Lady was sent for, and the dog brought with her,
which Sir Thomas taking in his arms, he caused his Wife to stand at the upper
end of his Hall, and the beggar at the lower end, and then, (saying that he sat
there to do every one justice) he bad each of them call the dog; which when
they did, the dog ran presently to the beggar, forsaking his Lady; When he saw
this, he bad his Wife be contented, for it was none of hers, yet, she repining
at his sentence, agreed with the beggar, and gave her a piece of Gold; so all
parties were satisfied every one smiling at this strange discovery of truth.

A witty censure of a witless writing.
Another time a certain friend of his taking great pains about a Book which he
intended to publish, (being well conceited of his own wit, which no body else
thought worth commendation) and because he would Sir Thomas should oversee it,
ere it were printed, he brought it to him, who perusing it, and finding no
thing therein worthy the Press, said with a grave countenance, If it were
inverse, it were more worth: upon which words, he went and turned it into
verse, and then brought it to Sir Thomas, who looking thereon, said soberly:
Yea marry, now it is somewhat; for now it is Rhyme, before it was neither
Rhyme, nor Reason.

A merry mistake.
And indeed whatsoever jest he brought forth, he never laughed at any himself,
but spoke them so seriously, that few could discern by his look, whether he
were in earnest or in jest; as, once talking with another in dispute of his
Dialogues by some occasion they happened to speak of a dogs turd; at that very
instant one of his men came to tell him, that dinner was ready, to whom he
said, Look that there be better meat provided for us then that: who presently
went and told his Lady, that his Lord would have better meat provided for his
dinner; which caused a great disturbance in the house till at last the mistake
being known they all fell a laughing.

Some few of Sir THO. MORE'S Apophthegms, collected out of Dr. Stapleton.
A Sinner says he cannot taste spiritual delights; Sinners distasted.
because all carnal are first to be abandoned.

By an excellent similitude, he teaches us why few do fear death, thus: Why
few. fear death
Even as they which look upon things afar off, see them confusedly, not knowing
whether they be men or trees; even so he that promises unto himself long life,
looks upon death, as a thing afar off, not judging what it is, No man sure of
long life.
how terrible, what griefs and dangers it brings with it; and that none ought
to promise himself long life, he proves thus: even as two men that are brought
out of Prison to the gallows, one by a long way about he other by a direct
short path yet neither knowing which is which until they come to the gallows,
neither of these two can promise himself longer life, by reason of the
uncertainty of the way: even so a young man cannot promise himself longer life
then an old man.

Worlds vanity.
Against the vanity of worldly honor, he speaks thus: Even as that Criminal
person, who is led to execution shortly, should be accounted vain, if he should
engrave his Coat of Arms upon the prison Gate: even so are they vain, who
endeavor to leave with great industry, monuments of their dignity in the
prison of this world.

Worldly losses hurt not.
By a subtle Dilemma, he teaches us why we are not to think that we can be
hurt, by the iosse of our superfluous goods, in this manner: He that suffers
any loss of his goods, he would either have bestowed them with praise and
liberality; and so God will accept his will in stead of the deed it self: or
else he would have wasted them wickedly; and then he has cause to rejoice,
that the matter of sinning is taken away. The folly of old misers.


To express lilvely the folly of an old covetous man, he writes thus: A thief
that is to dye to morrow, steals to day, and being asked why he did so, he
answered, that it was great pleasure to him to be master of that money but one
night; So an old miser, never cease to increase his heap of coin though he be
never so aged.

He said also, How fond it is to love this world.
that those which give themselves to pleasure and idleness in the time of
their pilgrimage, are like to him who traveling to his own house, where there
is abundance of all things, would yet be an hostler in an Inn by the way for
to get an Inne-keepers favor, and to end his life there in a stable.

Affliction more profitable then pleasure.
Pleasure (says he) does not only withdraw wicked men from prayer, but also
affliction sometimes; yet this is the difference, that affliction does sometime
wrest some short prayer from the wicked'st men alive, but pleasure calls away
even one that is indifferent good, from all prayer.

Against deferring of amendment.
Against impenitent persons, and such as defer the amending of their lives till
the latter end of their days, he says thus: A lewd fellow that had spent all
his lise in wickedness, was wont to brag, that he could be saved, if he spoke
but three words at the hour of his death: Riding over a bridge that was broken,
his horse stumbling, and not being able to keep himself from falling into the
water, when he saw himself past recovery, casting away the bridle he said, The
Devil take all, and so with his three words he perished in the river.

Pusillanimity a dangerous temptation.
Even as he that passes over a narrow bridge by reason of his fear often
falls, especially if others say unto him, you fall, which otherwise he would
safely pass over: even so he that is fearful by nature and full of
pusillanimity, often falls into desperation, the Devil cryiag unto him, thou
art damned, thou art damned, which he would never hearken to, nor be in any
danger of, if he should take unto him a good heart, and by wholesome counsel
nothing fear the Devils outcry.

The prosperity of this world is like the shortest winters day, Danger of
prosperity.
and we are lifted up in it as an arrow shot up on high, where a hot breath
does delight us: but from thence we fall suddenly to the earth and there we
stick fast, either bemired with the dirt of infamy, or starving with cold,
being plucked out of our feathers.

Of riches and honors.
It is a hard thing to touch pitch and not be defiled therewith: a dry stick to
be put into the fire and not to burn, to nourish a Snake in our bosom, and not
be stung with it: so a most hard thing it is, to be rich and honored in this
world, and not to be struck with the dart of pride and vain glory.

Let there be two beggars who a long time begged together: one of whom some
rich man has entertained in his house, All riches of this world none of our
own.
put him in silk, given him money in his purse: but with this condition, as he
tells him, within a short space he will thrust him out of his door^ and take all
that away from him again: if he in the mean while being thus gallant should
chance to meet with his fellow beggar would he be so foolish as for al^ this
not to acknowledge him for his companion? or would he for these few days
happiness hol^ himself better then he? Applyin^ this to every man's case, who
comes naked into this world, and (...) to return naked again.

Covetousness.
He compares Covetousness t^ a fire, which, by how much the more wood there
is laid on it t^^ burn, so much apter it is to bur^ more still.

Bad Merchants.
That there are many in this li^^ that buy hell with more toil, the heaven
might be won with (...) half.

If he be called stout, that has fortitude, he hot, who has heat, Riches are
not goods
wise that has Wisdom, yet he who has riches cannot be said presently to be
good, therefore riches cannot be numbered among good things. Twenty, yea a
hundred bare heads standing by a Noble man, do not defend his head from cold so
much as his own hat does alone, which yet he is enforced to put off in the
presence of his Prince.

The worst affection.
That is the worst affection of the mind which does delight us in that thing
which cannot be gotten but by offending God. He that does get or keep worldly
wealth by offending God, let him fully persuade himself, that those things will
never do him good, either God will quickly take away illgotten goods, or will
suffer them to be kept for a greater mischief.

Almesdeeds.
Even as he that knows certainly he is to be banished into a strange Country,
never to return into his own again, and will not that his goods be transported
thither being loath to want them, for that little while rather then ever to
enjoy them after, may well be thought a mad man: so are they out of their wits,
who enticed with vain affections to keep their goods always about them, and
neglective to give alms for sear of wanting, cannot endure to have their goods
s^nt before them to Heaven, when as they know most assuredly, that they shall
enjoy them always there, with all plenty and with a double reward.

The world a prison.
To ease his thoughts when he was in prison, he imagined that all the world was
but a prison, out of which every day some one or other was called to execution.

He said it was an easy matter in some cases for a man to lose his head, To
suffer for God.
and yet to have no harmat all.

Prayer.
He prayed thus: O Lord God, grant that I endeavor to get those things, for
which I am to pray unto Thee.

Detraction.
When he heard any at his Table speaking detraction, he would interrupt them
thus; Let any man think as he pleases, I like this room very well for it is
well contrived and fairly built.

Ingratitude.
Of an ungrateful person he would say, that they wrote good turns done unto
them in the dust; but even the least injuries in marble.

Faith the mistresse^ of reason.
He compared reason to a handmaid, which if she be well taught will obey, and
Faith to the Mistress, which is to keep her in awe Captivans intellectum in
obsequium Fidei.

Better prevent then redress.
He says that he were a mad man that would drink poison to take a preservative
after it; but he is a wise man, that spilling the poison leaves the Antidote
for him, that has need thereof.

Desire of heaven.
He was wont to say that he may well be admitted to Heaven who was very
desirous to see God; but on he contrary side, he that does not desire
earnestly, shall never be admitted thither.

Bad life no miracle.
That people should fall into bad life and lust is, as great a miracle, he
says, as stones to fall downwards.

School Divinity.
Whereas he says, you inveigh against School Divinity, because truth is there
called in doubt not without danger, we inveigh against you, because false
matters are held by you undoubtedly for truth it self.

An Apology for Sir Tho. M pleasantness of wit.
NOw because there is an English Chronologer that terms him a scoffing man,
because his writings and doings were full of witty jests, calling him a wise
foolish man; or a foolish wise man: I think it very fit to set down in this
place, the reason (out of his own writings) why he has used so many pleasant
passages in his books, it is this, Even as some sick men (says he) will take
no medecines unless some pleasant thing be put among their potions, although
perhaps it be somewhat hurtful, yet the Physician suffers them to have it:
So, because many will not willingly hearken to serious and grave documents,
except they be mingled with some fable or jest, therefore reason wills us to
do the like. And in his great volume, page 1048 he says, that jests are as it
were sauce whereby we are recreated, that we may eat with more appetite: but as
that were an absurd Banquet in which there were few dishes of meat, and much
variety of sawces, and that an unpleasant one, where there were no sauce at
all, even so that life were spent idly, where nothing were but mirth and
jollity, and again, that tedious and uncomfortable wherein no pleasure or mirth
were to be expected. Which mirth as it may well become all men, so most
especially did it become such a one as Sir Thomas M. being a married man, nay a
Courtier and companion to his Prince, of whom I suppose that may worthily be
spoken which Titus Livius recounteth of Cato, thus. In this man there was such
excellency of wit and wisdom, that he seems to have been able to make his
fortune, in what place soever he had been born: he wanted no (...) for the
managing of private or public businesses, he was experienced both in Country
and City affairs: some are raised to honor either because they are excellent
Lawyers, singularly eloquent, or of admirable virtues, but the towardliness of
this man's understanding, framed him so to all employments, that you would
suppose him for to be born for one alone: In the practice of virtues you would
judge him rather a Monk then a Courtier, in learning a most famous writer; if
you would ask his counsel in the Law, he was most ready to advise you the
best; if he were to make an Oration, he would show wonderful eloquence: he was
admirable in all kind of Learning, Latin, Greek, Profane, Divine: if there
were an Embassy to be undertook none more expert to finish it: in giving solid
and sound counsel in doubtful Cases, none more prudent; to tell the truth
without fear, none more free: as far from all flattery, as he was open and
pleasant, full of grace in delivering his judgment; and that which Cato had
not, he was most happy in: For Livie says, that he had a sour behavior, and
a tongue immoderately free and full of taunting, but Sir Thomas was mild, and
of an humble heart, neither sad nor turbulent, and besides of a pleasant
conversation, never stern, but (out of zeal) for his Religion, a great
contemner either of unlawful pleasures, or of inordinate riches an^ glory. And
as Cato had much enmity with diverse Senators, so many of them on the other side
did exercise his patience, that one can hardly discern whether the nobility did
press him more, or he the nobility, but on the contrary, Sir Thomas More never
had any private or public grudge with any man nay surely no man can suppose
any to have been his enemy, being born wholly to friendship and affability, and
as he was nothing inferior to Cato for gravity, integrity and innocence (being
as exact a hater of all vice, and as stern to all wicked men as he) so did he
f^rre excel him in meekness, sweetness of behavior and pleasantness of
wit: nay I fear I do him too much injury to compare him with any the best of
moral Philosophers, who was endued with such supernatural perfections, and
(no doubt) notwithstanding his judgment, high in the favor of God.

FINIS.

