Memorable Sayings of Mr. Hobbes in his Books and at the Table. en! quam modice
habitat Philosophia

Vera and Viva Effigies THOMAE HOBBES Malmesburiensis. Aetat. suae. 92. obiit
4. Dece^ 1679.


Malmsburiensis Obit, decurso Lumine vitae,
Qui genus humanum Ingenio Superavit, and omnes
Praestrinxit Stellas, exortus uti Aethereus Sol.
THE Love of the knowledge of Causes draws a man from the Consideration of the
Effect, to seek the Cause, and again the Cause of that Cause, till of necessity
he must come to this thought at last, That there is some Cause, whereof there
is no former Cause, but is Eternal, which is God; so that it is impossible to
make any profound enquiry into Natural Causes, without believing there is one
Eternal God.

If any man think this World without a mind, I shall think him without a mind.

Nothing is Law, where there are not manifest signs that it proceeds from the
will of the Sovereign.

To be slow in the belief of Miracles, is not a contempt of Divine Power, but a
just circumspection that our Reason be not over-reacht.

All Devotion ought to be grounded upon Reason, and Truth, else it is
Will Worship, and the Sacrifice of Fools.

The Doctrine of Original sin, ought to be cautiously handled, lest when the
Bowl wanders from the Jack, the Biass, not the hand that delivers it, be blamed.

So ought the Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness, lest a man with a Silken
Stockin on a Gouty Leg think himself well and at ease.

The Credulous choose rather not to doubt, than not to err.

Distance of time impresseth false Images of things upon the mind, as well as
distance of place. Most of the Valuable Opinions of mankind, if you search them
in their Originals, being like an Egyptian Temple, with a magnificent Portico,
much Sculpture, and Picture; but if you be admitted into the Penetralia, to see
the God, you will find but an Ape, or an Asses Head, Fancy or Folly.

My Noble Friend my Lord Herbert of Cherbury, had no mean unworthy thought of
God when he said, he was like the Sun, that always shined unto mankind with the
same light.

The Absurd Opinions, and Evil Lives of the Clergy make them contemptible.

All the changes of Religion in the World may be attributed to one and the same
Cause, unpleasing Priests, and those not only among Catholics, but even in
that Church that has presumed most upon Reformation.

Men are easily drawn to believe any thing, from such men as have gotten credit
with them, and can with Gentleness, and Dexterity, take hold of their Fear, and
Ignorance.

Whatsoever Power Ecclesiastics take upon themselves (in any place where they
are subject to the State) in their own right, although they call it Gods right,
it is but Usurpation.

It Is strange that men, never having spoken with God Almighty, nor knowing one
more than another what he has said, when the Laws and Preacher disagree,
should so keenly follow the Minister, for the most part an Ignorant, though a
ready tongued Scholar, rather than the Laws, that were made by the King, with
the Peers, and Commons of the Land.

The Papacy is the Ghost of the deceased Roman Empire, sitting crowned upon the
Grave thereof.

The Pope is a Shittle-Cock, kept up by the Differences of Princes.

The name of Fulmen Excommunicationis [that is the Thunderbolt of
Excommunication] proceeded from an imagination of the Bishop of Rome that first
used it, that he was King of Kings, as the Heathen made Jupiter King of the
Gods, and assigned him a Thunderbolt, wherewith to subdue and punish.

Excommunication is a Sword that has no other edge but what is given to it by
the Opinion of him against whom it is used.

The Roman Clergy are a Confederacy of Deceivers, that to obtain dominion over
other men, endeavor by Mystery and Nonsense to extinguish in them both the
light of Nature and the Gospel.

Priestcraft is a sort of Legerdemain, and the Roman Priests are to the rest
of mankind, as the Juglers in a Fair to the rest of the People there, and must
have money given them before they will play their Tricks.

The Papal Ecclesiastics in their Receipts, accept the money that the Laics
do; but when they are to make any payment it is in Indulgences, Masses and
Canonizations.

He used to cite Themistius often, [in his Consular Oration to Jovinian.] The
flattering Bishops do not Worship God, but the Imperial Purple. And a Greek
sentence [in English thus] A wise man's satisfaction, is to have a Treasure of
hope with the Gods, or else not to fear them at all.

Fear and Hope arising from Ignorance of the Causes of Things, are for the most
part groundless and violent, and in all matters, touching which a man has
great Hope, or great Fear, he is easily deceived; which is the Reason that the
Planters of false Religions, do so industriously keep all true Science from
them they intend to impose upon.

There is no Doctrine which tends to the advancement of the Power
Ecclesiastical, or to the reverence, or profit of the Clergy, but the
contradiction thereof is by the Church of Rome made Heresy, and punished with
Death.

I have been bitterly excepted against by the Ecclesiastics, for making the
Civil Power too large; by the Sectaries, for taking away Liberty of Conscience;
by the Lawyers, for setting Sovereign Princes above the Laws, wherewith I am
not much moved: For these men in doing this, do but their own business.

There is nothing but Infinite Power that is not to fear.

Every man is bound by nature, as much as in him lies, to protect in War the
Authority by which he is himself protected in time of Peace.

Ambitious men wade through other men's blood to their own Power.

Evil Government is like a Tempest, may throw down here and there a Fruitful
Tree, but Civil War, or Anarchy, like a Deluge, would sweep away all before
them.

A Prince ought to remember that nothing has been more the agreement of
mankind in all Ages, and in all Nations, than this, To change their Government,
for the Opressions and Corruptions in it.

The Majestas Imperii, and the Salus Populi, are always quarrelling, there
wants a Deus Terminus in the World to set out the bounds of Dominion, and
Obedience so clearly, as the passions of Prince or People, dare not adventure
to leap over.

Drinking a Glass of Wine, he said, it is with Truth as it is with excellent
Wine, the Drawer, (the Priest) is not to fill out the dregs with the purer
Liquor. And after another Glass, speaking of Government, he cited the Arcadia.
Princes are to remember whom they Govern, Men, Rational Creatures, who soon
scorn at Follies, and repine at Injuries. Adding of his own, that it was an
unparalled Arrogance, and Fanaticism in any one man to believe, that God from
Eternity had appointed all Creatures for his Pleasure, Men for his Ambition,
the Women for his Lust. And that the Doctrine of Preces and Lachrymae, ought to
be discreetly handled, least the people believe, they made themselves Slaves,
when they became Christians; and lest Princes should so far mistake, as to
believe their Subjects made up of Knees and Eyes, and no Hands.

It is impossible without Letters for any man to become either excellently
wise, or [unless his memory be hurt by Disease or ill Constitution of Organs]
excellently foolish: For words are wise men's Counters, they do but reckon by
them; but they are the money of Fools, that value them by the Authority of an
Aristotle, a Cicero, or a Thomas.

Such Opinions as are taken upon Credit of Antiquity, are not truly the
Judgment of those that cite them; but words that pass (like gaping) from mouth
to mouth.

Wealth, like Women, is to be used, not loved (Platonickly.)

Speaking of the Lawyers; he used to jeer them with Gothofred, Inter Laudem,
and Placentiam non Veronam versus ambulare solet Vlpianus; and with Erasmus,
Doctum Genus, hominum indoctorum.

Opinion, Armed with power, passes for Reason, Law, and Religion.

It cannot be proved that the Obedience which springs from the scorn of
injustice is less acceptable to God, than that which proceeds from the fear of
reward or hope of benefit.

That which gives to human actions the relish of Justice, is a certain
nobleness or gallantness of Courage, (rarely found) by which a man scorns to be
beholden for the contentment of his life, to fraud or breach of promise.

Death, is a Leap into the Dark.

Quid Prodest Garrulis Philosophis, de immortalitate Animorum, de Fortitudine,
tam multa praedicare, deinde: minimo in periculo pallescere.

Et prope stans dictat Mors mihi ne metue.

When he was dying, he called for his Chair (in which he dyed) saying, Oportet
Philosophum Sedentem mori.

Si quis morte obita sensus Tellure sub ima est
Hobbesii gaudent manes; Nec grandior umbra
Ambulat Elysium. --
FINIS.

