Though, in this darker Shade, there something lies,
Might be the lodestone of all learned eyes:
There Is never a leaf in which I cannot spy
The Author in's more true Anatomy:
Yet All Is too little: He is but made less
By the Painters Pencil, or the Printers Press.


SION and PARNASSVS, OR EPIGRAMS On several texts of the Old and New
Testament. To which are added, A Poem on the Passion. A Hymn on the
Resurrection, Ascension, And feast of Pentecost.

By JOHN HODDESDON.

Horat. de art Poet. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.

LONDON, Printed by R. Daniel for G. Eversden, and are to be sold at his shop
over against the little north gate of S. Paul's Church. MDCL.

Imprimatur.

June 7. 1650. Nath. Brent.

To my worthy friend, and honored Uncle, CHRISTOPHER HODDESDON Esquire,
Secundary of the Upper bench.
SIR,
THe happy (although too late) acquaintance which I have had with you as a
Friend, and the kind reception which I have found from you as a Kinsman, has
encouraged me to dedicate these Epigrams to you; not doubting, but that you who
have already owned the Author, will also Patronize the Work. Sir, I shall not
herein seek my self, or flatter you. That I present you with this book, is more
out of respect to you, then any design for my self; and not so much to beg new
favors, as to give thanks for such as I have already received. The great
reward that I look for, is only your kind Acceptance; by which yet I shall be
a gainer: your name in the frontispiece will add credit to the book, and grace
to

Your obliged, and ever dutiful nephew J. HODDESDON.

Ad Juvenem optimae spei atque indolis JOHANNEM HODDESDON, Hujus libelli
autorem.
NOstra juventatuos pingat Cithereia vultus
Suspendatque comis carmina vana tuis.
Tu sacrata nova texisti Biblia vest,
Primaque divinum pagina tractat opus.
Nulla Venus, nulla his lascivit Lesbia chartis,
Nec Minus est facies inde venusta libri,
Charta Deum brevis illa capit: liber atria coeli
Et pius, and doctus, (quid volo plura?) Tuus.
Hoc Juvenis folio juste-mirabilis, in se
Omnia quod potuit claudere, clausit opus.
Tuis Amicus studiis Henricus Bromley. To his much respected friend the Author
on his divine Epigrams.
NO more, ye Roman Theaters, rehearse
Your Maro's, Ovids, or Tibullus verse:
Here Is such an honor as great Virgil mist,
Though to attain't he turned Evangelist.
This work, which metaphras'd in prose required
A Septuagint, and often Synods tired;
Is perfected by one, if one he be,
Who hundreds seems in ingenuity.
Only this work in one thing don't agree,
But differs quite from our Theology.
Both sacred pages, old and new, in it
Make but one testament of the Authors wit.
R. Marsh. To his friend the Author on his divine Epigrams.
LO here is a muse, whose active nimble wings
Soar up aloft to reach at heavenly things:
Who makes a higher Helicon his abode,
With eager pride, scorning the common rode
Of vulgar meditations: one whose wit
Aimed at the noblest subject, and most fit:
The holy Bible: and although this story
So ex'lent be, that none can add more glory;
Yet heathens, which do most respect the letter,
Will be allured to like it far the better.
Go on, go on,; if thy first enterprise
Does mount so high, we must get eagles eyes
To see thy next: but if thou fliest high'r,
Then all that we can do, is to admire:
Fear not mortality; Gods name shall be
(Which here you mention) thine's eternity.
W. James. To his friend the Author, on his divine Epigrams.
THou have inspired me with thy soul, and I
Who never before could ken of Poetry
Am grown so good proficient, I can lend
A line in commendation of my friend;
Yet it is but of the second hand, if ought
There be in this, it is from thy fancy brought?
Good thief who dare Prometheus-like aspire,
And fill thy poems with Celestial fire:
Enlivened by these sparks divine, their rays
Add a bright luster to thy crown of bays.
Young Eaglet who thy nest thus soon forsook,
So lofty and divine a course have took
As all admire, before the down begin
To peep, as yet, upon thy smoother Chin;
And, making heaven thy aim, have had the grace
To look the sun of righteousness ith face.
What may we hope, if thou ghost on thus fast!
Scriptures at first; Euthusiasmes at last!
Thou have commenced, betimes, a saint: go on,
Mingling Diviner streams with Helicon.
That they who view what Epigrams here be
May learn to make like, in just praise of thee.
Reader, I Have done, nor longer will withhold
Thy greedy eyes; looking on this pure gold
Thou Wilt know adult'rate copper, which, like this,
Will only serve to be a foil to his.
J. Dryden of Trin. C. THE CREATION OF THE WORLD.
Come and behold the works of God.

PSALM. LXVI.
COME and behold the works of God, and see
If any greater then our God there be:
Come, and behold his works, by whose words said
The fabrique of this Universe was made.
And when thou have viewed all the world does contain;
Look on thy self, and view them over again.
GENESIS
1. God eternal. Chapter 1.
In the beginning God did all things make:
Himself from no time did beginning take.
2. The Chaos. Chapter 1. v. 11.
This rude unmoulded mass, this Four-in-One
Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, made Union
In discord, but could not have long subsisted:
The Fire had Water, Earth had Air resisted,
And infant-Nature worn with jurres at length
Had been consumed with her proper strength;
But that great word, which first did bid them be.
Made separation, and yet unitye.
3. Light created. chapter 1. v. 3.
All things were clothed with universal Night
When God created beams of radiant light:
In imitation strive we that we may
Be children now not of the night, but Day.
4. The Firmament. chapter 1. v. 7.
'Twas now high time God should fulfill's intent
To build his high Watchtower, the Firmament:
Which might divide the waters here below,
From those Nectarean streams, that there do flow.
This is his Palace, whose all-searching eye
The inmost cavernes of the earth does spy.
Vast is the House, but here the wonder is;
Himself is greater then the Aedifice.
5. The Sea separated from the Land. chapter 1. v. 9.
The Ocean's wide womb yawnes, and Earth ginns peep
From out the confines of the watery deep:
'Twixt whom so firm a fixed league is plight
That neither dare usurp the others right:
These senseless Elements thus cease to jarre;
Yet Man with earth seas, Heaven, himself does war.
6. The earth bringing forth fruit. chapter 1. v. 12.
Plenty ensues on this established peace.
Trees, flowrs, roots, herbs, grass, seeds yield their increase.
O Let us to bring forth good fruits begin!
Only be barren in the fruits of sin.
7. The Sun and Moon created. chapter 1. v. 16.
The earth replenish't thus, adorned, and graced;
The candles now above the room are placed.
The Sun to rule the day: the Moon is given
To guide the night: the stars made signs in heaven;
But O what need is there in heaven of them!
God's presence gilds the new Jerusalem.
8. Fish. chapter 1. v. 20.
The fruitful Sea gives sundry creaturs birth
More and more monstrous then or air or Earth:
Thetis, whilst these she dandles in her lap,
Wayles in salt tears her speechless issues hap.
9. Birds and Fowls. chapter 1. v. 21.
Foul, the first liveing creatures, did repair
Into the open mansion of the Air
Where though their bodies confined are to th'sky;
Man's soul a far more lofty course does fly.
10. Beasts and creeping things. chapter 1. v. 24.
After the Air was filled, and the sea;
The Earth brought forth her beastly progeny.
But since Man fell from keeping God's behests
He Is turned more foul then Foul, more beast then Beasts.
11. MAN Created chapter 1. v. 26.
His Palace fully furnished; MAN was made
To enter it, and be by all obeyed
Who with a reasonable soul indu'd
Does in himself another World include:
He has over all the creatures mastery;
Thrice happy! if God's servant he could be.
12. The end of the CREATION. chapter 2. ADAM.
He was in paradise, in innocence,
But having fell from grace, he fell from thence;
Well, Adam, yet be cheerd in this hard happ,
Thou falst no lower, then thy Mothers lapp.
13. Aliud. chapter 3. v. 7.
Adam, who dureing his first state, had none,
Then first sought clothes, when righteousness was gone,
Truth naked is: when truth from him was fled
Noe mar'l he sought a cloak for what he did.
14. On the forbidden fruit. chapter 3. AD EVAM.
She Will eat it, though, for eating it, she dye;
O'tis a precious apple in her eye!
15. CAIN. chapter 4.
Is It not a fair example thou do give
(Bloodthirsty Cain) to them that after live,
That thus times Annalls should record of thee
The first man borne, the first manslayer he?
Hold, hold thy impious hand; but it is too late;
Thy brothers blood cries loud at heavens Gate
Lowdlike A-Bell for vengeance, who being slain,
You Are marked: Hell knows thee by that brand again.
16. Aliud. chapter 4.
Who first the art of Tillage found,
With His Brothers blood manured his ground:
A fruitful harvest followed
A crop of Vengeance on his Head.
17. ABEL. chapter 4.
More innocent, more harmless then those sheep;
Whom though he kept, himself he could not keep.
His Offering GOD accepts; he there fore dies,
Unto his Brother's wrath, a Sacrifice.
18. SETH. chapter 5.
Seth's pillars which inscribed with learning stood
Firme'gainst th'incursions of the swelling flood;
Are now consumed with time, and so is he:
These lines help to support his memory.
19. ENOCH. chapter 5. v. 24.
Blessed Enoch in the Heavens is thy abode.
Thou walkst with God before thou walkst with God.
20. METHUSALEM. chapter 5. v. 27.
Good Enoch lived here a little space,
And was translated to a better place.
Methuselah lived long, how was this done?
The Sire translated's years unto the son.
21. NOAH. chapter 6.
When men from Adam, sin from men had birth
And both were now grown Giants on the Earth;
God sent a flood, whose proud o're-flowing waves
Drown great and little world: his Arc Noy saves;
But when the world shall be destroyed again,
Then AH-NO Arc shall be for mortal men.
Aliud. chapter 6.
The World is drowned, Noah no deluge fears;
For he had drowned himself before, in tears.
23. Aliud. chapter 6.
When all mankind found in the sea their graves
His fireof zeal Noy from the waters saves.
24. NOAH's Husbandry. chapter 9.
After the flood Noah begann
To plant and play the husbandman.
But too much wine carousing down,
In drunkenness himself does drown:
He now too had been saved I guess
Had he the Arc of Soberness.
25 NOAH's Sons. chapter 9.
HAM came and saw his Fathers nakedness?
But SHEM and JAPHET cover't: Noy does bless
These two, this curse bequeatheth to their brother
That he should bow the ham unto the other.
26, ABRAHAM. chapter 12. V. 7.
With this good Patriarch God did covenant
Unto his seed blessed Canaan to grant:
But ere God to fulfill his word began
Himself possessed the heavenly Canaan.
27. LOT. chapter 9.
Agodly life he lived, great wealth he got
God pleased with Lot, and Lot pleased with his lot.
Yet this strange sin by him was strangely don,
He was the Grandfather of his own son!
28. SODOM and GOMORRAH. chapter 19.
Sin reigned here, God therefore on this town
Does rain from Heaven fire and brimstone down:
Which, as a sad praeludium, does foretell
What they hereafter must expect in Hell.
29. BRAHAM, offering (his son) ISAAC. chapter 22. V. 10.
When he with willing heart, and outstretch'd hand
Was ready to fulfill the hard command:
When now the fatal knife was drawn, which so
Was to have slain all Israel at one blow;
God, for the Offering, did with him dispense
Pleased with the offer of's obedience.
30. On the Ram caught in the Bush. chapter 22. V. 13.
Ram, this with thee will prove a bloody day;
Thou with thy life the price of life must pay:
For Isaac thou art made a Sacrifice,
And Christ the Paschall lamb for Sinners dies.
31. ESAU. chapter 24. V. 33.
When, Esau toild with hunting, now was come
To take up toils and spoils, returning home
Fainting for hunger: he his birthright gave
For pottage, his near fleeting life to save.
O fool, that hunted had so hard all day,
Yet letts at last his brother take the prey!
32. ISAAC. chapter 27.
Just Abraham in his old Age begat
Isaac heir of his blessings, and estate,
Who blind with age, yet with foreseeing mind,
The future fortunes of his son's divined;
No blessing gave to Esau he loved best,
But Jacob whom he loved not, he blessed.
33. JACOB Getting the blessing. chapter 27.
Whilst Esau ranging seeks for Venison,
Mean space the blessing which he sought, is gone,
For Hearts and fallow Deer seeks every whore
And loses what is to his heart most dear.
34. JACOB's Ladder. chapter 28. V. 13.
Jacob by pious fraud, and honest theft
Supplanted Esau of his birthright: 'reft
Him of his blessing, more what could he do?
He did his best to have been born first too.
Nor was less force then wisdom to him given
By which he wrastled and prevayl'd with heaven:
At last worn out with age, his staff laid by,
He takes his ladder, and so scales the sky.
35. JUDAH. chapter 38.
From Judah, Jacob's third, but strongest son;
A greater lion then himself there sprung.
36. JOSEPH. chapter 39.
Joseph thou art sold a slave, but yet made free
From their malicious hands, who envied thee.
A prisoner both for thine, and for their good
Sent into Egypt to prepare them food.
Thy Mistress would persuade thee to her will
But found thee trusty honest Joseph still:
And when thy garment snatchd from thee was gone,
Thy naked truth more clear then ever shone.
Liber secundus Mosis dictus EXODUS.
37. MOSES. chapter 1.
HIs cradle's made of rush, he lays his head
On Nile's proud back; that is his feather-bed:
Had he not bin so lost, he would nere been found
If not cast out to drowning, had been drowned.
Blessed Babel all things conspire thy good: and chance
Out of thy danger works deliverance.
38. The burning bush. chapter 3. v. 3. and 4.
In midst of fire, and unconsumed yet!
This does a wonder in my mind beget.
A fire of zeal this was made by heavens-art,
Not to inflame the bush, but Moses heart.
39. PHARAOH. chapter 7.
For Pharaoh's pride against the LORD of Hosts
An universal darkness shades his coasts.
A darkness such as might be felt, a night
That long usurped baffled Phoebus right,
He yet continued obstinate (we find)
The greatest darkness then was in his mind.
THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
Command. 1.
40. Hear O ISRAEL. I am the LORD thy GOD etc.
Israel, that GOD, who gave, requires thine ear
He deignes to speak; and should not thou, to hear!
So hear as after hearing to fulfill
The holy tenor of his heavenly will:
Who hopes that GOD should hear him, when he prays,
Attend what GOD, attend what justice says.
Should we so ill requital to him make,
Who fore all other people did us take?
To take a god'fore him? place him behind
The fancied Idols of our idle mind?
We have created gods indeed below
To whom obedience, honor, love we owe.
Whom would we see rightly to serve; O let
Them fore our eyes, but GOD fore them be set!
Command. 2.
41. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Images. etc.
Whilst to Bulls, Dogs, and Cats The Egyptians bow
They an egregious Hieroglyphick show
Of vain Idolatry: but little more
Of reason then those Animals they adore.
For why should Man into whose soul his maker
Has heavenly light infused, and made partaker
Of his own image, worship things that are
Inferior to himself in worth so far?
Or worship God by Proxy? dare to set
Of what we never saw, the counterfett?
If against this we a remedy would find;
Conserve these precepts graven in our mind
Command. 3.
42. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain etc.
Thou hurtst God's name with vain, and idle chat
But Fool thou hurt'st thy self far more then that:
Thy words are wind, but when great God does speak
Thou Wilt find he silence can in thunder break.
43. Aliud.
Is God thy fellow that thou still
Do take his holy name at will?
The word that framed thee thou do mock
And make it thy laughing stock.
Thou often invokest God to hear:
Take heed; too soon he will lend an ear.
Command. 4.
44. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day etc.
It Is hard if out of seven we cannot afford
One day to be kept holy to the Lord:
Rest then from Labor and bless him, that we
In six days toil of him may blessed be.
This Sabbath sanctify: an earnest it is
Of that eternal one of heavenly bliss.
Bestow some hours in pious meditation
(Though we work not) on Gods work, the creation:
And if to that grand secret we would climb
Of our Redemption; O redeem this time!
What though the day be changed, as 'twas heaven's will;
Keep our devotion on it unchanged still.
Command. 5.
45. Honor they Father, and thy Mother etc.
Honor thy parents, and obey
What they, and what God here does say.
To them observant if thou be,
And honour'st them, others will thee.
Long life is promised a reward
For those who this command regard,
A long life shall on earth be given,
A longer afterward in heaven.
46. Aliud.
Honor and love thy father natural,
Politic, and Ecclesiastical:
For, in so doing, all may clearly know
Whether thou truly honor God or no.
Nature's laws charge the first, which who resists
Is of the rank of rankest naturalists:
Thother's enjoined us by civility,
And that imp'd with a smack of policy:
The third, which teaches, why this should be shown,
T'all three's the sum of all religion.
Command. 6.
47. Thou shall do no murder.
Murther's so foul a crime, 't may not be wrought
By us indeed in deed, in word, or thought.
To boil with anger is manslaughter, nay
We shall for grudgings be arraigned one day.
Of murdering there be many pieces mo
Then death which comes by murdering piece's blow.
Command. 7.
48. Thou shall not Commit Adultery.
O have a care and bridle each ill thought
Which this command may violate; let naught
That is but unbeseeming be in thee
Do thou avoid all wanton company.
Let not thy love be firmly fixed upon
Her, that is another man's and not thine own.
Yet on Christ's spouse the Church fix thy firm love
Although her proper husband be above.
Command. 8.
49. Thou shall not steal.
We are forbid to steal, and if we do;
In hell we shall be punished, and here too.
Whilst (though we work in darkness like the mole,
And steal) another steals from us our soul.
Command. 9.
50. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbout.
God is the Father of all truth; but lies
Are only wicked Satan's properties.
If thou then must bear witness, don't through fear
Speak false, God will not with a liar bear.
Command. 10.
51. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc.
This last, and least of Gods commandments lies
In order next, which we ought not despise.
However: if ought we would contemn, begin
With detestation to despise this sin
Of coveting what is not our own; yet still
Covet what is not our own, to have like will
With our Divine Creator, that were rather
To keep, then break, the Law of him our Father.
What should I covet, poor babe, under age?
But Christ my elder brother's heritage;
That, and his love, I prize all things before,
And covet I may covet nothing more.
The third book of MOSES called LEVITICUS.
52. The fire shall be ever burning, etc. chapter 6. v. 13.
THe Priest, lest holy fire should decay,
Duly, each morn, did on it fuel lay:
So, lest our fire of zeal should die, it is fit
Our prayers each morning give new life to it.
Whilst we this flame foment, we need not doubt
But that the fire of Gods wrath will go out;
This on the Altar of our hearts being kept,
God us and our peace offering will accept.
53. NADAB and ABIHU burnt. chapter 10.
Your minds were kindled with a strange desire
Of offering incense with as strange a fire:
This 'twas, incensed Gods anger, made you wish
You had been strangers to such deeds as this.
Fire, sent from God, your death, and ruin was,
Made heavenly martyrs, though not for heavens cause;
Whilst these unsanctified flames you bring;
Your selves are turned to a burnt-offering.
Sinne-offering you were none, since no expense
Of sacred fire could expiate your offense:
Yet a sinne-offering too you were, for in
Your offering there was nothing else but sin:
Had you one spark of grace, then had not heaven
Needed ethereall fire thus to have given.
God gave you what you offered him, 'twas fit
For offering such a trespass to commit.
54. SHELOMITHS son, blaspheming, is stoned, chap. 24.
You Are stoned blasphemer, and 'twas thy desert,
Just punishment for such a stony heart;
That curse thou dartedst up at Heaven, fell down
Heavy (as is stones nature) on thy crown:
Thy Sire was an Egyptian, which made thee
In the holy language no more skilled to be.
55. The year of JUBILEE. chapter 25.
Blessed year of rest which was, as we may say,
Through all its course a lasting holy day.
Whose privilege of rest did so abound,
That amongst the rest it priviledg'd the ground;
No crooked plough could now the leave obtain
To make her furrow up her face for pain:
Now Lands revolve to their right Lord: each skore
Of debt, and tears were wiped off from the poor.
Blessed year, more blessed, if grateful they had been,
And made this year their resting year from sin.
56. For unto me the children of ISRAEL, etc. chapter 27. verse the last.
Lord, it is confessed we are thy servants, so
Are glorious Angels, far our Betters, too.
But (might a servant say it without offense)
We'd be thy servants in a stricter sense.
Would thou us manumize from bondage then,
As Denizons of new Jerusalem;
Or by adoption make us thine, this done,
Each shall thy servant be although thy son.
The fourth book of MOSES called NUMBERS.
56. The ISRAELITE gathering sticks on the Sabbath day stoned. chapter 15.
WHy did thou break his precept, who does say
Abstain from labor on the Sabbath day?
These sticks send thee to Styx, fool make thy moan.
Thus looking for a stick, thou'st got the stone.
58. The Rebellion of KORAH, DATHAN, and ABIRAM. chapter 16.
Thus clogged with sin it was impossible
But such a weight should sink them down to hell.
A crime so foul that lest it should be spide,
The earth did it within her entrails hide;
She could not sure, but breed herself disquiet,
Clogging her stomach with such loathsome diet.
Thus they were taken in their proper gin,
They dug a pit, and fell themselves therein:
When thus you opened your mouths, dire murmurers,
What marvel was it, the Earth so opened hers?
59. AARON'S rod budding. chapter 17.
That Aaron's rod should blossom, shows that God
Would that the house of Levi still should bud
And flourish; what a wonder's here? O see,
A withered branch becomes a fruitful tree!
But still a rod, that if we bear no fruit,
The rod of chastisement may force us to it.
Yet Almonds are poor fruit, I wish that mine,
Were not of them, but rather of the Vine.
60. AARON'S death. chapter 20.
Thou now great priest approaching to thy death,
Do first resign thy office, then thy breath;
Here thou ascend'st a mount, whence thy soul will
Take her ripe flight unto the heavenly hill;
Thou leave thy people now, yet leave them so,
That thou art gathered to thy people too.
61. The brazen Serpent. chapter 21.
That through Gods power virtue in this brass lay,
None is so impudent that dare gain say.
No cordial nor yet simple, 'twould appear,
To humane sense, a simple medicine here:
Wondrous! yet wondrous easy to apply
Such precious salve in the twinkling of an eye.
62. BALAAMS Ass. chapter 22.
Heaven gives a tongue and mind, the Ass 'gins break
Her silence, and has now a mind to speak.
Her master, and his pride, no longer bears,
Though she his ass had been so many years.
She saw the Angel, and with terror led,
Fell down upon the ground and worshipped.
Had Balaam known in what a case he was,
And done like her, he had not played the ass.
63. Defile not the Land, etc. chapter 35.
Do not defile our land, and mak't an hell,
With sins, wherein heavens God is pleased to dwell
But when that is defiled, lest he depart,
Be sure keep one place pure, and that is thy heart.
The fifth book of MOSES called DEUTERONOMY.
64. Thou shall not plough with an ox and an ass together. chapter 22. v. 10.
PReposterous sin! what reason can thou find,
That thou, what nature would not, would have joined?
Must the poor ass, for all past pains, at length
Be matched thus with a beast above his strength?
Although for humane cause desist thou would not.
O join them not, 'cause God enjoins thou should not.
65. Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn. chapter 25. v. 4.
Before he took pains for thee at the plough,
And though he eat, why yet he labors now:
It Is fit that he, with whose help thou do sow,
Should eat the fruit, of what he toild for, too.
Thou Wilt say, as he treads out he eats, it is true,
Yet as he eats, he sweats; and give him's due:
Why do thou muzzle up his mouth? heaven hears
His dumb complaints, thou can not stop heavens ears:
But will thou tie his chaps up yet (accursed?)
Tie up his legs withal, and do thy worst.
66. Joshua encouraged. chapter 31.
Joshua in Moses stead, by Gods command,
Was to guide Israel to the promised land:
Moses now ready to depart does make him,
This promise, that God never should forsake him.
God would go up before him, were it not so,
Both he and Israel down the wind would go:
He Would be their Captains Captain, can they miss
To conquer Earth, whose Captain Heaven is?
Beforehand God goes up, the cause we see,
That Israel never might behind hand be.
67. The Israelites freed by MOSES. chapter 34.
He led Gods chosen from proud Pharaohs Land,
By miracles, and an outstretched hand
Through the red sea and Wilderness of Sin
To the confines of the promised land did bring;
Where having left his charge with Joshua,
He went before hand to prepare their way.
68. MOSES his death. chapter 34.
Moses, who whilst he lived, a blessing still
Had been, leaves blessings as his dying will;
Whose corpse lest Israel should prize too high,
And so fall into flat Idolatry;
God himself buried: Where, 's unknown to men,
In silence bury all such questions then.
The book of JOSHUAH.
69. RAHABS preserving the two spies. chapter 2. v. 15.
IN saving them she saved herself, who by
Her craft so hid the spies, none could them spy;
And though an harlot, yet in this did well,
Proving a common friend to Israel.
Down by a cord she let them, which did move
Their hearts, and drew them with a cord of love.
70. Bind this line of scarlet thread in the window. chapter 2. v. 18.
Great Joshuah dare not siege'gainst this house lay,
Where Rahab does her bloody flagge display.
71. Jordan dried up. chapter 3.
Where Joshuah goes, the Ark must go before,
An Ark must save part of mankind once more.
Jordan, though he o'reflows his banks, for fear
Retires, seeing the fiery pillar near.
The billows, from above, of leave debarred
TO run down, here rev'rently keep court of guard:
The waves below, seeing no succor nigh,
Straight shrink away, and leave their channel dry:
O wonder! which, who looks on, sees more clear
Then Jordans crystal waters do appear;
For they are troubled, and yet glad that so
Israel might over them without trouble go.
72. And JOSHUAH set up twelve stones in the midst of JORDAN. chapter 4. v. 9.
Twelve stones are fixed, whereby, at once, are showed
Gods mercy and their humble gratitude.
Those monuments may fail, in my mind, though
The thought of this shall ever freshly flow.
73. An Angel appears to JOSHUAH. chapter 5. v. 13.
Now Angels meat 'gan cease, though Manna fell
No more, yet Angels selves aid Israel;
And when they draw their swords, there is cause to fear
(Or rather, hope) that the Heathens fall draws near.
74. JOSHUAH. chapter 6.
Kings conquered were by his victorious hand,
The days bright Carman staid at his command:
Ay's lofty towers, for aye, to wrack did go;
He with an engine beat down Jericho.
No iron-horn'd-ram 'twas, but the mere sound
Of rams-horns razed its walls unto the ground:
These ruins lift his name unto the sky,
Those horns resound his praise continually.
75. ACHANS wedge. chapter 7.
Accursed wretch, who by the accursed thing,
A general curse on Israel did bring;
And almost on its general: Ay could strike
Israel, when thou with hell had done the like:
Had struck a bargain, wherein thou did prove
So fast wedged in with filthy lucres love,
Yet loose in thy desires, burying thy pelf
Ill got, not getting burial for thy self.
If buried, yet alive, a heap of stones
Reward thine avarice, not precious ones.
Two hundred shekles! a sufficient bait;
But they are not of the Sanctuary weight:
That thou for them should hazard life, it was
In my opinion too light a cause.
Wast thou an Isra'lite, and could so dote
To covet thus a Babylonish coat?
Thou have what thou desir'st, and more; for, see
How Babels ruins, wretch, are fell on thee.
76. The Sun standing still. chapter 10.
Why this unusual Solstice made the Sun?
That with his speed great Ioshuah might run.
77. Be ye the children of light. chap. 10.
Sun stand thou still, thus Joshua said; the Sun
Amazed forgot's diurnall race to run:
He truly is a child of light, whose faith
So great an influence over Lights emperor has.
The book of JUDGES.
78. JAEL killing SISERA. chapter 4. v. 21.
THou woman Worthy, who shall aye rehearse
Thy act heroic in heroic verse?
For nailing that proud Pagan's temples down,
Thy temples do deserve a laurel crown.
79. GIDEONS fliece. chapter 6.
The fleece was wet, and yet no dew was found
Upon the ground:
The ground was wet, and yet the fleece did lie
Upon it dry.
Dry! 'twas a miracle, but when dew fell,
O then it fatness dropped on Israel.
80. Aliud. chapter 6.
Admire the golden sheep-skin, youths of Greece.
I find more wonder far in Gideons fleece.
81. GIDEONS stratagem. chapter 7.
How great, how glorious a conquest came,
From sound of trumpets and of Gideons name!
Those lamps in Isreal's darkest, gloomiest night,
Were those, that shone, and ushered in the light.
The Midianites, though ten and more to one,
By pitchers, not pitched fight, were overthrown.
82. A woman kills ABIMELECH. chapter 9.
Great warrior, who so often have vanquished
Strong men, shall a weak woman break thy head?
Well I Will excuse the matter as 'twas done;
Thou diedst not of her hand but of the stone.
83. JEPHTHAH. chapter 11.
To vow, methinks, it was too rash a thing,
But more to offer such an offering:
With blood thy vow and country thus to free,
For which thy daughter's not much bound to thee.
84. SAMSON. chapter 11.
Samson overcome by her, whose arms entwine
About thee, not by the arms oth' Philistine:
She blinded thee before, no wonder then,
That they could bind, and blind thee over again.
85. Aliud. chap. 11.
Strong Samson dallying with his Dalilah,
Confessed to her where his power lay.
She treach'rously robbed him of that, and then
He differr'd not an hair from other men.
86. RUTH.
RUth with malignant fortune long oppressed,
At last with honor, wealth, and husband blessed:
Freed from her wandering troubles and annoy,
And yet she is Ruth-full now (I mean) of joy.
87. BOAZ his kindness to RUTH. chapter 2.
Boaz to Ruth a stranger, kind! O know
What kindness God to her in that did show.
So well she husbanded this kindness; from
Her seed the Prince of peace in time did come,
Springing from her in direct line; yet is
To us the center of eternal bliss.
The first book of SAMUEL.
88. SAMUEL. chapter 3.
FRom's infancy in Gods house made abode:
God called him, ere he could call on God.
89. SAUL. chapter 10.
Fortune to thee, O son of Kish, was kind,
Who looking for an ass a crown did find.
DAVID. chapter 16.
Blessed David, blessed abroad, and blessed at home;
Blessed in the seed that from thy loins did come:
But blessed 'bove all in thy harps harmony,
Which with thy minds rare temper did agree;
Whose tunes instruct the warbling orbs to sing
Their Hallelujahs to their heavenly King.
91. DAVID slaying GOLIATH. chapter 18.
A bold attempt it was and venturous
To offer to affront a Giant thus
With a poor sling: this act of valor, when
Thou did, thou tookst time by the foretop then.
92. JONATHAN. chapter 18.
Of all Saul's issue, Jonathan alone
Merits high praise and commendation;
Who did, with all he had, to's girdle, part,
And ti'd that zone of love 'bout David's heart,
Which with a knot of friendship he did ty
So fast as lasts unto eternity.
93. SAUL enquireth of a witch at ENDOR. chapter 18.
Had Saul live Samuels counsel followed,
He never would have sought him being dead.
The second book of SAMUEL.
94. BATSHEBA, chapter IX.
THy bathing thee, to cool thy self, did prove
The way to set David on fire in love.
95. ABSALOM. chapter 14.
Thy hair, O Absalom, the Scriptures said,
Two hundred shekells every year it weighed:
These locks, young man, which now thou holdst so dear,
Will weigh no less then thy life's price I fear.
96. AHITHOPHEL. chapter 17.
Too wise a statesman, cursed Achitophel,
Whose every word was thought an oracle.
'Twas not the wisest part thou ere did play,
To rid thy self, a traitor, out oth' way.
97. ABSALOM hangedon a tree. chapter 18. v. 9.
Promotion on the throne, Absalom, that
The chiefest thing was which thou aimedst at.
Promotion, 'cause thou will, thou shall; 't must be,
Not on thy fathers throne though, but a tree;
Which tree of all the trees that ever were,
Then bore the basest fruit when thou hung'st there.
98. DAVID weepeth for ABSALOM. chapter 18. the last v.
What aileth holy David's grief to rise?
Look how the tears run trickling down his eyes.
It Is for his son, his dearest son, alas!
Which lately against him in rebellion was.
His death so much he wails not, as 'cause he
Lived not to repent him of his treachery.
99. JOAB kills AMAZA. chapter 20.
What fiend, foul Traitor, thy fell heart did move
To make thy malice in a seeming love?
O baseness! (with a complement to do it)
To take him by the beard, but mean the throat!
The first book of KINGS.
100. SOLOMON'S choice. chapter 3. v. 9.
RIches and honor, Power and Majesty
Were offered, Heav'n-blest Solomon, to thee.
Wisdom was offered too amongst the rest,
Which thou prefer'dst, as of all gifts the best:
That thou were wise before, this wise choice shows,
Else thou had never known so to have chose.
101. The two harlots. chapter 3. v. 16.
Wisest of Kings, who hear'st two harlots plead,
Both challenging the live child, not the dead:
How will thou find its mother! will thou go
To part the living babe, and kill that too?
The true one sooner with her own will part,
Then have it parted, which would kill her heart.
By the remorslesse answer of the other
Thou came to know which is, which not, the Mother.
'Twas wisdom that, but't had beeen greater rather,
Could thou have then found out the child's true Father.
102. SOLOMON. chapter 3.
What does thy wisdom boot thee, Solomon?
Thou Wilt find it but an earths vexation;
Except thou know thy self naked and poor,
Thou Wilt know thou art not so wise, who know no more.
103. The Queen of SHEBA. ch 10.
Fair Queen, thy coming is an honest stealth:
Thou take more wisdom, then thou leavest wealth
104. REHOBOAM. chapter 12. v. 8.
Unlike his father Rehoboam makes
Youths of his counsel, and old age forsakes;
He goes about with sharp replies, not mild
Persuasions, to qualify the wild
Uproars: how he could think to guide his Realm
That drove his boat against the common stream!
105. Aliud. chapter 12.
Fond Rehoboam, had thou served one day
The people, they had served thee for aye.
They now crown Jeroboam with applause,
Yet serve thee: how? truly in thine own sauce.
106. JEROBOAM. chapter 12. v. the last.
By goodly words and sly insinuation
He reined in, and reigned over a nation:
Whom God had promised, if he would persevere
In righteousness, his seed should rule for ever;
But having Golden calves for true Gods placed,
His race extirp'd, he proved the calf at last.
107. The Prophet slain. chapter 13.
Had thou but list'ned to Gods word aright,
Thou need'dst not, fearing him, fear lions might.
Thy beast did escape, but thou were slain, alas!
Perchance the lion took thee for the ass.
108. JEROBOAMS wife, chapter 14.
Why did thou come disguised? dissembledst too
Thy voice, and thought to gull the prophet so;
His mind is clear, though blind his eyesight be;
Could he thy child's fate know, and not know thee?
109. ELISHA. chapter 17.
Ravens preserved thy life with food, I read,
Who others with the bread of life did feed.
110. BAALS priests and ELISHA. chapter 18.
Baul louder, Baal does his friends forget,
He Is thick of hearing sure; baul louder yet,
Perchance his Godhead now a nap does take;
And being drowsy,'s somewhat loath to wake.
He Is gone a journey, pray him take the pain
To spur his steed, and ride home post again:
Or, 'midst the groans of dying enemies,
Perchance, he cannot hear your feeble cries.
All done, yet nothing done, their flesh they tear
And cut; yet sullen Baal will not hear:
But at Elisha's prayer, is forthwith given
Fire to consume his sacrifice from heaven:
Then for these Priests, who spilt some blood in jest,
The prophet in good earnest spilt the rest.
111. AHAB. chapter 22.
Thou art forbid expressly; art thou mad,
Yet to go up to Ramoth-Gilead?
Dismount quick from thy chariot again,
Perchance thou mai'st, perchance thou shall, be slain.
Why, sold to wickedness, do thou go forth?
The devil's a chapman for that pennyworth:
Thou go disguised for fear of being known,
But, to thy cost, thou wilt know, he knows his own.
The second book of KINGS.
112. ELIIAH translated. chapter 2.
When thou in fiery carr were drawn to th'sky,
Thy mantle dropped from thee immediately;
To show that when we seek heaven in our mind,
We ought to leave all earthly things behind.
113. Aliud. chapter 2.
Good Prophet, almost with thy latest breath,
Thy soul thou to Elisha did bequeath:
Thy body wond'rously to heaven does go,
More wondrously thy soul did stay below.
114. ELISHA increases the widows oil. chapter 4.
The oil poured out caused this poor widows sadness;
But thus poured out, it proved the oil of gladness:
Bring me, she said, another bottle, boy.
There Is none: she next will fill her heart with joy.
115. Aliud. chapter 4.
The widow put small trust in God, ere while,
But as her faith increased so did her oil.
116. Death in the pot. chapter 4.
They say life's sweet, nor do they say amiss;
Hence comes to pass that death so bitter is:
Elisha flung in meal; for had he not,
They all were likely to have gone to pot.
117. NAAMANS leprosy. chapter 5. v. 10.
Wash in no other but in Iordans flood,
It Is holy water that must do thee good.
118. GEHAZI. chapter 5. v. 26.
Went not my heart with thee, (Elisha said)
When Naaman with presents did thee lade?
Ono, thou righteous prophet, say not so,
Thy heart did not along with that deed go.
White innocence is gone, but in its room
A direful white of leprosy is come.
119. The Syrians struck with blindness. chapter 6.
In vain, O Syrian, do thou counsel take,
Elisha frustrate thy device does make.
If thou thy secrets should to none impart,
He Would fetch them from thy secretst chest, thy heart:
Nor fears he whom thou sendest him to kill;
Horsemen, and fiery chariots guard him still;
And now their eyes he does not only blind,
But even infatuates their very mind,
Strikes them with blindness doubly, leads them on
To death, yet saves them from destruction.
Ioram would smite them, he bids smite no more
With blindness, they were smote enough before.
A banquet, lastly, he prepares for them,
Who had prepared a bloody one for him.
120. IEZABEL. chapter 9.
Proud painted creatures see, and wonder at
This Queen, this Queen, by dogs dogged to her fate:
She, who but late in rich attire was found,
Now lies a prey for mastives on the ground;
Although she went most richly clothed in all
Her jewels, pride at last would have a fall:
Her carrion stinks now unperfum'd by art;
Now, Iezabel, thou in thy colors art.
121. AHABS seventy sons. chapter 10. v. 7.
Ahab, thou have a numerous seed,
But all before their time must bleed.
How in a moment all are gone!
Their blood cementing Iehu's throne.
122. BAALS priests slain. chapter 10.25.
So, near-spent candles give a blaze before
Their snuff's extinguished, and they shine no more?
When Iehu dignifies the priests of Baal,
I fear this pomp is for their funeral.
The offering to make ready, each one hies,
Poor fools your selves must be the sacrifice.
123. JOASH hid in the house of GOD. chapter 11.
O happy receptacle! happy he,
Who hid secure in the house of God could be!
But O more happy Ioash, had the God
Of that house, in thy hearts house made abode!
124. HEZEKIAH. chapter 20.
Good Hezekiah, sick almost to death,
His life for fifteen years prolonged has:
The sign whereof upon a dial made,
The Sun fifteen degrees went retrograde.
Unthankful he, in his hearts dial, so
The Sun of righteousness did backward go,
125. JOSIAH. chapter 23.
Josiah the high places down did throw,
And meekly his own heart did lay as low.
126. ZEDEKIAH. chapter 25.
All things concur, O king, to ruin thee;
First thy rebellion, next thy perjury:
O, if thou Jeremies advice had took,
To bear, perchance thou had shook off, the yoke.
Thou saw thy children slain; new miseries!
To see that object ere thou lost thine eyes.
The first book of CHRONICLES.
127. DAVID'S servants shaved by HANUN. chapter 19.
MUst thus Ambassadors rewarded be?
You shavers, bearded thus despitefully;
To receive Legates you not worthy are;
Expect now Heralds to denounce a war.
128. The Giant slain by Jonathan. chapter 20. v. 7.
Defying Israel, thou soon shall feel
The edge of Jonathans revengefull steel;
Not that so monstrous bulk his force withstands,
Though thou thy self a man art of thy hands:
Six fingers, and six toes: and yet the art dead,
Thy steady feet have stood thee in small stead.
129. DAVID'S choice. chapter 21. v. 12.
Sword, famine, pestilence! hard choice; yet one
Of The three thou have in thy election,
Choose quickly then; since thou must fall, it stands
Thee in some stead to fall into Gods hands:
By numbering Israel what did thou get?
Since that is the way but to diminish it.
The Angel stretches out his hand, but it is
In vain, now David 'gins to stretch out his.
Blessed Nuntius, hold; a fume t'ascend begins,
Which drives away both stench of plague and sins.
The second book of CHRONICLES.
130. SOLOMON'S prayer at the dedication of the temple. chapter 6. v. 13.
THe temple by a prayer is consecrated,
To which sole use 'twas to be dedicated:
Who, by Heavens wisdom, knew this house to rear,
Knew, the main column of it must be prayer.
131. ASA. chapter 15.
To the Pysicians thou did trust, I find
The greatest sickness then was of thy mind.
132. JEHOSHAPHAT. chapter 18.
If thou with Ahab needs wilt partner go,
Look with his pleasure to partake his woe.
Ahab and thou to mask your selves combined,
He to disguise his body, thou thy mind.
133. MANASSEH. chapter 33.
In thy prosperity, perversely, thou
Did follow other gods, forsook'st the true:
Dealt'st with familiar spirits; but, brought low
By miseries, thy heart was humbled too.
Thou from thy kingdom, and thy God wast gone:
Return'st to God, return'st unto thy throne;
Yet with a spirit now thou deal'st, I guess,
Not of the devil, but of righteousness.
The book of EZRA.
134. The dedication of the second temple. chapter 3. v. 12.
TWo different effects arise and flow
From the same cause, both joy and sorrow too,
It Is hard to judge, whether the oil of gladness
Repells, or is repelled, by th'stream of sadness:
Both torments strive, but the old's limping course
At last is drowned by this fresher source.
Ancient, and young, to the temples consecration
Contribute: those give cries, these acclamation.
The book of NEHEMIAH.
135. And their children spoke half in the language of Ashdod. chapter 13. v. 24.
MIxing with foreign nations, you shall so
Be made partakers of their fortune too.
How should they speak pure Hebrew, when they had
Their first original so impure and bad?
Their mothers nurtured them, and who is among
Children, that sucks not in his Mothers tongue?
Whilst thus you match with nations Oriental,
Your righteousness is in the Occidentall.
The book of ESTHER.
136. Queen VASNTI. chapter 1.
KIng Ahasuerus sent for's beauteous Queen,
That she of all his Nobles might be seen.
Why Vashti would not come? wast pride, or fear,
Thou should not beauteous in their eyes appear?
Do not expect from him a second call,
The next thou hear'st; Thou must not come at all.
137. ESTHER. chapter 2.
Esther elected in Queen Vashti's place,
Obtained both with King and people grace.
The golden scepter was held forth to assure
Her, that her suits his favor should procure:
Good God, when I approach thy throne, hold thou
Thy mercies golden scepter forth, and bow
Thine ear to my requests: protect me still,
And let no man, no Haman work me ill.
138. HAMAN and MORDECAI. chapter 7. v. 10.
Hamanth' art but a man, why then do thou
Grudge that the Jew unto thee does not bow?
Thou covet'st to be higher made then he;
Thou shall, but, Haman, how? upon a tree.
The book of JOB.
139. JOBS patience.
HIs cattle stolen, goods spoiled, and children slain;
Yet after all Jobs patience did remain:
On each part of his body sores you will find,
But not a spot of sin did taint his mind;
So that the tempter's self was tired more,
With torturing, then he who the tortures bore.
The book of PSALMS.
140. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Psalm. 111.
DId little children Christs-crosse truly know,
They quickly would be taught the rest oth' row.
Had we but gained this fear, we need not fear
To gain all knowledge, worth our knowledge here.
141. I have thought upon thy name in the night-season. Psalm. 119. v. 7. oct. 7.
When others quiet rest did take,
Tossing in my bed lay I;
Nor would I let heaven rest to take,
Till heaven eased my misery.
At last such beams of grace did on me light,
As made a sunshine in the midst of night.
142. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto thee. Psalm. 119. v. 6. oct. 8.
In The deadest time oth' night I Will rise and say
My oraisons, then down in peace me lay.
By prayer, and faith, I hope 'bove stars to bide,
And stars can only in the night be spide.
143. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unity. Psalm. 133. v. 1.
God to send blessings down will never cease,
On such who live in amity and peace:
But O, what other blessing can there prove
A greater blessing unto love, then love!
144. But mine eyes look unto thee. Psalm. 141. v. 9.
All worldly thoughts, forsake my breast, away;
Since worldly pleasures, like the world, decay:
At somewhat higher my soul aims; her birth
She had from heaven, why should she stoop to earth?
What worthyer object can our fancy find,
Then to contemplate him who gave the mind?
But why, ambitiously, seek I to climb,
And see what no eye saw at any time!
Lord, give me faith, then by the eye of grace
I shall behold thee, though not face to face.
The PROVERBS of SOLOMON.
145. Chap. 1. v. 1.
WHen we for prudence would praise any one,
We say he is as wise as Solomon:
He who alive so many proverbs said,
Is after death himself a proverb made.
146. Cast in thy lot among us, etc. chapter 1. v. 14.
Come, let us have all one purse, be Joviall still,
Let Us live in common, have the world at will.
No, no: my lot amongst yours shall never fall,
TO have all one purse, is to have none at all.
147. Enter not into the paths, etc. chapter 4. v. 14.
It is a fair broad way, plain, plausible,
But yet beware, it is the way to hell,
Although't be strow'd with roses altogether,
I Will none on it: foh! it stinks of brimstone hither.
148. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber. chapter 6. v. 10.
A little slumber more the sluggard cries,
I Will take the other od nap, and then I Will rise;
Good alas the weather's very cold indeed,
For certain I am glew'd unto my bed:
Thus trifles out his time, till poverty
Catch him, and 's belly in his face does fly:
Go to the Ant, consider her; why so?
The sluggard will not take the pains to go.
149. Keep my commandments and live.
Keep Gods commandments sure, and live thereby,
His precepts as the apple of thine eye.
Observe his laws, thou can not choose but thrive,
Since his commandments do command to live.
150. Say unto wisdom thou art my Sister. chapter 7. v. 4.
Since thou this charge, wise King, on me do lay,
Wisdom, thou art my Sister, I will say;
But O! I fear, that so unlike we be,
She Will not be such a fool t'acknowledge me.
151. Does not wisdom cry? etc. chapter 8. v. 1.
Wisdom about the streets does crying rome,
To see if any one will take her home.
O use her gently, do not with her part,
But lock her in the bottom of thy heart:
She cries, and cries to think, that all reject her;
I Am sure there is none, but fools, who will neglect her.
152. I love them who love me. chapter 8. v. 17.
I know it is wisdom to love them who love me;
To love mine enemy it is piety.
153. And those who seek, etc. chapter 8. v. 17.
Wisdom requires, who would her suitors be
Must seek her even from their infancy:
She woos us to woo her early; if we do,
We shall be certain to wed her, not woo.
154. Wisdom has builded her house. chapter 9. v. 1.
Wisdom has built her house, and finished it,
Made all her rooms, for Kings and Princes, fit.
The arts and sciences do beautify
This Palace, make it stand perpetually:
Needs must it last, built in so wise a sort,
Whom sev'n so mighty columns do support.
155. Stolen waters are sweet. chapter 9. v. 17.
Stolen things are like the book Ezekiel eat,
Which, to his palate, seemed delicious meat;
But swallowed in his belly, out, alas
More bitter there, then ever sweet it was,
Let thieves beware, nor on stolen treasures dote;
Though sweet in the mouth, 'twill choke them in their throat.
156. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief. chapter 10. v. 23.
When wicked men do ill, as seems them best;
They say, to mend the matter, 'twas in jest,
And not in earnest: well, I think not so,
I think it was not in good earnest though.
ECCLESIASTES.
157. In much wisdom there is much sorrow. chapter 1. v. 18.
IT grieves me much to hear of this; can grief
Be got in getting wisdom? past belief!
And yet it is true: the more we know, the more
We grieve our knowledge does no higher soar:
Wisdoms Arithmetic contains but one
Grand head, and that is Multiplication
Of sorrow: She and I, I see, must part;
What profit comes from such a sorry art?
158. A good name is better then precious ointment. chapter 7. v. 1.
Give't others: let their curious nostrills dwell,
On precious ointments aromatic smell.
Besmear them with those liquid odours; me
Set out with those oiled arts, let no man see:
Let me a good name keep; better by far,
An holy good man is, then greater are.
The box of ointment broke, sents sweet'st; but this,
Kept whole, most redolent and fragrant is.
159. Truly the light is sweet. chapter 11. v. 7.
Though Sols refulgent rays dazzle our sight,
Those beams are better then the shade of night:
For who but darkness children fancy it?
A time only for Bats and Screetch-owls fit.
I Will look to the sun, and looking may I be
Exhaled a meteor to heavens axle-tree.
160. Remember thy Creator. chapter 12. v. 1.
In youthful days do not forgetful be
Of God, who always does remember thee;
And though thy years be green, yet humbly bring
Thy firstlings; make an Autumn in thy Spring:
Thy spritefull blood, as yet, is hot. O why
Should zeal, amidst so great flames, frozen die!
Think on thy Maker; husband well thy time:
In the prime service, O bestow thy prime;
And thou who giv'st thy youth to God, wilt see,
That God will likewise give old age to thee.
161. God shall bring every work into judgment. chapter 12. v. 14.
God is the judge, who, at the last grand day,
Shall the just guerdon of our labors pay:
All works shall into light be brought, though none
To light eternal, but good works alone.
SOLOMON'S SONG, or CANTICLES.
162. I am black, but comely. chapter 1. v. 5.
SOul thou art black, yet Christ loves thee,
Although naught lovely he can see.
Though naught but what is naught there grows,
He loves thee merely' cause he does.
It pleases now the eternal dove,
Not only a white house to love.
163. Look not upon me because I am black. chapter 1. v. 6.
Because the sun has looked upon thee, why
To look on thee do thou forbid mine eye?
Those whom the Sun of righteousness looks on,
Though they are black now, shall be white anon.
164. As the lilly among the thorns, etc. chapter 2. v. 2.
As does the lilly amongst the thorns; just so
Does my beloved 'midst the daughters show:
More truly, Lord, were this applied to thee,
When hanging 'midst two thieves upon a tree.
Thy self's the lilly, not now white, but red;
And these the thorns are which embrace thy head.
165. He brought me to the banqueting house. chapter 2. v. 4.
He brought me to a summer house, and there
Did feast me with abundance of good cheer;
Those dainties yet, did not to love me force,
Until he served his coarse, the second course.
166. Comfort me with apples. chapter 2. v. 5.
Art sick? of what disease? of love? O say,
What cordial to thy lovesick heart wilt lay?
Think thou an apple will give thee relief?
Poor soul! an apple first did cause thy grief.
167. Rise up my love, my fair one, etc. chapter 2. v. 10, 11, 12. etc.
Rise up my fair one, come away, for lo,
The winter's past, the spring her head does show;
Let not fierce winter in thy chill heart stay,
I am thy Sun to thaw those frosts away.
The chanting birds do imitate the spheres;
But thy voice were more music in my ears.
The sparrows in loves dialect do prate;
The turtles bill, then come to me thy mate:
The fig-tre puts forth her green fruits; O see!
They load their boughs; a fig for all but thee.
The vines about the elms do twine; just so
Let thou and I, in love, together grow.
Now pressing time draws near, I Will vie a flood
Of purple with thee; thy vine, and my blood.
168. He feeds among the lillies. chapter 2. v. 16.
True did thou say, wise King, indeed,
That Christ does amongst the lillies feed:
Christ loves a pure heart, white as snow,
Which yet with love of him must glow.
169. I held him, and would not let him go. ch 3. v. 4.
Well done: hold fast my soul; let him not go,
Nor think to be rid of thee so;
But he will descend to hell, my soul, I fear;
Yet hell's no hell while he is there.
170. His lips drop as the honey-combe. chapter 4. v. 11.
If I a Be could be (my dear)
I Would gather all my honey here.
Thy roseat lips my flowers I Would make,
And from them store of sweets would take;
And when I full from them did part,
I Would store them in my hive, my heart.
171. A garden enclosed is my sister. chapter 4. v. 12.
A garden, though enclosed I be
To others, I am open to thee:
A spring I am, shut up, what though?
My waters still to thee-ward flow;
A fountain locked? why Lord? that is small:
The key of David opens all.
172. I sleep, but my heart waketh. chapter 5. v. 2.
Although my outward body sleep,
My mind awake I always keep;
Nor does my soul e're take a nap
In dull securities soft lap:
In expectation, whilst I waking wake,
My soul a sweeter rest then sleep does take.
173. He gave me no answer. chapter 5. v. 6.
He will not answer give when thy sins cry,
His love is proved in taciturnity.
174. Tell my beloved I am sick of love. chapter 5. v. 8.
Sick! Sick! yet sick of such a grief am I,
I love the causer, and the malady;
Of which, were I not truly soul-sick, I
Am sure, my sick-soul would for ever die.
O wondrous sickness! where the very grief,
Is to it self sole-med'cine, soul-relief!
175. What is thy beloved more then another. chapter 5. v. 9.
What is he: nay, what is he not? who is he
Can be what my beloved is to me?
Would you the sweetness of my lover prove?
The only way's, like me, to learn to love.
176. His legs are like pillars of marble. chapter 5. v. 15.
How aptly Christ is here a pillar said?
On whom the weight of all the Church is laid.
177. Aliud. chapter 5.
Christ is a marble pillar; were not he,
Our sins would crush him down immediately.
178. My dove, my undefiled, is but one. chapter 6. v. 9.
Thy coat must have no seams, one Church must be
Alone saved, Lord; and saved alone by thee.
179. Many waters cannot quench love. chapter 8. v. 7.
Love is a fire unquenchable; nor can
It be extinguished by the art of man.
What water can against this fire prevail!
Tears are a water, and yet love's best oil:
Who hate this love, shall for their hatred pay,
Their fire shall be unquench'd too, at last day.
180. We have a little Sister, and she has no breasts. chapter 8. v. 8.
We have a little Sister who can show
No breasts, what shall our little Sister do?
This shall she do; if breasts her self have none,
Suck at my breasts of consolation.
ISAIAH.
181. Therefore with joy shall ye draw. chapter 12. v. 3.
TO draw, and draw with joy, implies; that, which
We toil for with such joy, shall make us rich.
182. We have made a covenant with death. chapter 18. v. 15.
You Have bid farewell to God; and poast to evil,
Shook hands with God, and struck hands with the devil.
You're now cock-sure, you think, what e're ensue,
Of safety, and the devil's as sure of you:
Your bond shall be in force, after you die,
And bear a date, even to eternity;
And he, your all in all, into whose power
You give up, shall be your Executour;
And Executer, O! this bargain, then,
Undo, or you your selves are undone men.
183. Woe to the rebellious children. chapter 30. v. 1.
A Father, and a God omniscient too;
To whom but thee should they for counsel go?
They mean to dive down into hell, I fear,
And search the depth of devilish wisdom there.
Woe to him who thinks hell a council fit,
Fit it is that they, who take, partake of it.
184. And thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee. chapter 30. v. 31.
Hear'st not a voice cry out of heaven and say,
Sin-blinded wretch, thou art out of heavens way:
Turn thee, O quickly turn, lest in a trice
Thou headlong fall into a precipice.
Direct thy steps to goodness, and that is even
The plainest and directest way to heaven.
185. Woe to them that go down to Egypt. chapter 31. v. 1.
Woe, woe to them that have at Egypt staid,
Looked down to that, not up to God, for aid;
Who in the speed of coursers their trust put,
And rest secure within a Chariot.
Are they so far enthralled, with sin, that fain
They Would have the Egyptian bondage too again?
On Egypt staid! but God does help deny,
And then they may stay to Eternity,
Yet come far short of hope; although they, to
Procure that hoped, for succor far do go:
On chariots they rely, but O 'twere well,
That those the Chariots were of Israel.
186. I have blotted out as a thick cloud. chapter 44. v. 22.
A sullen cloud of sin our head hangs over,
Which threats to break in judgment evermore;
Till with a vengeance falling it oppress
The Land, and turn it to a wilderness.
Black clouds! black deeds! yet these thick fogs of hell
The sun of glory, rising, shall dispell.
187. As one whom his Mother comfort. chapter 66. v. 13.
O comfortable words! words which do prove,
The Mothers greater then the Fathers love;
Their tender babes they dandle on their knee,
And of his babes of grace, as tender's he.
O Quintessence of happiness! if thus,
The Father through the Son, would comfort us.
JEREMIAH.
188. Moreover the word of the Lord. chapter 1. v. 11.
THis prophet scarce was called, when again, God
Called to ask what he saw: an almond rod,
By which 'twas signified, how soon God will,
The tenor of his sacred word fulfill:
Blessed Saint! so lately called, and yet to shoot
Thus soon, in bringing forth such early fruit.
189. Run ye through the streets. chapter 5. v. 1.
Run through Jerusalem, and find, who can,
(If there be one to find) a pious man:
Run through the turning ways, and see if any
Do turn his ways to God among those many:
Persist not in that ill, which to your ill
Will prove: execute judgment, or God will.
190. O that my head were waters! chapter 9. v. 1.
A sweeping deluge now was coming on,
Threatening a general destruction.
The prophet this o'reflowing judgment fears,
And meets the tidings with a tide of tears;
He wishes that his head, made water-rills,
Might wail their sins the head-spring of those ills.
The Seer has beheld much miseries,
That now for water he would change his eyes:
His eyes, though water, could not vie that flood,
Though bloodshed, not enough, bewails the blood.
Crying to heaven; he could not drown the cry
Their sins made, therefore cries perpetually.
191. Woe is me for my hurt, etc. chapter 10. v. 19.
Woe, woe! for what? thou have a wound; and he
Who gave that wound can give thee remedy:
Then bear't with resolution; let no grief
Exceed thy patience, though it exceeds relief.
192. For mine eyes are upon all. chapter 16. v. 17.
Go seek, blind wretches, some blind hole, wherein
You think you may with safety act your sin:
Grope 'midst Cymmerian darkness, and commit
Such crimes, as add another night to it.
Light, if you can, on such a dusky place,
Where light never came, where Sol never showed his face.
Wear hills upon your backs; bid mountains fall
On you, yet God from his high mount sees all:
O then repent in time, who e're thou art,
Lest that thou feel, God sees, unto thy smart.
193. So they drew up JEREMIAH. chapter 38. v. 13.
Telling what hap unto his king should be,
Himself first tastes of his own prophecy;
He Is cast into a dungeon, and therein
As much bemir'd with filth, as Jews with sin;
But this black Eunuchs help's more candid far,
To him, then those of his own country are:
Where for not letting his life be (as they
Would hav't) he has his own life for a prey.
194. And it was so that when, etc. chapter 41. v. 7.
Judah laid waste, and Gedaliah slain,
Lest any of the people should remain:
Ismael contrives, and does his worst and best,
In a dire pit-fall to entrap the rest:
His plot's effected: O the rufull sight!
He proves himself here a true I shmaelite.
LAMENTATIONS.
195. See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become vile. chapter 1. v. 11.
SEE Lord how vile we are, our sins do lie
Before our God's, before the nations eye:
For our desert the land lies desert; beasts
Here couch: birds from our ruins build their nests.
Vile as we are, 'twould be some comfort though,
Could we (blind we) but our own vileness know.
196. All thine enemies have, etc. chapter 2. v. 16.
Behold thine enemies, on every side,
With bloody jaws, like serpents, yawning wide:
Yet ere they swallow down their morsel, hiss
To see how contemptible prey it is:
No snake ere harmed with his three-forked tongue,
Like those bisulced, which do doubly wrong;
They show their teeth; grin, snarl, and gnash, supposing
They shall not snap short, and catch naught in the closing:
But God, who their outrageous madness sees,
Provides a place, where they shall gnash their teeth.
197. Thou have covered thy self, etc. chapter 3. v. 44.
What cloud's so thick, or what condensed air
'S not broke with the Artillery of prayer.
Prayer has omnipotence, 'twill rend asunder
Those lets, and parl with Heaven in Heavens thunder.
Then let him muffle up his face; no doubt
Well break those clouds until his face break out:
Not breaking off our suit, nor till then part,
While we through clouds force passage to his heart.
198. They shall be slain with the sword. chapter 4. v. 9.
To die by sword, or famine, I confess
The choice is somewhat hard; yet, ne'rethelesse,
Give me a soldiers death; for who would lie
Protracting with his life his misery:
Yet I Would choose hunger, were it my maker's will
I after righteousness might hunger still.
Grant me that thirst which brings not death, but life,
Or with the Gospells sword decide this strife.
199. The Crown is fallen from our head, etc. chapter 5. v. 16.
Our graceful crown from off our head is thrust,
And gone to lay its splendor in the dust.
That crown is fallen, and woe to us: more woe,
Our crown of grace is fallen from us too.
EZEKIEL.
200. Take this stony heart out, etc. chapter 11. v. 19.
MY stony heart O take away;
Give me heart of flesh I pray;
But when thou this have given, this suit I Would move,
My heart of flesh, a fleshly heart never prove.
201. Therefore ye shall no more seek vanity, etc. chapter 13. v. 23.
No, no, 'ts not fit Gods servants should rely
On each vain presage, and forged prophecy;
Should they Sibylls dark leaves consult? no: rather,
Leave Satan, sire of lies: fly to the Father
Of everlasting truth; so not incline
To divinations, but what is more divine.
202. AHAHOLAH and AHOLIBAH. chapter 23. v. 1.
Two wretched Sisters, who in wedlock-state
Participated, and in woeful fate.
The one on captains altogether placed
Her love, and she came poorly off at last.
The other on Chaldeans dotes, and shall
By means of those her greatest lovers, fall:
She who took others captive with her love,
Her self a worse way now must captive prove.
203. The dry bones revived, etc. chapter 37. v. 2,
See here dry bones cements Gods word alone,
The skin with the now long estranged bone:
Life is infused, and they who lately lay
Dispersed skeletons, set in array,
Now make a numerous army: Isra'ls state
God by his vision here does intimate:
Their ruins he together joins, nay more
Joins them to him, which never so near before.
Gods arm this army formed, his name be praised,
Which has such companies so strangely raised.
Raise we his glory then, and pray he grant
We prove, like those troops, his Church militant.
204. GOOS burial. chapter 39. v. 15.16. etc.
Gog, slain, lies yet unburied: bloody feast,
To which each vultur's an invited ghest:
Suck in the clotted gore of these accursed,
Who would have quenched their own unsatiate thirst
In such another flood: they laid a ginne,
And thought to catch the harmless dove therein,
But were escaped; revenge us though, that they
That would have birds, may be to fowls a prey.
205. (...) cap. ult. v. ult.
Thrice happy city, which includ'st what e're
Heaven makes its boast of, that the Lord is there.
How can thy greatness well be measured, since
Thy blessings are unmeasured, as thy prince:
Were I a Citizen of thee, I Would near
The assaults of the infernal legions fear;
Yet then too, had I but my choice, 't should be,
Not to live there, so God might live in me.
DANIEL.
206. SHADRACH, MESHACH, and ABEDNEGO. chapter 3.
IT pleased our God his mighty power to show
By Shadrah, Meshach, and Abednego.
These three just persons stoutly did desie
The Kings commands, though death 'twas to deny;
So hot their site of zeal was, that those three
To the golden image would not bow the knee.
Wherefore it was the heathen Kings desire,
They should be cast in the scortching flames of fire:
Which forth with then was done; yet to forbear
The fire was forced, and durst not sindge a hair.
'Twas strange, yet not so strange; for, without doubt,
Their fire within o'recame the fire without.
207. Aliud. chapter 3.
The fiery furnace, seven fold hotter now,
Then ever's made for those who would not bow
Unto the golden Idol; but in vain:
Untouched they, in midst oth' flames, remain!
I wonder not that they were hurt no more,
Since they were thoroughly purified before.
208. NEBUCHADNEZAR metamorphosed. chapter 4.
By pride, I fear, O great Chaldean King,
A sev'n years penance on thy self thou wilt bring;
And come, at last, to eat grass with the beasts,
Who us'dst each day to frolic it in feasts:
Thou now a higher then thy self wilt see,
Since you are deprived of all dignity.
209. DANIEL cast into the lions den. chapter 6. v. 16.
You salvage Monsters, crueller by far
Then lions, although beasts of prey they are:
Is thus his piety rewarded then,
Straight to be thrust into the lions den:
They say those creatures never harm kings seed,
But fawn on them, it is true in him indeed:
Then courage, Daniel, and pluck up thy heart,
Thou the adopted son of heavens King art.
210. His accusers devoured, etc. chapter 6. v. 24.
The beasts their stomach now could find at last,
When, who cast him into their den were cast;
Whose bodies mangled by those lions power,
A far worselion did their souls devour.
HOSEA.
211. Come, and let us return unto the Lord. chapter 6. v. 1.
COme, jointly, let us return unto the Lord,
Who made the sore can only balm afford;
And the only balm; our hurt by him thus bound
Will be more firm, then e're it was a wound.
He smites, but shows his love, in smiting, best;
Let us too smite our selves upon the breast.
Like fawning spaniels, let us love the more
The Master, from whose hands the stroke we bore:
Whilst thus we undergo these sufferings,
Each blow is struck will cure the smart it brings.
212. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people. chapter 9. v. 1.
But little reason for true joys have we,
'Midst worldly joys, whilst wallowing we be:
Alas! a whoring from our God we are led,
And joy in wrongs we do our nuptial bed.
Rejoice not we like other people, no,
But drown false pleasures in the abyss of woe.
This done, and God once more propitious,
No other people ere should joy like us.
213. When Israel was a child, then I loved him etc. chapter 11. v. 1.
Oraculous sense! an Evangelick dream
Infolded in abstruse prophetic scheme.
Epitome of what was past, yet doom
Of what in future ages was to come:
A sure foretoken Israel was beloved;
When for their sake from Egypt God was moved
To call his son: and he calls us, could we
Call on his sacred name uncessantly:
Since he is from Egypt called, there is little doubt
Our souls from thence shall be delivered out.
214. Who is wise, he shall understand these things. chapter 14. v. the last.
To understand Gods ways aright would we,
We must our selves be right, as those ways be:
All earthly knowledge too, we should decline
To gain experience in Gods laws divine
This prophet sure the way of wisdom took,
In it, he ends his life, with it, his book.
JOEL.
215. Awake ye drunkards, etc, chapter 1. v. 5.
Rouse you from out your death like Lethargy,
Drunkards, that on your couches snorting lie.
'Ts not to carouse, (mistake me not) no sack,
But rather sackcloth it is, my friends, you lack.
The blushing liquour late you drunk, I fear,
Must now grow paler, and turn to a tear.
What makes you look so friday-fac'd to day,
Over pressed with woe! our pressed wine taken away.
'Ts cut from your mouth, and with your swill to part,
No mar'l it cuts you to the very heart.
216. Beat your plough-shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into spears.
chapter 3. v. 10.
Beat up the drums, and sound alarm, all-arm;
Let numerous companies together swarm:
Beat, beat, your plough-shares into swords, learn now
To handle weapons, who erst held a plough:
Turn pruning hooks to spears, and what ere are
The instruments of peace, let be of war.
Ploughs, thus employed, 'twill be to us I fear,
An hard, to death a too too plenteous, year.
AMOS.
217. Ye who turn judgment to wormwoood, and leave off righteousness in the
earth. chapter 5. v. 7.
IS righteousness quite out of fashion then!
And will you never put it on again?
Were you but wise, you would wear it; lest you be
Your selves worn out with war and misery;
And you, who justice call a wormwood-cup,
Shall justly drink a far more bitter up.
218. Behold the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in
the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, etc. chapter 8. v. 11.
A famine, yet no want of bread! can be
Abundance, plenty, and yet scarcity:
Are contrarieties then joined! can now
A man be hungry, and yet filled too:
Yet so it is: although the bodi's fed,
The soul may want its food of heavenly bread.
Much better 'twere, the first were pined away,
Then the last have not its ambrosia:
Yet could we truly hunger for Gods word,
Heavens Granaries abundance would afford.
219. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them. chapter 9. v. 2.
You Will then dig deep enough; I cannot tell
A pit you have more title to, then hell:
Or will you climb 'bove the mid region,
Where thunder to reward you there is none?
Yet there you cannot stay long, your sins deny
A receptacle for you in the sky.
That God should take you up from hell, (profane)
It Is with more force to hurl you down again.
OBADIAH.
220. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised. v. 2.
Despised, contemned, of all the heathen folk;
Their public laughing stock, their open talk.
JONAH.
221. JONAH swallowed by a fish. chapter 1.
He Is swallowed by the whale, who does become
To him drowned, yet alive, a living tomb:
Himself, inguls'd in double sea, he knows,
Being now, truly, in the depth of woes:
But yet the fish quickly disgorg'd him quick;
And for his welfare was her self sea-sick:
Though 'twas a miracle, yet all things scanned,
This was the soonest way to have come to land.
222. And the Lord prepared a gourd, and made it to come over Jonah, etc. But
God prepared a worm, etc. chapter 4. v. 6.7.
How soon grown up, and yet how soon it is gone,
Ere thought upon:
Of which, longer to write, I could afford;
But I Will cut short, and imitate the gourd.
MICAH.
223. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds: when the
morning is light they practice it. chapter 2. v. 1.
HEar God in justice, here pronounce a woe,
On those which they would fain bring others to.
Who hatch that mischief on their beds, which they
Intend to perpetrate the ensuing day:
Whilst thus they show their power they will understand
At last themselves the powers of Gods right hand.
They merit it, whose only care's to make
Others the more and greater care to take.
224. But thou Bethlehem-Ephratah, though thou be little amongst the thousands
of JUDAH, etc. chapter 6. v. 2.
Thrice happy Bethlehem, though thou little art,
Of Judahs thousands scarce the thousandth part,
Yet out of little thee, by Gods fore-doome,
An immense Savior was foretold to come.
This Micah could discern far off; his eye,
Cleared by bright rays, made it appear more nigh:
And yet his purblind contrymen scarce saw
The light arising out of Ephratah.
When we, far distant Isles, descry it; sure
The too near splendor did their sight obscure.
NAHUM.
225. The mountains quake at him, and the hills. chapter 1. v. 6.
SEE how the mountains quake, as if they meant
To the center through themselves a way to rent.
The hils' gin melt, earth burns with a desire
She might be turned to elementall fire:
God's present; that is the cause: yet all this light
Is dimmed by his refulgence far more bright.
226. The ruin of NINEVEH. chapter 3.
Great Nineveh is fallen: the burden, late
Good Nahum bore, is turned upon their state.
Sad state of things: what had so populous been,
Overthrown, is now depopulated clean!
Yet were it clean; fire never had com there,
If matter none, combustible, there were.
HABAKKUK.
227. And the Lord answered and said, Write, etc. c. 2. v. 2.
When mute things shall to cry begin,
O think how crying is thy sin!
228. What profits the graven image, etc. chapter 2. v. 18.
From him that formed you, you expect no good;
Yet do, from what your selves have formed, wood.
Were you not wood, and stonyhearted too,
You Would give God his, not them what is not their due.
Whilst you frame images by hel-bred arts;
You quite deface Gods image in your hearts.
229. Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the
rivers? was thy wrath against the sea? etc. chapter 3. v. 8.
Though figtrees blossom not, or blossoming,
Let fall their scarce-form'd buds, blasted in the spring:
Though olives bear no fatness, and the vine,
Empty of clusters, bring no store of wine;
Yet whilst we have Gods favor, oil of gladness,
We never shall want of wine to banish sadness.
Though all else barren are, we'll fruitful be,
And consecrate our first fruits, Lord, to thee.
ZEPHANIAH.
230. And it shall come to pass, at that time, that I will search erusalem
with a candle, etc. chapter 1. v. 12.
O Time of dismal darkness! horrid night,
When heaven it self is forced to use a light.
Israel pursues the Egyptians sins, I fear,
For they have got their quondam darkness here:
God lights a candle, 'cause you Jews ('it is plain)
Have put out yours, and must, I fear, remain
^n night eternal: as your candle you
Put out, from heaven you put your selves out too.
Y' extinguish grace, and natures light, to dwell
Midst the unextinguishable flames of hell.
231. This is the rejoicing city, that dwelt carelessly, etc. chapter 2. v. 15.
Ingodly joys, mirth, pleasure, pride; to what
A sad condition brought you Judahs state?
A place for beasts to lie in, yet not more,
^r viler beasts, then there were in it before.
What Is Gods they wrest to their destruction,
Who is indeed, and there is beside him none:
Yet now, with little change, it is made their own,
They Are (miserable) and beside them none.
HAGGAI.
232. Ye have sown much, but ye bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not
enough. chapter 1. v. 6.
YOu clothe you, but no warmth you get;
No fire of zeal inflames you yet:
From hence, alas, the reason came,
You clothed you not with wool oth' Lamb.
Unholy folk, your gains bring curses,
You put your coin in holely purses
Without a bottom, for therein
You lay the wages up of sin;
Which yet, I fear, you will not lose,
But keep them to your lives last close,
Until they weigh you down that precipice
Where, like, your purses, there no bottom is.
233. In that day, says the Lord of hosts, I will take the sons of
Zerubbabel, and will make them a signet, etc. chapter 2. ver. last.
What greater sign of favor can be had,
Then thus to be a signet made?
A signet which was used, in times of yore,
On great men's right hands to be wore.
This grace did thou, Shealtiel's son, obtain;
And now do at Gods right hand reign:
O grant, good God, though I a signet never
Shall prove, I may thy impresse bear.
Vouchsafe I may, in these my infant days,
Be made a cignet to resound thy praise.
ZECHARIAH.
234. Yea they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the
law, etc. chapter 7. v. 12.
HArd hearts, and yet I fear if all were known,
Not so precious as that stone.
If hard as adamant, methinks 'twere fit
Gods laws were in such tables writ:
But since they will not have it so, their sin
Is wrote with lasting characters therein.
235. Rejoice greatly daughter of Sion, shout daughter of Jerusalem. chapter 9. v.
9.
As if with aged eyes he could behold,
What he fore told.
As if he saw what heaven is proud of; ride
Without all pride.
As if he heard the peoples clamours ringing,
Hosannah singing.
He long before, might, I have a dim cast
Of what is past:
But since I cannot, Heaven reserve a room,
That I, with joy, may see the pomp to come.
236. And in that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS
UNTO THE LORD. chapter 14. v. 20.
Asses bore holiness of late; and now
Must horses too?
What Aarons bells and plate did whilome bear,
These beasts must wear.
Their bridles have't ingrav'd, though their mute tongue
Does want a song.
Gods servants in their hearts keep holiness,
These on their breasts:
We in the Scriptures, and these steeds have it
In holy writ.
MALACHI.
237. A son honors his Father, and a servant his Master: if then I be a
Father, where is my honor? if a Master, where is my fear? chapter 1. v. 6.
A Master fear has due to him, a Sire
Does honor from his progeny require.
If God our heavenly Father be, O where
'S his Honor? if a Master, where is his fear?
If sense of duty naught in us will do,
Honor for fear, fear not to honor though.
The end of the Old Testament.
The Gospel of our Savior JESUS CHRIST According to S. MATTHEW.
The blessed Virgin.
O Virgin blessed 'bove all in Israel,
In that the art mother of Emanuel.
But O more blessed in that thou undefiled
With sin, art made the daughter of thy child.
The nativity of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. chapter 2.
Emanuel is born, O where shall we,
Blessed babe, find out thy place, and worship thee?
Where li'st thou? at an Inn? left I should rove
Tell me the sign, is it not the sign of love?
Let me at thy celestial manger feed,
And eat thy body which is bread indeed:
The heavens have sent their starry Messenger,
To bid my soul take up her lodging here.
^nes, which to public sins were once abused,
Are now by us to public worship used.
Temples farewell; heaven prompts me it is no sin,
^ such a case to make my Church an Inn.
The miracle of the loaves. chapter 15.
Thou fed'st their bodies, Lord, and then
Thou brak'st the bread of life again;
Who can this wondrous banquet tell,
But as a double miracle?
Where to be sure they might be fed,
Thou made thy body, Lord, the bread.
The blind receiving sight. chapter 20.
He gave sight, and repentance, to the blind,
At once enlightening both their eyes and mind.
JUDAS selling his LORD. chapter 26. v. 15.
Judas, whilst thou thy master thus do sell,
Traitor, thou make thy self a price for hell.
JUDAS his kiss. chapter 26. v. 49.
Thy falsehood, Judas, thou would hide in this
By candying thy poison in a kiss:
That kiss thou everlastingly shall wail;
Thy heart meant hale, 'twas but thy lips said Hail.
Peter denying Christ. chapter 26. v. 74.
Why, Peter, do thou thus deny
Thy Lord so often, so bitterly?
How do thou think, that he will own
Thee, when thou plead'st before his throne?
O let the cock, whose voice sounds thy offense,
Lend the a spur to tears and penitence.
PILATH judgeing our Savior. chapter 27.
Whom do thou judge, fond man? what power is given
To thee, O wretch, to judge the judge of heaven?
When he shall come with troops of Angels hemmed,
For that condemning thou shall be condemned;
Only this different sentence he shall give,
Thou him condemn'st to die, he thee to live.
The Gospel of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST according to S. MARK.
I will make you fishers of men. chapter 1.
TWill be an happy occupation, then,
To fish for the immortal souls of men.
Their hook's the word, by which our souls are saught,
And woe betide that fish which is not caught.
And all the devils besought him, saying, if thou cast us out, etc. chapter 5. v.
12.
Inveterate malice, though they cannot do
Mischief to man, they will work the creatures woe.
A legion of spite to whom ere they come,
^ marvel not they drive him to his tomb;
But from this one expuls'd, I fear, they mean
To quench their hate (though that cannot make them clean)
In a whole sea, one easily might divine
That filthy company they chose, were swine
Or swinish men, when once they would drove them in
To the mire, I fear, they will never return agin.
The daughter of Herodias. chapter 6.
Damsel thy feet a fatal measure tread,
That thus do spurn against the Baptists head;
Which in a charger placed, thou make thy play,
With that be sure he will charge thee at last day.
And he looked up and said, I see men as trees walking, etc. chapter 8. v. 24.
The man, late blind, gins re-salute the light,
And now is a probationer for sight;
And yet how perfectly at first he sees,
That saw the senseless Jews to walk like trees!
The penitent chief. chapter 23. v. 40.
He stole, and with his life did pay the price,
Yet dying stole both life and paradise.
The Gospel of our Lord, and Savior JESUS CHRIST according to S. LUKE.
When Jesus heard these things he marvelled at him, and turned about and said,
etc. chapter 7. v. 9.
NOt so great faith was found in Israel,
None found so faithful as an Infidel.
He that believed Christ could his servant cure,
Might have believed and so himself assure,
That whilst prayers for his servant he did make,
Christ would himself into his service take.
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a
stone? chapter 11. v. 11.
Ask'st thou for bread? a stone God will not give,
But bread of life, whereby thy soul shall live;
Or if heaven gives a stone'ts a precious one,
It Is Christ the rock of hope, the corner stone.
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth, but how is
it, that ye discern not this time? chapter 12. v. 56.
What foolish star gazer is there but knows
We shall have heat when sulfurous Auster blows?
When muddy Zephyre calls up from the sea
A spungy cloud, we trow there rain will be.
Heavens face it is easy to discern, but pry
Not into Heavens invisibility.
ZACCHAEUS. chapter 19.
What need Zaccheus climb upon a tree,
Who with faiths eyes his Savior could see!
The Gospel of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST according to S. JOHN.
And when the ruler of the feast had tasted, etc. chapter 2. v. 9.
CHrist was invited to a nuptial feast,
Not so much made by the dishes as the ghest;
But lo, in midst of all this jollity,
The wine'gins fail; which, or he must supply,
Or they must want: he straight does give command;
And wine is made of water out of hand:
The bridegroom could not choose but like such wine,
That had a relish of that heavenly Vine.
Except a man be born again, etc. chapter 3. v. 3.
Again must I be born? again must I
Shrunk up within my mothers bowels lie?
Again receive my birth? O strange! must heaven,
A price to things impossible, be given?
It Is true (O Nicodemus) for again
Thou must be born through faith, prayer, fasting, pain.
Christ is thy father must beget thee here,
The Church that mother is that thee must bear.
JESUS wept. chapter 11. v. 35.
Moses, whilst with his wand the rock he smites,
Gives water to the thirsty Isra'lites;
Laz'rus, like him, had traveled long to find
Another promised land, which was assigned
For blessed souls above; but here, by the way,
Like his forefathers, drops: being forced to lay
His weary limbs under a rock, and wait
For such a remedy in such a strait;
When lo a rock, a mov'ng rock comes near
This weary tir'd-out traveller to cheer,
Out of his eyes a double spring does flow,
Not to refresh his thirst alone; but lo
It brings the dead to life: fear not to die,
Laz'rus, since thou have life's wellspring so nigh.
I am the true vine. chapter 15. v. 1.
Art thou the vine, dear Savior? happy's he
Who shall a branch in that stock grafted be:
Thou art a vine, as sadly shows the loss
Of thy dear blood at, the wine press, the cross.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, etc. chapter 15. v. 12.
On peace, since that is the delight of God,
Fix to continue soul thy sole abode;
That so a chain of concord there may be,
Betwixt thy conscience, thy God, and thee.
Incredulous Thomas. chapter 20. v. 27.
Incredulous, who thy belief do tie
Unto no other witness then thine eye:
But if thou do desire a surer band
Unto thy faith; here, Thomas, feel mine hand.
The Acts of the APOSTLES.
ANANIAS and SAPPHIRA. chapter 5. v. 5. and v. 10.
Why, when you would sold all your possession,
Kept you a part oth' price? give all, or none.
When you to Peter came, and gave him that,
You parted with your lives at a dear rate.
Aliud.
At the Apostles feet thou laidst a part,
Lay not thy treasure down, lay open thy heart.
Saint STEPHEN stoned. chapter 7. v. 59.
Cares he for tortures, or for death think you,
Who has his haven, heaven, in full view?
These stones, which would have clogged another quite,
Add wings (O Stephen) to thy spirits flight.
In vain you think this martyred saint to stay,
His eyes already have prepared his way.
SIMON MAGUS. chapter 8. v. 18.
Simon in bitterness is thy abode,
Who think with coin to buy the gift of God.
Thy money-good, bad Simon, keep to thee,
For thou may purchase hell without a fee.
The baptized Eunuch. chapter 8. v. 38.
O Eunuch, treasurer to Candace, here
A greater treasure is approaching near:
Though it is but water, yet that water may
Wash all the blackness of thy mind away.
SAUL'S conversion. chapter 9. v. 3.
The light thou saw from heaven did make thee blind;
And yet, O Saul, gave light unto thy mind.
Peter's deliverance. chapter 12. v. 7, 8, etc.
Peter, the doors flew open for thy
Egresse to former liberty.
Thy hearts-doores to fly open begin,
Joy with the angel enters in.
Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? etc. chapter 16. v. 30.
What should thou do O Jaylour? why repent,
Hear the glad tidings of the Gospel sent,
Perform thy function, thou a Jaylour art,
Imprison Gods commandments in thy heart.
PAUL beaten, chapter 16. v. 37.
When thou with stripes were beat, thou did begin
To say thou were a Roman Citizen:
But when the day of judgment comes, O Paul,
Thou Wilt plead thy freedom of another Hall.
The viper shook into the fire. chapter 28. v. 5.
Thou Murderous beast who by unnat'rall strife,
Do break a passage thorough death to life;
And now with fell intent upon the hand
Of godly Paul, who scorns thy power, do stand;
Think thou, when he has escaped the raging sea
That he on land shall find his death by thee?
Or do thou but to kiss his hand aspire?
He escaped the sea, try if thou can, the fire.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the ROMANS.
Who will render to every man according to his deeds. chapter 2. v. 6.
IF laborers are worthy of their hire,
I Have undeserved thy love, deserved thine ire:
My work, O heavenly Father, always has
Been the more amply to deserve thy Wrath,
Not working in thy vineyard, but have sown
Tares' sted of tears to my confusion;
Nor should I reap in joy these fruits, but hell
Would fall to my lot, and I should have fell
To it, yet though poor wretch I contrary
Have been to thee still, let my wages be
Contrary to my merits and though I
Cannot thy mercy by my actions buy,
My labor being naught worth, yet be it thy will
That I may labor to be worthy still.
Aliud.
The earth with grateful tribute does restore
The seed we put into her trust before,
But that is earthly fruit, sow then with toil
Heaven's seeds, for that is a far more fertile soil;
For God takes care that those who mean to give
Their lives to him, shall nere want means to live.
For I am persuaded that neither height nor depth, etc. chapter 8. v. 28.
The Poets fancy that a chain of gold,
Which does, alone, bound to Jove's chair, uphold
The earth, the sea, and all things else; but we
Have better chains in our Divinity:
Whose links are naught but amity, and love
Which binds us fast unto our God above:
So held by Christ that no sinister fate,
Nor World nor Devils shall us separate.
The first Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the CORINTHIANS.
And now abides Faith, hope and charity: but the greatest of these is charity.
chapter 13. v. the last.
CHarity is a grace, whence all the rest,
Do take their rise, and is of all the best.
This grace God used, to give us grace, which he
Had never given, but for charity:
This proper is to God. each other grace
That in man's heart does find a biding place
Does die with him; but this no end shall shall have
Nor rest within the compass of a grave:
This shows Gods image in us; seek it then:
This makes us earthly Gods; those, only men.
Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some amongst you
that there is no resurrection? but now is Christ risen from the dead, etc. For
as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. chapter 15. ver. 12.20,
22.
The execration's dreadful, yet therein
There Is naught so terrible as is the finne.
Has Christ so ill deserved of us that we
Should pay him thus again unthankfully!
Let love breed love, kindling an equal fire In our desire.
Contemplate on his sufferings, let them move:
The greatest curse is, not our Lord to love.
The second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the CORINTHIANS.
Nevertheless though we walk in the flesh, yet we do not war after the
flesh. chapter 10. v. 3.
WHat though we live on earth, our nobler part
Has learned to subjugate by heavenly art
Our terrene dross, our viler heart that still
Moves war, and is repugnant to his will,
So dissonant they are, that midst their strife
They both do mutually endanger life.
Yet when that is gone, this still my comfort shall
Be found, I have a life spiritual.
And I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, etc. chapter 12. v. 15.
Spend, and be spent, and all that he thereby
Might us enrich; this prodigality
Is too too much! O no, he does no more
Then what our Savior's self did heretofore;
He for mankind laid down his life, and shall
Not we too of our lives be prodigal?
What Is Paul's unto our Savior's? and what are
Our lives if them we do with Paul's compare?
Sure far below him: grant good God that we
May follow him as he has followed thee.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the GALATIANS.
Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth? chapter 4. v. 16.
IF truth breed enmity, he who is truths foe
An enemy to the God of truth is too.
Shall parasitick lies, oiled phrases gain
Acceptance, where truth can no grace obtain?
It truly shows we have none: who then will dare
To put's in mind we men, and mortal are?
Then fly base sycophants, count him thy so
That fawning would not have thee think him so.
This is the wholesom'st counsel can be given
Like this, or the art not like to come to heaven.
For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. chapter 6. v. 17.
(Paul) in thy body the Lords marks I find,
But far more legible are in thy mind.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the EPHESIANS.
Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. chapter 6. v. 16.
If time for no man waits, but poasteth on;
Who can recall the time that is past and done.
It seems perhaps unto our weaker eye
To redeem time, impossibility.
But heaven will teach it by an art divine,
Look back upon thy grandsires age, then thine.
See their integrity, and quiet life,
Thine full of falsehood tending to all strife;
Tread in their paths, to imitate them strive;
So't may be said that age does still survive.
Stand therefore having your loins girt about with, etc. chapter 6. v. 14.
Arm, arm, against an enemy, a foe
More to be feared, then any here below.
Weapons of Steel framed by a mortals hand
Cannot the on-sets of this power withstand:
True holiness within our simple hearts
Must be our safeguard from hells fiery darts:
Strike down all lusts that cannot give the word,
That word will wound these foes more then thy sword.
When the have or'ecome, lay not thy weapons down,
Acknowledge 'twas Gods might, and not thine own,
Else to thy self, thy self a foe art grown,
Thou, none assaulting, shall be overthrown.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the PHILIPPIANS.
Let nothing be done through contention or vainglory, etc. chapter 2. v. 3.
It Is fit each one of others better deem;
Himself in lowest rank of all esteem.
Naught in vainglory do, nor ostentation,
Ioyn not humility with affectation.
And 'midst the mad applause of the vulgar rout,
With consciousnesse of secret faults keep out
All pride, thus sin within, this good has done,
To give no other intromission.
Debarring pride, here fix thy firm abode,
The lowest nighest is to the highest God.
Let your moderation be known unto all men: the Lord is at hand. chapter 4, v. 5.
The coming of our Lord is near, and we
Should always for that time prepared be,
So let our moderation now be shown
That he may vindicate us for his own,
Only at that time waiting for such profit,
Immoderate be in expectation of it.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the COLOSSIANS.
Set your affections on things above, and not on things below, etc. chapter 3. v. 2.
WHo can, then him who gave affects to the mind
A fitter object of affection find?
Shall sordid earth bemire the immortal soul
Which else woul soar aloft above the Pole?
Shall dunging land, shall carts our business be
Whilst we despise the ethereall axeltree?
Shall all those vast dimensions of Heavens globe
A Ptolomy could take in's Astrolabe,
Be thought room big enough to entertain
My vast aspiring mind? no; all is but vain:
With zeal imp'd I Will mount higher, till I see
The stars as far below me, as I, thee:
I Will fly, at one cast have at heaven, at all,
Take pride in climbing, and yet fear no fall.
But he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has done, and
there is no respect of persons. chapter 3. v. the last.
Thou Monarch of the World, whose powerful hand
Does sway the nations all at thy command;
Deal'st with all justly, letst it not be sed
Thy laws are like Arachne's fine-spun web.
Where little flies are caught and killed, but great
Pass at their pleasures and break down the net.
Let not through their injustice fools provoke
The God of Heaven, he strikes an equal stroke;
Strikes at the Crown as well as at the feet,
And often makes both head and tail to meet.
For what is our hope, or joy, etc. Yes, ye are our glory and joy. chapter 2. v.
19.20.
Twill add another Diadem to thee
Good Paul, when at the last day thou shall see
Those Thessalonians circled with divine
Rays of bright glory, which, though theirs, are thine:
To hear them bless that gracious God who sent
Of their conversion thee the instrument.
But when Christ comes, and claims thee for his own,
Their joys will mount to the higher region.
The first Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS.
Quench not the Spirit. chapter 5. v. 19.
A Sacred heat inspires me; and shall I
Fling water on it? or lay the fuel by?
No, let it have its work, this burning sure
My safety does from others flames procure.
But when I feel the heat decrease and gone
Almost; I Will cast the Spirits unction on:
Or wanting that, pour tears; salt water will
Re-kindle it, and keep't in vigor still:
That like as Chemists keep continual fire
TO obtain the rich extraction they desire;
So I may study ('twould more fruitful prove)
To keep the Spirit the quintessence of love.
The second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to the THESSALONIANS.
And ye brethren be not weary in well-doing. chapter 3. v. 13.
MAy noble Titus name long live, who thought
That day was spent in worse then doing naught
Wherein he did no good. so kind was he,
Of indefatigable charity.
In our religion, shall an ethnic thus
Be said to have preeminence over us!
Though for's vast empire none did ere excel
That Prince; each strive at least in doing well:
To be above him, imitate him who
Never cease good to us and ours to do,
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to TIMOTHY.
And having food and raiment let us be therewith content. chapter 6. v. 8.
GLuttons, you are deceived; and so are you
Fine silken Gallants too
Which place your summum bonum in such things
As summum malum brings.
High fare and sumptuous you think, no doubt,
To life will set you out,
To wit for fools; O rather be content
With that which God has sent;
Yet not content; but, since God thinks it good,
Pray for spiritual raiment, heavenly food.
The second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to TIMOTHY.
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. chapter 3. v.
7.
^S this your learning? O it is surely then
Backwards to learn again.
So often to commence, yet never past
Master of the art at last.
Backwards you learn the holy tongue I know,
I fear you holiness it self learn so.
The Epistle of PAUL the Apostle to TITUS.
The profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, chapter 1. v. the
last.
PRofessing Heaven, he is in a hellish state
That nere is candid, though a candidate:
No man at any time Jehovah knew,
Much less (if not a man) you bestiall crew;
Though you profess much, yet my faith's but small
That you have any faith in you at all.
The Epistle to PHILEMON.
Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being such a one as Paul the aged,
and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. verse 9.
Who would not rather such a prisoner be,
Then of the richest potent'st city, free?
A prisoner: but it is better far to die,
Then seek apostatizing liberty.
O happy Paul who had the honor thus
To be his prisoner who redeemed us.
The Epistle to the HEBREWS.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. chapter 10. v. 31.
IN what a stupid and a sottish age
Do we now live, that we should dread the rage
Of punishment, which is Gods harbinger,
And torments more then the tormentours fear!
Surely if that his instrument strike sore,
When he is the instrument 'twill be far more:
These rods like that Assyrian King have power
From him who sent them forth, not to devour
But purge us, would until it is set on fire,
Can give no heat. O then if you desire
TO avoid the scorpions sting of punishment;
Appease him first who has these scourges sent.
By faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, chapter 11. v. 24.
Mild Moses, was it through humility
Thou did deny
To be the adopted heir of Pharaoh?
Or if not so,
What moved thee to refuse a dignity
That su'd to thee?
No 'twas thy holy pride which shot upright
At heaven, the white;
Thou choosing God thy Father, 'twas not strange
So choosing, thou were proud of such a change.
Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ, etc. chapter 11.
v. 25, 26.
Cheap pennieworth affliction, when such gain
It brings, and quits with so much joy our pain.
Cheap bought, yet dearly too, since 't does confer
On us what is both precious and dear.
Who then can Moses discommend, that he
Suffered reproaches so contentedly?
In case he had denied to bear them, then
He had deserved reproach from all good men.
The Epistle of the Apostle S. JAMES.
For as the body without the spirit is dead, even so etc. chapter 2. v. 26.
YOu boast of faith, you say too, you have set
It safe, like jewels in a cabinet.
Why say you not (and I should credit give,
Almost as soon) a carrion corpse does live
That does not breathe? nor's thy faith joined with works,
I Would sooner take a charitable Turks;
And for your cabinet you keep it there
So safe, that we shall never see it, I fear.
Therefore to him that knows how to do well, and does is not, to him it is
sin. chapter 4. v. 17.
Often with my self as I have musing sat,
Weighing the foolish and the wise man's state;
I Have doubtful been, which I might judge the best;
The wise man knows much good, but does least.
The senseless doltish Idiot without wit,
Knows naught, and naught is able to commit.
The first Epistle of the Apostle S. PETER.
For it is better if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well. doing,
then for evil. chapter 3. v. 17.
AFflictions are like medicines, if they be
Given to sound bodies go down currently,
And trouble not; but if distempers grow,
And make the stomach queazy, it is not so;
They purge, and scour, and search, till naught remain;
That Is an ill humor then comes out again:
So it is with us. If we our selves prepare,
And with no great offense corrupted are;
Afflictions seem more sweet, but if there lie
Upon the soul some foul enormity;
The burden weighs more heavy, and our God
Seems angry, strikes hard with his iron rod.
If I must of that bitter purge partake,
May't be for trial, not for my sins sake.
But it is unto them according to the proverb, The dog is returned to his own
vomit, and the some that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. chapter 2. v.
22. ep. 2.
When thou art purged, and cleans'd have bin,
Be careful lest again thou sin:
Behold the sheep that once being washed
Is wary lest she should be dash't;
For otherwise 'twould labor be in vain
To wash to filth, to filth to wash again.
The first Epistle of JOHN.
He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. chapter 4. v. 8.
OUr God is love, then why should we
Live thus in wrath and enmity?
The blessed Trinity teach us love,
That we the liker them may prove;
To tie true-love's-knots now begin,
But yet at variance be with sin.
The second Epistle of JOHN.
For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil works. v. 11.
TO bid an evil man God speed,
'S to be partaker of his deed;
But if unwittingly I spoke,
My self I conscious did not make?
But must I first his business know,
Whether it lawful be or no?
What need of that? leave him to God,
And unto his revengefull rod:
Pray then that such who unto sins are bent,
God would with speed bring them to punishment.
The third epistle of JOHN.
But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak face to face. v. 14.
A Greater bliss then peace no man can have,
He that gave peace, no doubt all things else gave.
Peace is the chief of graces, for those were
Indeed no graces, which at discord are:
They, as the Poets fain, are linked in one,
And virtue makes the full conjunction.
Behold how this one peace does prosp'ring bless
All temporal affairs with wished success.
The earth yields her increase, each under's vine
Sits down in peace, and drinks of his own wine.
More joy I cannot wish you, then farewell,
The peace of God be with you where you dwell.
The epistle general of JUDE.
Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the devil, and disputing about
the body of MOSES, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. ver. 9.
WHat argument of pro and con there was
With them I mean not to dispute the case.
This only I am certain of, the one
Would bring no railing accusation:
For 'twas as far below him to contend,
In bitter words, as was that ugly feind.
A body moved this strife at first 'twixt those
Who had no bodies, incorporeall foes.
Michael, in his mild words, without dispute,
His words did to mild Moses nature suit.
The Revelations of JOHN.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ. chapter 1. v. 1.
THis revelation in your minds up hoord,
See Christ the word revealed in his word.
Behold, he comes with clouds, etc. chapter 1. v. 7.
With clouds he comes, a cloudy day 'twill be
With those, Lord Jesus, who despised thee:
But to the Saints happy, thrice happy hour,
Those clouds shall melt in a sweet honey shower.
I am he that lives, and was dead. chapter 1. v. 18.
No death could have the power over thee,
Thou freely did submit thy self to die;
Thou now do live; in sins, Lord, I am dead;
Join me a member to thy self the head.
Be thou faithful unto the death, etc. chapter 2. v. 10.
Have thou begun well? so persever,
Run on thy race, and alter never.
Hell is their portion, who begin
In piety, and end in sin;
And this will be another hell,
To think that they began so well.
And I will give thee a crown of life. chapter 2. v. 10.
In the bright throne thou shall be set,
About thy head a coronet:
Thy faithfulness, and constancy
Shall be resounded in the sky;
And to have got this fame, with such renown,
Shall add a greater luster to thy crown.
I am Alpha, and Omega. chapter 22. v. 13.
God's the worlds Alpha, its creator,
He formed all the works of nature:
He Will be the worlds Omega to
Bring to wicked men great WOE.
Here Is first and last; for the middle man, who is it?
Who can that be, but Mediator Christ?
Aliud. chapter 22. v. 13.
God does himself Alph' and Omega call,
Yet no beginning has, no end at all.
Blessed are they that do his commandments. chapter 22. v. 14.
O shut not up the book
Ere you a little further look:
A sweet encouragement
(Read it) in the close is sent.
The tree of life is yours
Who do endeavor to your powers
Gods precepts to fulfill in the best abode,
The tree shall yield more fruit to you, then you to God.
Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly. chapter 22. v. 20.
Make haste, Lord Jesus, quickly come,
And take my wandering spirit home:
Too long it has been pleased with toies,
And sought to lying vanities.
'Twixt two I am, and fain would be
Dissolved, Lord, and come to thee:
O take me, Lord, and ease my fears;
Or else I shall dissolve in tears:
Where is the temple? gently guide
My soul to it, thy virgin bride;
Or if no temple fit enough there be,
My soul's a temple consecrate to thee.
FINIS.
An additionall corollary of divine Epigrams, such as cannot be referred to any
particular place of Scripture.
By J. H.
Saint Paul beheaded.
THe end of thy appointed race is come,
And thou must loose thy reverend head at Rome:
This crumme of comfort, yet, thy spirit fed;
Thou art the member of another head.
Mary Magdalens joys after mourning.
Mourning, now be gone,
Go seek some other place, depart;
Joy must possess thy throne,
Now truly, now, thou mourning art.
Her eyes have long rained April showers,
It Is now full time she crop May flowers.
S. PETER.
Peter from petra comes, a rock, and on
This rock the Papists lay foundation:
This rock so narrow is, that there is no room,
For those that would be saved, on it to come;
'T will prove a rock, but such a rock indeed,
As will their drowning, not salvation, breed.
They build upon the sands, their own hopes mock,
Since Peter's self was built on Christ his rock.
CHRIST to me is gain.
Cross others, if you wish there should ensue,
Crosses, on crosses, multiplied on you:
But if you will needs be crossing, it is no loss,
But rather gain for you to learn Christ's.
PRAYER.
The Devil, a roaring lion, seeks each hour
Whom he unarmed may find, and so devour.
Let prayer our buckler be, all night, all day,
Pray that thou be not made the devils prey.
Heavenly love.
Great love, no marriage, there is in heaven above;
Here is much marrying not a whit of love.
Soul-comfort.
Look up to heaven with erected looks
Of love, my soul, thou art much in Gods books.
On the end of the World.
The wicked world, in waters, long ago
Was steeped; the ill humors then from it did go:
It Is now infected with ungodly men,
Which makes me fear that fire must purge't again.
A Divine Poem on the cruel death and Pussion of our Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST.
ANd now the time is come, dear Lord, is come,
When not by Pilate's doom, but thy fore-doom
Thou art to suffer; 'twas not his decree,
But thine, ordained from all Eternity.
Thy subject, man, infringed thy Laws just force,
And thou, the Lawgiver, sustaind'st the curse:
When we so far had from thy precepts swerved,
That little we desired, this less deserved.
When we were did in sin of so deep grain,
Only thy dying could us cleanse again;
When we were all be-purpled over, yet none
Could blush at those offenses he had done.
Strange miracle, that crimson blood should so
Turn our souls crimson hue to purest snow!
Beyond expression, that he tastes of death,
Whose breath infused in every creature breath!
To which sad joyful narrative we come,
Drawn by his agonies preludium.
Our Savior, having supped his last, 'gan sup
The wholesome liquour of the saving cup;
Which did resemble that his precious blood
Was to be shed for our eternal good:
Now a more bitter one to drink he has,
The dregs of an incensed Fathers wrath.
Being to quaffe this wormwood-draught, alas,
No mar'l he prayed the cup from him might pass.
Now his first conflict comes, now drops of blood
Bedew the blushing earth, whereon he stood:
Those precious drops, which from him now down glide,
Usher the streams must issue from his side.
The inward torments of his soul were great,
The outward signs whereof was bloody sweat;
But greater follow, armed soul diers stand
With holdberds, staves, and knotty clubs, in hand;
Ready to seize the prince of peace, and he
Who could have guards of Angels presently
Attending on his summons, now can brook
To be by mortal creatures prisoner took:
O would they bind him never to depart,
The strongest chain were love, to hold the heart;
Or, happy they, could they so happy prove,
Themselves to be taken captives by his love:
That, that had bound them to the peace, and so
Of The militant Church they had been soldiers too:
But Peter not endures it, with zeal stirred,
Out of his sheath he draws his keen edged sword:
Peter, if pleasure thou in swords do take,
The Gospels two edged sword thy weapon make;
But he who came to heal his peoples sins,
To heal the highpriests servants ear begins.
Who yet, poor creature, Gods call could not hear,
Because, alas, he wants the inward ear;
And now the shepherd took; the sheep, poor sheep
Are scattered, when their pastor does not keep
Himself: the shepherd, said, I? he became
No more a shepherd now, but proves a lamb;
Whose fleece his servants faults for aye should cover,
That so his fathers wrath might them pass over.
He suffers them to leave him, and does make
That the means that he might never them forsake:
This surely was his deepest grief, who here
Deserted was, of all whom he held dear.
Accompanied, but how? with foes, and none
But would much rather, so, be left alone.
Great are his sufferings sure, heavy his doom,
Who suffers thus much e're his sufferings come:
Yet, meek and silent, gives no occasion
For any one to think he is in passion:
Although he be, so patient bears his state,
Though full of passion, yet not passionate.
Judas, perditions son, 'twas led the van
Of those who came to take the Son of man.
Foul treas'rer who, to gain a little pelf,
Have treasured up great wrath unto thy self.
Our Savior, gently, yet would call him Friend,
How much more rightly were he styled Friend!
What wicked deed, base traitor, have thou done!
Have thou no other way to kiss the Son?
Blind Pharisees Christ's bounty do not know;
He Will give himself, they need not buy him so:
Think you a price for his life can be given,
Who gives, that life, a price to purchase heaven:
The traitor does not long outlive the fact;
But he who did incite him to this act,
Invites him to another, to destroy
His body, make that bear's soul company.
He hangs himself, completing his sins score,
Who was ensnared with love of hell before.
Peter, who so of late his Savior loved,
Now runs: the rock of Peter's love is moved.
First led to Annas, next to Caiaphas;
To Pilate twice, to Herod once he was:
Both Jews and Gentiles his condemners be;
Romans, Barbarians seem in cruelty.
Those who were foes before, now think it good
First to cement their friendship in his blood:
This reconcilements dire foundation
Was built on, yet without the cornerstone:
What wonder is it then that we have read
Both blood, and building fell upon their head?
False witnesses were sought, whose consciences
Witness to them how false their witness is.
The temple, in three days he will destroy,
And at the three days end reedisie
Is of his body, yours too (would you yield
Temples unto the holy Ghost) would build:
This not enought, these Theo-cides begin
To smite him on the cheeks, O horrid sin!
Whilst they disfigure thus with blows his face,
Gods image clean from out themselves they race;
Whilst on the face they smite him, happy were
Their consciences could smite them on the heart.
Buffets are added too, and they shall hear,
If I may say it, on both sides of their ear:
Those buffetings, I may with holy Paul
Satan's at least, or Satan's servants call.
How think ye, he your prayers will hear, who thus
Have strove to deaf him both to you and us?
Those hands which formed them, they impiously
With blows would bring unto deformity:
Those hands they strike, to heaven he upward throws.
They strike upon a palm that upward grows:
His eyes too in derision they blind,
They Would have his eyes, it seems, like to their mind.
How could those wretches think to kood-wink him
Who both lights organ gave and medium?
They mock him, the eternal God, and he
Will mock their hopes unto eternity.
They brag they are Isaac's seed, but who can know
Now whether they are Ishmaelites, or no?
First scoffing, and then downright murdering, sure
They thought it difficult hell to procure;
Else, certainly, they never so would wrest
It doubly, both by earnest, and in jest:
But this is nothing yet; disloyally
Peter whoerst forsook, does now deny
His Master, and does curse himself; but he
Whom he denies, denies his curse shall be
Fulfild on him, but gives him penitence;
Eyes first to see, then weep for his offense.
He had decreed to die before, and hence
It was he spoke not in his own defense:
Had he, for his just cause, but pleaded so,
Injustice would be forced justice to do.
He could have uttered one such sentence then,
Which should have forced his judge change his again
Who yet unwilling was, that one so Just
Should die to satlsfie the peoples lust.
Fain would he have condemned one who was
An homicide, seditious Barabbas.
An homicide must be released that they
The homicides might with their Savior play:
Play, said I? I recant, it was not true;
Or if they played, at least, they played the Jew.
What madness seized you, that you should release
The peace's troubler, bind the Prince of peace?
Much troubled in her dream was Pilates wife;
And did her best to save our Saviors life.
He hears her not, O wretch, how could it be,
Unless all goodness were a dream to thee?
Like dreams thy joys shall vanish, pleasures too;
And, but hells pains, thou shall have nothing true.
Scribes, people, Pharisees, together cry
Out with him; crucify him, crucify
Their noise resounds, and rends the air again,
Ascending high'r then they shall ere attain.
That clamor, which cried crucify him here,
Thundering at heaven, demands for vengeance there:
The voice ascended upwards, but alas,
That they the lower might descend it was.
Why washest thou thy hands? employ that art
(Yet that were bootlesse too) to cleanse thine heart,
Or in that blood, from which thou sain would free
Thy self, but wash, and thou shall cleansed be:
But O their cry prevails, who cursing stood,
On them, and on their children be his blood.
God, who never heard their prayers in ought but this,
Fulfilled the tenor of their direful wish;
Yet had they laid his blood to heart, in stead
Of that, God had not laid it on their head.
Pilate begins himself now to bestirre,
Not like a judge, but Executioner.
The scourge foreshows what tortures are to come,
Of which that is but the Proaemium.
Deep print these lashes left; but we (unkind)
Forget to have them printed in our mind:
We may keep Gods commands, and yet keep these,
No sin to have such graven images.
Stripped naked from his clothes; if ever, now
Truth naked is, we boldly may avow:
Who of eternal rays, himself before
Had stripped; clogged with humanity, once more
Is stripped of earthly garments, that so he
Might clothe us with his immortality:
But this was not enough; with more disdain,
Then ere they stripped, they clothe him now again:
Little those miscreants thought, when thus they played,
That they in searlet had their judge araid;
This color with his office well agrees,
That bloody fact, and our iniquities;
Thus by anticipation be begins
To be apparrell'd in his peoples sins.
A wreath of thorns ingirts his temples, and
A reed, stead of a scepter in his hand.
Those thorns, which crown his brows, may seem to say,
Who goes to heaven must go a thorny way.
How can the members better think to speed,
When he their head does wear them on his head?
Never were thorns so rightly said to enclose,
As now they are, a full-blown purple rose.
He Will near prove steady Christian, who sticks
Loath to embrace, kicking against these pricks.
His scepter weak although it be, they need
Not fear that he will break the bruised reed;
And now they make obeisance to him: how
Their outward not their inward knee they bow!
Prophetic it is, though little they intend
It so, to him of right all knees must bend.
Hail, hail, long reign the king, methinks I hear
Their clamorous mock-shouts rend the troubled air:
As on those goodly cities of the Plain
He did, so wretches he on you will rain
Snares, sulphur, fire (your courages shall quail)
And dreadful stones of, what you wished him, hail.
Our Lord was spit upon, and we must too
Expect through spittle unto heaven to go:
But O they go about far worse then it,
I fear they have not all their venom spit.
The reed which stood before in's sceptres stead,
Has left his hand, and's flown unto his head:
Which grieving their spites instrument to be,
Has from that time to this sighed vocally.
Through strokes however the way may seem uneven,
He goes a beaten path, that goes to heaven:
Jesting is past, and now their play must be
Closed in a Tragical Catastrophe.
His own clothes are put on, he in short space
Is led to's death, Mount Calvarie's the place:
Simon takes up his cross, his others were
Crosses sufficient for himself to bear;
On whose back laid, besides his grief, we find,
The sins, and punishment of all mankind;
And now I come, where I (methinks) could stay,
Ravished in contemplation, for aye.
What a sad-joyfull object greets mine eye?
Seeing his sorrows, can I choose but cry?
Both grief and gladness, here at once there lies;
And even my very tears, are tears of joys.
Can I refrain to pour a briny flood,
Which yet is drowned in the Ocean of his blood?
Can I refrain to joy? those drops, I see,
Are made the oil of gladness, Soul, to thee.
Yet, can I choose but grieve, since paradise
Is purchased for me at so dear a price?
Yet, can I choose but joy in contemplation,
That these his sorrows work my souls salvation?
Then share me jointly, joy and sadness: part
Stakes in my leaping, yet dissolving, heart;
Or, since the world's a vale of tears, on earth
I Will weep; in heaven will make eternal mirth.
The son of man is lifted up, O see
How heaven and earth strive for the deity!
He in suspense, as dubious, yet is loath
To leave one for the other, but midst both;
Nor midst his sufferings, suffers to resign
His humane nature, or put off's divine:
Yet though he doubly has obscured his light
By humane nature, and with pains; too bright
He is for my aspect, my eyes grow dim;
Thus long with gazing upon glorious him;
He now drinks up the dregs of's cup, which are
A mixed compound of gall and vinegar.
So he a dove in life, at his death shall
Take in, what is not innate unto him, gall.
The God of love drinks vinegar; O power
Of love, which overcame with sweet that sour!
He takes that wormwood potion down that we
Might in the gall of bitterness never be.
His hands are nailed but not a-crosse, he stands
As ready to embrace with open hands,
They Have hit the proverb right. Sharp nails are sped
Through both the hands of him who is our head.
O let these wounds suffice he does sustain,
Let us not crucify him over again.
Between two thieves he hangs, who held to be
Equal with God no part of robbery:
So I'twixt grace and sin, but fain from sin
Would be dissolved; O so a tract begin,
My cauterix'd, my iron heart! one thief
Upbraids: O the impudence beyond belief!
And were it not Gospel, I should take it to be
As far remote from all belief, as he
Impenitently sinful, sinful more
In this, then ere he showed himself before.
(If thou be Christ) he did his worst I see
To rob our Lord of his Divinity.
The other meekly chides him, and begins
Now at his end to ask pardon for his sins.
Good pious thief, who thus past hope have stole
To heaven, and cheat'st the Devil of a soul.
A title's over our Savior writ, and all
In letters, like their own crime, capital.
Now capital it needs must be, because
Both over his head, and 'against our Head it was:
Hebrew, Greek, Roman, which may signify
He for all languages alike did die.
This is the title of our King; by this
He gives us title to a throne of bliss.
This is the title of our King; nor need it
Explained be, for he that runs may read it.
Our Saviors sorrows are at height; each scribe,
As he by-passes, spends some quip, some gibe.
If thou be Christ (so said the thief)'s to me
Doubtful, if he the Christ your Christ will be.
(If thou be Christ, come down) what would you do?
Should he descend, you needs must lower go.
(That we this miracle beholding may
Give credence that thou art whom thou do say)
(Come down, and save thy self) what would you have?
Should he himself, alas who should you save?
So difficult you are faith to receive,
Twill be a miracle if you believe.
Midst pangs beyond our reasons dull belief,
Eternal torments and internal grief,
Our Savior cries in this extremity
Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani.
Heaven now, heaven gates are shut, they now begin
TO refuse to let the King of glory in.
Those doors against their maker closed be,
By him for us opened to eternity.
His Fathers ear is stopped, justice does move
So much his fury that it clouds his love.
Hell gapes, and the infernal monarch glories
Hoping to engulf him in his territories.
Vanished Hosannaes are: all signs of gladness:
Through the universe an universal sadness.
But the mistaking Jews believe amiss,
Elias to his help invoked is.
Elias was not of that mournful song
The burden: but 'twas EL God far more strong
Yet as that Sire in flaming chariots hurried,
To the Apotheiosis was rapt and carried.
So he is to come, involved with flames of fire,
And turn the world to cinders in his ire.
Then happy those, whom guilt does not appall;
Who theirs, can Isreal's carre, and horsemen, call.
There now remains one thing for him to do,
Then are his acts, and passions ended too.
He thirsts: who thirsty unto him are brought
He gives life's waters for an heavenly draught.
That sponge of vinegar, which they thought good
Enough for him, he will fill it with his blood.
And as a sign their safety he does mean
Purge them with Hyssop that they may be clean.
And now it is finished. O that I and all
Could in the hour of expiration call
On God, as he. My spirit I commit
My God to thee, thou gav'st, receive thou it.
Father, forgive their sins, they do not know
(Father, forgive their trespass,) what they do.
O see his goodness! in his greatest pain
He did not leave to intercede for man:
Even in his change, when just he was to part,
His sp'rit flew forth in prayers to change their heart;
And with these words resigning quietly
His soul, he who can never die, does die.
The sun amazed reins in his steeds, and shrouds
His muffled face in black condensed clouds;
Thinking it more preposterous to see
The sun of righteousness eclipsed, then he.
A three hours darkness straight invelops all
The land: the night is a night typical,
For each hour count a day, our Savior has
Just so long walked in the vale of death.
Nature's turned topsy-turvy from her station,
Earth's fabric moved with fear moves her foundation.
The rocks now that grand Rock of help is shook
Tear their hard entrails up as thunder-strook;
Mosaic rites of right with him now ending,
'Gin vail to him, the veil o'th temple rending,
The heavens above flash lightnings out of measure;
The earth reveals her own, and Gods best treasure;
The saints arise, and show themselves abroad,
And in that showing show the power of God.
Yet as the holy city now sees them,
They may see those in the new Jerusalem;
This the Centurion sees, and, on the quaking
Of The earth, has fixed his faith beyond all shaking.
The Jews high-feast is nigh at hand, and they
For greater celebration of the day,
Ask't that the crucified might forth with be
Dispatched outright, and taken from the tree;
Who, to execute this hard command were sent,
Straight brake the two thieves legs. sans complement.
Do break them. without help of legs, the one
Will make a shift to paradise to run.
But when they to our Savior came, whose breath
Was gone, they, satisfied with his death,
Broke not a bone: the Scriptures so had spoke.
Had they broke them, they Gods decrees had broke,
Those were the marble columns his spouse praised,
On whom the basis of the Church were raised.
But one more boldly curious then the rest,
Resolved to put the truth unto the test,
And thrust his spear into his side, a spout
Of blood and water severally gushed out;
Both streams were for mankinds eternal good,
Only denied to him that made the flood.
Why cast they lots for's coat, since none would be
Amongst them content to wear his livery?
Oh think they, clad in that same woollen coat,
Each shall a sheep be thought, and not a goat?
Alas! they cannot act Saints parts; without doubt
The all-knowing God will find dissemblers out.
Our Lord's yet on the Cross, but in the even
Joseph takes heart of grace, prays to be given
To him Christ's body. Pilate hears him: gives
What Judas sold, by him whose guilt he lives.
His body is embalmed. O could there be
A sent more aromatic then was he!
Could ought more sovereign then himself be had?
Heavens sovereign, precious balm of Gilead.
Wrapped up in fine white sindon, which (how e're)
Cannot his whiter innocence come near.
Clothe me with that pure raiment that I may
Appearing (at the last and general day)
Not daunted; at that great mutation
Be found to have my wedding garments on.
His tomb's prepared of no rare Architect,
With Imagery of Persian marble decked.
What other ornament could that grave need,
Wherein our Lord did deign to lay his head.
From any former dusts pollution free;
Gods holy one must no corruption see.
But soft. I am too rash that thus dare venture
Boldly into this hallowed place to enter.
Yet oh! e're back I step, it is all I crave
To leave my sins behind me in his grave.
Alas the day-star's clouded from my sight;
Alas the day! rather, alas the night!
The Sun of righteousness is set, and I
Groping to find the way in the dark must cry
At once my Savior Lord, why leave thou me?
The Sun of righteousness is set: to rise
After repose more splendent in our eyes.
The Sun of glory's set, what should we do
But turn our glory into sadness too?
Set in a sea of blood: who is he forbears
At least to bathe him in a sea of of tears?
The Sun of glory's set and I have done;
Setting a period here with him my Sun.
An Hymn on the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
1
He Is rose, not death the power could have
To keep him longer in the grave,
His dusty spoils among.
He Is rose who set before to rise
With greater splendor in our eyes;
And with him rise my song.
2
This tomb in which enclosed did lie
Mortal immortality,
Left widdow'd since he went
Though him it could not keep, shall be
Conserved it self in memory;
Be its own monument.
3
How dire a journey did he take
Of three days travel for our sake,
Riding his progress on!
Conquering even death it self, and making
The damned fiends, aghast, stand quaking
In their own region.
4
Who could a fitter Nuncius choose
Then some bright cherub for this news?
Tidings so sweet they are
As might create a strife to tell
Which does the other most excel,
The news, or messenger.
5
Let superstitious Persians follow,
With bent knees their adored Apollo,
From his Sabeans nest;
But my devotions course shall run,
An heliotropium, to that Sun
Arising in the East.
6
Nor let Astrologers divine,
Because two suns together shine,
Death will ensue; but rather
Life, which benignely flows from hence,
Shown by combined influence
Of Spirit, Son, and Father.
An Hymn on the glorious Ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
1
MAke clear thy optics, Soul, and view,
If wonder gives thee leave to see
Heaven comes to claim from earth it is due
Who not content is forced t'agree:
The principal she holds it best
To pay; yet keeps the interest.
2
But loath her Lord so soon should hence
From some low veil she would not let
Him part; but lingering brought her prince
To the top of high mount Olivet:
From whence an envious cloud in spite
Does ravish him from humane sight.
3
What joys Heaven's Hierarchy among?
What peales of Hallelujah's ring?
The glorified quire 'ginne throng
Together to salute their King.
There gladness is, on earth, greifes swell;
Wrath, envy, black despair, in Hell.
4
Now thou art raised; why lingers here
Thy servant in this vale of woe?
Let him be fixed in a sphere
With thee, not wander here below
Let him a star; no planet prove,
A sign in heaven of thy love
5
My loadstone's set aloft, attract
With thy magnetic force my soul;
That touched with faiths lively act
May turn to thee as to the Pole:
These are my Oraisons which god fulfill,
And Christ's ascension bids me hope he will.
A Hymn on the day of Pentecost.
1
Hail, o day, so highly famed
Brighter be thou still returning;
For thy candor aye be named
A white, a blessed, a glorious morning.
2
In whose just praise my muse now writing
Fears this honored feast she wrongs,
Wanting, whilst she is reciting,
What those Saints had, the gift of tongues.
3
Tongues as diverse, and as many,
As upon the Apostles fell;
Yet amongst them all not any,
But kindled by the fire of zeal.
4
Those their tongues were clove asunder,
Their praises I intend to join
Till all as much are filled with wonder
As they supposed to be with wine.
5.
But soft, rash muse, no further venture,
That heat sure does not thee inspire:
Keep aloof, and dare not enter
Lest thou deserve another fire.
FINIS.

