Hobson's Choice.

A POEM, IN ANSWER TO THE CHOICE, Written by a Person of Quality.



LONDON: Printed, and Sold by John Nutt, ne^^ Stationers' Hall. M. DCC.

Hobson's Choice. A POEM.
SInce Heaven denies us liberty of Choice,
Why should a Man (for God-sake) make a noise?
I Will never whine into a Golden Wish,
Nor labor after Flying Happiness:
Nor take the pains to Curse my backward Fate,
Or to the Goddess Fortune doff my Hat:
But if my Fate does lend me Breath so long,
To make an end of this Authentic Song,
You Will hear it; or if not, I Will hold my Tongue.
For it is a Jest to Rail at adverse Fate,
A Wise Man's Merry, does Congratulate,
And will Enjoy himself in Every State.
If He be doomed to Knighthood, or a Gown,
It does affect his Heel's, but not his Crown:
For why should he have Windmills in his Head,
Because the Bishop, or the King, has said,
Rise up Sir Richard, or Hey-jingo Priest
Appear, and show the World a New-made Vest?
Prelates and Princes too are often mistaken;
It Is not what They, but what One's self does make One.
Then should a Wise Man mind the random Talk,
Of those Iocose and Elevated Folk,
And so be bubbled of his Native Will,
By which he is just what he would be still?
Fantastique Fortune may do what she can,
She Will leave me as she finds me, still a Man;
Or if she please to let me but alone,
I shall be Hobson then, and that is all one:
And though she most Delights to make us Apes,
And gives us every Day New several Shapes;
Nicknames us Lords, and Citts, and Mountebanks,
And makes us play abroad her senseless Pranks,
A Wise Man knows himself still under all,
And never forgets his true Original:
The Man Appears beneath the Ass's Skin;
And Fortune wears without, himself within.
But what if froward Fortune looks awry?
Why, if she be Cross-grained, even so she may.
What Man of S(...) would care a Straw for that?
(...)ur than her Hate?
If I deserve her Friendship, she is to blame,
And the Reproach Asperses most the Dame.
For who that sees a Muse's Son in Rags,
That up and down in Rhyme for Vittle begs,
Does not with utmost Indignation say,
Fortune's a Jade, but He Is an honest Boy?
This Dons, and Men of Quality, will own,
Who Buy his Wit, because themselves have None.
Mean time the Bard reels on, and never Reflects,
His Poverty his Liberty Protects.
And well he knows 'twere Mad in him to Wish,
For Country Seats, or Landed Happiness;
That Prayer would never obtain among the Gods;
For 'twere enough to set the Stars at Odds.
His Planet governs with a Liberal force,
And unrestrained, abides no stated Course,
But freely all about the Sky it reels,
As he below its merry Influence feels.
By Heaven, I Would rather be just what I am,
Plain Hobson, than be painted with the Sham
Appearance of the Gaudy Fortunate,
Who have less Happiness, and more Crevat.
For Happiness would be a Paradox,
If 'twere Enjoyed alike by Wits and Blocks.
But Various Men pursue the Various Notion
Of Happiness, according to the Portion
They have of Sense, which is the Gift of Fate,
And not to be inferred from an Estate,
No more than Wisdom from a broad-brim'd Hat.
And yet it is the ardent wish of One,
That was, belike, both Bred and Born in Town,
O that hard by I had a private Seat, The Choice, P. 3.

Fine as my Hopes, as my Ambition Great,
That all the Town might come and hear me Bleat,
And make new Wishes for a fresh Retreat.
So Wishes still vain Wishes must succeed,
And those again beget an Endless Breed,
And all at last must stray without a Head;
For who that has that Engine on his Neck,
Whose heft does not the weak Supporter break,
Would ever Ramble from himself so far,
And what he has not here, to hunt for there?
As if when he his Wench and Stream had found, P. 3. and 6.

His Happiness would not in both be drowned:
For who can bound the Cravings of his Thought,
When it exceeds the brims of what he is got?
The Fancied Ground-plot, and the Flowing Stream,
Content him better as they are his Theme,
Than if he viewed his disappointed Face in them.
Then home recall thy Wandering Thoughts again,
Make that their Mansion which was once their Den:
There let them form Domestic Happiness,
With less Applause, but with much more Success,
And with inverted Wit the Poet truly Bless.
For I Am the happy Man, when all is said,
Who live at Home, my House upon my Head;
Who never lengthen to a foreign Wish,
But size my Porrage always to my Dish;
And unaffected both with Time and Place,
Behold the uneven World with even Face.
Instant Fruition Cheers my aged Pate,
And Marks of Plenty shine upon my Hat.
Though l'm not Rich, I have the Ready Mess,
To stop my Mouth, ever Gutts are in distress:
Not that I tune my Speculative Brain,
Just to the Croacking of their Grosser Strain:
But if they Cry aloud, I Have Bread and Cheese,
And they shall hold their Peace for such as these.
Custard, and Nicer Diet, I forbid,
And Sacred Pies unviolated Lid.
When Supper's done, I never Dream of want
For times to come, Times which I also have not;
But in the Corner when I Have sat a while,
Pleased with my self, I give the World a smile,
Then my own Pace away I go to Bed,
Stretch my self out, and Sleep as I were Dead.
FINIS.

