THE QUESTIONS Concerning LIBERTY, NECESSITY, And CHANCE.

Clearly Stated and Debated Between Dr. Bramhall Bishop of Derry, And Thomas
Hobbes of Malmesbury.

London, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Green
Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To the Reader.
YOu shall find in this little Volum the Questions concerning Necessity,
Freedom, and Chance, which in all Ages have perplexed the minds of curious Men,
largely and clearly discussed, and the Arguments on all sides, drawn from the
Authority of Scripture, from the Doctrine of the Schools, from Natural Reason,
and from the Consequences pertaining to common Life, truly alleged, and
severely weighed between two persons who both maintain that Men are Free to Do
as they Will, and to Forbear as they Will. The things they dissent in are, that
the one holds, That it is not in a Man's Power now, to choose the Will he
shall have anon; That Chance produces nothing; That all Events and Actions
have their Necessary Causes; That the Will of God makes the Necessity of all
things. The other on the contrary maintains, That not only the Man is Free
to choose what he will Do, but the Will also to choose what it shall Will; That
when a Man wills a good Action, Gods Will concurreth with his, else not; That
the Will may choose whether it will Will or not; That many things come to pass
without Necessity, by Chance; That though God foreknow a thing shall be, yet it
is not Necessary that that thing shall be, in as much as God sees not the
future as in its Causes, but as present. In sum, they adheare both of them to
the Scripture; but one of them is a learned School-Divine, the other a man that
does not much admire that kind of learning.

This is enough to acquaint you withal in the beginning, which also shall be
more particularly explained by and by in the stating of the Question, and
dividing of the Arguments into their several heads. The rest you shall
understand from the persons themselves when they enter. Fare ye well.

T. H.

THE OCCASION OF THE CONTROVERSY.
WHether whatsoever comes to pass proceed from Necessity, or some things from
Chance; has been a Question disputed amongst the old Philosophers long time
before the Incarnation of our Savior, without drawing into argument on either
side the almighty power of the Deity. But the third way of bringing things to
pass distinct from Necessity and Chance, namely Freewill, is a thing that
never was mentioned amongst them, nor by the Christians in the beginning of
Christianity. For St. Paul that disputes that question largely and purposely,
never uses the term of Freewill; nor did he hold any Doctrine aequivalent to
that which is now called the Doctrine of Freewill; but deriveth all actions
from the irresistible Will of God, and nothing from the will of him that
runs or wills. But for some ages past, the Doctors of the Roman Church
have exempted from this dominion of Gods Will, the Will of Man; and brought in
a Doctrine that not only Man, but also his Will is Free, and determined to
this or that action, not by the Will of God, nor necessary causes, but by the
power of the Will it Self. And though by the reformed Churches instructed by
Luther, Calvin and others, this opinion was cast out, yet not many years since
it began again to be reduced by Arminius and his followers, and became the
readiest way to Ecclesiastical promotion; and by discontenting those that held
the contrary, was in some part the cause of the following troubles; which
troubles were the occasion of my meeting with the Bishop of Derry at Paris,
where we discoursed together of the Argument now in hand; from which Discourse
we carried away each of us his own opinion, and for ough I remember without any
offensive words, as blasphemous, atheistical or the like, passing between us;
either for that the Bishop was not then in passion, or suppressed his passion,
being then in the presence of my Lord of Newcastle.

But afterward the Bishop sent to his Lordship his opinion concerning the
question in writing, and desired him to persuade me to send an answer thereunto
likewise in writing. There were some reasons for which I thought it might be
inconvenient to let my answer go abroad; yet the many obligations wherein I was
obliged to him, prevailed with me to write this answer, which was afterward
not only without my knowledge, but also against my will, published by one that
found means to get a Copy of it surreptitiously. And thus you have the Occasion
of this Controversy.

The State of the Question.
THe Question in general is stated by the Bishop himself, (toward the end of
Numb. 3.) in these words, Whether all Events, Natural, Civil, Moral, (for we
speak not now of the conversion of a sinner, that concerns not this question,)
be praedetermined extrinsecally and inevitably, (without their own
concurrence,) so as all the actions and events which either are or shall be,
cannot but be, nor can be otherwise, after any other manner, or in any other
place, time, number, measure, order, nor to any other end than they are. And
all this in respect of the supreme cause, or a concourse of extrinsecall
causes, determining them to one.

Which though drawn up to his advantage, with as much caution as he would do a
Lease, yet (excepting that which is not intelligible) I am content to admit.
Not intelligible is, First, that the conversion of a sinner concerns not the
Question. If he mean, that the conversion of a sinner is from necessity, and
praedetermined, then he is, for so much as the Question concerns Religion, of
the same mind that I am, and what he can mean else by that exception I cannot
guess. Secondly, these words without their own concurrence, are insignificant,
unless he mean that the events themselves should concur to their production:
as that fire does not necessarily burn without the concurrence of burning, as
the words properly import: or at least without concurrence of the fuel. Those
two clauses left out, I agree with him in the state of the Question as it is
put universally. But when the Question is put of the necessity of any
particular event, as of the Will to write, or the like, then it is the stating
of that particular Question: but it is decided in the decision of the Question
universal.

He states the same Question again ^n another place thus, This is the very
Question where the water sticks between us, Whether there be such a Liberty
free from necessitation and extrinsecall determination to one, or not. And I
allow it also for well stated so.

Again he says, In a word, so great difference there is between Natural and
Moral efficacy, as there is between his opinion and mine in this Question. So
that the state of the Question is reduced to this, Whether there be a Moral
efficacy which is not Natural. I say there is not, he says there is.

Again he writes thus, And therefore as it were ridiculous to say, that the
object of Sight is the cause of Seeing; so it is to say, that the proposing of
the object by the Understanding to the Will, is the cause of Willing. Here also
the Question is brought to this issue, Whether the object of Sight be the cause
that it is Seen. But for these words, proposing of the object by the
Understanding to the Will, I understand them not.

Again, he often uses such words as these, The Will wills; the Will
suspendeth its act, ( id est, the Will wills not;) the Understanding
proposes; the Understanding understands. Herein also lies the whole
Question. If they be true, I; if false, He is in the error.

Again, the whole question is decided, when this is decided, Whether he that
willingly permits a thing to be done, when without labor, danger, or
diversion of mind, he might have hindered it, do not Will the doing of it.

Again, the whole Question of Free Will is included in this, Whether the Will
determine it self.

Again, it is included in this, Whether there be an universal Grace, which
particular men can take, without a particular Grace to take it.

Lastly, there be two Questions; one, Whether a man be free in such things as
are within his power, to do what he Will; another, Whether he be free to Will.
Which is as much as to say, (because Will is Appetite) it is one Question,
Whether he be free to eat that has an Appetite; and another, Whether he be feee
to have an Appetite. In the former, Whether a man be free to do what he Will, I
agree with the Bishop: In the latter, Whether he be free to Will, I dissent
from him. And therefore all the places of Scripture, that he alleges to
prove that a man has liberty to do what he Will, are impertinent to the
Question. If he has not been able to distinguish between these two Questions,
he has not done well to meddle with either: if he has understood them, to bring
arguments to prove that a man is free to do if he Will, is to deal
uningenuously and fraudulently with his Readers. And thus much for the State of
the Question.

The Fountains of Argument in this Question.
THe Arguments by which this Question is disputed, are drawn from four
Fountains. 1. From Authorities. 2. From the Inconveniences consequent to
either opinion. 3. From the Attributes of God. 4. From natural Reason.

The Authorities are of two sorts, Divine and Humane. Divine are those which
are taken from the holy Scriptures. Humane also are of two sorts, one, the
Authorities of those men that are generally esteemed to have been learned,
especially in this Question, as the Fathers, Schoolmen, and old Philosophers:
the other, are the Uulgar and most commonly received opinions in the world.

His Reasons and places of Scripture I will answer the best I am able; but his
humane Authorities I shall admit and receive, as far as to Scripture and
Reason they be consonant, and no further.

And for the Arguments derived from the Attributes of God, so far forth as
those Attributes are argumentative, that is, so far forth as their
significations be conceavable, I admit them for Arguments; but where they are
given for honor only, and signify nothing but an intention and endeavor to
praise and magnify as much as we can Almighty God, there I hold them not for
Arguments, but for Oblations; not for the language, but (as the Scripture calls
them) for the calves of our lips; which signify not true nor false, or any
opinion of our brain, but the reverence and devotion of our hearts: and
therefore they are no sufficient praemises to infer Truth, or convince
Falsehood.

The places of Scripture that make for me are these. First, Genesis 45. 5. Joseph
says to his Brethren that had sold him, Be not grieved nor angry with your
selves, that ye sold me hither: For God did send me before you to preserve
life. And again verse 8. So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God.

And concerning Pharaoh, God says Exodus 7. 3. I will harden Pharaohs heart.
And concerning Sihon King of Hesbon Moses says Deuteronomy. 2. 30. The Lord thy God
hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate.

And of Shimei that did curse David, David himself says 2 Samuel 16. 10. Let
him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, curse David. and 1 Kings 12 15.
The King hearkened not to the People, for the curse was from the Lord.

And Job disputing this very Question, says, Job 12. 14. God shuts man,
and there can be no opening. and verse. 16. The deceaved and the deceaver are
his. and verse 17. He makes the Judges fools. and verse 24. He takes away the
heart of the chief of the people of the Earth, and causes them to wander in a
Wilderness where there is no way. and verse 25. He makes them to stagger like
a drunken man.

And of the King of Assyria God says, I will give him a charge to take the
spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the
streets. Esaias 10. 6.

And Jeremiah says, Jer. 10 23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps.

And to Ezechiel whom God sent as a watchman to the house of Israel, God says
thus, When a Righeous man does turn from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall dye; because thou
have not given him warning, he shall dye in his sin. Eze. 3. 20. Note here, God
lays the stumbling block, yet he that falls dies in his sin: which shows
that Gods Justice in killing, depends not on the sin only.

And our Savior says, John 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him.

And St. Peter concerning the dilivering of Christ to the Jews says thus, Acts
2. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
ye have taken, etc.

And again, those Christians to whom Peter and John resorted, after they were
freed from their troubles about the miracle of curing the lame man, praising
God for the same say thus: Of a truth against the holy Child Jesus whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people
of Israel, were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done, Acts 4. 27, 28.

And St. Paul, Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. and verse 18, 19, 20. Therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth. Thou will say
unto me why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted his will? Nay but, O
man, who art thou that disputest against God? Shall the thing formed, say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

And again, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee differ from another? and what have
thou that thou have not received? and 1 Cor. 12. 6. There are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God that works all in all. and Ephesians. 2. 10.
We are his workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. and Phillip. 2. 13. It is God that
works in you both to Will and to Do, of his good pleasure.

To these places may be added all the places that make God the giver of all
Graces, that is to say, of all good habits and inclinations; and all the places
wherein men are said to be dead in sin: for by all these it is manifest that
although a man may live holily if he will, yet to will is the work of God, and
not eligible by man.

A second sort of places there be, that make equally for the Bishop and Me; and
they be such as say that a man has Election, and may do many things if he
will, and also if he will he may leave them undone; but not that God Almighty
naturally or supernaturally works in us every act of the will, as in my
opinion; nor that he works it not, as in the Bishops opinion; though he use
those places as Arguments on his side.

The places are such as these, Deuteronomy. 30. 19 I call Heaven and Eatth to record
this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing. Therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. and
Eccles^, 15. 14. God in the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his
Counsel. and verse 16, 17. He has set fire and water before thee, stretch
forth thy hand to whether thou will. Before man is life and death, and whether
him likes shall be given him.

And those places which the Bishop cites. If a wife make a vow, it is left to
her husbands choice, either to establish it, or to make it void, Numb. 30. 14.
and Josh 24. 15. Choose ye this day whom you will serve, etc. But I and my house
will serve the Lord. and 2 Samuel 24. 12. I offer thee three things, choose which
of them I shall do. and Before the Child shall know to refuse the evil and
choose the good. Esaias 7. 10. And besides these very many other places to the
same effect.

The third sort of Texts are those which seem to make against me. As, Esaias 5.
4. What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?

And Jer. 19. 5. They have also bailt the high places of Baal, to burn their
sonns with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke
it, neither came it into my mind.

And Hosea 15. 9. O Israel thy destruction is from thy self, but in me is thy
help.

And 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of truth.

And Ecclesiasticus 15. 11. 12. Say not thou it is through the Lord I fell
away, for thou ought not to do the things that he hates. Say not thou, he
has caused me to err; for he has no need of thee sinful man. And many other
places to the like purpose.

You see how great the apparent contradiction is between the first and the
third sort of Texts, which being both Scripture, may and must be reconciled and
made to stand together; which unless the rigor of the letter be on one or both
sides, with intelligible and reasonable interpretations mollified, is
impossible.

The Schoolmen to keep the literal sense of the third sort of Texts, interpret
the first sort thus; the words of Joseph, It was not you that sent me hither,
but God, they interpret in this manner, It was you that sold me into Egypt, God
did but permit it; It was God that sent me and not you; as if the selling were
not the sending. This is Suarez; of whom and the Bishop I would know whether
the selling of Joseph did infallibly and inevitably follow that permission. If
it did, then that selling was necessitated before hand by an eternal
permission. If it did not, how can there be attributed to God a foreknowledge
of it, when by the Liberty of humane Will it might have been frustrated? I
would know also, whether the selling of Joseph into Egypt were a sin. If it
were, why does Joseph say, Be not grieved nor angry with your selves that ye
sold me hither? Ought not a man to be grieved and angry with himself for
sinning? If it were no sin, then treachery and fratricide is no sin.

Again, seeing the selling of him consisted in these acts, binding, speaking,
delivering, which are all corporeal motions, did God Will they should not be,
how then could they be done? Or does he permit barely, and neither Will nor
Nill corporeal and local motions? How then is God the first mover and cause of
all local motion? Did he cause the motion, and Will the law against it, but not
the irregularity? How can that be, seeing the motion and law being existent,
the contrariety of the motion and law is necessarily coexistent?

So these places, He hardened Pharaohs heart, He made Sihons heart obstinate,
they interpret thus, He permitted them to make their own hearts obstinate. But
seeing that man's hear without the grace of God, is uninclinable to good, the
necessity of the hardness of heart, both in Pharaoh and in Sihon, is as easily
derived from Gods permission that is, from his withholding his grace, as from
his positive decree. And whereas they say, He Wil^s godly and free actions
conditionally and consequently, that is, if the man will them, then God Wills
them, elso not; and Wills not evil actions, but permits them; they ascribe to
God nothing at all in the causation of any action either good or bad.

Now to the third sort of places, that seem to contradict the former, let us
see if they may not be reconciled with a more intelligible and reasonable
interpretation, than that wherewith the Schoolmen interpret the first.

It is no extraodinary kind of ^anguage, to call the Commandments and
Exhortations and other significations of the Will, by the name of Will; though
the Will be an internal act of the soul, and Commands are but words and signs
external of that internal act. So that the will and the word are diverse
things; and differ as the thing signified, and the sign. And hence it comes to
pass, that the Word and Commandment of God, namely the holy Scripture, is
usually called by Christians Gods Will, but his revealed Will; acknowledging
the very Will of God, which they call his Counsel and Decree, to be another
thing. For the revealed Will of God to Abraham was, that Isaac should be
sacrificed; but it was his Will he should not. And his revealed Will to Jonas,
that Niniveh should be destroyed within forty days; but not his Decree and
Purpose. His Decree and Purpose cannot be known beforehand, but may afterward
by the Event; for from the Event we may infer his Will. But his revealed
Will, which is his Word, must be foreknown, because it ought to be the rule of
our actions.

Therefore where it is said that God will have all men to be saved, it is not
meant of his Will internal, but of his Commandments or Will revealed; as if it
had been said, God has given Commandments, by following of which all men may
be saved. So where God says, O Israel how often would I have gathered thee,
etc. as a Hen does her Chickens, but thou would not. It is thus to be
understood, How often have I by my Prophets given thee such counsel, as being
followed, thou had been gathered, etc. And the like interpretations are to
be given to the like places. For it is not christian to think, if God had the
purpose to save all men, that any man could be damned, because it were a sign
of want of power to effect what he would. So these words, What could have been
done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done; If by them be meant the
Almighty power, might receave this answer; Men might have been kept by it from
sinning. But when we are to measure God by his revealed Will, it is as if he
had said, What directions, what laws, what threatenings could have been used
more that I have not used. God does not will and command us to enquire what his
Will and Purpose is, and accordingly to do it; for we shall do that whether we
will or not; but to look into his Commandments, that is, as to the Jews, the
Law of Moses; and as to other People, the Laws of their Country.

O Israel thy destruction is from thy self, but in me is thy help. Or as some
English Translations have it. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, etc. Is
literally true, but makes nothing against me; for the man that sins willingly,
whatsoever be the cause of his Will, if he be not forgiven, has destroyed
himself, as being his own act.

Where it is said, They have offered their sons unto B^al, which I commanded
not, nor spoke it, nor came it into my mind, These words, nor came it into my
mind, are by some much insisted on, as if they had done it without the Will of
God. For whatsoever is done comes into Gods mind, that is, into his knowledge,
which implies a certainty of the future action, and that certainly an
antecedent purpose of God to bring it to pass. It cannot therefore be meant
God did not will it, but that he had not the will to command it. But by the way
it is to be noted, that when God speaks to men concerning his Will and other
Attributes, he speaks of them as if they were like to those of men, to the end
he may be understood. And therefore to the order of his Work, the World,
wherein one thing follows another so aptly as no man could order it by
Design, he gives the name of Will and Purpose. For that which we call Design,
which is reasoning, and thought after thought, cannot be properly attributed to
God, in whose thoughts there is no fore nor after.

But what shall we answer to the Words in Ecclesiasticus,

Say not thou, it is through the Lord I fell away; say not thou, he has caused
me to err. If it had not been, say not thou, but think not thou, I should have
answered that Ecclesiasticus is Apocrypha, and merely humane authority. But it
is very true, that such words as these are not to be said; first because St.
Paul forbids it, Shall the thing formed, (says he) say to him that formed it,
why have thou made me so. Yet true it is, that he did so make him. Secondly,
because we ought to attribute nothing to God but what we conceave to be
Honorable, and we judge nothing Honorable but what we count so amongst our
selves; and because accusation of man is not Honorable, therefore such words
are not to be used concerning God Almighty. And for the same cause it is not
lawful to say that any Action can be done, which God has purposed shall not be
done; for it is a token of want of the power to hinder it. Therefore neither of
them is to be said, though one of them must needs be true. Thus you see how
disputing of Gods nature which is incomprehensible, drives men upon one of
these two Rocks. And this was the cause I was unwilling to have my Answer to
the Bishops Doctrine of Liberty published.

And thus much for comparison of our two opinions with the Scriptures; which
whether it favor more his or mine, I leave to be judged by the Reader. And now
I come to compare them again by the Inconveniences which may be thought to
follow them.

First, the Bishop says, that this very persuasion, that all things come to
pass by Necessity, is able to overthrow all Societies and Commonwealths in
the World. The Laws says he are unjust which prohibit that which a man cannot
possibly shun.

Secondly, that it makes superstuous and foolish all Consultations, Arts,
Arms, Books, Instruments, Teachers, and Medicines, and which is worst, Piety
and all other Acts of Devotion. For if the Event be necessary, it will come to
pass whatsoever we do, and whether we sleep or wake.

This inference, if there were not as well a necessity of the means as there is
of the event, might be allowed for true. But according to my opinion both the
event and means are equally necessitated. But supposing the inference true, it
makes as much against him that denies, as against him that holds this
necessity. For I believe the Bishop holds for as certain a truth, what shall
be, shall be, as what is, is, or what has been, has been. And then the
ratiocination of the sick man, If I shall recover what need I this unsavory
potion; if I shall not recover what good will it do me, is a good
ratiocination. But the Bishop holds, that it is necessary he shall recover or
not recover. Therefore it follows from an opinion of the Bishops, as well as
from mine, that Medicine is superstuous. But as Medicine is to Health, so is
Piety, Consultation, Arts, Arms, Books, Instruments, and Teachers, every one
to its several and. Out of the Bishops opinion it follows as well as from
mine, that Medicine is superstuous to Health. Therefore from his opinion as
well as from mine, it follows, (if such ratiocination were not unsound,) that
Piety, Consultation, etc. are also superstuous to their respective ends. And
for the superstuity of Laws, whatsoever be the truth of the Question between
us, they are not superstuous, because by the punnishing of one, or of a few
unjust men, they are the cause of justic* in a great many.

But the greatest inconvenience of all that the Bishop pretends may be drawn
from this opinion is, that God in justice cannot punnish a man with eternal
torments for doing that, which it was never in his power to leave undone It is
true, that seeing the name of punnishment has relation to the name of Crime,
there can be no punishment but for Crimes that might have been left undone; but
instead of punnishment if he had said affliction, may not I say that God may
afflict and not for sin? does he not afflict those Creatures that cannot sin?
and sometimes those that can sin, and yet not for sin, as Job and the Man in
the Gospel that was born blind, for the manifestation of his power which he
has over his Creature, no less, but more than has the Potter over his Clay,
to make of it what he please? But though God have power to afflict a man and
not for sin without injustice, shall we think God so cruel as to afflict a man
and not for sin with extreme and endless torment? Is it not cruelty? No more
than to do the same for sin, when he that so afflicts might without trouble
have kept him from sinning. But what Infallible evidence has the Bishop, that
a man shall be after this life, Eternally in torments and never die? Or how is
it certain there is no second death, when the Scripture says there is? Or
where does the Scripture say that a second death is an endless life? Or do the
Doctors only say it? then perhaps they do but say so, and for reasons best
known to themselves. There is no injustice nor cruelty in him that gives life,
to give withit sickness, pain, torments, and death; nor in him that gives
life twice, to give the same miseries twice also. And thus much in Answer to
the Inconveniences that are pretended to follow the Doctrine of Necessity.

On the other side from this Position, that a man is free to will, it follows
that the Prescience of God is quite taken away. For how can it be known before
hand what man shall have a will to, if that will of his proceed not from
necessary causes, but that he have in his power to will or not will? So also
those things which are called future contingents, if they come not to pass
with certainty, that is to say, from necessary causes, can never be foreknown;
so that Gods f^reknowing shall sometimes be of things that shall not come to
pass, which is as much to say, that his foreknowledge is none; which is a
great dishonor to the All-knowing Power.

Though this be all the Inconvenient Doctrine that follows Freewill for as
much as I can now remember; yet the defending of this opinion has drawn the
Bishop and other Patrons of it into many inconvenient and absurd conclusions,
and made them make use of an infinite number of Insignificant words; whereof
one conclusion is in Suarez, that God does so concur with the Will of Man,
that if Man will, then God concurres; which is to subject not the will of Man
to God, but the will of God to Man. Other inconvenient conclusions I shall then
mark out, when I come to my observations upon the Bishops reply. And thus far
concerning the inconveniences that follow both Opinions.

The Attribute of God which he draws into argument is his Justice, as that
God cannot be Just in punishing any man for that which he was necessitated to
do. To which I have answered before, as being one of the Inconveniences
pretended to follow upon the Doctrine of Necessity. On the Contrary, from
another of Gods Attributes, which is his Foreknowledge, I shall evidently
derive, that all Actions whatsoever, whether they proceed from the will or from
fortune, were necessary from eternity. For whatsoever God Fore-knoweth shall
come to pass, cannot but come to pass, that is, it is Impossible it should
not come to pass, or otherwise come to pass then it was fore-known. But
whatsoever was Impossible should be otherwise, was necessary; for the
definition of Necessary is that which cannot possibly be otherwise. And whereas
they that distinguish between Gods Praescience and his Decree, say the
Foreknowledge makes not the Necessity without the Decree; it is little to the
purpose. It suffices me that whatsoever was fore-known by God, was necessary;
but all things were Fore-known by God; and therefore all things were necessary.
And as for the distinction of Foreknowledge from Decree in God Almighty, I
comprehend it not. They are Acts coeternall, and therefore one.

And as for the Arguments drawn from natural reason, they are set down at
large in the end of my discourse to which the Bishop makes his reply; which
how well he has answered shall appear in due time. For the present, the
Actions which he thinks proceed from liberty of will, must either be
necessitated, or proceed from fortune, without any other cause; for certainly
to Will is Impossible without thinking on what he wills. But it is in no man's
Election what he shall at any named time hereafter think on. And this I take to
be enough to clear the understanding of the Reader, that he may be the better
able to Judge of the Following Disputation. I find in those that write of this
Argument (especially in the Schoolmen and their Followers) so many words
strangers to our Language, and such Confusion and Inanity in the ranging of
them, as that a man's mind in the reading of them distinguishes nothing; And as
things were in the beginning (before the Spirit of God was moved upon the
Abiss) Tohu and Bohu, that is to say, Confusion and Emptiness; so are their
discourses.

To the Right Honorable the Marquis of NEWCASTLE, etc.
SIR,
IF I pretended to compose a complete treatise upon this subject, I should not
refuse those large recruites of reasons and authorities, which offer themselves
to serve in this cause, for God and man, Religion and Policy, Church and Common
wealth, ( a) against the blasphemous, desperate, and destructive opinion of
fatal destiny. But as (b) mine aim, in the first discourse, was only to
press home hose things in writing, which had been agitated between us by word
of mouth, (a course much to be preferred before verbal conferences, as being
freer from passions and tergiversations, less subject to mistakes and
misrelations, wherein paralogismes are more quickly detected, impertinencies
discovered, and confusion avoided.) So my present intention is only to
vindicate that discourse, and together with it, ( c) those lights of the
Schools, who were never slighted, but where they were not understood. How far
I have performed it, I leave to the judicious and unpartiall Reader, resting
for mine own part well contented with this, that I have fatisfied my self.

Your Lordships most obliged to love and serve you I. D.

Animadversions upon the Bishops Epistle to my Lord of Newcastle.
(a) AGainst the Blasphemous, Desperate, and Destructive Opinion of fatal
Destiny.

This is but choler, such as ordinarily happens unto them who contend against
greater difficulties than they expected.

(b) My aim in the first discourse, was only to press home those things in
writing, which had been agitated between us by word of mouth, (a course much to
be preferred before verbal Conferences, as being freer from Passions, etc.

He is here, I think mistaken, for in our verbal Conference there was not one
passionate word, nor any objecting of Blasphemy or Atheism, nor any other
uncivil word, of which in his writing there are abundance.

(c) Those Lights of the Schools who were never slighted but where they were
not understood.

I confess I am not apt to admire every thing I understand not* nor yet to
slight it. And though the Biishop slight not the Schoolmen so much as I do,
yet I dare say he understands their writings as little as I do. For they are in
most places unintelligible.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, this ensuing Treatise was (a) neither penned nor intended
for the Press, but privately undertaken, that by the ventilation of the
Question, truth might be cleared from mistakes. The same was Mr. Hobbs his
desire at that time, as appears by four passages in his Book, wherein he
requesteth and beseeches, that it may be kept private. But either through
forgetfulness or change of judgment, he has now caused, or permitted it to be
printed in England, without either adjoining my first Discourse, to which he
wrote that answer, or so much as mentioning this Reply, which he has had in
his hands now these eight years. So wide is the date of his letter, in the year
1652. from the truth, and his manner of dealing with me in this particular from
ingenuity, (if the edition were with his own consent.) Howsoever, here is all
that passed between us upon this subject, without any addition, or the least
variation from the original.

Concerning the nameless Aurhor of the preface, who takes upon him to hang out
an lvy bush before this rare piece of sublimated Stoicisme, to invite
passengers to purchase it, as I know not who he is, so I do not much heed it,
nor regard either his ignoranr censures, or hyperbolical expressions. The
Church of England is as much above his detraction, as he is beneath this
Question. Let him lick up the spittle of Dionysius by himself, as his servile
flatterers did, and protest, that it is more sweet than Nectar; we envy him
not, much good may it do him. His very frontispiece is a sufficient confutation
of his whole preface, wherein he tells the world as falsely and ignorantly, as
confidently, that all controversy, concerning Predestination, Election,
Free Will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is fully decided and cleared. Thus
he accustometh his pen to run over, beyond all limits of truth and discretion,
to let us see that his knowledge in Theological Controversies is none at all,
and into what miserable times we are fallen, when blind men will be the only
judges of colors. Quid tanto dignum feret hic promissor hiatu?

There is yet one thing more, whereof I desire to advertise the Reader. (b)
Whereas Mr. Hobbs mentions my objections to his Book De Cive; It is true, that
ten years since I gave him about 60. Exceptions, the one half of them
Political, the other half Theological, to that Book, and every Exception
justified by a number of Reasons, to which he never yet vouchsafed any answer.
Nor do I now desire it, for since that, he has published his Leviathan,
Monstrum honnendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum, which affords much
more matter of Exception, and I am informed that there are already two, the one
of our own Church, the other a stranger, who have shaken in pieces the whole
Fabric of his City, that was but builded in the air, and resolved that huge
mass of his seeming Leviathan into a new nothing, and that their labors will
speedily be published. But if this information should not prove true, I will
not grudge upon his desire, God willing, to demonstrate, that his principles
are pernicious both to Piety and policy, and destructive to all relations of
mankind, between prince and Subject, Father and Child, Master and Servant,
Husband and Wife; and that they, who maintain them obstinately, are fitter to
live in hollow-trees among wild beasts, than in any Christian or Political
Society, so God bless us*

Animadversions upon the Bishops Epistle to the Reader.
(a) NEither penned nor intended for the Press, but privately undertaken, that
by the ventilation of the Question Truth might be cleared. The same was Mr.
Hobbs his desire at that time, as appears by four passages in his Book, etc.

It is true that it was not my intention to publish any thing in this Question.
And the Bishop might have perceived by not leaving out those four passages,
that it was without my knowledge the Book was printed; but it pleased him
better to take this little advantage to accuse me of want of ingenuity. He
might have perceived also, by the date of my Letter, 1652. which was written
1646. ( which error could be no advantage to me,) that I knew nothing of the
printing of it. I confess, that before I received the Bishops Reply, a French
Gentleman of my acquaintance in Paris, knowing that I had written something of
this subject, but not understanding the language, desired me to give him leave
to get it interpreted to him by an english young Man that resorted to him;
which I yielded to. But this young Man taking his opportunity, and being a
nimble writer, took a Copy of it for himself, and printed it here, all but the
Postcsript, without my knowledge, and (as he kn^w) against my will; for which
he since has asked me pardon. But that the Bishop intended it not for the
Press, is not very probable, because he says he writ it to the end that by the
ventilation of the Question, Truth might be cleared from mistakes; which end he
had not obtained by keeping it private.

(b) Whereas Mr. Hobbs mentions my objections to his Book De Cive, it is true
that ten years since, I gave him about 60. Exceptions, etc.

I did indeed intend to have answered those Exceptions as finding them neither
Political nor Theological, nor that he alleged any Reasons, by which they
were to be justified. But shortly after intending to write in English, and
publish my thoughts concerning Civil Doctrine, in that Book which I entitled
Leviathan, I thought his objections would by the clearness of my method fall
off without an answer. Now this Leviathan he calls Monstrum horrendum,
inform, Ingens, cui lumen ademptum. Words not far fetched, nor more
applicable to my Leviathan, than to any other writing that should offend him.
For allowing him the word Monstrum ( because it seems he takes it for a
monstrous great Fish,) he can neither say it is Inform; for even they that
approve not the Doctrine allow the Method. Nor that it is Ingens; for it is a
Book of no great Bulk. Nor cui lumen ademptum; for he will find very few
Readers, that will not think it clearer than his Scholastique Jargon. And
whereas he says there are two of our own Church ( as he hears say) that are
answering it; And that he himself ( if I desire it) will demonstrate that my
Principles are pernicious both to Piety and Policy, and destructive to all
Relations, etc. My answer is, that I desire not, that he or they should so
mispend their time; but if they will needs do it, I can give them a fit Title
for their Book, Behemoth against Leviathan. He ends his Epistle with so God
bless us. Which words are good in themseves, but to no purpose here; but are a
Buffonly abusing of the name of God to Calumny.

A VINDICATION OF TRUE LIBERTY FROM Antecedent and Extrinsecal Necessity.
J. D. EIther I am free to write this Discourse for Liberty against Necessity,
or I am not free. If I be Numb. 1.
free, I have obtained the cause, and ought not to suffer for the truth. If I
be not free, yet I ought not to be blamed, since I do it not out of any
voluntary election, but out of an inevitable Necessity*


T. H. RIght Honorable, I had once resolved to answer J. D'^. objections to my
Book De Cive in the first place, as that which concerns me most, and afterward
to examine this disco^^se of Liberty and Necessity, which (because I never had
uttered my opinion of it) concerned me the less. But seeing it was both your
Lordships, and J. D*s. desire, that I should begin with the later, I was
contented so to do. And here I present and submit it to your Lordships
judgment.


J. D. (a) THe first day that I did read over T. H. his defense of the
necessity of all things, was April 20. 1646. Which proceeded not out of any
disrespect to him; for if all his discourses had been Geometrical
demonstrations, able not only to persuade, but also to compel assent, all had
been one to me, first my journey, and afterward some other trifles (which we
call business) having diverted me until then. And then my occasions permitting
me, and an advertisement from a friend awakening me, I set my self to a serious
examination of it. We commonly see those who delight in Paradoxes, if they have
line enough confute themselves; and their speculatives, and their practicks
familiarly enterfere one with another. (b) The very first words of T. H. his
defense trip up the heels of his whole cause; I had once resolved; To resolve
praesupposeth deliberation; but what deliberation can there be of that which is
inevitably determined by causes, without our selves, before we do deliberate?
can a condemned man deliberate whether he should be executed, or not? It is
even to as much purpose, as for a man to consult and ponder with himself
whether he should draw in his breath, or whether he should increase in stature.
Secondly, (c) to resolve implies a man's dominion over his own actions, and his
actual determination of himself; but he who holds an absolute necessity of all
things, has quitted this dominion over himself, (and which is worse) has
quitted it to the second extrinsecal causes, in which he makes all his actions
to be determined; one may as well call again Yesterday, as resolve or newly
determine that which is determined to his hand already. (d) I have perused this
treatise, weighed T. H his answers, considered his reasons, and conclude that
he has missed, and missed the Question* that the answers are evasions, that
his arguments are paralogisms, that the opinion of absolute and universal
Necessity is but a result of some groundless and ill chosen principles, and
that the defect is not in himself, but that his cause will admit no better
defense; and therefore by his favor I am resolved to adhere to my first
opinion. Perhaps another man reading this discourse with other eyes, judges it
to be pertinent and well founded. How comes this to pass? the treatise is the
same, the exterior causes are the same, yet the resolution is contrary. Do the
second causes play fast and loose? do they necessitate me to condemn, and
necessitate him to maintain? what is it then? the difference must be in our
selves, either in our intellectuals, because the one sees clearer than the
other, or in our affections, which betray our unsterstandings, and produce an
implicit adhaerence in the one more than in the other. Howsoever it be, the
difference is in our selves. The outward causes alone do not chain me to the
one resolution, nor him to the other resolution. But T. H. may say, that our
several and respective deliberations and affections, are in part the causes of
our contrary resolutions, and do concur with the outward caufes, to make up one
total and adaequate cause, to the necessary production of this effect. If it be
so, he has spun a fair thread, to make all this stir for such a necessity as no
man ever denied or doubted of; when all the causes have actually determined
themselves, then the effect is in being; for though there be a priority in
nature between the cause and the effect, yet they are together in time. And the
old rule is, (e) whatsoever is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is. This is
no absolute necessity, but only upon supposition, that a man has determined
his own liberty. When we question whether all occurrences be necessary, we do
not question whether they be necessary when they are, nor whether they be
necessary in sensu composito, after we have resolved and finally determined
what to do, but whether they were necessary before they were determined by our
selves, by or in the praecedent causes before our selves, or in the exterior
causes without our selves. It is not inconsistent with true Liberty to
determine it self, but it is inconsistent with true Liberty to be determined by
another without it self.

T. H. says further, that upon your Lorships desire and mine, he was contented
to begin with this discourse of Liberty and Necessity, that is, to change his
former resolution. (f) If the chain of necessity be no stronger, but that it
may be snapped so easily in sunder; if his will was no otherwise determined
without himself, but only by the signification of your Lordships desire and my
modest entreaty, then we may easily conclude, that humane affairs are not
always governed by absolute necessity; that a man is Lord of his own actions,
if not in chief, yet in mean, subordinate to the Lord Paramount of Heaven and
Earth; and that all things are not so absolutely determined in the outward and
precedent causes, but that fair entreaties, and moral persuasions may work upon
a good nature so far, as to prevent that which otherwise had been, and to
produce that which otherwise had not been. He that can reconcile this with an
Antecedent Necessity of all things, and a Physical or Natural determination of
all causes, shall be great Apollo to me.

Whereas T. H. says that he had never uttered his opinion of this Question, I
suppose he intends in writing; my conversation with him has not been frequent,
yet I remember well, that when this Question was agitated between us two in
your Lordships Chamber by your command, he did then declare himself in words,
both for the absolute necessity of all events, and for the ground of this
necessity, the Flux or concatenation of the second causes.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, I.
(a) THe first day that I did read over T. H. his defense of Necessity, etc.

His deferring the reading of my defense of necessity, he will not (he says)
should be interpreted for disrespect. It Is well; though I cannot imagine why he
should fear to be thought to disrespect me. He was diverted ( he says) by
trifles called business. It seems then he acknowledges that the will can be
diverted by business. Which though said on the By, is contrary I think to the
Main, that the Will is Free; for free it is not if any thing but it self ca^
divert it.

(b) The very first words of T. H. his defense, trip up the heels of his whole
cause, etc.

How so? I had once ( says he) Resolved* To Resolve praesupposeth
deliberation. But what deliberation can there be of that which is inevitably
determined without our selves? There is no man doubts but a man may deliberate
of what himself shall do, whether the thing be impossible or not, in case he
know not of the impossibility; though he cannot deliberate of what another
shall do to him. Therefore his examples of the man condemned, of the man that
breaths, and of him that grows, (because the Question is not what they
shall do) but what they shall suffer, are impertinent. This is so evident, that
I wonder how he that was before so witty, as to say, my first words tript up
the ^e^les of my cause, and that having line enough I would confute my self,
could presently be so dull, as not to see his Argument was too weak to support
so triumphant a language. And whereas he seems to be off ended with
Paradoxes, let him thank the Schoolmen whose senceless writings, have made the
greatest number of important Truths see^ Paradoxe.

(c) This Argument that follows is no better. To Resolve ( says he) implies
a man's dominion over his actions, and his actual determination of himself, etc.

If he understand what it is to Resolve, he knows that it signifies no more
then (after deliberation) to Will. He thinks therefore to Will is to have
dominion over his own actions and actually to determine his own Will. But no
man can determine his own will; for the will is appetite, nor can a man more
determine his will than any other appetite; that is, more than he can determine
when he shall be hungry and when not. When a man is hungry, it is in his choice
to eat or not eat; this is the liberty of the man; But to be hungry or not
hungry (which is that which I hold to proceed from necessity) is not in his
choice. Besides these words dominion over his own actions, and determination of
himself, so far as they are significant, make against him. For over
whatsoever things there is dominion, those things are not Free, and therefore a
man's actions are not Free* And if a man determine himself, the Question will
still remain what determined him to determine himself in that manner.

(d) I have perused this Treatise, weighed T. H. his answers, considered his
reasons, etc.

This and that which follows, is talking to himself at random, till he come
to all^adge that which he calls an old rule, which is this, (e) Whatsoever
is, when it is, is necessarily so as it is. This is no absolute necessity, but
only upon supposition that a man has determined his own liberty, etc.

If the Bishop think that I hold no other Necessity than that which is
expressed in that old foolish rule, he neither understands me, nor what the
word Necessary signifies. Necessary is that which is impossible to be
otherwise, or, that which cannot possibly otherwise come to pass. Therefore
Necessary, Possible, and Impossible, have no signification in reference to time
past, or time present, but only time to come. His Necessary, and his in sensu
composito signify nothing; My Necessary is a Necessary from all Eternity; and
yet not inconsistent with true Liberty, which does not consist in determining
it self, but in doing what the Will is determined unto. This dominion over it
self, and this, sensus compositus, and this, determining it self, and this,
necessarily is when it is, are confused and empty words.

(f) If the chain of Necessity be no stronger, but that it may be snapped so
easily in sunder, etc. by the signification of your Lordships desire, and my
modest entreaty, then we may safely conclude that humane affairs, etc.

Whether my Lords desire, and the Bishops modest entreaty were enough to
produce a Will in me to write an answer to his treatise, without other
concurrent causes, I am not sure. Obedience to his Lordship did much, and my
civility to the Bishop did somewhat, and perhaps there were other imaginations
of mine own, that contributed their part. But this I am sure of, that
altogether they were sufficient to frame my will thereto; and whatsoever is
sufficient to produce any thing, produces it as necessarily as the fire
necessarily burns the F^wel that is cast into it. And though the Bishops
modest entreaty had been no part of the cause of my yiedling to it, yet
certainly it would have been cause enough to some civil man, to have requited
me with fairer Language, than he has done throughout this Reply.

T. H. ANd first I assure your Lordship, I find in it no new Argument, Numb. ^.
neither from Scripture nor from Reason, that I have not often heard before,
which is as much, as to say, that I am not supprised.


J. D. (a) THough I be so unhappy, that I can present no novelty to T. H. yet I
have this comfort, that if he be not supprised, then in reason I may expect a
more mature answer from him, and where he fails, I may ascribe it to the
weakness of his cause, not to want of preparation. But in this case I like
Epictetus his Council well, that (b) the Sheep should not brag how much they
have eaten, or what an excellent pasture they do go in, but show it in their
Lamb and Wool. Opposite answers and downright Arguments advantage a cause. To
tell what we have heard or seen is to no purpose. When a respondent leaves many
things untouched, as if they were too hot for his Fingers, and declines the
weight of other things, and alters the true state of the Question, it is a
shrewd sign either that he has not weighed all things maturely, or else that
he maintains a desperate cause.


Animadversions upon his Reply Numb. II*
(a) THough I be so unhappy that I can present no novelty to T. H. yet I have
this comfort that if he be not supprised, then in reason I may expect a more
mature answer from him, etc.

Though I were not supprised, yet I do not see the reason for which, he says,
he may expect a more mature answer from me; or any further answer at all. For
seeing I writ this at his modest request, it is no modest expectation to look
for as many answers as he shall be pleased to exact.

(b) The Sheep should not bragg how much they have eaten, but show it in their
Lamb and Wool.

It is no great bragging, to say I was not supprised; for whosoever chances to
read Suarez his Opuscula where he writes of Free Will, and of the concourse of
God with Man's Will; shall find the greatest part, if not all that the Bishop
has urged in this Question. But that which the Bishop has said of the Reasons
and Authorities which he says (in his Epistle) do offer themselves to serve in
this cause; and many other passages of his Book, I shall (I think) before I
have done with him, make appear to be very bragging, and nothing else. And
though he say it be Epictetus his counsel that Sheep should show what they
eat, in their Lamb and Wool, It is not likely that Epictetus should take a
metaphor from Lamb and Wool; for it could not easily come into the mind of men
that were not acquainted with the paying of Tithes. Or if it had, he would have
said Lambs in the Plural, as Lay men use to speak. That which follows of my
leaving things untoucht, and altering the state of the Question; I remember no
such thing, unless he require that I should answer, not to his Arguments only,
but also to his Syllables.

T. H. THe Praeface is an handsome one, but it appears even in that, Numb. 3.
that he has mictaken the Question; for whereas he says thus, if I be free to
write this discourse, I have obtained the cause, I deny that to be true, for
it is not enough to his freedom of writing, that he had not written it, unless
he would himself; if he will obtein the cause, he must prove that before he
writ it, it was not necessary he should write it afterward. It may be he thinks
it all one to say, I was free to write it, and it was not necessary I should
write it. But I think otherwise; for he is free to do a thing, that may do it
if he have the will to do it, and may forbear if he have the will to forhear.
And yet if there be a necessity that he shall have the will to do it, the
action is necessarily to follow; and if there be a necessity, that he shall
have the will to forbear, the forbearing also will be necessary. The Question
therefore is not, whether a man be a free Agent, that is to say, whether he can
write or forbear, speak or be silent, according to his will; but whether the
will to write, and the will to forbear, come upon him according to his will, or
according to any thing else in his own power. I acknowledge this liberty, that
I can do if I will, but to say I can will if I will, I take to be an absurd
speech. Wherefore I cannot grant him the cause upon this Preface.


J. D. TAcitus speaks of a close kind of adversaries, which evermore begin with
a man's praise. The Crisis or the Catastrophe of their discourse is when they
come to their but; As he is a good natured man, but he has a naughty quality;
or he is a wise man, but he has committed one of the greatest follies; So here
the Praeface is an handsome one, but it appears even in this, that he has
mistaken the Question. This is to give an Inch, that one may take away an Ell
without suspicion; to praise the handsomeness of the Porch, that he may gain
credit to the vilifying of the House. Whether of us has mistaken the Question,
I refer to the judicious Reader. (a) Thus much I will maintain, that that is no
true necessity, which he calls necessity; nor that liberty, which he calls
liberty; nor that the Question, which he makes the Question.

First for liberty, that which he calls liberty, is no true liberty.

For the clearing whereof it behooveth us to know the difference between these
three, Necessity, Spontaneity, and Liberty.

Necessity and Spontaneity may sometimes meet together; so may Spontaneity and
Liberty; but real necessity and true liberty can never meet together. Some
things are necessary and not voluntary or spontaneous; some things are both
necessary and voluntary; some things are voluntary and not free; some things
are both voluntary and free; But those things which are truly necessary can
never be free, and those things which are truly free can never be necessary.
Necessity consists in an Antecedent determination to one; Spontaneity consists
in a conformity of the Appetite, either intellectual or sensitive to the
object; True Liberty consists in the elective power of the rational Will; That
which is determined without my concurrence, may nevertheless agree well enough
with my fancy or desires, and obtein my subsequent consent; But that which is
determined without my concurrence or consent, cannot be the object of mine
election. I may like that which is inevitably imposed upon me by another, but
if it be inevitably imposed upon me by extrinsecal causes, it is both folly for
me to deliberate, and impossible for me to choose, whether I shall undergo it
not. Reason is the root, the fountain, the original of true liberty, which
judges and represents to the will, whether this or that be convenient,
whether this or that be more convenient. Judge then what a pretty kind of
liberty it is which is maintained by T. H. such a liberty as is in little
Children before they have the use of reason, before they can consult or
deliberate of any thing. Is not this a Childish liberty? and such a liberty as
is in brute Beasts, as Bees and Spiders, which do not learn their faculties as
we do our trades, by experience and consideration; This is a brutish liberty,
such a liberty as a Bird has to fly, when her wings are clipped, or to use
his own comparison, such a liberty as a lame man, who has lost the use of his
limbs has to walk; Is not this a ridiculous liberty? Lastly (which is worse
than all these) such a liberty as a River has to descend down the Channel;
what! will he ascribe liberty to inanimate Creatures also, which have neither
reason, nor spontaneity, nor so much as sensitive appetite? Such is T. H. his
liberty.

(b) His Necessity is just such another, a necessity upon supposition, arising
from the concourse of all the causes, including the last dictate of the
understanding in reasonable creatures. The adaequate cause and the effect are
together in time, and when all the conurrent causes are determined, the effect
is determined also, and is become so necessary, that it is actually in being;
But there is a great difference between determining, and being determined. If
all the collateral causes concurring to the production of an effect, were
antecedently determined, what they must of necessity produce, and when they
must produce it, then there is no doubt but the effect is necessary. (c) But if
these causes did operate freely, or contingently, if they might have suspended
or denied their concurrence, or have concurred after another manner, then the
effect was not truly and antecedently necessary, but either free or contingent.
This will be yet clearer by considering his own instance of casting Ambs-Ace,
though it partake more of contingency than of freedom. Supposing the positure
of the parties hand who did throw the Dice, supposing the figure of the Table
and of the Dice themselves, supposing the measure of force applied, and
supposing all other things which did concur to the production of that cast, to
be the very same they were, there is no doubt but in this case the cast is
necessary. But still this is but a necessity of supposition; for if all these
concurrent causes, or some of them were contingent or free, then the cast was
not absolutely necessary. To begin with the Caster, He might have denied his
concurrence and not have cast at all; He might have suspended his concurrence,
and not have cast so soon; He might have doubled or diminished his force in
casting, if it had pleased him; He might have thrown the Dice into the other
Table. In all these cases what becomes of his ambs-ace? The like uncertainties
offer themselves for the maker of the Tables, and for the maker of the Dice,
and for the keeper of the Tables, and for the kind of Wood, and I know not how
many other circumstances. In such a mass of contingencies, it is impossible
that the effect should be antecedently necessary. T. H. appeals to every man's
experience. I am contented. Let every one reflect upon himself, and he shall
find no convincing, much less constreining reason, to necessitate him to any
one of these particular acts more than another, but only his own will or
arbitrary determination. So T. H. his necessity is no absolute, no antecedent,
extrinsecal necessity, but merely a necessity upon supposition.

(d) Thirdly, that which T. H. makes the Question, is not the Question. The
Question is not, says he, Whether a man may write if he will, and forbear if
he will, but whether the will to write or the will to forbear, come upon him
according to his will, or according to any thing else in his own power. Here is
a distinction without a difference. If his will do not come upon him according
to his will, than he is not a free, nor yet so much as a voluntary Agent, which
is T. H. his Liberty. Certainly all the freedom of the Agent, is from the
freedom of the will. If the will have no power over it self, the Agent is no
more free than a Staff in a man's hand. Secondly, he makes but an empty show of
a power in the will, either to wtite or not to write. ^ If it be precisely and
inevitably determined in all occurrences whatsoever, what a man shall will, and
what he shall not will, what he shall write, and what he shall not write, to
what purpose is this power? God and Nature never made any thing in vain; but
vain and frustraneous is that power which never was and never shall be deduced
into Act. Either the Agent is determined before he acts, what he shall will,
and what he shall not will, what he shall act, and what he shall not act, and
then he is no more free to act, than he is to will; Or else he is not
derermined, and then there is no necessity. No effect can exceed the virtue of
its cause; if the action be free to write or to forbear, the power or faculty
to will, or nill, must of necessity be more free. Quod efficit tale illud magis
est tale. If the will be determined, the writing or not writing is likewise
determined, and then he should not say, He may write or he may forbear, but he
must write, or he must forbear. Thirdly, This answer contradicts the sense of
all the world, that the will of man is determined without his will, or without
any thing in his power; Why do we ask men whether they will do such a thing or
not? Why do we represent reasons to them? Why do we pray them? Why do we
entreat them? Why do we blame them if their will come not upon them according
to their will. Will thou be made clean? said our Savior to the Paraiyticke
person, John 5. 6. to what purpose, if his will was extinsecally determined?
Christ complains, We have piped unto you and y^ have not danced, Matthew. 11. 17.
How could they help it, if their wills were determined without their wills, to
forbear? And Matthew. 23. 37. I would have gathered your Children together, as
the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, but ye would not. How easily
might they answer according to T. H. his doctrine, Alas blame not us, Our wills
are not in our own power or disposition, if they were, we would thankfully
embrace so great a favor. Most truly said St. Austin, Our will should not be a
will at all, if it were not in our power. f This is the belief of all mankind,
which we have not learned from our Tutors, but is imprinted in our hearts by
nature; We need not turn over any obscure books to find out this truth. The
Poets chant it in the Theaters, the Shepherds in the mountains, the Pastors
teach it in their Churches, the Doctors in the Universities, the common people
in the markets, and all mankind in the whole world do assent unto it, except an
handful of men, who have poisoned their intellectuals with paradoxical
principles. Fourthly, this necessity which T. H. nath devised, which is
grounded upon the necessitation of a man's will without his will, is the worst
of all others, and is so far from lessening those difficulties and absurdities
which flow from the fatal destiny of the Stoics, that it increases them, and
renders them unanswerable. g No man blames fire for burning whole Cities, No
man taxes poison for destroying men, but those persons who apply them to such
wicked ends. If the will of man be not in his own disposition, he is no more a
free Agent than the fire or the poison. Three things are required to make an
act or omission culpable; First, that it be in our power to perform it, or
forbear it, Secondly, that we be obliged to perform it, or forbear it.
respectively. Thirdly, that we omit that which we ought to have done, or do
that which we ought to have omitted. h No man sins in doing those things which
he could not shun, or forbearing those things which never were in his power. T.
H. may say, that besides the power, men have also an appetite to evil objects,
which renders them culpable. It is true, but if this appetite be determined by
another, not by themselves, Or if they have not the use of reason to curb or
restrain their appetites, they sin no more than a stone descending downward,
according to its natural appetite, or the brute Beasts who commit voluntary
errors in following their sensitive appetites, yet sin not.

i The Question then is not whether a man be necessitated to will or nill, yet
free to act or forbear. But saving the ambiguous acception of the word, Free,
the Question is plainly this, whether all Agents, and all events natural,
civil, moral, (for we speak not now of the conversion of a sinner, that
concerns not this Question,) be predetermined extrinsecally and inevitably
without their own concurrence in the determination; so as all actions and
events which either are or shall be, cannot but be, nor can be otherwise, after
any other manner, or in any other place, time, number, measure, order, nor to
any other end, than they are. And all this in respect of the supreme cause, or
a concourse of extrinsecal causes determining them to one.

k So my preface remains yet unanswered. Either I was extrinsecally and
inevitably predetermined to write this discourse, without any concurrence of
mine in the determination, and without any power in me to change or oppose it,
or I was not so predetermined; If I was, then I ought not to be blamed, for no
man is justly blamed for doing that which never was in his power to shun. If I
was not so predetermined, then mine actions and my will to act, are neither
compelled nor necessitated by any extrinsecal causes, but I elect and choose,
either to write or to forbear, according to mine own will, and by mine own
power. And when I have resolved, and elected, it is but a necessity of
supposition, which may and does consist with true liberty, not a real
antecedent necessity. The two horns of this Dilemma are so strait, that no
mean can be given, nor room to pass between them. And the two consequences are
so evident, that instead of answering, he is forced to decline them.


Animadversions upon his Reply Numb. III.
a THus much I will maintain, that that is no true necessity, which he calls
Necessity; nor that Liberty, which he calls Liberty; nor that the Question,
which he makes the Question, etc. For the clearing whereof, it behooveth us to
know the difference between these three, Necessity, Spontaneity, and Liberty.

I did expect, that for the knowing of the difference between Necessity,
Spontaneity, and Liberty, he would have set down their Definitions. For without
these, their difference cannot possibly appear; for how can a man know how
things differ, unless he first know what they are; which he offers not to show.
He tells us that Necessity, and Spontaneity may meet together, and Spontaneity,
and Liberty; but Necessity and Liberty never; and many other things impertinent
to the purpose. For which (because of the length) I refer the Reader to the
Place. I note only this, that Spontaneity is a word not used in common
English; and they that understand Latin, know it means no more, than Appetite,
or Will, and is not found but in living Creatures. And seeing he says that
Necessity and Spontaneity may stand together, I may say also, that Necessity
and Will, may stand together; and then is not the Will Free (as he would have
it) from Necessitation. There are many other things in that which follows,
which I had rather the Reader would consider in his own words, to which I
refer him, than that I should give him greater trouble in reciting them
again. For I do not fear it will be thought too hot for my fingers, to show the
vanity of such words as these, Intellectual appetire, Conformity of the
appetite to the object, Rational will, Elective power of the Rational will; nor
understand I how Reason can be the root of true Liberty, if the Bishop (as he
says in the beginning) had the liberty to write this discourse. I understand
how objects, and the Conveniences and the Inconveniences of them may be
represented to a man, by the help of his senses; but how Reason represents
any thing to the Will, I understand no more, than the Bishop understands there
may be Liberty in Children, in Beasts, and inanimate Creaturs. For he seems
to wonder how Children may be left at Liberty; how Beasts imprisoned may be set
at Liberty; and how a River may have a free course; and says, what! will he
ascribe Liberty to inanimate Creatures also? And thus he thinks he has made it
clear how Necessity, Spontaneity, and Liberty differ from ^^e another. If the
Reader find it so, I am contented.

b His Necessity is just such another, a Necessity upon supposition, arising
from the concourse of all the causes, including the last dictate of the
understanding in reasonable Creatures, etc.

The Bishop might easily have seen, that the Necessity I hold, is the same
Necessity that he denies; namely a Necessity of things future, that is, an
antecedent Necessity derived from the very beginning of time; and that I put
Necessity for an Impossibility of not being, and that Impossibility as well as
Possibility are never truly said, but of the future. I know as well as he that
the cause when it is adaequate (as he calls it) or entire (as I call it) is
together in time with the effect. But for all that the Necessity may be and is
before the effect, as much as any Necessity can be. And though he call it a
Necessity of supposition, it is no more so, than all other Necessity is. The
fire burns neoessarily; but not without supposition, that there is fuel put
to it. And it burns the fuel (when it is put to it) necessarily; but it is
by supposition, that the ordinary course of nature is not hindered; For the fire
burnt not the three Children in the Furnace.

c But if these causes did operate Freely, or Contingently, if they might have
suspended, or denied their concurrence, or have concurred after another manner,
then the effect was not truly and antecedently necessary, but either free, or
Contingent.

It seems by this he understands not what these words Free, and Contingent
mean. A little before he wondered I should attribute Liberty to inanimate
Creatures, and now he puts causes amongst those things that operate Freely. By
these causes it seems be understands only men, whereas I showed before that
Liberty is usually ascribed to whatsoever Agent is not hindered. And when a man
does any thing Freely, there be many other Agents immediate, that concur to the
effect he intends, which work not Freely, but necessarily; as when the man
moves the Sword Freely, the Sword wounds necessarily, nor can suspend or
deny its concurrence; And consequently if the man move not himself, the man
cannot deny ^is concurrence. To which he cannot reply, unless he say a man
originally can move himself, for which he will be able to find no Authority of
any that have but tasted of the knowledge of motion. Then for Contingent he
understands not what it means, for it is all one to say it is Contingent
and simply to say it is; saving that when they say simply it is, they consider
not how or by what means; but in saying it is contingent they tell us they know
not whether necessarily or not. But the Bishop thinking Contingent to be that
which is not necessary, instead of arguing against our knowledge of the
necessity of things to come, argues against the necessity it self. Again he
supposes that Free and Contingent causes might have suspended or denied their
concurrence. From which it follows that Free causes, and Contingent causes
are not causes of themselves, but concurrent with other causes, and therefore
can produce nothing but as they are guided by those causes with which they
concur; for it is strange, he should say, they might have concurred after
another manner; for I conceave not how when this runs one way, and that
another, that they can be said to concur, that is run together, And this his
concurrence of causes contingent, makes (he says) the cast of Ambs-ace not to
have been absolutely necessary. Which cannot be conceaved unless it had hindered
it; and then it had made some other cast necessary, perhaps Deux-ace, which
serves me as well. For that which he says of suspending his concurrence, of
casting sooner or later, of altering the casters force, and the like accidents
serve not to take away the necessity of Ambs-ace, otherwise then by making a
necessity of Deux-ace, or other cast that shall be thrown.

d Thirdly, that which T. H. makes the Question, is not the Question, etc.

He has very little reason to say this. He requested me to tell him my opinion
in writing concerning Free Will. Which I did, and did let him know a man was
Free in those things that were in his power, to follow his will; but that he
was not Free to Will, that is, that his will did not follow his will, which I
expressed in these words, the Question is, whether the will to write, or the
will to forbear, come upon a man according to his will, or according ta any
thing else in his own power. He that cannot understand the difference between
Free to do if he will, and Free to will, is not fit (as I have said in the
Stating of the Question) to hear this Controversy disputed, much less to be a
writer in it. His consequence, if a man be not Free to will, he is not a Free,
nor a Voluntary Agent, and his saying the Freedom of the Agent is from the
Freedom of the Will, is put here without proof; nor is there any considerable
proof of it through the whole Book ^ereafter offered. For why; he never before
had heard (I believe) of any distinction between Free to do and Free to will,
which makes him also say if the Will have not power over it self, the Agent is
no more Free, than a Staff in a man's hand. As if it were not Freedom enough
for a man to do what he will* unless his Will also have power over his Will,
and that his Will be not the power it self, but must have another power within
it to do all voluntary acts.

c If it be precisely and inevitably determined in all occurrences whatsoever,
what a man shall Will, and what he shall not Will, and what he shall write, and
what he shall not write, to what purpose is this power, etc.

It is to this purpose, that all those things may be brought to pass, which
God has from Eternity predetermined. It is therefore to no purpose here to
say, that God and Nature has made nothing in vain. But see what weak Arguments
he brings next, which though answered in that which is gone before, yet if I
answer not again, he will say they are too hot for my fingers. One is, If the
Agent be determined what he shall Will, and what he shall Act, Then he is no
more Free to Act than he is to Will; as if the Will being necessitated, the
doing of what we Will were not Liberty. Another is, If a man be Free to Act, he
is much more Free to Will; because Quod efficit tale illud magis est tale; as
if he should say, if I make him angry, then I am more angry; because Quod
efficit, etc. The third is, If the Will be determined, then the writing is
determined, and he ought not to say he may write, but he must write. It Is true,
it follows that he must write, but it does not follow I ought to say he must
write, unless he would have me say more than I know, as himself does often in
this Reply.

After his Arguments, come his difficult Questions. If the Will of man be
determined without his Will, or without any thing in his power, why do we ask
men whether they will do such a thing or not? I answer, Because we desire to
know, and cannot know but by their telling, nor then neither for the most part.
Why do we represent reasons to them? Why do we pray them? Why do we entreat
them? I answer, because thereby we think to make them have the Will they have
not. Why do we blame them? I answer, because th'y please us not. I might ask
him, whether blaming be any thing else but saying the thing blamed is ill or
imperfect. May not we say a Horse is lame, though his lameness came from
necessity; or that a man is a fool or a knave, if he be so, though he could not
help it? To what purpose did our Savior say to the Paralytique person, Will thou be made clean, if his Will were extrinsecally determined? I answer, that
it was not because he would know, for he knew it before; but because he would
draw from him a confession of his want. We have piped unto you, and ye have not
danced; how could they help it? I answer, they could not help it. I would have
gathered your Children as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her vvings, but
ye would not. How easily might they answer according to T. H. his doctrine,
Alas, blame not us, our wills are not in our own power? I answer, they are
to be blamed though their Wills be not in their own power. Is not good good,
and evil evil though they be not in our power? and shall not I call them so?
and is not that Praise and Blame? But it seems the Bishop takes blame not for
the dispraise of a thing, but for a praetext and color of malice and revenge
against him he blames. And where he says our Wills are in our power, he sees
not that he speaks absurdly; for he ought to say, the Will is the Power; and
through ignorance detecteth the same fault in St. Austin, who says, our Will
should not be a Will at all, if it were not in our power; that is to say, if it
were not in our Will.

f This is the belief of all mankind, which we have not learned from our
Tutors, but is imprinted in our hearts by Nature, etc.

This piece of Eloquence is used by Cicero in his defense of Milo, to prove it
lawful for a man to resist force with force, or to keep himself from killing;
which the Bishop ( thinking himself able to make that which proves one thing
prove any thing,) has translated into English, and brought into this place to
prove Free Will. It is true, very few have learned from Tutors, that a man is
not free to Will; nor do they find it much in Books. That they find in Books,
that which the Poets chant in their Theaters, and the Shepherds in the
Mountains, that which the Pastors teach in the Churches, and the Doctors in the
Universities, and that which the common people in the Markets, and all mankind
in the whole World do assent unto, is the same that I assent unto, namely, that
a man has freedom to do if he will; but whether he has freedom to Will, is
a Question which it seems neither the Bishop nor they ever thought on.

g No man blames fire for burning Cities, nor taxes poison for destroying
Men, etc.

Here again he is upon his arguments from Blame, which I have answered before;
and we do as much blame them as we do men; for we say fire has done hurt, and
the poison has killed a man, as well as we say the man has done unjustly; but
we do not seek to be revenged of the fire and of poison, because we cannot make
them ask forgiveness, as we would make men to do when they hurt us; so that the
blaming of the one and the other, that is, the declaring of the hurt or evil
action done by them, is the same in both; but the malice of man is only
against man.

h No man sins in doing those things which he could not shun.

He may as well say, no man halts which cannot choose but halt; or stumbles,
that cannot choose but stumhl^. For what is sin but halting or stumbling in the
way of Gods Commandments.

i The Question then is not, whether a man be necessitated to will or nill, yet
free to act* or forbear. But saving the ambiguous acceptions of the word Free,
the Question is plainly this, etc.

This Question which the Bishop stateth in this place, I have before set down
verbatim and allowed: and it is the same with mine, though he perceave it not.
But seeing I did nothing, but at his request set down my opinion, there can be
no other Question between us in this controversy, but whether my opinion be
the truth or not.

k So my preface remains yet unanswered, Either I was extrinsecally and
inevetably predetermined to write this discourse, etc.

That which he says in the preface is that if he be not Free to write this
discourse, he ought not to be blamed. But if he be Free he has obtained the
cause.

The first consequence I should have granted him, if he had written it
rationally and civilly; the later I deny, and have shown that he ought to have
proved that a man is Free to Will. For that which he says, any thing else
whatsoever, would think, if it know it were moved, and did not know what moved
it. A wooden Top that is lasht by the Boys, and runs about sometimes to one
Wall, sometimes to another, sometimes spinning, sometimes hitting men on the
shins, if it were sensible of its own motion, would think it proceeded from its
own Will, unless it felt what lasht it. And is a man any wiser, when he runns
to one place for a Benefice, to another for a Bargain, and troubles the world
with writing errors, and requiring answers, because he thinks he does it
without other cause than his own Will, and sees not what are the lashings that
cause his Will?

J. D. ANd so to fall in hand with the Question, without any further proems or
prefaces. By Liberty, I do neither Numb. 4.
understand a liberty from sin, nor a liberty from misery, nor a liberty from
servitude, nor a liberty from violence, but I understand a liberty from
Necessity' or rather from Necessitation, that is, an universal immunity from
all inevitability and determination to one, whether it be of exercise only
which the Schools call a liberty of contradiction, and is found in God, and in
the good and bad Angels, that is not a liberty to do both good and evil, but a
liberty to do or not to do this or that good, this or that evil respectively;
or whether it be a liberty of specification and exercise also, which the
Schools call liberty of contrariety, and is found in men endowed with reason
and understanding, that is, a llberty to do and not to do, good and evil, this
or that. Thus the coast being cleared, etc.


T. H. IN the next place he makes certain distinctions of liberty, and says,
he means not liberty from sin, nor from servitude, nor from violence, but from
Necessity, Necessitation, inevitability, and determination to one; It had been
better to define liberty than thus to distinguish, for I understand never the
more what he means by liberty. And though he says he means liberty from
Necessitation, yet I understand not how such a liberty can be, and it is a
taking of the Question without proof; for what else is the Question between ut
but whether such a liberty he possible or not. There are in the same place
other distinctions, as a liberty of exercise only, which he calls a liberty of
contradiction, (namely, of doing not good or evil simply, but of doing this
or, that good, or this or that evil respectively.) And a liberty of
specification and exercise also, which he calls a liberty of contrariety,
namely, a liberty not only to do or not to do, good or evil, but also to do
or not to do, this or that good or evil. And with these distinctions he says,
he clears the coast, whereas in truth he darkneth his meaning, not only with
the Jargon of exercise only, specification also, contradiction, contrariety,
but also with pretending distinction where none is; for how is it possible for
the liberty of doing or not doing this or that good or evil, to consist (as he
says it does in God and Angels) without a liberty of doing or not doing good
or evil.


J. D. a IT is a rule in art, that words which are homonymous, of various and
ambiguous significations, ought ever in the first place to be distinguished. No
men delight in confused generalities, but either Sophisters or Bunglers. Vir
dolosus versatur in generalibus, deceitful men do not love to descend to
particulars; and when bad Archers shoot, the safest way is to run to the mark.
Liberty is sometimes opposed to the slavery of sin and vicious habits, as Romans
6. 22. Now being made free from sin. Sometimes to misery and oppression, Isay
58. 6. To let the oppressed go free. Sometimes to servitude, as Levit. 25. 10.
In the year of Jubilee ye shall proclaim liberty throughout the land. Sometimes
to violence, as Psalm. 105. 20. The prince of his people let him go free. Yet
none of all these are the liberty now in question, but a liberty from
necessity, that is a determination to one, or rather from necessitation, that
is a necessity imposed by another, or an extrinsecal determination. These
distinctions, do virtually imply a description of true liberty, which comes
nearer the essence of it, than T. H. his roving definition, as we shall see in
due place. And though he say that he understands never the more what I mean by
liberty, yet it is plain by his own ingenuous confession, both that he does
understand it, and that this is the very Question where the water sticks
between us, whether there be such a liberty free from all necessitation and
extrinsecal determination to one. Which being but the stating of the Question,
he calls it amiss the taking of the Question. It were too much weakness to beg
this Question, which is so copious and demonstrable. b It is strange to see
with what confidence now adays particular men slieght all the Schoolmen, and
Philosophers, and Classick Authors of former ages, as if they were not worthy
to unloose the shoe-strings of some modern Author, or did sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, until some third Cato dropped down from Heaven, to
whom all men must repair, as to the Altar of Promotheus, to light their
torches. I did never wonder to hear a raw Divine out of the Pulpit declare
against School Divinity to his equally ignorant Auditors; It is but as the Fox
in the Fable, who having lost his own tail by a mischance, would have
persuaded all his fellows to cut off theirs, and throw them away as
unprofitable burdens. But it troubles me to see a Scholar, one who has been
long admitted into the innermost closet of Nature, and seen the hidden secrets
of more subtle learning, so far to forget himself, as to style School-learning
no better than a plain Jargon, that is a senseless gibrish, or a fustian
language, like the chattering noise of Sabots. Suppose they did sometimes too
much cut truth into shreds, or delight in abstruse expressions, yet certainly,
this distinction of liberty into liberty of contrariety and liberty of
contradiction, or which is all one, of exercise only, or exercise and
specification jointly, which T. H. rejects with so much scorn, is so true, so
necessary, so generally received, that there is searce that writer of note,
either Divine or Philosopher, who did ever treat upon this subject, but he
uses it.

Good and evil are contraries, or opposite kinds of things, therefore to be
able to choose both good and evil, is a liberty of contrariety or of
specification; To choose this, and not to choose this, are contradictory, or
which is all one, an exercise or suspension of power; Therefore to be able to
do or forbear to do the same action, or to choose or not choose the same
object, without varying of the kind, is a liberty of contradiction, or of
exercise only. Now a man is not only able to do or forbear to do good only,
or evil only, but he is able both to do and to forbear to do both good and
evil. So he has not only a liberty of the action, but also a liberty of
contrary objects; not only a liberty of exercise, but also of specification;
not only a liberty of contradiction, but also of contrariety. On the other
side, God and the good Angels, can do or not do this or that good, but they
cannot do and not do both good and evil. So they have only a liberty of
exercise or contradiction, but not a liberty of specification or contrariety.
It appears then plainly, that the liberty of man is more large in the extension
of the object, which is both good and evil, than the liberty of God and the
good Angels, whose object is only good. But withal, the liberty of man comes
short in the intension of the power. Man is not so free in respect of good
only, as God, or the good Angels, because (not to speak of God whose liberty
is quite of another nature) the understandings of the Angels are clearer, their
power and dominion over their actions is greater, they have no sensitive
appetites to distract them, no Organs to be disturbed; we see then this
distinction is cleared from all darkness.

And where T. H. demands how it is possible for the liberty of doing, or not
doing this or that good or evil, to consist in God and Angels, without a
liberty of doing or not doing good or evil. The answer is obvious and easy,
referendo singula singulis, ^ rendering every act to its right object
respectively. God and good Angels have a power to do or not to do this or that
good, bad Angels have a power to do or not do this or that evil, so both
jointly considered have power respectively to do good or evil. And yet
according to the words of my discourse, God, and good and bad Angels being
singly considered, have no power to do good or evil, that is, indifferently, as
man has.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, IV.
HE intends here to make good the distinctions of Liberty of Exercise, and
Liberty of Contradiction; Liberty of Contrariety, and Liberty of Specification
and Exercise. And he begins thus.

a It is a rule in Art, that words which are homonymous, or of various and
ambiguous significations, ought ever in the first place to be distinguished,
etc.

I know not what Art it is that gives this rule. I am sure it is not the Art
of Reason which men call Logique. For Reason teaches, and the example of those
who only reason methodically, (which are the Mathematicians) that a man when
he will demonstrate the truth of what he is to say, must in the first place
determine what he will have to be understood by his words; which determination
is called definition; whereby the significations of his words are so clearly
set down, that there can creep in no ambiguity. And therefore there will be no
need of distinctions; and consequently his rule of Art, is a rash precept of
some ignorant man* whom he and others have followed.

The Bishop tells us that Liberty is sometimes opposed to sin, to oppression,
to servitudo; which is to tell us that they whom he has read in this point,
are inconstant in the meaning of their own words; and therefore they are little
beholding to him. And this diversity of significations he calls distinctions.
Do men that by the same word in one place mean one thing, and in another
another, and never tell us so, distinguish? I think they rather confound. And
yet he says, that these distinctions do vertually imply a description of true
Liberty, which comes nearer the essence of it, than T. H. his roving
definition; Which definition of mine was this, Liberty is when there is no
external impediment. So that in his opinion a man shall sooner understand
Liberty by reading these words, Romans 6. Being made free from sin, or these
words, Esaias 58. To let the oppressed go free, or by these words, Levit. 25. You
shall proclaim Liberty throughout the Land, than by these words of mine,
Liberty is the absence of external impediments to motion* Also he will face me
down that I understand what he means by his distinctions of liberty of
Contrariety, of Contradiction, of Exercise only, of Exercise and Specification
jointly. If he mean I understand his meaning, in one sense it is true; for by
them he means to shift off the discredit of being able to say nothing to the
Question, as they do, that pretending to know the cause of every thing, give
for the cause of why the Loadstone draws to it Iron, sympathy, and occult
quality; making they cannot tell, ( turned now into Occult) to stand for
thereall cause of that most admirable effect. But that those words signify
distinction I constantly deny. It is not enough for a distinction to be forked,
it ought to signify a distinct conception. There, is great difference between
luade distinctions and cloven feet.

b It is strange to see with what confidence now adays particular men slight
all the Schoolmen, and Philosophers, and Classick Authors of former ages, etc.

This word particular men is put here in my opinion with little judgment,
especially by a man that pretends to be learned. Does the Bishop think that
he himself is, or that there is any Universal man? It may be he means a private
man. Does he then think there is any man not private, besides him that is
endued with Sovereign power? But it is most likely he calls me a particular
man, because I have not had the authority he has had to teach what doctrine I
think fit. But now, I am no more Particular than he; and may with as good a
grace despise the Schoolmen, and some of the old Philosophers, as he can
despise me, unless he can show that it is more likely that he should be better
able to look into these Questions sufficiently, which require meditation and
reflection upon a man's own thoughts, he that has been obliged most of his time
to preach unto the people, and to that end to read those Authors that can best
furnish him with what he has to say, and to study for the rhetoric of his
expressions, and of the spare time (which to a good Pastor is very little) has
spent no little part in seeking preferment, and increasing of riches; than I
that have done almost nothing else, nor have had much else to do but to
meditate upon this and other natural Questions. It troubles him much that I
style School-learning Jargon. I do not call all School-learning so, but such as
is so, that is, that which they say in defending of untruths, and especially in
the maintenance of Free Will, when they talk of liberty of Exercise,
Specification, Contrariety, Contradiction, Acts Elicite and Exercite, and the
like; Which though he go over again in this place, endeavoring to explain
them, are still both here and there but Jargon, or that (if he like it better)
which the Scripture in the first Chaos calls Tohu and Bohu.

But because he takes it so hainously, that a private man should so hardly
censure School Divinity; I would be glad to know with what patience he can hear
Martin Luther, and Phillip Melancthon speaking of the same. Martin Luther that
was the first beginner of our deliverance from the servitude of the Romish
Clergy, had these three Articles censured by the University of Paris. The first
of which was, School-Theology is a false interpretation of the Scripture, and
Sacraments, which has banished from us true and sinceere Theology. The second
is, At what time School-Theology, that is, Mock-Theology came up, at the same
time the Theology of Christ's Cross went down. The third is, It is now almost
300 years since the Church has endured the licentiousnes of School Doctors in
corrupting of the Scriptures. Moreover the same Luther in another place of his
works says thus, School-Theology is nothing else but ignorance of the truth,
and a block to stumble at, laid before the Scriptures. And of Tho. Aquinas in
particular he says, that it was he that did set up the Kingdom of Aristotle,
the destroyer of godly Doctrine. And of the Philosophy whereof St. Paul bids
us beware, he says it is School-Theology. And Melancthon a Divine once much
esteemed in our Church, says of it thus, It Is known that that profane
Scholastique learning, which they will have to be called Divinity, began at
Paris; which being admitted, nothing is left sound in the Church, the Gospel is
obscured, Faith extinguished, the Doctrine of works received, and instead of
Christ's People, we are become not so much as the people of the Law, but the
people of Aristotle's Ethiques. These were no raw Divines, such as he says
preached to their equally ignorant Auditors. I could ad to these the slighting
of School Divinity by Calvin, and other learned Protestant Doctors; yet were
they all but private men, who it seems to the Bishop had forgot themselves as
well as I.

J. D. THus the coast being cleared, the next thing to be done, Numb. 5.
is to draw out our forces against the enemy; And because they are divided into
two Squadrons, the one of Christians, the other of Heathen Philosophers, it
will be best to dispose ours also into two Bodies, the former drawn from
Scripture, the later from Reason.


T. H. THe next thing be does after the clearing of the coast, is the dividing
of his forces, as he calls them, into two Squadrons, one of places of
Scripture, the other of Reasons, which Allegory be uses, I suppose, because he
addresseth the discourse to your Lordship, who is a Millitary Man. All that I
have to say, touching this is, that I observe a great part of those his forces,
do look and march another way, and some of them do fight among themselves.


J. D. IF T. H. could divide my forces, and commit them together among
themselves, it were his only way to conquer them. But he will find that those
imaginary contradictions, which he thinks he has espied in my discourse, are
but fancies, and my supposed impertinences will prove his own real mistakings.


IN this fifth Number there is nothing of his or mine, pertinent to the
Question, therefore nothing necessary to be repeated.


J. D. Proofs of Liberty out of Scripture.

FIrst, whosoever have power of election have true Liberty, Numb. 6. 1.
for the proper act of liberty is election. A Spontaneity may consist with
determination to one, as we see in Children, Fools, mad Men, bruit Beasts,
whose fancies are determined to those things which they act Spontaneously, as
the Bees make Honey, the Spiders Webs. But none of these have a liberty of
election, which is an act of judgment and understanding, and cannot possibly
consist with a determination to one. He that is determined by something before
himself or without himself, cannot be said to choose or elect, unless it be as
the Junior of the Mess chooses in Cambridge, whether he will have the least
part or nothing. And scarcely so much.

But men have liberty of election. This is plain, Numb. 30. 14. If a Wife make
a vow its left to her Husbands choice, either to establish it or to make it
void. And Josh. 24. 15. Choose you this day whom you will serve, etc. But I and
my house will serve the Lord. He makes his own choice, and leaves them to the
liberty of their election. And 2 Samuel 24, 12. I offer thee three things, choose
thee which of them I shall do. If one of these three things was necessarily
determined, and the other two impossible, how was it left to him to choose what
should be done? Therefore we have true liberty.


T. H. ANd the first place of Scripture taken from Numb. 30. 14 is one of them
that look another way; The words are, If a Wife make a vow, it is left to her
Husbands choice, either to establish it, or make it void; for it prooves no
more but that the Husband is a free or voluntary Agent, but not that his choice
therein is not necessitated or not determined to what he shall choose by
praecedent necessary causes.


J. D. MY first Argument from Scripture is thus formed, Arg. 1.
Whosoever have a liberty or power of election, are not determined to one by
praecedent necessary causes.

But men have liberty of election.

The assumption or minor proposition is prooved by three places of Scripture,
Numb. 30. 14. Josh. 24. 15. 2 Samuel 24. 12. I need not insist upon these,
because T. H. acknowledges, that it is clearly prooved that there is election
in Man.

But he denies the major Proposition, because (says he) Man is necessitated
or determined to what he shall choose by praecedent necessary causes; I take
away this answer three ways.

First, by Reason. Election is evermore either of things 1.
possible, or at least of things conceived to be possible, that is, efficacious
election, when a man hops or thinks of obteining the object. Whatsoever the
will chooses, it chooses under the notion of good, either honest or
delightful or profitable, but there can be no real goodness apprehended in
that which is known to be impossible: It is true, there may be some wandering
pendulous wishes of known impossibilities, as a man also that has committed an
offense, may wish he had not committed it, but to choose efficaciously an
impossibility, is as impossible as an impossibility it self. No man can think
to obtein that which he knows impossible to be obtained; but he who knows that
all things are antecedently determined by necessary causes, knows that it is
impossible for any thing to be otherwise than it is; Therefore to ascribe unto
him a power of election to choose this or that indifferently, is to make the
same thing to be determined to one, and to be not determined to one, which are
contradictories. Again, whosoever has an elective power, or a liberty to
choose, has also a liberty or power to refuse, Isa. 7. 10. Before the Child
shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good. He who chooses this rather
than that, refuses that rather than this. As Moses choosing to suffer
affliction with the people of God, did thereby refuse the pleasures of sin.
Heb. 11. 24. But no man has any power to refuse, that which is necessarily
praedetermined to be, unless it be as the Fox refused the Grapes which were
beyond his reach. When one thing of two or three is absolutely determined, the
other are made thereby simply impossible.

a Secondly, I prove it by instances, and by that universal 2.
notion, which the world has of election; what is the difference between an
elective and hereditary Kingdom? but that in an elective Kingdom they have
power or liberty to choose this or that Man indifferently: But in an hereditary
Kingdom they have no such power nor liberty. Where the Law makes a certain
Heir, there is a necessitation to one; where the Law does not name a certain
Heir, there is no necessitation to one, and there they have power or liberty to
choose. An haereditary prince may be as grateful and acceptable to his
subjects, and as willingly received by them (according to that liberty which is
opposed to compulsion or violence) as he who is chosen, yet he is not therefore
an elective Prince. In Germany all the Nobility and Commons may assent to the
choice of the Emperor, or be well pleased with it when it is concluded, yet
none of them elect or choose the Emperor, but only those six Princes who have
a consultative, deliberative, and determinative power in his Election. And if
their votes or suffrages be equally divided, three to three, then the King of
Bohemia has the casting voice. So likewise in Corporations or Commonwealths,
sometimes the People, sometimes the Common Council, have power to name so many
persons for such an office, and the Supreme Magistrate, or Senate, or lesser
Council respectively, to choose one of those. And all this is done with that
caution and secrecy, by billets or other means, that no man knows which way
any man gave his vote, or with whom to be offended. If it were necessarily and
inevitably predetermined, that this individual person and no other shall and
must be chosen, what needed all this circuit and caution, to do that which is
not possible to be done otherwise, which one may do as well as a thousand, and
for doing of which no rational man can be offended, if the electors were
necessarily predetermined to elect this man and no other. And though T. H. was
pleased to pass by my University instance, yet I may not, until I see what he
is able to say unto it. The Junior of the Mess in Cambridge divides the meat in
four parts, the Senior chooses first, then the second and third in their
order. The Junior is determined to one, and has no choice left, unless it be
to choose whether he will take that part which the rest have refused, or none
at all. It may be this part is more agreeable to his mind that any of the others
would have been, but for all that he cannot be said to choose it, because he is
determined to this one. Even such a liberty of election is that which is
established by T. H. Or rather much worse in two respects. The Junior has yet
a liberty of contradiction left to choose whether he will take that part or not
take any part, but he who is precisely predetermined to the choice of this
object, has no liberty to refuse it. Secondly, the Junior by dividing
carefully may preserve to himself an equal share, but he who is wholly
determined by extrinsecal causes, is left altogether to the mercy and
disposition of another.

Thirdly, I prove it by the texts alleged, Numb. 30. 3.
13. If a Wife make a vow, it is left to her Husbands choice, either to
establish it or make it void. But if it be predetermined, that he shall
establish it, it is not in his power to make it void. If it be predetermined,
that he shall make it void, it is not in his power to establish it. And
howsoever it be determined, yet being determined, it is not in his power
indifferently, either to establish it, or to make it void at his pleasure. So
Joshua 24. 15. Choose you this day whom ye will serve: But I and my house will
serve the Lord. It is too late to choose that this day, which was determined
otherwise yesterday, whom ye will serve, whether the Gods whom your fathers
served, or the Gods of the Amorites. Where there is an election of this or
that, these Gods, or those Gods, there must needs be either an indifferency to
both objects, or at least a possibility of either. I and my house will seve the
Lord. If he were extrinsecally predetermined, he should not say I will serve,
but I must serve. And 2 Samuel 24. 12. I offer thee three things choose thee
which of them I shall do. How does God offer three things to David's choice, if
he had predetermined him to one of the three by a concourse of necessary
extrinsecal causes? If a sovereign Prince should descend so far as to offer a
delinquent his choice, whether he would be fined, or imprisoned, or banished,
and had under hand signed the sentence of his banishment, what were it else but
plain drollery, or mockery? This is the argument which in T. H. his opinion
looks another way. If it do, it is as the Parthians used to fight, flying. His
reason follows next to be considered.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, VI.
IN this Number he has brought three places of Scripture to prove Free Will.
The first is, If a Wife make a vow, it is left to her Husbands choice either to
establish it, or to make it void. And Choose you this day whom you will serve,
etc. But I and my house will serve the Lord. And I offer thee three things
choose thee which of them I shall do. Which in the Reply he endeavors to
make good; but needed not, seeing they prove nothing but that a man is Free to
do if he will, which I deny not. He ought to prove he is Free to will, which I
deny.

a Secondly, I prove it by instances, and by that universal notion which the
world has of Election.

His instances are first the difference between an Hereditary Kingdom, and an
Elective; and then the difference between the Senior and Junior of the Mess
taking their commons; both which prove the liberty of doing what they will, but
not a liberty to will; for in the first case the Electors are Free to name whom
they will, but not to Will; and in the second the Senior having an appetite,
chooses what he has an appetite to; but chooses not his appetite.

T. H. FOr if there come into the Husbands mind greater good by establishing
Numb 7.
than abrogating such a vow, the establishing will follow necessarily. And if
the evil that will follow thereon in the Husbands opinion outweigh the good,
the contrary must needs follow. And yet in this following of ones hopes and
fears consists the nature of Election. So that a man may both choose this,
and cannot but choose this. And consequently choosing and necessity are joined
together.


J. D. ^THere is nothing said with more show of reason in this cause by the
patrons of necessity, and adversaries of true liberty than this, That the Will
does perpetually and infallibly follow the last dictate of the understanding,
or the last judgment of right reason. (...) in this, and this only, I confess
T. H. has good seconds. Yet the common and approved opinion is contrary. And
justly: For,

First, this very act of the understanding is an effect of 1.
the will, and a testimony of its power and liberty. It is the will, which
affecting some particular good, does engage and command the understanding to
consult and deliberate what means are convenient for atteining that end. And
though the Will it self be blind, yet its object is good in general, which is
the end of all human actions. Therefore it belongs to the Will, as to the
General of an Army to move the other powers of the soul to their acts, and
among the rest the understanding also, by applying it and reducing its power
into act. So as whatsoever obligation the understanding does put upon the Will,
is by the consent of the Will, and derived from the power of the Will, which
was not necessitated to moove the understanding to consult. So the Will is the
Lady and Mistress of human actions, the understanding is her trusty counselor,
which gives no advise, but when it is required by the Will. And if the first
consultation or deliberation be not sufficient, the Will may moove a review,
and require the understanding to inform it self better, and take advise of
others, from whence many times the judgment of the understanding does receive
alteration.

Secondly, for the manner how the understanding does 2.
determine the Will, it is not naturally but morally. The Will is moved by the
understanding, not as by an efficient, having a causal influence into the
effect, but only by proposing and representing the object. And therefore as it
were ridiculous to say, that the object of the sight is the cause of seeing, so
it is to say, that the proposing of the object by the understanding to the
will, is the cause of willing; and therefore the understanding has no place in
that concourse of causes which according to T. H. do necessitate the will.

Thirdly, the judgment of the understanding is not always 3.
practice practicum, nor of such a nature in it self, as to oblige and
determine the will to one. Sometimes the understanding proposes two or three
means equally available to the atteining of one and the same end. Sometimes it
dictateth, that this or that particular good is eligible or fit to be chosen,
but not that it is necessarily eligible, or that it must be chosen. It may
judge this or that to be a fit means, but not the only means to attain the
desired end. In these cases no man can doubt, but that the Will may choose, or
not choose, this or that indifferently. Yea, though the understanding shall
judge one of these means to be more expedient than another, yet for as much as
in the less expedient there is found the reason of good, the Will in respect of
that dominion which it has over it self, may accept that which the
understanding judges to be less expedient, and refuse that which it judges to
be more expedient.

Fourthly, sometimes the will does not will the end so efficaciously, 4.
but that it may be, and often is deterred from the prosecution of it by the
difficulty of the means; and notwithstanding the judgment of the
understanding, the will may still suspend its own act.

Fifthly, supposing but not granting, that the will did necessarily 5.
follow the last dictate of the understanding, yet this proves no antecedent
necessity, but coexistent with the act; no extrinsecal necessity, the will and
the understanding being but two faculties of the same soul; no absolute
necessity, but merely upon supposition. And therefore the same Authors who
matntain that the judgment of the understanding does necessarily determine the
will, do yet much more earnestly oppugn T. H. his absolute necessity of all
occurrences. Suppose the Will shall apply the understanding to deliberate and
not require a review. Suppose the dictate of the understanding shall be
absolute, not this or that indifferently, nor this rather than that
comparatively, but this positively, nor this freely, but this necessarily. And
suppose the will do will efficaciously, and do not suspend its own act. Then
here is a necessity indeed, but neither absolute, nor extrinsecal, nor
antecedent, flowing from a concourse of causes without our selves, but a
necessity upon supposition, which we do readily grant. So far T. H. is wide
from the truth, whilst he maintains, either that the apprehension of a greater
good does neessitate the Will, or that this is an absolute necessity.

b Lastly, whereas he says, that the nature of election does consist in
following our hopes and fears, I cannot but observe that there is not one word
of Art in this whole treatife, which he uses in the right sense; I hope it
does not proceed out of an affectation of singularity, nor out of a contempt of
former Writers, nor out of a desire to take in sunder the whole frame of
Learning, and new mould it after his own mind. It were to be wished that at
least he would give us a new Dictionary, that we might understand his sense.
But because this is but touched here sparingly and upon the by, I will forbear
it, until I meet with it again in its proper place. And for the present it
shall suffice to say, that hopes and fears are common to brute Beasts, but
election is a rational act, and is proper only to man, who is Sanctius his
animal mentisque capacius altae.


T. H. THE second place of Scripture is Josh. 24. 15. The third is 2 Samuel 24.
12. whereby it is clearly proved, that there is election in man, but not proved
that such election was not necessitated by the hopes, and fears, and
considerations of good and bad to follow, which depend not on the Will, nor are
subject to election. And therefore one answer serves all such places, if they
were a thousand.


J. D. THis answer being the very same with the former, word for word, which
has already sufficiently been shaken in pieces, does require no new reply.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. VII.
a THere is no thing said with more show of reason in this cause by the Patrons
of Necessity then this, that the Will does perpetually and infallibly follow the
last dictate of the understanding, or the last judgment of right reason, etc.
Yet the common and approved opinion is contrary, and justly; for first this
very act of the understanding is an effect of the Will, etc.

I note here first, that the Bishop is mistaken in saying that I or any other
Patron of Necessity, are of opinion that the Will follows always the last
judgment of right Reason. For it follows as well the judgment of an
erroneous as of a true reasoning; and the truth in general is that it follows
the last opinion, of the goodness or evilness of the object, be the opinion
true or false.

Secondly I note, that in making the understanding to be an effect of the Will,
he thinks a man may have a will to that which he not so much as thinks on.
And in saying, that it is the Will, which affecting some particular good, does
engage and command the Understanding to consult, etc.

That he not only thinks the Will affects a particular good, before the
man understands it to be good, but also he thinks that these words does
command the understanding; and these; for it belongs to the Will as to the
General of an Army to move the other powers of the soul to their acts, and a
great many more that follow which are not sense; but mere confusion and
emptiness: as for example, The understanding does determine the will, not
Naturally, but Morally; and The will is moved by the understanding, is
unintelligible. Moved not as by an Efficient, is nonsense. And where he says,
that it is ridiculous to say, the object of the sight is the cause of seeing,
he shows so clearly that he understands nothing at all of Natural
Philosophy, that I am sorry I had the ill fortune to be engaged with him in a
dispute of this kind. There is nothing that the simplest Country Man could say
so absurdly concerning the understanding, as this of the Bishop, the judgment
of the understanding is not always practice practicum. A Country Man will
acknowledge there is judgment in Men, but will as soon say the judgment of
the judgment, as the judgment of the understanding. And if practice practicum
had been sense, he might have made a shift to put it into English. Much more
follows of this stuff.

b Lastly, whereas he says, that the nature of Election does consist in
following our hopes and fears, I cannot but observe that there is not one word
of Art in this whole treatise which he uses in the right sense. I hope it does
not proceed out of an affectation of singularity, nor out of a contempt of
former Writers, etc.

He might have said, there is not a word of Jargon, nor Nonsense; and that it
proceeds from an affectation of truth, and contempt of metaphysical Writers,
and a desire to reduce into frame the Learning which they have confounded and
disordered.

T. H. SUpposing, it seems, I might answer as I have done, that Numb. 8.
Necessity and Election might stand together, and instance in the actions of
Children, Fools, and brute Beasts, whose fancies I might say, are necessitated
and determined to one: before these his proofs out of Scripture he desires to
prevent that instance; and therefore says, that the actions of children,
fools, madmen, and beasts are indeed determined, but that they proceed not
from election, nor from free, but from spontaneous Agents. As for example, that
the Be when it makes honey does it spontaneously; And when the Spider makes
his webb, he does it spontaneously, and not by election. Though I never meant
to ground any answer upon the experience of what children, fools, madmen, and
beasts do, yet that your Lordship may understand what can be meant by
spontaneous, and how it differs from voluntary, I will answer that distinction
and show, that it fights against its fellow Arguments. Your Lordship
therefore is to consider, that all voluntary actions, where the thing that
induces the will is not fear, are called also spontaneous, and said to be done
by a man's own accord. As when a man gives money voluntarily to another for
Merchandise, or out of affection, he is said to do it of his own accord, which
in Latin is Sponte, and therefore the action is spontaneous. Though to give
ones money willingly to a thief to avoid killing, or*throw it into the Sea to
avoid drowning, where the motive is fear, be not called spontaneous. But every
spontaneous action is not therefore voluntary, for voluntary presupposes some
precedent deliberation, that is to say, some consideration and meditation of
what is likely to follow, both upon the doing and abstaining from the action
deliberated of, whereas many actions are done of our own accord, and be
therefore spontaneous; of which nevertheless, as he thinks, we never consulted,
nor deliberated in our selves, as when making no question, nor any the least
doubt in the world, but that the thing we are about is good, we eat, or walk,
or in anger strike or revile, which he thinks sponnaneous, but not voluntary
nor elective actions. And with such kind of actions he says necessitation may
stand, but not with such as are volnntary, and proceed upon election and
deliberation Now if I make it appear to you, that even these actious which he
says proceed from spontaneity, and which he ascribes only to fools,
children, madmen, and beasts, proceed from deliberation and election, and that
actions inconsiderate, rash and spontaneous are ordinarily found in those that
are by themselves and many more, thought as wise or wiser than ordinary men
are. Then his Argument concludes, that necessity and election may stand
together, which is contrary to that which he intends by all the rest of his
Arguments to prove. And first your Lordships own experience furnishes you with
proof enough, that Horses, Dogs, and other brute beasts do demurre oftentimes
upon the way they are to take. The Horse retiring from some strange figure he
sees, and coming on again to avoid the spur. And what else does man that
deliberateth, but one while proceed toward action, another while retire from
it, as the hope of greater go^d draws him, or the fear of greater evil drives
him? A Child may be so young as to do all which it does without all
deliberation, but that is but till it chance to be hurt by doing somewhat, or
till it be of age to understand the rod; for the actions wherein he has once a
check, shall be deliberated on the second time. Fools and mad Men manifestly
deliberate no less than the wisest Men, though they make not so good a choice,
the images of things, being by diseases altered. For Bees and Spiders, if he
had so little to do as to be a spectator of their astions, he would have
confessed not only Election, but also Art, Prudence, and Policy in them, very
near equal to that of Mankind. Of Bees Aristotle says, their life is civil. He
is deceived, if he think any spontaneous action after once being checked in it,
differs from an action voluntary and elective, for even the setting of a man's
foot in the posture of walking, and the action of ordinary eating, was once
deliberated, how and when it should be done; And though it afterward become
easy and habitual, so as to be done without forethought, yet that does not
hinder, but that the act is voluntary, and proceeds from election. So also are
the rashest actions of choleric persons voluntary and upon deliberation; for
who is there but very young children that has not considered, when and how far
he ought or safely may, strike or revile. Seeing then he agrees with me that
such actions are nec^cessitated, and the fancy of those that do them is
determined to the actions they do, it follows out of his own doctrine, that the
liberty of election does not take away the necessity of electing this or that
individual thing. And thus one of his Arguments fights against another*


J. D. WE have partly seen before how T. H. has coined a new kind of liberty,
a new kind of necessity, a new kind of election, and now in this section a new
kind of spontaneity, and a new kind of voluntary actions. Although he say, that
here is nothing new to him, yet I begin to suspect, that either here are many
things new to him, or otherwise his election is not the result of a serious
mature deliberation. a The first thing that I offer, is, how often he mistakes
my meaning in this one section; first, I make voluntary and spontaneous actions
to be one and the same, he says I distinguish them, so as spontaneous actions
may be necessary, but voluntary actions cannot. Secondly, b I distinguish
between free acts and voluntary acts. The former are always deliberate, the
later may be indeliberate; all free acts are voluntary, but all voluntary acts
are not free. But he says I confound them and make them the same. c Thirdly,
he says I ascribe spontaneity only to Fools, Children, mad Men and Beasts,
But I acknowledge spontaneity has place in rational men, both as it is
comprehended in liberty* and as it is distinguished from liberty.

d Yet I have no reason to be offended at it; for he deals no otherwise with me
than he does with himself. Here he tells us that voluntary praesupposeth
deliberation. But Numb. 25. he tells us contrary, that whatsoever follows the
last appetite is voluntary, and where there is but one appetite, that is the
last. And that no action of a man can be said to be without deliberation,
though never so sudden. So Numb. 33. he tells us, that by spontaneity is meant,
inconsiderate proceeding, or else nothing is meant by it, yet here he tells us,
that all voluntary actions which proceed not from fear, are spontaneous,
whereof many are deliberate, as that wherein he instanceth himself, to give
money for Merchandise. Thirdly, when I said that Children before they have the
use of reason, act spontaneously, as when they suck the Breast, but do not act
freely because they have not judgment to deliberate or elect, Here T. H.
undertakes to prove, that they do deliberate and elect. And yet presently
after confesses again, that a Child may be so young, as to do what it does
without all deliberation.

Besides these mistakes and contradictions he has other errors also in this
^ection. As this, that no actions proceeding from fear are spontaneous. He who
throws his goods into the Sea, to avoid drowning does it not only
spontaneously but even freely. He that wills the end, wills the means conducing
to that end. It is true that if the action be considered nakedly without all
circumstances, no man willingly or spontaneously casts his goods into the Sea.
But if we take the action as in this particular case invested with all the
circumstances, and in order to the end, that is, the saving of his own life, it
is not only voluntary and spontaneous, but elective and chosen by him, as the
most probable means for his own preservation. As there is an Antecedent and a
subsequent will, so there is an Antecedent and a subsequent spontaneity: His
Grammatical argument, grounded upon the derivation of spontaneous from sponte,
weighs nothing; we have learned in the rudiments of Logic that conjugates are
sometimes in name only, and not indeed. He who casts his goods into the Sea,
may do it of his own accord in order to the end. Secondly, he erres in this
also, that nothing is opposed to spontaneity but only fear. Invincible and
Antecedent ignorance does destroy the nature of spontaneity or voluntariness,
by removing that knowledge which should and would have prohibited the action.
As a man thinking to shoot a wild Beast in a Bush* shoots his friend, which if
he had known, he would not have shot. This man did not kill his friend of his
own accord.

For the clearer understanding of these things, and to know 4.
what spontaneity is, let us consult a while with the Schools about the
distinct order of voluntary or involuntary actions. Some acts proceed wholly
from an extrinsecal cause; as the throwing of a stone upwards, a rape, or the
drawing of a Christian by plain force to the Idols Temple, these are called
violent acts. Secondly, some proceed from an intrinsecal cause, but without any
manner of knowledge of the end, as the falling of a stone downwards, these are
called natural acts. Thirdly, some proceed from an internal principle, with an
imperfect knowledge of the end, where there is an appetite to the object, but
no deliberation nor election, as the acts of Fools, Children, Beasts, and the
inconsiderate act; of men of judgment. These are called voluntary or
spontaneous acts. Fourthly, some proceed from an intrinsecal cause, with a more
perfect knowledge of the end, which are elected upon deliberation, These are
called free acts. So then the formal reason of liberty is election. The
necessary requisite to election is deliberation. Deliberation implies the
actual use of reason. But deliberation and election cannot possibly subsist,
with an extrinsecal praedetermination to one. How should a man deliberate or
choose which way to go, who knows that all ways are shut against him, and made
impossible to him, but only one? This is the genuine sense of these words
Voluntary and Spontaneous in this Question. Though they were taken twenty other
ways vnlgarly or metaphorically, as we say spontaneous ulcers, where there is
no appetite at all, yet it were nothing to this controversy, which is not
about Words, but about Things; not what the words Voluntary or Free do or may
signify, but whether all things be extrinsecally praedetermined to one.

These grounds being laid for clearing the true sense of the words, the next
thing to be examined is, that contradiction which he has espied in my
discourse, or how this Argument fights against his fellows. If I (says T. H.)
make it appear, that the spontaneous actions of Fools, Children, mad Men and
Beasts, do proceed from election and deliberation, and that inconsiderate and
indeliberate actions are found in the wisest men, then this argument concludes,
that necessity and election may stand together, which is contrary to his
assertion. If this could be made appear as easily as it is spoken, it would
concern himself much, who when he should prove, that rational men are not free
from necessity, goes about to prove that brute Beasts do deliberate and elect,
that is as much as to say, are free from necessity. But it concerns not me at
all, it is neither my assertion, nor my opinion, that necessity and election
may not meet together in the same subject, violent, natural, spontaneous, and
deliberate or elective acts may all meet together in the same subject. But this
I say, that necessity and election cannot consist together in the same act. He
who is determined to one, is not free to choose out of more then one. To begin
with his later supposition, that wise men may do inconsiderate and indeliberate
actions, I do readily admit it. But where did he learn to infer a general
conclusion from particular premises? as thus, because wise men do some
indeliberate acts, therefore no act they do is free or elective. Secondly, for
his former supposition, That Fools, Children, mad Men, and Beasts do deliberate
and elect, if he could make it good, it is not I who contradict my self, nor
fight against mine own assertion, but it is he who endeavors to prove that
which I altogether deny. He may well find a contradiction between him and me,
otherwise to what end is this dispute? But he shall not be able to find a
difference between me and my self: But the truth is, he is not able to prove
any such thing; and that brings me to my sixth Consideration.

That neither Horses, nor Bees, nor Spiders, nor Children, nor Fools, nor
Madmen do deliberate or elect. His 6.
first instance is in the Horse, or Dog, but more especially the Horse. He told
me, that I divided my argument into squadrons, to apply my self to your
Lordship, being a Military man; And I apprehend, that for the same reason he
gives his first instance of the Horse, with a submission to your own
experience. So far well, but otherwise very disadvantageously to his cause. Men
use to say of a dull fellow, that he has no more brains than a Horse. And the
Prophet David says, Be not like the Horse and Mule which have no
understanding. Psalm. 32. 9. How do they deliberate without understanding? And
Psalm. 49. 20. he says the same of all brute Beasts. Man being in honor had no
understanding, but became like unto the Beasts that perish. The Horse d^^urres
upon his way, Why not? Outward objects, or inward fancies may produce a stay in
his course, though he have no judgment, either to deliberate or elect. He
retires from some strange figure which he sees, and comes on again to avoid the
spur. So he may; and yet be far enough from deliberation. All this proceeds
from the sensitive passion of fear, which is a perturbation arising from the
expectation of some imminent evil. But he urges, what else does man that
deliberateth? Yes very much. The Horse fears some outward object, but
deliberation is a comparing of several means conducing to the same end. Fear is
commonly of one, deliberation of more than one; fear is of those things which
are not in our power, deliberation of those things which are in our power; fear
arises many times out of natural antipathies, but in these disconveniences of
nature, deliberation has no place at all. In a word, fear is an enemy to
deliberation, and betrayeth the succors of the Soul. If the Horse did
deliberate, he should consult with reason, whether it were more expedient for
him to go that way or not; He would represent to himself, all the dangers both
of going, and staying, and compare the one with the other, and elect that which
is less evil; He should consider whether it were not better to endure a little
hazard, than ungratefully and dishonestly to fail in his duty toward his
Master, who did breed him, and does* feed him. This the Horse does not; Neither
is it possible for him to do it. Secondly, for Children, T. H. confesses that
they may be so young, that they do not deliberate at all; Afterward as they
attein to the use of reason by degrees, so by degeees they become free Agents.
Then they do deliberate, before they do not deliberate. The rod may be a means
to make them use their reason, when they have power to exercise it, but the rod
cannot produce the power before they have it. Thirdly, for Fools and mad Men;
It is not to be understood of such mad Men as have their lucida intervalla, who
are mad and discreet by fitts; when they have the use of reason, they are no
mad Men, but may deliberate as well as others; Nor yet of such Fools as are
only comparative Fools, that is, less wise than others. Such may deliberate,
though not so clearly, nor so judiciously as others; but of mere mad Men, and
mere natural Fools, to say that they, who have not the use of reason, do
deliberate or use reason, implies a contradiction. But his chiefest confidence
is in his Bees and Spiders, of whose actions, (he says) if I had been a
spectator, I would have confessed, not only Election, but also Art, Prudence,
Policy, very near equal to that of Mankind, whose life, as Aristotle says, is
civil. Truly I have contemplated their actions many times, and have been much
taken with their curious works, yet my thoughts did not reflect so much upon
them, as upon their maker, who is sic magnus in magnis, that he is not, minor
in parvis; So great in great things, that he is not less in small things. Yes,
I have seen those silliest of creatures, and seeing their rare works, I have
seen enough to confute all the bold-faced Atheists of this age, and their
hellish blasphemies. I see them, but I praised the marvaillous works of God,
and admired that great and first intellect, who has both adapted their organs,
and determined their fancies to these particular works. I was not so simple to
ascribe those Rarities to their own invention, which I knew to proceed from a
mere instinct of Nature. In all other things they are the dullest of creatures.
Naturalists write of Bees, that their fancy is imperfect, not distinct from
their common sense, spread over their whole body, and only perceiving things
present. When Aristotle calls them Political or Sociable Creatures, he did not
intend it really that they lived a civil life, but according to an Analogy,
because they do such things by instinct, as truly Political Creatures do out of
judgment. Nor when I read in St. Ambrose, of their Hexagones or Sexangular
celles, did I therefore conclude, that they were Mathematicians. Nor when I
read in Crespet, that they invoke God to their aid, when they go out of their
Hives, be^^^ing their thighs in form of a cross, and bowing themselves; did I
therefore think, that this was an act of religious piety, or that they were
capable of Theological virtues, whom I see in all other things in which their
fancies are not determined, to be the silliest of creatures, strangers not only
to right reason, but to all resemblances of it.

Seventhly, concerning those actions which are done 7.
upon precedent and passed deliberations; They are not only spontaneous, but
free acts. Habits contracted by use and experience do help the Will to act with
more facility, and more determinately, as the hand of the Artificer is helped
by his tools. And precedent deliberations, if they were sad and serious, and
prooved by experience to be profitable, do save the labor of subsequent
consultations, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora, yet
nevertheless the actions which are done by virtue of these formerly acquired
habits are no less free, than if the deliberation were coexistent which this
particular action. He that has gained an habit and skill to play such a
lesson, needs not a new deliberation how to play every time that he plays it
over and over; yet I am far from giving credit to him in this, that walking or
eating universally considered are free actions, or proceed from true liberty,
not so much because they want a particular deliberation before every individual
act, as because they are animal motions, and need no deliberation of reason, as
we see in brute beasts. And nevertheless the same actions, as they are
considered individually, and invested with their due circumstances, may be and
often are free actions subjected to the liberty of the Agent.

Lastly, whereas T. H. compares the first motions or 8.
rash attempts of choleric persons with such acquired habits, it is a great
mistake. Those rash attempts are voluntary actions, and may be facilitated
sometimes by acquired habits; But yet for as much as actions are often altered
and varied by the circumstances of Time, Place and Person, so as that act which
at one time is morally good, at another time may be morally evil. And for as
much as a general precedent deliberation how to do this kind of action is not
sufficient to make this or that particular action good or expedient, which
being in it self good, yet particular circumstances may render inconvenient or
unprofitable, to some persons, at some times, in some places. Therefore a
precedent general deliberation how to do any act, as for instance, how to
write, is not sufficient to make a particular act, as my writing this
individual Reply to be freely done, without a particular and subsequent
deliberation. A man learns French advise^^y, that is a free act: The same man
in his choler and passion reviles his friend in French, without any
deliberation; this is a spontaneous act, but it is not a free act; If he had
taken time to advise, he would not have reviled his friend. Yet as it is not
free, so neither is it so necessary, as the Bees making honey, whose fancy is
not only inclined but determined by nature to that act. So every way he fails.
And his conclusion, that the liberty of Election, does not take away the
necessity of electing this or that individual thing, is no consequent from my
doctrine, but from his own. Neither do my arguments fight one against another,
but his private opinions fight both against me and against an undoubted truth.
A free Agent endowed with liberty of election, or with an elective power, may
nevertheless be necessitated in some individual acts, but those acts wherein he
is necessitated, do not flow from his elective power, neither are those acts
which flow from his elective power necessitated.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, VIII.
a THe first thing that I offer is, how often he mistakes my meaning in this
one Section. First I make Voluntary and Spontaneous actions to be one and the
same; He says I distinguish them, etc.

It is very possible I may have mistaken him; for neither he nor I understand
him. If they be one, why did he without need bring in this strange word
Spontaneous? Or rather, why did the School men bring it in, if not merely to
shift off the difficulty of maintaining their tenet of Free Will?

b Secondly he says* I distinguish between Free acts and Voluntary acts; but
he says, I confound them and make them the same.

In his Reply Number 2. he says, that for the clearing of the Question, we are
to know the difference between these three, Necessity, Spontaneity, and
Liberty; and because I thought he knew that it could not be cleared without
under standing what is Will, I had reason to think that Spontaneity was his new
word for Will. And presently after some things are Necessary, and not Voluntary
or Spontaneous; some things are both Necessary and Voluntary. These words
Voluntary and Spontaneous so put together, would make any man believe
Spontaneous we^e put as* explicative of Voluntary; for it is no wonder in the
eloquence of the School men. Therefore presently after, these words Spontaneity
consists in a conformity of the Appetite, either intellectual or sensitive,
signify that Spontaneity is a conformity or likeness of the appetite to the
object; which to me sounds as if he had said, that the Appetite is like the
Object; which is as proper as if he had said the Hunger is like the Meat. If
this be the Bishops meaning, as it is the meaning of the Words, he is a very
fine Philosopher. But hereafter I will venture no more to say his meaning is
this or that, especially were he uses terms of Art.

c Thirdly he says, I ascribe spontaneity only to Fools, Children, mad Men
and Beasts. But I acknowledge Spontaneity has place in rataonal men, etc.

I resolve to have no more to do with Spontaneity. But I desire the Reader to
take notice, that the common people, on whose arbitration depends the
signification of words in com^^n use, among the Latins and Greeks did call all
actions and motions whereof they did perceive no cause, Spantaneous, and (...):
I say, not those actions which had no causes, for all actions have their
causes, but those actions whose causes they did not perceive. So that
Spontaneous as a general name comprehended many actions and motions of
inanimate creatures; as the falling of heavy things downwards, which they
thought spantaneous, and that if they were not hindered, they would descend of
their own accord. It comprehended also all animal motion, as beginning from the
Will or Appetite; because the causes of the Will and Appetite being not
perceived, they supposed as the Bishop does that they were the causes of
themselves. So that that which in general is called Spont^neous, being applied
to Men and Beasts in special, is called Voluntary. Yet the Will and Appetite,
though the very same thing, use to be distinguished in certain occasions. For
in the public conversation of Men, where they are to judge of one another
Will, and of the regularity and irregularity of one another actions, not every
Appetite, but the last is esteemed in the public judgment for the Will. Nor
every action proceeding from Appetite, but that only to which there had
preceded or ought to have preceded some deliberation. And this I say is so,
when one man is to judge of another Will. For every man in himself, knows
that what he desires or has an appetite to, the same he has a will to,
though his will may be changed before he has obtained his desire. The Bishop
understanding nothing of this, might if it had pleased him, have called it
Jargon* But he had rather pick out of it some contradictions of my self. And
therefore says,

d Yet I have no reason to be offended at it ( meaning such contradictions) for
he deals no otherwise with me than he does with himself.

It is a contradiction, he says, that having said that voluntary presupposes
deliberation, I say in another place, that whatsoever follows the last
appetite is voluntary, and where there is but one appetite that is the last.
Not observing that voluntary presupp^seth deliberation, when the judgment
whether the action be voluntary or not, is not in the Actor but in the Judge,
who regards not the will of the Actor where there is nothing to be accused in
the action of deliberate malice; yet knows that though there be but one
appetite, the same is truly will for the time, and the action (if it follow) a
voluntary action.

This also he says is a contradction, that having said, no action of a man can
be said to be without deliberation, though never so sudden, I say afterward
that by spontaneity is meant inconsiderate proceeding.

Again he observes not that the action of a man that is not a child, in
public judgment how rash, inconsiderate, and sudden soever it be, is to be
taken for deliberation, because it is supposed, he ought to have considered and
compared his intended action with the Law; when nevertheless that sudden and
indeliberate action was truly voluntary.

Another contradiction which he finds is this, that having undertaken to prove
that Children before they have the use of reason do deliberate and elect, I say
by and by after a Child may be so young as to do what he does without all
deliberation. I yet see no contradiction here; for a Child may be so young as
that the appetite thereof is its first appetite, but afterward and often before
it come to have the use of reason, may elect one thing and refuse another, and
consider the consequences of what it is about to do. And why not as well as
Beasts, which never have the use of reason? for they deliberate as men do. For
though men and beasts do differ in many things very much, yet they differ not
in the nature of their deliberation. A man can reckon by words of general
signification, make propositions, and syllogismes, and compute in numbers,
magnitudes, proportions, and other things computable; which being done by the
advantage of language, and words of general significations, a beast that has
not language cannot do, nor a man that has language, if he misplace the words,
that are his counters. From hence to the end of this Number, he discourses
again of Spontaneity, and how it is in Children, mad Men and Beasts; which as I
before resolved I will not meddle with; let the Reader think and judge of it us
he pleases.

J. D. SEcondly, a they who might have done, and may do many things which they
leave undone; And they who leave undone many things which they might do, are
neither compelled nor necessitated to do what they do, but have true liberty.
But we might do many things which we do not* and we do many things which we
might leave undone, as is plain, 1 King. 3. 11. Because thou have asked this
thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, neither have asked riches for
thy self, nor have asked the life of thine enemies, etc. God gave Solomon his
choice. He might have asked riches, but then he not had asked wisdom, which he
did ask. He did ask wisdom, but he might have asked riches, which yet he did
not ask. And Acts 5. 4. After it was sold, was it not in thine own power? It
was in his own power to give it, and it was in his own power to retein it. Yet
if he did give it, he could not retein it; And if he did retein it, he could
not give it. Therefore we may do, what we do not. And we do not, what we might
do. That is, we have true liberty from necessity.


T. H. THE second Argument from Scripture consists in Histories of men that
did one thing, when if they would they might have done another. The places are
two, one is in the 1 Kings 3. 11. Where the history says, God was pleased that
Solomon who might, if he would, have asked riches or revenge, did nevertheless
ask wisdom at Gods hands. The other is the words of St. Peter to Ananias, Acts
5. 4. After it was sold, was it not in thine own power?

To which the answer is the same, with that I answered to the former places.
That they prove there is election, but do not disprove the necessity which I
maintain of what they so elect.


J. D. WE have had the very same answer twice before. It seems that he is
well pleased with it, or else he would not draw it in again so suddenly by head
and shoulders, to no purpose, if he did not conceive it to be a Panchreston, a
salve for all sores, or Dictamnum, sovereign Dittany, to make all his
adversaries weapons to drop out of the wounds of his cause, only by chewing it,
without any application to the sore. I will not waste the time to show any
further, how the members of his distinction do cross one another, and one take
away another. To make every election to be of one thing imposed by necessity,
and of another thing which is absolutely impossible, is to make election to be
no election at all. But I forbear to press that in present. If I may be bold to
use his own phrase; His answer looks quite another way from mine Argument. My
second reason was this, They who may do, and might have done many things which
they leave undone, and who leave undone many things which they might do, are
not necessitated, nor precisely, and antecedently determined to what they do.

But we might do many things which we do not, and we do many things which we
might leave undone, as appears evidently by the texts alleged. Therefore we
are not antecedently and precisely determined, nor necessitated to do all
things which he do. What is here of Election in this Argument? To what
proposition, to what term does T. H. apply his answer? He neither affirms,
nor denies, nor distinguishes of any thing contained in my argument. Here I
must be bold to call upon him for a more pertinent answer.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. IX.
THe Bishop for the proving of Free Will had alleged this text, Because thou
have asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, etc. And
another Acts 5. After it was sold was it not in thine own power? Out of which
he inferres, there was no necessity that Solomon should ask wisdom rather than
long life, nor that Ananias should tell a lie concerning the price for which he
sold his Land. And my answer that they prove Election, but disprove not the
necessity of Election, satisfies him not; because says he,

a They who might have done what they left undone, and left undone what they
might have done, are not necessitated.

But how does he know (understanding power properly taken) that Solomon had a
real power to ask long life? No doubt Solomon knew nothing to the contrary;
but yet it was possible that God might have hindered him. For though God gave
Solomon his choice, that is, the thing which he should choose, it does not
follow, that he did not also give him the act of Election. And for the other
text, where it is said, that the price of the Land was in Ananias his power,
the word Power signifies no more than the word Right, that is, the right to do
with his own what he pleased, which is not a real and natural power, but a
civil power made by Covenant. And therefore the former answer is sufficient,
for that though such places are clear enough to prove Election, they have no
strength at all to take away Necessity.

J. D. THirdly, if there be no true liberty, but all things come Numb. 10. Arg.
3.
to pass by inevitable necessity, then what are all those interrogations, and
objurgations, and reprehensions, and expostulations which we find so frequently
in holy Scriptures, (be it spoken with all due respect) but fained and
hypocritical exaggerations? Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
that thou should not eat? Genesis 3. 11. And ver. 13. he says to Eve. Why have
thou done this? And to Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
cast down? And why will ye dye, O house of Israel? Does God command openly not
to eat, and yet secretly by himself or by the second causes necessitate him to
eat? Does he reprehend him for doing that, which he has antecedently
determined that he must do? Does he propose things under impossible conditions?
Or were not this plain mockery and derision? Does a loving Master chide his
Servant because he does not come at his call, and yet knows that the poor
Servant is chained and fettered, so as he cannot move, by the Masters own
order, without the Servants default or consent? They who talk here of a towfold
will of God, secret and revealed, and the one opposite to the other, understand
not what they say. These two Wills concern several persons. The secret Will of
God is what he will do himself; The revealed Will of God is what he would have
us to do; It may be the secret Will of God to take away the life of the Father,
yet it is Gods revealed Will that his Son should wish his life, and pray for
his life. Here is no contradiction where the Agents are distinct. But for the
same person to command one thing, and yet to necessitate him that is commanded
to do another thing; To chide a man for doing that, which he has determined
inevitably and irresistibly that he must do; This were (I am afraid to utter
what they are not afraid to assert) the highest dissimulation. Gods chiding
prooves man's liberty.


T. H. TO the third and fifth Arguments, I shall make but one answer.


J. D. a CErtainly distinct Arguments, as the third and fifth are, the one
drawn from the truth of God, the other from the justice of God, the one from
his objurgations and reprehensions, the other from his judgments after life,
did require distinct answers. But the plain truth is, that neither here, nor in
his answer to the fifth Argument, nor in this whole Treatise, is there one word
of solution or satisfaction to this Argument, or to any part of it. All that
looks like an answer is contained, Numb. 12. That which he does is made just by
his doing, Just I say, in him, not always just in us by the example; for a man
that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance of the
same, if he punish him whom he commanded so, for not doing it, is unjust: b I
dare not insist upon it, I hope his meaning is not so bad as the words
intimate, and as I apprehend, That is to impute falsehood to him that is Truth
it self, and to justify feining and dissimulation in God, as he does tyranny,
by the infiniteness of his power, and the absoluteness of his dominion. And
therefore by his leave, I must once again tender him a new summons for a full
and clear answer to this Argument also. He tells us, that he was not supprised.
Whether he were or not, is more than I know. But this I see plainly, that
either he is not provided, or that his cause admits no choice of answers. The
Jews dealt ingenously when they met with a difficult knot, which they could not
untie, to put it upon Elias. Elias will answer it when he comes.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. X.
THE Bishop argued thus, Thirdly, if there be no true liberty, but all things
come to pass by inevitable necessity, then what are as those interrogations we
find so frequently in holy Scriptures, (be it spoken with all due respect) but
feigned and hypocritical exaggerations? Here putting together two repugnant
suppositions either craftily or (be it spoken with all due respect) ignorantly,
he would have men believe that I because I hold Necessity, I deny Liberty. I
hold as much that there is true Liberty, as he does, and more, for I hold it as
from Necessity; and that there must of Necessity be Liberty, but he holds it
not from Necessity, and so makes it possible there may be none. His
expostulations were, First, Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat? Secondly, Why have thou done this? Thirdly,
Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance east down? Fourthly, Why will ye
dye O house of Israel? These Arguments requiring the same answer which some
other do, I thought fit to remit them to their fellows. But the Bishop will
not allow me that. For he says,

a Certainly says he distinct Arguments, as the third and fifth are, etc. did
require distinct Answers.

I am therefore to give an account of the meaning of the aforesaid objnrgations
and expostulations; Not of the end for which God said Have thou eaten of the
tree etc. but how those words may be taken without repugnance to the doctrine
of Necessity. These words Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded that
thou should not eat, Convince Adam that notwithstanding God had placed in
the Garden a means to keep him perpetually from dying in case he should
accommodate his Will to obedience of Gods commandment concerning the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, yet Adam was not so much master of his own Will as
to do it. Whereby is signified that a mortal man though invited by the promise
of immortality cannot govern his own Will, though his Will govern his Actions,
which dependence of the Actions on the Will, is that which properly and truly
is called Liberty. And the like may be said of the words to Eve, why have thou
done this? and of those to Cain, why art thou wroth? etc. and to Israel, why
will ye dye O house of Israel? but the Bishop here will say dye, signifies not
dye, but live eternally in torments. For by such interpretations any man may
answer any thing, and whereas he asks, Does God reprehend him for doing that
which he has antecedently determined him that he must do? I answer, no; but he
convinces and instructs him, that though immortality was so easy to obtain,
as it might be had for the abstinence from the fruit of one only tree; yet he
could not obtain it but by pardon, and by the sacrafice of Jesus Christ; nor is
there here any punishment, but only a reducing of Adam and Eve to their
original mortality, where death was no punishment but a gift of God. In which
mortality he lived near a thousand years, and had a numerous issue, and lived
without misery, and I believe shall at the Resurrection obtain the immortality
which then he lost. Nor in all this, is there any plotting secretly, or any
mockery or derision, which the Bishop would make men believe there is And
whereas he says, that they who talk here of a twofold Will of God, secret and
revealed, and the one opposite to the other, understand not what they say. The
Protestant Docttors both of our, and other Churches, did use to distinguish
between the secret and revealed Will of God; the former they called voluntas
been placiti, which signifies absolutely his Will, the other voluntas signi,
that is, the signification of his Will, in the same sense that I call the one
his Will, the other his Commandment, which may sometimes differ. For Gods
Commandment to Abraham was, that he should sacrafice Isaac, but his Will was,
that he should not do it. Gods denunciation to Ninive was, that it should be
destroyed within forty days, but his Will was that it should not.

b I dare not insist upon it, I hope his meaning is not so bad, as the words
intimate* and as I apprehend; That is to impute falsehood to him that is Truth
it self, etc.

What damned Rhetorique and subtle Calumny is this? God (I said) might command
a thing openly, and yet hinder the doing of it, without injustice; but if a man
should command a thing to be done, and then plot secretly the hinderance of the
same, and punish for the not doing of it, it were injustice. This is it which
the Bishop apprehends as an imputation of falsehood to God Almighty. And perhaps
if the death of a sinner were, as he thinks, an eternal life in extreme misery,
a man might as far as Job has done, expostulate with God Almighty, not
accusing him of injustice, because whatsoever he does is therefore just because
done by him; but of little tenderness and love to mankind, and this
expostulation will be equally just or injust, whether the necessity of all
things be granted or denied; for it is manifest that God could have made man
impeccable, and can now preserve him from sin, or forgive him if he please; and
therefore, if he please not, the expostulation is as reasonable in the cases of
Liberty as of Necessity.

J. D. FOurthly, if either the deeree of God, or the foreknowledge Numb. 11.
Arg. 4.
of God or the influence of the Stars, or the concatenation of causes, or the
physical, or moral efficacy of objects, or the last dictate of the
understanding, do take away true liberty, then Adam before his fall had no true
liberty. For he was subjected to the same decrees, the same prescience, the
same constellations, the same causes, the same objects, the same dictates of
the understanding. But, quicquid ostendes mihi sic, incredulous od^; The
greatest opposers of our liberty, are as earnest maintainers of the liberty of
Adam. Therefore none of these supposed impediments take away true liberty.


T. H. THe fourth Argument is to this effect; If the decree of God, or his
foreknowledge, or the influence of the Stars, or the concatenation of causes,
or the physical or moral efficacy of causes, or the last dictate of the
understanding, or whatsoever it be, do take away true liberty, then Adam before
his fall had no true liberty, Quicquid ostendes mihi sic incredulous odi. That
which I say necessitateth and determines every action, (that he may no longer
doubt of my meaning) is the sum of all those things, which being now existent,
conduce and concur to the production of that action hereafter, whereof if any
one thing now ^ere wanting, the effect could not be produced. This concourse of
causes, whereof every one is determined to be such as it is by a like concourse
of former causes, may well be called (in respect they were all set and ordered
by the eternal cause of all things God Almighty) the decree of God.

But that the foreknowledge of God, should be a cause of any thing, cannot be
truly said, seeing foreknowledge is knowledge, and knowledge depends on the
existence of the things known, and not they on it.

The influence of the Stars is but a small part of the whole cause, consisting
of the concourse of all Agents.

Nor. does the concourse of all causes make one simple chain, or concatenation,
but an innumerable number of chains joined together, not in all parts, but in
the first link God Almighty; and consequently the whole cause of an event, does
not always depend upon one single chain, but on many together

Natural efficacy of objects does determine voluntary Agents, and necessitates
the Will, and consequently the Action; but for moral efficacy* I understand not
what he means by it. The last dictate of the judgment concerning the good or
bad that may follow on any action, is not properly the whole cause, but the
last part of it. And yet may be said to produce the effect necessarily, in such
manner as the last feather may be said to break an Horses back, when there were
so many laid on before, as there wanted but that to do it.

Now for his Argument, That if the concourse of all the causes necessitate the
effect, that then it follows, Adam had no true liberty. I deny the consequence,
for I make not only the effect, but also the election of that particular effect
to be necessary, in as much as the Will it self, and each propension of a man
during his deliberation is as much necessitated, and depends on a sufficient
cause, as any thing else whatsoever. As for example, it is no more necessary
that fire should burn, then that a man, or other creature, whose limbs be moved
by fancy, should have election, that is, liberty to do what he has a fancy to,
though it be not in his will or power to choose his fancy, or choose his
election or will.

This Doctrine, because he says he hates, I doubt had better been suppressed,
as it should have been, if both your Lordship, and he had not pressed me to an
answer.


J. D. a THis Argument was sent forth only as an epsy to make a more full
discovery, what were the true grounds of T. H. his supposed Necessity; which
errand being done, and the foundation whereupon he bnilds being found out,
which is as I called it a concatenation of causes, and as he calls it a
concourse of necessary causes; It would now be a superfluous, and impertineut
work in me to undertake the refutation of all those other opinions, which he
does not undertake to defend. And therefore I shall wave them at the present,
with these short animadversions.

b Concerning the eternal decree of God, he confounds the decree it self with
the execution of his decree. And concerning the foreknowledge of God, he
confounds that speculative knowledge, which is called the knowbedge of vision,
which does not produce the intellective objects, no more then the sensitive
vision does produce the sensible objects, with that other knowledge of God,
which is called the knowledge of approbation, or a practical knowledge, that
is, knowledge joined with an act of the Will, of which Divines do truly say,
that it is the cause of things, as the knowledge of the Artist is the cause of
his work. God made all things by his word, John. 1. that is by his wisdom.
Concerning the influence of the Stars, I wish he had expressed himself more
clearly; For as I do willingly grant, that those Heavenly Bodies do act upon
these sublunary things, not only by their motion and light, but also by an
occuit virtue, which we call influence, as we see by manifold experience in the
Loadstone, and Shellfish, etc. So if he intend, that by these influences they
do naturally or physically determine the Will, or have any direct dominion over
humane Counsels, either in whole or in part, either more or less, he is in an
error. Concerning the concatenation of causes, where as he makes not one
chain, but an innumerable number of chains, ( I hope he speaks hyperbolically,
and does not intend that they are actually infinite,) the difference is not
material whether one or many, so long as they are all joined together, both in
the first link, and likewise in the effect. It serves to no end, but to show
what a shadow of liberty T. H. does fancy, or rather what a dream of a
shadow. As if one chain were not sufficient to load poor man, but he must be
clogged with iunumerable chains. This is just such another freedom as the
Turkish Galli-slaves do enjoy. But I admire that T. H. who is so versed in this
Question, should here confess, that he understands not the difference between
physical, or natural, and moral efficacy. And much more that he should affirm,
that outward objects do determine voluntary agents by a natural efficacy. No
object, no second Agent, Angel or Devil, can determine the Will of man
naturally, but God alone, in respect of his supreme dominion over all things.
Then the Will is determined naturally, when God Almighty, besides his general
influence, where* upon all second causes do depend, as well for their being as
for their acting, does moreover at some times, when it pleases him in cases
extraordinary, concur by a special influence, and infuse something into the
Will, in the nature of an act, or an habit, whereby the Will is moved, and
excited, and applied to will or choose this or that. Then the Will is
determined morally, when some object is proposed to it with persuasive reasons
and arguments to induce it to will. Where the determination is natural, the
liberty to suspend its act is taken away from the will, but not so where the
determination is moral. In the former case, the Will is determined
extrinsecally, in the later case intrinsecally; The former produces an
absolute necessity, the later only a necessity of supposition. If the Will do
not suspend, but assent, then the act is necessary; but because the Will may
suspend and not assent, therefore it is not absolutely necessary. In the former
case the Will is moved necessarily and determinately; In the later freely and
indeterminately. The former excitation is immediate, the later is mediate
mediante intellectu, and requires the help of the understanding. In a word, so
great a difference there is between natural and moral efficacy, as there is
between his opinion and mine in this Question.

There remains only the last dictate of the understanding, which he makes to
be the last cause that concurreth to the determination of the Will, and to the
necessary production of the act, as the last feather may be said to break an
Horses back, when there were somany laid on before, that there wanted but that
to do it. I have showed Numb. 7. that the last dictate of the understanding, is
not always absolute in it self, nor conclusive to the Will, and when it is
conclusive, yet it produces no antecedent nor extrinsecal Necessity; I shall
only ad one thing more in present, That by making the last judgment of right
reason to be of no more weight then a single feather, he wrongs the
understanding as well as he does the Will; and endeavonrs to deprive the Will
of its supreme power of application, and to deprive the understanding of its
supreme power of judicature and definition. Neither corporeal agents and
objects, nor yet the sensitive appetite it self, being an inferior faculty,
and affixed to the Organ of the Body, have any direct or immediate dominion or
command over the rational Will. It is without the sphere of their activity* All
the access which they have unto the Will, is by the means of the understanding,
sometimes clear, and sometimes disturbed, and of reason either right or
misinformed. Without the help of the understanding, all his second causes were
not able of themselves to load the Horses back with so much weight as the least
of all his feathers does amount unto. But we shall meet with his Horse load of
feathers again Numb. 23.

These things being thus briefly touched, he proceeds to his answer. My
argument was this, If any of these ^rall these causes formerly recited, do take
away true liberty, (that is, still intended from necessity) then Adam before
his fall had no true liberty.

But Adam before his fall had true liberty.

He mis-recites the argument, and denies the consequence, which is so clearly
proved, that no man living can doubt of it. Because Adam was subjected to all
the same causes as well as we, the same decree, the same prescience, the same
influences, the same concourse of causes, the same efficacy of objects, the
same dictates of reason But it is only a mistake, for it appears plainly by
his following discourse, that he intended to deny, not the consequence, but the
assumption; For he makes Adam to have had no liberty from necessity before his
fall, yea he proceeds so far, as to affirm, that all humane wills, his and
ours, and each propension of our wills, even during our deliberation, are as
much necessitated as any thing else whatsoever; that we have no more power to
forbear those actions which we do, than the fire has power not to burn. Though
I honor T. H. for his person, and for his learning, yet I must confess
ingeniously, I hate this Doctrine from my heart. And I believe both I have
reason so to do, and al others who shall seriously ponder the horrid
consequences which flow from it. It destroys liberty, and dishonours the
nature of Man. It makes the second causes and outward objects to be the
Rackets, and Men to be but the Tennis-Balls of destiny. It makes the first
cause, that is, God Almighty, to be the introducer of all evil, and sin into
the world, as much as Man, yea more than Man, by as much as the motion of the
Watch is more from the Artificer, who did make it and wind it up, than either
from the spring, or the wheels, or the thread, if God by his special influence
into the second causes, did necessitate them to operate as they did. And if
they being thus determined, did necessitate Adam inevitably, irresistably, not
by an accidental, but by an essential subordination of causes to whatsoever he
did, Then one of these two absurdities must needs follow, either that Adam did
not sin, and that there is no such thing as sin in the world, because it
proceeds naturally, necssarily, and essentially from God Or that God is more
guilty of it, and more the cause of evil than Man, because Man is
extrinsecally, inevitably determined, but so is not God. And in causes
essentially subordinate, the cause of the cause is always the cause of the
effect. What Tyrant did ever impose Laws that were impossible for those to
keep, upon whom they were imposed, and punish them for breaking those Laws,
which he himself had necessitated them to break, which it was no more in their
power not to break, than it is in the power of the fire not to burn? Excuse me
if I hate this Doctrine with a perfect hatred, which is so dishonorable both
to God and Man, which makes Men to blaspheme of necessity, to steal of
necessity, to be hanged of necessity, and to be damned of necessity. And
therefore I must say and say again; Quicquid ostendes mihi sic incredulous odi.
It were better to be an Atheist, to believe no God; or to be a Manichee, to
believe two Gods, a God of good, and a God of evil; or with the Heathens, to
believe thirty thousand Gods, than thus to charge the true God to be the proper
cause and the true Author of all the sins and evils which are in the world.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, XI.
aTHis Argument was sent forth only as an epsy, to make a more full discovery,
what were the true grounds of T. H. his supposed Necessity.

The Argument which he sends forth as an Epsy, is this, If either the decree
of God, or the Foreknowledge of God, or the Influence of the Stars, or the
Concatenation ( which he says falsely I call a Concourse) of causes, or the
Physical or Moral Efficacy of objects, or the last Dictate of the
Understanding, do take away true liberty, then Adam before his fall had no true
liberty. In answer whereunto I said, that all the things now existent, were
necessary to the production of the effect to come; that the Foreknowledge of
God causes nothing though the Will do; that the influence of the Stars is but
a small part of that cause which makes the Necessity; and that this
consequence If the concourse of all the causes necessitate the effect, then
Adam had no true liberty, was false. But in his words, if these do take away
true liberty, then Adam before his fall had no true liberty, the consequence is
good; but then I deny that Necessity takes away Liberty; the reason whereof
which is this, Liberty is to choose what we will, not to choose our Will, no
iucul^ation is sufficient to make the Bishop take notice of, notwithstanding he
be other where so witty, and here so crafty, as to send out Arguments for
spies. The cause why I denied the consequence was, that I thought the force
thereof consisted in this, that Necessity in the Bishops opinion destroyed
Liberty.

b Concerning the eternal Decree of God, etc.

Here begins his Reply. From which if we take these words, knowledge of
Approbation, Practical knowledge, Heavenly Bodies act upon sublunary things,
not only by their motion, but also by an occult virtue, which we call
influence. Moral efficacy. General influence. Special influence. Infuse
something into the Will. The Will is moved. The Will is induced to will. The
Will suspends its own act, Which are all Nonsense, unworthy of a Man, nay and
if a Beast could speak, unworhthy of a Beast, and can befall no creature whose
nature is not dep^aved by Doctrine, nothing at all remains to be answered.
Perhaps the word Occult virtue is not to be taxed as unintelligible, But then I
may tax therein the want of ingenuity in him that had rather say, that heavenly
Bodies do work by an occult virtue, then that they work he knows not how;
which he would not confess, but endeavors to make Occult be taken for a Cause.
The rest of this Reply is one of those consequences, which I have answered in
the beginning, where I compare the inconveniences of both opinions, that is,
That either Adam did not sin, or his sin proceeded necessarily from God; which
is no stronger a consequence than if out of this, That a man is lame
necessarily, one should infer, That either he is not lame, or that his
lameness proceeded necessarily from the Will of God. To the end of this Number
there is nothing more of argument. The place is filled up with wondering and
railing.

^. D. Fifthly, If there be no Liberty, there shall be no day of Numb. 12. Arg.
5.
Doom, no last Judgment, no rewards nor punishments after death. A man can
never make himself a criminal, if he be not left at liberty to commit a crime.
No man can be justly punished for doing that, which was not in his power to
shun. To take away Liberty, hazards Heaven, but undoubtedly it leaves no Hell,


T. H. THE Arguments of greatest consequence are the third and fifth, and fall
both into one. Namely, If there be a necessity of all events, that it will
follow, that praise and reprehension, reward and punishment, are all vain and
unjust. And that if God should openly forbid, and secretly necessitate the same
action, punishing men for what they could not avoid, there would be no belief
among them of Heaven or Hell.

To oppose hereunto, I must borrow an answer from St. Paul, Romans 9. ver 11.
from the 11. verse of the Chapter to the 18. is laid down the very same
objection in these words. When they (meaning Esau and Jacob) were yet unborn,
and had done neither good nor evil, That the purpose of God according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls, might remain firm, it was said
to her ( viz. to Rebeckah) that the elder shall serve the younger. And what
then shall we say, is there injustice with God? God forbid. It is not-therefore
in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, I have stirred thee up, that I may show my
power in thee, and that my Name may be set forth in all the earth, Therefore
whom God wills, he has mercy on, and whom he wills he hardens. Thus you
see the case put by St. Paul, is the same with that of J. D. and the same
objection in these words following, Thou will ask me thin, why will God yet
complain, for who has resisted his will? To this therefore the Apostle
answers, not by denying it was Gods will, or that the decree of God concerning
Esau was not before he had sinned, or that Esau was not necessitated to do what
he did, but thus, Who art thou, O Man, that interrogatest God? shall the work
say to the workman, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over
the Clay, of the same stuff, to make one vessel to honor, another to
dishonor? According therefore to this answer of St. Paul, I answer J. D's
objection, and say, The power of God alone, without other help, is sufficient
Justification of any action he does. That which men make among themselves here
by Pacts and Covenants, and call by the name of Justice, and according
whereunto men are counted and termed rightly just and unjust, is not that by
which God Almighties actions are to be measured or called just, no more than
his counsails are to be measured by human wisdom* That which he does is made
just by his doing; Just I say in him, not always just in us by the Example;
for a man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance
of the same, if he punish him he so commanded for not doing it, is unjust. So
also his Counsails, they be therefore not in vain, because they be his, whether
we see the use of them or not. When God afflicted Job, he did object no sin to
him, but justified that afflicting him by telling him of his power. Have thou
(says God) an arm like mine? Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of
the earth? and the like. So our Savior concerning the man that was born blind,
said it was not for his sin, nor his parents sin, but that the power of God
might be shown in him* Beasts are subject to death and torment, yet they cannot
sin. It was Gods will it should be so. Power irresistible justifies all
actions really and properly in whomsoever it be found. Less power does not. And
because such power is in God only, he must needs be just in all his actions.
And we, that not comprehending his Counsails, call him to the Bar, commit
injustice in it.

I am not ignorant of the usual reply to this answer by distinguishing between
Will and Permission. As, that God Almighty does indeed permit sin sometimes,
And that he also foreknoweth that the sin he permits shall be committed, but
does not will it, nor necessitate it. I know also they distinguish the action
from the sin of the action, saying, God Almighty does indeed cause the action,
whatsoever action it be, but not the sinfulness or irregularity of it, that is,
the discordance between the Action and the Law. Such distinctions as these
dazel my understanding. I find no difference between the will to have a thing
done, and the permission to do it, when he that permits it can hinder it,
and knows it will be done unless he hinder it. Nor find I any difference
between an action that is against the Law, and the sin of that action. As for
example, between the killing of Uriah, and the sin of David in killing Uriah.
Nor when one is cause both of the action and of the Law, how another can be
cause of the disagreement between them, no more than how one man making a
longer and shorter garment, another can make the inequality that is between
them. This I know, God cannot sin, because his doing a thing makes it just, and
consequently no sin. And because whatsoever can sin, is subject to another
Law, which God is not. And therefore it is blasphemy to say, God can sin. But to
say, that God can so order the world as a sin may be necessarily caused thereby
in a man, I do not see how it is any dishonor to him. Howsoever, if such or
other distinctions can make it clear that St. Paul did not think Esaus or
Pharaohs actions proceeded from the will and purpose of God, or that proceeding
from his will could not therefore without injustice be blamed or punished, I
will as soon as I understand them turn unto J. D's opinion. For I now hold
nothing in all this Question between us, but what seems to me not obscurely,
but most expressly said in this place by Saint Paul. And thus much in answer to
his places of Scripture.


J. D. T. H. thinks to kill two birds with one stone, and satisfy two
Arguments with one answer, whereas in truth he satisfies neither. First, for
my third reason. a Though all he say here, were as true as an Oracle. Though
punishment were an act of dominion, not of Justice in God; yet this is no
sufficient cause why God should deny his own act, or why he should chide or
expostulate with men, why they did that which he himself did necessitate them
to do, and whereof he was the actor more than they, they being but as the
stone, but he the hand that threw it. Notwithstanding any thing which is
pleaded here, this Stoical opinion does stick hypocrisy and dissimulation
close to God, who is Truth it self.

And to my fifth Argument, which he changes and relates amiss, as by comparing
mine with his, may appear, His chiefest answer is to oppose a difficult place
of St. Paul, Romans 9. 11. Has he never heard, that to propose adoubt is not to
answer an Argument, Nec been respondet qni litem lite resolvit. But I will not
pay him in his own coin. Wherefore to this place alleged by him, I answer, The
case is not the same. The Question moved there, is, how God did keep his
promise made to Abraham to be the God of him and of his seed, if the Jews who
were the legimate progeny of Abraham were deserted. To which the Apostle
answers ver. 6, 7, 8. That that promise was not made to the carnal seed of
Abraham, that is, the Jews, but to his spiritual Sons which were the Heirs of
his Faith, that is to the believing Christians; which answer he explicateth,
first by the Allegory of Isaac and Ishmael, and after in the place cited of
Esau and of Jacob. Yet neither does he speak there so much of their persons as
of their posterities. And though some words may be accommodated to Gods
predestination, which are there uttered, yet it is not the scope of that text,
to treat of the reprobation of any man to Hell fire. All the posterity of Esau
were not eternally reprobated, as holy Job and many others. But this Question
which is now agitated between us, is quite of another nature, how a man can be
a criminal who does nothing but that which he is extrinsecally necessitated to
do, or how God in Justice can punish a man with eternal torments for doing
that, which it was never in his power to leave undone. That he who did imprint
the motion in the heart of man, should punish man, who did only receive the
impression from him. So his answer looks another way.

But because he grounds so much upon this text, that if it can be cleared he is
ready to change his opinion, I will examine all those passages which may seem
to favor his cause. First, these words ver. 11. being not yet borne, neither
having done any good or evil, upon which the whole weight of his argument does
depend, have no reference at all to those words ver. 13. Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated, for those words were first uttered by the Prophet
Malachy, many ages after Jacob and Esau were dead, Mal. 1. 2. and intended of
the posterity of Esau, who were not redeemed from captivity, as the Israelites
were. But they are referred to those other words, ver. 12. The elder shall
serve the younger, which indeed were spoken before Jacob or Esau were Born,
Genesis 5. 23. And though those words of Malachy had been used of Jacob and Esau
before they were Born, yet it had advantaged his cause nothing, for hatred in
that text does not signify any reprobation to the flames of Hell, much less
the execution of that decree, or the actual imposition of punishment, nor any
act contrary to love. God saw all that he had made, and it was very good.
Goodness it self cannot hate that which is good. But hatred there signifies
Comparative hatred, or a less degree of love, or at the most a negation of
love. As Genesis 29. 31. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated, we may not
conclude thence that Jocob hated his Wife, The precedent verse does fully
expound the sense, ver. 30. Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah. So Mat. 6. 24.
No man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one and love the
other. So Luke 14. 26. If any man hate not his Father and Mother, etc. he
cannot be my Disciple. St. Matthew tells us the sense of it, Mat. 10. 37. He
that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me.

Secondly, those words ver. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, do
prove no more but this, that the preferring of Jacob before Esau, and of the
Christians before the Jews, was not a debt from God, either to the one or to
the other, but a work of mercy. And what of this? All men confess that Gods
mercies do exceed man's deserts, but Gods punishments do never exceed man's
misdeeds. As we see in the Parable of the Laborers, Matthew. 20. Friend I do the
no wrong, did not I agree with thee for a penny, Is it not lawful for me to do
with mine own as I will? Is thy eye evil because I am good? Acts of mercy are
free, but acts of Justice are due.

That which follows ver. 17. comes something nearer the cause. The Scripture
says unto Pharaoh, for this same purpose I have raised the up, (that is, I
have made thee a King, or I have preserved thee) that I might show my power in
thee. But this particle (that) does not always signify the main end of an
action, but sometimes only a consequent of it. As Matt. 2. 15. He departed into
Egypt, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, out of Egypt
have I called my Son; without doubt Joseph's aim or end of his journey was not
to fulfill prophesies, but to save the life of the Child. Yet because the
fulfilling of the prophecy was a consequent of Joseph's journey, he says, That
it might be fulfilled. So here, I have raised thee up that I might show my
power. Again, though it should be granted that this particle that, did denote
the intention of God to destroy Pharaoh in the Red Sea, yet it was not the
antecedent intention of God, which evermore respects the good and benefit of
the creature, but Gods consequent intention upon the prevision of Pharaohs
obstinacy, that since he would not glorify God in obeying his word, he should
glorify God undergoing his judgments, Hitherto we find no eternal
punishments, nor no temporal punishment without just deserts.

It follows ver. 18. whom he will he hardneth: Indeed hardness of heart is the
greatest judgment that God lays upon a sinner in this life, worse than all
the Plagues of Egypt. But how does God harden the heart? not by a natural
influence of any evil act or habit into the will, nor by inducing the will with
persuasive motives to obstinacy and rebellion, for God tempts no man, but
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and intised. Jam. 1.
13. Then God is said to harden the heart three ways, First, negativly, 1.
and not positively, not by imparting wickedness, but by not imparting grace,
as the Sun descending to the tropic of Capricorn, is said with us to be the
cause of Winter, that is, not by imparting cold, but by not imparting heat. It
is an act of mercy in God to give his grace freely, but to detein it is no act
of injustice. So the Apostle opposes hardening to showing of mercy, To harden
is as much as not to show mercy.

Secondly, God is said to harden the heart occasionally and not causally, by
doing good, which incorrigible sinners 2.
make an occasion of growing worse and worse, and doing evil; as a Master by
often correcting of an untoward Scholar, does accidentally and occasionally
harden his heart, and render him more obdurate, insomuch as he grows even to
despise the Rod. Or as an indulgent parent by his patience and gentleness does
encourage an obstinate son to become more rebellious. So, whether we look upon
Gods frequent judgments upon Pharaoh, or Gods iterated favors in removing and
withdrawing those judgments upon Pharaohs request, both of them in their
several kinds, were occasions of hardening Pharaohs heart, the one making him
more presumptuous, the other more desperately rebellious. So that which was
good in it was Gods; that which was evil was Pharaohs. God gave the occasion,
but Pharaoh was the true cause of his own obduration. This is clearly
confirmed, Exodus 8. 15. When* Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened
his heart. And Exodus 9. 34. When Pharaoh saw, that the Rain and the Hail, and
the Thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants. So Psalm. 105. 25. He turned their hearts, so that they hated his
people, and dealt subtly with them: That is, God blessed the Children of
Israel, whereupon the Egyptians did take occasion to hate them, as is plain.
Exodus 1. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. So God hardened Pharaohs heart, and Pharaoh hardened
his own heart. God hardened it by not showing mercy to Pharaoh, as he did to
Nebuckadnezzar, who was as great a sinner as he, or God hardened it
occasionally, but still Pharaoh was the true cause of his own obduration, by
determining his own will to evil, and confirming himself in his obstinancy. So
are all presumptuous sinners, Psalm. 95 8. Harden not your hearts as in the
provocation, as in the day of temptation in the Wilderness.

Thirdly, God is said to harden the heart permissively, 3.
but not operatively, nor effectively, as he who only lets loose a Greyhound
out of the slip, is said to hound him at the Hare. Will* you see plainly what
St. Paul intends by hardening? Read ver. 22. What if God willing to show his
wrath and to make his power known (that is, by a consequent will, which in
order of nature follows the prevision of sin,) endured with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. And that he might make
known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, etc. There is much
difference between enduring and impelling, or inciting the vessels of wrath. He
says of the vessels of mercy, that God prepared them unto glory. But of the
vessels of wrath, he says only that they were fitted to destruction, that is,
not by God, but by themselves. St. Paul says, that God does endure the vessels
of wrath with much long suffering, T. H. says, that God wills and effects by
the second causes all their actions good and bad, that he necessitateth them,
and determines them irresistibly to do those acts which he condemns as
evil, and for which he punishes them. If doing willingly, and enduring, If
much long suffering, and necessitating, imply not a contrariety one to another,
reddat mihi minam Diogenes, Let him that taught me Logic, give me my money
again,

But T. H. says, that this distinction between the operative and permissive
Will of God, and that other between the action and the irregularity do dazel
his understanding. Though he can find no difference between these two, yet
others do, St. Paul himself did, Acts 13. 18. About the time of forty years
suffered he their manners in the Wilderness. And Acts 14. 16. Who in times past
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. T. H. would make suffering to
be inciting, their manners to be Gods manners, their ways to be Gods ways.
And Acts 17. 30. The times of this ignorance God winked at. It was never heard
that one was said to wink or connive at that which was his own act. And 1 Cor.
10. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able. To tempt is the Devils act, therefore he is called the Tempter; God
tempts no man to sin, but he suffers them to be tempted. And so suffers that he
could hinder Satan, if he would. But by T. H. his doctrine, To tempt to sin,
and to suffer one to be tempted to sin, when it is in his power to hinder it,
it is all one. And so he transforms God (I write it with horror) into the
Devil, and makes tempting to be Gods own work, and the Devil to be but his
instrument. And in that noted place, Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of
his goodness, and forbearrance, and long*suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance, but after thy hardness and
impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy ^elf wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Here are as many convincing
Arguments in this one text against the opinion of T. H almost as there are
words. Here we learn that God is rich in goodness, and will not punish his
creatures for that which is his own act; Secondly, that he suffers and
forbeares sinners long, and does not snatch them away by sudden death as they
deserve, Thirdly, that the reason of Gods forbearance is to bring men to
repentance. Fourthly, that hardness of heart and impenitency is not causally
from God, but from our selves. Fifthly, that it is not the insufficient proposal
of the means of their conversion on Gods' part, which is the cause of men's
perdition, but their own contempt and despising of these means. Sixthly, that
punishment is not an act of absolute dominion, but an act of righteous
judgment, whereby God renders to every man according to his own deeds, wrath
to them and only to them who treasure up wrath unto themselves and eternal life
to those who continue patiently in well-doing. If they deserve such punishment
who only neglect the goodness and long suffering of God, what do they who
utterly deny it, and make Gods doing and his suffering to be all one? I do
beseech T. H. to consider what a degree of wilfulness it is, out of one obscure
text wholly misunderstood, to contradict the clear current of the whole
Scripture. Of the same mind with St. Paul was St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 22. The long
suffering of God waited once in the days of Noah. And 2 Pet. 3. 15. Account
that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation. This is the name God gives
himself, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord God, mercyful and gracious, long
suffering, etc.

b Yet I do acknowledge that which T. H. says to be commonly true, That he who
does permit any thing to be done, which it is in his power to hinder, knowing
that if he do not hinder it, it will be done, does in some sort will it. I say
in some sort, that is, either by an antecedent will, or by a consequent will,
either by an operative will, or by a permissive will, or he is willing to let
it be done, but not willing to do it. Sometimes an antecedent engagement does
cause a man to suffer that to be done, which otherwise he would not suffer. So
Darius suffered Daniel to be cast into the Lions den, to make good his rash
decree; So Herod suffered John Baptist to be beheaded, to make good his rash
oath; How much more may the immutable rule of justice in God, and his fidelity
in keeping his word, draw from him the punishment of obstinate sinners, though
antecedently he wills their conversion? He loves all his creatures well, but
his own Justice better. Again, sometimes a man suffers that to be done, which
he does not will directly in it self, but indirectly for some other end, or for
the producing of some greater good; As a man wills that a putrid member be
cut off from his body, to save the life of the whole. Or as a Judge being
desirous to save a malefactors life, and having power to reprieve him, does yet
condemn him for example sake, that by the death of one, he may save the lives
of many. Marvel not then if God suffer some creatures to take such courses as
tend to their own ruin, so long as their sufferings do make for the greater
manifestation of his glory, and for the greater benefit of his faithful
servants. This is a most certain truth* that God would not suffer evil to be in
the world, unless he knew how to draw good out of evil. Yet this ought not to
be understood, as if we made any priority or posteriority of time in the acts
of God, but only of Nature, Nor do we make the antecedent and consequent will
to be contrary one to another, because the one respects man pure and
uncorrupted, the other respects him as he is lapsed. The objects are the same,
but considered after a diverse manner. Nor yet do we make these wills to be
distinct in God, for they are the same with the divine essence, which is one.
But the distinction is in order to the objects or things willed. Nor, lastly,
do we make this permission to be a naked or a mere permission. God causes all
good, pemitteth all evil, disposes all things, both good and evil.

c T. H. demands how God should be the cause of the action and yet not be the
cause of the irregularity of the action. I answer, because he concurres to the
doing of evil by a general, but not by a special influence. As the Earth
gives nourishment to all kinds of plants, as well to Hemlock as to Wheat, but
the reason why the one yields food to our sustenance, the other poison to our
destruction, is not from the general nourishment of the Earth, but from the
special quality of the root. Even so the general power to act is from God, In
him we live, and move, and have our being. This is good. But the specification,
and determination of this general power to the doing of any evil, is from our
selves, and proceeds from the free will of man; This is bad. And to speak
properly, the free will of man is not the efficient cause of sin, as the root
of the Hemlock is of poison, sin having no true entity or being in it, as
poison has. But rather the deficient cause. Now no defect can flow from him
who is the highest perfection. d Wherefore T. H. is mightily mistaken, to make
the particular and determinate act of killing Uriah to be from God. The general
power to act is from God, but the specification of this general and good power
to murder, or to any particular evil, is not from God, but from the free will
of man. So T. H. may see clearly if he will, how one may be the cause of the
Law, and likewise of the action in some sort, that is, by general influence;
and yet another cause concurring by special influence and determining this
general and good power may make it self the true cause of the anomy or the
irregularity. And therefore he may keep his longer and shorter garments for
some other occasion. Certainly, they will not fit this subject, unless he could
make general and special influence to be all one.

But T. H. presses yet further, that the case is the same, and the objection
used by the Jews, ver. 19. Why does he yet find fault? who has resisted his
will, is the very same with my argument; And St. Paul's answer ver. 20. O man
who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over his Clay,
etc, is the very same with his answer in this place, drawn from the
irresistible power, and absolute dominion of God, which justifies all his
actions. And that the Apostle in his answer does not deny, that it was Gods
will, nor that Gods decree was before Esaus sin. To which I reply.

First, that the case is not at all the same, but quite different, as may
appear by these particulars; first, those words, before they had done either
good or evil, are not, cannot be refered to those other words, Esau have I
hated; Secondly, If they could, yet it is less than nothing, because before
Esau had actually sinned, his future sins were known to God. Thirdly, by the
Potters clay, here is not to be understood the pure mass, but the corrupted
mass of mankind. Fourthly, the hating here mentioned is only a comparative
hatred, that is, a less degree of love. Fifthly, the hardening which St. Paul
speaks of, is not a positive, but a negative obduration, or a not imparting of
grace, Sixthly, St. Paul speaks not of any positive reprobation to eternal
punishment, much less does he speak of the actual inflicting of punishment
without sin, which is the Question between us, and wherein T. H. differs from
all that I remember to have read, who do all acknowledge that punishment is
never actually inflicted but for sin. If the Question be put, why God does good
to one more than to another, or why God imparteth more grace to one than to
another, as it is there, the answer is just and fit, because it is his
pleasure, and it is sawciness in a creature in this case to reply, May not God
do what he will with his own* Matthew. 20. 15. No man doubts but God imparteth
grace beyond man's desert; c But if the case be put, why God does punish one
more than another, or why he throws one into hell fire, and not another, which
is the present case agitated between us; To say with T. H. that it is because
God is Omnipotent, or because his power is irresistible, or merely because it
is his pleasure, is not only not warranted, but is plainly condemned by St.
Paul in this place. So many differences there are between those two cases. It
is not therefore against God, that I reply, but against T. H. I do not call my
Creator to the Bar, but my fellow creature; I ask no account of Gods counsails,
but of man's presumptions. It is the mode of these times to father their own
fancies upon God, and when they cannot justify them by reason, to plead his
Omnipotence, or to cry, O altitudo, that the ways of God are unsearchable. If
they may justify their drowsy dreams, because Gods power and dominion is
absolute; much more may we reject such fantastical devises which are
inconsistent with the truth, and goodness, and justice of God, and make him to
be a Tyrant, who is the Father of Mercies, and the God af all consolation. The
unsearchableness of Gods ways should be a bridle to restrain presumption, and
not a sanctuary for spirits of error.

Secondly, this objection contained ver. 19. to which the Apostle answers ver.
20. is not made in the person of Esau or Pharaoh, as T. H. supposes, but of
the unbelieving Jews, who thought much at that grace and favor which God was
pleased to vouchsafe unto the Gentiles, to acknowledge them for his people,
which honor they would have appropriated to the posterity of Abraham. And the
Apostles answer is not only drawn from the Sovereign Dominion of God, to
impart his grace to whom he pleases, as has been showed already, but also
from the obstinacy and proper fault of the Jews, as appears ver. 22. What if
God willing (that is, by a consequent will) to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, endures with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction. They acted, God endured; They were toltrated by God, but fitted to
destruction by themselves; for their much wrong doing, here is Gods much long
suffering; And more plainly ver. 31. Israel has not atteined to the Law of
righteousness, wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law. This reason is set down yet more empha^ically in the
next Chapter ver. 3. They (that is, the Israelites) being ignorant of Gods
righteousness (that is, by faith in Christ,) and going about to establish their
own righteousness, (that is, by the works of the Law) have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. And yet most expressly Chap. 11. ver.
20. Because of undelief they were broken off, but thou stand by faith*
Neither was there any precedent binding decree of God, to necessitate them to
unbelief, and consequently to punishment. It was in their own power by their
concurrence with Gods grace to prevent these judgments, and to recover their
former estate, ver. 23. If they (that is, the unbelidving Jews) abide not still
in unbelief, they shall be grafted in. The Crown and the Sword are immovable,
(to use St. Anselmes comparison) but it is we that move and change places.
Sometimes the Jews were under the Crown, and the Gentiles under the Sword,
sometimes the Jews under the Sword, and ^he Gentiles under the Crown.

Thirdly, though I confess, that human pacts are not the measure of Gods
Justice, but his justice is his own immutable will, whereby he is ready to give
every man that which is his own, as rewards to the good, punishments to the
bad, so nevertheless God may oblige himself freely to his creature. He made the
Covenant of works with mankind in Adam, and therefore he punishes not man
contrary to his own Covenant, but for the transgression of his duty. And Divine
justice is not measured by Omnipotence, or by irresistible power, but by Gods
will; God can do many things according to his absolute power which he does not.
He could raise up children to Abraham of stones, but he never did so. It is a
rule in Theology, that God cannot do any thing, which argues any wickedness or
imperfection, as God cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy* 2. 13. He cannot lie, Tit. 1.
2. These and the like are fruits of impotence, not of power. So God cannot
destroy the righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18. 25. He could not destroy Shdome
whilst Lot was in it, Genesis 19 22. not for want of dominion or power, but
because it was not agreeable to his Justice, nor to that Law which himself had
constituted. The Apostle says Heb. 6. 10. God is not unrighteous to forget
your work. As it is a good consequence to say, this is from God, therefore it
is righteous, so is this also; This thing is unrighteous, therefore it cannot
proceed from God. We see how all creatures by instinct of nature do love their
young, as the Hen her Chickens; how they will expose themselves to death for
them; And yet all these are but shadows of that love which is in God toward
his Creatures. How impious is it then to conceive, that God did create so many
millions of souls to be tormented eternally in hell, without any fault of
theirs, except such as he himself did necessitate them unto, merely to show his
dominion, and because his power is irresistible? The same privilege which T.
H. appropriates here to power absolutely irresistible, a friend of his in his
Book de Cive cap. 6. page 70. ascribes to power respectively irresistible, or
to Sovereign Magistrates, whose power he makes to be as absolute as a man's
power is over himself, not to be limited by any thing but only by their
strength. The greatest propugners of Sovereign power think it enough for
Princes to challenge an immunity from coercive power, but acknowledge, that the
Law has a directtive power over them. But T. H. will have no limits but their
strength. Whatsoever they do by power, they do justly.

But, says he, God objected no sin to Job, but justified his afflicting him by
his power. First, this is an Argument from authority negatively, that is to
say, worth nothing. Secondly, the afflictions of Job were no vindicatory
punishments to take vengeance of his sins, (whereof we dispute) but probarory
chasstisements to make trial of his graces. Thirdly, Job was not so pure, but
that God might justly have laid greater punishments upon him, than those
afflictions which he suffered. Witness his impatience, even to the cursing of
the day of his nativity, Job 3. 3. Indeed God said to Job, where wast thou when
I laid the foundations of the earth? Job 38. 4. that is, how can thou judge
of the things that were done before thou wast born? or comprehend the secret
causes of my judgments? And Job 42. 9. Have thou an arm like God? As if he
should say, why art thou impatient? do thou think thy self able to strive
with God? But that God should punish Job without desert here is not a word.

Concerning the blind man, mentioned John 9. his blindness was rarher a
blessing to him than a punishment, being the means to raise his Soul
illuminated, and to bring him to see the face of God in Jesus Christ. The sight
of the body is common to us with Ants and Flies, but the sight of the soul with
the blessed Angels. We read of some, who have put out their bodily eyes because
they thought they were an impediment to the eye of the Soul. Again, neither he
nor his parents were innocent, being conceived and born in sin and iniquity,
Psalm. 51. 5. And in many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. But our Saviors
meaning is evident by the Disciples question, ver. 2. They had not so sinned,
that he should be born blind. Or they were not more grievous sinners than other
men, to deserve an examplary judgment more than they; but this corporal
blindness befell him principally by the extraordinary providence of God, for the
manifestation of his own glory, in restoring him to his sight. So his instance
halts on both sides; neither was this a punishment, nor the blind man free from
sin. His third instance of the death and torments of Beasts, is of no more
weight than the two former. The death of brute Beasts is not a punishment of
sin, but a debt of nature. And though they be often slaughtered for the use of
man, yet there is a vast difference between those light and momentary pangs,
and the unsufferable and endless pains of hell; between the mere depriving of a
creature of remporal life, and the subjecting of it to eternal death; I know
the Philosophical speculations of some who affirm, that entity is better than
nonentity, that it is better to be miserable, and suffer the tormenss of the
damned, than to be annihilated, and cease to be altogether. This entity which
they speak of, is a Metaphysical entity abstracted from the matter, which is
better than nonentity, in respect of some goodness, not moral nor natural, but
trancendental, which accompanies every being. But in the concrete it is far
otherwise, where that of our Savior often takes place, Mat. 26. 24. Woe unto
that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed, It had been good for that man,
that he had not been born. I add, that there is an Analogical Juctice and Mercy
due, even to the brute Beasts. Thou shall not mus^^e the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn. And, a just man is merciful to his Beast.

f* But his greatest error is that which I touched before, to make Justice to
be the proper result of Power. Power does not measure and regulate Justice, but
Justice measures and regulates Power. The Will of God, and the Eternal Law
which is in God himself, is properly the rule and measure of Justice. As all
goodness whether Natural or Moral, is a participation of divine goodness, and
all created Rectitude is but a participation of divine Rectitude, so all Laws
are but participations of the eternal Law, from whence they derive their
power. The rule of Justice then is the same both in God and us, but it is in
God, as in him that does regulate and measure; in us, as in those who are
regulated and measured. As the Will of God is immutable, always willing what
is just and right and good; So his justice likewise is immutable. And that
individual action which is justly punished as sinful in us, cannot possibly
proceed from the special influence and determinative power of a just cause. See
then how grossly T. H. does understand that old and true principle, that the
Will of God is the rule of Justice, as if by willing things in themselves
unjust, he did render them just, by reason of his absolute dominion and
irresistible power, as fire does assimilate other things to it self, and
convert them into the nature of fire. This were to make the eternal Law a
Lesbian rule. Sin is defined to be that which is done, or said, or thought
contrary to the eternal Law. But by this doctrine nothing is done, nor said,
nor thought contrary to the Will of God. St. Anselm said most truly, then the
will of man is good and just and right, when he wills that which God would have
him to will: but according to this doctrine every man always wills that which
God would have him to will. If this be true, we need not pray, Thy Will be done
in earth as it is in heaven, T. H. has devised a new kind of heaven upon
earth. The worst is, it is an heaven without Justice. Justice is a constant and
perpetual act of the Will, to give every one his own; But to inflict punishment
for those things which the Judge himself did determine and necessitate to be
done, is not to give every one his own; right punitive Justice is a relation of
equallity and proportion, between the demerit and the punishment; But supposing
this opinion of absolute and universal necessity, there is no demerit in the
World, we use to say, that right springs from Law and Fact, as in this
Syllogism, Every thief ought to be punished, there is the Law; But such an one
is a thief, there is the Fact, therefore he ought to be punished, there is the
right. But this opinion of T. H. grounds the right to be punished, neither upon
Law, nor upon Fact, but upon the irresistible power of God. Yea, it overturneth
as much, as in it lies all Law; First, the eternal Law, which is the
ordination of divine Wisdom, by which all Creaturs are directed to that end
which is convenient for them; that is, not to necessitate them to eternal
flames. Then the Law participated, which is the ordination of right reason,
instituted for the common good, to show unto man, what he ought to do, and
what he ought not to do. To what purpose is it to show the right way to him
who is drawn and haled a contrary way by Adamantine bonds of inevitalbe
necessity?

g Lastly, howsoever T. H. cries out, that God cannot sin, yet in truth he
makes him to be the principal and most proper cause of all sin. For he makes
him to be the cause not only of the Law, and of the action, but even of the
irregularity it self, and the difference betvveen the Action and the Law,
wherein the very essence of sin does consist. He makes God to determine David's
Will, and necessitate him to kill Uriah. In causes physically, and essentially
subordiuate, the cause of the cause is evermore the casue of the effect. These
are those deadly fruits which spring from the poisonous root of the absolute
necessity of all things, which T. H. seeing, and that neither the sins of
Esau, nor Pharaoh, nor any wicked person do proceed from the operative, but
from the permissive Will of God, and that punishment is an act of Justice, not
of dominion only; I hope that according to his promise he will change his
opinion.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, XII.
THE Bishop had argued in this manner, If there be no Liberty, there shall be
no last Judgment, no Rewards nor Punishments after death. To this I answered,
that though God cannot sin, because what he does his doing makes just; and
because he is not subject to another Law, and that therefore it is blasphemy
to say, that God can sin, yet to say that God has so ordered the world, that
sin may necessarily be committed is not blasphemy. And I can also further say,
though God be the cause of all motion and of all actions, and therefore unless
sin be no motion, nor action, it must derive a necessity from the first mover;
nevertheless it cannot be said that God is the Author of sin, because not he
that necessitateth an action, but he that does command and warrant it, is the
Author. And if God own an action, though otherwise it were sin, it is now no
sin. The act of the Israelites in robbing the Egyptians of their Jewels,
without Gods warrant, had been theft. But it was neither theft, cousonage, nor
sin; supposing they knew the warrant was from God. The rest of my answer to
that inconvenience, was an opposing to his inconveniences, the manifest Texts
of St. Paul, Romans 9. The substance of his Reply to my Answer is this.

a Though punishment were an act of dominion not of Justice in God; yet this
is no sufficient cause, why God should deny his own act; or why he should
chide or expostulate with men, why they did that which he himself did
necessitate them to do.

I never said that God denied his act, but that he may expostulate with men;
And this may be (I shall never say directly it is) the reason of that his
expostulation, viz. to convince them, that their wills were not independent,
but were his mere gift; and that to do, or not to do, is not in him that
wills, but in God that has mercy on, or hardens whom he will. But the
Bishop interprets hardening to be a permission of God. Which is to attribute
to God in such actions, no more than he might have attributed to any of
Pharaohs servants, the not persuading their Master to let the People go. And
whereas he compares this permission to the indulgence of a parent, that by his
patience incourageth his son to become more rebellious, (which indulgence is a
sin)* he makes God to be like a sinful man. And indeed it seems that all
they, that hold this Freedom of the Will, concieve of God no otherwise than
the common sort of Jews did, that God was like a man, that he had been seen by
Moses, and after by the seventy Elders, Exodus 9. 10. Expounding that and other
places literally. Again he says, that God is said to harden the heart
permissively, but not operatively, which is the same distinction with his
first, namely negatively, not positively, and with his second occasionally and
not causally; so that all his three ways, how God hardens the heart of wicked
meu, come to this one of permission, which is as much as to say, God sees,
looks on, and does nothing, nor ever did any thing in the business. Thus you
see how the Bisho^ expounds St. Paul. Therefore I will leave the rest of his
^mentary upon Romans 9. to the judgment of the Reader, to think of the same as
he pleases.

b Yet I do acknowledge that which T. H says, That he who does permit any
thing to be done, which it is in his power to hinder* knowing that if he do not
hinder it, it will be done, does in some sort will it, I say in some sort, that
is, either by an antecedent Will, or by a consequent Will; either by an
operative Will, or by a permissive Will; or he is willing to let it be done,
but not willing to do it.

Whether it be called antecedent or consequent, or operative or permissive, it
is enough for the necessity of the thing* that the heart of Pharaoh should be
hardened, and if God were not willing to do it, I cannot conceive how it could
be done without him.

c T. H. demands how God should be the cause of the Action, and yet not be the
cause of the irregularity of the Action, I answer because he concurres to the
doing of evil, by a general but not by a special influence.

I had thought to pass over this place, because of the nonsense of general
and special influence, seeing he says that God concurres to the doing of evil,
I desire the Reader would take notice, that if he blame me for speaking of God
as of a necessitating cause, and as it were a principal Agent in the causing of
all Actions, he may with as good reason blame himself for making him by
concurrence, an accessory to the same, and indeed let men hold what they will
contrary to the truth, if they write much, the truth will fall into their pens.
But he thinks he has a similitude, which will make this permissive Will, a
very clear business. The earth ( says he) gives nourishment to all kinds of
plants, as well to Hemlock, as to Wheat; but the reason why the one yields food
to our sustenance, the other poison to our destruction, is not from the general
nourishment of the earth, but from the special quality of the root. It seems
by this similitude, he thinks, that God does not operatively, but
premissively Will that the root of Hemlock should poison the man that eats
it, but that Wheat should nonrish him be wills operatively. Which is very
absurd; or else he must confess that the venomous effects of wicked men, are
willed operatively.

d Wherefore T. H. is mightily mistaken, to make the particular and determinate
act of killing Uriah to be from God. The general power to act is from God, but
the specification of this general and good power, to murder, or to any
particular evil, is not from God, but from the free will of man.

But why am I so mightily mistaken? did not God foreknow that Uriah in
particular, should be murdered by David in particular, and what God
foreknoweth shall come to pass, can that possibly not come to pass? and that
which cannot possibly not come to pass, does not that necessarily come to pass?
and is not all necessity from God? I cannot see this great mistake. The general
power ( says he) to act is from God, but the specification to do this act upon
Uriah, is not from God, but from Eree-will. Very learnedly. As if there were a
power, that were not the power to do some particular act; or a power to kill,
and yet to kill no body in particular. If the power be to kill, it is to kill
that which shall be by that power killed, whether it be Uriah or any other; and
the giving of that power is the application of it to the act; nor does power
signify any thing actually, but those motions and present acts from which the
act that is not now, but shall be hereafter, necessarily proceeds. And
therefore this Argument is much like that, which used heretofore to be brought
for the defense of the divine Right of the Bishops to the Ordination of
Ministers. They derive not (say they) the Right of Ordination from tho civil
Sovereign, but from Christ immediately. And yet they acknowledge that it is
unlawful for them to Ordain, if the civil power do forbid them. But how have
they right to Ordain, when they cannot do it lawfully? their answer is they
have the Right, though they may not exercise it; as if the Right to Ordain, and
the Right to Exercise Ordination were not the same thing. And as they answer
concerning Right, which is Legal Power, so the Bishop answers concerning
Natural Power, that David had a general power to kill Uriah from God, but not a
power of applying this power in special to the killing of Uriah from God, but
from his own Free Will; that is be had a power to kill Uriah, but not to
exercise it upon Uriah, that is to say, he had a power to kill him, but not to
kill him; which is absurd.

e But if the case be put why God does punish one more than another, or why he
throws one into Hell fire, and not another, which is the present case between
us; to say with T. H. that it is because God is Omnipotent, or because his
power is irresistible, or merely because it is his pleasure, is not only not
warranted, but is plainly condemned by St. Paul in this place.

I note first that he has no reason to say, the case agitated between us, is
whether the cause why God punishes one man more than another be his
irresistible power, or man's sin. The case agitated between us is, whether a man
can now choose what shall be his Will anon, or at any time hereafter. Again
it is not true that he says it is my opinion that the irresistible power of God,
is the cause why he punishes one more than another. I say only that when he
does so, the irresistible power is enough to make it not unjust. But that the
cause why God punishes one more than another, is many times the will he has
to show his power, is affirmed in this place by St Paul, Shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, etc. And by our Savior in the case of him
that was born blind, where he says, Neither has this man sinned nor his
parents; but that the works of God may be made manifest. And by the
expostulation of God with Job. This endeavor of his to bring the text of St.
Paul to his purpose, is not only frustrate, but the cause of many
insignificant phrases in his discourse; as this, It was in their own power by
their concurrence with Gods grace, to prevent these judgments, and to recover
their former estates, which is as good sense, as if he should say, that it is
in his own power, with the concurrence of the Sovereign Power of England to be
what he will. And this, that God may oblige himself freely to his Creature. For
he that can oblige, can also when he will release; and he that can release
himself when he will, is not obliged. Besides this, he is driven to words ill
becoming him that is to speak of God Almighty, for he makes him unable to do
that which has been within the ordinary Power of men to do. God ( he says)
cannot destroy the Righteous with the Wicked, which nevertheless is a thing
ordinarily done by Armies, and He could not destroy Sodom while Lot was in it,
which he interprets, as if he could not do it lawfully, one text i^ Genesis 18.
23, 24, 25. There is not a word that God could not destroy the Righteous with
the Wicked. Only Abraham says (as a man) shall not the Judge of all the earth
do Right. Another is Genesis 19, 22. Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do
any thing till thou be come thither. Which is an ordinary phrase, in such a
case where God had determined to burn the City, and save a particular man, and
signifies not any obligation to save Lot, more than the rest. Likewise
concerning Job, who expostulating with God, was answered only with the
explication of the infinite power of God, the Bishop answers, that there is
never a word of Jobs being punished without desert; which answer is
impertinent, for I say not that he was punished without desert, but that it was
not for his desert that he was afflicted; for punished, he was not at all.

And concerning the blind Man, John 9. who was born blind that the power of God
might be shown in him; he answers that it was not a punishment, but a blessing.
I did not say it was a punishment; certainly it was an affliction. How then
does he call it a blessing? reasonably enough, because ( says he) it was the
means to raise his soul illuminated, and to bring him to see the face of God in
Jesus Christ. The sight of the Body is common to us with Ants and Flies, but
the sight of the soul, with the blessed Angels. This is very well said; for no
man doubts, but some afflictions may be blessings; but I doubt whether the
Bishop, that says he reads of some who have put out their bodily eyes, because
they thought they were an impediment to the eye of the soul, think that they
did well. To that where I say that brute Beasts are afflicted which cannot sin,
he answers, that there is a vast difference, between those light and
momentary pangs, and the unsufferable and endless pains of Hell. As if the
length or the greatness of the pain, made any difference in the justice or
injustice of the inflicting it.

f But his greatest error is that which I touched before, to make Justice, to
be the proper result of Power.

He would make men believe, I hold all things to be just that are done by them,
who have power enough to avoid the punishment. This is one of his pretty little
policies, by which I find him in many occasions, to take the measure of his own
wisdom. I said no more but that the Power which is absolutely irrefistible
makes him that has it above all Law, so that nothing he does can be unjust.
But this Power can be no other than the Power divine. Therefore let him preach
what he will upon his mistaken text, I shall leave it to the Reader, to
consider of it without any further answer.

g Lastly, howsoever T. H. cries out, that God cannot sin, yet in truth he
makes him, to be the principal and most proper cause of all sin, for he makes
him to be the cause not only of the Law, and of the Action, but even of the
irregularity it self, etc. wherein the very essence of sin does consist.

I think there is no man but understands, no not the Bishop himself, but that
where two things are compared, the similitude or dissimilitude, regularity or
irregularity that is between them, is made in and by the making of the things
themselves that are compared. The Bishop therefore that denies God to be the
cause of the irregularity, denies him to be the cause both of the Law and of
the Action. So that by his doctrine, there shall be a good Law whereof God
shall be no cause, and an Action, that is, a local motion that shall depend
upon another first Mover, that is not God. The rest of this Number is but
railing.

J. D. Proofs of Liberty drawn from Reason.

THe first Argument is Herculeum or Baculinum, drawn Numb. 13. Arg. 1.
from that pleasant passage between Zeno and his man; The serva^t had committed
some pettilarceny, and the Master was cudgeling him well for it; The servant
thinks to creep under his Masters blind side, and pleads for himself; That the
necessity of destiny did compel him to steal. The Master answers, the same
necessity of destiny compels me to beat thee. He that denies Liberty is fitter
to be refuted with rodds, than with arguments, until he confess that it is free
for him that beats him either to continue striking, or to give over, that is,
to have true Liberty.


T. H. OF the Arguments from Reason, the first is, that which he says, is
drawn from Zenos beating of his wan which is therefore called Argumentum
baculinum, that is to say, a wooden Argument. The story is this, Zeno held that
all actions were necessary, His man therefore h^ing for some fault beaten,
excused himself upon the necessity of it. To avoid this excuse, his Master
pleaded likewise the necessity of beating him. So that not he that maintaiued,
but he that derided the necessity of things was beaten, contrary to that he
would infer; And the Argument was rather withdrawn than drawn from the story.


J. D. Whether the Argument be withdrawn from the story, or the answer
withdrawn from the argument, let the Reader judge. T. H. mistakes the scope of
the reason, the strength whereof does not lie, neither in the authority of
Zeno, a rigid Stoic, which is not worth a button in this cause; Nor in the
servants being an adversary to Stoical necessity, for it appears not out of the
story, that the servant did deride necessity, but rather that he pleaded it in
good earnest for his own justification. Now in the success of the fray, we were
told even now, that no power does justify an action, but only that which is
irresistible. Such was not Zenos. And therefore it advantageth neither of their
causes, neither that of Zeno, nor this of T. H. What if the servant had taken
the staff out of his Masters hand and beaten him soundly, would not the same
argument have served the man as well as it did the Master? that the necessity
of destiny did compel him to strike again. Had not Zeno smarted justly for his
Paradox? And might not the spectators well have taken up the Judges Apothegm,
concerning the dispute between Corax and his Scholar, An ill egg of an ill
bird? But the strength of this argument lies partly in the ignorance of Zeno,
that great Champion of necessity, and the beggarliness of his cause, which
admitted no defense but with a cudgel. No man (says the servant) ought to be
beaten for doing that which he is compelled inevitably to do, but I am
compelled inevitably to steal. The major is so evident, that it cannot be
denied. If a strong man shall take a weak man's hand perforce, and do violence
with it to a third person, he whose hand is forced, is innocent, and he only
culpable who compelled him. The minor was Zenos own doctrine; what answer made
the great patron of destiny to his servant? very learnedly he denied the
conclusion, and cudgelled his servant, telling him in effect, that though there
was no reason why he should be beaten, yet there was a necessity why he must be
beaten. And parttly, in the evident absurdity of such an opinion which deserves
not to be confuted with reasons, but with rods. There are four things, said the
Philosopher, which ought not to be called into question, First, such things
where of it is wickedness to doubt; as whether the soul be immortal, whether
there be a God, such an one should not be confuted with reasons, but cast into
the Sea, with a millstone about his neck, as unworthy to breath the air, or to
behold the light. Secondly, such things as are above the capacity of reason; as
among Christians, the mystery of the holy Trinity. Thirdly, such principles as
are evidently true; as that two and two are four in Arithmetic, that the whole
is greater than the part in Logic. Fourthly, such things as are obvious to the
senses; as whether the snow be white. He who denied the heat of the fire, was
justly sentenced to be scorched with fire; and he that denied motion, to be
beaten until he recanted. So he who denies all Liberty from necessitation,
should be scourged until he become an humble suppliant to him that whips him,
and confess, that he has power, either to strike, or to hold his hand.


T. H. IN this Number 13. which is about Zeno and his man, there is contained
nothing necessary to the instruction of the Reader. Therefore I pass it over*


J. D. SEcondly, this very persuasion, that there is no true Liberty Numb. 14.
Arg. 2.
is, able to overthrow all Societies and Common wealths in the World. The Laws
are unjust which prohibit that which a man cannot possibly shun; All
consultations are vain, if every thing be either necessary or impossible. Who
ever deliberated, whether the Sun should rise to morrow, or whether he should
sail over mountains? It is to no more purpose to admonish men of understanding
than fools, children, or mad men* if all things be necessary. Praises and
dispraises, rewards and punishments, are as vain as they are undeserved, if
there be no liberty. All Counsels, Arts, Arms, Books, Instruments are
superfluous and foolish, if there be no liberty: In vain we labor, in vain we
study, in vain we take Physic, in vain we have Tutors to instruct us, if all
things come to pass alike, whether we sleep or wake, whether we be idle or
industrious, by unalterable necessity. But it is said, that though future
events be certain, yet they are unknown to us. And therefore we prohibit,
deliberate, admonish, praise, dispraise, reward, punish, study, labor, and use
means. Alas, how should our not knowing of the event be a sufficient motive to
us to use the means, so long as we believe the event is already certainly
determined, and can no more be changed by all our endeavors, than we can stay
the course of Heaven with our finger, or add a cubite to our stature? Suppose
it be unknown, yet it is certain. We cannot hope to alter the course of things
by our labors; Let the necessary causes do their work, we have no remedy but
patience, and shrug up the shoulders. Either allow liberty, or destroy all
Societies.


T. H. THE second Argument is taken from certain inconveniences which he thinks
would follow such an opinion. It is true, that ill use may be made of it, and
therefore your Lordship and J. D. ought at my request to keep private, that I
say here of it. But the inconveniences are indeed none; and what use soever be
made of truth, yet truth is truth; and now the Question is not what is fit to
be preached, but what is true. The first inconvenience he says, is this, that
Laws which prohibit any action are then unjust. The second, that all
consultations are vain. The third, that admonitions to men of understanding are
of no more use than to fools, children and mad men. The fourth, that praise,
dispraise, reward and punishment are in vain. The fifth, that Counsels, Arts,
Arms, Books, Instruments, Study, Tutours, Medicines are in vain. To which
Argument expecting I should answer by saying, that the ignorance of the event
were enough to make us use means, he adds (as it were a reply to my answer
foreseen) these words. Alas, how should our not knowing the event be a
sufficient motive to make us use the means? Wherein be says right, but my
answer is not that which he expects. I answer.

First, that the necessity of an action does not make the Law which prohibits
it unjust. To let pass, that not the necessity, but the will to break the Law
makes the action unjust, because the Law regards the will, and no other
precedent causes of action. And to let pass, that no Law can be possibly
unjust, in as much as every man makes by his consent the Law he is bound to
keep, and which consequently must be just, unless a man can be unjust to
himself; I say, what necessary cause soever preceeds an action, yet if the
action be forbidden, he that does it willingly may justly be punished. For
instance, suppose the Law on pain of death prohibit stealing, and there be a
man who by the strength of temptation is necessitated to steal, and is there
upon put to death, does not this punishment deterr others from theft? is it not
a cause that others steal not? does it not frame and make their will to
justice? To make the Law is therefore to make a cause of Justice, and to
necessitate justice, and consequently it is no injustice to make such a Law.

The institution of the Law is not to grieve the delinquent for that which is
passed, and not to be undone, but to make him and others just, that else would
not be so. And respects not the evil act past, but the good to come. In so
much as without this good intention of future, no past act of a delinquent
could justify his killing in the sight of God. But you will say, how is it
just to kill one man to amend another, if what were done were necessary? To
this I answer, that men are justly killed, not for that their actions are not
necessitated, but that they are spared and preserved, because they are not
noxious; for where there is no Law, there no killing, nor any thing else can be
unjust. And by the right of Nature we destroy, without being unjust, all that
is noxious both beasts and men. And for beasts we kill them justly, when we do
it in order to our own preservations. And yet J. D. confesses, that their
actions, as being only spontaneous and not free, are all necessitated and
determined to that one thing which they shall do. For men, when we make
Societies or Commonwealths, we lay down our right to kill, excepting in certain
cases, as murder, theft, or other offensive actions; So that the right which
the Commonwealth has to put a man to death for crimes, is not created by the
Law, but remains from the first right of Nature, which every man has to
preserve himself, for that the Law does not take that right away, in case of
criminals, who were by Law excepted. Men are not therefore put to death, or
punished for that their theft proceeds from election, but because it was
noxious and contrary to men's preservation, and the punishment conducing to the
preservation of the rest. In as much as to punish those that do voluntatary
hurt, and none else, frames and makes men's wills such as men would have them.
And thus it is plain, that from the necessity of a voluntary action cannot be
inferred the injustice of the Law that for bids it, or of the Magistrate
that punishes it.

Secondly, I deny that it makes consultations to be in vain; it is the
consultation that causes a man, and necessitateth him to choose to do one
thing rather than another. So that unless a man say, that cause to be in vain,
which necessitateth the effect, he cannot infer the superfluousness of
consultation o^t of the necessity of the election proceeding from it. But it
seems be reasons thus, If I musts needs do this rather than that, then I shall
do this rather than that, though I consult not at all; which is a false
proposition, a false consequence, and no better than this. If I shall live till
to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my self through with a
sword to day. If there be a necessity that an action shall be done, or that any
effect shall be brought to pass, it does not therefore follow, that there is
nothing necessarily required as a means to bring it to pass. And therefore when
it is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is determined
also for what cause it shall be chosen, which cause for the most part is
deliberation or consultation. And therefore consultation is not in vain, and
indeed the less in vain, by how much the election is more necessitated.

The same answer is to be given to the third supposed inconvenience; Namely,
that admonitions are in vain, for admonitions are parts of consultations. The
admonitor being ^ Counsailer for the time, to him that is admonished.

The fourth pretended inconvenience is, that praise and dispraise, reward and
punishment will be in vain. To which I answer, that for praise and dispraise,
they depend not at all on the necessity of the action praised or dispraised.
For, what is it else to praise, but to say a thing is good? Good, I say for me,
or for some body else, or for the State and Commonwealth. And what is it to say
an action is good, but to say, it is as I would wish or as another would have
it, or according to the will of the State, that is to say, according to Law?
Does J. D. think, that no action can please me or him, or the Commonwealth,
that should proceed from necessity?

Things may be therefore necessary, and yet praiseworthy, as also necessary,
and yet dispraised, and neither of both in vain, because praise and dispraise,
and likewise reward and punishment, do by example make and conform the will to
good or evil. It was a very great praise in my opinion, tha^ Velleius
Paterculus gives Cato, where he says, he was ^^od by Nature, Et quia aliter
esse non potuit.

To his fifth and sixth inconvenience, that Counsels, Arts, Arms, Books,
Instruments, Study, Medicines, and the like, would be superfluous, the same
answer serv^ that to the former; That is to say, that this consequence, if the
effect shall necessarily come to pass, then it shall come to pass without its
cause, is a false one. And those things named, Counsels, Arts, Arms, etc. are
the causes of those effects.


J. D. NOthing is more familiar with T. H. than to decline an Argument. But I
will put it into form for him. ^ The first inconvenience is thus preffed. Those
Laws are unjust and tyrannical, which do prescribe things absolutely
impossible in themselves to be done, and punish men for not doing of them. But
supposing T. H. his opinion of the necessity of all things to be true, all
Laws do prescribe absolute impossibilities to be done, and punish men for not
doing of them. The former proposition is so clear that it cannot be denied.
Just Laws are the Ordinances of right Reason, but those Laws which prescribe
absolute impossibilities, are not the Ordinances of right Reason. Just Laws are
instituted for the public good, but those Laws which prescribe absolute
impossibilities, are not instituted for the public good. Just Laws do show
unto a man what is to be done, and what is to be shunned; But those Laws which
prescribe impossibilities, do not direct a man what he is to do, and what he is
to shun. The Minor is as evident; for if his opinion be true, all actions, all
transgressions are determined antecedently inevitably to be done by a natural
and necessary flux of extrinsecal causes. Yea, even the will of man, and the
reason it self is thus determined. And therefore whatsoever Laws do prescribe
any thing to be done, which is not done, or to be left undone which is done, do
prescribe absolute impossibilities, and punish men for not doing of
impossibilities. In all his answer there is not one word to this Argument, but
only to the conclusion. He says, that not the necessity, but the will to
break the Law makes the action unjust. I ask what makes the will to break the
Law, is it not his necessity? What gets he by this? A perverse will causes
injustice, and necessity causes a perverse wilf. He says, the Law regards
the will, but not the precedent causes of action. To what proposition, to what
term is this answer? he neither denies, nor distinguishes. First, the
Question here is not what makes actions to be unjust, but what makes Laws to
be unjust. So his answer is impertinent. It is likewise untrue, for First, that
will which the Law regards, is not such a will as T. H. imagines. It is a free
will, not a determined, necessitated will; a rational will, not a brutish will.
Secondly, the Law does look upon precedent causes as well as the voluntariness
of the action. If a child before he be seven years old, or have the use of
reason, in some childish quarrel do willingly stab another, whereof we have
seen experience, yet the Law looks not upon it as an act of murder, because
there wanted a power to deliberate, and consequently true liberty.
Manslaughter may be as voluntary as murder, and commonly more voluntary,
because being done in hot blood, there is the less reluctation, yet the Law
considers, that the former is done out of some sudden passion without serious
deliberation, and the other out of prepensed malice, and desire of revenge, and
therefore condemns murder as more wilful and more panishable than
Man-slaughtter.

b He says, that no Law can possibly be unjust; And I say, that this is to
deny the conclusion, which deserves no reply; But to give him satisfaction, I
will follow him in this also. If he intended no more, but that unjust Laws are
not genuine Laws, nor bind to active obedience, because they are not the
ordinations of right Reason, nor instituted for the common good, nor prescribe
that which ought to be done, he said truly, but nothing at all to his purpose.
But if he intend (as he does) that there are no Laws de facto, which are the
ordinances of reason erring, instituted for the common hurt, and prescribing
that which ought not to be done, he is much mistaken. Pharaohs Law to drown the
Male Children of the Israelites, Exodus 1. 22. Nebuckadnezzars Law, that
whosoever did not fall down and worship the golden Image which he had set up,
should be cast into the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 4 Darius his Law, that whosoever
should ask a Petition of any God or man, for thirty days, save of the King,
should be cast into the Den of Lions, Dan. 6. 7. Ahashuerosh his Law, to
destroy the Jewish Nation, root and branch, Esther 3. 13. The Pharisees Law,
that whosoever confesses Christ, should be excommunicated, John 9. 22. were
all unjust Laws.

c The ground of this error is as great an error it self, (Such an art be
has learned of repacking Paradoxes) which is this. That every man makes by his
consent the Law which he is bound to keep; If this were true, it would preserve
them, if not from being unjust, yet from being injurious: But it is not true.
The positive Law of God, contained in the old and new Testament; The Law of
Nature, written in our hearts by the finger of God; The Laws of Conquerors,
who come in by the power of the Sword; The Laws of our Ancesters, which were
made before we were born, do all oblige us to the observation of them, yet to
none of all these did we give our actual consent. Over and above all these
exceptions, he builds upon a wrong foundation, that all Magestrates at first,
were elective. The first Governors were Fathers of Families; And when those
petty Princes could not afford competent protection and security to their
subjects, many of them did resign their several and respective interists into
the hands of one joint Father of the Country.

And though his ground had been true, that all first Legislators were elective,
which is false, yet his superstructure fails, for it was done in hope and
trust, that they would make just Laws. If Magistrates abuse this trust, and
deceive the hopes of the people, by making tyrannical Laws, yet it is without
their consent. A precedent trust does not justify the subsequent errors and
abuses of a Trustee. He who is duly elected a Legislator, may exercise his
Legislative power unduely. The peoples implicit consent does not render the
tyrannical Laws of their Legislators to be just.

d But his chiefest answer is* that an action forhidden, though it proceed from
necessary causes, yet if it were done willingly, it may be justly punished,
which according to his custom he proves by an instance; A man necessitated to
steal by the strength of temptation, yet if he steal willingly, is justly put
to death. Here are two things and both of them untrue.

First, he fails in his assertion. Indeed we suffer justly for those
necessities which we our selves have contracted by our own fault, but not for
extrinsecal, antecedent necessities, which were imposed upon us without our
fault. If that Law do not oblige to punishment which is not intimated, because
the subject is invincibly ignorant of it; How much less that Law which
prescribes absolute impossibilities, unless perhaps invincible necessity be not
as strong a plea as invincible ignorance. That which he adds, if it were done
willingly, though it be of great moment, if it be rightly understood, yet in
his sense, that is, if a man's will be not in his own disposition, and if his
willing do not come upon him according to his will, nor according to any thing
else in his power, it weighs not half so much as the least feather in all his
horse-load. For if that Law be unjust and tyrannical which commands a man to do
that which is impossible for him to do, then that Law is likewise unjust and
tyrannical, which commands him to will that which is impossible for him to will.

Secondly, his instance supposes an untruth, and is a plain begging of the
Question. No man is extrinsecally, antecedently and irresistibly necessitated
by temptation to steal. The Devil may solicit us, but he cannot necessitate
us. He has a faculty of persuading, but not a power of compelling. Nosignem
habemus, spiritus ^^ammam ciet, as Nazi*anzen. He blows the coals, but the
fire is our own. Mordet duntaxat sese in fauces illius objicientens, as St.
Austin, he bites not until we thrust our selves into his mouth. He may propose,
he may suggest, but he cannot move the will effectively. Resist the Devil, and
he will fly from you. Jam. 4. 7. By faith we are able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6. 16. And if Satan, who can both propose the
object, and choose out the fittest times and places, to work upon our
frailties, and can suggest reasons, yet cannot necessitate the will (which is
most certain,) then much less can outward objects do it alone. They have no
natural efficacy to determine the will. Well may they be occasions, but they
cannot be causes of evil. The sensitive appetite may engender a proclivity to
steal, but not a necessity to steal. And if it should produce a kind of
necessity, yet it is but Moral, not Natural; Hypothetical, not Absolute;
Coexistent, not Antecedent from our selves, nor Extrinsecall. This necessity,
or rather proclivity, was f^^^ in its causes, we our selves by our own
negligence in not opposing our passions when we should, and might, have freely
given it a kind of dominion over us. Admit that some sudden passions may and do
extraordinarily surprise us; And therefore we say, motus primo primi, the first
motions are not always in our power, neither are they free, yet this is but
very rarely, and it is our own fault that they do surprise us. Neither does the
Law punish the first motion to theft, but the advised act of stealing. The
intention makes the thief. But of this more largely Numb. 25.

e He pleads moreover, that the Law is a cause of justice, that it frames the
wills of men to justice, and that the punishment of one does conduce to the
preservation of many. All this is most true of a just Law justly executed. But
this is no god-a-mercy to T. H. his opinion of absolute necessity. If all
actions, and all events be predetermined Naturally, Necessarily, Extrinsecally,
how should the Law frame men morally to good actions? He leaves nothing for the
Law to do, but either that which is done already, or that which is impossible
to be done. If a man be chained to every individual act which he does, and from
every act which he does not, by indissolvible bonds of inevitable necessity,
how should the Law either deter him or frame him? If a Dog be chained fast to
a post, the sight of a rod cannot draw him from it. Make a thousand Laws, that
the fire shall not burn, yet it will burn. And whatsoever men do (according to
T. H.) they do it as necessarily, as the fire burns. Hang up a thousand
Thieves, and if a man be determined inevitably to steal, he must steal
notwithstanding.

f He adds, that the sufferings imposed by the Law upon delinquents, respect
not the evil act past, but the good to come, and that the putting of a
delinquent to death by the Magistrate for any crime whatsoever, cannot be
justified before God, except there be a real intention to benefit others by
his example. The truth is, the punishing of delinquents by Law, respects both
the evil act past, and the good to come. The ground of it, is the evil act
past, the scope or end of it, is the good to come. The end without the ground
cannot justify the act. A bad intention may make a good action bad; but a good
intention cannot make a bad action good. It is not lawful to do evil, that good
may come of it, nor to punish an innoceut person for the admonition of others;
that is to fall into a certain crime, for fear of an uncertain. Again, though
there were no other end of penalties inflicted, neither probatory* nor
castigatory, nor exemplary, but only vindicatory, to satisfy the Law out of a
zeal of Justice, by giving to every one his own, yet the action is just and
warrantable. Killing, as it is considered in it self without all undue
circumstances, was never prohibited to the lawful Magistrate, who is the
Vicegerent or Lieutenant of God, from whom he derives his power of life and
death.

T. H. has one plea more. As a drowning man catches at every Bu^rush, so he
lays hold on every pretense to save a desperate cause. But first, it is worth
our observation to see how often he changes shapes in this one particular. ^
First, he told us, that it was the irresistible power of God that justifies all
his actions, though he command one thing openly, and plot another thing
secretly, though he be the cause, not only of the action, but also of the
irregularity, though he both give man power to act and determine this power to
evil, as well as good; though he punish the Creatures, for doing that which he
himself did necessitate them to do. But being pressed with reason, that this is
tyrannical; first, to necessitate a man to do his will, and then to punish him
for doing of it, he leaves this pretense in the plain field, and flies to a
second. That therefore a man is justly punished, for that which he was
necessitated to do, because the act was voluntary on his part. This has more
show of reason than the former, if he did make the will of man to be in his own
disposition, but maintaining, that the will is irresistibly determined to will
whatsoever it does will, the injustice and absurdity is the same; First, to
necessitate a man to will, and then to punish him for willing. The Dog only
bites the stone which is thrown at him with a strange haud, but they make the
first cause to punish the instrument, for that which is his own proper act.
Wherefore not being satisfied with this, he casts it off, and flies to his
third shift. Men are not punished (says he) ^fore, because their theft
proceeded from election (that is, because it was willingly done, for to Elect
and Will, says he, are both one; Is not this to blow hot and cold with the
same breath?) but because it was noxious and contrary to men's preservation,
Thus far he says true, that every creature by the instinct of nature seeks to
preserve it self; cast water into a dusty place, and it contracts it self into
little globes, that is, to preserve it self. And those who are noxious the eye
of the Law, are justly punished by them to whom the execution of the Law is
committed; but the Law accounts no persons noxious, but those who are noxious
by their own fault. It punishes not a thorn for pricking, because it is the
nature of the thorn, and it can do no otherwise, nor a child before it have the
use of reason. If one should take mine hand perforce, and give another a box on
the ear with it, my hand is noxious, but the Law punishes the other who is
faulty. And therefore he has reason to propose the question how it is just to
kill on man to amend another, if he who killed did nothing but what he was
necessitated to do. He might as well demand how it is lawful to murder a
company of innocent. Infants to make a bath of their lukewarm blood, for curing
the Leprosy. It had been a more rational way; first to have demonstrated that
it is so, and then to have questioned why it is so. His assertion it self is
but a dream, and the reason which he gives of it why it is so, is a dream of a
dream.

The sum of it is this; That where there is no Law, there no killing or any
thing else can be unjust; that before the constitution of Commonwealths every
man had power to kill another, if he conceived him to be hurtful to him; that
at the constitution of Commonwealhts particular men lay down this right in
part, and in part reserve it to themselves, as in case of theft, or murder.
That the right which the Commonwealth has to put a malefactor to death is not
created by the Law, but remains from the first right of Nature, which every
man has to preserve himself; that the killing of men in this case is as the
killing of beasts in order to our own preservation. This may well be called
stringing of Paradoxes.

But first, h there never was any such time when Mankind was without Governors
and Laws, and Societies. Paternal Government was in the world from the
beginning, and the Law of Nature. There might be sometimes a root of such
Barbatous Theevish Brigants, in some rocks, or deserts, or odd corners of the
World, but it was an abuse and a degeneration from the nature of man, who is a
political creature. This savage opinion reflects too much upon the honor of
mankind.

Secondly, there never was a time when it was lawful ordinarily for private
men to kill one another for their own preservation. If God would have had men
live like wild beasts, as Lions, Bears, or Tigers, he would have armed them
with horns, or tusks, or talons, or pricks; but of all creatures man is born
most naked, without any weapon to defend himself, because God had provided a
better means of security for him, that is, the Magistrate.

Thirdly, that right which private men have to preserve themselves, though it
be with the killing of another, when they are set upon to be murdered or
robbed, is not a remainder or a reserve of some greater power which they have
resigned, but a privilege which God has given them, in case of extreme danger
and invincible necessity, that when they cannot possibly have recourse to the
ordinary remedy, that is, the Magistrate, every man becomes a Magistrate to
himself.

Fourthly, nothing can give that which it never had; The people, whilst they
were a dispersed rabble (which in some odd cases might happen to be) never had
justly the power of life and death, and therefore they could not give it by
their election. All that they do is to prepare the matter, but it is God
Almighty, that infuseth the soul of power.

Fifthly and lastly, I am sorry to hear a man of reason and parts to compare the
murdering of men with the slaughtering of brute beasts. The elements are for
the Plants, the Plants for the brute Beasts, the brute Beasts for Man. When God
enlarged his former grant to man, and gave him liberty to eat the flesh of his
creatures for his sustenance, Genesis 9. 3. Yet man is expressly excepted, ver. ^.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. And the reason is
assigned, for in the image of God made he man. Before sin entered into the
World, or before any creatures were hurtful, or noxious to man, he had ^^minion
over them, as their Lord and Master. And though the possession of this
sovereignty be lost in part, for the sin of man, which made not only the
creatures to rebel, but also the inferior (...), to rebel against the
superior, from whence it comes, that one man is hurtful to another, yet the
dominion still remains; wherein we may observe how sweetly the providence of
God does temper this cross, that though the strongest creatures have withdrawn
their obedience, as Lions and Bears. to show that man has lost the ^cy of his
dominion, and the weakest creatures, as Flies and Gnats, to show into what a
degree of contempt he is fallen, yet still the most profitable and useful
creatures, as Sheep and Oxen, do in some degree retain their obedience.

i The next branch of his answer concerns consultations, which (says he) are
not superfluous, though all things come to pass necessarily, because they are
the cause which does necessitate the effect, and the means to bring it to pass.
We were told Numb. 11. that the last dictate of right reason was but as the
last feather which breaks the Horses back. It is well, yet that reason has
gained some command again, and is become at least a Quartermaster. Certainly
if any thing under God have power to determine the will, it is right reason.
But I have showed sufficiently, that reason does not determine the will
physically, nor absolutely, much less extrinsecally, and antecedently, and
therefore it makes nothing for that necessity which T. H. has undertaken to
prove.

k He adds further, that as the end is necessary, so are the means; And when it
is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is determined
also for what cause it shall be so chosen. All which is truth, but not the
whole truth; for as God ordaines means for all ends, so he adapts and fits the
means to their respective ends, free means to free ends, contingent means to
contingent ends, necessary means to necessary ends, whereas T. H. would have
all means, all ends, to be necessary. If God has so ordered the World, that a
man ought to use and may freely use those means of God, which he does neglect,
not by virtue of Gods decree, but by his own fault; If a man use those means of
evil, which he ought not to use, and which by Gods decree, he had power to
forbear; If God have left to man in part the free managery of human affairs,
and to that purpose has endowed him with understanding, then consultations are
of use, then provident care is needful, then it concerns him to use the means.
But if God have so ordered this world that a man cannot, if he would, neglect
any means of good, which by virtue of Gods decree it is possible for him to
use, and that he cannot possibly use any means of evil, but those which are
irresistibly and inevitably imposed upon him by an antecedent decree, then not
only consultations are vain, but that noble facn^ty of reason it self is vain:
do we think that we can help God Almighty to do his proper work? In vain we
trouble our selves, in vain we take care to use those means, which are not in
our power to use, or not to use. And this is that which was contained in my
prolepsis or prevention of his answer, though he be pleased both to disorder
it, and to silence it. We cannot hope by our labors, to alter the course of
things set down by God; let him perform his decree, let the necessary causes do
their work. If we be those causes, yet we are not in our own disposition, we
must do what we are ordained to do, and more we cannot do. Man has no remedy
but patience, and to shrug up the shoulders. This is the doctrine flows from
this opinion of absolute necessity. Let us suppose the great wheel of the clock
which sets all the little wheels a going, to be as the decree of God and that
the motion of it were perpetually infallible from an intrinsecal principle,
even as Gods decree is Infallible, Eternal, All-sufficient. Let us suppose the
lesser wheels to be the second causes, and that they do as certainly follow the
motion of the great wheel, without missing or swerving in the least degree, as
the second causes do pursue the determination of the first cause. I desire to
know in this case what cause there is to call a Council of Smiths, to consult
and order the motion of that which was ordered and determined before to their
hands. Are men wiser than God? yet all men know, that the motion of the lesser
wheels is a necessary means to make the clock sirike.

l But he tells me in great sadness* that my Argument is just like this other;
If I shall live till to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my
self through with a sword to day, which says he, is a false consequence, and a
false proposition. Truly, if by running through, he understands killing, it is
a false, or rather a foolish proposition, and implies a contradiction. To live
till to morrow, and ^o dye to day, are inconsistent. But by his favor, this is
not my consequence, but this is his own opinion. He would persuade us, that it
is absolutely necessary that a man shall live till to morrow, and yet that it
is possible that he may kill himself to day. My Argument is this. If there be a
liberty and possibility for a man to kill himself to day, then it is not
absolutely necessary, that he shall live till tomorrow; but there is such a
liberty, therefore no such necessity. And the consequence which I make here is
this. If it be absolutely necessary, that a man shall live till to morrow, then
it is vain and superfluous for him to consult and deliberate, whether he should
dye to day, or not. And this is a true consequence. The ground of his mistake
is this, that though it be true, that a man may kill himself to day, yet upon
the supposition of his absolute necessity it is impossible. Such Heterogeneous
arguments and instances he produces, which are half builded upon our true
grounds, and the other half upon his false grounds.

m The next branch of my argument concerns Admonitions, to which he gives no
new answer, and therefore I need not make any new reply; saving only to tell
him, that he mistakes my argument; I say not only, If all things be necessary,
then admonitions are in vain, but if all things be necessary, then it is to no
more purpose to admonish men of understanding than fools, children, or mad men.
That they do admonish the one and not the other, is confessedly true; and no
reason under heaven can be given for it but this, that the former have the use
of reason, and true liberty, with a dominion over their own actions, which
children, fools, and mad men have not.

Concerning praise and dispraise, he inlargeth himself. The scope of his
discourse is, that things necessary may be praiseworthy. There is no doubt of
it, but withal their praise reflects upon the free agent, as the praise of a
statue reflects upon the workman who made it. To praise a thing (says he) is
to say it is good. n True, but this goodness is not a Metaphysical goodness, so
the worst of things, and whatsoever has a being, is good. Nor a Natural
goodness; The praise of it passes wholly to the Author of Nature; God saw all
that he had made, and it was very good. But a Moral goodness, or a goodness of
actions rather than of things. The moral goodness of an action is the
conformity of it with right reason. The moral evil of an action, is the
deformity of i^, and the alineation of it from right reason. It is moral praise
and dispraise which we speak of here. To praise any thing morally, is to say,
it is morally good, that is, conformable to right reason. The moral dispraise
of a thing is to say, it is morally bad, or disagreeing from the rule of right
reason. So moral praise is from the good use of liberty, moral dispraise from
the bad use of liberty: but if all things be necessary, then moral liberty is
quite taken away, and with it all true praise and dispraise. Whereas T. H.
adds, that to say a thing is good, is to say, it is as I would wish, or as
another would wish, or as the State would have it, or according to the Law of
the Land, he mistakes infinitely. He and another, and the State, may all wish
that which is not really good, but only in appearance. We do often wish what is
profitatble, or delightful, without regarding so much as we ought what is
honest. And though the will of the State where we live, or the Law of the Land
do deserve great consideration, yet it is no infallible rule of moral goodness.
And therefore to his question, whether nothing that proceeds from necessity can
please me, I answer, yes. The burning of the fire pleases me when I am cold;
And I say* it is good fire, or a creature created by God, for my use and for my
good: Yet I do not mean to attribute any moral goodness to the fire, nor give
any moral praise to it, as if it were in the power of the fire it self, either
to communicate its heat, or to suspend it, but I praise first the Creator of
the fire, and then him who provided it. As for the praise which Velleius
Paterculus gives Cato, that he was good by nature, Et quia aliter esse non
potuit, it has more of the Orator than either of the Theologian or
Philosopher in it. Man in the State of innocence* did f^ll and become evil,
what privilege has Cato more than he? No, by his leave. Narratur and dij
Catonis saepe m^ro caluiss^ virtus. but the true meaning is, that he was
naturally of a good temper, not so prone to some kinds of vices as others were;
This is to praise a thing, not an action, naturally, not morally. Socrates was
not of so good a natural temper, yet prooved as good a man; the more his
praise, by how much the difficulty was the more to conform his disorderly
appetite to right reason.

Concerning reward and punishment, he says not a word, but only that they
frame and conform the will to good, which has been sufficiently answered. They
do so indeed, but if his opinion were true, they could not do so. But because
my aim is not only to answer T. H. but also to satisfy my self; o Though it
be not urged by him, yet I do acknowledge, that I find some improper and
analogical rewards and punishments used to brute beasts, as the hunter rewards
his dog, the master of the Coy-duck whipps her, when she returns without
company. And if it be true, which he affirms a little before, that I have
confessed, that the actions of brute beasts are all necessitaeed and determined
to that one thing which they shall do, the difficulty is increased.

But first, my saying is misalledged. I said, that some kinds of actions which
are most excellent in brute beasts, and make the greatest show of reason, as
the Bees working their Honey, and the Spider weaving their Webbs, are yet done
without any consultation, or deliberation, by a mere instinct of nature, and by
a determination of their fancies to these only kinds of works. But I did never
say, I could not say, that all their individual actions are necessary, and
antecedently determined in their causes, as what days the Bees shall fly
abroad, and what days and hours each Be shall keep in the Hive, how often
they shall fetch in Thyme on a day and from whence. These actions and the like,
though they be not free, because brute beasts want reason to deliberate, yet
they are contingent, and therefore not necessary.

Secondly, I do acknowledge, that as the fancies of some brute creatures are
determined by nature, to some rare and exquisite works; So in others, where it
finds a natuall propension, Art which is the Imitator of Nature, may frame and
form them according to the will of the Artist, to some particular actions and
ends, as we see in Setting-dogs, and Coy-ducks, and Parrots; and the principal
means whereby they effect this, is by their backs, or by their bellies, by the
rod, or by the morsel, which have indeed a shadow, or resemblance of rewards
and punishments. But we take the word here properly, not as it is used by
vulgar people, but as it is used by Divines and Philosophers, for that
recompense which is due to honest and dishonest actions. Where there is no
moral liberty, there is neither honesty nor dishonesty, neither true reward nor
punishment.

Thirdly, p when brute creatures do learn any such qualities, it is not out of
judgment, or deliberation, or discourse, by infering or concluding one thing
from another, which they are not capable of. Neither are they able to conceive
a reason of what they do, but merely out of memory, or out of a sensitive fear,
or hope. They remember, that when they did after one manner, they were beaten;
and when they did after another manner, they were cherished, and accordingly
they apply themselves. But if their individual actions were absolutely
necessary, fear or hope could not alter them. Most certainly, if there be any
defert in it, or any praise due unto it, it is to them who did instruct them.

Lastly, concerning Arts, Arms, Books, Instruments, Study, Physic, and the
like, he answers not a word more than what is already satisfied. And
therefore I am silent.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. XIV.
a THe first inconvenience is thus pressed. Those Laws are unjust and
tyrannical, which do prescribe things absolutely impossible in themselves to be
done, and punish men for not doing of them.

I have already in the beginning, where Irecite the inconveniences that follow
the doctrine of necessity, made clear, that the same inconveniences follow not
the doctrine of Necessity any more than they follow this truth, whatsoever
shall be, shall be, which all men must confess* The same also follows upon
this, that whatsoever God foreknowes cannot but come to pass, in such time and
manner as he has foreknown it. It is therefore evident that these
inconveniences are not rationally deduced from those Tenets. Again it is a
truth manifest to all men, that it is not in a man's power to day, to choose
what Will he shall have to morrow, or an hour, or any time after. Intervening
occasions, business, (which the Bishop calls trifles) Trifles of which the
Bishop makes here a great business to change the Will. No man can say what he
will do to morrow, unless he foreknow (which no man can) what shall happen
before to morrow. And this being the substance of my opinion, it must needs be
that when he deduceth from it, that Counsels, Arts, Arms, Medicines,
Teachers, Praise, Prayer, and Piety, are in vain, that his deduction is false,
and his ratiocination fallacy. And though I need make no other answer to all
that he can object against me, yet I shall here mark out the causes of his
several Parologismes.

Those Laws ( he says) are unjust and tyrannical, which do prescribe things
absolutely impossible to be done, and punish men for not doing of them. In which
words this is one absurdity that a Law can be unjust, for all Laws are Divine
or Civil, neither of which can be unjust. Of the first there is no doubt. And
as for Civil Laws they are made by every man that is subject to them, because
every one of them consents to the placing of the Legislative Power. Another
is this in the same words, that he supposes there may be Laws that are not
Tyrannical; for if he that makes them have the sovereign Power, they may be
Regal, but not Tyrannical; if Tyrant signify not King, as he thinks it does
not. Another is in the same words, that a Law may prescribe things absolutely
impossible in themselves to be done. When he says impossible in themselves, he
understands not what himself means. Impossible in themselves are contradictions
only, as to be, and not to be, at the same time, which the Divines say is not
possible to God. All other things are possible at least in themselves. Raising
from the dead, changing the course of nature, making of a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, are things possible in themselves; for there is nothing in their nature
able to resist the Will of God; and if Laws do not prescribe such things, why
should I believe they prescribe other things that are more impossible. Did he
ever readin Suarez of any Tyrant that made a Law commanding any man to do, and
not to do the same Action, or to be and not to be at the same place, in one and
the same moment of time. But out of the doctrine of Necessity, it follows he
says, that all Laws do prescribe absolute impossibilities to be done. Here he
has left out in themselves, which is a wilful Fallacy.

He further says that Just Laws are the Ordinances of right Reason, which is
an error that has cost many thousands of men their lives. Was there ever King
that made a Law which in right reason had been better unmade? and shall those
Laws therefore not be obeyed? shall we rather rebel? I think not, though I am
not so great a Divine as he. I think rather that the Reason of him that has
the Sovereign Authority, and by whose Sword we look to be protected, both
against war from abroad, and injuries at home, whether it be Right or Erroneous
in it seslf, ought to stand for Right to us that have submitted our selves
thereunto by receiving the protection.

But the Bishop puts his greatest confidence in this, that whether the
things be impossible in themselves, or made impossible by some unseen accident,
yet there is no reason that men should be punished for not doing them. It
seems he takes punishment for a kind of revenge, and can never therefore
agree with me that take it for nothing else but for a correction, or for an
example, which has for end the framing and necessitating of the Will to
virtue; and that he is no good man, that upon any provocation uses his power,
(though a power lawfully obtained) to afflict another man without this end, to
reform the will of him or others. Nor can I comprehend (as having only humane
Idea's) that that punishment which neither intends the correction of the
offender, nor the correction of others by example, does proceed from God.

b He says that no Law can possibly be unjust, etc.

Against this he replies that the Law of Pharaoh to drown the Male Children of
the Israelites; and of Nebuckadnezxar to worship the golden Image; and of
Darius against praying to any but him in thirty days; and of Ahashuerosh to
destroy the Jews; and of the Pharisees to excommunicate the confessors of
Christ, were all unjust Laws. The Laws of these Kings as they were Laws have
relation only to the men that were their subjects; And the making of them,
which was the action of every one of those Kings, who were subjects to another
King, namely to God Almighty, had relation to the Law of God. In the first
relation there could be no injustice in them; because all Laws made by him to
whom the people had given the Legislative Power, are the Acts of every one of
that people; and no man can do injustice to himself. But in relation to God, if
God have by a Law forbidden it, the making of such Laws is injustice. Which
Law of God was to those Heathen Princes no other but salus populi, that is to
say the properest use of their natural reason, for the preservation of their
subjects. If therefore those Laws were ordained out of wantonness or cruelty,
or envy, or for the pleasing of a Favorite, or out of any other sinister end,
as it seems they were, the making of those Laws was unjust. But if in right
Reason they were necessary for the preservation of those people of whom they
had undertaken the charge, then was it not unjust. And for the Pharisees who
had the same written Law of God, that we have, their excommunication of the
Christians, proceeding (as it did) from envy, was an Act of malicious
injustice. If it had proceeded from misinterpretation of their own Scriptures,
it had been a sin of ignorance. Nevertheless, as it was a Law to their subjects
(in case they had the Legislative Power, which I doubt of) the Law was not
unjust. But the making of it was an unjust action, of which they were to give
account to none but God. I fear the Bishop will think this discourse too
subtle, but the judgment is the Readers.

c The ground of this error, etc. is this. That every man makes by his consent
the Law which he is bound to keep, etc.

The reason why he thinks this an error, is because the positive Law of God
contained in the Bible is a Law with out our assent; the Law of Nature was
written in our hearts by the finger of God without our assent; the Laws of
Conquerours who come in by the power of the Sword were made without our assent;
and so were the Laws of our Ancestors which were made before we were born. It
is a strange thing that he that understands the nonsense of the Schoolmen,
should not be able to perceave so easy a truth as this which he denies. The
Bible is a Law. To whom? To all the World? He knows it is not. How came it
then to be a Law to us? Did God speak it viva voce to us? Have we then any
other Warrant for it than the Word of the Prophets? Have we seen the miracles?
Have we any other assurance of their certainty than the authority of the
Church? and is the authority of the Church any other than the authority of the
Commonwealth, or that of the Commonwealth any other than that of the Head of
the Commonwealth, or has the Head of the Commonwealth any other authority than
that which has been given him by the Members? Else, why should not the Bible
be Canonical as well in Constantinople as in any other place? They that have
the Legislative power make nothing Canon, which they make not Law, nor Law
which they make not Canon. And because the Legislative power is from the assent
of the subjects, the Bible is made Law by the assent of the subjects. It was
not the Bishop of Rome that made the Scripture Law without his own temporal
Dominions; nor is it the Clergy that make it Law in their Dioceses and
Rectories. Nor can it be a Law of it self without special and supernatural
revelation. The Bishop thinks because the Bible is Law, and he is appointed to
*teach it to the people in his Diocese, that therefore it is Law to whom soever
he teach it; which is somewhat gross, but not so gross as to say that
Conquerors who come in by tho power of the sword, make their Laws also without
our assent. He thinks belike that if a Conqueror can kill me if he please, I
am presently obliged without more a do to obey all his Laws. May not I rather
dye, if I think fit? The Conqueror makes no Law over the Conquered by virtue
of his power; but by virtue of their assent that promised obedience for the
saving of their lives. But how then is the assent of the Children obtained to
the Laws of their Ancestors? This also is from the desire of preserving their
lives, which first the Parents might take away, where the Parents be free from
all subjection; and where they are not, there the Civil power might do the
same, if they doubted of their obedience. The Children therefore when they be
grown up to strength enough to do mischief, and to judgment enough to know
that other men are kept from doing mischief to them, by fear of the Sword that
protecteth them, in that very act of receiving that protection, and not
renouncing it openly, do oblige themselves to obey the Laws of their
Protectors; to which, inreceaving such protection they have assented. And
whereas he says, the Law of Nature is a Law without our assent, it is absurd;
for the Law of Nature is the Assent it self, that all men give to the means of
their own preservation.

d But his chiefest answer is, that An action forbidden, though it proceed from
necessary causes; yet if it were done willingly, may be justly punished, etc.

This the Bishop also understands not, and therefore denies it. He would have
the Judge condemn no man for a crime if it were necessitated; as if the Judge
could know what acts are necessary, unless he knew all that has anteceded,
both visible and invisible, and what both every thing in it self, and
altogether can effect. It is enough to the Judge, that the act he condemns,
be voluntary. The punishment whereof may, if not capital, reform the will of
the offender; if capital, the will of others by example. For heat in one body,
does not more create heat in another, than the terror of an example creat^th
fear in another, who otherwise were inclined to commit injustice.

Some few lines before he has said that I built upon a wrong foundation,
namely, That all Magistrates were at first elective, I had forgot to tell you,
that I never said nor though it. And therefore his Reply, as to that point is
impertinent.

Not many lines after, for a reason why a man may not be justly punished, when
his crime is voluntary, he offers this, that Law is unjust and tyrannical
which commands a man to Will, that which is impossible for him to Will. Whereby
it appears he is of opinion, that a Law may be made to command the Will. The
style of a Law is Do this, or Do not this; or If thou Do this, thou shall
Suffer this; but no Law runs thus, Will this, or Will not this; or If thou have
a Will to this, thou shall Suffer this; He objecteth further that I hegg the
question, because no man's Will is necessitated. Wherein he mistakes, for I say
no more in that place, but that he that does evil willingly, whether he be
necessarily willing, or not necessarily, may be justly punished. And upon this
mistake he runs over again his former and already answered nonsense saying,
we our selves by our own negligence, in not opposing our passions when we
should and might, have freely given them a kind of dominion over us; and again
motus primo primi, the first motions are not always in our power. Which motus
primo primi, signifies nothing, and our negligence in not opposing our
passions, is the same with our want of Will, to oppose our Will, which is
absurd; and that we have given them a kind of dominion over us, either
signifies nothing, or that we have a dominion over our Wills, or our Wills a
dominion over us, and consequently either we or our wills are not Free.

e He pleads moreover that the Law is a cause of Justice, etc. All this is most
true, of a just Law, justly executed.

But I have shown that all Laws are just, as Laws, and therefore not to be
accused of injustice, by those that owe subjection to them; and a just Law is
always justly executed. Seeing then that he confesses that all that he
replieth to here is true, it follows that the Reply it self, where it
contradicts me, is false.

f He adds that the sufferings imposed by the Law upon Delinquents, respect
not the evil act past, but the good to come; and that the putting of a
Delinquent to death by the Magistrate for any crime whatsoever, cannot be
justified before God, except there be a real intention to benefit others by
his example.

This he neither confirms nor denies, and yet forbeareth not to discourse
upon it to little purpose; and therefore I pass it over.

g First he told us, that it was the irresistible power of God that justifies
all his Actions; though he command one thing openly, and plot another thing
secretly; though he be the cause not only of the Action, but also of the
irregularity, etc.

To all this which has been pressed before, I have answered also before, but
that he says I say having commanded one thing openly, he plots another thing
secretly, it is not mine, but one of his own ugly Phrases. And the force it
has proceeds out of an apprehension he has, that affliction, is not Gods
correction, but his revenge upon the Creatures of his own making; and from a
reasonning he uses, because it is not just in a man, to kill one man for the
amendment of another, therefore neither is it so in God; not remembering that
God has, or shall have killed all the men in the World, both nocent and
innocent.

My assertion ( he says) is a Dream, and the sum of it this, that where there
is no Law, there no killing or any thing else can be unjust; that before the
constitution of Commonwealths, every man had power to kill another, etc. and
adds, That this may well be called stringing of Paradoxes. To these my words he
replies,

h There was never any time when Mankind was without Governors, Laws and
Societies.

It is very likely to be true, that since the Creation there never was a time
in which Mankind was totally without Society. If a part of it were without
Laws and Governors, some other parts might be Commonwealths. He saw there was
Paternal Government in Adam, which he might do easily, as being no deep
consideration. But in those places where there is a Civil War at any time, at
the same time there is neither Laws nor Commonwealth, nor Society; but only a
temporal League; which every discontented Soldier may depart from when he
pleases, as being entered into by each man for his private interest, without any
obligation of conscience. There are therefore almost at all times multitudes of
lawless men; but this was a little too remote from his understanding to
perceave. Again, he denies that ever there was a time, when one private man
might lawfully kill another for his own preservation; and has forgotten that
these words of his (Number 2.) This is the belief of all Mankind, which we have
not learned from our Tutors, but is imprinted in our hearts by Nature; we need
not turn over any obscure Books to find out this truth, etc. Which are the
words of Cicero in the defense of Milo, and translated by the Bishop to the
defense of Free Will, were used by Cicero to prove this very thing, that it is
and has been always lawful for one private man to kill another for his own
preservation. But where he says it is not lawful ordinarily, he should have
shown some particular case wherein it is unlawful. For seeing it is a belief
imprinted in our hearts, not only I, but many more are apt to think it is the
Law of Nature, and consequently Universal and Eternal. And where he says, this
right of defense where it is, is not a remainder of some greater power which
they have resigned, but a privilege which God has given them in case of
extreme danger and invincible necessity, etc. I also say it is a privilege
which God has given them; but we differ in the manner how; which to me seems
this, that God does not account such killing sin. But the Bishop it seems would
have it thus, God sends a Bishop into the Pulpit to tell the People it is
lawful for a man to kill another man when it is necessaay for the preservation
of his own life; of which necessity, that is, whether it be invincible, or
whether the danger be extreme, the Bishop shall be the Judge after the man is
killed, as being a case of conscience. Against the resigning of this our
general power of killing our enemies, he argues thus, Nothing can give that
which it never had; the People whilst they were a dispersed rabble (which in
some odd cases might happen to be) never had justly the power of life and
death; and therefore they could not give it by their election, etc. Needs there
much acuteness to understand, what number of men soever there be, though not
united into Government, that every one of them in particular having a right to
destroy whatsoever he thinks can annoy him, may not resign the same right,
and give it to whom he please, when he thinks it conducible to his
proservation? And yet it seems he has not understood it.

He takes it ill that I compare the murdering of men with the slaughtering of
brute beasts; as also a little before, he says my opinion reflects too much
upon the honor of mankind. The Elements ( says he) are for the Plants, the
Plants for the brute Beasts, and the brute Beasts for Man. I pray, when a Lion
eats a Man, and a Man eats an Ox; why is the Ox more made for the Man, than
the Man for the Lion? Yes he says, God gave man liberty ( Genesis 9. 3.) to eat
the flesh of the Creatures for his sustenance. True. But the Lion had the
liberty to eat the flesh of man long before. But he will say no; pretending
that no man of any Nation, or at any time, could lawfully eat flesh, unless he
had this license of holy Scripture, which it was impossible for most men to
have. But how would he have been offended, if I had said of man as Pliny does,
Quo nullum est animal neque miserius, neque superbius? The truth is, that man
is a Creature of greater power, than other living Creatures are; but his
advantages do consist especially in two things, whereof one is the use of
speech by which men communicate one with another, and join their forces
together, and by which also they Register their thoughts, that they perish not,
but be reserved, and afterward joined with other thoughts, to produce general
Rules for the direction of their actions. There be Beasts that see better,
others that hear better, and others that exceed mankind in other senses. Man
excels beasts only in making of Rules to himself, that is to say, in
remembering, and in reasoning aright upon that which he remembers. They which
do so, deserve an honor above brute beasts. But they which mistaking the use
of words, deceive themselves and others, introducing error, and seducing men
from the truth, are so much less to be honored than brute beasts, as error is
more vile than ignorance. So that it is not merely the nature of man, that
makes him worthier than other living Creatures, but the knowledge that he
acquires by meditation, and by the right use of reason in making good rules of
his future actions. The other advantage a man has, is the use of his hands for
the making of those things which are instrumental to his well-being. But this
advantage is not a matter of so great honor, but that a man may speak
negligently of it without offense. And for the dominion that a man has over
beasts, he says it is lost in part for the sin of man, because the strongest
Creatures as Lions, and Bears, have withdrawn their obedience; but the most
profitable and useful Creatures, as Sheep and Oxen, do in some degree, retain
their obedience. I would ask the Bishop in what consists the dominion of man,
over a Lion or a Bear. Is it in an obligation of promise, or of debt? That
cannot ^e; for they have no sense of debt or duty. And I think he will not say,
that they have received a command to obey him from authority. It rests
therefore that the dominion of man consists in this, that men are too hard for
Lions and Bears, because though a Lion or a Bear be stronger than a man, yet
the strength, and art, and specially the Leagu^ing and Societies of men, are a
greater power, than the ungoverned strength of unruly Beasts. In this it is
that consists this dominion of man; and for the same reason when a hungry
Lion meets an unarmed man in a desert, the Lion has the dominion over the
man, if that of man over Lions, or over Sheeep and Oxen, may be called
dominion* which properly it cannot; nor can it be said that Sheep and Oxen do
otherwise obey us, than they would do a Lion. And if we have dominion over
Sheep and Oxen, we exercise it not as dominion, but as hostility; for we keep
them only to labor, and to be killed and devoured by us; so that Lions and
Bears would be as good Matters to them as we are. By this short passage of his,
concerning Dominion and Obedience, I have no reason to expect a very shrewd
answer from him, to my Leviathan.

i The next branch of his Answer, concerns Consultations, which (says he) are
not superfluous, though all things come to pass necessarily, because they are
the cause which does necessitate the effect, and the means to bring it to pass.

His Reply to this is, that he has showed sufficiently, that reason does not
determine the will Physically, etc. If not Physically, how then? As he has
told us in another place, Morally. But what it is to determine a thing Morally,
no man living understands. I doubt not but be had therefore the Will to write
this Reply, because I had answered his Treatise concerning true Liberty. My
answer therefore was (at least in part) the cause of his writing, yet that is
the cause of the nimble local motion of his fingers. Is not the cause of local
motion Physical? His Will therefore was Physically and Extrinsecally, and
Antecedently, and not Morally caused by my writing.

k He adds further, that as the end is necessary, so are the means. And when it
is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is determined
also for what cause it shall be so chosen. All which is truth, but not the
whole truth, etc.

Is it not enough that it is truth? must I put all the truth I know into two or
three lines? No. I should have added, that God does adapt and fit the means to
their respective ends, free means to free ends, contingent means to contingent
ends, necessary means to necessary ends. It may be I would have done so, but
for shame. Free, Contingent, and Necessary, are not words that can be joined to
Means or Ends, but to Agents and Actions; that is to say, to things that moove,
or are moved. A Free Agent being that whose motion, or action is not hindered
nor stopped. And a Free Action, that which is produced by a Free Agent. A
Contingent Agent, is the same with an Agent simply. But because men for the
most part think those things are produced without cause, whereof they do not
see the cause, they use to call both the Agent and the Action Contingent, as
attributing it to fortune. And therefore when the causes are Necessary, if they
perceive not the necessity, they call those necessary Agents and Actions, in
things that have Appetite, Free; and in things inanimate, Contingent. The rest
of his Reply to this point, is very little of it applied to my answer. I note
only that where he says, but if God have so ordered the World, that a man
cannot, if he would, neglect any means of good, etc. He would fraudulently
insinuate that it is my opinion, that a man is not Free to Do if he will, and
to Abstain if he will. Whereas from the beginning I have often declared that it
is none of my opinion; and that my opinion is only this, that he is not Free to
Will, or which is all one, he is not Master of his future Will. After much
unorderly discourse he comes in with This is the doctrine that flows from this
opinion of absolute Necessity; which is impertinent; seeing nothing flows from
it more than may be drawn from the confession of an eternal Prescience.

l But he tells me in great sadness, that my Argument is no better than this;
If I shall live till to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my
self through with a sword to day, which (says he) is a false consequence, and a
false proposition. Truly, if by running through, he understand killing, it is a
false, or rather a foolish proposition. He says right. Let us therefore see
how it is not like to his; He says, If it be absolutely necessary that a man
shall live till to morrow, then it is vain and superfluous for him to consult,
whether he should dye to day or not.

And this ( he says) is a true consequence. I cannot perceive how it is a
better consequence than the former; for if it be absolutely necessary that a
man should live till to morrow, (and in health, which may also be supposed) why
should he not (if he have the curiosity) have his head cut off to try what pain
it is. But the consequence is false, for if there be a necessity of his living,
it is necessary also that he shall not have so foolish a curiosity. But he
cannot yet distinguish between a seen and unseen necessity, and that is the
cause he believes his consequence to be good.

m The next branch of my Argument concerns Admonitions, etc.

Which he says is this, If all things be necessary, then it is to no more
purpose to admonish men of understanding, than fools, children, or madmen, but
That they do admonish the one and not the other, is confessedly true; and no
reason under heaven can be given for it but this, that the former have the use
of reason, and true liberty, with a dominion over their own actions, which
children, fools, and madmen have not.

The true reason why we admonish men and not children, etc. is because
admonition, is nothing else but telling a man, the good and evil consequences
of his actions. They who have experience of good and evil, can better perceive
the reasonableness of such admonition, than they that have not; and such as
have like passions to those of the Admonitor, do more easily conceive, that to
be good or bad which the Admonitor says is so, than they who have great
passions, and such as are contrary to his. The first* which is want of
experience makes children, and fools unapt, and the second, which is strength
of passion, makes madmen unwilling to receive admonition; for children are
ignorant, and mad men in an error concerning what is good or evil for
themselves. This is not to say children and mad men want true Liberty, that is,
the liberty to do as they will, nor to say that men of judgment, or the
Admonitor himself has a dominion over his own actions, more than children or
mad men, (for their actions are also voluntary) or that when he admonishes he
has always the use of reason, though he have the use of deliberation, which
children, fools, mad men, and beasts also have. There be therefore reasons
under heaven which the Bishop knows not of.

Whereas I had said, that things necessary may be praiseworthy, and to praise a
thing is to say it is good, He distinguishes and says,

n True, but this goodness is not a Metaphysical goodness, so whatsoever has a
being is good, nor a Natural goodness; The praise of it passes wholly to the
Author of Nature, etc. But a Moral goodness, or a goodness of actions rather
than of things. The Moral goodness of an action is the conformity of it to
right Reason, etc.

There has been in the Schools derived from Aristotle's Metaphysics an old
Proverb rather than an Axiom, Ens, Bonum, et verum convertuntur. From hence
the Bishop has taken this notion of a Metaphysical goodness, and his doctrine,
that whatsoever has a being is good; and by this interprets the words of
Genesis 1. God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. But the reason of
those words is that Good is relative to those that are pleased with it, and not
of absolute signification to all men. God therefore says that all that he had
made was very good, because he was pleased with the Creatures of his own
making. But if all things were absolutely good, we should be all pleased with
their Being, which we are not, when the actions that depend upon their Being
are hurtful to us. And therefore, to speak properly, nothing is good or evil,
but in regard of the action that proceeds from it, and also of the person to
whom it does good or hurt. Satan is evil to us because he seeks our
destruction, but good to God, because he executes his commandments. And so
his Metaphysical goodness is but an idle term, and not the member of a
distinction. And as for Natural goodness, and evilness, that also is but the
goodness and evilness of Actions, as some Herbs are good because they nourish,
others evil because they poison us; and one Horse is good because he is gentle
strong, and carries a man easily, another bad because he resists, goes
hard, or otherwise displeases us, and that quality of gentleness, if there
were no more Laws amongst men than there is amongst beasts, would be as much a
moral good in a horse or other beast as in a man. It Is the Law from whence
proceeds the difference between the Moral and the Natural goodness, so that it
is well enough said by him, that Moral goodness is the conformity of an action
with right Reason; and better said than meant; for this right Reason which is
the Law, is no otherwise certainly Right than by our making it so by our
approbation of it, and voluntary subjection to it. For the Lawmakers are men
and may err, and think that Law which they make is for the good of the people
sometimes when it is not. And yet the ^^^ions of subjects, if they be
conformable to the Law are Morally good, and yet cease not to be Naturally
good, and the praise of them passes to the Author of Nature, as well as of any
other good whatsoever. From whence it appears that Moral praise is not as he
says from the good use of liberty, but from obedience to the Laws, nor Moral
dispraise from the bad use of liberty, but from disobedience to the Laws. And
for his consequence If all things be necessary, then Moral Liberty is quite
taken away, and with it all true praise and dispraise, there is neither truth
in it, nor argument offered for it; for there is nothing more necessary than
the consequence of voluntary actions to the Will. And whereas I had said, that
to say a thing is good, is to say it is as I, or another would wish, or as the
State would have it, or according to the Law of the Land, he answers, that I
mistake infinitely. And his reason is, because we often wish what is
profitable, or delightful, without regarding as we ought, what is honest. There
is no man living that sees all the consequences of an action from the
beginning to the end, whereby to weigh the whole sum of the good, with the
whole sum of the evil consequents. We choose no further than we can weigh.
That is good to every man which is so far good as he can see. All the real
good, which we call honest and Morally vertu^us, is that which is not repugnant
to the Law, Civil or Natural; for the Law is all the right Reason we have, and
though he, as often as it disagreeth with his own reason deny it, is the
infallible rule of Moral goodness. The reason whereof is this, that because
neither mine nor the Bishops reason, is right Reason, fit to be a rule of our
Moral actions, we have therefore set up over our selves a Sovereign Governor,
and agreed that his Laws shall be unto us, whatsoever they be, in the phace of
Right roason, to dictate to us what is really good; in the same manner as men
in playing turn up Trump, and as in playing their game their Morality
consists in not renouncing, so in our civil conversation, our Morality is all
co^^^^ned in not disobeying of the Laws.

To my question, whether nothing could please him that proceeded from
Necessity, he answers, yes. The fire pleases him when he is cold, and he says
it is good fire, but does not praise it Morally. He praises (he says) first
the Creator of the fire, and then him who provided it. He does well; yet he
praises the fire when he says it is good, though not Morally. He does not say
it is a just fire, or a wise, or a well manered fire obedient to the Laws, but
these Attributes it seems he gives to God, as if justice were not of his
nature, but of his manners. And in praising Morally him that provided it, he
seems to say, he would not say the fire was good, if he were not Morally good
that did provide it.

To that which I had answered concerning reward and punishment, he has replied
(he says) sufficiently before, and that that which he discoursenh here, is not
only to answer me, but also to satisfy himself, and says,

o Though it be not urged by him, yet I do acknowledge, that I find some
improper and analogical rewards and punishments, used to brute beasts, as the
Hunter rewards his Dog, etc.

For my part I am too dull to perveave the difference between those rewards
used to brute beasts, and those that are used to men. If they be not properly
called rewards and punishments let him give them their proper name. It may be
he will say he has done it in calling them Annalogical, yet for any thing that
can be understood thereby, he might have called them Paragogical, or Typical,
or Topical if he had pleased. He adds further, that whereas he had said, that
the action of Bees and Spiders were done without consultation, by mere instinct
of nature, and by a determination of their fancies, I missaleadge him, and say
he made their individual Actions necessary. I have only this to answer that
seeing he says, that by instinct of nature their fancies were determined to
special kinds of works, I might justly infer they were determined every one
of them to some work, and every work is an individual action, for a kind of
work in the general is no work. But these their individual actions he says are
contingent, and therefore not necessary; which is no good consequence: for if
he mean by contingent that which has no cause, he speaks not as a Christian,
but makes a Deity of Fortune, which I verily think he does not. But if he mean
by it, that whereof he knows not the cause, the consequence is naught.

The means whereby Setting-dogs, and Coy-ducks, and Parats are taught to do
what they do, is by their backs, by their bellies, by the rod, or by the
morsel, which have indeed a shadow, or resemblance of rewards and
punishments. But we take the word here properly, not as it is used by vulgar
plople, but as it is used by Divines, and Philosophers, etc. Does not the
Bishop know that the Belly has taught Poets, and Historians, and Divines, and
Philosophers. and Artificers their several Arts, as well as Parrats? Do not men
do their duty with regard to their backs* to their necks, and to their
morsells, as well as Setting-dogs, Coy-ducks and Parrats? Why then are these
things to us the substance, and to them but the shadow or resemblance of
rewards or punishments?

p When brute creatures do learn any such qualities, it is not out of judgment
or deliberation or discourse, by inferring or concluding one thing from
another, which they are not capable of, neither are they able to conceive a
reason of what they do, etc. but they remember that when they did after one
manner, they were beaten; and when they did after another manner, they were
cherished; and accordingly they apply themselves.

If the Bishop had considered the cogitations of his own mind, not then when he
disputes, but then when he followed those businesses which he calls trifles,
he would have found them the very same which he here mentions, saving instead
of beating, ( because he is exempt from that) he is to put in damage. For
setting aside the discourse of the tongue, in words of general signification,
the Idea's of our minds are the same with those of other living creatures,
created from Visible, Audible, and other sensible objects to the eyes and other
Organs of sense, as theirs are. For as the objects of sense are all individual,
that is singular, so are all the fancies proceeding from their operations; and
men reason not but in words of universal signification uttered, or tacitly
thought on. But perhaps he thinks remembrance of words to be the Idea's of
those things which the words signify; and that all fancies are not effected by
the operation of Objects upon the Organs of our senses. But to rectify him in
those points is greater labor ( unless he had better principles) than I am
willing or have at this tim^ leisure to undergo.

Lastly, whereas he says, if their Individual actions were absolutely
necessary, Fear or Hope could not alter them. That's true. For it is Fear and
Hope that makes them necessarily what they are.

J. D. THirdly, let this opinion be once radicated in the minds Numb. 15. Arg.
3.
of men, that there is no true liberty, and that all things come to pass
inevitably, and it will utterly destroy the study of Piety. Who will bewail
his sins with tears? what will become of that Grief, that Zeal, that
Indignation, that holy Revenge, which the Apostle speaks of, if men be once
thoroughly persuaded that they could not shun what they did? A man may grieve
for that which he could not help, but he will never be brought to bewail, that
as his own fault, which flowed not from his own error, but from antecedent
necessity. Who will be careful or sollicitous to perform obedience, that
believes there are inevitable bounds and limits set to all his devotions,
which he can neither go beyond, nor come short of? To what end shall he pray
God to avert those evils which are inevitable? or to confer those favors which
are impossible? We indeed know not what good or evil shall happen to us, but
this we know, that if all things be necessary, our devotions and endeavors
cannot alter that which must be. In a word, the only reason why those persons
who tread in this path of fatal destiny do sometimes pray, or repent, or serve
God, is because the light of nature and the strength of reason, and the
evidence of Scripture, do for that present transport them from their ill chosen
grounds, and expel those Stoical fancies out of their heads; A complete
Stoic can neither pray, nor repent, nor serve God to any purpose. Either allow
liberty, or destroy Church, as well as Commonwealth, Religion as well as Policy.


T. H. HIs third Argument consists in other inconveniences which he says
will follow, namely impiety and negligence of Religious duties, Repentance, and
zeal to Gods service. To which I answer, as to the rest, that they follow not.
I must confess, if we consider the far greatest part of mankind, not as they
should be, but as they are, that is, as men whom either the study of acquiring
wealth, or preferments, or whom the apperite of sensual delights, or the
impatience of meditating, or the rash embracing of wrong principles, have made
unapt to discuss the truth of things, that the dispute of this question will
rather hurt than help their piety. And therefore, if he had not desired this
answer, I would not have written it. Nor do I write it, but in hope your
Lordship, and he will keep it private. Nevertheless in very truth, the
necessity of events does not of it self draw with it any impiety at all. For
piety consists only in two things; One, that we honor God in our hearts,
which is, that we think of his power as highly as we can, for to honor any
thing is nothing else but to think it to be of great power. The other that we
signify that honor and esteem by our words and actions, which is called
cultus, or worship of God. He therefore that thinks that all things proceed
from Gods Eternal Will, and consequently are necessary, does he not think God
Omnipotent? does he not esteem of his power as highly as is possible? which is
to honor God as much as can be in his heart. Again, he that thinks so, is he
not more apt by external acts and words to acknowledge it, than he that
thinks otherwise? Yet is this external acknowledgement the same thing which
we call Worship. So this opinion fortifieth piety in both kinds, externally and
internally, and therefore is far from destroying it. And for Repentance, which
is nothing but a glad returning into the right way, after the grief of being
out of the way, though the cause that made him go astray were necessary, yet
there is no ^ason why he should not grieve; and again, though the cause ^hy he
returned into the way were necessary, there remains still the causes of joy.
So that the necessity of the actions takes away neither of those parts of
repentance, grief for the error, nor joy for the returning. And for Prayer,
whereas he says, that the necessity of things destroys prayer, I deny it. For
though prayer be none of the causes that moove Gods Will, his Will being
unchangeable, yet since we find in Gods Word, he will not give his blessings
but to those that ask them, the motive to prayer is the same. Prayer is the
gift of God, no less than the blessings. And the prayer is decreed together in
the same decree wherein the blessing is decreed. It Is manifest, that
thanksgiving is no cause of the blessing past; And that which is past is sure,
and necessary. Yet even amongst men, thanks is in use as an acknowledgement of
the benefit past, though we should expect no new benefit for our gratitude. And
prayer to God Almighty is but thanksgiving for his blessings in general; and
though it precede the particular thing we ask, yet it is not a cause or means
of it, but a signification that we expect nothing but from God, in such manner
as he, not as we will. And our Savior by word of mouth bids us pray, Thy will,
not our will be done, and by example teaches us the same, for he prayed thus,
Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass, etc. The end of prayer, as of
thanksgiving, is not to move, but to honor God Almighty, in acknowledging that
what we ask can be effected by him only.


J. D. I Hope T. H. will be persuaded in time, that it is not the Covetousness,
or Ambition, or Sensuallity, or Sloth, or Prejudice of his Readers which
renders this doctrine of absolute necessity dangerous, but that it is in its
own nature destructive to true godliness; a And though his answer consist more
of oppositions than of solutions, yet I will not willingly leave one grain of
his matter unweighed. b First, he erres in making inward piety to consist
merely in the estimation of the judgment. If this were so, what hinders but
that the Devils should have as much inward piety as the best Christians, for
they esteem Gods power to be infinite, and tremble? Though inward piety do
suppose the act of the understanding, yet it consists properly in the act of
the will, being that branch of Justice which gives to God the honor which is
due unto him. Is there no Love due to God, no Faith, no Hope? Secondly, he
erres in making inward piety to ascribe no glory to God, but only the glory of
his Power or Omnipotence. What shall become of all other the divine Attributes,
and particularly of his Goodness, of his Truth, of his Justice, of his Mercy,
which beget a more true and sincere honor in the heart than greatness it self?
Magnos facile laudamus, bonos lubenter. Thirdly, this opinion of absolute
necessity destroys the truth of God, making him to command one thing openly,
and to necessitate another privately; to chide a man for doing that which he
has determined him to do; to profess one thing, and to intend another. It
destroys the goodness of God, making him to be an hater of mankind, and to
delight in the torments of his creatures, whereas the very dogs licked the
sores of Lazarus in pity and commiseration of him. It destroys the Justice of
God, making him to punish the creatures for that which was his own act, which
they had no more powerto shun, than the fire has power not to burn. It
destroys the very power of God, making him to be the true Author of all the
defects and evils which are in the world. These are the fruits of Impotence,
not of Omnipotence. He who is the effective cause of sin either in himself, or
in the Creature, is not Almighty. There needs no other Devil in the world to
raise jealousies and suspicions between God and his creatures, or to poison
mankind with an apprehension, that God does not love them, but only this
opinion, which was the office of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 5. Fourthly, for the
outward worship of God. e How shall a man praise God for his goodness, who
believes him to be a greater Tyrant than ever was in the world? who creates
millions to burn eternally without their fault, to express his power? How shall
a man hear the word of God with that reverence, and devotion, and faith, which
is requisite, who believes that God causes his Gospel to be preached to the
much greater part of Christians, not with any intention that they should be
converted and saved, but merely to harden their hearts, and to make them
inexcusable? How shall a man receive the blessed Sacrament with comfort and
confidence, as a Seal of Gods love in Christ, who believes, that so many
millions are positively excluded from all fruit and benefit of the passions of
Christ, before they had done either good or evil? How shall he prepare himself
with care and conscience, who apprehends, that Eating and Drinking unworthily
is not the cause of damnation, but because God would damn a man, therefore he
necessitates him to eat and drink unworthily? How shall a man make a free vow
to God, without gross ridiculous hypocrisy, who thinks he is able to p^rform
nothing, but as he is extrinsecally necessitated? Fifthly, for Repentance, how
shall a man condemn and accuse himself for his sins, who thinks himself to be
like a Watch which is wound up by God, and that he can go neither longer nor
shorter, faster nor slower, truer nor falser, than he is ordered by God? If God
sets him right, he goes right. If God set him wrong he goes wrong. How can a
man be said to return into the right way, who never was in any other way, but
that which God himself had chalked out for him? What is his purpose to amend,
who is destitute of all power, but as if a man should purpose to fly without
wings, or a beggar who has not a groat in his purse, purpose to build
Hospitals?

We use to say, admit one absurdity, and a thousand will follow. To maintain
this unreasonable opinion of absolute necessity he is necessitated (but it is
hypothetically, he might change his opinion if he would) to deal with all
ancient Writers, as the Goths did with the Romans, who destroyed all their
magnificent works, that there might remain no monument of their greatness upon
the face of the earth. Therefore he will not leave so much as one of their
opinions, nor one of their definitions, nay, not one of their ^earms of Art
standing. f Observe what a description he has given us here of Repentance. It
is a glad returning into the right way, after the grief of being out of the
way. It amazed me to find gladness to be the first word in the description of
Repentance. His repentance is not that repentance, nor his piety that piety,
nor his prayer that kind of prayer which the Church of God in all Ages has
acknowledged. Fasting and Sackcloth, and Ashes, and Tears, and Humi-cubations,
used to be companions of Repentance. Joy may be a consequent of it, not a part
of it. g It is a returning, but whose act is this returning? Is it Gods alone,
or does the penitent person concur also freely with the grace of God? If it be
Gods alone, then it is his repentance, not man's repentance, what need the
penitent person trouble himself about it? God will take care of his own work.
The Scriptures teach us otherwise, that God expects our concurrence, Revel. 3.
19. Be zealous and repent, behold I stand at the door, and knock. If any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him. It is a glad returning
into the right way. Why dare any man call that a wrong way, which God himself
has determined? He that wills, and does that which God would have him to
will and to do, is never out of his right way. It follows in his description,
after the grief, etc. It is true, a man may grieve for that which is
necessarily imposed upon him, but he cannot grieve for it as a fault of his
own, if it never was in his power to shun it; Suppose a Writing-master, shall
hold his Scholars hand in his, and write with it; the Scholars part is only to
hold still his hand, whether the Master write well or ill; the Scholar has no
ground, either of joy or sorrow as for himself, no man will interpret it to be
his act, but his Masters. It is no fault to be out of the right way, if a man
had not liberty to have kept himself in the way.

And so from Repentance he skips quite over New obedience, to come to Prayer,
which is the last Religious duty insisted upon by me here. But according to his
use, without either answering or mentioning what I say. Which would have showed
him plainly what kind of prayer I intend, not contemplative prayer in general,
as it includes thanksgiving, but that most proper kind of prayer which we call
Petition, which used to be thus defined, to be an act of Religion by which we
desire of God something which we have not, and hope that we shall obtain it by
him* Quite contrary to this T. H. tells us, h that prayer is not a cause, nor a
means of Gods blessing, but only a signification that we expest it from him.
If he had told us only that prayer is not a meritorious cause of Gods
blessings, as the poor man by begging an alms does not deserve it, I should
have gone along with him. But to tell us, that it is not so much as a means to
procure Gods blessing, and yet with the same breath, that God will not give his
blessings, but to those who pray, who shall reconcile him to himself? The
Scriptures teach us otherwise, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you, John 16. 23. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, Matthew. 7. 7. St. Paul tells
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 11. that he was helped by their prayers, that's not
all, that the gift was bestowed upon him by their means, So prayer is a means:
And St. James says chap. 5. 16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man avails much. If it be effectual, then it is a cause. To show this
efficacy of prayer, our Savior uses the comparison of a Father toward his
Child, of a Neighbor toward his Neighbor, yea, of an unjust Judge, to shame
those who think, that God has not more compassion than a wicked man. This was
signified by Jacobs wrestling and prevailing with God. Prayer is like the
Tradesmans tools wherewithal he gets his living for himself, and his family.
But, says he, Gods Will is unchangeable. What then? He might as well use this
against study, Physic, and all second causes, as against Prayer. He shows
even in this, how little they attribute to the endeavors of men. There is a
great difference between these two, mutare voluntatem, to change the will,
which God never does, in whom there is not the least shadow of turning by
change; His will to love and hate, was the same from eternity, which it now is,
and ever shall be. His love and hatred are immovable, but we are removed, Non
tellus cymbam tellurem cymbareliquit, And velle mutationem, to will a change,
which God often does. To change the will argues a change in the Agent, but to
will a change, only argues a change in the object. It is no inconstancy in a
man to love or to hate, as the object is changed. Praesta mihi omnia ^ad^m and
idem sum. Prayer works not upon God, but us; It renders not him more propitious
in himself, but us more capable of mercy. He says, this, That God does not
bless us, execpt we pray, is a motive to prayer. Why talks he of motives, who
acknowledges no liberty, nor admits any cause, but absolutely necessary? He
says, Prayer is the gift of God, no less than the blessing which we pray for,
and contained in the same decrree with the blessing. It is true, the spirit of
prayer is the gift of God, will he conclude from thence, that the good
employment of one talent, or of one gift of God, may not procure another? Our
Savior teaches us otherwise, Come thou good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful in little, I will make the ruler over much. Too much light is an
enemy to the sight, and too much Law is an enemy to Justice. I could wish we
wrangled less about Gods Decrees, until we understood them better. But, says
he, Thanksgiving is no cause of the blessing past, and prayer is but a
thanksgiving. He might even as well tell me, that when a beggar craves an
alms, and when he gives thanks for it, it is all one. Every thanksgiving is a
kind of prayer, but every prayer, and namely Petition, is not a thanksgiving.
In the last place he urges, that in our prayers we are bound, to submit our
Wills to Gods Will, who ever made any doubt of this? we must submit to the
Preceptive Will of God, or his Commandments; we must submit to the effective
Will of God, when he declares his good pleasure by the event or otherwise. But
we deny, and deny again, either that God wills things, ad extra, without
himself necessarily, or that it is his pleasure that all second causes should
act necessarily at all times, which is the question, and that which he
alleges to the contrary comes not near it.


Anim^dversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. XV.
a ANd though his answer consist more of oppositions than of solutions, yet I
will not willingly leave one grain of his matter unweighed.

It is a promise of great exactness, and like to that which is in his Epistle
to the Reader, Here is all that passed between us upon this subject, without
any addition or the least variation from the original, etc. Which promises were
both needless and made out of gallantry; and therefore he is the less
pardonable in case they be not very rigidly observed. I would therefore have
the Reader to consider, whether these words of mine, Our Savior bids us pray
Thy Will, not our Will be done, and by example teaches us the same, for he
prayed thus, Father if it be thy Will let this cup pass, etc. which seem at
least to imply that our prayers cannot change the Will of God, nor divert him
from his eternal decree, have been weighed by him to a grain according to his
promise. Nor has he kept his other promise any better; For ( Number 8.)
replying to these word^ of mine, If he had so little to do as to be a spectator
of the actions of Bees and Spiders, he would have confessed not only Election,
but also Art, Prudence, and Policy in them, etc. He says, Yes, I have seen
those silliest of Creatures, and seeing their rare works I have seen enough to
confute all the bold-faced Athiests of this age, and their hellish blasphemies.
This passage is added to that which passed between us upon this subject. For it
is not in the Copy which I have had by me (as himself confesses) these eight
years. Nor is it in the Body of the Copy he sent to the Press, but only in
the margent, that is to say, added out of anger against me, whom he would have
men think to be one of the bold-faced Athiests of this Age.

In the rest of this Reply he endeavors to prove, that it follows from my
opinion, that there is no use of Piety. My opinion is no more than this that a
man cannot so determine to day, the will which he shall have to the doing of
any action to morrow, as that it may not be changed by some external accident
or other, as there shall appear more or less advantage to make him persevere in
the Will to the same action, or to Will it no more. When a man intends to pay
a debt at a certain time, if he see that the deteining of the money for a
little longer may advantage himself, and ^eth no other disadvantage equivalent
likely to follow upon the detention, has his will changed by the advantage,
and therefore had not determined his Will himself; but when he foreseeth
discredit or perhaps imprisonment, then his Will remains the same, and is
determined by the thoughts he has of his Creditor, who is therefore an
external cause of the determination of the debtors Will. This is so evident to
all men living, though they never studied School Divinity, that it will be very
strange if he draw from it the great impiety he pretends to do. Again my
opinion is only this, that whatsoever God foreknowes shall come to pass, it
cannot possibly be that that shall not come to pass. But that which cannot
possibly not come to pass, that is said by all men to come to pass necessarily;
therefore all events that God foreknowes shall come to pass, shall come to pass
necessarily. If therefore the Bishop draw Impiety from this, he falls into
the Impiety of denying Gods Prescience. Let us see now how he reasons.

b First, he erres in making inward Piety to consist merely in the estimation
of the judgment. If this were so, what hinders but that the Devils should have
as much inward Piety as the best Christians, for they esteem Gods power to be
infinite, and tremble?

I said that two things concurred to Piety; one, to esteem his power as highly
as is possible. The other, that we signify that estimation by our words and
actions, that is to say, that we worship him; This later part of Piety he
leaves out; and then it is much more easy to conclude as he does, that the
Devils may have inward Piety. But neither so does the Conclusion follow; For
Goodness is one of Gods Powers, (namely that Power by which he works in men,
the Hope they have in him) and is relative; and therefore unless the Devil
think that God will be good to him, he cannot esteem him for his Goodness. It
does not therefore follow from any opinion of mine, that the Devil may have as
much inward Piety as a Christian. But how does the Bishop know how the Devils
esteem Gods Power? and what Devils does he mean? there are in the Scripture two
sorts of things, which are in English translated Devils, one is, that which is
called Satan, Diabolus, and Abaddon, which signifies in English an Enemy, an
Accuser, and a Destroyer of the Church of God. In which sense, the Devils are
but wicked men. How then is he sure that they esteem Gods Power to be infinite?
for trembling inferrs no more than that they apprehend it to be greater than
their own. The other sort of Devils are called in the Scripture Doemonia, which
are the feigned Gods of the Heathen, and are neither bodies nor spiritual
substances, but mere fancies, and fictions of terrified hearts, feigned by the
Greeks and other Heathen People, and which St. Paul calls Nothings; for an
Idol says he is Nothing. Does the Bishop mean that these Nothings esteem Gods
Power, to be infinite and tremble? there is nothing that has a real being, but
God and the World, and the parts of the World; nor has any thing a feigned
being but the fictions of men's brains. The World and the parts thereof are
corporeal, endued with the dimensions of Quantity, and with Figure. I should be
glad to know in what Classis of Entities, (which is a word that Schoolmen use)
the Bishop ^anketh these Devils that so much esteem Gods Power and yet not love
him, nor hope in him; if he place them not in the rank of those men, who are
enemies to the People of God, as the Jews did.

c Secondly, he erres in making inward Piety, to ascribe no glory to God, but
only the glory of his Power, or Omnipotence. What shall become of all other
the Divine Attributes, and particularly of his Goodness, of his Truth, of his
Justice, of his Mercy, etc.

He speaks of Gods Goodness, and Mercy, as if they were no part of his Power.
Is not Goodness in him that is good the Power to make himself beloved, and is
not Mercy Goodness? are not therefore these Attributes contained in the
Attribute of his Omnipotence. And Justice in God, is it any thing else but the
Power he has, and exercises in distributing blessings and afflictions?
Justice is not in God as in man, the observation of the Laws made by his
superiors. Nor is Wisdom in God a logical examination of the means by the
end, as it is in men; but an incomprehensible Attribute given to an
incomprehensible nature, for to honor him. It is the Bishop that erres, in
thinking nothing to be Power, but Riches, and High place, wherein to dominere
and please himself, and vex those that submit not to his opinions.

d Thirdly, this opinion of absolute Necessity, destroys the Truth of God,
making him to command one thing openly, and to necessitate another privately,
etc. It destroys the goodness of God, making him to be a hater of mankind,
etc. It destroys the Justice of God, making him to punish the creatures for
that which was his own act, etc. It destroys the very Power of God, making him
to be the true Author of all the defects and evils, which are in the world.

If the opinion of absolute necessity do all this, then the opinion of Gods
Prescience does the same; for God foreknoweth nothing that can possibly not
come to pass; but that which cannot possibly not come to pass, comes to pass
of necessity. But how does necessity destroy the Truth of God by commanding and
hindering what he commands? Truth consists in Affirmation and Negation, not
in commanding and hindering; it does not therefore follow if all things be
necessary that come to pass, that therefore God has spoken an untruth; Nor
that he professesseth one thing and intends another. The Scripture which is
his word, is not the profession of what he intends, but an indication of what
those men shall necessarily intend, whom he has chosen to salvation, and whom
he has determined to destruction. But on the other side, from the Negation of
necessity, there follows necessarily the Negation of Gods Prescience; which
is in the Bishop ( if not ignorance) impiety. Or how destroys it the Goodness
of God, or makes him to be an hater of mankind, and to delight in the torments
of his creatures, whereas the very dogs licked the sores of Lazarus, in pity
and commiseration of him? I cannot imagine when living creatures of all sorts
are often in torments, as well as men, that God can be displeased with it,
without whose will they neither are nor could be at all tormented. Nor yet is
he delighted with it; but health* sickness, ^ase, torments, life and death are
without all passion in him dispensed by him, and he puts an end to them then
when they end, and a beginning when they begin, according to his eternal
purpose, which cannot be resisted. That the necessity argues a delight of God
in the torments of his creatures, is even as true as that it was pity and
commiseration in the dogs, that made them lick the sores of Lazarus. Or how
does the opinion of necessity destroy the Justice of God, or make him to punish
the creatures for that which was his own act? If all afflictions be
punishments, for whose act are all other Creatures punished which cannot sin?
Why may not God make the affliction both of those men that he has elected, and
also of those whom he has reprobated, the necessary causes of the conversion
of those he has elected; their own afflictions serving therein as
chastisements, and the afflictions of the rest, as examples? But he may perhaps
think it no injustice to punish the creatures that cannot sin, with temporary
punishments, when nevertheless it would be injustice to torment the same
creatures eternally. This may be somewhat to Meekness and Cruelty, but nothing
at all to Justice and Injustice: For in punishing the innocent the injustice is
equal, though the punishments be unequal. And what cruelty can be greaner than
that which may be inferred from this opinion of the Bishop, that God does
torment eternally, and with the extremest degree of torment, all those men
which have sinned, that is to say, all mankind from the creation to the end of
the world, which have not believed in Jesus Christ, whereof very few in respect
of the multitude of others have so much as heard of his name, and this, when
Faith in Christ is the gift of God himself, and the hearts of all men in his
hands to frame them to the belief of whatsoever he will have them to believe?
He has no reason therefore for his part to tax any opinion, for ascribing to
God either cruelty or injustice. Or how does it destroy the Power of God, or
make him to be the Author of all the defects and evils which are in the world?
First, he seems not to understand what Author signifies. Author is he which
owneth an Action, or gives a warrant to do it. Do I say that any man has in
the Scripture, (which is all the warrant we have from God for any Action
whatsoever) a Warrant to commit Theft, Murder, or any other sin? Does the
opinion of necessity infer, that there is such a warrant in the Scripture?
Perhaps he will say no, but that this opinion makes him the cause of sin. But
does not the Bishop think him the cause of all Actions? And are not sins of
commission Actions? Is Murder no Action? And does not God himself say Non est
malum in*civitate quod ego non feci? And was not murder one of those evils?
whether it were or not, I say no more but that God is the cause (not the
Author) of all Actions and Motions. Whether sin be the Action, or the Defect,
or the Irregularity* I mean not to dispute. Nevertheless I am of opinion, that
the distinction of Causes into Efficient and Deficient is Bohu, and signifies
nothing.

e How shall a man praise God for his Goodness, who believes him to be a
greater Tyrant than ever was in the world? who creates millions to burn
eternally without their fault, to express his Power.

If Tyrant signify (as it did when it came first in use) a King, it is no
dishonor to believe that God is a greater Tyrant than ever was in the world;
for he is the King of all Kings, Emperors and Commonwealths. But if we take
the word (as it is now used) to signify those Kings only, which they that
call them Tyrants are displeased with; that is, that Govern not as they would
have them, the Bishop is nearer the calling him a Tyrant than I am, making that
to be Tyranny, which is but the exercise of an absolute Power; For he holds
(though he see it not) by consequence, in withdrawing the Will of man from Gods
dominion, that every man is a King of himself. And if a man cannot praise God
for his Goodness, who creates millions to burn eternally without their fault;
how can the Bishop praise God for his Goodness, who thinks he has created
millions of millions to burn eternally, when he could have kept them so easily
from committing any fault? And to his How shall a man hear the Word of God with
that reverence, and devotion, and faith which is requisite, who believes that
God causes his Gospel to be preached to the much greater part of Christians,
not with any intention, that they should be converted and saved, etc. I answer
that those men who so believe have Faith in Jesus Christ, or they have not
Faith in him, If they have, then shall they by that faith hear the Word of God
with that reverence and devotion, and faith which is requisite to salvation.
And for them that has no faith, I do not think he asks how they shall hear
the Word of God with that reverence, and devotion, and faith which is
requisite, for he knows they shall not till such time as God shall have given
them faith. Also he mistakes if he think that I or any other Christian believe,
that God intends by hardening any man's heart, to make that man inexcusable,
but to make his Elect the more careful.

Likewise to his question, How shall a man receave the Sacrament with comfort,
who believes that so many millions are positively excluded from the benefit of
Christ's Passion, before they had done either good or evil. I answer as before,
by Faith, if he be of Gods Elect; if not, he shall not receave the Sacrament
with comfort. I may answer also that the Faithful man shall receave the
Sacrament with comfort by the same way that the Bishop receaveth it with
comfort. For he also believes that many millions are excluded from the benefit
of Christ's Passion, (whether positively or not positively is nothing to the
purpose, nor does positively signify any thing in this place) and that so long
before they had either done good or evil, as it was known to God before they
were born that they were so excluded

To his How shall he prepare himself with care and conscience, who apprehends
that eating and drinking unworthily, is not the cause of damnation, but because
God would damn a man, therefore he necessitates him. I answer that he that
eats and drinks unworthily, does not believe that God necessitates him to
Eat and Drink unworthily, because he would damn him; for neither does he think
he Eats and Drinks unworthily, nor that God intends to damn him; for he
believes no such damnation, nor intends any preparation. The belief of
damnation is an Article of Christian faith; so is also preparation to the
Sacrament. It Is therefore a vain question, how he thaet has no faith shall
prepare himself with care and conscience to the receiving of the Sacrament. But
to the question how they shall prepare themselves that shall at all prepare
themselves; I answer it shall be by Faith, when God shall give it them.

To his How shall a man make a free vow to God, who thinks himself able to
perform nothing, but as he is extrinsecally necessitated. I answer, that if he
make a vow it is a Free vow, (or else it is no vow) and yet he may know when he
has made that vow, (though not before) that it was extrinsecally nocessitated,
for the necessity of vowing before he vowed, hindered not the Freedom of his
Vow, but made it.

Lastly, to How shall a man condemn and accuse himself for his sins, who thinks
himself to be like a Watch which is wound up by God, etc. I answer, though he
think himself necessitated to what he shall do, yet if he do not think himself
necessitated, and wound up to impenitence, there will follow upon his opinion
of necessity no impedment to his repentance. The Bishop disputes not against
me, but against sombody that holds a man may repent, that believes at the same
time he cannot repent.

f Observe what a description he has given us here of Repentance. It is a glad
returning into the right way, after the grief of being out of the way. It
amazed me to find gladness to be the first word in the description of
repentance.

I could never be of opinion that Christian repentance could be ascribed to
them, that had as yet no intention to forsake their sins and to lead a new
life. He that grieves for the evil that has happened to him for his sins, but
has not a resolution to obey Gods Commandments better for the time to come,
grieveth for his sufferings but not for his doings, which no Divine I think
will call Christian Repentance; but he that resolves upon ameudment of life,
knows that there is forgiveness for him in Christ Jesus, whereof a Christian
cannot possibly be but glad. Before this gladness there was a grief preparative
to Repentance, but the Repentance it self was not Christian Repentance till
this Conversion, till this glad Conversion. Therefore I see no reason why it
should amaze him to find gladness to be the first word in the description of
Repentance, saving that the light amazeth such as have been long in darkness.
And for the Fasting, Sackcloth, and Ashes, they were never parts of Repentance
perf^cted, but signs of the beginning of it. They are external things;
Repentance is internal. This Doctrine pertains to the establishing of Romish
Penance, and being found to conduce to the power of the Clergy, was by them
wished to be restored.

g It is a returning, but whose act is this returning? If it be Gods alone,
then it is his Repentance, not man's Repentance, what need the penitent person
trouble himself about it.

This is ill argued, for why is it Gods Repentance, when he gives man
Repentance, more than it is Gods Faith, when he gives man Faith. But he labors
to bring in a concurrence of Man's Will with Gods Will; and a power in God to
give Repentance, if man will take it; but not the Power to make him take it.
This concurrence he thinks is proved by Revel. 3. 19. Be zealous, and repent,
behold I stand at the door, and knock. If any man hear my voice, and open the
door. I will come in to him. Here is nothing of concurrence, nor of any thing
eqvivalent to it, nor mention at all of the Will or Purpose, but of the
calling, or voice by the Minister. And as God gives to the Minister a Power of
persuading; so he gives also many times a concurrence of the Auditor with the
Minister in being persuaded. Here is therefore somewhat equivalent to a
concurrence with the Minister, that is, of man with man, but nothing of the
concurrence of man, (whose Will God frames as he pleases,) with God that
frames it. And I wonder how any man can conceive, when God gives a man a Will
to do any thing whatsoever, how that Will when it is not, can concur with
Gods Will to make it self be. The next thing he excepteth against is this,
that I hold.

h That prayer is not a cause, nor a means of Gods blessing, but only a
signification that we expect it from him.

First instead of my words a signification that we expect nothing but from him,
he has put a signification that we expect it from him. There is much
difference between my words and his in the sense and meaning, for in the one
there is honor ascrihed to God, and humility in him that prays; but in the
other presumption in him that prays, and a detraction from the honor of God.
When I say Prayer is not a cause nor a means, I take cause and means in one
and the same sense, affirming that God is not moved by any thing that we do,
but has always one and the same eternal purpose, to do the same things that
from eternity he has foreknown shall be done; and me thinks there can be no
doubt made thereof. But the Bishop alleges 2 Cor. 1. 11. That St Paul was
helped by their prayers, and that the gift was bestowed upon them by their
means, and James 5. 16. The effectual and fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. In which places the words means, effectual, avails, do not
signify any causation; for no man nor creature living can work any effect upon
God, in whom there is nothing, that has not been in him eternally heretofore,
nor that shall not be in him eternally hereafter; but do signify the order in
which God has placed men's prayers, and his own blessings. And not much after
the Bishop himself says, Prayer works not upon God, but us. Therefore it is no
cause of Gods Will, in giving us his blessings, but is properly a sign, not a
procuration of his favor. The next thing he replieth to is, that I make prayer
to be a kind of thanksgiving, to which he replies, He might even as well tell me
that when a Beggar craves an Alms, and when he gives thanks for it, it is all
one. Why so? Does not a Beggar move a man by his prayer, and sometime works
in him a compassion not without pain, and as the Scripture calls it, a yerning
of the Bowels, which is not so in God when we pray to him. Our prayer to God is
a duty; it is not so to man. Therefore though our prayers to man be
distinguished from our thanks, it is not necessary it should be so in our
prayers and thanks to God Almighty.

To the rest of his Reply in this Number 15. there needs no further Answer.

J. D. FOourthly, the order, beauty, and perfection of the world does require,
that in the Universe should be Agents of all sorts, some necessary, some free,
some contingent. He that shall make either all things necessary, guided by
destiny; or all things free, governed by election; or all things contingent,
happening by chance, does overthrow the beauty and the perfection of the world.


T. H. THE fourth Argument from Reason is this. The Order, Numb. 16. Arg. 4.
Beauty and Perfection of the World, requires, that in the Universe, should be
Agents of all sorts, some necessary, some free, some contingent. He that shall
make all things nenessary, or all things free, or all things contingent, does
overthrow the beauty and pefection of the World.

In which Argument I observe, first, a contradiction. For seeing he that makes
any thing in that he makes it, he makes it to be necessary, it follows,
that he that makes all things, makes all things necessary to be. As if a
workman make a garment, the garment must necessarily be. So if God make every
thing, every thing must necessarily be. Perhaps the beauty of the World
requires (though we know it not) that some Agents should work without
deliberation, which he calls necessary Agents. And some Agents with
deliberation, and those, both he and I call free Agents. And that some Agents
should work, and we not know how; And those effects we both call contingent;
But this hinders not, but that he that electeth may have his election
necessarily determined to one by former causes; And that which is contingent,
and imputed to Fortune, be nevertheless necessary, and depend on precedent
necessary causes. For by contingent, men do not mean that which has no cause,
but which has not for cause any thing which we perceive. As for Example; when
a Travailer meets with a shower, the journey had a cause, and the rain had a
cause sufficient enough to produce it* but because the journey caused not the
rain, nor the rain the journey, we say, they were contingent one to another.
And thus you see, though there be three sorts of events, Necessary, Contingent,
and Free, yet they may be all necessary, without the destruction of the beauty
or perfection of the Univers.


J. D. THE first thing he observes in mine Argument is contradiction, as he
calls it, but in truth it is but a deception of the sight. As one candle
sometimes seems to be two, or a rod in the water shows to be two rods,
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad m^dum recipientis. But what is this
contradiction? Because I say, he who makes all things, does not make them
necessary. What! a contradiction, and but one proposition? That were strange. I
say, God has not made all Agents necessary; he says, God has made all Agents
necessary. Here is a contradiction indeed, but it is between him and me, not
between me and my self But yet though it be not a formal contradiction, yet
perhaps it may imply a contradiction in adjecto. Wherefore to clear the matter,
and dispell the mist which he has raised; It is true, that every thing when it
is made; it is necessary that it be made so as it is, that is, by a necessity
of infallibility, or supposition, supposing, that it be so made, but this is
not that absolute, antecedent necessity, whereof the question is between him
and me. As to use his own instance; Before the Garment be made, the Tailor is
free to make it, either of the Italian, Spanish, or French fashion
indifferently: But after it is made, it is necessary that it be of that fashion
whereof he has made it, that is by a necessity of supposition. But this does
neither hinder the cause from being a free cause, nor the effect from being a
free effect, but the one did produce freely, and the other was freely produced.
So the contradiction is vanished.

In the second part of his answer a he grants, that there are some free Agents,
and some contingent Agents, and that Perhaps the beauty of the World does
require it, but like a shrewd Cow, which after she has given her milk, casts
it down with her foot, in the conclusion he tells us, that nevertheless they
are all necessary. This part of his answer is a mere Logomachy, (as a great
part of the controversies in the world are) or a contention about words. What
is the meaning of necessary, and free, and contingent actions. I have showed
before what free and necessary do properly signify; but he misrecites it. He
says, I make all Agents which want deliberation to be necessary, but I
acknowledge that many of them are contingent. b Neither do I approve his
definition of contingents, though he say I concur with him, that they are
such Agents as work we know not how. For according to this description many
necessary actions should be contingent, and many contingent actions should be
necessary. The Loadstone draws Iron, the Jet chaff, we know not how, and yet
the effect is necessary, and so it is in all Sympathies and Antipathies or
occult qualities. Again, a man walking in the streets, a Tile falls down from
an house, and breaks his head. We know all the causes, we know how this came to
pass. The man walked that way, the pin failed, the Tile fell just when he was
under it; And yet this is a contingent effect. The man might not have walked
that way, and then the Tile had not fallen upon him. Neither yet do I
understand here in this place by contingents, such events as happen beside the
scope, or intention of the Agents; as when a man digging to make a grave, finds
a Treasure, though the word be sometimes so taken. But by contingents, I
understand all things which may be done, and may not be done, may happen or may
not happen, by reason of the indetermination, or accidental concurrence of the
causes. And those same things which are absolutely Incontingent are yet
Hypothetically necessary. As supposing the passenger did walk just that way,
just at that time, and that the pin did fail just then, and the Tile fall, it
was necessary that it should fall upon the Passengers head. The same defense
will keep out his shower of rain. But we shall meet with his shower of rain
again, Number 34. Whither I refer the further explication of this point.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Number, XVI.
IN this Number he would prove that there must be Free Agents, and Contingent
Agents, as well as Necessary Agents, from the Order, Beauty, and Perfection of
the World. I that thought that the Order, Beauty, and Perfection of the World
required that which was in the World, and not that which the Bishop had need of
for his Argument, could see no force of consequence to infer that which he
calls Free and Contingent. That which is in the World is the Order, Beauty, and
Perfection which God has given the World; and yet there are no Agents in the
World, but such as work a seen Necessity, or an unseen Necessity; and when they
work an unseen Necessity in creatures inanimate, then are those creatures said
to be wrought upon Contingently, and to work Contingently. And when the
Necessity unseen is of the actions of men, then it is commonly called Free, and
might be so in other living creatures; for Free and Voluntary are the same
thing. But the Bishop in his Reply has insisted most upon this, that I make it
a contradiction to say that He that makes a thing, does not make it necessary,
and wonders how a Contradiction can be in one Proposition, and yet within two
or three lines after found it might be; and therefore to clear the matter he
says that such Necessity is not Antecedent, but a Necessity of Supposition;
which nevertheless is the same kind of Necessity which he attributes to the
burning of the fire, where there is a necessity that the thing thrown into it
shall be burned, though yet it be but burning, or but departing from the hand
that throws it in; and therefore the Necessity is Antecedent. The like is in
making a Garment; the Necessity begins from the first motion toward it, which
is from Eternity, though the Tailor and the Bishop are equally unsensible of
it. If they saw the whole order and conjunction of Causes, they would say it
were as Necessary as any thing else can possibly be; and therefore God that
sees that order and conjunction, knows it is necessary.

The rest of his Reply is to argue a contradiction in me; for he says.

a I grant that there are some Free Agents, and some Contingent Agents, and
that perhaps the beauty of the World does require it, but like a shrewd Cow,
which after she has given her milk casts it down with her foot, in the
conclusion I tell him that nevertheless they are all necessary.

It is true, that I say some are Free Agents, and some Contingent; nevertheless
they may be all necessary For according to the significations of the words
Necessary, Free, and Contingent, the distinction is no more but this; of
Necessary Agents, some are Necessary, and some are Agents; and of Agents, some
are living creatures, and some are inanimate; which words are improper, but the
meaning of them is this; men call necessary Agents such as they know to be
necessary, and contingent Agents such inanimate things as they know not whether
they work necessarily or no, and by free Agents, men whom they know not whether
they work necessarily or no. All which confusion arises from that presumptuous
men take for granted, that that is not whith they know not.

b Neither do I approve his definition of Contingents, that they are such
Agents as work we know not how.

The reason is because it would follow that many necessary Actions should be
contingent, and many contingent Actions necessary. But that which follows
from it really is no more but this: That many necessary Actions would be such
as we know not to be necessary, and many Actions which we know not to be
necessary, may yet be necessary, which is a truth. But the Bishop defines
Contingents thus, All things which may be done and may not be done, may happen,
or may not happen by reason of the Indetermination, or accidental concurrence
of the Causes. By which definition Contingent is nothing, or it is the same
that I say it is. For, there is nothing can be done and not be done, nothing
can happen and not happen by reason of the Indetermination or accidental
concurrence of the causes. It may be done or not done for ought he knows, and
happen or not happen for any determination he perceaveth; and that is my
definition. But that the indetermination can make it happen or not happen, is
absurd; for indetermination makes it equally to happen or not to happen; and
therefore both; which is a contradiction. Therefore indetermination does
nothing, and whatsoever causes do, is necessary.

J. D. Fifthly take away liberty, and you take away the very nature Numb. 17.
Arg. 5.
of evil, and the formal reason of sin. If the hand of the Painter were the law
of painting, or the hand of the Writer the law of writing, whatsoever the one
did write, or the other paint, must infallibly be good. Seeing therefore, that
the first cause is the rule and Law of goodness, if it do necessitate the will,
or the person to evil, either by it self immediately or mediatly by necessary
flux of second causes, it will no longer be evil. The essence of sin consists
in this, that one commit that which he might avoid. If there be no liberty to
produce sin, there is no such thing as sin the world- Therefore it appears,
both from Scripture and Reason, that there is true Liberty.


T. H. TO the fifth Argument from reason, which is, that if liberty be taken
away, the nature and formal reason of sin is taken away I answer, by denying
the consequence. The nature of sin consi^^eth in this, that the action done
proceed from ou^ will, and be against the Law. A Judge in judging whether it be
sin or not, which is done against the Law, l^oks at no higher cause o^ the
action then the will of the doer. Now when I say the action was necessary, I do
not say it was done against the will o^ the doer, but with his will, and so
necessarily, because man's will, that is, every act of the will, and purpose of
man had a sufficient and therefore a necessary cause, and consequently every
voluntary action was necessitated. An action therefore may be voluntary and a
sin and nevertheless be necessary. And because God may afflict by right derived
from his ^mnip^tency, though sin were not. And the example of punishment on
voluntary sinners, is the cause that produces Justice, and makes sin less
frequent; for God to punish such sinners, as I have showed before, is no
injustice. And thus you have my answer to his objections, both out of Scripture
and Reason.


J. D. SCis tu simulare ^upressum. quid hoc? It was shrewd couns^il which
Alcibiades gave to Themistocles, when he was busy about his accounts to the
State, that he should rather study how to make no accounts. So it seems T. H.
thinks it a more compendious way to baulk an argument, then to satisfy it. And
if he can produce a Rowland against an Ol^ver, if he can urge a reason against
a reason, he thinks he has quitted himself fairly. But it will not serve his
turn. And that he may not complain of misunderstanding it, as those who have a
politic deafness, to hear nothing but what likes them* I will first reduce
mine argument into form, and then weigh what he says in answer, or rather in
opposition to it. ( a) That opinion which takes away the formal reason of sin,
and by consequence, sin it self, is not to be approoved; this is clear, because
both Reason and Religion, Nature, and Scripture do prove, and the whole world
confesses, that there is sin. But this opinion of the necessity of all things,
by reason of a conflux of second causes, ordered and determined by the first
cause, does take away the very formal reason of sin. This is prooved thus. That
which makes sin it self to be good, and just, and lawful, takes away the
formal cause, and destroys the essence of sin; for if sin be good, and just,
and lawful, it is no more evil, it is no sin, no anomy. But this opinion of
the necessity of all things, makes sin to be very good and just* and lawful;
for nothing can flow essentially by way of Physical determination from the
first cause, which is the Law and Rule of Goodness and Justice, but that which
is good, and just, and lawful; but this opinion makes sin to proceed
essentially by way of Physical determination from the first cause, as appears
in T. H. his whole discourse. Neither is it material at all whether it proceed
immediately from the fist cause, or mediately, so as it be by a necessary flux
of second and determinate causes which produce it inevitably. To these proofs
he answers nothing, but only by denying the first consequence, as he calls
it, and then sings over his old song, That the nature of sin consists in
this, that the action proceed from our will, and be against the Law, which in
our sense is most true, if he understand a just Law, and a free rational will.
( b) But supposing (as he does) that the Law injoins things impossible in
themselves to be done* then it is an unjust and Tyrahnical Law, and the
transgression of it is no sin, not to do that which never was in our power to
do. And supposing likewise (as he does) that the will is inevitably determined
by special influence from the first cause then it is not man's will, but Gods
Will, and flows essentially from the Law of Goodness.

( c) That which he adds of a Judge* is altogether impertinent, as to his
defense. Neither is a Civil Judge the proper Judge, no^ the Law of the Land the
proper Rule of Sin. But it makes strongly against him; for the Judge goes upon
a good ground, and even this which he confesses, that the Judge looks at no
hig^er cause, then the will of the doer, prooves, that the will of the doer did
determine it self freely, and that the malefactor had liberty to have kept the
Law, if he would: Certainly, a Judge ought to look at all material
circumstances, and much more at all essential causes. Whether every sufficient
cause be a necessary cause, will come to be examined more properly, Numb. 31.
For the present, it shall suffice to say, that liberty flows from the
sufficiency, and contingency from the debility of the cause. ( d) Nature Never
intends the generation of a monster. If all the causes concur sufficiently, a a
perfect creature is produced, but by reason of the insufficiency, or debility,
or contingent aberration of some of the causes, sometimes a Monster is
produced. Yet the causes of a Monster were sufficient for the production of
that which was produced, that is a Monster* otherwise a Monster had not been
produced. What is it then? A Monster is not produced by virtue of that order
which is set in Nature, but by the contingent aberration of some of the natural
causes in their concurrence. The order set in Nature, is, that every like
should beget its like. But supposing the concurrence of the causes to be such
as it is, in the generation of a Monster, the generation of a Monster is
necessary; as all the events in the world are when they are, that is, by an
hypothetical necessity. ( e) Then he betakes himself to his old help, that God
may punish by right of omnipotence though there were no sin. The question is
not now what God may do, but what God will do, according to that Covenant which
he has made with man, Fac hoc and vives, Do this and thou shall live. Neither
does God punish any man contrary to this Covenant, Hosea. 13. 9. O Israel, thy
destruction is from thy self, but in me is thy help He that wills not the death
of a Sinner, does much less will the death of an innocent Creature. By death or
destruction in this discourse, the only separation of Soul and Body is not
intended, which is a debt of nature, and which God, as Lord of Life and Death,
may justly do, and make it not a punishment, but a blessing to the party; but
we understand the subjecting of the Creature to eternal torments. Lastly, he
tells of that benefit which redounds to others from Exemplary Justice, which is
most true, but not according to his own grounds, for neither is it Justice to
punish a man for doing that which it was impossible always for him not to do;
Neither is it lawful to punish an innocent person, that good may come of it;
And if his opinion of absolute necessity of all things were true, the destinies
of men could not be altered, either by examples or fear of punishment.


Animadversions upon the Reply. Numb. XVII.
WHereas he had in his first discourse made this consequence, If you take away
Liberty, you take away the very nature of evil, and the formal reason of sin. I
denied that consequence. It is true, he who takes away the Liberty of doing,
according to the will, takes away the nature of sin; but he that denies the
Liberty to Will, does not so. But he supposing I understood him not, will needs
reduce his argument into form, in this manner.

(a) That opinion which takes away the formal reason of sin and by consequence,
Sin ^t self, is not to be approved. This is granted. [But the opinion of
necessity does this.] This I deny, He proves it thus,

This opinion makes sin to proceed essentially, by way of Physical
determination from the first cause. But whatsoever proceeds essentially by way
of Physical determination from the first cause, is Good, and Just, and Lawful.
Therefore this opinion of necessity makes sin to be very Good, Just, and
Lawful. He might as well have concluded whatsoever man has been made by God
is a good, and just man. He observes not that sin is not a thing really made.
Those things which at first were actions were not th^n sins, though actions of
the same nature with those, which were afterward sins; nor was then the will
to any thing a sin, though it were a will to the same thing, which in willing
now we should sin. Actions became sins, then first, when the commandment came:
for as St. Paul says, Without the Law sin is dead; and sin being but a
transgression of the Law, there can be no action made sin but by the Law.
Therefore this opinion though it derive actions essentially from God, it
derives not sins essentially from him, but relatively, and by the Commandment.
And consequently the opinion of necessity, takes not away the nature of sin,
but necessitateth that action which the Law has made sin. And whereas I said
the nature of sin consists in this, that it is an action proceeding from our
will and against the Law, he allows it for true; and therefore he must allow
also, that the formal reason of sin lies not in the Liberty or necessity of
willing, but in the will it self (necessary, or unnecessary) in relation to the
Law. And whereas he limits this truth which he allowed, to this, that the Law
be just, and the will a Free rational Will, it serves to no purpose; for I have
shown before, that no Law can be unjust. And it seems to me, that a rational
Will, if it be not meant of a Will after deliberation, whether he that
deliberateth reasons aright or not, signifies nothing. A rational man is
rightly said, but a rational Will in other sense, then I have mentioned, is
insignificant.

( b) [But supposing (as he does) that the Law injoynes things impossible in
themselves to be done, then it is an unjust and Tyrannical Law, and the
transgression of it no sin, etc. And supposing likewise (as he does) that the
Will is inevitably determined, by special influence from the first cause, then
it is not man's Will, but Gods Will.] He mistakes me in this. For I say not the
Law injoyns things impossible in themselves, for so I should say it enjoined
contradictories. But I say the Law sometimes (the Lawmakers not knowing the
secret necessities of things to come) injoynes things made impossible by secret
and extrinsicall causes from all eternity. From this h^s error he infers, that
the Laws must be unjust and Tyrannical, and the transgression of them no sin.
But he who holds that Laws can be unjust and Tyrannical, will easily find
pretense enough under any Government in the World to deny obedience to the
Laws, unless they be such as he himself makes, or advises to be made. He
says also, that I suppose the will is inevitably determined by special
influence from the first cause. It is true, saving that senseless word
Influence, which I never used. But his consequence, then it is not man's Will,
but Gods will, is not true; for it may be the Will both of the one and of the
other, and yet not by concurrence, as in a league, but by subjection of the
will of man, to the Will of God.

(c) [That which he adds of a Judge is altogether impertinent, as to his
defense: Neither is a Civil Judge the proper Judge, nor the Law of the Land a
proper Rule of sin.] A Judge is to judge of voluntary crimes. He has no
commission to look into the secret causes that make it voluntary. An because
the Bishop had said, the Law cannot justly punish a crime that proceeds from
necessity, it was no impertinent answer to say* the Judge looks at no higher
cause then the Will of the Doer. And even this* as h^ says, is enough to
prove, that the Will of the Doer did determine it self freely, and that the
Malefactor had liberty to have kept the Law if he would To which I answer, that
it proves indeed, that the Malefactor had Liberty to have kept the Law if h^
would; but it proves not, that he had the Liberty to have a Will to keep the
Law. Nor does it prove that the Will of the Doer d^d determine it self freely;
for nothing can prove nonsense. But here you see what the Bishop p^^sueth in
this whole Reply, namely, to prove, that a man has Liberty to do if he will,
which I deny not; and thinks when he has done that, he has proved a man has
Liberty to Will, which he calls the Wills determining of it self freely. And
whereas he adds, a Judge ought to look at all essential causes, It is answer
enough to say, he is bound to look at no more then he thinks he can see.

( d) [Nature never intends the generation of a Monster. If all the causes
concur sufficiently, a perfect creature is produced, but by reason of the
insufficiency or debility, or contingent aberration of some of the causes,
sometimes a Monster is produced] He had no sooner said this, but finding his
error, he retracteth it, and confesses that the causes of a Monster were
sufficient for the production of that which was produced, that is, of a
Monster; otherwise a Monster had not been produced. Which is all that I
intended by sufficiency of the cause. But whether every suff^^^^nt cause be a
necessary cause or not, he means to examine in Numb. 31. In the mean time,
he says only, that Liberty flows from the sufficiency, and contingency from
the debility of the cause; and leaves out necessity, as if it came from
neither. I must note also, that where he says, Nature never intends the
generation of a Monster, I understand not whether by nature, he mean the
Author of Nature, (in which meaning it derogates from God) or nature it self,
as the Universal work of God, and then it is absurd; for the universe as one
aggregate of things natural, has no intention. His Doctrine that follows,
concerning the generation of Monsters, is not worth consideration; therefore I
leave it wholly to the Judgment of the Reader.

(e) Then he betakes himself to his old help, that God may punish by right of
omnipotence, though there were no sin. The question is not now, what God may
do, but what God will do, according to that Covenant which he has made with
Man, Fac hoc and vives, Do this, and thou shall live.] It Is plain (to let pass
that he puts Punishment, where I put Affliction, making a true sentence false)
that if a man do this he shall live, and he may do this if he will. In this the
Bishop and I disagree not. This therefore is not the question; but whether the
will to do this, or not to do this, be in a man's own Election. Whereas he adds
He that wills not the death of a sinner, does much less Will the death of an
innocent creature. He had forgot for a while, that both good and evil men are
by the Will of God all mortal; but presently corrects himself, and says, he
means by Death, Eternal torments, that is to say, eternal life, but in
torments. To which I have answered once before in this Book, and spoken much
more amply in another Book, to which the Bishop has inclination to make an
answer, as appears by his Epistle to the Reader. That which follows to the
end of this number, has been urged and answered already diverse times; I
therefore pass it over.

J. D. BUT the Patrons of necessity being driven out of the Numb. 18.
plain field with reason, have certain retreats or distinctions, which they
fly unto for refuge. First, they distinguish between Stoical necessity and
Christian necessity, between which they make a threefold difference.

First, say they, the Stoics did subject Jupiter to destiny, but but we
subject destiny to God; I answer, that the Stoical and Christian destiny are
one, and the same, fatum quasi effatum Jovis. Hear Seneca, Destiny is the
necessity of all things, and actions, depending upon the disposition of
Jupiter, etc. I add, that the Stoics left a greater liberty to Jupiter over
destiny, than these Stoicall Christians do to God over his decrees, either for
the beginnings of things as Euripides, or for the progress of them as
Chrysippus, or at least of the circumstances of time and place, as all of them
generally, So Virgil, Sed trahere and moras ducere, etc. So Osyris in Apuleius,
promises him to prolong his life Ultra fato constituta tempora, beyond the
times set down by the destinies.

Next, they say, that the Stoics did hold an eternal flux and necessary
connection of causes, but they believe that God does act, praeter and contra
naturam, besides and against nature. I answer, that it is not much material,
whether they attribute necessity to God, or to the Stars, or to a connection of
causes, so as they establish necessity. The former reasons do not only condemn
the ground or foundation of necessity, but much more necessity it self upon
what ground soever. Either they must run into this absurdity, that the effect
is determined, the cause remaining undetermined, or else hold such a necessary
connection of causes, as the Stoics did.

Lastly, they say, the Stoics did take away liberty and contingence, but they
admit it; I answer, what liberty or contingence was it they admit, but a
titular liberty, and an empty shadow of contingence, who do profess stiffly,
that all actions and events which either are or shall be, cannot but be, nor
can be otherwise, after any other manner, in any other Place, Time, Number,
Order, Measure, nor to any other end than they are, and that in respect of God,
determining them to one; what a poor ridiculous liberty, or contingence is this?

Secondly, they distinguish between the first cause, and the second causes;
they say, that in respect of the second causes many things are free, but in
respect of the first cause* all things are necessary. This answer may be taken
away two ways.

First, so contraries shall be true together; The same thing 1.
at the same time shall be determined to one, and not determined to one; the
same thing at the same time must necessarily be, and yet may not be. Perhaps
they will say, not in the same respect. But that which strikes at the root of
this question is this, If all the causes were only collateral, this exception
might have some color, but where all the causes being joined together, and
subordinate one to another, do make but one total cause, if any one cause
(much more the first) in the whole series, or subordination of causes be
necessary, it determines the rest, and without doubt, makes the effect
necessary; Necessity or Liberty is not to be esteemed from one cause, but from
all the causes joined together. If one link in a chain be fast, it fastens all
the rest.

Secondly, I would have them tell me whether the second 2.
causes be predetermined by the first cause or not; If it be determined, then
the effect is necessary, even in respect of the second causes; If the second
cause be not determined, how is the effect determined, the second cause
remaining undetermined? Nothing can give that to another which it has not it
self. But say they, nevertheless the power or faculty remains free. True, but
not in order to the act, if it be once determined. It is free, in sensu diviso,
but not in sensu composito, when a man holds a bird fast in his hand, is she
therefore free to fly where she will, because she has wrings? Or a man
imprisoned or fettered, is he therefore free to walk where he will, because he
has feet and a loco-motive faculty? Judge without prejudice, what a miserable
subterfuge is this, which many men confide so much in.


T. H: Certain distinctions which he supposing may be brought to his arguments
are by him removed.

HE says, a man may perhaps answer, that the necessity of things held by him,
is not a Stoical necessity, but a Christian necessity, etc. but this
d^stinction I have not used, nor indeed have ever heard before. Nor do I think
any man could make Stoical and Christian two kinds of necessiti^s, though they
may be two kinds of doctrine. Nor have I drawn my answer to his arguments from
the authority of any Sect, but from the nature of the things themselves.

But here I must take notice of certain words of his in this place, as making
against his own Tenet, where all the causes, says he, being j^yned together,
and subordinate one to another, do make but one total cause, If any one cause,
much more the first, in the whole series of subordination of causes be
necessary, it determines the rest, and without doubt makes the effect
necessary. For that which I call the necessary cause of any effect, is the
joining togeth^r of all causes subordinate to the first into one total cause.
If any o^^ of those, says he, especially the first, produce its effect
necessarily, th^n all the rest are determined, and the effect also necessary.
Now, it is manifest, that the first cause is a necessary cause o^ all the
effects that are next, and immediate to it, and therefore by h^^ own reason, all
effects are necessary. Nor is that distinction of necessary, in respect of the
first cause, and necessary in respect of second causes mine; It does (as he
well not^th) imply a contradiction.


J. D. BEcause T. H. disavowes these two distinctions, I have joined them
together in one paragraph. He likes not the distinction of necessity or
destiny, into Stoicall and Christian, no more do I. We agree in the conclusion,
but our motives are diverse. My reason is, because I acknowledge no such
necessity, either as the one or as the other, and because I conceive, that
those Christian writers, who do justly detest the naked destiny of the Stoics,
as fearing to fall into those gross absurdities and pernicious consequences
which flow from thence, do yet privily (though perhaps unwittingly) under
another form of expression, introduce it again at the backdoor after they had
openly cast it out at the foredoor: But T H. rusheth boldly without
distinctions (which he accounts but Jargon) and without foresight, upon the
grossest destiny of all others, that is, that of the Stoics. He confesses,
that they may be t^o kinds of doctrine. May be? Nay, they are without all
peradventure. And he himself is the first who bears the name of a Christian
that I have read, that has raised this sleeping Ghost out of its grave, and
set it out in its true colors. But yet he likes not the names of Stoicall and
Christian destiny, I do not blame him, though he would not willingly be
accounted a Stoic. To admit the thing, and quarrel about the name, is to make
our selves ridiculous. Why might not I first call that kind of destiny, which
is maintained by Christians, Christian destiny? and that other maintained by
Stoics, Stoicall destiny? But I am not the inventer of the term. If he had
been as careful in reading other men's opinions, as he is confident in setting
down his own, he might have found not only the thing but the name it self often
used. But if the name of fot^m Christi number, do offend him, Let him call it with
Lipsius, ^atum verum, who divides destiny into four kinds; 1. Mathematical or
Astrological destiny, 2. Natural destiny, 3. Stoical or violent destiny; and 4.
true destiny, which he calls ordinarily nostrum, our destiny; that is, of
Christians, and fatum pium, that is godly destiny, and defines it just as T. H.
does his destiny, to be a series or order of causes depending upon the divine
Counsel, de constable. l 1. cap. 17. 18. and 19. Though he be more cautelous than
T. H. to decline those rocks which some others have made shipwreck upon, Yet
the Divines thought he came too near them, as appears by his Epistle to the
Reader, in a later Edition. And by that note in the margent of his twentieth
Chapter, Whatsoever I dispute here, I submit to the judgment of the wise, and
being admonished, I will convert it. One may convince me of error, but not of
obstinacy. So fearful was he to overshoot himself, and yet he maintained both
true liberty, and true contingency. T. H. says, he has not sucked his answer
from any Sect; And I say so much the worse; It is better to be the disciple of
an old Sect than the ringleader of a new.

Concerning the other destinction of liberty, in respect of the first cause,
and liberty in respect of the second causes, though he will not see that which
it concerned him to answer, like those old Lamiae, which could put out their
eyes when they list; As namely, that the faculty of willing when it is
determined in order to the act (which is all the freedom that he acknowledges)
is but like the freedom of a bird, when she is first in a man's hand, etc. Yet
he has espied another thing wherein I contradict my self, because I affirm,
that if any one cause in the whole series of causes, much more the first cause,
be necessary, it determines the ^est. But, says he, it is manifest, that the
first cause is a necessary cause of all the effects that are next. I am glad
yet it is not I who contradict my self, but it is some of his manifest truths
which I contradict. That the first cause is a necessary cause of all effects,
which I say, is a manifest falsehood. Those things which God wills without
himself, he wills freely not necessarily. Whatsoever cause acts or works
necessarily, does act or work all that it can do, or all that is in its power;
But it is evident, that God does not all things without himself, which he can
do, or which he has power to do. He could have raised up children unto Abraham
of the very stones, which were upon the banks of Jordan, Luke 3. 8. but he did
not. He could have sent twelve Legions of Angels to the succor of Christ, but
he did not. Matthew. 26. 53. God can make T. H. live the years of Methuselah, but
it is not necessary that he shall do so, nor probable that he will do so. The
productive power of God is infinite, but the whole created world is finite. And
therefore God might still produce more, if it pleased him. But this it is, when
men go on in a confused way, and will admit no distinctions. If T. H. had
considered the difference between a necessary being, and a necessary cause, or
between those actions of God, which are immanent within himself, and the
transient works of God, which are extrinsecall without himself, he would never
have proposed such an evident error, for a manifest truth. Qui pauca
considerat, facile pronuntiat.


Animadversions upon the Reply Numb. XVIII.
THE Bishop supposing I had taken my opinion from the Authority of the Stoic
Philosophers, not from my own Meditation, falls into dispute against the
Stoics, whereof I might if* I pleased take no notice but pass over to Number
19. But that he may know I have considered their doctrine concerning Fate, I
think fit to say thus much, that their error consists not in the opinion of
Fate, but in faigning of a false God. When therefore they say, Fatum est
effatum Jovis, They say no more but that Fate is the word of Jupiter. If they
had said it had been the Word of the true God, I should not have perceived any
thing in it to contradict; because I hold as most Christians do, that the whole
world was made, and is now Governed by the Word of God, which brings a
necessity of all things and actions to depend upon the divine disposition. Nor
do I see cause to find fault with that, (as he does) which is said by Lipsius,
that (a) Fate is a series or order of causes depending upon the Divine counsel,
though the Divines thought he came to near them] (as he thinks I do now) And
the reason why he was cautelous, was because being a member of the Romish
Church, he had little confidence in the judgment, and lenity of the Romish
Clergy; and not because he thought he had over-shot himself.

( b) Concerning the other distinction of liberty in respect of the first
cause, and liberty in respect of the second causes, though he will not see that
which it concerned him to answer, etc. as namely, that the faculty of willing
etc.] I answer, that distinction he alleges not to be mine, but the Stoics;
and therefore I had no reason to take notice of it, for he disputes not
against me but others. And whereas he says, it concerned me to make that answer
which he has set down in the words following, I cannot conceive how it
concerns me, (whatsoever it may do somebody else) to so^a^ absurdly.

I said that the first cause is a necessary cause of all the effects that are
next, and immediate to it; which can not be doubted, and though he deny it* he
does not disprove it. For when he says, those things which God wills without
himself, he wills freely and not necessarily. He says rashly, and untruly.
Rashly, because there is nothing without God, who is Infinite, in whom are all
things, and in whom we live, move, and have our being; and untruly because
whatsoever God foreknew from eternity, he willed from eternity, and therefore
necessarily. But against this he argues thus. Whatsoever cause acts, or works
necessarily, does work or act all that it can do, or all that is in its power;
but it is evident that God does not all things which he can do, etc. In things
inanimate, the action is always according to the extent of its power; not
taking in the Power of Willing because they have it not. But in those things
that have Will, the action is according to the w^ole Power, wi^^ and all It is
true that God does not all things that he can do if he will, but that he can
Will, that which he has not Willed from all eternity, I deny; unless that he
can not only Will a change, but also change his will which all Divines say, is
immutable; and then they must needs be necessary effects, that proceed from
God. And his Texts, God could have raised up Children unto Abraham, etc. And
sent twelve Legions of Angels etc. make nothing against the necessity of those
actions which from the first cause proceed immediately.

J. D. THirdly, they distinguish between liberty from compulsion, Numb. 19.
and liberty from necessitation. The Will, say they, is free from compulsion,
but not free from necessitation. And this they fortify with two reasons.
First, because it is granted by all Divines, that hypothetical necessity, or
necessity upon a supposition, may consist with liberty: Secondly, because God
and the good Angels do good necessarily, and yet are more free than we. To the
first reason I confess; that necessity upon a supposition may sometimes consist
with true liberty, as when it signifies only an infallible certitude of the
understanding in that which it knows to be, or that it shall be; But if the
supposition be not in the Agents power, nor depend upon any thing that is in
his power; If there be an exterior antecedent cause which does necessitate the
effect, to call this free, is to be mad with reason.

To the second reason, I confess that God and the good Angels are more free
than we are, that is, intensively in the degree of freedom, but not extensively
in the latitude of the object, according to a liberty of exercise, but not of
specification. A liberty of exercise, that is, to do or not to do, may consist
well with a necessity of specification, or a determination to the doing of
good. But a liberty of exercise, and a necessity of exercise; A liberty of
specification; and a necessity of specification, are not compatible, nor can
consist together. He that is antecedently necessitated to do evil, is not free
to do good. So this instance is nothing at all to the purpose.


T. H. BUT the distinction of free, into free from compulsion, and free from
necessitation, I acknowledge; for to be free from compulsion, is to do a thing
so, as terror be not the cause of his will to do it; for a man is then only
said to be compelled, when fear makes him willing to it, as when a man
willingly throws his goods into the Sea to save himself, or submits to his
enemy for fear of being killed. Thus all men that do any thing from love, or
revenge, or lust are free from compulsion, and yet their actions may be as
necessary as those which are done upon compulsion; for sometimes other passions
work as forcibly as fear; But free from necessitation I say nothing can be; And
it is that which he undertook to disproove. This distinction, he says, uses to
be fortified by two reasons. But they are not mine. The first, he says is,
That it is granted by all Divines, that an hypothetical necessity, or necessity
upon supposition, may stand with liberty. That you may understand this, I will
give you an example of hypotheticall necessity. If I shall live, I shall eat,
this is an hypotheticall necessity. Indeed it is a necessary proposition, that
is to say, it is necessary that that proposition should be true, whenever
uttered, but it is not the necessity of the thing, nor is it therefore necessary,
that the man shall live, or that the man shall eat. I do not use to fortify my
distinctions with such reasons. Let him confute them as he will, it contents
me. But I would have your Lordship take notice hereby, how an easy and plain
thing, but withal false, may be with the grave usage of such words, as
hypotheticall necessity, and necessity upon supposition and such like terms of
Schoolmen, obscured and made to seem profound learning.

The second reason that may confirm the distinction of free, from compulsion,
and free from necessitation, he says is, that God, and good. Angels do good
necessarily, and yet are more free than we. This reason, though I had no need
of it, yet I think it so far forth good, as it is true that God and good Angels
do good necessarily, and yet are free; but because I find not in the Articles
of our Faith nor in the Decrees of our Church set down, in what manner I am to
conceive God, and good Angels to work by necessity, or in what sense they work
freely, I suspend my sentence in that point, and am content, that there may be
a freedom from compulsion, and yet no freedom from necessitation, as has been
prooved in that, that a man may be necessitated to some actions without threats
and without fear of danger; But how he can avoid the consisting together of
freedom and necessity, supposing God and good Angels are freer than men, and
yet do good necessarily, that we must now examine.

I confess (says he) that God and good Angels are more free than we, that is
intensively in degree of freedom, not extensively in the latitude of the
object, according to a liberty of exercise, not of specification. Again, we
have here two distinctions, that are no distinctions, but made to seem so by
terms invented, by I know not whom, to cover ignorance, and blind the
understanding of the Reader. For it cannot be conceived that there is any
liberty greater than for a man to do what he will, and to fobrear what he will.
One heat may be more intensive than another, but not one liberty than another.
He that can do what he will, has all liberty possibly, and he that cannot, has
non^ at all* Also liberty (as he says, the Schools call it) of exercise, which
is as I have said before, a liberty to do, or not to do, cannot be without a
liberty (which they call of specification) that is to say, a liberty to do or
not to do this or that in particular; for how can a man conceive, that he has
liberty to do any thing, that has not liberty to do this or that, or somewhat
in particular. If a man be forbidden in Lent to eat this and that, and every
other particular kind of flesh, how can he be understood to have a liberty to
eat flesh, more than he that has no l^cense at all?

You may by this again see the vanity of distinctions used in the Schools; And
I do not doubt but that the imposing of them by authority of Doctors in the
Church, has been a great cause that men have labored, though by sedition, and
evil courses to shake them off; for nothing is more apt to beget hatred, than
the tyrannising over man's reason and understanding, especially when it is done,
not by the Scripture, b^^ by pretense of learning, and more judgment than that
of other men.


J. D. HE who will speak with some of our great undertakers, about the grounds
of learning, had need either to speak by an Interpreter, or to learn a new
Language, (I dare not call it Jargon or Canting) lately devised, not to set
forth the truth, but to conceal falsehood. He must learn a new Liberty, a new
necessity, a new Contingency, a new Sufficiency, a new Spontaneity, a new kind
of Deliberation, a new kind of Election* a new Eternity, a new Compulsion, and
in conclusion, a new Nothing. ( a) This proposition, the will is free, may be
understood in two senses, Either that the will is not compelled, or that the
will is not always necessitated; for if it be ordinarlly, or at any time free
from necessitation, my assertion is true, that there is freedom from necessity.
The former sense, that the will is not compelled, is acknowledged by all the
world as a truth undeniable, Voluntas non cogitur For, if the will may be
compelled, then it may both will and not will the same thing at the same time,
under the same notion, but this implies a contradiction. Yet this Author (like
the good woman whom her husband sought up the stream when she was drowned, upon
pretense that when she was living, she used to go contrary courses to all other
people,) he holds, that true compulsion and fear, may make a man will, that
which he does not will, that is, in his sense may compel the will. As when a
man willingly throws his goods into the Sea to save himself, or submits to his
enemy for fear of being killed, I answer, that T. H. mistakes sundry ways in
this discourse.

( b) First, he erreth in this, to think, that actions proceeding from fear,
are properly compulsory actions, which in truth are not only voluntary, but
free actions; neither compelled, nor so much as Physically necessitated.
Another man, at the same time, in the same Ship, in the same storm, may choose,
and the same individual man otherwise advised, might choose, not to throw his
goods overboard. It is the man himself, who chooses freely this means to
preserve his life. It is true, that if he were not in such a condition, or if
he were freed from the grounds of his present fears, he would not choose
neither the casting of his goods into the Sea, nor the submitting to his enemy
But considering the present exigence of his affairs, reason dictates to him,
that of two inconveniences, the less is to be chosen, as a comparative good.
Neither does he will this course, as the end or direct object of his desires,
but as the means to attain his end. And what Fear does in these cases, Love,
Hope, Hatred, etc. may do in other cases, that is, may occasion a man to elect
those means to obtain his willed end, which otherwise he would not elect. As
Jacob to serve seven years more, rather than not to enjoy his beloved Rachel.
The Merchant to hazard himself upon the rough Seas, in hope of profit. Passions
may be so violent, that they may necessitate the will, that is, when they
prevent deliberations, but this is rarely, and then the will is not free. But
they never properly compel it. That which is compelled, is against the will,
and that which is against the will, is not willed.

( c) Secondly, T. H. erres in this also, where he says, that a man is then
only said to be compelled when fear makes him willing to an action. As if
force were not more prevalent with a man then fear; we must know therefore,
that this word compelled is taken two ways, sometimes improperly, that is,
when a man is moved or occasioned by threats or fear, or any passion, to do
that which he would not have done, if those threats, or that passion had not
been; Sometimes it is taken properly, when we do any thing against our own
inclination, moved by an external cause, the will not consenting, nor
concurring, but resisting as much as it can. As in a rape, or when a Christian
is drawn or carried by violence to the Idols Temple. Or as in the case of St.
Peter, John 21. 18. Another shall guide thee, and carry thee whither thou
would not. This is that compulsion which is understood, when we say, the will
may be let, or changed, or necessitated, or that the imperate actions of the
will (that is, the actions of the inferior faculties which are ordinarily
moved by the will) may be compelled; but that the immanent actions of the will,
that is, to will, to choose, cannot be compelled, because it is the nature of
an action properly compelled to be done by an extrinsecal cause, without the
concurrence of the will.

( d) Thirdly, the question is not, whether all the actions of a man be free,
but whether they be ordinarily free. Suppose some passions are so sudden and
violent, that they surprise a man, and betray the succors of the soul, and
prevent deliberation, as we see in some motus primo primi, or antipathies, how
some men will run upon the most dangerous objects, upon the first view of a
loathed creature, without any power to contain themselves. Such actions as
these, as they are not ordinary, so they are not free, because there is no
deliberation nor election. But where deliberation and election are, as when a
man throws his goods overboard, to save the Ship, or submits to his enemy, to
save his life; there is always true liberty.

Though T. H. slight the two reasons which I produce in favor of his cause,
yet they who urged them, deserved not to be stighted, unless it were because
they were Schoolmen. The former reason is thus framed; A necessity of
supposition may consist with true liberty, but that necessity which flows from
the natural and extrinsecall determination of the will, is a necessity of
supposition; To this, my answer is in effect; That ( e) a necessity of
supposition is of two kinds, sometimes the thing supposed is in the power of
the Agent to do, or not to do: As for a Romish Priest to vow continence, upon
supposition that he be a Romish Priest, is necessary, but because it was in his
power to be a Priest, or not to be a Priest, therefore his vow is a free act.
So supposing a man to have taken Physic, it is necessary that he keep at home,
yet because it was in his power to take a Medicine or not to take it, therefore
his keeping at home is free. Again, sometimes the thing supposed is not in the
power of the Agent to do, or not to do; supposing a man to be extrem sick, it
is necessary that he keep at home, or supposing that a man has a natural
antipathy against a Cat, he runs necessarily away so soon as he sees her
Because this antipathy, and this sickness are not in the power of the party
affected, therefore these acts are not free. Jacob blessed his Sons, Balaam
blessed Israel, these two acts being done, are both necessary upon supposition;
But it was in Jacobs power not to have blessed his Sons, So was it not in
Balaams power, not to have blessed Israel, Numb. 22. 3^. Jacobs will was
determined by himself, Balaams will was Physically determined by God. Therefore
Jacobs benediction proceeded from his own free election; And Balaams from Gods
determination. So was Ca^phas his Prophesy, John 11. 51. Therefore the Text
says, He spoke not of himself. To this T. H. says nothing, but only declares
by an impertinent instance, what Hypotheticall signifies. And then advises
your Lordship to take notice how Errors and Ignorance may be cloked under
grave Scholastic terms. And I do likewise entreat your Lordship to take
notice, that the greatest fraud and cheating, lurks commonly under the pretense
of plain dealing; we see Juglers commonly strip up their sleeves, and promise
extraordinary fair dealing before they begin to play their tricks.

Concerning the second argument drawn from the liberty of God, and the good
Angels. As I cannot but approove his modesty, in suspending his judgment
concerning the manner how God and the good Angels do work necessarily or
freely, because he finds it not set down in the Articles of our Faith, or the
Decrees of our Church, especially in this age, which is so full of Atheism,
and of those scoffers which St. Peter prophesied of, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Who neither
believe, that there is God or Angels, or that they have a Soul, but only as
^alt, to keep their bodies from putri^action; So I can by no means assent unto
him, in that which follows, that is to say, that he has proved, that Liberty
and Necessity of the same kind may consist together, that is, a liberty of
exercise with a necessity of exercise; or a liberty of specification, with a
necessity of specification. Those actions which he says are necessitated by
passion, are for the most part dictated by reason, either truly, or apparently
right, and resolved by the will itself. But it troubles him that I say, that
God and the good Angels are more free than men intensively in the degree of
freedom, but not extensively in the latitude of the object, according to a
liberty of exercise, but not of specification, which he says, are no
distinctions, but terms invented to cover ignorance. Good words. Does he only
see? Are all other men stark blind? By his favor, they are true and necessary
distinctions; And if he alone do not conceive them, it is because distinctions,
as all other things* have their fates, according to the capacities or
prejudices of their Readers. But he urges two reasons, One heat, says he, may
be more intensive than another, but not one liberty than another. Why not, I
wonder? Nothing is more proper to a man than reason, yet a man is more rational
than a child, and one man more rational than another, that is, in respect of
the use and exercise of reason. As there are degrees of understanding, so there
are of liberty. The good Angels have cleerer understandings than we, and they
are not hindered with passions as we, and by consequence, they have more use of
liberty than we. ( f) His second reason is, He that can do what he will, has
all liberty, and he that cannot do what he will, has no liberty. If this be
true, then there are no degrees of liberty indeed. But this which he calls
liberty, is rather an Omnipotence than a liberty, to do whatsoever he will. A
man is free to shoot, or not to shoot, although he cannot hit the white,
whenever he would. We do good freely, but with more difficulty and
reluctation than the good Spirits. The more rational, and the less sensual the
will is, the greater is the degree of liberty. His other exception against
liberty of exercise, and liberty of specification, is a mere mistake, which
grows merely from not rightly understanding what liberty of specification, or
contrariety is. A liberty of specification, says he, is a liberty to do, or
not to do this, or that, in particular. Upon better advice he will find, that
this which he calls a liberty of specification, is a liberty of contradiction,
and not of specification, nor of contrariety. To be free to do or not to do,
this or that particular good, is a liberty of contradiction, so likewise to be
free to do or not to do this, or that particular evil. But to be free to do
both good and evil, is a liberty of contrariety, which extends to contrary
objects, or to diverse kinds of things. So his reason to prove, that a liberty
of exercise cannot be without a liberty of specification, falls flat to the
ground. And he may lay aside his Lenten license for another occasion. I am a
shamed to insist upon these things which are so evident, that no man can
question them who does understand them.

( g) And here he falls into another invective against distinctions, and
Scholastical expressions, and the Doctors of the Church, who by this means
tyrannized over the understandings of other men. What a presumption is this for
one private man, who will not allow human liberty to others, to assume to
himself such a license, to control so Magistrally, and to censure of gross
ignorance and tyrannising over men's judgments, yea, as causes of the troubles
and tumults which are in the World, the Doctors of the Church in general, who
have flourished in all ages and all places, only for a few necessary and
innocent distinctions. Truly said Plutarch, that a sore eye is offended with
the light of the Sun; ( h) What then, must the Logicians lay aside their first
and second Intentions? their Abstracts and Concrets, their Subjects and
Predicates, their Modes and Figures, their Method Synthetick and Analytick,
their Fallacies of Composition and Division, etc? Must the moral Philosopher
quite his means and extremes, his pricipia congenita and acquisita, his liberty
of contradiction and contrariety, his necessity absolute and hypothetical, etc?
Must the natural Philosopher give over his intentional Species, his
understanding Agent and Patient, his receptive and eductive power of the
matter, his qualities infinitae or influxae, symbolae or dissymbolae, his
temperament ad pondus, and adj^stitiam, his parts Homogeneous and
Heterogeneous, his Sympathies and Antipathies, his Antiperistasis, etc? Must
the Astrologer and the Geographer leave their Apog^um and Perigaeum, their
Arctick and Antarctick Poles, their Equator; Zodiac, Zenith, Meridian,
Horison, Zones* etc? Must the Mathematician, the Metaphysician, and the Divine,
relinquish all their terms of Art, and proper id^otismes, because they do not
relish with T. H. his palate? But he will say, they are obscure expressions;
What marvel is it, when the things themselves are more obscure? Let him put
them into as plain English as he can, and they shall be never a whit the better
understood by those who want all grounds of learning. Nothing is clearer than
Mathematical demonstration, yet let one who is altogether ignorant in
Mathematics hear it, and he will hold it to be as T. H. terms these
distinctions, plain Fustian or Jargon. Every Art or Profession has its proper
mysteries and expressions, which are well known to the Sons of Art, not so to
strangers. Let him consult with Military men, with Physicians, with Navigators,
and he shall find this true by experience. Let him go on shipboard, and the
Mariners will not leave their Sterbord and Larbord, because they please not
him, or because he accounts it Gibrish. No, no, it is not the Schoole-Divines,
but Innovators and seditious Orators, who are the true causes of the present
troubles of Europe. ( ^) T. H. has forgotten what he said in his book, De Cive
cap. 12. That it is a seditious opinion to teach, that the knowledge of good
and evil belongs to private persons. And cap. 17. that in questions of Faith
the Civil Magistrates ought to consult with the Ecclesiastical Doctors, to
whom Gods blessing is derived by imposition of hands, so as not to be deceived
in necessary truths, to whom our Savior has promised infallibility. These are
the very men whom he traduceth here. There he ascribes infallibility to them,
here he accuses them of gross superstitious ignorance. There he attributes too
much to them, here he attributes too little. Both there and here he takes too
much upon him. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14. 32.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply. Numb. XIX.
(a) THis proposition, the Will is Free, may be understood in two senses;
Either that the Will is not compelled, or that the Will is not always
necessitated, etc. The former sense, that the Will is not compelled is
acknowledged by all the world, as a truth undeniable. I never said the Will is
compelled, but do agree with the rest of the World in granting that it is not
compelled. It is an absurd speech to say it is compelled, but not to say it is
necessitated, or a necessary effect of some cause. When the fire heateth, it
does not compel heat; so likewise when some cause makes the Will to any
thing, it does not compel it. Many things may compel a man to do an Action in
producing the Will; but that is not a compelling of the Will, but of the man.
That which I call necessitation, is the effecting and creating of that Will
which was not before, not a compelling of a Will already existent. The
necessitation or Creation of the Will, is the same thing with the compulsion of
the man, saving that we commonly use the word compulsion, in those Actions
which proceed from terror. And therefore this distinction, is of no use; and
that raving which follows immediately after it, is nothing to the question,
whether the Will be free, though it be to the question, whether the man be Free.

(b) [First, he erreth in this, to think that actions proceeding from fear are
properly compulsory actions, which in truth are not only Voluntary, but free
actions.] I never said nor doubted, but such actions were both Voluntary and
free; For he that does any thing for fear, though he say truly, he was
compelled to it, yet we deny not that he had Election to do or not to do, and
consequently that he was a Voluntary and free Agent. But this hinders not but
that the terror might be a necessary cause of his Election, of that which
otherwise he would not have Elected, unless some other potent cause made it
necessary he should elect the contrary. And there fore in the same ship, in the
same storm, one man may be necessitated to throw his goods overboard, and
another man to keep them within the Ship; and the same m^n in a like storm be
otherwise advised; if all the causes be not like. But that the same invidual
man, as the Bishops says, that close to throw his goods over board might choose
not to throw his goods over board, I cannot conceive, unless a man can choose
to throw over board, and not to throw over board; or be so advised and
otherwise advised all at once.

(c) [Secondly, T. H. errs in this also, where he says, that a man is then
only said to be compelled, when ^ear makes him willing to an Action. As if
force were not more prevalent with a man then fear, etc.] When I said fear, I
think no m^n can ^oubt, but the fear of force was understood. I cannot se^
therefore what quarrel he could justly take at saying, that, a man is compelled
by ^ar, only; unless he think it may be called compulsion when ^ man by
force, seizing on another man's limbs, moves them* as himself, not as the other
man pleases, but this is not the meaning of compulsion. Neither is the Action
so done, the Action of him that suffers, but of him that uses the force. But
this (as if it were a question of the propriety of the English tongue) the
Bishop denies, and says, when a man is moved by fear, it is improperly said he
is compelled. But when a man is moved by an external cause, the Will resisting
as much as it can, then he says, he is properly said to be compelled; as in a
Rape, or when a Christian is drawn or carried by violence to the idols Temple.
Insomuch as by this distinction it were very proper English to say, that a
stone were compelled when it is thrown, or a man, when he is carried in a Cart.
For my part I understand compulsion to be used rightly of living creatures
only, which are moved only by their own animal motion, in such manner as they
would not be moved without the fear. But of this dispute the English and
Well-bred Reader, is the proper Judge.

(d) [Thirdly, the question is not, whether all the actions of a man be free,
but whether they be ordinarily free.] Is it impossible for the Bishop to
remember the question, which is Whether a man be Free to Will? Did I ever say
that no Actions of a man are free? On the contrary I say, that al his Voluntary
Actions are Free, even those also to which he is compelled by fear. But it does
not therefore follow, but that the Will, from whence those Actions and their
Election proceed, may have necessary causes; against which he has never yet
said any thing. That which follows immediately, is not offered as a proof,
but as explication how the passions of a man surprise him; therefore I let it
pass, noting only that he expound the Motus primo primi (which I understood
not before) by the word Antipathy.

(e) A necessity of supposition is of two kinds, sometimes a thing supposed is
in the power of the Agent, to do or not to do, etc. sometimes a thing supposed
is not in the power of the Agent to do or not to do, etc.

When the necessity is of the former kind of supposition then, (he says)
Freedom may consist with this necessity. In the latter sense hat it cannot. And
to use his own instances, to vow continence in a Romish Priest, upon
supposition that he is a Romish Priest, is a necessary Act; because it was in
his power to be a Priest or not. On the other side supposing a man having a
natural Antipathy against a Cat; because this Antipathy is not in the power of
the party affected, therefore the running away from the Cat is no Free act.

I deny not but that it is a Free act of the Romish Priest to vow continence,
no^ upon the supposition that he was a Romish Priest, but because he had not
done it, unless he would; if he had not been a Romish Priest, it had been all
one to the Freedom of his Act. Nor is his Priesthood any thing to the
Necessity of his vow, saving that if he would not have vowed he should not
have been made a Priest. There was an antecedent necessity in the causes
extrinsecal; first that he should have the Will to be a Priest, and then
consequently that he should have the Will to vow. Against this he alleges
nothing. Then for his Cat, the man's running from it is a Free Act, as being
voluntary, and arising from a false apprehension (which nevertheless he cannot
help) of some hurt or other the Cat may do him. And therefore the Act is as
free as the Act of him that throws his goods into the Sea. So likewise the
Act of Jacob in blessing his sons, and the Act of Balaam in blessing Israel,
are equally Free, and equally voluntary* yet equally determined by God, who is
the Author of all blessings, and framed the will of both of them to bless, and
whose Will (as St. Paul says) cannot be resisted. Therefore both their Actions
were necessitated equally; and (because they were Voluntary) equally Free. As
for Caiphas his prophecy which the Text says, He spoke not of himself, it was
necessary; first, because it was by the supernatural gift of God to the
Highpriests as sovereigns of the Commonwealth of the Jews, to speak to the
people as from the mouth of God, that is to say, to prophecy; and secondly,
whenever he did speak not as from God, but as from himself, it was
nevertheless necessary he should do so, not that he might not have been silent
if he would, but because his will to speak was antecedently determined to what
he should speak from all Aeternity; which he has yet brought no argument to
contradict.

He approves my modesty in suspending my judgment concerning the manner how
the good Angels do work, Necessarily, or Freely, because I find it not set
down in the Articles of our Faith, nor in the decrees of our Church* But he
uses not the same modesty himself. For whereas he can apprehend neither the
Nature of God, nor of Angels; nor conceive what kind of thing it is, which in
them he calls Will, he nevertheless takes upon him to attribute to them,
Liberty of Exercise, and to deny them a Liberty of Specification; to grant them
a more intensive Liberty then we have, but not a more extensive* using not
incongruously in the incomprehensibility of the subject ^^comprehensible terms,
as Liberty of Exercise, and Liberty of Specification; and degrees of intention
in Liberty, as if one liberty, like heat, might be more intensive then another.
It is true that there is greater liberty in a large then in a strait prison,
but one of those Liberties is not more intense then the other.

(f) His second reason is, He that can do what he Will, has all Liberty; and
he that cannot do what he Will, has no Liberty.

If this be true, then there are no degrees of Liberty indeed. But this which
he calls Liberty, is rather an Omnipotence, then a Liberty.] It Is one thing to
say, a man has Liberty to do what he will, and another thing to say he has
power to do what he Will. A man that is bound would say readily he has not the
Liberty to walk, but he will not say he wants the Power. But the sick man will
say he wants the Power to walk* but not the Liberty. This is as I conceive to
speak the English tongue; and consequently an English man will not say the
Liberty to do what he Will, but the Power to do what he Will, is Omnipotence.
And therefore either I or the Bishop understand not English. Whereas he adds
that I mistake the meaning of the word, Liberty of specification, I am sure
that in that way wherein I expound them, there is no absurdity. But if he say I
understand not what the Schoolmen mean by it, I will not contend with him; for
I think they know not what they mean themselves.

(g) [And here he falls into another invective against distinctions, and
Scholastical expressions, and the Doctors of the Church, who by this means
tyrannized over the understanding of other men. What a presumption is this, for
one private man, etc] That he may know I am no enemy to intelligible
distinctions, I also will use a distinction in the defense of my self against
this his accusation. I say therefore that some distinctions are Scholastical
only, and some are Scholastical and sapiential also. Against those that are
Scholastical only, I do, and may inveigh. But against those that are
Scholastical and Sapiential also, I do not inveigh. Likewise some Doctors of
the Church (as Suarez, Johannes a Duns and their imitators) to breed in men
such opinions as the Church of Rome thought suitable to their interest* did
^rite such things, as neither other men nor themselves understood. These I
confess I have a little slighted. Other Docters of the Church (as Martin
Luther, Philip Melancthon John Calvin, William Perkins, and others) that did
write their sense clearly, I never slighted, but always very much reverenced,
and admired* Wherein then lies my presumption? if it be because I am a private
man, let the Bishop also take heed he contradict not some of those whom the
World worthily esteems, least he also (for he is a private man) be taxed of
presumption

(h) What then, must the Logicians lay aside their first and second intentions,
their Abstracts and Concrets, etc. Must the Moral Philosopher quit his means
and extremes, his Principia congenita and aquisita, his liberty of
contradiction and contrariety, his necessity absolute and Hypothetical, etc.
Must the Natural Philosopher give over his intentional species, etc. Because
they do not relish with T. H. his Palate?] I confess that among the Logicians,
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, etc. are terms of Art* But if the Bishop
thing that words of first and second intention, that Abstract and Concret, that
Subjects and Predicates, Moods and Figures, Method Synthetique and Analytique,
Fallacies of Composition and Division be terms of Art, I am not of his opinion.
For these are no more terms of Art in Logic* then Lines, Figures, Squares,
Triangles etc. in the Mathematics. Barbara, Celarent, and the rest that follow
are terms of Art invented for the easier Apprehension of youngmen, and are by
youngmen understood. But the terms of the School with which I have found fault,
have been invented to blind the understanding, and cannot be understood by
those, that intend to learn Divinity. And to his question whether the Moral
Philosopher must quit his means and extremes, I answer, that though they are
not terms of Art, he ought to quite them, when they cannot be understood, and
when they can, to use them rightly. And therefore though means and extremes, be
terms intelligible, yet I would have them quit the placing of virtue in the
one, and of vice in the other. But for his liberty of contradiction and
contrariety, his necessity absolute and Hypothetical (if any moral Philosopher
ever used them) then away with them, they serve for nothing but to seduce young
Students. In like manner let the natural Philosopher no more mention his
intentional Species, his understanding Agent and Patient, his Receptive and
Eductive power of the matter, his qualities infusae or influxae, Symbolae or
Dissymbolae, his Temperament ad pondus and ad justitiam. He may keep his parts
Homogeneous and Heterogeneous; but his Sympathies and Antipathies, his
Antiperistasis and the like, names of excuses, rather then of causes* I would
have him ^^ing away. And for the Astrologer (unless he means Astronomer) I
would have him throw away his whole trade; but if he mean Astronomer, then the
terms of Apogaeum, and Perigaeum, Artique, Antartique, Equator, Zodiac,
Zenith, Meridian, Horizon, Zones, etc. are no more terms of Art in Astronomy,
then a Saw, or a Hatchet in the Art of a Carpenter. He cites no terms of Art
for Geometry, I was afraid he would have put Lines, or perhaps Equality or
Inequality for terms of Art. So that now I know not what be those terms he
thinks I would cast away in Geometry. And lastly for his Metaphysician, I would
have him quit both his terms and his Profession, as being in truth ( as
Plutarch, says in the beginning of the life of Alexander the Great) not at all
profitable to learning, but made only for an essay, to the learner; and the
Divine to use no word in preaching, but such as his Auditors, nor in writing,
but such as a common Reader may understand; And all this not for the pleasing
of my Palate, but for the promotion of truth.

(i) T. H. Has forgotten what he said in his Book De Cive, Cap. 12. that it is
a seditious opinion to teach that the knowledge of good and evil belongs to
private persons. And Cap. 17. that in questions of Faith, the civil
Magistrates ought to consult with the Ecclesiastical Doctors, to whom Gods
blessing is derived by imposition of hands, so as not to be deceived in
necessary truths, etc. There he attributes too much to them, here he
attributes too little, both there and here he takes too much upon him. The
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.] He thinks he has a great
advantage against me from my own words in my Book de Cive, which he would not
have thought if he had understood them. The knowledge of good and evil, is
Judicature, which in Latin is cognitio causarum not Scientia. Every private man
may do his best to attain a knowledge of what is good and evil in the action
he is to do; but to judge of what is good and evil in others belongs not to
him, but to those whom the Sovereign Power appoints thereunto. But the Bishop
not understanding, or forgetting that Cognoscere is to judge, as Adam did of
Gods commandment, has cited this place to little purpose. And for the
infallibility of the Ecclesiastical Doctors by me attributed to them, it is not
that they cannot be deceaved, but that a subject cannot he deceived in obeying
them when they are our lawfully constituted Doctors. For the supreme
Ecclesiastical Doctor is he that has the supreme Power; and in obeying him no
subject can be deceived; because thy are by God himself commanded to obey him.
And what the Ecclesiastical Doctors lawfully constituted do tell us to be
necessary in point of Religion, the same is told us by the Sovereign Power. And
therefore, though we may be deceaved by them in the belief of an opinion, we
can not be deceived by them in the duty of our Actions. And this is all that I
ascribe to the Ecclesiastical Doctors. If they think it too much, let them take
upon them less. Too little they cannot say it is, who take it, as it is, for a
Burden. And for them who seek it as a wordly preferment, it is too much. I
take (he says) too much upon me. Why so? Because The Spirits of the Prophets,
are subject to the Prophets. This is it that he finds fault with in me, when he
says I am a private man, that is to say no Prophet, that is to say no Bishop.
By which it is manifest that the Bishop subject^th not his Spirit but to the
Convocation of Bishops, I admit that every man eught to subject his Spirit to
the Prophets. But a Prophet is he that speaks unto us from God; which I
acknowledgement to do, but him that has due Authority so to do. And no man
has due Authority so to do immediately, but be that has the supreme Authority
of the Commonwealth; nor mediately but they that speak such things to the
people, as ^e that has the Supreme Authority allows of. And as it is truth
in this sense, that The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; So
it is also true, that we ought not to believe every Spirit, but to try the
Spirits, whether they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into
the World. 1 J^h. 4. 1. Therefore, I that am a private man may examine the
Prophets; which to do I have no other means but to examine whether their
Doctrine, be agreeable to the Law; which theirs is not, who divide the Common
Wealth into two Commonwealths, Civil and Ecclesiastical.

J. D. NOw, to the distinction it self I say first, that the proper Number. 20.
act of liberty is election, and election is opposed, not only to coaction, but
also to coarctation or determination to one. Necessitation or determination to
one, may consist with spontaneity, but not with election or liberty, as has
been showed. The very Stoics did acknowledge a spontaneity. So our adversaries
are not yet gone out of the confines of the Stoics.

Secondly, to rip up the bottom of this business. This I take to be the clear
resolution of the Schools; There is a double act of the will, the one more
remote, called Imperatus, that is, in truth the act of some inferior faculty,
subject to the command of the will, as to open or shut ones eyes; without doubt
these actions may be compelled. The other act is nearer, called actus elicitus,
an act drawn out of the will; as to will, to choose, to elect; this may be
stopped or hindered by the intervening impediment of the understanding, as a
stone lying on a table is kept from its natural motion, otherwise the will
should have a kind of Omnipotence; But the will cannot be compelled to an act
repugnant to its inclination, as when a stone is thrown upwards into the air,
for that is both to incline, and not to incline to the same object, at the same
time, which implies a contradiction. Therefore to say the will is necessitated,
is to say, the will is compelled so far as the will is capable of compulsion.
If a strong man holding the hand of a weaker, should therewith kill a third
person, haec quidem vis est, this is violence, the weaker did not willingly
perpetrate the fact, because he was compelled. But now suppose this strong man
had the will of the weaker in his power as well as the hand, and should not
only incline, but determine it secretly and insensibly to commit this act, is
not the case the same? whether one ravish Lucretia by force, as Tarquine, or by
amatory potions, and Magical Incantations, not only allure her, but
necessitate her to satisfy his lust, and incline her effectually, and draw her
inevitably, and irresistibly to follow him spontaneously, Lucretia in both
these conditions is to be pitied; but the latter person is more guilty, and
deserves greater punishment, who endeavors also so much as in him lies, to make
Lucretia irrisistibly partake of his crime. I dare not apply it, but thus only;
Take heed how we defend those secret and invincible necessitations to evil
though spontaneous and free from coaction.

These are their fastnesses.


T. H. IN the next place, he brings two arguments against distinguishing
between being free from compulsion, and free from necessitation. The first is,
that election is opposite, not only to coaction or compulsion, but also to
necessitation or determination to one. This is it he was to prove from the
beginning, and therefore brings no new argument to prove it. And to those
brought formerly, I have already answered; And in this place I deny again, that
election is opposite to either, for when a man is compelled (for example, to
subject himself to an enemy or to die) he has still election left in him, and a
deliberation to be think which of these two he can better endure; And he that
is led to prison by force, has election and may deliberate whetker he will be
haled and trained on the ground, or make use of his feet.

Likewise when there is no compulsion, but the strength of temptation to do an
evil action, being greater than the motives to abstain, necessarily determine
him to the doing of it, yet he deliberates whilst sometimes the motives to do,
sometimes the motives to forbear, are working on him, and consequently he
electeth which he will. But commonly when we see and know the strength that
moves us, we acknowledge Necessity, but when we see not, or mark not the force
that moves us, we then think there is none, and that it is not Causes but
Liberty that produces the action. Hence it is that they think he does not
choose this, that of necessity chooses it; but they might as well say, fire
does not burn, because it burns of necessity. The second argument is not so
much an argument, as a distinction, to show in what sense it may be said, that
voluntary actions are necessitated, and in what sense not. And therefore he
alleges as from the authority of the Schools, and that which rippeth up the
bottom of the question, that there is a double act of the will; The one he
says, is actus Imperatus, an act done at the command of the will, by some
inferior faculty of the soul, as to open or shut ones eyes, and this act may
be compelled. The other he says, is actus elicitus, an act allured, or an act
drawn forth by allurement out of the will, as to will, to choose, to elect:
This he says cannot be compelled. Wherein letting pass that Metaphorical
speech of attributing command and subjection to the faculties of the Soul, as
if they made a Commonwealth or Family among themselves, and could speak one to
another, which is very improper in searching the truth of the question; You may
observe first, that to compel^ a voluntary act, is nothing else, but to will
it; for it is all one to say, my will commands the shutting of mine eyes, or
the doing of any other action, and to say, I have the will to shut mine eyes.
So that actus imperatus here, might as easily have been said in English, a
voluntary action, but that they that invented the term, understood not any
thing it signified. Secondly, you may observe, that actus elicitus, is
exemplified by these words, to Will, to Elect, to Choose, which are all one,
and so to will is here made an act of the will; and indeed, as the will is a
faculty, or power of a man's soul, so to will is an act of it, according to that
power. But as it is absurdly said, that to dance is an act allured or drawn by
fair means out of the ability to dance; so it is also to say, that to will, is
an act allured or drawn out of the power to will, which power is commonly
called, the Will. Howsoever it be, the sum of his distinction is, that a
voluntary act may be done on compulsion, that is to say, by foul means, but to
will that, or any act, cannot be but by allurement or fair means. Now, seeing
fair Means, Allurements, and Enticements, produce the action which they do
produce, as necessarily as threatening and foul means, it follows, that to
will* may be made as necessary as any thing that is done by compulsion. So that
the distinction of actus imperatus, and actus elicitus, are but words, and of
no effect against necessity.


J. D. IN the next place follow two reasons of mine own against the same
distinction, the one taken from the former grounds, that Election cannot
consist with determination to one. To this (he says) he has answered already.
No, truth is founded upon a Rock. He has been so far from prevailing against
it, that he has not been able to shake it. (a) Now again, he tells us, that
Election is not opposite to either, (Necessitation or Compulsion) He might even
as well tell us, that a stone thrown upwards mooves naturally; Or, that a a
woman can be ravished with her own will. Consent takes away the Rape. This is
the strangest liberty that ever was heard of, that a man is compelled to do
what he would not, and yet is free to do what he will. And this he tells us
upon the old score, that he, who submits to his enemy for fear of death,
chooses to submit. But we have seen formerly, that this, which he calls
compulsion, is not compulsion properly, nor that natural determination of the
will to one, which is opposite to true Liberty. He who submits to an enemy for
saving his life, does either only counterfeit, and then there is no will to
submit (this disguise is no more than a stepping aside, to avoid a present
blow) Or else he does sincerely will a submission, and then the will is
changed; There is a vast difference between compelling and changing the will.
Either God or man may change the will of man, either by varying the condition
of things, or by informing the party otherwise, but compelled it cannot be,
that is, it cannot both will this, and not will this, as it is invested with
the same circumstances, though, if the act were otherwise circumstantiated, it
might nill that freely, which now it wills freely. (b) Wherefore this kind of
actions are called mixed actions, that is partly voluntary, partly unvoluntary.
That which is compelled in a man's present condition or distress, that is not
voluntary nor chosen. That which is chosen, as the remedy of its distress, that
is voluntary. So hypothetically, supposing a man were not in that distress,
they are involuntary, but absolutely without any supposition at all, taking the
case as it is, they are voluntary. (c) His other instance of a man forced to
prison, that he may choose whether he will be haled thither upon the ground, or
walk upon his feet is not true. By his leave, that is not as he pleases, but
as it pleases them who have him in their power. If they will drag him, he is
not free to walk; And if they give him leave to walk, he is not forced to be
dragged. (d) Having laid this foundation, he begins to build upon it, that
other passions do necessitate as much as fear; But he erres doubly; first, in
his foundation, fear does not determine the rational will naturally and
necessarily; The last and greatest of the five terrible things is death, yet
the fear of death cannot necessitate a resolved mind to do a dishonest action,
which is worse than death. The fear of the fiery furnace could not compel the
three Children to worship an Idol, nor the fear of the Lions necessitate Daniel
to omit his duty to God; It is our frailty, that we are more afraid of empty
shadows than of substantial dangers, because they are nearer our senses, as
little Children fear a Mouse or a Visard, more than fire or weather. But as a
fit of the stone takes away the sense of the gout for the present, so the
greater passion does extinguish the less. The fear of Gods wrath, and eternal
torments does expel corporal fear, fear not them who kill the body, but fear
him who is able to cast both body and soul into hell* Luc. 7. 4. (e) Da veniam
Imperator, tu carcerem, ille gehennam minatur, Excuse me, O Emperor, thou
threatenest men with prison, but he threatens me with hell. ( f) Secondly, he
erres in his superstruction also. There is a great difference, as to this case
of justifying, or not justifying an action between force and fear, and other
passions; Force does not only lessen the sin, but takes it quite away, De^t.
22. 26. He who forced a betrothed Damsel was to die; but unto the Damsel
(says he) thou shall do nothing, there is in her no fault worthy of death.
Tamars beauty, or Ammons love did not render him innocent, but Ammons force
rendered Tamar innocent. But fear is not so prevalent as force. Indeed if fear
be great, and justly grounded, such as may fall upon a constant man, though it
do not dispense with the transgression of the negative Precepts of God or
Nature, because they bind to all times, yet it diminishes the offense, even
against them, and pleades for pardon. But it dispenses in many cases with the
trangression of the positive Law, either Divine or humane; because it is not
probable, that God or the Law, would oblige man to the observation of all
positive Precepts, with so great damage as the loss of his life. The omission
of Circumcision was no sin, whilst the Isralites were traveling through the
wilderness. By T. H. his permission. ( g) I will propose a case to him. A
Gentleman sends his servant with money to buy his dinner, some Ruffians meet him
by the way, and take it from him by force, The servant cried for help, and did
what he could to defend himself, but all would not serve. The servant is
innocent, if he were to be tried before a Court of Areopagites. Or suppose the
Ruffians did not take it from him by force, but drew their swords and threatened
to kill him, except he delivered it himself; no wise man will conceive, that it
was either the Masters intention, or the servants duty, to hazard his life, or
limbs, for saving of such a trifling sum. But on the other side suppose this
servant, passing by some Cabaret, or Tennis-court, where his Camerads were
drinking or playing, should stay with them, and drink or play away his money,
and afterward plead as T. H. does here, that he was overcome by the mere
strength of temptation, I trow, neither T. H. nor any man else would admit of
this excuse, but punish him for it, because, neither was he necessitated by the
temptation, and what strength it had was by his own fault, in respect of that
vicious habit which he had contracted of drinking or gaming, Jam. 1. 14. Every
man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and entised. Disordered
passions of anger, hatred, lust, if they be consequent (as the case is here put
by T. H.) and flow from deliberation and election, they do not only not
diminish the fault, but they aggravate it, and render it much greater.

( h) He talks much of the motives to do, and the motives to forbear, how they
work upon and determine a man, as if a reasonable man were no more than a
Tennis-ball, to be tossed to and fro by the Rackets of the second causes; As if
the will had no power to moove it self, but were merely passive, like an
artificial Popingay remooved hither and thither by the bolts of the Archers,
who shoot on this side and on that. What are motives but reasons or discourses
framed by the understanding, and freely moved by the will? What are the will
and the understanding but faculties of the same soul? and what is liberty but a
power resulting from them both? To say that the will is determined by these
motives, is as much as to say, that the Agent is determined by himself; If
there be no necessitation before the judgment of right reason does dictate to
the will, then there is no antecedent, no extrinsecal necessitation at all. (
i) All the world knows, that when the Agent is determined by himself, then the
effect is determined likewise in its cause. But if he determined himself
freely, then the effect is free. Motives determine not naturally, but morally;
which kind of determination may consist with true liberty. But if T. H. his
opinion were true, that the will were naturally determined by the Physical and
special influence of extrinsecal causes, not only motives were vain, but
reason it self, and deliberation were vain. No, says he, they are not vain,
because they are the means. Yes, if the means be superfluous they are vain;
what needed such a circuit of deliberation to advise what is fit to be done,
when it is already determined extrinsecally, what must be done.

( k) He says, that the ignorance of the true causes, and their power is the
reason, why we ascribe the effect to liberty; but when we seriously consider
the causes of things, we acknowledge a necessity. No such thing, but just the
contrary. The more we consider, and the cleerer we understand, the greater is
the liberty, and the more the knowledge of our own liberty. The less we
consider, and the more incapable that the understanding is, the lesser is the
liberty, and the knowledge of it. And where there is no consideration, nor use
of reason, there is no liberty at all, there is neither moral good nor evil.
Some men, by reason that their exterior senses are not totally bound, have a
trick to walk in their sleep. Suppose such an one in that case should cast
himself down a pair of stairs, or from a bridge, and break his neck, or drown
himself, it were a mad Jury that would find this man accessory to his own
death. Why? because it was not freely done, he had not then the use of reason.

( l) Lastly, he tells us, that the will does choose of necessity, as well as
the fire burns of neoessity. If he intend no more but this, that election is
the proper and natural act of the will, as burning is of the fire, or that the
elective power is as necessarily in a man, as visibility, he speaks truly, but
most impertinently; For, the question is not now of the elective power, in actu
primo, whether it be an essential faculty of the soul, but whether the act of
electing this or that particular object, be free and undetermined by any
antecedent and extrinsecal causes. But if he intend it in this other sense,
that as the fire has no power to suspend its burning, nor to distinguish
between those combustible matters which are put unto it, but burns that which
is put unto it necessarily, if it be combustible; So the will has no power to
refuse that which it wills, nor to suspend its own appetite, He erres grossly.
The will has power, either to will or nill, or to suspend, that is neither to
will nor nill the same object; Yet even the burning of the fire, if it be
considered as it is invested with all particular circumstances, is not
otherwise so necessary an action as T. H. imagines. ( m) Two things are
required to make an effect necessary. First, that it be produced by a necessary
cause, such as fire is; Secondly, that it be necessarily produced. Protagoras
an Atheist, began his Book thus. Concerning the Gods, I have nothing to say,
whether they be, or they be not; for which his Book was condemned by the
Athenians to be burned. The fire was a necessary Agent, but the sentence or the
application of the fire to the Book, was a free act; and therefore the burning
of his Book was free. Much more the rational will is free, which is both a
voluntary agent, and acts voluntarily.

( n) My second reason against this distinction of Liberty from Compulsion, but
not from necessitation is new, and demonstrates clearly, that to necessitate
the will by a Physical necessity, is to compel the will so far as the will is
capable of Compulsion; and that he, who does necessitate the will to evil,
after that manner is the true cause of evil, and ought rather to be blamed than
the will it self. But T. H. for all he says he is not surprised, can be
contented upon better advise to steal by all this in silence; And to hide this
tergiversation from the eyes of the Reader, he makes an empty show of braving
against that famous and most necessary distinction between the elicite and
imperate acts of the will; first, because the terms are improper; secondly,
because they are obscure. What Trivial and Grammatical objections are these,
to be used against the universal current of Divines and Philosophers. Verborum
ut Nummorum, It is in words, as it is in money. Use makes them proper and
current; A Tyrant at first, signified a lawful and just Prince; Now, use has
quite changed the sense of it, to denote either an Usurper, or an Oppressor.
The word praemunire is now grown a good word in our English Laws by use and
tract of time; And yet at first it was merely mistaken for a praemonere. The
names of Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, were derived at first from those Heathenish
Deities, the Sun, the Moon, and the warlike God of the Germans; Now we use them
for distinction sake only, without any relation to their first original. He is
too froward that will refuse a piece of coin that is current throughout the
world, because it is not stamped after his own fancy. So is he that rejects a
good word, because he understands not the derivation of it. We see foreign
words are daily naturalized, and made free Denizons in every Country. But why
are the terms improper? Because, says he, It attributes command, and
subjection to the faculties of the soul* as if they made a Commonwealth or
family among themselves, and could speak one to another, Therefore he says,
(o) They who invented this term of Actus Imperatus, understood not any thing
what it signified. No, why not? It seems to me they understood it better than
those who except against it. They knew, there are mental terms, which are
only conceived in the mind, as well as vocal terms, which are expressed with
the tongue. They knew that howsoever a Superior do intimate a direction to his
inferior, it is still a command. Tarquin commanded his son, by only striking
off the tops of the Poppies, and was by him both understood and obeyed. Though
there be no formal Commonwealth or family either in the body, or in the soul
of man, yet there is a subordination in the body of the inferior members to
the head; there is a subordination in the soul of the inferior faculties to
the rational will. Far be it from a reasonable man, so far to dishonor his own
nature, as to equal fancy with understanding, or the sensitive appetite with
the reasonable will. A power of command there is without all question, though
there be some doubt in what faculty this command does principally reside,
whether in the will or in the understanding. The true resolution is, that the
directive command for counsel is in the understanding; And the applicative
command, or empire, for putting in execution of what is directed, is in the
will. The same answer serves for his second impropriety, about the word
Elicite. For, says he, as it is absurdly said, that to dance is an act
allured, or drawn by fair means out of the ability to dance; So it is absurdly
said, that to will or choose, is an act drawn out of the power to will. His
objection is yet more improper than their expression. The art of dancing rather
resembles the understanding, than the will. That drawing, which the Schools
intend, is clear of another nature from that which he conceives; By
elicitation, he understands, a persuading or enticing with flattering words, or
sweet alluring insinuations, to choose this or that. But that elicitation,
which the Schools intend, is a deducing of the power of the will into act; that
drawing, which they mention, is merely from the appetibility of the object, or
of the end; as a man draws a Child after him with the sight of a fair Apple, or
a Shepherd draws his sheep after him with the sight of a green bough: So the
end ^raw^ the will to it, by a Metaphorical motion. What he understands here by
an ability to dance, is more than I know, or any man else, until he express
himself in more proper terms, whether he understand the locomotive faculty
alone, or the art, or acquired habit of dancing alone, or both of these
jointly. It may be said aptly without any absurdity, that the act of dancing is
drawn out (^lic^tur) of the locomotive faculty helped by the acquired habit. He
who is so scrupulous about the received phrases of the Schools should not have
let so many improper expressions have dropped from his pen, as in this very
passage he confounds the compelling of a voluntary action, with the commanding
of a voluntary action, and willing with electing, which he says, are all one.
Yet to will properly respects the end, to elect the means.

(p) His other objection against this distinction of the acts of the will into
Elicite and Imperate i^ obscurity. Might it not (says he) have been as easily
said in English, a voluntary action. Yes, it might have been said as easily,
but not as truly, nor properly. Whatsoever has its original from the will,
whether immediately or m^diatly, whether it be a proper act of the will it self,
as to elect, or an act of the understanding, as to deliberate, or an act of the
inferior faculties, or of the members, is a voluntary action; but neither the
act of reason nor of the senses, nor of the sensitive appetite, nor of the
members are the proper acts of the will, nor drawn immediately out of the will
it self, but the members and faculties are applied to their proper and
respective acts by the power of the will.

And so he comes to cast up the total sum of my second reason, with the same
faith, that the unjust Steward did make his accounts, Luke 16. The sum of J.
D's distinction is (says he) that a voluntary act may be done on compulsion
(just contrary to what I have maintained) that is to say, by ^oul means. But to
will that, or any act cannot be but by allurement or fair means. I confess the
distinction is mine, because I use it, as the Sun is mine, or the Air is mine,
that is common to me, with all who treat of this subject. (q) But his mistakes
are so thick* both in relating my mind, and his own, that the Reader may
conclude, he is wandered out of his known way. I will do my duty to show him
the right way. First, no acts, which are properly said to be compelled, are
voluntary. Secondly, acts of terror (which he calls foul means) which are
sometimes in a large improper sense called compulsory actions, may be, and for
the most part are consistent with true liberty. Thirdly, actions proc^^^^ng
from blandishments or sweet persuasions (which he calls fair means, if they be
indeliberated as in children, who want the use of reason, are not presently
free actions. Lastly, the strength of consequent, and deliberated desires does
neither diminish guilt, nor excuse from pun^^^ment as just fears of extreme and
imminent dangers thr^^t^^^ by extrinsecal agents often do, because the strength
o^ the fo^mer proceeds from our own fault, and was free^^ elected in the causes
of it; But neither desires nor fears, which are consequent and deliberated, do
absolutely necessitate the will.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. XX.
(a) [NOw again, he tells us, that Election is not opposite to either
necessation or compulsion. He might even as well tell us, that a stone thrown
upwards moves naturally, or that a Woman (...) be ravished with her own Will.
Consent takes away the R^^e, etc.] If that which I have told him again be
false, why shows he not why it is false? Here is not one word of Argument
against it. To say I might have said as well that a stone thrown upwards moves
naturally is no refutation, but a denial. I will not dispute with him whether
a stone thrown up move naturally, or not. I shall only say to those Readers,
whose Judgments are not defaced with the abuse of Words, that as a stone
moves not upwards of it self, but by the P^^^er of the Exernal Agent, who
gives it a beginning of that motion; So also when the stone falls, it is
moved downward by the Power of some other Agent, which (though it be
imper^eptible to the eye) is not imperceptible to reason. But because this is
not proper discourse for the Bishop, and because I have else where discoursed
thereof expressly, I shall say nothing of it h^re. And whereas he says ^^nsent
takes away the Rape; It may parhap^ be ^rue, and I think it is; but here it not
only infers nothing, but was also needless, and therefore in a public
writing is an undecent instance, though sometimes not unnecessary in a
Spiritual Court. In the next place he wonders how a man is compelled, and yet
Free to do what he will; that is to say, how a man is made to will, and yet Free
to do what he will. I^ he had said he wondered how a man can ^e compelled to
^ill, and yet be Free to do that which he would have done, if ^e had not been
compelled, it had been somewhat; as it is it is nothing; again he says, He who
submits to an enemy for saving his life, does either only counterfeit, or else
his Will is changed, etc. All which is true* But when he says he does
counterfeit, be does not insinuate that he may counterfeit Lawfully; For that
would pre^udice him hereafter in case he should have need of quarter. But how
this makes for him, or against me, I perceive not. There is a vast difference
(says he) between compelling, and changing the Will. Either God or man may
change the Will of m^n, either by varying the condition of things, or by
informing the party otherwise; but compelled it cannot be etc. I say the same,
The Will cannot be compelled; but the man may be, and (...) then compelled when
his Will is changed by the fear o^ force, punishment, or other hurt from God or
man. And when h^s Will is changed, there is a new Will formed, (Whether it be by
God or by man,* and that necessarily; and consequently the Actions that flow
from that Will are both volunt^ry Free, and ^ecessary, notwithstanding that he
was compelled to do them. Which makes not for the Bishop but for me.

(b* [Wherefore this kind of Actions are called mixed Actions, that is partly
voluntary, partly unvoluntary, etc* So supposing a man were not in that
distress, they are involuntary.] That some Actions are partly voluntary partly
involuntary, is not a new, but a false opinion. For one and the same Action can
never be both voluntary and involuntary. If therefore the parts of an Action,
be Actions, be says no more but that some Actions are volun^^^^ some
involuntary; or that one multitude of Actions may be (...) voluntary, partly
involuntary. But that one Action should be partly voluntary partly involuntary
is absurd; And it is the absurdity of those Authors which he unwarily gave
credit to. But to say, supposing the man had not been in distress, that then
the Action had been involuntary, is to say, that the throwing of a man's goods
into the Sea, supposing he had not been in a storm, had been an involuntary
Action; which is also an absurdity; for he would not have done it, and
therefore it had been no Action at all, And this absurdity it his own.

(c) His other instance of a man forced to prison, that he may choose whether
he will be h^^ed thither upon the ground, or walk upon his fe^t, is not true.
By his leave that is not as he pleases, but as it pleases them who have him
in their Power.] It is enough for the use I make of that instance, that when a
man in the necessity of going to Prison, though he cannot elect nor deliberate
of being Prisoner in the Jail, may nevertheless deliberate sometimes, whether
he shall walk, or be haled thither.

(d) [Having laid this foundation, he begins to build upon it, that other
passions do necessitate as much as fear. But he errs doubly, etc.] First, he
says, I err in this that I say, that fear determins the rational Will naturally
and necessarily. And first, I answer, that I never used that term of rational
Will. There is nothing rational but God, Angels, and men. The Will is none of
these. I would not have excepted against this expression, but that every where
he speaks of the Will and other faculties as of men, or Spirits in men's
bellies. Secondly, he offers nothing to prove the contrary. For that which
follows the last and greatest of five terrible things, is death, yet the fear
of death cannot necessitate a resolved mind to a dishonest Action. The fear of
the fiery furnace could not compel the three Children to worship an Idol, nor
the fear of the Lions necessitate Daniel to omit his duty to God, etc. I grant
him that the greatest of five (or of fifteen for he had no more reason for five
then fifteen) terrible things does not always necessitate a man to do a
dishonest Action, and that the fear of the fiery Furnace could not compel the
three Children, nor the Lions Daniel to omit their duty; for somewhat else
(namely their confidence in God) did necessitate them to do their duty. That
the fear of Gods wrath does expel corporal fear, is w^ll said, and according to
the Text he cites. And proves strongly that fear of the greater evil may
necessitate in a man, a courage to endure the lesser evil.

(e) Da veniam Imperator, tu carcerem, ille gehennam minatur. Excuse me, O
Emperor thou threatnest men with Prison, but God threatens me with Hell.] This
Sentence, and that which he says Numb. 17. that neither the civil Judge, is the
proper Judge, nor the Law of the Land is the proper Rule of sin, and diverse
other sayings of his to the same effect, make it impossible for any Nation in
the World to preserve themselves from civil Wars. For all men living equally
acknowledging that the High and Omnipotent God is to be obeyed before the
greatest Emperors; every one may pretend the commandment of God to Justify
his disobedience. And if one man pretends that God commands one thing, and
another man that he commands the contrary, what equity is there to allow the
pretense of one, more then of another? Or what peace can there be if they be
all allowed a like? There will therefore necessarily arise discord and civil
War, unless there be a Judge agreed upon with Authority given to him by every
one of them, to show them, and interpr^t to them the Word of God, which
Interpretor is always the Emperor, King, or other Soverain person, who
therefore ought to be obeyed. But the Bishop thinks that to show us and
interpret to us the Word of God, belongs to the Clergy, wherein I cannot
consent unto him; Excuse me, O Bishop, you threaten me with that you cannot do,
but the Emperor threateneth me with death, and is able to do what he
threateneth.

(f) [Secondly, he errs in his superstruction also. There is a great
difference, as to this case of Justifying, or not Justifying an Action, between
force and fear, etc. Force does not only lessen the sin, but takes it quite
away, etc.] I know not to what point of my answer, this Reply of his is to be
applied. I had said the Actions of men compelled, are nevertheless voluntary.
It seems that he calls Compulsion Force; but I call it a fear of force, or of
damage to be done by force, by which fear a man's will is framed to somewhat,
to which he had no will before. Force takes away the sin, because the Action
is not his that is forced, but his that forces. It is not always so in
Compulsion, because in this case a man electeth the Less Evil under the notion
of Good. But his instances of the betrothed Damsel that was forced, and of
Tamar, may for any thing there appears in the Text, be Instances of
Compulsion, and yet the Damsel and Tamar be both innocent. In that which
immediately follows concernin^ how far fear may extenuate a sin, there is
nothing to be answered. I preceive in it, he has some glimmering of the truth,
but not of the grounds thereof. It is true, that Just ^ear dispenceth not with
the precepts of God or Nature; for they are not dispensable; but it extenuateth
the fault, not by di^^inishing any thing in the Action, but by being no
transgressi^n. For if the fear be allowed the Action it produces is allowed
also. Nor does it disp use in any case with the Law positive, but by making the
Action it self Lawful, for the breaking of a Law is always sin; and it is
certain that men are obliged to the observation of all positive Precepts,
though with the loss of their lives, unless the right that a man has to
preserve himself, make it, in case of a just Fear, to be n^ Law. The omission
of circumcision was no sin, he says, whilst the Israelites were traveling
through the Wilderness. 'T is very true, but this has nothing to do with
Compulsion. And the cause why it was no sin, was this; they were ready to ob^y
it, wh^nsoever God should give them leisure and rest from travel; whereby they
might be cured, or at least when God, that daily spoke to their Conducter in
the Desert, should appoint him to renew that Sacrament.

(g) [I will propose a case to him, etc.] The case is this; a Servant, is
robbed of his Masters money by the Highway, but is acquit because he was
forced. Another Servant spends his Masters money in a Tavern. Why is he not
acquitted also seeing he was necessitated? Would (h^ says he) T. H. admit of
this excuse? I answer no: But I would do that to him, which should necessitate
him to behave himself better anoth^r time, or at least necessitate another to
behave himself better, by his example.

(h) He talks much of the motives to do, an^ the m^tives to forbear, how they
work upon, and determine a man; as if a reasonable man were no more then a
Tennis-ball, to be tossed to and fro by the Rackets of the second causes; etc.]
May not great things be produced by second causes as well as little? And a
Football as well as a Tennis-ball? But the Bishop can never be driven from
this, that the Will has power to move it self, but says it is all one to say,
that an Agent can determine it self, and that the Will is determined by motives
extrinsical. He adds, that if there be no necessitation before the Judgment of
right reason does dictate to the Will, then there is no Antecedent nor
Extrinsecal necessitation at all. I say indeed the effect is not produced
before the last dictate of the understanding; but I say not that the necessity
was not before; he knows I say it is from eternity. When a Cannon is planted
against a Wall, though the battery be not made till the bullet arrive, yet the
necessity was present all the while the bullet was going to it, if the Wall
stood still; and if it ^li^t away, the hitting of somewhat else was necessary,
and that antecedently.

(i) [All the World knows, that when the Agent is determined by himself, then
the effect is determined likewise in its cause. Yes, when the Agent is
d^termined by himself, then the effect is determined likewise in its cause, and
so any thing else is what he will have it. But nothing is determined by it
self, nor is there any man in the World that h^th any Conception answerable to
those Words. But Motives (he says) determine not naturally but Morally. This
also is insignificant, for all Motion is Natural or Supernatural. Moral motion
is a mere Word, without any Imagination of the mind correspondent to it. I have
heard men talk of a Motion in a Court of Justice; perhaps this is it which he
means by Moral Motion. But certainly when the tongue of the Judge, and the hands
of the Clerks are thereby moved, the Motion is Natural, and proceed from
natural causes, which causes also, were Natural Motions of the tongue of the
Advocate. And whereas he adds, that if this were true then not only Motives,
but reason it self, and deliberation were vain* it has been sufficiently
answered before that therefore they are not vain, because by them is produced
the effect. I must also note that oftentimes in citing my opinion, he puts ^n
instead of mine, those terms of his own, which upon all occasions I complain of
for absurdity; as here he makes me to say, that which I did never say, Special
influence of extrinsical causes.

(k) He says, that the ignorance of the true causes, and their Power, is the
reason why we ascribe the effect ^o Liberty; but when we seriously consider the
causes of things, we acknowledge a necessity. No such thing, but just the
contrary.] I^^* understand the Authors which he reads upon this point no
better, then he understands what I have here written, it is no wonder he
understands not the truth of the question. I said not, that when we consider
the causes of things, but when we see and know the strength that moves us, we
acknowledge necessity. No such thing ( says the Bishop) but just the contrary,
the more we consider, and the clearer we understand, the greater is the
Liberty, etc. Is there any doubt if a man could foreknow, as God foreknows that
which is hereafter to come to pass, but that he would also see and know she
causes which shall bring it to pass, and how they work, and make the effect
necessary; for necessary it is whatsoever God foreknoweth. But we that foresee
them not, may consider as much as w^ will, and understand as clearly as we
will, but are never the nearer to the knowledge of their necessity; and that I
said was the cause why we impute those events to Liberty, and not to causes.

(l) [Lastly, he tells us, that the Will does chose of necessity, as well as the
fire burns of necessity. If he intend no more but this, that Election is the
proper and natural Act of the Will, as burning is of the fire, etc. He speaks
truly, but most impertinently; for the question is not now of the Elective
power, in actu primo, etc.] Here again he makes me speak non sense; I said the
man chooses of necessity, he says, I say the Will chooses of necessity; And
why, but because he thinks I ought to speak as he does, and say, as he does
here, that Election is the Act of the Will. No, Election is the Act of a man, as
power to Elect is the power of a man. Election and Will are all one Act of a
man, and the power to Elect, and the power to Will one and the same power of a
man. But the Bishop is confounded by the use of calling by the name of Will, the
power of willing in the future, as they also were confounded that first brought
in this senseless term of Actus primus. My meaning is, that the Election I
shall have of any thing hereafter, is now as necessary, as that the fire that
now is, and continues, shall burn any combustible matter thrown into it
hereafter. Or to use his own terms, the Will has no more power to suspend its
Willing, then the burning of the fire to suspend its burning. Or rather more
properly, the man has no more power to suspend his Will, then the fire, to
suspend his burning; Which is contrary to that, which he would have, namely,
that a man should have power to refuse what he Wills, and to suspend his own
appetite* for to refuse what one wills implies a contradiction; the which
also is made much more absurd by his expression; for he says, the Will has
power to refuse what it Wills, and to suspend its own Appetite, whereas the
Will, and the Willing, ^^d the Appetite is the same thing. He adds that even
the burning of the fire, if it be considered, as it is invested with all
particular circumstances, is not so necessary an Action as T. H. imagines. He
does not sufficiently understand what I imagine. For I imagine, that of the
fire which shall burn five hundred years hence, I may truly say now, it shall
burn necessarily; and of that which shall not burn then, (for fire may
sometimes not burn the combustible matter thrown into it, as in the case of the
three Children) that it is necessary it shall not burn.

(m) [Two things are required to make an Effect necessary. First, that it be
produced by a necessary cause, etc. Secondly, that it be necessarily produced,
etc.] To this I say nothing but that I understand not how a cause can be
necessary, and the Effect not be necessarily produced.

(n) [My second reason against this distinction of Liberty from compulsion, but
not from necessitation, is new, and demonstrates clearly, that to necessitate
the Will by a Physical necessity, is to compel the Will, so far as the Will is
capable of compulsion; and that he, who does necessitate the Will to evil after
that manner, is the true cause of evil, etc.] By this second reason, which he
says is new and demonstrates, etc. I cannot find what reason he means; for
there are but two, whereof the later is in these Words; Secondly, to rip up the
bottom of this business, this I take to be the clear resolution of the Schools;
There is a double Act of the Will, the one more remote called Imperatus, etc.
The other Act is nearer, called Actus Elicitus, etc. But I doubt whether this
be it he means or no. For this being the resolution of the Schools, is not new;
and being a distinction only, is no demonstration; though ^erhaps he may use
the word demonstration, as every unlearned man now a days does, to signify any
Argument of his own. As for the distinction it self, because the terms are
Latin, and never used by any Author of the Latin tongue, to show their
impertinence, I expounded them in English, and left them to the Readers
judgment, to find the absurdity of them himself. And the Bishop in this part
of his Reply, endeavors to defend them. And first he calls it a Trivial and
Grammatical objection, to say they are improper and obscure. Is there any thing
less be seeming a Divine, or a Philosopher, then to speak improperly and
obscurely, where the truth is in question. Perhaps it may be tolerable in one
that Divineth, but not in him that pretends to demonstrate. It is not the
universal current of Divines, and Philosophers, that gives Words their
Authority, but the generality of them who acknowledge, that they understand
them. Tyrant and Praemunire, though their signification be changed, yet they
are understood; and so are the names of the Days. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday. And
when English Rea^ers not engaged in School Divinity shall find Imperate and
Elicite Acts as intelligible as those, I will confess I had no reason to find
fault.

But my braving against that famous, and most necessary distinction, between
the Elicite and Imperate Acts of the Will, he says was only to hide from the
eyes of the Reader a tergiversation in not answering this Argument of his; he
who does necessitate the Will to evil, is the true cause of evil; But God is not
the cause of evil; Therefore he does not necessitate the Will to evil. This
Argument is not to be found in this Numb. 20. to which I here answered; nor had
I ever said that the Will was compelled. But he taking all necessitation for
Compulsion, does now in this place from necessitation simply, bring in this
Inference concerning the cause of evil, and thinks he shall force me to say,
that God is the cause of sin. I shall say only what is said in the Scripture,
Non est malum, quod ego non feci. I shall say what Micaiah says to Ahab, 1
Kings 22. 23. Behold the Lord has put a lying Spirit into the mouth of all
these thy Prophets. I shall say that that is true, which the Prophet David
says, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, curse
David. But that which God himself says of himself, 1 Kings 12. 15. The King
hearkened not to the people, for the cause was from the Lord, I will not say,
least the Bishop exclaim against me, but leave it to be interpreted by those
that have authority to interpret the Scriptures. I say further, that to cause
sin is not always sin, nor can be sin in him that is not subject to some higher
Power; but to use so unseemly a Phrase as to say that God is the cause of sin,
because it sounds so like to saying that God sins, I can never be forced
by so weak an argument as this of his. Luther says we act necessarily,
necessarily by necessity of immutability, not by necessity of constraint, that
is in plain English necessarily, but not against our wills. Zanchius says
Tract. Theol. cap. 6. These. 1. The freedom of our will does not consist in
this, that there is no necessity of our sinning; but in this, that there is no
constraint. Bucer. Lib. de Concordia. Whereas the Catholics say, man has Free
Will, we must understand it of freedom from constraint, and not freedom from
necessity. Calvin. Inst. Cap. 2.. 6. And thus shall man be said to have Free
Will, not because he has equal freedom to do good and evil, but because he
does the evil he does not by constraint but willingly. Monsr. du Mou^in, in
his Buckler of the Faith, Article 9 The necessity of sinning is not repugnant
to the freedom of the Will. Witness the Devils who are necessarily wicked, and
yet sin freely without constraint. And the Synod of Dort. Liberty is not
opposite to all kinds of necessity and determination. It is indeed opposite to
the necessity of constraint but stands well enough with the necessity of
infallibility. I could add more. For all the famous Doctors of the Reformed
Churches, and with them St. Augustine are of the same opinion. None of these
denied that God is the cause of al Motion and Action, or that God is the cause
of al Laws; and yet they were never forced to say that God is the cause of sin.

(o) They who invented this term of Actus Imperatus understood not (he says)
any thing what it signified. No? Why not? It seems to me they understood it
better then those who except against it. They knew there are mental terms
which are only conceived in the mind, as well as vocal terms, which are
expressed with the tongue, etc. In this place the Bishop has discovered the
ground of all his errors in Philosophy, which is this, that he thinks, when
he repeateth the words of a proposition in his mind, that is, when he fancieth
the words without speaking them, that then he conceives the things which the
words signify, and this is the most general cause of false opinions. For men
can never be deceived in the conceptions of things, though they may, and are
most often deceived by giving unto them wrong terms or appellations, different
from those which are commonly used, and constituted to signify their
conceptions. And therefore they that study to attain the certain knowledge of
truth, do use to set down before hand all the terms they are to express
themselves by, and declare in what sense they shall use them constantly. And by
this means, the Reader having an Idea of every thing there named, cannot
conceive amiss. But when a man from the hearing of a word has no Idea of the
thing signified, but only of the sound, and of the Letters whereof the word is
made (which is that he here calls Mental terms) it is impossible he should
conceive aright, or bring forth any thing but absurdity; as he does here, when
he says, that when Tarquin delivered his commands to his Son, by only striking
off the tops of the Poppies, he did it by Mental terms. As if to strick off the
head of a Poppy were Mental term. It is the sound and the Letters that makes
him think Elicitus and Imperatus somewhat. And it is the same that makes him
say (for think it he cannot) that to Will, or choose, is drawn, or allured, or
fetched out of the power to Will. For drawing cannot be imagined but of bodies;
and therefore to Will, to speak, to write, to dance, to leap, or any way to be
moved, cannot be said intelligibly to be drawn, much less to be drawn out of a
Power, that is to say, out of an ability; for whatsoever is drawn out, is drawn
out of one place into another. He that can discourse in this manner in
Philosophy, cannot probably be thought able to discourse rationally in any
thing.

(p) [His other objection against this distinction of the Acts of the Will into
Elicite and Imperate is obscurity. Might it not (says he) have been as easily
said in English, a voluntary Action? Yes, it might have been said as easily,
but not as truly, nor as properly.] He says, that Actus Imperatus is when a man
opens or shuts his eyes at the command of the Will. I say when a man opens and
shuts his eyes according to his Will, that it is a voluntary Action; and I
believe we mean one and the same thing. Whether of us speak more properly, or
more truly, let the Reader Judge.

(q) [But his mistakes are so thick, etc. I will do my duty to show him the
right way. First, no Acts which are properly said to be compelled, are
voluntary. Secondly* Acts of of terror, etc.] This is nothing but Tohu and
Bohu.

J. D. THE rest are umbrages quickly dispelled; first, the Astrologer Number. 21.
steps up, and subjects Liberty to the motions of Heaven, to the aspects and
ascensions of the Stars,

-- Plus etenim fati valet hora benigni.
Quam si nos Veneris commendet Epistola Marti.
I stand not much upon them who cannot see the fishes swimming besides them in
the rivers, yet believe they see those which are in Heaven. Who promise great
treasures to others, and beg a groat for themselves. The Stars at the most do
but incline, they cannot necessitate.

Secondly, the Physician subjects liberty to the complexion and temperature of
the body. But yet this comes not home to a necessity. Socrates, and many others
by assiduous care have corrected the pernicious propensions, which flowed from
their temperatures.


T. H. IN the rest of his discourse he reckons up the opinions of certain
professions of men, touching the causes, wherein the necessity of things, which
they maintain, consists. And first he says, the Astrologer deriveth his
necessity from the Stars. Secondly, that the Physician attributes it to the
temper of the body. For my part, I am not of their opinion, because neither the
Stars alone, nor the temperature of the Patient alone is able to produce any
effect without the concurrence of all other Agents. For, there is hardly any
one action, how casual soever it seem, to the causing whereof concur not
whatsoever is in rerum natura. Which because it is a great Paradox, and depends
on many antecedent speculations I do not press in this place.


J. D. Toward the later end of my discourse I answered some specious pretenses
against liberty, The two first were of the Astrologer and the Physician. The
one subjecting liberty to the motions and influences of the heavenly bodies;
The other to the complexions of men. ( a) The sum of my answer was, that the
Stars and complexions do incline, but not at all necessitate the will. To which
all judicious Astronomers and Physicians do assent. And T. H. himself does not
dissent from it. So as to this part there needs no reply.

( b) But whereas he mentions a great paradox of his own that there is hardly
any one action to the causing of which concurres not whatsoever is in rerum
natura, I can but smile to see with what ambition our great undertakers do
affect to be accounted the first founders of strange opinions, as if the
devising of an ill grounded Paradox were as great an honor as the invention of
the needle, or the discovery of the new World. And to this Paradox in
Particular, I meddle not with natural actions, because the subject of my
discourse is moral liberty; But if he intend not only the kinds of things, but
every individual creature, and not only in natural but voluntary actions, I
desire to know how Prester John, or the great Mogol, or the King of China, or
any one of so many millions of their subjects do concur to my writing of this
reply. If they do not, among his other speculations concerning this matter, I
hope he will give us some restrictions. It were hard to make all the Negroes
accessory to all the murders that are committed in Europe.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply. Numb. XXI.
THere is not much in this part of his Reply, that needs Animadversion. But I
must observe where he says.

( a) [The sum of my answer was that the Stars and complections do incline, but
not at all necessitate the Will.] He answers nothing at all to me, who
attribute not the necessitation of the Will to the Stars and Complections, but
to the aggregate of all things together that are in motion. I do not say that
the Stars or Complections of themselves do incline men to Will; but when men are
inclined, I must say that that inclination, was necessitated by some causes or
other.

( b) [But whereas he mentions a great Paradox of his own; that there is hardly
any one Action, to the causing of which concurres not whatsoever is in rerum
natura. I can but smile to see with what ambition our great undertakers do
affect to be accounted the first founders of strange opinions, etc.] The Bishop
speaks often of Paradoxes which such scorn or detestation, that a simple Reader
would take a Paradox either for Felony, or some other heinous crime, or else
for some rediculous turpitude; whereas perhaps a Judicious Reader knows what
the word signifies. And that a Paradox is an opinion not yet generally
received. Christian Religion was once a Paradox; and a great many other
opinions which the Bishop now holds, were formerly Paradoxes. Insomuch as
when a man calls an opinion Paradox, he does not say it is untrue, but
signifies his own ignorance; for if he understood it, he would call it either
a truth or an error. He observes not, that but for Paradoxes, we should be now
in that savage ignorance which those men are in* that have not, or have not
long had Laws and Commonwealth, from whence porceedeth Science and Civility.
There was not long since a Scholar, that maintained that if the least thing
that had weight should be laid down upon the hardest body that could be,
supposing it an Anvill of Diamant, it would at the first access make it yield.
This I thought, and much more the Bishop would have thought a Paradox. But when
he told me, that either that would do it, or all the weight of the World would
not do it, because if the whole weight did it, every the least part thereof
would do its part, I saw no reason to dissent. In like manner when I say there
is hardly any one Action to the causing of which concurs not whatsoever is in
rerum natura; It seems to the Bishop a great Paradox; and if I should say that
all Action is the effect of Motion, and that there cannot be a Motion in one
part of the World, but the same must also be communicated to all the rest of
the World, he would say that this were no less a Paradox. But yet if I should
say, that if a lesser body, as a concave Sphere or Tun, were filled with air or
other liquid matter, and that any one little particle thereof were moved, all
the rest would be moved also, he would conceive it to be true, or if not he, a
judicious reader would. It is not the greatness of the Tun that alters the
case; and therefore the same would be true also, if the whole World were the
Tun; for it is the greatness of this Tun that the Bishop comprohendeth not. But
the truth is comprehensible enough, and may be said without ambition of being
the founder of strange opinions. And though a Grave man may smile at it, he
that is both Grave and wise will not.

J. D. THirdly, the moral Philosopher tells us how we are haled hither Number. 22.
and thither with outward objects. To this I answer.

First, that the power, which outward objects have over us, is for the most
part by our own default, because of those vicious habits which we have
contracted. Therefore, though the actions seem to have a kind of violence in
them, yet they were free and voluntary in their first originals. As a
paralitick man, to use Aristotle's comparison, shedding the liquor deserves to
be punished, for though his act be unwilling, yet his imtemperance was willing,
whereby he contracted this infirmity.

Secondly, I answer, that concupiscence, and custom, and bad company, and
outward objects do indeed make a proclivity, but not a necessity. By Prayers,
Tears, Meditations, Vows, Watchings, Fastings, Humi-cubations, a man may get a
contrary habit, and gain the victory, not only over outward objects but also
over his own corruptions, and become the King of the little world of himself.

Si metuis, si prava cupis, si duceris ira,
Servitii patiere jugum, tol^rabis iniquas
Interius leges. Tunc omnia jure tenebis,
Cum poteris rex esse t^^.
Thirdly, a resolved mind, which weighs all things judiciously, and provides
for all occurrences, is not so easily surprised withoutward objects. Only
Ulysses wept not at the meeting with ^is wife and son. I would beat thee (said
the Philosopher) but that I am angry. One spoke lowest when he was most moved.
Another poured out the water when he was thirsty. Another made a Covenant with
his eyes. Neither opportunity nor entisement could prevail with Joseph. Nor the
Music, nor the fire with the three Children. It is not the strength of the
wind, but the lightness of the chaff, which causes it to be blown away.
Outward objects do not impose a moral, much less a Physical necessity, they may
be dangerous, but cannot be destructi e to true liberty.


T. H. THirdly, he disputes against the opinion of them that say, external
objects present^d to men of such and such t^mperatures, do make their actions
necessary. And says, the po^^er that such objects have over us, proceed from
our own fault; But that is nothing to the purpose, if such ^ault of ours
proceeds from causes, not in our own power. And therefore that opinion may
^old true fo^^ all this answer: Further he says, Prayer, Fasting, etc. may
alter our habits. 'T is true, but when they do so, they are causes of the
contrary habit, and make it necessary; as the former habit had been necessary,
i^ Prayer, Fasting, etc. had not been. Besides we are not moved, nor disposed
to prayer, or any ot er action but by outward objects, as pious company, godly
preachers, or something equivalent. Thirdly, he says, a resolved mind is not
easily surprised. As the mind of Ulysses, who when others wept, he alone wept
not. And of the Philosopher that abstained from striking, because he found
himself angry. And of him that poured out the water when he was thirsty; And
the like. Such things I confess have, or may have been done, and do prove only
that it was not necessary for Ulysses then to we^p, nor for the Philosopher to
strike, nor for that other man to drink, but it does not prove that it was not
necessary for Ulysses then to ab^^ain, as he did from weeping, nor the
Philosopher to abstain as he did from striking; Nor the other man to forbear
drinking. And yet that was the thing he ought to have proved.

Lastly, he confesses, that the disposition of objects may be dangerous to
liberty, but cannot be destructive. To which I answer, t^^ impossible; For,
liberty is never in any other danger than to be lost. And if (...) cannot be
lost, which he confesses, I may in^er it can be in no danger at all.


J. D. ( a) THe third pretense was out of moral Philosophy misunderstood, that
outward objects do necessitate the will. I shall not need to repeat what he
has omitted, but only to satisfy his exceptions; ( b) The first is, that it
is not material, though the power of outward objects do proceed from our own
faults, if such faults of ours proceed not from causes in our own power. Well,
but what if they do proceed from causes that are in our own power, as in truth
they do, then his answer is a mere subterfuge. If our faults proceed from
causes that are not, and were not in our own power, then they are not our
faults at all. It is not a fault in us not to do those things, which never were
in our power to do. But they are the faults of these causes from whence they do
proceed. ( c) Next he confesses, that it ^^^n our power by good endeavors, to
alter those vicious habits which we had contracted, and to get the contrary
habit. True (says he) but then the contrary habit does necessitate the one
way, as well as the former habit did the other way. By which very consideration
it appears, that that which he calls a necessity is no more but a proclivity.
If it were a true necessity, it could not be avoided, nor altered by our
endeavors. The truth is Acquired habits do help and assist the faculty; but
they do not necessitate the faculty. He who has gotten to himself an habit of
temperance, may yet upon occasion commit an intemperate act. And so on the
contrary. Acts are not opposed to habits, but other habits. ( d) He adds, that
we are not moved to prayer or any other action but by outward objects, as
pions company, godly Preachers or something equivalent. Wherein are two other
mistakes, first* to make godly Preachers, and pious company, to be outward
objects, which are outward Agents. Secondly to affirm that the will is not
moved but by outward objects. The will is moved by it self, by the
understanding, by the sensitive passions by Angels good and bad, by men, and
most effectually by acts or habits infused by God, whereby the will is excited
extraordinarily indeed, but efficaciously and determinately. This is more than
equivalent with outward objects.

Another branch of mine answer was, that a resolved and prepared mind is able
to resist both the app^tibility of objects, and the unruliness of passions; As
I showed by examples. ( e) He answers that I prove Ulysses was not necessitated
to weep, nor the Philosopher to strike, but I do not prove that they were not
necessitated to forbear. He says true. I am not now proving, but answering.
Yet my answer does sufficiently prove that which I intend. That the rational
will has power, both to slight the most appetible objects, and to control the
most unruly passions. When he has given a clear solution to those proofs which
I have produced, then it will be time for him to cry for more work.

Lastly, whereas I say, that outward objects may be dangerous, but cannot be
destructive to true liberty. He catches at it, and ( f) objects, that liberty
is in no danger, but to be lost, but I say, it cannot be lost, therefore (he
infers) that it is in no danger at all. I answer; First, that liberty is in
more danger to be abused than to be lost. Many more men do abuse their wits
than lose them. Secondly, liberty is in danger likewise to be weakened or
diminished, as when it is clogged by vicious habits contracted by our selves,
and yet it is not totally lost. Thirdly, though liberty cannot be totally lost
out of the world, yet it may be totally lost to this or that particular man, as
to the exercise of it. Reason is the root of liberty, and though nothing be
more natural to a man than reason, yet many by excess of study, or by continual
gurmandizing, or by some extravagant passion, which they have cherished in
themselves, or by doting too much upon some affected object, do become very
sorts, and deprive themselves of the use of reason, and consequently of
Liberty. And when the benefit of liberty is not thus universally lost, yet it
may be lost respectively to this or that particular occasion. As he who makes
choice of a bad wife, has lost his former liberty to chose a good one.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply Numb. XXII.
( a) [THe third pretense was out of Moral Philosophy misunderstood, that
outward objects do necessitate the Will.] I cannot imagine how the question,
whether outward objects do necessitate, or not necessitate the Will, can any
^ay be referred to Moral Philosophy. The principles ^f moral Philosophy are the
Laws, wherewith outward objects have little to do, as being for the most part
inanimate, and which follow always the force of nature without respect to
moral Laws. Nor can I conceive what purpose he had to bring this into his Reply
to my answer, wherein I attribute nothing in the Action of outward objects to
Morallity.

(b) [His first exception is, that it is not material that the power of outward
objects do proceed from our own faults, if such faults of ours proceed not from
causes in our own power. Well, but what if they do proceed from causes, that
are in our own power, as in truth they do, then his answer is a mere
subterfuge. But how pr^v^s he that in truth they do? Because else, says he,
they are not our faults at all.] Very well reasoned. A Horse is lame from a
cause that was not in his power, therefore the lameness is no fault in the
Horse. But his meaning is, t^s no injustice unless the causes were in his own
power; as if it were not injustice whatsoever is willingly done against the
Law, whatsoever it be that is the cause o^ the Will to do it.

(c) [Next he confesses, that it is in our power by good endeavors to alter
those vicious habits which we had contracted, and to get the contrary habits.]
There is no such confession in my answer. I said, Prayer, Fasting, etc. May
alter our habits. But I never said that the Will to Pray, Fast etc. is in our
own power. True (says he) but then the contrary habit does necessitate the on^
way, as well as the former habit did the other way. By which very consideration
it appears, that that which he calls a necessity, is no more but a Proclivity.
If it were a true necessity, it could not be avoided, nor altered by our
endeavors.] Again he mistakes, for I said that Prayer, Fasting, etc. when they
alter our habits do necessarily cause the contrary habits; which is not to say
that the habit necessitates but is necessitated But this is Common with him to
make me say that which out of readin^, not out of Meditation he uses to say
hi^^^^. B^t how does it ap^^ar, that Prayer and Fasting etc. make but a
Proclivity in men to do what they do for if it ^ere but a Proclivity, then what
they do, they do not. Therefore they either necessitate the Will, or the Will
follows not; I contend for the truth of this only, that when the W^ll
follows them they necessitate the will; and when a ^r^climity follows they
necessitate the proclimity. But the Bishop thin^s I maintain that that also is
produced necessiarily, which is not produced at a^.

(d) [He adds, that we are not moved to Prayer, or any other Action, but by
outward objects, as pio^s company, and Godly Preachers, or something equivalent
Wherein are two other mistake^; first, to make Godly Preachers, and pious
company, to be outward objects, which are outward Agents. Secondly, to affirm
that the Will is not moved but by outward objects. The W^l is moved by it self,
etc.] The first mistake, he urges that I call Preachers and company objects.
Is not the Preacher to the hearer the object of his hearing? No, perhaps he
will say it is the voice which is the object, and that we hear not the
Preacher, but his voice, as before he said the object of sight, was not the
cause of sight. I must therefore once more make him smile with a great Paradox
which is this, that in all the senses he Object is the Agent; And that it is,
when we hear a Preacher, the Preacher that we hear, and that his voice is the
same thing with the hearing and a fancy in the hearer, though the motion o^ the
Lips, and other organs of spe^ch be his that speaks. But of this I have
written more largely in a mo^e proper place.

My second mistake, in affirming that the Will is not moved but by outward
objects, is a mistake of his own. For I said not the Will is not moved, but we
ate not moved, for I always avoid attributing motion to any thing but Body.
The Will is produced, generated, formed, and created in such ^ort as accidents
are effected in a corp^real subject, but moved it cannot be, because it goes
not from place to place. And whereas h^ says the Will is moved by it self, if
he had spoken properly as he ought to do, and said, the Will is made or created
by it self, he would presently have acknowledged that it was impossible. So
that it is not without cause men use improper Language, when they mean to keep
their errors from being detected. And because nothing can move that is not it
self moved, it is untruly said that either the Will or any thing else is moved
by it self, by the understanding, by the sensitive passions, or by Acts or
habits, or that Acts or habits are infused by God, for infusion is motion, and
nothing is moved but bodies.

(e) [He answers that I prove Ulysses was not necessitated to weep nor the
Philosopher to strik, but I do not prove that they were not necessitated to
forbear. He says true; I am not now proving, but answering.] By his favor,
though he be answering now, he was proving then. And what he answers now makes
nothing more toward a proof then was before. For these words, the rational Will
has Power to slight the most appetible objects, and to control, the most
unruly passions, are no more, (being reduced into proper terms) then this, the
appetite has power to be without appetite toward most appetible objects, and
to Will contrary to the most unruly Will; which is Jargon.

(f) [He objects that Liberty is in no danger, but to be lost; but I say it
cannot be lost, therefore (he inferrs) that it is in no danger at all. I
answer, First, that Liberty is in more danger to be abused then lost, etc.
Secondly, Liberty is in danger likewise to be weakened by vic^ous habits.
Thirdly, it may be totally lost.] It is true that a man has more liberty one
time then another, and in one place then another, which is a difference of
liberty (...) to the Body. But as to the liberty of doing what we will, in
those things we are able to do, it cannot be greater one time then another.
Consequently outward objects can (...) ways endanger liberty further then it
destroys it. And his answer that liberty is in more danger to be abused then
lost, is not to the question, but a mere shift to be thought not silenced. And
whereas he says liberty is diminished by vicious habits, it cannot be
understood otherwise then that vicious habits make a man the less free to do
vicious actions; which I believe is not his meaning. And lastly, whereas he
says that Liberty is lost, when reason is lost, and that they who by express
of Study, or by continual gurmandising, or by extravagant passion, etc. do
become sots, have consequently lost their liberty, it requires proof; for for
any thing that I can observe, mad men and fools have the same liberty that
other men have, in those things that are in their power to do.

J. D. FOurthly, the natural Philosopher does teach, that the will Number. 23.
does necessarily follow the last dictate of the understanding. It is true
indeed the will should follow the direction of the understanding, but I am not
satisfied that it does evermore follow it. Sometimes this saying has place,
Video m^liora proboque, Deteriora sequor. As that great Roman said of two
Sailers that the one produced the better reasons, but the other must have the
office. So reason often lies dejected at the feet of affection. Things nearer
to the senses moove more powerfully. Do what a man can, he shall sorrow more
for the death of his child, than for the sin of his soul; Yet appreciatively in
the estimation of judgment, he accounts the offense of God, a greater evil
than any temporal loss.

Next, I do not believe that a man is bound to weigh the expedience or
inexpedience of every ordinary trivial action to the least grain in the
balance of his understanding, or to run up into his Watchtower with his
perspective to take notice of every Jack-daw that flies by, for fear of some
hidden danger. This seems to me to be a prostitution of reason to petit
observations as concerning every rag that a man wears each drop of drink, each
morsel of bread that he eats, each pace that he walks. Thus many steps must he
go, not one more, nor one less, under pain of mortal sin. What is this but a
Rack and a Gibbet to the Conscience? But God leaves many things indifferent,
though man be so curious he will not. A good Architect will be sure to provide
sufficient materials for his building, but what particular number of stones, or
trees, he troubles not his head. And suppose he should weigh each action thus,
yet he does not, so still there is liberty. Thirdly, I conceive it is possible
in this mist and weakness of human apprehension, for two actions to be so
equally circumstantiated, that no discernable difference can appear between
them upon discussion A^ suppose a Surgeon should give two plasters to his
Patient, and ^id him apply either o^ them to his wound, what can induce his
reason more to the one than to the other, but that he may refer it to chance
whether he will use? But leaving these probable speculations which I submit ^o
better judgments. I answer the Philosopher briefly thus; Admitting that the
will did necessarily follow the last dictare of the understanding as certainly
in many things it does. Yet,

First, this is no extrins^^al determination from without, and a man's own
resolution is not destructive to his own liberty, but depends upon it. So the
person is still free.

Secondly, this determination is not antecedent, but joined with the Action.
The understanding and the will, are not different Agents, but distinct
faculties of the same soul. Here is an infallibility, or an hypothetical
necessity, as we say, Quicquid est quando est, necess^ est esse: A necessity of
consequence, but not a necessity of consequent. Though an Agent have certainly
determined, and so the Action be become infallible, yet if the Agent did
determine freely, the Action likewise is free.


T. H. THE fourth opinion which he r^jecteth, is of them that make the will
necessarily to follow the last dictate of the understanding but it seems he
understands; that Tenet in another sense than I do. For he speaks as if they
that held it did suppose men must dispute the sequel of every astion they do,
great and small, to the least grain, which it a thing that he thinks with
reason to be untrue. But I understand it to signify, that the will follows
the last opinion or judgment immediately proceeding the action, concerning
whether it be good to do it or not, whether he has weighed it long before or
not at all. And that I take to be the meaning of them that hold it. As for
example, when a man strikes, his will to strike follows necessarily that
thought he had of the sequel of his stroke immediately before the liftin^ of
his hand. N^w i^ it be understood in that sense, the last dictate of the
understanding does ^ertainly necessitate the action, though not as the whole
cause, yet as the last cause, as the last feather necessitates the breaking of
an horses back, when there are so many laid on before, as there needs but the
addition o^ that one to make the weight sufficient. That which he alleges
against this, is first, out of a Poet, who in the person of Medea says Video
Meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor^ But the saying (as pr^try as it is) (...)
not true; for though Medea saw many reasons to forbear killing her Children,
yet the last dictate of her judgment was, that the present revenge on her
husband outweighed them all, and thereupon the wicked action followed
necessarily. Then the story of the Roman, that of two competitors, said one had
the better reasons, but the o^ her must have the office. This also makes
against him, for the last dictate of his judgment, that had the bestowing of
the office was this, that it was better to take a great bribe, than reward a
great merit. Thirdly, he objects that things nearer the senses moove more
powerfully than reason. What follows thence but this, That the sense of the
present good is commonly more immediate to the Action, than the foresight of
the evil consequents to come? Fourthly* whereas he says, that do what a man
can, he shall sorrow more for the death of his son, than for the sin of his
soul; it makes nothing to the last dictate of the understanding, but it argues
plainly, that sorrow for sin is not voluntary. And by consequence repentance
proceeds from causes.


J. D. THE fourth pretense alleged against Liberty was, that the will does
necessarily follow the last dictate of the understanding, This objection is
largely answered before in several places of this Reply, and particularly,
Numb. 7. In my former discourse, I gave two answers to it: The one certain and
undoubted, That (a) supposing the last dictate of the understanding did always
determine the will, yet this determination being not antecedent in time, nor
proceeding from extrinsecal causes, but from the proper resolution of the
Agent, who had now freely determined himself, it makes no absolute necessity,
but only hypothetical, upon supposion that the Agent has determined his own
will, after this or that manner. Which being the main answer, T. H. is so far
from taking it away, that he takes no notice of it. The other part of mine
answer was probable; That it is not always certain, that the will does always
actually follow the last dictate of the understanding, though it always ought
to follow it. ( b) Of which I gave then three reasons, one was, that actions
may be so equally circumstantiated, or the case so intricate, that reason
cannot give a positive sentence, but leaves the election to liberty or chance.
To this he answers not a word. Another of my reasons was, because reason does
not weigh, nor is bound to weigh the convenience or inconvenience of every
individual action to the uttermost grain in the balance of true judgment. The
truth of this reason is confessed by T. H. though he might have had more
abetters in this than in the most part of his discourse, that nothing is
indifferent, that a man cannot stroke his beard on one side, but it was either
necessary to do it, or sinful to omit it, from which confession of his* it
follows, that in all those actions, wherein reason does not define what is most
convenient* there the will is free from the determination of the understanding,
and by consequence the last feather is wanting to break the horses back. A
third reason was, because passions and affections sometimes prevail against
judgment, as I prooved by the example of Medea and Caesar, by the neerness of
the objects to the senses, and by the estimation of a temporal loss more than
sin. Against this reason, his whole answer is addressed. And first, (c) he
explaineth the sense of the assertion by the comparison of the last feather,
wherewith he seems to be delighted, seeing he uses it now the second time. But
let him like it as he will, it is improper, for three reasons; First, the
determination of the judgment is no part of the weight, but is the sentence of
the trier. The understanding weighs all Things, Objects, Means,
Circumstances, Convenience, Inconvenience, but it self is not weighed.
Secondly, the sensitive passion in some extraordinary cases, may give a
counterfeit weight to the object, if it can detein or divert reason from the
balance, but ordinarily the Means, Circumstances, and Causes concurrent they
have their whole weight from the understanding. So as they do not press the
horses back at all until reason lay them on. Thirdly, he conceives that as each
feather has a certain natural weight, whereby it concurs not arbitrarily, but
necessarily toward the overcharging of the horse; So all objects and causes
have a natural efficiency whereby they do Physically determine the will, which
is a great mistake. His Objects, his Agents, his Motives, his Passions, and all
his concurrent causes* ordinarily do only moove the will morally, not
determine it naturally. So as it has in all ordinary actions a free dominion
over it self.

His other example of a man that strikes, whose will to strike follows
necessarily that thought he had of the sequel of this stroke immediately
before the lifting up of his hand) as it confounds passionate, indeliberate
thoughts, with the dictates of right reason, so it is very uncertain; for
between the cup and the lip between the lifting up of the hand and the blow,
the will may alter, and the judgment also. And lastly, it is impertinent, for
that necessity of striking proceeds from the free determination of the Agent,
and not from the special influence of any outward determining causes. And so it
is only a necessity upon supposition.

Concerning Medeas choice, the strength of the argument does not lie either in
the fact of Medea, which is but a fiction, or in the authority of the Poet, who
writes things rather to be admired than believed, but in the experience of all
men, who find it to be true in themselves, That sometimes reason does show unto
a man the exorbitancy of his passion, that what he desires is but a pleasant
good, that what he loses by such a choice is an honest good, That that which
is honest is to be preferred before that which is pleasant, yet the will
pursues that which is pleasant, and neglects that which is honest. St. Paul
says as much in earnest as is feined of Medea, That he approoved not that
which he did and that he did that which he hated, Romans 7. 15. The Roman Story
is mistaken; There was no bribe in the case but affection. Whereas I urge that
those things, which are nearer to the senses do moove more powerfully, he lays
hold on it; and without answering to that for which I produced it, infers, That
the sense of present good is more immediate to the action than the foresight of
evil consequents. Which is true, but it is not absolutely true by any
antecedent necessity. Let a man do what he may do, and what he ought to do, and
sensitive objects will lose that power which they have by his own fault, and
neglect. Antecedent or indeliberate concupiscence does sometimes (but rarely)
surprise a man, and render the action not free. But consequent and deliberated
concupiscence, which proceeds from the rational will ^oth render the action
more free, not less free, and introduces only a necessity upon supposition.

Lastly, he says, that a man's mourning more for the loss of his Child than for
his sin, makes nothing to the last dictate of the understanding. Yes, very
much. Reason dictates, that a sin committed, is a greater evil than the loss of
a Child, and ought more to be lamented for, yet we see daily how affection
prevails against the dictate of reason; That which he inferrs from hence, that
sorrow for sin is not voluntary, and by consequence that repentance proceeds
from causes, is true, as to the latter part of it, but not in his sense. The
causes from whence repentance does proceed are Gods grace preventing, and man's
will concurring. God prevents freely, man concurs freely. Those inferior
Agents, which sometimes do concur as subordinate to the grace of God, do not,
cannot, determine the will naturally. And therefore the former part of his
inference, that sorrow for sin is not voluntary, is untrue, and altogether
groundless. That is much more truly, and much more properly said to be
voluntary, which proceeds from judgment, and from the rational will, than that
which proceeds from passion, and from the sensitive will. One of the main
grounds of all T. H. his errors in this question is, that he acknowledges no
efficacy, but that which is natural. Hence is this wild consequence, Repentance
has causes, and therefore it is not voluntary. Free effects have free causes,
necessary effects necessary causes, voluntary effects have sometimes free,
sometimes necessary causes.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply. Numb. XXIII.
(a) [SUpposing the last dictate of the understanding did always determine the
Will, yet this determination, being not antecedent in time, nor proceeding from
extrinsecall causes, but from the proper resolution of the Agent, who had now
freely determined himself, makes no absolute necessity, but only Hypothetical,
etc.] This is the Bishops answer to the necessity inferred from that, that the
Will necessarily follows the last dictate of the understanding; which answer
he thinks is not sufficiently taken away, because the last act of the
understanding is in time together with the Will it self, and therefore not
antecedent. It is true, that the Will is not produced, but in the same Instant
with the last dictate of the understanding; but the necessity of the Will, and
the necessity of the last dictate of the understanding may have been
antecedent. For that last dictate of the understanding was produced by causes
antecedent, and was then necessary though not yet produced; as when a stone is
falling, the necessity of touching the earth is antecedent to the touch it
self. For all motion through any determined space, necessarily makes a motion
through the next space, unless it be hindered by some contrary external
motion, and then the stop is as necessary, as the proceeding would have been.
The Argument therefore from the last dictate of the understanding sufficiently
infers an antecedent necessity, as great as the necessity that a stone shall
fall when it is already falling. As for his other answer, that the Will does not
certainly follow the last dictate of the understandig though it always ought
to follow it, he himself says it is but probable; but any man that speaks not
by rote, but thinks of what he says, will presently find it false; and that it
is impossible to will any thing that appears not first in his understanding to
be good for him. And whereas he says, the Will ought to follow the last dictate
of the understanding, unless he mean that the man ought to follow it, it is an
insignificant speech (for duties are the man's not the Wills duties) and if he
means so, then it is false; for a man ought not to follow the dictate of the
understanding when it is erroneous.

(b) [Of which I gave then three reasons, one was, that actions may be so
equally circumstantiated, that reason cannot give a positive sentence, but
leaves the election to liberty or chance. To this he answers not a word.] There
was no need of answer, for he has very often in this discourse contradicted it
himself, in that he makes Reason to be the true root of liberty, and men to
have more or less liberty as they have more or less Reason. How then can a
man leave that to liberty when his Reason can give no sentence? And for his
leaving it to chance, if by chance he mean that which has no causes, he
destroys Providence, and if he mean that which has causes, but unknown to
us, he leaves it to necessity. Besides, it is false that actions may be so
equally circumstantiated, that Reason cannot give a positive sentence. For
though in the things to be elected there may be an exact equality, yet there
may be circumstances in him that is to elect, to make him resolve upon that of
the two which he considers for the present, and to break of all further
deliberation for this cause, that he must not (to use his own instance) by
spending time in vain apply neither of the plasters, which the Surgeon
gives him, to his wound. Another of his reasons was, because Reason does not
weigh every individual action to the uttermost grain. True; But does it
therefore follow, a man gives no sentence? The Will therefore may follow the
dictate of the judgment, whether the man weigh, or not weigh all that might be
weighed. His third reason was, because Passions and Affections sometime prevail
against Judgment. I consesse they prevail often against Wisdom, which is it he
means here by Judgment. But they prevail not against the dictate of the
understanding, which he knows is the meaning of Judgment in this place. And the
Will of a passionate and peevish fool, does no less follow the dictate of that
little understanding he has, then the Will of the wisest man follows his
wisdom.

(c) [He explaineth the sense of the assertion by the comparison of the last
feather, wherewith he seems to be delighted, seeing he uses it now the second
time. But let him like it as he Will, it is improper, for three Reasons.] To me
this comparison seems very proper, and therefore I made no scruple, (though
not much delighted with it, as being no new comparison) to use it again when
there was need again. For in the examination of truth I search rather for
perspicuity, then elegance. But the Bishop with his School terms is far from
perspicuity. How near he is to elegence, I shall not forget to examine in due
time. But why is this comparison improper? First, because the determination of
the Judgment is no part of the weight, for the understanding weighs all
things, Objects, Means, Circumstances, Convenience, Inconvenience, but it self
is not weighed. In this comparison, the Objects, Means, etc. are the weights,
the man is the scale, the understanding of a Convenience, or Inconvenience, is
the pressure of those weights, which incline him, now one way, now another, and
that inclination is the Will. Again the Objects, Means, etc. are the feathers
that press the Horse, the feeling of that pressure is understanding, and his
patience or impatience, the Will to bear them, if not too many, or if too many
to lie down under them. It Is therefore to little purpose that he says the
understanding is not weighed. Secondly, he says the comparison is improper,
because ordinarily the Means Circumstances, and Causes concurrent, have their
whole weight from the understanding, so as they do not press the Horses back
at all, until Reason lay them on. This and that which follows, that my
Objects, Agents, Motives Passions, and all my concurrent Causes, ordinarily do
only move the Will morally, not determine it naturally, so as it has in all
ordinary actions a Free dominion over it self, is all non sense; for no man can
understand that the understanding makes any alteration in the Object in Weight
or lightness; nor that Reason lays on Objects upon the understanding; nor that
the Will is moved, nor, that any motion is moral; nor that these Words the Will
has a Free dominion over it self, signify any thing. With the rest of this
Reply I shall trust the Reader, and only note the last Words, where he makes
me say, Repentance has causes and therefore it is not voluntary; but I said,
repentance has causes, and that it is not voluntary; he chops in, and
therefore and makes an absurd consequence, which he would have the Reader
believe was mine, and then c^n^utes it with these senseless words* Free
effects have Free causes necessary effects necessary causes, Voluntary effects
have sometimes Free, sometimes necessary causes. Can any man but a Schoolman
think the Will is voluntary? But yet the Will is the cause of voluntary actions.

J. D. Fifthly, and lastly, the Divine labors to find out a way how Number. 24.
liberty may consist with the prescience and decrees of God. But of this I had
not very long since occasion to write a full discourse, in answer to a Treatise
against the prescience of things contingent. I shall for the present only
repeat these two things. First, we ought not to desert a certain truth, because
we are not able to comprehend the certain manner. God should be but a poor God,
if we were able perfectly to comprehend all his Actions and Attributes.

Secondly, in my poor judgment, which I ever do and ever shall submit to
better, the readiest way to reconcile Contingence and Liberty, with the decrees
and prescience of God, and most remote from the altercations of these times, is
to subject future contingents to the aspect of God, according to that
presentiality which they have in eternity. Not that things future, which are
not yet existent are co-existent with God, but because the infinite knowledge
of God, incircling all times in the point of eternity, does attain to their
future Being, from whence proceeds their objective and intelligible Being. The
main impediment which keeps men from subscribing to this way is, because they
conceive eternity to be an everlasting succession, and not one indivisible
point. But if they consider, that whatsoever is in God is God; That there are
no accidents in him, for that which is infinitely perfect cannot be further
perfected; That as God is not wise but Wisdom it self, not just but Justice it
self, so he is not eternal but Eternity it self; They must needs conclude that
therefore this eternity is indivisible, because God is indivisible, and
therefore not successive, but altogether an infinite point, comprehending all
times within it self.


T. H. THE last part of this discourse contains his opinion about reconciling
Liberty with the Prescience, and Decrees of God, otherwise than some Divines
have done, against whom he had formerly written a Treatise, out of which he
only repeateth two things. One is, that we ought not to desert a certain truth,
for not being able to comprehend the certain manner of it. And I say the same,
as for example, that he ought not to desert this certain truth; That there are
certain and necessar^ causes, w^i^h make ev^ry man to will what he will^th,
though he do not yet conceive in what manner the will of man is caus^d. And yet
I think the manner of it is not very hard to conceive, seeing that we see
daily, that praise, dispraise, reward, punishment, good and evil sequels of
m^ns actions ^^tained in memory ^o frame and make us to the election of
whatsoever it be that we el^ct. And ^^a^ the memory of such things proceeds
from the senses, and sense from the operation of the objects of sense, which
are external to us, and governed only by God Almighty. And by consequence, all
actions, even of free and voluntary Agents ^re necessary.

The other thing he repeateth is, that the best way to reconcile Contingency
and Liberty with the prescience and Decrees of God, is to subject future
contingents to the aspect of God. The same is also my opinion, but cont^ary to
what he has all this while labored to prove. For, ^itherto he held liberty
and necessity, that is to say, libert^ and the decrees of God irreconcilable,
unless the aspect of God which word appears now the first time in this
discourse) signify somewhat else besides Gods will and decree, which I cannot
understand. Bu^ he adds, that we must subject them according to that
presentiality which they have in eternity, which he says cannot be done by them
that conceive eternity to be an everlasting succession, but only by them that
conceive it an indivisible poi^t. To this I answer, that as soon as I can
conceive Eternity to be an indivisible point, or any thing, but an everl^sting
succession, I will renounce all I have written in this subject. I know St.
Thomas Aquinas calls eternity Nunc stans, an ever abid^ng now which is easy
enough to say, but though I fain would, I never could conceive it. They that
can, are more hap^y than I. But in the mean time he allows hereby all men to
be of my opinion, save only those that conceive in their minds a nunc stans,
which I think are none* I und^rstand as little how it can be true that God is
not just, but Justice it self, not wise but Wisdom it self, not eternal but
Eternity it self. Nor how he concludes thence, that Eternity is a point
indivisible, and not a succession. Nor in what sense it can be said, that an
infinite point, etc. wherein is no succession, can comprehend all times, though
time be su^cessive.

These phrases I find not in the Scripture. I wonder therefore, what was the
d^sign of the Schoolmen, to bring them up, unless they th^ught a man could not
be a true Christian, unless his understanstanding be first strangled with such
hard sayings.

And thus much in answer to his discourse, wherein I think not only his
squadrons, but also his reserves of distinctions are defeated. And now your
Lordship shall have my doctrine concerning the some question, with my reasons
for i^, positively and briefly as I can, without any terms of Art in plain
English.


J. D. (a) THat poor discourse which I mention, was not written against any
Divines, but in way of examination of a French Treatise, which your Lordships
Brother did me the honor to show me at York; (b) My assertion is must true,
that we ought not to desert a certain truth, because we are not able to
comprehend the certain manner. Such a truth is that which I maintain, that the
will of man in ordinary actions is free from extrinsecal determination. A truth
demonstrable in reason, received and believed by all the world. And therefore
though I be not able to comprehend or express exactly the certain manner how it
consists together with Gods Eternal Prescience, and Decrees, which exceed my
weak capacity, yet I ought to adhere to that truth, which is manifest. But T.
H. his opinion of the absolute necessity of all events, by reason of their
antecedent determination in their extrinsecal and necessary causes, is no such
certain Truth, but an innovation, a strange paradox, without probable grounds,
rejected by all Authors, yea, by all the world. Neither, is the manner how the
second causes do operate so oscure, or so transcendent above the reach of
reason, as the Eternal Decrees of God are. And therefore in both these respects
he cannot challenge ^^e same privilege. I am in possession of an old truth
derived by inheritance or succession from mine ancestors. And therefore, though
I were not able to clear every quirk in Law, yet I might justly hold my
possession until a better title were showed for another. He is no old
Possessor, but a new Pretender, and is bound to make good his claim by evident
proofs, not by weak and inconsequent suppositions, or inducements, such as
those are which he uses here, of praises, dispraises, rewards, punishments,
the memory of good and evil sequels, and events, which may incline the will,
but neither can nor do necessitate the will. Nor by uncertain and accidental
inferences such as this, The memory of praises, dispraises, rewards,
punishments, good and evil sequels do make us (he should say dispose us) to
elect what we elect; but the memory of these things is from the sense, and the
sense from the o^^ration of the external ob^ects, and the Agency of external
obj^cts (...) from God therefore all actions, even of free and vol^nt^ry
Agents, are nec^ss^ry. ( c) To pass by all the other great imperfections, which
are to be sound in this Sorite. It is just like that old Sophistical piece: He
that drinks well sleeps well, ^e that sleeps well thinks no hurt, he that
thinks no hurt lives (...), therefore he that drinks well lives well.

(d) In the very last passage of my discourse, I proposed mine own private
opinion, how it might be made appear, that the Eternal Prescience and Decrees
of God are consistent with true liberty and contingency. And this I set down,
in as plain terms as I could, or as so profound a speculation would permit,
which is almost wholly misunderstood by T. H. and many of my words wrested to a
wrong sense. As first, where I speak of the aspect of God, that is his view,
his knowledge, by which the most free and contingent actions were manifest to
him from eternity, Heb. 4. 11. All things are naked and open to his eyes, and
this not discursively, but intuitively, not by external species, but by his
internal Essence; He confounds this with the Will, and the Decrees of God:
Though he found not the word Aspect before in this discourse, he might have
found prescience. ( e) Secondly, he charge me that hither to I have
maintained, that Liberty and the Decrees of God, are irrecilable. If I have
said any such thing, my heart never went along with my pen. No, but his reason
why he charge me on this manner, is because I have maintained, that Liberty
and the absolute necessity of all things are irreconciliable. That is true
indeed. What then? W^y (says he) Necessity and Gods Decrees are all one. How
all one? that were strange indeed. Necessity may be a consequent of Gods
Decrees, it cannot be the Decree it self. ( f) But to cut his argument short.
God has decreed all effects which come to pass in time, yet not all after the
same manner, but according to the distinct natures, capacities and conditions
of his creatures, which he does not destroy by his Decree; Some he acts, with
some he cooperateth by special influence, and some he only permits Yet this
is no idle or bare permission, seeing he does concur both by way of general
influence, giving power to act, and also by disposing all events necessary,
free, and contingent to his own glory. ( g) Thirdly, he charge me, that I
allow all men to be of his opinion, save only those that conceive in their
minds a Nunc stans, or how eternity is an indivisible point, rather than an
everlasting succession. But I have given no such allowance. I know, there are
many other ways proposed by Divines, for reconciling the Eternal Prescience,
and Decrees of God, with the Liberty and Contingency of second causes, some of
which may please other judgments better than this of mine. Howsoever, though a
man could comprehend none of all these ways, yet remember what I said, that a
certain truth ought not to be rejected, because we are not able, in respect of
our weakness, to understand the certain manner, or reason of it. I know, the
Lodestone has an attractive power to draw the Iron to it; And yet I know not
how it comes to have such a power.

But the chiefest difficulty which offers it self in this Section is, whether
Eternity be an indivisible point (as I maintain it) or an everlasting
succession, as he would have it. According to his constant use, he gives no
answer to what was urged by me, but pleads against it from his own incapacity.
I never could conc^ive, says he, how eternity should be an indivisible point.
I believe, that neither we nor any man else can comprehend it so clearly, as we
do these inferior things. The nearer that any thing comes to the essence of
God, the more remote it is from our apprehension. But shall we therefore make
potentia^ities, and successive duration, and former and later, or a part
without a part (as they say) to be in God? Because we are not able to
understand clearly the Divine perfection, we must not therefore attribute any
imperfection to him.

( h) He says moreover, that he understands as little how it can be true which
I say, that God is not just but Justice it self, not eternal but Eternity it
self. It seems howsoever he be versed in this question, that he has not
troubled his head overmuch with reading School-Divines, or Metaphysicians, if
he make faculties or qualities to be in God, really distinct from his essence.
God is a most simple or pure act, which can admit no composition of substance
and accidents. Does he think that the most perfect Essence of God cannot act
sufficiently without faculties and qualities? The infinite perfection of the
Divine essence, excludes all passive or receptive powers, and cannot be
perfected more than it is by any accidents. The attributes of God, are not
diverse virtues, or qualities in him, as they are in the creatures, but really
one and the same with the Divine Essence, and among themselves. They are
attributed to God to supply the defect of our capacity, who are not able to
understand that which is to be known of God, under one name, or one act of the
understanding.

Furthermore he says, that he understands not how I conclude from hence, that
Eternity is an indivisible point, and not a succession. ( i) I will help him.
The Divine Substance is indivisible; But Eternity is the Divine Substance. The
Major is evident, because God is actus simplicissimus, a most simple act,
wherein there is no manner of composition, neither of matter and form, nor of
subject and accidents, nor of parts, etc. and by consequence no divisibility.
The minor has been clearly demonstrated in mine answer to his last doubt, and
is confessed by all men, that whatsoever is in God, is God.

Lastly he says. He conceives not how it can be said, that an infinite point,
wherein is no succession, can comprehend all time which is successive. I
answer, that it does not comprehend it formally as time is successive, but
eminently and virtually, as Eternity is infinite. To day all Eternity is
coexistent with this day. To morrow all Eternity will be coexistent with to
morrow, and so in like manner with all the parts of time, being it self without
parts. He says, He finds not these phrases in the Scripture. No, but he may
find the thing in the Scripture, that God is infinite in all his attributes,
and not capable of any imperfection.

And so to show his antipathy against the Schoolmen, that he has no liberty
or power to contain himself, when he meets with any of their phrases or tenets,
he falls into another paroxisme or fit of inveighing against them; And so
concludes his answer with a plaudite to himself, because he had defeated both
my squadrons of arguments, and reserves of distinctions,

Dicite Io Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean. But because his eyesight was weak,
and theit backs were toward him, he quite mistook the matter. Those whom he
saw routed and running away were his own scattered forces.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Reply, Numb. XXIV.
( a) [THat poor discourse which I mention, was not written against any
Divines, but in way of examination of a French Treatise, etc. This is in Reply
to those words of mine, this discourse contains his opinion about reconciling
Liberty with the Prescience, and Decrees of God, otherwise then some Divines
have done, against whom he had formerly written a Treatise.] If the French
Treatise were according to his mind, what need was there that the examination
should be written? If it were not to his mind, it was in confutation of him,
that is to say, written against the Author of it, unless perhaps the Bishop
thinks that he writes not against a man, unless he charge him with blasphemy
and Atheism, as he does me.

( b) [My assertion is most true that we ought not to desert a certain truth,
because we are not able to comprehend the certain manner.] To this I answered
that it was true, and, as he alleged it for a reason why he should not be of
my opinion, so I alleged it for a reason why I should not be of his, but now
in his Reply, he says that his opinion is a truth demonstrable in reason,
received and believed by all the World. And therefore though he be not able to
comprehend or express exactly the certain manner, how this Liberty of Will
consists with Gods eternal Prescience, and Decrees, yet he ought to adhere to
that truth, which is manifest. But why should he adhere to it, unless it be
manifest to himself? And if it be manifest to himself, why does he deny that he
is able to comprehend it? And if he be not able to comprehend it, how knows he
that it is domonstrable? Or why says he that so confidently, which he does not
know? Me thinks that which I have said, ( namely, that that which God foreknows
shall be hereafter, cannot but be hereafter, and at the same time that he
foreknew it should be. But that which cannot but be, is necessary. Therefore
what God foreknows shall be necessarily, and at the time foreknown.) This I say
looks somewhat liker to a demonstration than any thing that he has hitherto
brought to prove Free Will. Another reason, why I should be of his opinion, is
that he is in possession of an old truth derived to him by inheritance or
succession from his Ancestors. To which I answer, first, that I am in
possession of a truth derived to me from the light of reason. Secondly, that
whereas he knows not, whether it be the truth that he possesses or not,
because he confesses he knows not how it can consist with Gods Prescience and
Decrees, I have sufficiently shown that my opinion of necessity not only
agrees with, but necessirily follows from the eternal Prescience and Decrees
of God. Besides it is an unhansome thing for a man to derive his opinion
concerning truth by succession from his Ancestors; For our Ancestors, the first
Christians derived not therefore their truth from the Gentiles because they were
their Ancestors.

( c) [To pass by all the other great imperfections, which are to be found in
this Sorite, it is just like that old Sophistical piece: he that drinks well
sleeps well; he that sleeps well thinks no hurt; he that thinks no hurt lives
well; therefore he that drinks well, lives well. My argument was thus, Election
is always from the Memory of good and evil sequels; Memory is always from the
Sense; and Sense always from the Action of external bodies; and all Action from
God; therefore all Actions even of Free and Voluntary Agents are from God, and
consequently necessary. Let the Bishop compare now his scurrilous Argumentation
with this of mine, and tell me, whether he that sleeps well, does all his life
time think no hurt.

( d) [In the very last passage of my discourse, I proposed my own private
opinion, how it might be made appear, that the eternal Prescience and Decrees
of God are consistent with true liberty and contingency, etc.] If he had meant
by Liberty, as other men do the Liberty of Action, that is, of things which are
in his power, to do which he will, it had been an easy matter to reconcile it
with the Prescience and Decrees of God; But meaning the Liberty of Will, it was
impossible. So likewise if by contingency he had meant simply coming to pass,
it had been reconcilable with the Decrees of God; but meaning coming to pass
without necessity, it was impossible. And therefore, though it be true he says,
that he set it down in as plain terms as he could, yet it was impossible to set
it down in plain terms. Nor ^ought he to charge me with misunderstanding him,
and wresting his words to a wrong sense. For the truth is, I did not understand
them at all, nor thought he understood them himself; but was willing to give
them the best imterpretation they would bear; which he calls wresting them to a
wrong sense. And first, I understood not what he meant by the Aspect of God.
For if he had meant his foreknowledge, (which word he had often used before)
what needed he in this one place only to call it Aspect? Or what need he here
call it his View? Or say that all things are open to the eyes of God, not
discursively, but intuitively, which is to expound Eyes in that Text, Hebr. 4.
11. not figuratively but littera^ly, neverth^l^sse excluding external Species,
which the Schoolmen say are the cause of seeing. But it wat well done to
exclude such insignificant speeches, upon every occasion whatsoever. And though
I do not hold the foreknowledge of God to consist in Discourse, yet I shall be
never driven to say it is by Intuition, as long as I know that even a man has
foreknowledge of all those things which he intends himself to do, not by
discourse but by knowing his own purpose, saving that man has a superior
power over him that can change his purpose, which God has not. And whereas he
says, I confound this Aspect with the Will and Decrees of God^, ^he (...)
wrongifully. For how could I so confound it, when I understood not what it
meant?

( e) [Secondly, he charge me* that hitherto I have maintained, that Liberty
and the Decrees of God are ^rreconcileable; and the reason why I do so is
because he maintained* that Liberty, and the absolute necessity of all things,
are ^rreconcileable.] If Liberty cannot stand with necessity, it cannot stand
with the Decrees of God; of which Decrees, necessity is a Consequent; I needed
not to say, nor did say, that Necessity and Gods Decrees are all one, though if
I had said it, it had not been without Authority of learned men, in whose
writings are often found this sentence, Voluntas Dei, Necessitas rerum.

( f) [But to cut his Argument short. God has Decreed all effects which come
to pass in time, yet not all after the same manner, but according to the
distinct natures, capacities and conditions of his creatures, which he does not
destroy by his Decree; Some he acts. Hitherto true; then he adds, with some
he cooperateth by special influence, and some he only permits. Yet this is
no idle or bare permission.] This is false. For nothing operateth by its own
original power, but God himself: Man operateth not but by special power, (I say
special power not special influence) derived from God. Nor is it by Gods
permission only as I have often already shown, and as the Bishop here
contradicting his former words confesses; for to permit only, and barely to
permit, signify the same thing; And that which he says that God concurs by way
of general influence, is Jargon. For every concurrence is one singular and
individual concurrence; and nothing in the World is general; but the
signification of words and other signs.

( g) [Thirdly, he charge me, that I allow all men to be of his opinion* save
only those that conceive in their minds a Nunc stans* or how eternity is an
indivisible point, rather then an everlasting succession. But I have given no
such allowance.] Surely if the reason, wherefore my opinion is false, proceed
from this, that I conceive not eternity to be Nunc stans, but an everlasting
succession, I am allowed to hold my opinion till I can conceive eternity
otherwise; at least he allows men not till then to be of his opinion; for the
has said, that the main impediment which keeps men from subscribing to that
way of his, is because they conceive eternity, to be an everlasting succession,
and not one indivisible point. As for the many other ways which he says are
proposed by Divines for reconciling the eternal Prescience and Decrees of God
with the Liberty and Contingency of second causes* if they mean such Liberty
and Contingency as the Bishop means, they are proposed in vain; for Truth and
Error can never be r^conciled. But however, ( says he) though a man could
comprehend none of all these ways, yet we must remember, that a certain Truth
ought not to be rejected, because we are not able to understand the reason of
it. For he knows ( ^e says* the lodestone has an attractive power to draw the
Iron to it, and yet he knows not how it comes to have such a power. I know
the lodestone has no such attractive power; and yet I know that the Iron
comes to it, or it to the Iron; and therefore wonder not that the Bishop
knows not how it comes to have that power. In the next place he says I
bring nothing to prove that Eternity is not an indivisible point, but my own
incapacity that I cannot conceive it. The truth is, I cannot dispute neither
for, nor against (as he can do) the positions I understand not. Nor do I
understand what der^gation it can be to the Divine perfection, to attribute to
it Potentiality, that is (in English) Power, and successive Duration; for such
Attributes are often given to it in the Scripture.

( h) [He says moreover, that he understands as little how it can be true
which I say, that God is not Just, but Justice it self, nor Eternal, but
Eternity it self It seems howsoever he be versed in this question, that he has
not troubled his head over much wi^h reading School-Divines, or
Metaphysicians.] They are unseemly word to be said of God, (I will not say)
blasp^emous and ath^istic^l* which are the attributes he gives to my opinions
because I do not think them spoken out of an evil mind, but out of Error, they
are I say unseemly words to be said of God, that he is not just, that he is not
Eternal, and (as he also said) that he is not Wise, and cannot be excused by
any following But, especially when the But is followed by that which is not to
be understood. Can any man understand ^ow Justice is just, or Wisdom Wise? and
whereas Justice is an Accident, one of the Moral virtues, and Wisdom another,
how God is an Accident or Moral virtue? It Is more then the Schoolmen or
Metaphysicians can understand; whose writings have troubled my head more then
they should have done, if I had known that amongst so many senseless disput^s,
there had been so f^w lucide internall^. But I have considered since, where men
will undertake to reason out of natural Philosophy, of the Incomprehensible
Nature of God, that it is impossible they should sp^ak intelligibly, or in
other Language then Metaphysique; wherein they may contradict themselves* and
not perceave it; as he does here, when he says, the Attributes of God are not
diver^e Virtues or Qualities in him, as they are in the Creatures, but really
one and the same with the Divine Essence, and amongst themselves, and
attributed to God to supply the defect of our capacity. Attributes are na^^s
and therefore it is a contradiction, ^o say they are really one and the same
with the Divine Essence. But if he mean ^h^ Ve^tues signified by the
Attributes, as Justice, Wisdom, Eternity, Divinity, etc. So also they are
Virtues, and not n^ Virtue, (which is still a contradiction,) and we give those
Attributes to God, not to show that we apprehend how they are in him, but to
signify how we think it best to honor him.

( i) [ In the next place he will help me to understand (he says) how Eternity
is an indivisible point. The Divine substance is indivisible; But Eternity is
the Divine substance. The Major is evident* because God is actus
simplicissimus; The Minor has been clearly demonstrated in my answer to his
last doubt; and is confessed by all men, that whatsoever is attributed to God
is God.] The Major is so far from being evident, that actus simplicissimus
signi^^eth nothing. The Minor, is said by some men, thought by no man; for
whatsoever is thought, is understood; And all that he has else where and here
dilated upon it, is as perfect nonsense, as any man ever writ on purpose to
make merry with. And so is that whereby he answers to my objection* that a
point cannot comprehend all time, which is successive; Namely, his distinction.
That a point does not comprehend, all Time forma^^y* as Time is successive; but
eminently and Virtually, as Eternity is infinite. And this, To day all Eternity
is coexistent with this day, and to morrow all Eternity will be coexistent with
to morrow. It is well that his Eternity is now come from a Nunc stans to be a
Nunc fluens* flowing from this day to the next, and so on. This kind of
Language is never found in the Scripture; No, but the thing (says he) is found
there; Namely, that God is infinite in all his Attributes. I would he could
show me the place where God is said to be infinite in all his Attributes. There
be places enough to show that God is infinite in Power* in Wisdom, Mercy, etc.
but neither is he said to be infinite in Names, (which is the English of
Attributes) nor that he is an indivisible Point, nor that a Point does
comprehend Time eminently, and Vertually; Nor that to day all Eternity, is
coexistent which to day, etc. And thus much in answer to his Reply upon my
answer. That which remains, is my Reply upon his answer to my positive
Doctrine on this subject.

T. H. My* opinion about Liberty and Necessity.

FIrst, I conceive that when it comes into a man's mind, to do or Number. 25.
not to do some certain action, if he have* no time to deliberat* the doing or
abstaining necessarily follows the present thought he had of the good or evil
consequence thereof to himself. As for example, in sudden anger the action
shall follow the though^ of revenge, in sudden fear the thought of escape.
Also when a man has time to deliberate, but deliberates not, because never any
thing appeared that could make him doubt of the consequence, the action
follows his opinion of the goodness or harm of it. These actions I call
voluntary. He, if I understand him aright, call^ them Spontaneous, I call them
voluntary, because those actions that follow immediately the last appetite are
voluntary. And here where there is one only appetite, that one is the last.

Besides, I see it is reasonable to punish a rash action; which could not be
justly done by man, unless the same were voluntary: For no action of a man can
be said to be without deliberation, though never so sudden, because it is
supposed he had time to deliberate all the precedent time of his life, whether
he should do that kind of action or not. And hence it is, that he that kills
in a sudden passion of anger, shall nevertheless be justly pu^ to death,
because all t^^ time wherein he was able to consider, whether to kill were good
or evil, shall be held for one continual deliberation, and consequently* the
killing shall be judged to proceed from election.


J. D. THis part of T. H. his discourse hangs together like a sickmans dreams.
( a) Even now he tells us, that a man may* have time to deliberate, yet not
deliberate; By and by he says, that no action of a man, though never so
sudden, can be said to be* without deliberation. He tells us Numb. 33. that
the scope of this section is to show what is spontaneous: Howbeit he shows
only what is voluntary; ( b) So making voluntary and spontaneous to be all
one, whereas before he had told us, that every spontaneous action is not
voluntary, because indeliberate. Nor every voluntary action spontaneous, if it
proceed from fear* ( c) Now he tells us, that those actions, which follow the
last appetite, are voluntary, and where there is one only appetite, that is
the last. But before he told us, that voluntary presuppaseth some precedent
deliberation and Meditation of what is likely to follow, both upon the doing
and abstaining from the action* ( d) He defines Liberty, Numb. 29. to be the
absence of all extrinsecal impediments to action. And yet in his whole
discourse he labors to make good, that whatsoever is not done, is therefore
not done, because the Agent was necessitated by extrinsecal causes not to do
it. Are not extrinsecal causes, which determine him not to do it, extrinsecal
impediments to action? So no man shall be free to do any thing, but that which
he does actually. He defines a free Agent to be him, who has not made an end
of deliberating, Numb. 28. And yet defines liberty to be an absence of outward
impediments. There may be outward impediments, even whilst he is deliberating.
As a man deliberates whether he shall play at Tennis, and at the same time the
door of the Tennis-court is fast locked against him. And after a man has
ceased to deliberate, there may be no outward impediments, as when a man
resolves not to play at Tennis, because he finds himself ill disposed, or
because he will not hazard his money. So the same person, at the same time,
should be free and not free, not free and free. And as he is not firm to his
own grounds, so he confounds al things, the mind and the will, the estimative
faculty and the understanding imagination with deliberation, the end with the
means, humane ^il with the sensitive appetite, rational hope or fear, with
irrational possions inclinations with intentions, A beginning of Being with a
beginning of working, Sufficiency with efficiency. So as the greatest
difficulty is to find out what he aims at. So as I had once resolved not to
answer this part of his discourse, yet upon better advise, I will take ^ brief
survey of it also; and show how far I assent unto, or dissent from that which I
conceive to be his meaning.

And first, concerning sudden passions, as Anger or the like; ( e) That which
he says, that the action does necessarily follow the thought, is thus far true
that those actions, which are altogether undeliberated and do proceed from
sudden and violent passions, or motus primo primi, which surprise a man, and
give him no time to advise with reason, are not properly and actually in
themselves free, but rather necessary actions, as when a man runs away from a
Cat or a Custard, out of a secret antipathy.

( f) Secondly, as for those actions wherein actual deliberati^n seems not
necessary, because never any thing appeared that could make a man doubt of the
consequence. I do confess, that actions done by virtue of a precedent
deliberation, without any actual deliberation in the present, when the act is
done, may notwithstanding be truly, both voluntary and free acts, yea, in some
cases, and in some sense more free, than if they were actually deliberated of
in present. As one who has acquired by ^ormer deliberation and experience, an
habit to play upon the Virginals, needs not deliberate what man, or what Jack
he must touch, nor what finger of his hand he must move to play such a lesson;
Yea, if his mind should be fixed, or intent to every motion of his hand, or
every touch of a string, it would hinder his play, and render the action more
troublesome to him. Wherefore I believe, that not only his playing in general,
but every motion of his hand, though it be not presently deliberated of, is a
free act, by reason of his precedent deliberation. So then (saving
improprieties of speech, as calling that voluntary which is free, and limiting
the will to the last appetite, and other mistakes, as that no act can be said
to be without deliberation) we agree also for the greater part in this second
observation.

( g) Thirdly, whereas he says, that some sudden acts proceeding from violent
passions, which surprise a man, are justly punished, I grant they are so
sometimes, but not for his reason, because they have been formerly actually
deliberated of, but because they were virtually deliberated of, or because it
is our faults, that they were not actually deliberated of, whether it was a
fault of pure negation that is, of not doing our duty only, or a fault of bad
disposition also, by reason of some vicious habit, which we had contracted by
our former actions. To do a necessary act is never a fault, nor justly
punishable, when the necessity is inevitably imposed upon us by extrinsecal
causes. As if a Child before he had the use of reason shall kill a man in his
passion, yet because he wanted malice to incite him to it, and reason to
restrain him from it, he shall not dye for it in the strict rules of particular
Justice, unless there be some mixture of public Justice in the case.

( h) But if the necessity be contracted by our selves, and by our own faults,
it is justly punishable. As he who by his wanton thoughts in the daytime, does
procure his own nocturnal pollution. A man cannot deliberate in his sleep, yet
it is accounted a sinful act, and consequently, a free act, that is not
actually free in its self, but virtually free in its causes, and though it be
not expressly willed and chosen, yet it is tacitly and implicitly willed and
chosen, when that is willed and chosen from whence it was necessarily produced.
By the Levitical Law, if a man dug a pit, and left it uncovered, so that his
neighbors Ox, or his Ass, did fall into it, he was bound to make reparation,
not because he did chose to leave it uncovered on purpose that such a mischance
might happen, but because he did freely omit, that which he ought to have done,
from whence this damage proceeded to his neighbor. Lastly, there is great
difference between the first motions, which sometimes are not in our power, and
subsequent acts of killing or stealing, or the li^^, which always are in our
power, if we have the use of r^^so^, or else it is our own fault, that they are
not in our power. Yet to such hasty acts done in hot blood, the Law is not so
severe, as to those which are done upon long deliberation, and prepensed
malice, unless (as I said) there be some mixture of public Justice in it. He
that steals an Horse deliberately may be more punishable by the Law, than he
that kills the owner by Chance-medley. Yet the death of the owner was more
no^ious (to use his phrase) and more dammageable to the family, than the
stealth of the Horse. So far was T. H. mistaken in that also, that the right to
kill men, does proceed merely from their being noxious, Numb. 14.


Animadversions upon the Bishops Answer to my opinion about Liberty and
Necessity. Numb. XXV.
(a) [EVen now he tells us, that a man may have time to deliberate, yet not
deliberate. By and by he says, that no action of a man, though never so
sudden, can be said to be without deliberation.] He thinks he has here oatcht
me in a contradiction. But he is mistaken; and the cause is, that he observed
not that there may be a difference between deliberation, and that which shall
be constr^ed for deliberation by a Judge. For a man may do ^ rush ast suddenly
without deliberation; yet because he ought to have deliberated, and had time
enough to deliberate whether the action were Lawful or not, it shall not be
said by the Judge that it was without deliberation, who supposes that after
the Law known, all the time following was time of deliberation. It is therefore
^o contradiction to say a man deliberates not, and that he shall be said to
deliberate, by him that is the Judge of vol^ntary actions.

(b) [ Again, where he says, he makes Voluntary and Spontaneous to be alone,
where as before he had told us that every Spontaneous Action is not Voluntary,
because indeliberate, Nor every Voluntary Action Spontaneous, if it proceed
from fear.] He thinks he has espied another contradiction. It is no wonder if
speaking of Spontaneous which signifies nothing else in Latin (for English it
is not) but that which is done deliberately or indeliberately without
compulsion, I seem to the Bish^p who has never given any definition of that
word, not to use it as he would have me. And it is easy for him to give it any
signification he please as the occasion shall serve, to charge me with
contradiction. In what sense I have used that word once, in the same I have
used it always, calling that Spontaneous which is without co-action* or
compulsion by tenrour.

(c) [Now he tells us, that those actions which follow the last Appetite are
Voluntary, and where there is on^ only Appetite that is the last. But before he
told ^s, that Voluntary presupposes some precedent deliberation and meditation
of what is likely to follow, both upon the doing, and abstaining from the
Action.] This is a third contradiction he supposes he has found; but is again
mistaken. For when men are to judge of actions, whether they be Voluntary or
not, they cannot call that action Voluntary, which followed not the last
Appetite. But the same men, though there were no deliberation shall judge there
was, because it ought to have been, and that from the time that the Law was
known to the time of the action it self. And therefore both are true, that
Voluntary may be without, and yet presupposed in the Law, not to be without
deliberation.

(d) [He defines Liberty, Numb. 29. to be the absence of all extrinsical
impediments to action. And yet in his whole discourse, he labors to make
good, that whatsoever is not done, is therefore not done, because the Agent was
necessitated by extrinsecal causes, not to do it. Are not extrinsecal causes
which determine him not to do it, extrinsecal impediments to Action?] This
definition of Liberty, that it is the absence of all extrinsecal impediments to
action, he thinks he has sufficiently confuted by asking whether the
extrinsecal causes which determine a man not to do an action, be not
extrinsecal impediments to action. It seems by his question he makes no doubt
but they are; but is deceived by a too shallow consideration, of what the word
Impediment signi^eth. For Impediment or hinderance signifies an opposition to
endeavor. And therefore if a man be necessitated by extrinsecal causes not to
endeavor an action, those causes do ^ot oppose his endeavor to do it, because
he has no such endeavor to be opposed; and consequently extrinsecal causes
that take away endeavor, are not to be called impediments; nor can any man be
said to be hundred from doing that which he had no purpose at all to do. So
that this objection of his proceeds only from this, that he understands
not sufficiently, the English Tongue. From the same proceeds also, that he
thinks it a contradiction, to call a Free Agent him that has not yet made an
end of deliberating, and to call liberty an absence of outward impediments. For
( says he) there may be outward impediments, even while he is deliberating.
Wherein he is deceived. For though he may deliberate of that which is
impossible for him to do, as in the example he alleges of him that
deliberateth, whether he shall play at Tennis, not knowing that the door of the
Tennis-Court in shut against him; yet it is no impediment to him that the door
is shut, till he have a will to play, which he has not till he has done
deliberating whether he shall play or not. That which follows of my
confounding mind and will; the estimative faculty, and the understanding; the
imagination and deliberation; the end and the means; the humane will and the
sensitive appetite; rational hope or fear, and irrational passions;
inclinations and intentions, a beginning of being, and a beginning of working;
sufficiency and efficiency, I do not find in any thing that I have written, any
impropriety in the use of these or any other English words; nor do I doubt but
an English Reader, who has not lost himself in School Divinity, will very
easily conceive what I have said But this I am sure, that I never confounded
beginning of being, with beginning of working, nor sufficiency with efficiency,
nor ever used these words Sensitive Appetite, Rational hope, or Rational fear,
or Irrational Passions. It is therefore impossible I should confound them. But
the Bishop is either mistaken, or else he makes no scruple to say that which he
knows to be false, when he thinks it will serve his turn.

(e) [That which he says, that the action does necessarily follow the thought,
is thus far true, that those actions which are altogether undeliberated, and do
proceed from violent passions, etc. are not properly, and actually in
themselves free, but rather necessary actions; as when a man runs away from a
Cat or a custard] Thus far he says is true. But when he calls sudden passions
motus primo primi, I cannot tell whether he says true or not, because I do not
understand him, nor find how he makes his meaning ever the clearer by his
example of a Cat and a Custard; because I know not what he means by a secret
Antipathie. For what that Antipathy is he explaineth not by calling it secret,
but rather confesses he knows not how to explain it. And because he says it
is thus far true, I expect he should tell me also how far it is false.

(f) [Secondly, as for those actions, wherein actual deliberation seems not
necessary, because never any thing appeared that could make a man doubt of the
consequence, I do confess, that Actions done by virtue of a precedent
deliberation, without any actual deliberation for the present, may
notwithstanding be truly, voluntary and free Acts.] In this he agrees with me.
But where he adds, yea, in some cases, and in some sense more free, then if
they were actually deliberated of in present, I do not agree with him. And for
the instance he brings to prove it, in the man that plays on an i^strument
with his hand it makes nothing for him; for it proves only that the Habit
makes the motion of his hand, more ready and quick; but it proves not that it
makes it more voluntary, but rather less, because the rest of the motions
follow the first, by an easiness acquired from long custom; in which motion
the Will does not accompany all the strokes of the hand, but gives a beginning
to them only in the first. Here is nothing as I expected of how far that which
I had said, namely, that the action does necessarily follow the thought, is
false, unless it be improprieties of speech, as calling that voluntary which
is free, and limitting the will to the last appetite; and other mistakes, as,
that no act can be said to be without deliberation. For improprieties of
speech, I will not contend with one, that can use motus primo primi, practice
practicum, actus elicitus, and many other phrases of the same kind. But so say
that Free actions are voluntary; and that the Will, which oauseth a voluntary
action is the last appetite, and that that appetite, was immediately followed
by the action; and that no action of a man can be said in the judgment of the
Law, to be without deliberation, are no mistakes for any thing that he has
proved to the contrary.

(g) [Thirdly, whereas he says, that some sudden acts; pro^^eceeding from
violent passions, which surprise a man are justly punished, I grant they are so
sometimes, but not for his reason, etc.] My reason was, because he had time to
deliberate from the instant that he knew the Law, to the instant of his action,
and ought to have deliberated, that therefore he may be justly punished. The
Bishop grants they* are justly punished, and his reason is, because they were
vertually deliberated of, or because it is our fault they were not actually
deliberated of. How a man does deliberate, and yet not actually deliberate, I
understand not. If vertual deliberation, be not actual deliberation, it is no
deliberation. But he calls vertual deliberation, that which ought to have
been, and was not, and says the same that he condemns in me. And his other
reason, namely, because it is our fault that we deliberated not, is the same
that I said, that we ought to have deliberated, and did not. So that his
reprehension here, is a reprehension of himself proceeding from that the
custom of School Language has made him forget the Language of his Country.
And to that which he adds, that a necessary act is never a fault nor justly
punishable, when the necessity is inevitably imposed upon us by extrinsecal
causes, I have sufficiently answered before in diverse places, showing that a
fault* may be necessary from extrinsecal causes, and yet voluntary; and that
voluntary faults are justly punishable.

(h) [But if the necessity be contracted by our selves, it is justly
punishable. As he who by his wanton though in the day time, does procure his
own nocturnal pollution.] This instance because it makes not against any
thing, I have held, and partly also, because it is a stinking passage, (for
surely if as he that ascribing eyes to the understanding allows me to say, it
has a nose, it stinketh to the nose of the understanding, This sentence I
pass over, observing only* the canting terms, not actually free in it self,
but vertually free in its causes. In the rest of his answer to this Number 25.
I find nothing alleged in confutation of any thing I have said, saving that
his last words are, that T. H. is mistaken, in that also, that the right to
kill men, does proceed merely from their being noxious, Numb. 14. But to that I
have in the same Numb. 14. already answered. I must not pass over, that a
little before, he has these words. If a Child before he have the use of reason
shall kill a man in his passion, yet because he wanted malice to incite him to
it, and reason to restrain him from it, he shall not dye for it, in the strict
rules of particular Justice, unless there be some mixture of public Justice
in the case. The Bishop would make but an ill Judge of innocent Children, (for
such are they that for want of age have not use enough of reason to abstain
from killing.) for the want of reason proceeding from want of age, does
therefore take away tho punishment because it takes away the crime, and makes
them innocent. But he introduces another Justice which he calls public,
whereas he called the other particular; and by this public Justice, he says
the Child though innocent may be put to death. I hope we shall never have the
administration of public Justice, in such hands as his, or in the hands of
such as shall take counsel from him. But the distinction he makes is not by
himself understood. There are public causes and private causes, private are
those, where the parties to the cause, are both private men. Public are those,
where one of the parties is the Commonwealth, or the person that represents
it, and the cause criminal. But there is no distinction of Justice into
Public, and Private. We may read of men that having Soverain Power, did
sometimes put an Innocent to death, either upon a vow, as ^^pthah did, in
sacrificing his Daughter; or when it has been thought fit, that an innocent
person should be put to death to save a great number of people. But to put to
death a Child not for reason of State, which he improperly calls Public
Justice, but for killing a man, and at the same time to acknowledge such
killing to be no crime, I think was never heard of.

T. H. SEcondly, I conceive when a man deliberates whether he shall Number. 26.
do a thing or not do a thing, that he does nothing else but consider, whether
it be better for himself to do it, or not to do it. And to consider an action,
is to imagine the consequences of it, both good and evil, from whence is to be
inferred, that deliberation is nothing but alternate imagination, of the good
and evil sequells of an action, or (which is the same thing) alternate hope and
fear or alternate appetite to do, or acquit the action of which he deliberateth.


J. D. (a) IF I did not know what deliberation was, I should be little relieved
in my knowledge by this description. Sometimes he makes it to be a
consideration, or an act of the understanding, sometimes an imagination, or an
act of the fancy, sometimes he makes it to be an alternation of passions, hope
and fear. Sometimes he makes it concern the end, sometimes to concern the
means. So he makes it I know not what. The truth is this in brief. Deliberation
is an inquiry made by reason, whether this or that definitely considered be a
good and fit means, or indefinitely what are good and fit means to be chosen
for attaining some wished end.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXVI.
(a) [IF I did not know what Deliberation was, I should be little relieved in
my knowledge by this description. Sometimes he makes it to be a consideration,
or an act of the understanding, sometimes an imagination, or an act of the
fancy, etc. So he makes it I know not what.] If the Bishop had observed what he
does himself, when he Deliberates, reasons, understands, or imagins, he would
have known what to make of all that I have said in this Number. He would have
known that consideration, understanding, reason, and all the passions of the
mind; are imaginations. That to consider a thing, is to imagine it; that to
understand a thing is to imagine it; that to hope and fear are to imagine the
things hoped for and feared. The difference between them is, that when we
imagine the consequence of any thing, we are said to consider that thing; and
when we have imagined any thing from a sign, and especially from those signs,
we call names, we are said to understand his meaning that makes the sign; and
when we reason, we imagine the consequence of affirmations, and negations
joined together; and when we hope or fear, we imagine things good or hurtful to
our selves; insomuch as all these are but imaginations, diversely named, from
different circumstances, as any man may perceive as easily as he can look into
his own thoughts. But to him that thinks not himself upon the things where
of, but upon the words where with he speaks, and takes those words on trust
from pushed Schoolmen, it is not only hard, but impossible to be known. And
this is the reason that makes him say, I make Deliberation he knows not what.
But how is deliberation defined by him. It is (says he) an inquiry made by
reason, whether this or that definitely considered, be a good and fit means; or
indefinitely, what are good and fit means to be chosen for attaining some
wished end, If it were not his custom to say, the understanding understands,
the Will wills, and so of the rest of the faculties. I should have believed
that when he says deliberation is an inquiry made by reason, he means an
inquiry made by the man that reasons; for so it will be sense: But the reason
which a man uses in deliberation, being the same thing that is called
Deliberation, his Definition, that Deliberation is an inquiry made by reason,
is no more then if he had said, Deliberation is an inquiry, made by
Deliberation; a Definition good enough to be made by a School-man. Nor is the
rest of the Definition altogether as it should be; for there is no such thing
as an indefinite consideration of what are good and fit means; but a man
imagining first one thing, then another, considers them successively and
singly each one, whether it conduces to his ends or not.

T. H. THirdly, I conceive, that in all deliberations, that is to say, in all
alternate succession of contrary appetites, the last is that which we call the
Will, and is immediately before the doing of the action, or next before the doing
of it become impossible. All other appetites to do and to quit, that come upon
a man during his deliberation, are usually called intentions, and inclinations,
but not wills, there being but one will, which also in this case may be called
last will, though the intention change often.


J. D. ( a) STill here is nothing but confusion, he confounds the faculty of
the will, with the act of volition; he makes the will to be the last part of
deliberation; he makes the intention, which is a most proper and elicite act of
the will, or a willing of the end, as it is to be attain^^ by certain means, to
be no willing at all, but only some antecedaneous inclination or propension.
He might as well say, that the uncertain agitation of the needle hither and
thither, to find out the Pole, and the resting or fixing of it self directly
toward the Pole, were both the same thing. But the grossest mistake is, that
he will acknowledge no act of a man's will, to be his will, but only the last
act, which he calls the last will. If the first were no will, how comes this to
be the last will? According to this doctrine, the will of a man should be as
unchangeable as the Will of God, at least so long as there is a possibility to
effect it. ( b) According to this doctrine concupiscence with consent should be
no sin, for that which is not truly willed is not a sin; Or rather should not
be at all, unless either the act followed, or were rendered impossible by some
intervening circumstances. According to this Doctrine no man can say, this is
my will, because he knows not yet, whether it shall be his last appeal. The
truth is, there be many acts of the will, both in respect of the means, and of
the end. But that act, which makes a man's actions to be truly free, is
Election, which is the deliberate chosing or refusing, of this or that means,
or the acceptance of one means before another, where diverse are represented by
the understanding.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXVII.
( a) [STill here is nothing but confusion, he con founds the faculty of the
Will, with the act of Volition; he makes the Will to be the last part of
Deliberation; he makes the intention, which is a most proper and elicite act of
the Will to be no Willing at all, but only some anteced^n^ous (he might as well
have said antecedent) inclination.] To confound the faculty of the Will with the
Will, were to confound a Will, with no Will; for the faculty of the Will is no Will;
the Act only which he calls Volition is the Will. As a man that sle^peth has
the Power of seeing, and sees not, nor has for that time any sight; so also
he has the power of Willing, but Wills nothing, nor has for that time any
Will. I must therefore have departed very much from my own Principles, if I have
confounded the faculty of the Will, wi^h the Act of Volition. He should have
done well to have shown where I confound^d them. It is true, I make the Will to
be the last part of Deliberation. But it is that Will, which makes the Action
voluntar^; and therefore needs must be the last; But for the preceding
vari^tions of the Will, to do and not to do, though they be so many several
Wills, contrary to, and destroying one another, they usually are called
Intentions; And therefore they are nothing to the Will of which we dispute) that
makes an Action voluntary. And though a man have in every long deliberation a
great many Wills and Nills, they use to be called inclinations, and the last
only Will which is immediately foll^wed by the voluntary Action But
nevertheless both he that has those intentions, and God that s^eth them,
reckons them for so many Wills.

( b) [According to this Doctrine, concupiscence with consent, should be no
sin, for that which is not truly Willed is not a sin.] This is no consequent
to my Doctrine, for I hold that they are in the sight of God, so many consents
so many willings, which would have been followed by Actions, if the Actions had
been in their po^^er. It had been fitter for a man in whom is required gravity,
and sanctity more then ordinary, to have chosen some other kind of instance.
But what means he by concupiscence with consent? Can there be concupiscence
without consent? It is the consent it self. There may be also a Lawful
concupiscence with consent. For concupiscence makes not the sin, but the
unlawfulness of satisfying such concupiscence; and not the consent, but the Will
and design to prosecute that which a man knows to be unlawful. An appetite to
another man's bread is concupiscence; and though it be with consent to eat, it is
no sin; but the design to take it from the other, notwithstanding that he may
fail in his design, that is the sin. And this instance might have served his
turn, as well as the other; and for consent (if he had understood the truth) he
might have p^t design.

T. H. FOurthly, that those actions, which man is said to do upon deliberation,
Number. 28.
are said to be voluntary, and done upon choice and election. So that voluntary
action, and action proceeding from election, is the same thing. And that of a
voluntary Agent, it is all one to say he is free, and to say, he has not made an
end of deliberating.


J. D. ( a) THis short Section might pass without an animadversion but for two
things. The one is, that he confounds a voluntary act with a free act. A free
act is only that which proceeds from the free election of the rational will
after deliberation, but every act that proceeds from the sensitive appetite of
man or beast, without deliberation or election, is truly voluntary. ( b) The
other thing observable is his conclusion, that it is all one to say, a man is
free, and to say, he has not made an end of deliberating. Which confession of
his, overturns his whole structure of absolute necessity; for if every Agent be
necessitated to act what he does act by a necessary and natural flux of
extrinsecal causes, then he is no more free before he deliberates, or whilst
he deliberates, than he is after; but by T. H. his confession here, he is more
free, whilst he deliberates, than he is after* And so after all his
flourishes, for an absolute or extrinsecal necessity, he is glad to sit himself
down, and rest contented with an hypothetical necessity, which no man ever
denied or doubted of; ascribing the necessitation of a man in free acts to his
own deliberation, and in indeliberate acts to his last thought, Numb. 25. What
is this to a natural and special influence of extrinsecal causes? ( c) Again,
Liberty (says he) is an absence of extrinsecal impediments, but deliberation
does produce no new extrinsecal impediment, therefore (let him chose which part
he will) either he is free after deliberation, by his own Doctrine, or he was
not free before. Our own deliberation, and the direction of our own
understanding, and the election of our own will, do produce an hypothetical
necessity, that the event be such as the understanding has directed, and the
will elected. But for as much as the understanding might have directed
otherwise, and the will have elected otherwise, this is far from an absolute
necessity. Neither does liberty respect only future acts, but present acts
also. Otherwise God did not freely create the world. In the same instant
wherein the will elects it is free, according to a priority of Nature, though
not of time, to elect otherwise. And so in a divided sense, the will is free,
even whilst it acts, though in a compounded seuse it be not free. Certainly,
deliberation does constitute, not destroy liberty.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXVIII.
( a) [THis short section might pass, but for two things; one is, that he
confounds a voluntary act with a free act.] I do indeed t^ke all voluntary acts
to be free, and all free acts to be voluntary, but withal that all acts whether
free or voluntary, if they be acts, were necessary before they were acts. But
where is the error? A free act ( says he) is only that which proceeds from
the free election of the rational Will, after deliberation; but every act that
proceeds from the sensitive appetite of man or beast without Deliberation or
Election, is truly voluntary. So that my error lies in this that I
distinguish not between a rational Will, and a sensitive appetite in the same
man. As if the Appetite and Will in man or beast were not the same thing, or
that sensual men and beasts did not deliberate, and choose one thing before
another, in the same manner, that wise men do. Nor can it be said of Wills,
that one is rational, the other sensitive; but of men. And if it be granted
that deliberation is always (as it is not) there were no cause to ca^^ men
rational more then beasts. For it is manifest by continual experience, that
beasts do Deliberate.

(b) The other thing observeable is his conclusion, that it is all one to say,
a man is free, and to say, he has not made an end of deliberating. Which
confession of his, overturns his whole structure of absolute necessity. Why so?
Because (says he) if every Agent be necessitated to act what he does act by
extrinsical causes, then he is no more free before he Deliberates, or whilst he
Deliberates, then he is after. But this is a false consequence; he should have
inferred thus, then he is no less necessiated, before he Deliberates, then he
is after; Which is true, and yet nevertheless he is more free. But taking
necessity to be inconsistent with Liberty (which is the question between us) in
stead of necessitated he puts in not free. And therefore to say, a man is free
till he has made an end of Deliberating, is no contradiction to absolute and
antecedent necessity. And whereas he adds presently after, that I ascribe the
necessitation of a man in ^ree acts to his own deliberation, and in
indeliberate acts to his last thoughts, he mistakes the matter; for I ascribe
all necessity, to the universal Series or Order of causes, depending on the
first cause eternal. Which the Bishop underst^ndet^, as if I had said in his
Phrase to a special influence of extrinsecal causes, that is, understands it
not at all.

(c) [Again, Liberty (says he) is an absence of extrinsecal impe^iment^, but
Deliberation does produce no new extrinsecall impediment; therefore either he
is free after Deliberation, or he was not free before] I cannot perceive in
these words any more force of inference, then of so many other words whatsoever
put together at adventure. But be his meaning what he Will, I say not that
deliberation, porduceth any impediments, (for there are no impediments, but to
the Action, ^hilst we are endeavoring to do it, which is not till we have done
deliberating.) But during the Deliberation, there arise thoughts in him that
deliberateth, concerning the consequence of the action whereof he deliberateth,
which cause the action following, which are not impediments to that which was
not done, but the causes of that which was done: That which follows in this
Number, is not intelligible, by reason of the insignificance of these words
understanding directs; Will electeth, hypothetical necessity, which are but
Jargon, and his divided sense, and compounded sense non sense. And this also
Liberty respects not future acts only, but present acts also, is unintelli
ible. For how can a man have Liberty to do, or not to do that which is at the
same instant already done. For where he adds otherwise God did not freely
create the World, it proves nothing, because he had the Liberty to create it,
before it was created. Besides, it is a p^rphancing of the name of God, to make
instances of his incomprehensible working, in a question as this is merely
natural.

T. H. Fifthly, I conceive liberty to be rightly defined in this manner. Number. 29.
Liberty is the absence of all the impediments to action, that are not
contained in the nature, and in the intrinsecal quality of the Agent. As for
example, the water is said to descend freely, or to have liberty to descend by
the Chanel of the River, because there is no impediment that way, but not
across, because the banks are impediments. And though water cannot ascend, yet
men never say it wants the liberty to ascend, but the faculty or power, because
the impediment is in the nature of the water and intrinsecall. So also we say,
he that is tied wants the liberty to go, because the impediment is not in him,
but in his bon^s, whereas we say not so of him that is sick or lame, because
the impediment is in himself.


J. D. (a) HOw that should be a right definition of liberty which comprehends
neither the Genus nor the Difference, neither the Matter nor the Form of
liberty, which does not so much as accidentally describe liberty by its marks
and tokens. How a real faculty or the Elective power should be defined by a
negation, or by an absence, is past my understanding and contrary to all the
rules of right Reason, which I have learned. Negatives cannot explicate the
nature of things defined. By this definition, a stone has liberty to ascend
into the air, because there is no outward impediment to hinder it, and so a
violent act may be a free act. Just like his definit on are his instances of
the liberty of the water to descend down the Channel, and a sick or a lame
man's liberty to go. The later is an impotence and not a power or a liberty. The
former is so far from being a free act, that it is scarce a natural act.
Certainly, the proper natural motion of water, as of all heavy bodies, is to
descend directly downwards toward the center, as we see in rain, which falls
down perpendicularly. Though this be far from a free act, which proceeds from a
rational appetite, yet it is a natural act, and proceeds from a natural
appetite, and has its reason within in it self. So has not the current of the
river in its Channel, which must not be ascribed to the proper nature of the
water, but either to the general order of the universe, for the better being
and preservation of the creatures (otherwise the waters should not moove in
Seas and Rivers as they do, but cover the face of the earth, and possess their
proper place between the air and the earth, according to the degree of their
gravity.) Or to an extrinsecal principle, whilst one particle of water
thrusts and forces forward another, and so comes a current, or at least so
comes the current to be more impetuous, to which motion the position of the
earth does contribute much, both by restraining that fluid body with its banks
from dispersing it self, and also, by affording way for a fair and easy descent
by its proclivity. He tells us sadly that the water wants liberty to go over
the banks, because there is an extrinsecal impediment, But to ascend up the
channel it wants not liberty, but power. Why? Liberty is a power, if it want
power to ascend, it wants liberty to ascend. But he makes the reason why the
water ascends not up the channel, to be intrinsecal, and the reason why it
ascends not over the banks to be extrinsecal, as if there were not a rising of
the ground up the channel, as well as up the banks, though it be not so
discernable, nor always so sudden. The natural appetite of the water is as
much against the ascending over the banks, as the ascending up the channel. And
the extrinsecal impediment is as great in ascending up the channel as over the
banks, or rather greater, because there it must moove, not only against the
rising soil, but also against the succeeding waters, which press forward the
former. Either the River wants liberty for both, or else it wants liberty for
neither.

But to leave his metaphorical faculties, and his Catachrestical Liberty. How
far is his discourse wide from the true moral liberty, which is in question
between us. His former description of a free Agent, that is, he who has not
made an end of deliberating, though it was wide from the mark, yet it came much
nearer the truth than this difinition of Liberty, unless perhaps he think that
the water has done deliberating, whether it will go over the banks, but has
not done deliberating, whether it will go up the channel.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXIX.
(a) [HOw that should be a right definition of Liberty, which comprehends
neither the Genus nor the Difference, neither the Matter, nor* the Form, of
Liberty, etc. How a real faculty, or the elective power should be defined by a
negation, or by an absence; is past my understanding; and contrary to all the
rules of right reason, which I have learned.] A right d^^nition is, that which
determines the signification of the word defined, to the end that in the
discourse where it is used, the meaning of it may be constant and without
equivocation. This is the measure of a definition and intelligible to an
English Reader. But the Bishop that measures it by the Genus and the
Difference, thinks (it seems) though he write English, he writes not to an
English Reader, unless he also be a School-man. I confess the rule is good
that we ought to define when it can be done* by using first so^e more general
term, and then by r^straining, the signification of that general term till it
b^ the same with that of the word defin^d. And this general term, the Sc^ool
calls Genus, and the restraint Difference; This I say is a good rule where it
can be done; for some words are so general that they cannot admit a more
general in their definition. But why, this ought to be a Law of definition, I
doubt it would trouble him to find the reason; and therefore I referr him, (he
shall give me leave sometimes to cite, as well as he) to the 14. and 15.
Articles of the 6 Chapter, of my Book De Corpore. But it is to little purpose
that he requires in a definition, so exactly the Genus, and the Difference,
se^ing he does not know them when they are there. For in this my definition of
Liberty the Genus is absence of impediments to action; and the difference or
Restricti^n is, that they be not contained in the nature of the Agent. The
Bishop therefore though he talk of Genus and Difference* understands not what
they are, but requires the matter and Form, of the thing in the Definition
Matter is body, that is to say corporeal substance, and subject to dimension,
such as are the Elements, and the things compounded of the Elements. But it is
impossible that Matter should be part o^ a Definition, whose parts are only
words, or to put the name of Matter into the Definition of Liberty, which is
immaterial. How a real faculty can be defined, by an absence, is ( says he)
past my understanding. Unless he mean by real Faculty* a very Faculty, I know
not how a Faculty is real. If he mean so, then a very absence, is as real, as
a very Faculty. And if the word defined signify an absence, or Negation, I
hope he would not have me define it, by a presence, or affrmation. Such a word
is Liberty, for it signifies Freedom from impediments, which is all one with
the absence of impediments as I have defined it. And if this be contrary to all
the rules of right reason, (that is to say of Logic) that he has learned, I
should advise him to read some other Logic, then he has yet read, or consider
better those he did read, when he was a young man, and could less understand
them. He adds that by this Definition, a stone has Liberty to ascend into the
air, because there is no outward impediment to hinder it. How know he, whether
there be impediments to hinder it or not? Certainly if a stone were thrown
upwards, it would either go upwards eternally, or it must be stopped by some
outward impediment or it must stop it self. He has confessed that nothing can
moove it self, I doubt not therefore but he will confess also that it cannot
stop it self. But stopped we see it is; it is therefore stopped by impediments
external. He has in this part of his Answer ventured a little too far* in
speaking of Definition, and of Jmpediments, and Motion, and bew^ayed too much
his ignorance in Logic and Philosophy; and talks so absurdly of the current
of Rivers, and of the motion of the Seas, and of the weight of Water, that it
cannot be corrected otherwise then by blotting it all out.

T. H. Sixthly, I conceive, nothing takes beginning from it self, but Number. 30.
from the action of some other immediate Agent without it self. And that
therefore when first a man had an appetite or will, to something, to which
immediately before he had no appetite nor will, the cause of his will is not
the will it self, but something else, not in his own disposing. So that whereas
it is out of controversy that of voluntary actions the will is a necessary
cause; and by this which is said the will is also caused by other things
whereof it disposes not, it follows that voluntary actions have all of them
necessary causes, and therefore are necessitated.


J. D. THis sixth point does not consist in explicating of terms, as the
former, but in two proofs, that voluntary actions are necessitated* The former
proof stands thus, Nothing takes beginning from it self, but from some Agent
without it self, which is not in its own disposing, therefore, etc. concedo
omnia. ( a) I grant all he says, The will does not take beginning from it
self. Whether he understand by will the faculty of the will, which is a power
of the reasonable soul, it takes not beginning from it self, but from God, who
created and infused the Soul into man, and endowed it with this power: Or
whether he understand by will, the act of willing, it takes not beginning from
it self, but from the faculty, or from the power of willing, which is in the
Soul. This is certain, finite and participated things cannot be from
themselves, nor be produced by themselves. What would he conclude from hence?
that therefore the act of willing takes not its beginning from the faculty of
the will? Or that the faculty is always determined antecedently, extrinsecally
to will that which it does will? He may as soon draw water out of a pumice, as
draw any such conclusion out of these premises. Secondly, for his taking a
beginning, Either he understands a beginning of being, or a beginning of
working and acting. If he understand a beginning of being, he says most truly,
that nothing has a beginning of being in time from it self, But this is
nothing to his purpose. The question is not between us whether the Soul of man
or the will of man be eternal, But if he understand a beginning of working or
mooving actually, it is a gross error. All men know that when a stone
descends, or fire ascends* or when water, that has been heated returns to its
former temper, the beginning or reason is intrinsecal, and one and the same
thing does moove and is moved in a diverse respect. It mooves in respect of
the form, and it is moved in respect of the matter. Much more man, who has a
perfect knowledge and prenotion of the end, is most properly said to moove
himself* Yet I do not deny but that there are other beginnings of humane
actions, which do concur with the will, some outward* as the first cause by
general influence, which is evermore requisite, Angels or men by persuading,
evil spirits by tempting, the object or end by its appetibility, the
understanding by directing* So passions and acquired habits. But I deny that
any of these do necessitate or can necessitate the will of man by determining
it Physically to one, except God alone, who does it rarely in extraordinary
cases. And where there is no antecedent determination to one, there is no
absolute necessity but true Liberry.

( b) His second argument is ex concessis* It is out of controversy (says he)
that of voluntary actions the will is a necessary cause. The argument may be
thus reduced. Necessary causes produce necessary effects, but the Will is a
necessary cause of voluntary actions. I might deny his major; Necessary causes
do not always produce necessary effects except they be also necessarily
produ^ed, as I have showed before in the burning of Protagoras his book. But I
answer clearly to the minor, that the will is not a necessary cause of what it
wills in particular actions. It is without controversy indeed, for it is
without all probability. That it wills, when it wills, is necessary, but that
it wills this or that, now or then, is free. More expressly, the act of the will
may be considered three ways* Either in respect of its nature, or in respect
of its exercise, or in respect of its object. First, for the nature of the act;
That which the will wills is necessarily voluntary, because the will cannot be
compelled. And in this sense, it is out of controversy, that the will is a
necessary cause of voluntary actions. Secondly, for the exercise of its acts,
that is not necessary. The will may either will or suspend its act. Thirdly,
for the object that is not necessary but free, the will is not extrinsecally
determined to its objects. As for example, The Cardinals meet in the conclave
to chose a Pope, whom they chose he is necessarily Pope. But it is not
necessary that they shall chose this or that day. Before they were assembled
they might defer their assembling, when they are assembled, they may suspend
their election for a day or a week. Lastly, for the person whom they will
choose, it is freely in their own power, otherwise if the election were not
free, it were void, and no election at all. So that which takes its beginning
from the will, is necessarily voluntary* but it is not necessary that the will
shall will this or that in particular, as it was necessary, that the person
freely elected should be Pope, but it was not necessary, either that the
election should be at this time, or that this man should be elected. And
therefore voluntary acts in particular, have not necessary causes, that is,
they are not necessitated.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXX.
I Had said, that nothing takes beginning from it self, and that the cause of
the Will is not the Will it self, but something else which it disp^seth not of.
Answering to thi^ he endeavors to she^ us the cause of the Will.

( a) [I grant ( says he) that the Will does not take beginning from it self,
for that the faculty of the Will, takes beginning from God, who created the
soul, and powered it into man, and endowed it with this power; and for that the
act of willing takes not beginning from it self, but from the faculty, or from
the power of willing, which is in the soul. This is certain, finite and
participated things cannot be from themselves, nor be produced by themselves.
What would he conclude from hence? That therefore the Act of willing, takes not
its beginning, from the faculty of the Will?] It is well that he grants finite
things (as for his participated, it signifies nothing here) cannot be produced
by themselves. For out of this I can conclude that the Act of willing is not
produced by the faculty of willing. He that has the faculty of willing, has
the faculty of willing something in particular. And at the same time he has
the faculty of nilling the same. If therefore the faculty of willing be the
cause he wills any thing whatsoever, for the same reason the faculty of
nilling, will be the cause at the same time of nilling it, and so he shall will
and nill the same thing at the same time, which is absurd. It seems the Bishop
had forgot that Matter and Power are indifferent to contrary Forms and contrary
Acts. It is somewhat besides the Matter that d^termineth it to a certain form;
and somewhat besides the Power, that produces a certain Act; and thence it is,
that is inferred this that he grants, that nothing can be produced by it
self, which nevertheless he presently contradicts, in saying, that, all men
know when a stone descends, the beginning is intrinsecal, and that the stone
mooves in respect of the Form; and is moved in respect of the Matter. Which is
as much to say that the Form moves the Matter, or that the stone moves it
self, which before he denied. When a stone ascends, the beginning of the stones
motion, was in it self, that is to say intrinsecal, because it is not the
stones motion, till the store begins to be moved; but the motion that caused it
to begin to ascend, was a precedent and extrinsecal motion of the hand, or
other engine that threw it upward. And so when it descends, the beginning of
the stones motion is in the stone; but nevertheless, there is a former motion
in the ambient Body, air or water, that causes it to descend. But because no
man can see it, most men think there is none; though Reason, wherewith the
Bishop, (as relying only upon the Authority of Books) troubles not himself,
co^vince that there is.

( b) [His second Argument is, ex concessis; It is out of controversy, that of
voluntary Actions, the Will is a necessary cause. The Argument may be thus
reduced. Necessary causes produce necessary effects; but the Will is a necessary
cause of voluntary Actions. I might deny his Major; necessary causes do not
always produce necessary effects, except they be also necessarily produced.]
He has reduced the Argument to nonsense, by saying necessary causes produce not
necessary effects. For necessary effects, unless he mean such effects as shall
necessarily be produced, is insignificant. Let him consider therefore with what
grace he can say, necessary causes do not always produce their effects, except
those effects be also necessarily produced. But his answer is chiefly to the
Minor, and denies that the Will is not a necessary cause of what it wills in
particular Actions. That it wills, when it wills (says he) is necessary, but
that it wills this or that, is free. Is it possible for any man to conceive
that he that wills can will any thing but this or that particular thing? It
is therefore manifest* that either the Will is a necessary cause of this or that
or any other particular Action, or not the necessary cause of any voluntary
Action at all. For universal Actions there be none. In that which follows, he
undertaketh to make his doctrine more expressly understood by considering the
Act of the will three ways. In respect of its nature, in respect of its
Exercise; and in respect of its object. For the nature of the Act (be says)
that That which the will wills is necessarily volunrary, and that in this
sense, he grants it is out of controversy, that the will is a necessary cause
of voluntary Actions. Instead of that which the will wills, to make it sense,
read that which the man wills, and then if the man's will be as he confesses a
necessary cause of voluntary Actions, it is no less a necessary cause that
they are Actions, then that they are voluntary. For the Exercise of the Act, he
says that the will may either will, or suspend its Act, This is the old
canting which has already been sufficiently detected. But to make it somewhat
let us read it thus, the man that wills, may either will or suspend his
will, and thus it is intelligible but false; for how can he that wills, at
the same time suspend his will? And for the object he says, that it is not
necessary but Free, etc. His reason is because he says it was not necessary
(for example) in choosing a Pope, to choose him this or that day, or to choose
this or that man. I would be glad to know by what Argument ^e can prove the
Election not to have been necessitated; For it is not enough for him to say, I
perceive no necessity in it; nor to say they might have chosen another, because
he knows not whether they might or not; nor to say if he had not been freely
elected, the Election had been void or none. For though that be true, it does
not follow that the Election was not necessary; for there is no repugnance* to
necessity, either in Election, or in Freedom. And whereas he concludes,
therefore voluntary Acts in particular are not necessitated; I would have been
glad he had set down what voluntary Acts there are, not particular, which by
his restriction of voluntary Acts he grants to be necessitated.

T. H. SEventhly, I hold that to be a sufficient cause to which nothing Number. 31.
is wanting that is needful to the producing of the effect. The same is also a
necessary cause, for if it be possible, that a sufficient cause shall not bring
forth the effect, then there wanted somewhat which was needful to the producing
of it, and so the cause was not sufficient. But if it be impossible that a
sufficient cause should not produce the effect, then is a sufficient cause a
necessary cause, (for that is said to produce an effect necessarily, that
cannot but produce it) Hence it is manifest, that whatsoever is produced, is
produced necessarily, for whatsoever is produced has had a sufficient cause to
produce it, or else it had not been. And therefore also voluntary actions are
necessitated.


J. D. THis section contains a third Argument to prove that all effects are
necessary; for clearing whereof it is needful to consider how a cause may be
said to be sufficient or insufficient.

First, several causes singly considered may be insufficient, and the same
taken conjointly be sufficient to produce an effect. As ( a) two Horses jointly
are sufficient to draw a Coach, which either of them singly is insufficient to
do. Now to make the effect, that is the drawing of the Coach necessary, it is
not only required, that the two Horses be sufficient to draw it, but also that
their conjunction be necessary, and their habitude such as they may draw it. If
the owner of one of these Horses will not suffer him to draw, If the Smith have
shod the other in the quick, and lamed him; If the Horse have cast a shoe, or
be a resty jade, and will not draw but when he list, then the effect is not
necessarily produced, but contingently more or less, as the concurrence of the
causes is more or less contingent.

( b) Secondly, a cause may be said to be sufficient, either because 2.
it produces that effect which is intended, as in the generation of a man, or
else, because it is sufficient to produce that which is produced, as in the
generation of a Monster. The former is properly called a sufficient cause, the
later a weak and insufficient cause. Now, if the debility of the cause be not
necessary, but contingent, then the effect is not necessary, but contingent. It
is a rule in Logic, that the conclusion always follows the weaker part. If
the premises be but probable, the conclusion cannot be demonstrative. It holds
as well in causes as in propositions. No effect can exceed the virtue of its
cause. If the ability or debility of the causes be contingent, the effect
cannot be necessary.

Thirdly, that which concerns this question of Liberty from necessity most
nearly is. That ( c) a cause is said to be sufficient 3.
in respect of the ability of it to act, not in respect of its will to act. The
concurrence of the will is needful to the production of a free effect. But the
cause may be sufficient, though the will do not concur. As God is sufficient to
produce a thousand worlds, but it does not follow from thence, either that he
has produced them, or that he will produce them. The blood of Christ is a
sufficient ransom for all mankind, but it does not follow therefore, that all
mankind shall be actually saved by virtue of his Blood. A man may be a
sufficient Tutour, though he will not teach every Scholar, and a sufficient
Physician, though he will not administer to every patient. For as much
therefore as the concurrence of the will is needful to the production of every
free effect* and yet the cause may be sufficient, in sensu-divi'so, although
the will do not concur, it follows evidently, that the cause may be
sufficient, and yet something, which is needful to the production of the
effect, may be wanting, and that every sufficient cause is not a necessary
cause.

Lastly, if any man be disposed to wrangle against so clear light, and say,
that though the free Agent be sufficient in sensu diviso, yet, he is not
sufficient, in sensu composito, to produce the effect without the concurrence
of the will, he says true, but first, he bewrayes the weakness and the fallacy
of the former argument, which is a mere trifling between sufficiency in a
divided sense, and sufficiency in a compounded sense. And seeing the
concurrence of the will is not predetermined, there is no antecedent necessity
before it do concur; and when it has concurred, the necessity is but
hypothetical, which may consist with liberty.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXI.
IN this place he disputes against my definition of a sufficient cause,
namely, that cause to which nothing is wanting needful to the producing of the
effect. I thought this definition could have been mistiked by no man that had
English enough, to know that a sufficient cause, and cause enough signifies
the same thing. And no man will say that that is cause enough to produce an
effect, to which any thing is wanting needful to the producing of it. But the
Bishop thinks, if he set down what he understands by sufficient, it would serve
to confute my definition. And therefore says;

( a) [Two Horses jointly are sufficient to draw a Coach, which either of them
singly is insufficient to do; Now to make the effect that is, the drawing of
the Coach necessary, it is not only required that the two Horses be sufficient
to draw it, but also that it be necessary they shall be joined, and that the
owner of the Horses will let them draw, and that the Smith has not lamed them,
and they be not resty, and list not to draw, but when they list, otherwise the
effect is contingent.] It seems the Bishop thinks two Horses may be sufficient
to draw a Coach, though they will not draw, or though they be lame, or though
they be never put to draw; and I think they can never produce the effect of
drawing, without those needful circumstances of being strong, obedient, and
having the Coach some way or other fastened to them. He calls it a sufficient
cause of drawing, that they be Coach ho^ses, though they be lame, or wi^^ not
draw. But I say they are not sufficient absolutely; but conditionally, if they
be not lame, nor resty. Let the read r judge, whether my sufficient cause or
his may properly be called cause enough.

( b) [Secondly, a cause may be said to be sufficient, either because it
produces that effect which is intended, as in the generation of a man, or
else, because it is sufficient to produce that which is produced, as in the
generation of a Monster; the former is properly called a sufficient cause, the
latter a weak and insufficient cause.] In these few lines he has said the
cause of the generation of a Monster is sufficient to produce a Monster, and
that it is insufficient to produce a Monster. How soo^ may a man forget his
words that does not understand the^^. This term of insufficient cause, which
also the School calls Deficient that they may rhyme to efficient, is not
inte^^e^ible, but a word devised like Hocus Pocus to juggle a difficulty out of
sight. That which is sufficient to produce a Monster; is not therefore to be
called an insufficient cause to produce a m^n, no more then that which is
sufficient to produce a man, is to be called an insufficient cause to produce a
Monster.

( c) [Thirdly, a cause is said to be sufficient in respect of the ability of
it to act, not in respect of its will to act, etc. As God is sufficient to
produce a thousand Worlds.] He understands little, when ^en say, God is
sufficient to produce many worlds, if he understand not the meaning to be, that
he is sufficient to prod^ce them if he will. Without this s^pposition, It he
will, a man is not sufficient to produce any voluntary action, not so much as
to walk, though he be inh^alth, and at Liberty. The will is as much a
sufficient cause without the strength to do, as the strength without the Will*
To that which he adds, that my Definition is a mere trifling between a
sufficiency in a divided sense, and a sufficiency in a compounded sense, I can
make no answer, because I understand no more, what he means by sufficiency in a
divided sense, and sufficiency in a compounded sense, then if he had said
sufficiency in a divided nonsense, and sufficiency in a compounded nonsense.

T. H. LAstly, I hold that the ordinary definition of a free Agent, namely Number.
32.
that a free Agent is, that, which when all things are present, which are
needful to produce the effect, can nevertheless not produce it, implies a
contradiction, and is nonsense, being as much as to say, the cause may be
sufficient, that is, necessary, and yet the effect not follow.


J. D. THis last point is but a Corollary, or an Inference from the former
doctrine, that every sufficient cause produces its effect necessarily, which
pillar being taken away the superstructure must needs fall to the ground,
having nothing left to support it. Lastly, I hold (says he) what he is able to
prove is something. So much reason, so much trust; but what he holds concerns
himself not others. But what holds he? I hold (says he) that the ordinary
definition of a free Agent implies a contradiction, and is nonsense. That
which he calls the ordinary definition of liberty is the very definition which
is given by the much greater part of Philosophers and Schoolmen. And does he
think that all these spoke nonsense? or had no more judgment than to
contradict themselves in a definition? He might much better suspect himself,
than censure so many. Let us see the definition i^ self: A free Agent is that,
which when all things are present, that are needful to produce the effect, can
nevertheless not produce it. I acknowledge the old definition of Liberty, with
little variation. But I cannot see this nonsense, nor discover this
contradiction. For ( a) in these words all things needful or all things
requisite, the actual determination of the will is not included. But by all
things needful or requisite, all necessary power either operative or elective,
all necessary instruments and adjuments extrinsecall and intrinsecall, and all
conditions are intended. As he that has pen and ink, and paper, a table, a
desk, and leisure, the art of writing, and the free use of his hand, has all
things requisite to write if he will, and yet he may forbear, if he will. Or as
he that has men and money, and arms, and munition, and ships, and a just cause,
has all things requisite for war, yet he may make peace, if he will. Or as the
King proclaimed in the Gospel, Matthew. 2^. 4. ^ h^ve prepared my dinner, my oxen
and my fatlings are killed, all things are ready, come unto the marriage.
According to T. H his doctrine, the guests might have told him that he said not
truly, for their own wills were not read^. ( b) And indeed if the will were (as
he conceives it is) necessitated extrinsecally to every act of willing, if it
had no power to forbear willing what it does will, nor to will what it does not
will, then if the will were wanting, something requisite to the producing of
the effect was wanting. But now when Science and conscience, reason and
Religion, our own and other men's experience does teach us, that the will has a
dominion over its own acts to will, or nill without extrinsecal necessitation,
if the power to will be present in act^ primo, determinable by our selves, then
there is no necessary power wanting in this respect to the producing of the
effect.

Secondly, these words ^o act or not to act, to w^rk or not to work, to produce
or not to produce, have reference to the effect, not as a thing which is
already done, or doing, but as a thing ^o be done. They imply not the actual
production but the producibility of the effect. But when once the will has
actually concurred with all other causes and conditions, and circumstances,
then the effect is no more possible, or producible, but it is in being, and
actually produced. Thus he takes away the subject of the question. The question
is whether effects producible be free from necessity. He shuffles out effects
producible, and thrusts in their places effects produced, or which are in the
act of production Wherefore I conclude, that it is neither non* sense nor
contradiction to say, that a free Agent, when all things requisite to produce
the effect are present, may nevertheless not produce it.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXII.
THe question is here whether these words, a free Agent is that, which when all
things needful to the production of the effect are present, can nevertheless
not produce it, ^^mply a contradiction, as I say it does. To make it appear no
contradiction, he says

(a) [In these words, all things needful or all things requisite, the actual
determination of the Will is not included,] as if the Will were not needful nor
requisite to the producing of a voluntary Action. For to the production of any
Act whatsoever, there is needful, not only those things which proceed from the
Agent, but also those that consist in the disposition of the patient? And to
use his own instance, it is necessary to writing, not only that there be p^n,
ink, paper, etc. but also a will to write. He that has the former has all
things requisite to write if he will, but not all things necessary to writing.
And so in his other instances, he that has men and money, etc. (without that
which he puts in for a requisite) has all things requisite to make War if
he Will, but not simply to make War. And he in the Gospel that had prepared his
Dinner, had all things requisite for his guests if they came, but not all
things requisite to make them come. And therefore all things requisite, is a
term ill defined by him.

(b) [And indeed if the will were (as he conceives it is) necessitated
extrinsecally to every act of willing, if it had no power to forbear willing,
what it does will, nor to will what it does not will, then if the will were
wanting, something requisite to the produceing of the effect were wanting. But
now when Science and Conscience, Reason and Religion, our own and other men's
experience does teach us* that the Will has a Dominion over its own Acts to
Will, or Nill, without extrinsecal necessitation, if the power to will be
present in actu primo, determinable by our selves, then there is no necessary
power wanting in this respect to the producing of the effect.] These words, the
will has power to forbear willing what it does will, and these, the Will has a
Dominion over its own Acts, and these, the power to Will is present in actu
primo, determinable by our selves, are as wild as ever were any spoken with in
the Walls of Bedlam; and if Science, Conscience, Reason and Religion, teach us
to speak thus, they make us mad. And that which follows is false to Act or
not to Act, to work or not to work, to produce or not to produce, have
reference to the effect, not as a thing which is already done, or doing, but as
a thing to be done. For, to act, to work, to produce, are the same thing with
to be doing. It is not the act but the power that has reference to the future,
for act and power differ in nothing but in this, that the former, signifies
the time present, the latter, the time to come. And whereas he adds, that I
shuffle out effects producible, and thrust into their places effects produced,
I must take it for an untruth, till he cite the place wherein I have done so.

T. H. FOr my first five points where it is explicated; First, what Number. 33.
Spontaneity is, Secondly, what Deliberation is, Thirdly, what Will, Propension
and Appetite is, Fourthly, what a free Agent is, Fifthly, what Liberty is, There
can be no other proof offered, but every man's own experience, by reflecting on
himself, and remembering what he uses to have in his mind, that is, what he
himself means, when he says, an action is spontaneous, A man deliberates,
such is his will, That Agent, or that action is free. Now, he that so
reflecteth on himself cannot but be satisfied, that deliberation is the
considering of the good and evil sequells of the action to come* That by
Spontaneity, is meant inconsiderate proceeding, (for else nothing is meant by
it.) That will is the last act of our Deliberation. That a free Agent, is he
that can do, if he will, and forbear, if he will. And that Liberty is the
absence of external impediments; But to those that out of custom speak not
what they conceive, but what they hear, and are not able, or will not take the
pains to consider what they think, when they hear such words, no argument can
be sufficient, because experience, and matter of fact is not verified by other
men's Arguments, but by every m^ns own sense, and memory. For example, how can
it be prooved, that to love a thing, and to think it good are all one, to a man
that does not mark his own meaning by those words. Or how can it be prooved
that Eternity is not nunc Stans, to a man that says these words by c^sto^^e,
and never considers how he can conceive the thing it self in his mind. Also the
sixth point, that a man cannot imagine any thing to begin without a cause, can
no other way be made known but by trying how he can imagine it. But if he try,
he shall find as much reason (if there be no cause of the thing) to conceive,
it should begin at one time as another, that is, he has equal reason to
think, it should begin at all times, which is impossible. And therefore he must
think there was some special cause, why it began then rather than sooner or
later, or else, that it began never, but was Eternal.


J. D. NOw at length he comes to his main proofs; He that has so confidently
censured the whole current of Schoolmen and Philosophers of nonsense, had need
to produce strong evidence for himself. So he calls his reasons, Numb. 36.
demonstrative proofs. All demonstrations are either from the cause or the
effect, not from private notions and conceptions, which we have in our minds.
That which he calls a demonstration deserves not the name of an intimation. He
argues thus; That which a man conceives in his mind, by these words
Spontaneity* Deliberation, etc. that they are. This is his proposition which I
deny. (a) The true natures of things are not to be judged by the private ideas,
or conceptions of men, but by their causes and formal reasons. Ask an ordinary
person what upwards signifies, and whether our Antipodes have their heads
upwards or downwards; And he will not stick to tell you, that if his head be
upwards, theirs must needs be downwards. And this is because he knows not the
formal reason thereof; that the Heavens incircle the earth, and what is toward
Heaven is upwards. This same erroneous notion of upwards and downwards before
the true reason was fully discovered, abused more than ordinary capacities, as
appears by their arguments of penduli homines, and pendulae arbores. Again,
what do men conceive ordinaryly by this word empty, as when they say an empty
vessel, or by this word Body, as when they say, there is no body in that room,
they intend not to exclude the air, either out of the vessel, or out of the
room. Yet reason tells us, that the vessel is not truly empty, and that the
air is a true body. I might give an hundred such like instances. He, who
leaves the conduct of his understanding to follow vulgar notions, shall plunge
himself into a thousand errors, like him who leaves a certain guide to follow
an ignis fatuus, or a Will with the wispe. So his proposition is false. (b) His
reason, That matter of fact is not verified by other men's Arguments, but by
every man's own sense and memory, is likewise maimed on both sides, whether we
hear such words, or not, is matter of fact, and sense is the proper judge of
it. But what these words do, or ought truly to signify, is not to be judged
by sense but by reason. Secondly, reason may, and does oftentimes correct
sense, even about its proper object. Sense tells us that the Sun is no bigger
than a good Ball, but reason demonstrates, that it is many times greater than
the whole Globe of the earth. As to his instance. How can it be proved, that to
love a thing, and to think it good is al one to a man that does not mark his
own meaning by these words, I confess, it cannot be proved, for it is not true.
Beauty and likeness, and love do conciliate love as much as goodness, Cos
amoris amor. Love is a passion of the will, but to judge of goodness is an act
of the understanding. A Father may love an ungracious Child, and yet not esteem
him good. A man loves his own house better than another man's, yet he cannot but
esteem many others better than his own. His other instance, How can it be
proved that eternity is not nunc stans, to a man that says these words by
custom, and never considers how he can conceive the thing it self in his
mind, is just like the former, not to be proved by reason, but by fancy, which
is the way he takes. And it is not unlike the counsel, which one gave to a
Novice about the choice of his wife, to advice with the Bells, as he fancied so
they sounded, either take her, or leave her.

(c) Then for his assumption it is as defective as his proposition, That by
these words spontaneity, etc. men do understand as he conceives. No rational
man does conceive a spontaneous action, and an indeliberate action to be all
one, every indeliberate action is not spontaneous. The fire considers not
whether it should burn, yet the burning of it is not spontaneous. Neither is
ev^ry spontaneous action indeliberate, a man may deliberate what he will eat,
and yet eat it spontaneously. ( d) Neither does deliberation properly signify
the considering of the good and evil sequels of an action to come. But the
considering whether this be a good and fit means, or the best, and fittest
means for obtaining such an end. The Physician does not deliberate whether he
should cure his Patient, but by what means he should cure him. Deliberation is
of the means not of the end. ( e) Much less does any man conceive with T. H.
that deliberation is an imagination, or an act of fancy not of reason, common
to men of discretion with mad men, and natural fools and children, and bruit
beasts. ( f) Thirdly, neither does any understanding man conceive, or can
conceive, that the will is an act of our deliberation. The understanding and
the will are two distinct faculties, or that only the last appetite is to be
called our will. So no man should be able to say this is my will, because he
knows not whether he shall persevere in it or not. ( g) Concerning the fourth
point we agree that he is a free Agent that can do, if he will, and forbear if
he will. But I wonder how this dropped from his pen, what is now become of his
absolute necessity of all things, if a man be free to do and to forbear any
thing? Will he make himself guilty of the nonsense of the Schoolmen; and run
with them into contradictions for company? It may be he will say he can do if
he will, and forbear if he will, but he cannot will if he will. This will not
serve his turn, for if the cause of a free action, that is, the will to be
determined, then the effect, or the action it self is likewise determined, a
determined cause cannot produce an undetermined effect, either the Agent can
will, and forbear to will, or else he cannot do, and forbear to do. ( h) But we
differ holy about the fifth point. He who conceives liberty aright, conceives
both a liberty in the subject to will, or not to will, and a liberty to the
object to will this, or that, and a liberty from impediments. T. H. by a new
way of his own cuts off the liberty of the subject, as if a stone was free to
ascend, or descend, because it has no outward impediment. And the liberty
toward the object, as if the Needle touched with the Lodestone were free to
point, either toward the North, or toward the South, because there is not a
Barricado in its way to hinder it; yea, he cuts off the liberty from inward
impediments also: As if an Hawk were at liberty to fly when her wings are
plucked, but not when they are tied. And so he makes liberty from extrinsecal
impediments to be complete liberty; so he ascribes liberty to bruit beasts, and
liberty to Rivers, and by consequence makes Beasts and Rivers to be capeable of
sin and punishment. Assuredly, Xerxes, who caused the Hellespont to be beaten
with so many stripes, was of this opinion. Lastly, T. H. his reason that it is
^ustome, or want of ability, or negligence which makes a m^n c^nceive
otherwise, is but a begging of that which he should prove. Other men consider
as seriously as himself, with as much judgment as himself, with less prejudice
than himself, and yet they can apprehend no suchsense of these words Wouldhe
have other men feign that they see fiery Dragons in the Air, because he affirms
confidently that he sees them, and wonders why others are so blind as not to
see them?

(i) The reason for the sixth point is like the former, a fantastical, or
imaginative reason. How can a man imagine any thing to begin without a cause,
or if it should begin without a cause, why it should begin at this time rather
than at that time? He says truly, noth^^g can begin without a cause, that is
to be, but it may begin to act of it self without any other cause. Nothing can
begin without a cause, but many things may begin, and do begin without
necessary causes. A free cause may as well choose his time when he will begin,
as a necessary cause be determined extrins^cally when it must begin. And
although free effects cannot be foretold, because they are not certainly
predetermined in their causes, yet when the free causes do determine
themselves, they are of as great certainty as the other. As when I see a Bell
ringing. I can conceive the cause of it as well why it rings now, as I know the
interposition of the earth to be the cause of the Eclipse of the Moon, or the
most certain occurrent in the nature of things.

(k) And now that I have answered T. H. his Arguments drawn from the private
conceptions of men concerning the sense of words, I desire him seriously
without prejudice to examine himself, and those natural notions which he finds
in himself, not of words, but of things, these are from nature, those are by
imposition, whether he does not find by experience that he does many things
which he might have left undone if he would, and omits many things which he
might have done if he would, whether he does not somethings out of mere
animosity, and will, without either regard to the direction of right reason or
serious respect of what is honest, or profitable, only to show that he will
have a dominion over his own actions, as we see ordinarily in Children, and
wise men find at sometimes in themselves by experience. And I apprehend this
very defense of necessity against liberty to be partly of that kind. Whether he
is not angry with those who draw him from his study, or cross him in his
desires; if they be necessitated to do it, why should he be angry with them,
any more than he is angry with a sharp winter, or a rainy day that keeps him at
home against his antecedent will. Whether he does not sometime blame himself,
and say, O what a fool was I to do thus and thus, or wish to himself, O that I
had been wise, or, O that I had not done such an act. If he have no dominion
over his actions, if he be irres^stibly necessitated to all things that he
does, he might as well wish, O that I had not breached, or blame himself for
growing old, O what a fool was I to grow old.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXIII.
I Have said in the beginning of this Number, that to define what spontan^iry
is, what deliberation is, what Will, Propension, Appetite, a free Agent, and
Liberty is, and to prove they are well defined, there can be no other proof
offered, but every man's own experience and memory of what he means by such
words. For definitions being the beginning of all demonstration, cannot
themselves be demonstrated, that is, proved to another man; All that can be
done, is either to put him in mind, what th^se words signify commonly in the
matter whereof they tre^t, or if the words b^ unusual to make, the Definitions
of them true by mutual consent in their signification. And though this be
manifestly true, yet there is nothing of it amongst the Schoolmen, whouse to
argue* not by rule, but as Fencers teach to hardle weapons, by quickness ^n^ly
of the hand and eye. The Bishop therefore boggles at this kind of proof, and
says,

(a) The true natures of things, are not to be judged by the private Ideas, or
conceptions of men* but by their causes and formal reasons Ask an ordinary
person, what upwards signifies etc.] But what will ^e answer if I should ask
him how he will judge o^ the causes of things, whereof he hat^ no I^ea or
concepti^n in his own ^ind? It is therefore impossible to give a true
definition of any word, without the Idea, of the thing which that word
signifies, or not ac^o^^ing to that Idea or conception. Here again he
discovers the true cause, why he and other Schoolmen so often speak
absurd^y. For they speak without conception of the things, and by rote, one
receiving what he says from another by tradition, from some pust (...) or
Philosopher, that to decline a^ difficulty, speaks in such manner, as not to
be understood. And whereas he bidds us as^e an ordinary person, what upwards
signifies, (...) dare Answer for that ordinary person, he will tell us as
significantly as any Scholar, and say it is toward Heaven, and as so^^ as he
knows the earth is r^und makes no scruple to believe there are Antipodes, being
wiser in that point then were those, which he says, to have been of more then
ordinary capacities. Again, ordinary men understand not he says the words,
empty and Body; yes, but they do just as well as learned men. When they hear
named an empty vessel, the learned as well as the unlearned mean and understand
the same thing, namely, that there is nothing in it that can be seen; and
whether it be truly empty, the Plough-man, and the School man know a like. I
might give he says an hundred such like instances. That true; a man may give a
thousand foolish and impertinent instances of men ignorant in such questions of
Philosophy concerning Emptiness, Body, Upwards, and Downwards and the like; But
the question is not whether such and such tenets be true, but whether such and
such words can be well defined, without thinking upon the things they signifiet
as the Bishop thinks they may, when he concludes with these words, So his
proposition is salfe.

(b) [His reason, that matter of fact is not verified by other men's Arguments,
but by every man's own sense and memory, is likewise maimed on both sides.
Whether we hear such words, or not, is matter of fact, and sense is the proper
Judge of it; but what these words do, or ought truly to signify, is not to be
judged by sense, but by reason.] A man is borne with a capacity after due time
and experience to reason truly; to which capacity of nature, if there be added
no Discipline at all, yet, as far as he reasons he will reason truly, though
by a right Discipline, he may reason truly in more numerous and various
matters. But he that has lighted on deceiving or deceived masters, that teach
for truth all that has been dictated to them by their own interest, or has
been cried up by other such teachers before them, have for the most part their
natural reason as far as concerns the truth of Doctrine quite defaced or very
much weakened, becoming changelings through the enchantments of words not
understood. This comes into my mind from this saying of the Bishop, that
matter of fact, is not verified by sense and memory, but by Arguments. How is
it possible that without Discipline a man should come to think that the
estimony of a witness, which is the only verifier of matter of fact should
consist, not in sense and memory, so as he may say he saw and remembers the
thing done, but in Arguments or S^llegismes? Or how can an unlearn^d man be
brought to think the words he speaks, ought to signify, (when he speaks
sincerely) any thing else, but that which himself meant by them? Or how can any
man without learning take the question whether the Sun be no bigger then a
ball, or bigger then the Earth, to be a question of fact? Nor do I think that
any man is so simple as ^^t to find that to be good which he loves, good I say
so far forth, as it makes him to love it; or is there any unl^arned man, so
st^pid as to think Eternity is this present instant of time standing still, and
the same Eternit to be the very next instant after, an consequently, that there
be so many eternities ^a^ there can be instants of time supposed? No, there is
Sc^olastic^ learning required in some measure to make one mad.

(c) [Then for his assumption, it is as defective as his proposition, That by
these words spontaneity, etc. Men do understand as he conceives, etc. No
rational man does conceive a spontaneous Action and an indeliberate Action to
be all one; Every indeliberate Action is not spontaneous, etc. Nor every
spontaneous Action indeliberate.] This I get by striving to make sense of that
which he strives to make nonsense. I never thought the word spontaneity
English. Yet because he used it, I made such meaning of it as it would bear,
and said it meant inconsiderate proceeding or nothing. And for this my too much
officio^snesse I r^ceive the reward of b^ing thought by him not to be a rati
nal man. I know that in the Latin of all Authors but Schoolmen. Actio
spontanea signifies that Action, whereof there is no apparent cause derived
further th^n from the Agent it self, and is in all things that have sense, the
same with voluntary whether deliberated or not d^liberated. And therefore where
he distinguished it from voluntary, I thought he might mean indeliberate; but
let it signify what it will, provided it be intelligible, it would make
against him.

(d) [Neither does deliberation properly signify the considoring of the good
and evil sequells, of an Action to come; but the considering whether this be a
good and fit means, or the best, and fittest means for obtaining such an end]
If the Bi^^ops words proceeded not from hearing and readi^g of others, but from
his own thoughts, he could never have reprehended this ^efinition of
Deliberation especia^^y in the manner he does it; for he says it is the
consi^^ring whether this or that be a good and fit means, for obtaining such an
end; as if considering whether a means be good or not, were not all ^n^, with
considering whether the s^quei of using those means be good or evil.

(e) [Much less does any man conceive with T. H. that deliberation is an Act
o^ Fancy, not of Reason, common to men of discretion with mad men natural
fools, children, and brute beasts] I do indeed conceive that d^liberation is an
Act of Imagination or Fancy, ^ay more, that Reason and Understanding also, are
A^^s of the Imagination, that is to say, they are Imaginations. I find it so by
considering my own* Ratio^^nation; and he might find it so i^ his, i^ he did
consider his own thoughts, and not speak as he does by rote; by rote I say when
he disputes; not by rote, when he is about those tris^^s, he ca^^eth
businesses; then when he speaks he thinks of (that is to say he Imagins) his
business; but here he thinks only upon the words of other men that have gone
before him in th^^ question, transcribing their conclusions and arguments, not
his o^n thoughts.

(f) [Thirdly, neither does any understanding man conceive, or can conceive,
either that the Will is an Act of our Deliberation, the Understanding and the
Will are two distinct faculties; or that only the last appetite, is to be
called our Wi^^.] Though the understanding and the Will were two distinct
faculties, yet follow their not that the Will and the Deliberation are two
distinct facul^i^s; for the whole Deliberation is nothing else, but so many
Wills, alternatively chang^d, according as a man understands or fancieth, the
good and evil sequels of the thing concerning which he deliberateth whether he
shall purs^e it, or of the means whither they conduce or not to that end
whatsoever it be he seeks to obtain. So that in deliberation there be many
wills whereof net any is the cause of a voluntary action but the last, as I
have said before answering this objection in another place.

(g) Concerning the fourth point we agree* that he is a free Agent, that can do
if he Will, and forbear if he Will. But I wonder how this dropped from his Pen?
etc. It may be he will say he can do if he will, and forbear if he will, but he
cannot will if he will. He has no reason to wonder ^ow this dropped from my
Pen. He sound it in my Answer. Numb. 3. and has been all his while about to
confute it, so long indeed that he had forget I said it. And now again brings
another Argument to pr^v^ a man is free to Will, which ^^th; either the Agent
can Will, and forbear to Will, or else be cannot do, and forbear to do. There
is no doubt a man can Will one thing or other, and forbear to will it. For men
if they be awake ^re always willing one thing or other. But put the case a man
h^s a Will today to do a certain Action to* morrow, is he sure to have the same
Will tomorrow when he is to do it? Is he free to day to choose tomorrows Will?
This is it that's now in question, and this Argument makes nothing for the
assirmative or negative.

(h) [But we differ wholly about the fifth point. He who conceives Liberty
aright, conceives both a Liberty in the subject to Will or not to Will, and a
Liberty to the object to Will this, or that, and a Liberty from impediments. T.
H. by a new way of his own cuts of the ^iberty of the subject, as if a stone
were free to ascend, or descend, because it has no outward impediment; And the
Liberty toward the object, as if the needle touched with the Lodestone were
free to point* either toward the North or toward the South, because there is
not a Baricado in its way.] How does it appear that he who conceives Liberty
aright, conceives a Liberty in the subject to Will or no^ to Will, unless he
mean Liberty to d^ if he Will, or not to do if he will not, which was never
denied? Or how does it follow that a stone is as free to ascend, as desc^nd,
u^le^^e he prove there is no outward impe^iment to its ascent. Which cannot be
proved; for the contrary is true. Or how proves he, that there is no outward
impediment to keep that point of the Load stone which places it self toward
the North, from turning to the South? His ignorance of the causes external is
not a sufficient argument that there are none. And whereas he says, that
according to my definition of Liber^y, a Hauk were at Liberty to fly when her
wings are plucked, but not when they are tied. I answer, that she is not at
Liberty to fly when her wings are ty^d; but to say, when her wings are pl^ckt,
that she wanted the Liberty to fly, were to speak improp^rly and absurdly; for
in that case, men that speak English use to say she cannot fly And for his
reprehension of my attributing Lib^rty to brute beasts, and rivers, I would be
glad to know whether it be improper language to say a bird ^r beast* may be s^t
at Liberty from the cage wherein they were ^mprisoned, or to say that a river
which was stopped, has recovered its free course, and how it follows, that a
beast or river recovering this freedom, must needs therefore be capable of sin
and punishment.

(i) *The reason for the sixth point, is like the former, a Fantastical or
Imaginative reason. How can a man imagine any thing to begin without a cause;
or if it should begin without a cause, why it should begin at this time, rather
then at that time? He says truly, nothing can begin without a cause, that is
to be, but it may, begin to Act of it self without any other cause. Nothing can
begin without a cause, but many things may begin without an^cess^ry cause] He
grants nothing ca^ begin without a cause, and he has granted formerly that
nothing can cause it self. And now he says it may begin to Act of it self. The
action therefore begins to be without any cause which he said nothing could do,
contradicting what he had said but in the line before. And ^or that that he
says, that many things may begin not without cause, but without a necessary
cause. It has been argu^d before; and all causes have been proved, (if entire
and suffici^nt causes) to be n^cessary, and that which he repeat^th here,
namely, that a free cause may choose his time when he will begin to work, and
that although free effects, cannot be foretold, because they are not certainly
predetermined in their causes, yet when the free causes do determine
themselves, they are of as great certainty as the other, it has been made
appear sufficiently before, that it is but Jargon, the words free cause, and
determining themselves being insignificant, and having nothing in the mind of
man naswerable to them.

( k) [And now that I have answered T. H. his arguments drawn from the private
conceptions of men concerning the sense of words, I desire him seriously to
examine himself, etc.] One of his interrogatories is, this, whether I find not
by experience that I do many things which I might have left undone if I would.
This question was needl^sse, because all the way I have granted him that men
have libe^ty to do many things if they will, which they left und^ne, because
they had not the Will to do them. Another interrogatory is this, whether I do
not some things without regard to the direction of right reason, or serious
respect of what is honest or pr^fitable. This question was in vain, unless he
think himself my Confessor. Another is* whether I writ not this defense
against Liberty, only to show I will have a Dominion over my own actions. To
this I answer, no; but to show I have no Dominion over my will, and this also
at his request; But all these questions serve in this place for nothing else,
but to deliver him of a jest he was in labor with all, and therefore his last
question is, whether I do not sometimes say; Oh what a fool was I to do thus
and thus; or Oh that I had been wise; or Oh what a fool was I to grow old.
Subtle questions, and full of Episcopal gravity, I would he had left out
charging me with blasphemous, desperate, destructive, and Atheistecal opinions.
I should then have pardon^d him, his calling me fool, both because I do many
things foolishly, and because in this question disputed between us, I think he
will appear a greater fool then I.

T. H. FOr the seventh point, that all events have necessary causes, it is Number.
34.
there proved in that they have sufficient causes. Further, Let us in this
place also suppose any event never so casual at for example, the throwing
Ambs-ace upon a pair of Dice, and see if it must not have been necessary
before it was thrown; for, seeing it was thrown, it had a beginning, and
consequently a sufficient cause to produce it, consisting partly in the Dice,
partly in the ou^ward things, as the posture of the parties hand, the measure
of force applied by the caster, the posture of the parts of the Table, and the
like; In sum, there was not^ing wanting that was necessarily requisite to the
producing of that particular cast, and consequently, that cast was necessarily
thrown. For i^ it had not been thrown, there had wanted somewhat requisite to
the throwing of it, and so the cause had not been sufficient. In the like
manner it may be proved that every other accident, how conting^nt so^ver it
seem, or how voluntary soever it be, is produced nec^ssarily; which is that J.
D. dis^utes against. The same also may be proved in this manner, Let the case
be put for example) of the weather, It Is necessary that to morrow it shall rain,
or not rain. If therefore it be not necessary it shall rain, it is necessary it
shall not rain. Otherwise it is not necessary that the proposition, It shall
rain, or it shall not rain, should be true. I know there are some that say, it
may necessarily be true, that one of the two shall come to pass, but not singly
that it shall rain, or it shall not rain. Which is as much as to say, One of
them is necessary, yet neither of them is necessary; And therefore to seem to
avoid, that absurdity they make a distinction that neither of them is true
determinate but indeterminate; Which distinction, either signifies no more than
this, One of them is true, but we know not which, and so the necessity remains,
though we know it not: Or if the meaning of the distinction be not that, it has
no meaning. And they might as well have said, One of them is true Tytyrice, but
neither of them Tupatulice.


J. D. (a) HIs former proof, that all sufficient causes are necessary causes is
answered before. Numb. 31. (b) And his two instances of casting Ambs-ace, and
raining to morrow, are altogether impertinent to the question now agitated
between us, for two reasons. First, our present controversy is concerning free
actions, which proceed from the liberty of man's will, both his instances are of
contingent actions, which proceed from the indetermination, or contingent
concurrence of natural causes. First, that there are free actions, which
proceed merely from election* without any outward necessitation is a truth so
evident, as that there is a Sun in the Heavens, and he that doubts of it may
as well doubt whether there be a shell without the Nut, or a stone within the
Olive. A man proportions his time each day, and allots so much to his
Devotions, so much to his Study* so much to his Diet, so much to his
Recreations, so much to necessary, or civil visits, so much to his rest, he who
will seek for I know not what causes of all this without himself, except that
good God who has given him a reasonable Soul, may as well seek for a cause of
the Egyptian Pyramides among the Crocodiles of Nilus. (c) Secondly, for mixed
actions which proceed from the concurrence of free and natural Agents, though
they be not free, yet they are not necessary, as to keep my former instance, a
man walking though a street of a City to do his occasions, a Tile falls from
an House and breaks his head, the breaking of his head was not necessary, for
he did freely choose to go that way without any necessitation, neither was it
free, for he did not deliberate of that accident, therefore it was contingent,
and by undoubted consequence there are contingent ac^^ons in the World which
are not free. Most certainly by the concurrence of free causes, as God, the
good and bad Angels, and men, with natural Agents sometimes on purpose, and
sometimes by accident many events happen, which otherwise had never happened;
many effects are produced which otherwise had never been produced. And
admitting such things to be contingent not necessary, all their consequent
effects, not only immediate, but med^ate must likewise be conting^^^, that is
to say, such as do not proceed from a continued connection and succession of
necessary causes, which is directly contrary to T. H. his opinion.

(d) Thirdly, for the actions of bruit beasts, though they be not free, though
they have not the use of reason to restrain their appetites from that which is
sensitively good, by the consideration of what is rationally good, or what is
ho^est, and though their fancies be determined by nature to some kinds of work,
yet to think that every individual action of theirs, and each animal motion of
theirs, even to the least murmr, or gesture is bound by the chain of
unalterable necessity to the extrinsecal causes or objects, I see no ground for
it. Christ says one of these Sparrows does not fall to the gound without your
Heavenly Father, that is without an influence of power from him, or exempted
from his disposition, he does not say which your Heavenly Father casts not
down. Lastly, for the natural actions of inanimate Creatures, wherein there is
not the least concurrence of any free, or voluntary Agents, the question is yet
more doubtful; for many things are called contingent in respect of us, because
we know not the cause of them, which really and in themselves are not
contingent, but necessary. Also many things are contingent in respect of one
single cause, either actually hindered, or in possibility to be hindered, which
are necessary in respect of the joint concurrence of all collateral causes. (
e) But whether there be a necessary connection of all natural causes from the
beginning so as they must all have concurred as they have done, and in the same
degree of power, and have been deficient as they have been in all events
whatsoever, would require a further examination if it were pertinent to this
question of liberty; but it is not. It is sufficient to my purpose to have
showed that all elective actions are free from absolute ne^essity. And
more-over, that the concurrence of voluntary* and free Agents with natural
causes, both upon purpose and accidentally has helped them to produce many
effects, which otherwise they had not produced, and hindered them from producing
many effects, which otherwise they had produced. And that if this intervention
of voluntary and free Agents had been more frequent than it has been, (as
without doubt it might have been) many natural events had been otherwise than
they are. And therefore he might have spared his instances of casting Ambs-ace
and raining to morrow. And first for his casting Ambs-ace. If it be thrown by a
fair Gamester with indifferent Dice, it is a mixed action, the casting of the
Dice is free, but the casting of Ambs-ace is contingent, a man may deliberate
whether he will cast the Dice, or not, but it were folly to deliberate whether
he will cast Ambs-ace, or not, because it is not in his power, unless he be a
cheater that can cogge the Dice, or the Dice be false Dice, and then the
contingency, or the degree of contingency cease, accordingly as the Caster
has more, or less cunning, or as the figure or making of the Dice does incline
them to Ambs-ace more than to another cast, or necessitate them to this cast
and no other. Howsoever so far as the cast is free, or contingent, so far it is
not necessary. And where necessity begins there liberty and contingency do
cease to be: Likewise his other instance of raining, or not raining to morrow,
is not of a free elective act, nor always of a contingent act. In some
Countries as they have their stati venti their certain winds at set seasons, so
they have their certain and set rains. The Ethiopian rains are supposed to be
the cause of the certain inundation of Nilus. In some eastern Countries they
have rain only twice a year, and those constant, which the Scriptures call the
former and the later rain. In such places not only the causes do act
determinately and necessarily, but also the determination, or necessity of the
event is fore-known to the inhabitants. In our Climate the natural causes
celestial and sublunary do not produce rain so necessarily at set times,
neither can we say so certainly and infallibly, it will rain to morrow, or it
will not rain to morrow. Nevertheless, it may so happen that the causes are so
disposed and determined, even in our climate, that this proposition, it will
rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow, may be necessary in it self, and
the Prognostics, or tokens may be such in the sky, in our own bodies, in the
creatures, animate and inanimate, as weather-glasses, etc. that it may become
probably true to us that it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow.
But ordinarily it is a contingent proposition to us, whether it be contingent
also in it self, that is, whether the concurrence of the causes were absolutely
necessary, whether the vapors, or matter of the rain may not yet be dispersed,
or otherwise consumed, or driven beyond our coast, is a speculation which no
way concerns this question. So we see one reason why his two instances are
altogether impertinent, because they are of actions which are not free, nor
elective, nor such as proceed from the liberty of man's will.

Secondly, our dispute is about absolute necessity, his proofs extend only to
Hypothetical necessity. Our question is; whether the concurrence and
determination of the causes were necessary before they did concur, or were
determined. He proves that the effect is necessary after the causes have
concurred, and are determined. The freest actions of God, or man, are necessary
by such a necessity of supposition, and the most contingent events that are, as
I have showed plainly, Numb. 3. where his instance of Ambs-ace is more fully
answered. So his proof looks another way from his proposition. His proposition
is, that the casting of Ambs-ace was necessary before it was thrown. His proof
is that it was necessary when it was thrown; examine all his causes over and
over, and they will not afford him one grain of antecedent necessity. The first
cause is in the Dice: True, if they be false Dice there may be something in it,
but then his contingency is destroyed. If they be square Dice, they have no
more inclination to Ambs-ace, than to Cinque and Quater, or any other cast. His
second cause is the posture of the parties hand: But what necessity was there
that he should put his hand into such a posture? None at all. The third cause
is the measure of the force applied by the caster. Now for the credit of his
cause let him but name, I will not say a convincing reason nor so much as a
probable reason, but even any pretense of reason, how the Caster was
necessitated from without himself to apply just so much force, and neither more
nor less. If he cannot, his cause is desperate, and he may hold his peace for
ever. His last cause is the posture of the Table. But tell us in good earnest,
what necessity there was why the Caster must throw into that Table rather than
the other, or that the Dice must fall just upon that part of the Table, before
the cast was thrown: He that makes these to be necessary causes, I do not
wonder if he make all effects necessary effects. If any one of these causes be
contingent, it is sufficient to render the cast contingent; and now that they
are all so contingent, yet he will needs have the effect to be necessary. And
so it is when the cast is thrown, but not before the cast was thrown, which he
undertook to prove. Who can blame him for being so angry with the Schoolmen*
and their distinctions of necessity into absolute and hypothetical, seeing they
touch his freehold so nearly?

But though his instance of raining to morrow be impertinent, as being no free
action, yet because he triumphs so much in his argument, I will not stick to go
a little out of my way to meet a friend. For I confess, the validity of the
reason had been the same, if he had made it of a free action, as thus: Either I
shall finish this reply to morrow, or I shall not finish this reply to morrow,
is a necessary proposition. But because he shall not complain of any
disadvantage in the alteration of his terms; I will for once adventure upon his
shower of rain. And first, I readily admit his major that this proposition
(either it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to morrow, is necessarily
true, for of two contradictory propositions, the one must of necessity be true,
because no third can be given. But his minor, that it could not be necessarily
true, except one of the Members were necessarily true, is most false. And so is
his proof likewise, that if neither the one nor the other of the Members be
necessarily true, it cannot be affirmed that either the one, or the other is
true. A conjunct proposition may have both parts false, and yet the proposition
be true, as if the Suu shine, it is day, is a true proposition at midnight. And
T. H. confesses as much, Numb. 19. If I shall live I shall eat, is a necessary
proposition, that is to say, it is necessary that that proposition should be
true whenever uttered. But it is not the necessity of the thing, nor is it
therefore necessary that the man shall live, or that the man shall eat. And so
T. H. proceeds, I do not use to fortify my distinctions with such reasons. But
it seems he has forgotten himself, and is contented with such poor
fortifications. And though both parts of a disjunctive proposition cannot be
false, because if it be a right disjunction, the Members are repugnant, whereof
one part is infallibly true, yet vary but the proposition a little to abate the
edge of the disjunctions, and you shall find that which T. H. says to be
true, that it is not the necessity of the thing which makes the proposition to
be true. As for example vary it thus: I know that either (...) will rain to
morrow, or that it will not rain to morrow is a true proposition: But it is not
true that I know it will rain to morrow, neither is it true that I know it will
not rain to morrow; wherefore the certain truth of the proposition does not
prove, that either of the Members is determinately true in present. Truth is a
conformity of the understanding to the thing known, whereof speech is an
interpreter. If the understanding agree not with the thing it is an error, if
the words agree not with the understanding it is a lie. Now the thing known is
known either in it self, or in its causes. If it be known in it self, as it is,
then we express our apprehension of it in words of the present tence, as the
Sun is risen. If it be known in its cause, we express our selves in words of
the future tense, as to morrow will be an Eclipse of the Moon. But if we
neither know it in its self, nor in its causes, then there may be a foundation
of truth, but there is no such determinate truth of it, that we can reduce it
into a true proposition, we cannot say it does rain to morrow, or it does not
rain to morrow. That were not only false but absurd, we cannot positively say
it will rain to morrow, because we do not know it in its causes, either how
they are determined, or that they are determined, wherefore the certitude and
evidence of the disjunctive proposition is neither founded upon that which will
be actually to morrow, for it is granted that we do not know that; nor yet upon
the determination of the causes, for then we would not say indifferently,
either it will rain, or it will not rain, but positively it will rain, or
positively it will not rain. But it is grounded upon an undeniable principle,
that of two contradictory propositions, the one must necessarily be true. (f)
And therefore to say, either this, or that will infallibly be, but it is not
yet (...) whether this, or that shall be, is no such senseless (...) tha^ ^t
deserved a ^ytyrice T^patulice, but an ev^th which no man that has his eyes in
his head can d^^bt o^*

( g) If all this will not satisfy him, I will give one of his own kind of
proofs; that is an instance. That which necessitates all things according to T.
H. is the decree of God, or that order which is set to all things by the
eternal cause ( Numb. 11.) Now God himself, who made this necessitating decree,
was not subjected to it in the making thereof, neither was there any former
order to oblige the first cause necessarily to make such a decree; therefore
this decree being an act ad extra was freely made by God without any
necessitation. Yet nevertheless, this disjunctive proposition is necessarily
true. Either God did make such a decree, or he did not make such a decree.
Again, though T. H. his opinion were true that all events are necessary, and
that the whole Christian world are deccived, who believe that some events are
free from necessity, yet he will not deny, but if it had been the good pleasure
of God, he might have made some causes free from necessity, seeing that it
neither argues any imperfection, nor implies any contradiction. Supposing
therefore that God had made some second causes free from any such antecedent
determination to one, yet the former disjunction would be necessarily true.
Either this free undetermined cause will act after this manner, or it will not
act after this manner. Wherefore the necessary truth of such a disjunctive
proposition does not prove, that either of the members of the disjunction
singly considered, is determinately true in present, but only that the one of
them will be determinately true to morrow.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXIV.
( a) [HIs former proof; that all sufficient causes, are necessary causes, is
answered before Numb. 31.] When he shall have read my Animadversions upon that
Answer of his he will think otherwise whatsoever he will confess.

( b) [And his two instances of casting Ambs-ace, and of raining to morrow, are
altogether impertinent to the question, for two reasons. His first reason is,
because ( he says) our present controversy is concerning free actions, which
proceed from the Liberty of man's Will, and both his instances are of contingent
actions, which proceed from the indetermination, or contingent concurrence, of
natural causes] He knows that this part of my discourse which begins at
Numb. 25. is no dispute with him at all, but a bare se^ting down of my opinion
concerning the natural necessity of all things; which is opposite, not only to
the Liberty of Will; but also to all contingence that is not necessary. And
therefore these instances were not impertinent to my purpose; and if they be
impertinent to his opinion of the Liberty of man's Will, he does impertinently
to meddle with them. And yet for all he pretends here, that the question is
only ab ut Liberty of the Will. Yet in his first discourse Number the 16. he
maintains that the order, beauty, and perfection of the world does require,
that in the Universe should be Agents of all sorts, some necessary, some Free,
some contingent. And my purpose here is to show by those instances, that those
things which we esteem most contingent are nevertheless necessary. Besides,
the controversy is not whether free actions, which proceed from the Liberty of
man's Will be necessary or not; for I know no action, which proceeds from the
Liberty of man's Will. But the question is, whether those actions which proceed
from the man's Will, be necessary. The man's Will is something; but the Liberty
of his Will is nothing. Again, the question is not, whether contingent actions,
which proceed from the indetermination or contingent concurrence of natural
causes, (for there is nothing that can proceed from indetermination,) but
whether contingent actions be necessary before they be done, or whether the
concurrence of natural causes, when they happen to concur, were not
necessitated so to happen; or whether whatsoever chances be not necessitated
so to chance. And that they are so necessitated, I have proved already with
such arguments as the Bishop, for ought I see cannot answer. For to say (as he
does) that there are free actions which proceed merely from Election, without
any outward necessitation, is a truth so evident, as that there is a Sun in the
Heavens, is no proof. It Is indeed as clear as the Sun, that there are free
actions proceeding from Election; but that there is Election without any
outward necessitation, is dark enough.

( c) [Secondly, for mixed actions, which proceed from the concurrence of free
and natural Agents, though they be not free, yet they are not necessary, etc.]
For proof of this, he instanceth in a Tile that falling from an house, breaks a
man's head, neither necessarily, nor freely, and therefore contingently. Not
necessarily, for (says he) he did freely choose to go that way without any
necessitation. Which is as much as taking the question it self for a proof. For
what is else the question, but whether a man be necessitated to choose what he
chooses? Again (says he) it was not Free, because he did not deliberate
whether his head should be broken or not; and con^ludes, therefore it was
contingent; and by undoubted consequence, there are contingent actions in the
world, which are not free. This is true and denied by none; but he should have
proved, that such contingent actions are not antecedently necessary by a
concurrence of natural causes, (though a little before he grants they are.)
For whatsoever is produced by concurrence of natural causes, was antecedently
determined in the cause of such concurrence, though as he calls it contingent
concurrence, not perceiving that concurrence, and contingent concurrence, are
all one, and suppose a continued connection, and succession of causes, which
make the effect necessarily future. So that hitherto he has proved no other
contingence, then that which is necessary.

( d) [Thirdly, for the actions of brute beasts, etc. To think each animal
motion of theirs is bound by the chain of unalterable necessity, I see no
ground for it.] It makes nothing against the truth, that he sees no ground for
it. I have pointed out the ground in my former discourse, and am not bound to
find him eyes. He himself immediately cites a place of Scripture that proves
it, where Christ says, one of these sparrows does not fall to the ground,
without your heavenly father; which place if there were n^ more, were a
sufficient ground for the assertion of the necessity of all those changes of
animal motion; in birds and other living creatures, which seem to us so
uncertain. But when a man is dizzy with influence of power, elicite acts,
permissive will, Hypothetical necessity, and the like unintelligible terms* the
ground goes from him. By and by after he confesses that many things are called
contingent in respect of us, because we know not the cause o^ t^em* which
really and in themselves are not contingent, bu necessary, and err^ therein the
other way; for he says in effect that many things are, which are not; for it is
all one to say they are not contingent, and they are not. He should have said
there be many things, the necessity of whose contingence, we cannot or do not
know.

( e) [But whether there be a necessary connection of all natural causes from
the beginning, so as they must all have concurred as they have done, etc. Would
require a further examination, if it were pertinent to this question of
Liberty; but it is not. It is sufficient to my purpose to have showed, etc.] If
there be a necessary connection o^ all natural causes from the beginning, ^hen
there is no doubt but that all things happen necessarily which is that, that I
have all this while maintained. But whether there be or no, he says it requires
a further exa^inatio^. Hitherto therefore; he knows ^ot whether it be true or
no, and co^sequ^n^l^ all his arguments hitherto have been ^f no effect* nor
has he showed an^ thing to prove (what he purposed) that elective Actions are
not necessitated* And whereas a little before he says, that to my Arguments, to
prove that sufficient causes are necessary, he has already answered, it
seems he distrusteth his own answer, and answers again to the two instances
of casting Ambs^ace, and raining or not raining to morrow; but brings no other
Argument to prove the cast thrown not to be necessarily thrown, but this, that
he do not deliberate whether he shall throw that cast or not. Which Argument
may perhaps prove that the casting of it proceeds not from free will, but
proves not any thing against the antecedent, necessity of it. And to prove that
it is not necessary, that it should rain or not rain to morrow, after telling
us that the Ethiopian rains cause the inundation of Nilus; that in some
Eastern Countries they have rain only twice a year, which the Scripture (he
says) calls the former and the latter rain. ( I thought he had known it by
the experience of some Travelers, but I see he only gathers it from that
Phrase in Scripture of former and latter rain) I say after he has told us this,
to prove that it is not necess^ry it should rain or not rain to morrow, he
says that in our Climate, the natural causes celestial and sublunary do not
produce rain so necessarily at set times, as in the Eastern Countries; neither
can we say so certainly and infallibly, it will rain to morrow, or it will not
rain to morrow. By this Argument, a man may take the height of the Bishops
Logic. In our Climate the natural causes do not produce rain so necessarily at
set times as in some Eastern Countries. Therefore they do not produce rain
necessarily in our Climate, then when they do produce it. And again we cannot
say so certainly and infallibly, it will rain to morrow, or it will not rain to
morrow, therefore it is not necessary either that it should rain, or that it
should not rain to morrow; as if nothing were necessary the necessity whereof
we know not. Another reason he says, why my instances are impertinent, is
because they extend only to an Hypothetical necessity, that is, that the
necessity is not in the antecedent causes, and thereupon challenges me for the
credit of my cause, to name some reason, how the caster was necessitated from
without himself to apply just so much force to the cast, and neither more nor
less; or what necessity there was why the caster must throw into that Table
rather then the other, or that the Dice must fall just upon that part of the
Table, before the cast was thrown. Here again from our ignorance of the
particular causes that concurring make the necessity, he infers that there
was no such necessity at all; which indeed is that which has in all this
question deceived him and all other men, that attribute events to fortune. But
I suppose he will not deny that event to be necessary where all the causes of
the cast, and their concurrence, and the cause of that concurrence are
foreknown, and might be told him, though I cannot tell him. Seeing therefore
God foreknows them all, the cast was necessary, *and that from antecedent
causes from eternity, which is no Hypothetical necessity.

And whereas my argument to prove, that raining to morrow, if it shall then
rain, and not raining to morrow if it shall then not rain, was herefore
necessary because otherwise this disjuntive proposition, it shall rain or not
rain to morrow, is not necessary, he answers that a conjunct proposition, may
have both parts false and yet the proposition be true, as if the Sun shine it
is day, is a true proposition at midnight. What has a conjunct proposition to
do with this in question, which is disiunctive? Or what be the parts of this
proposition, if the Sun shine it is day? It is not made of two propositions, as
a disjunctive is; but is one s^^ple proposition, namely this, the shining of
the Sun is day. Either he has no Logic at all, or thinks they have no reason
at all that are his readers. But he has a trick he says to abate the edge of
the disjunction, by varying the proposition thus, I know that it will rain to
morrow, or that it will not rain to morrow, is a true proposition; and yet
says he, it is neither true, that I know it will rain to morrow; neither is it
true, that I know it will not rain to morrow. What childish deceit, or childish
ignorance is this, when he is to prove that neither of the members is
determinately true in a disjunctive proposition, to bring for instance a
proposition not disjunctive? It had been disjunctive if it had gone thus, I
know that it will rain to morrow, or I know that it will not rain to morrow;
but then he had certainly known determinately one of the two.

(f) [And therefore to say either this or that will infallibly be, but it is
not yet determined whether this or that shall be, is no such senseless
assertion, that it deserved a Tity rice Tupatulice.] But it is a senseless
assertion (whatsoever it deserve) to say that this proposition, it shall rain
or not rain is true indeterminedly, and neither of them true determinedly; and
little better as he has now qualified it, That it will infallibly be, though
it be not yet determined whether it shall be or no.

( g) [If all this will not satisfy him, I will give him one of his own kinds
of proof, that is an instance. That which necessitates all things according to
T. H. is the decree of God, etc. His instance is, that God himself made this
necessitating decree, and therefore this decree being an act ad extra was
freely made by God, without any necessitation.] I do believe the Bishop himself
believes that all the Decrees of God have been from all eternity, and
therefore he will not stand to this that Gods Decrees were ever made; for
whatsoever has been made, has had a beginning. Besides Gods Decree is his
Will; and the Bishop has said formerly that the Will of God is God, the
Justice of God, God, etc. If therefore God made a Decree (according to the
Bishops opinion) God made himself. By which we may see what fine stuff it is
that proceeds from disputing of Incomprehensibles. Again he says, if it had
been the good pleasure of God, he might have made some causes free from
necessity, seeing that it neither argues any imperfection, nor implies any
contradiction. If God had made either causes or effects free from necessity, he
had made the^^ free from his own Praescience, which had been imperfection.
Perhaps he will say, that in these words of his, the decree being an act ad
extra was freely made by God, I take no notice of that act ad extra, as being
too hot for my fingers. Therefore now I take notice of it, and say, that it is
neither Lati^, nor English, nor Sense.

T. H. THe last thing* in which also consists the whole controversy, Number. 35.
Namely, that there is no such thing as an Agent, which when all things
requisite to action are present, can nevertheless forbear to produce it, or
(which is all one, that there is no such thing as freedom from necessity, is
easily inferred from that which has been before alleged. For, if it be an
Agent, it can work, And if it work, there is nothing wanting of what is
requisite to produce the action, and consequently* the cause of the action is
sufficient. And if sufficient, then also necessary, as has been proved before.


J. D. I Wonder that T. H. should confess, that the whole weight of this
controversy does rest upon this proposition. That there is no such thing as an
Agent, which, when all things requisite to action are present, can nevertheless
forbear to act; And yet bring nothing but such poor Bull-rushes to support it.
( a)* If it be an Agent (says he) it can work, what of this? A posse ad esse
non valet argumentum, from can work, to will work, is a weak inference. And
from will work, to does work upon absolute necessity, is another gross
inconsequence. He proceeds thus, I^ it work, there is nothing wanting of what
is requisite to produce the action. True, there wants nothing to produce that
which is produced, but there may want much to produce that which was intended,
One horse may pull his heart out, and yet not draw the Coach whither it should
be, if he want the help or concurrence of his fellows. And consequently (says
he) the cause of the action is sufficient. Yes sufficient to do what it does,
though perhaps with much prejudice to it self, but not always sufficient to do
what it should do, or what it would do. As he that begets a Monster should
beget a man, and would beget a man, if he could: The last link of his argument
follows; (b) And if sufficient, then also necessary. Stay there; by his leave
there is no necessary connection between sufficiency and efficiency, otherwise
God himself should not be All-sufficient* Thus his Argument is vanished: But I
will deal more favorably with him, and grant him all that, which he labors so
much in vain to prove, That every effect in the world has sufficient causes:
Yea more* that supposing the determination of the free and contingent causes,
every effect in the world is necessary. ( c) But all this will not advantage
his cause the black of a bean, for still it amounts but to an hypothetical
necessity* and differs as much from that absolute necessity, which he
maintains, as a Gentleman, who travels for his pleasure, differs from a
banished man, or a free Subject from a slave.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXV.
(a) [ IF it be an Agent (says he) it can work, what of this? A posse ad esse
non valet argumentum from can work to will work is a weak inference. And from
will work, to does work upon absolute necessity, is another gross
inconsequence.] Here he has gotten a just advantage, for I should have said, if
it be an Agent it works, not it can work* But it is an advantage, which
profits little to his cause; for if I repeat my argument again in this
manner, that which is an Agent works; that which works wants nothing
requisite to produce the action* or the effect it produces; and consequently
is thereof a sufficient cause; and if a sufficient cause, then also a necessary
cause, his answer will be nothing to the purpose. For whereas to these words,
that which works wants nothing requisite to produce the action or the
effect it produces, he answers, it is true, but there may want much to
produce that which was intended, it is not contrary to any thing that I have
said. For I never maintained that whatsoever a man intends is necessarily
performed; but this, whatsoever a man performs i^ necessarily performed, and
what he intends, necessarily intended and that, from causes antecedent. And
therefore to say as he does, that the cause is sufficient to do what it does,
but not always sufficient to do what a man should or would do, is to say the
same that I do. For I say not that the cause that brings forth a Monster, is
sufficient to bring forth a man, but that every cause is sufficient to produce
only the effect it produces. And if sufficient, then also necessary.

( b) [ And if sufficient, then also necessary; stay there, by his leave there
is no necessary connection between sufficiency, and efficiency, otherwise God
himself should not be All sufficient.] All sufficiency signifies no more, when
it is attributed to God then Omnipotence, and Omnipotence signifies no more
then the Power to do all things that he will. But to the production of any
thing that is produced, the Will of God is as requisite, as the rest of his
Power and sufficiency. And consequently, his all sufficiency signifies not a
sufficiency or Power to do those thing he will not. But he will deal he says so
favorably with me, as to grant me all this, which I labor he says so much in
vain to prove, and adds*

( c) [But all this will not advantage his cause the black of a Bean, for still
it amounts but to an Hypothetical necessity.] If it prove no more; it proves no
necessity at all; for by Hypothetical necessity he means the necessity of this
proposition, the effect is, then when it is, whereas necessity is only said
truly of somewhat in future. For necessary is that which cannot possibly be
otherwise, and possibility is always understood of some future time. But
seeing he grants so favorably, that sufficient causes are necessary causes,
I shall easily conclude from it, that whatsoever those causes do cause, are
necessary antecedently. For if the necessity of the thing produced, when
produced, be in the same instant of time, with the existence of its immediate
cause, then also that immediate cause was in the same instant with the cause by
which it was immediately produced; the same may be said of the cause of this
cause, and so backward eternally; from whence it will follow that all the
connection of the causes of any effect from the beginning of the World, were
altogether existent in one and the same instant, and consequently all the time
from the beginning of the World or from Eternity to this day is but one
instant, or a Nunc stans, which he knows, by this time is not so.

T. H. AND thus you see how the inconveniences, which he objecteth Number. 36.
must follow upon the holding of necessity, are avoided, and the necessity it
self demonstratively proved. To which I could add, if I thought it good Logic,
the inconvenience of denying necessity, as that it destroys both the Decrees
and Prescience of God Almighty; for whatsoever God has purposed to bring to
pass by man as an instrument, or foreseeth shall come to pass, A man, if he
have Liberty, such as he affirms from necessitation, might frustrate, and
make not to come to pass. And God should either not foreknow it, and not Decree
it, or he should foreknow such things shall be as shall never be, and decree
that which shall never come to pass.


J. D. THus he has labored in vain to satisfy my reasons, and to prove his
own assertion. But for demonstration there is nothing like it among his
Arguments. Now he says, ( a) he could add other Arguments, if he thought it
good Logic. There is no impediment in Logic, why a man may not press his
Adversary with those absurdities which flow from his opion, Argumentum ducens
ad impossible, or, ad absurdum, is a good form of reasoning. But there is
another reason of his forbearance, though he be loath to express it. -- Haeret
lateri laethal^^ arund^. The Arguments drawn from the attributes of God do
stick so close in the sides of his cause, that he has no mind to treat of that
subject. By the way take notice of his own confession, that he could add other
reasons, if he thought it good Logic. If it were predetermined in the outward
causes, that ^e must make this very defense and no other, how could it be in
his power to add or substract any thing. Just as if a blindman should say in
earnest, I could see, if I had mine eyes: Truth often breaks out, whilst men
s^e^ to smother it. ( b) But let us view his Argument: If a man have liberty
from necessitation, he may frustrate the Decrees of God, and make his
prescience false. First, for the Decrees of God* This is his Decree, that man
should be a free Agent; If he did consider God, as a most simple Act without
priority, or posteriority of time, or any composition, He would not conceive of
his Decrees, as of the Laws of the Modes and Persians, long since enacted, and
passed before we were born, but as coexistent with our selves, and with the
acts which we do, by virtue of those Decrees. Decrees and Attributes are but
notions to help the weakness of our understanding to conceive of God. The
Decrees of God, are God himself, and therefore justly said to be before the
foundation of the world was laid. And yet coexistent with our selves, because
of the Infinite and Eternal being of God. The sum is this, The Decree of God,
or God himself Eternally constitutes or ordaines all effects which come to pass
in time, according to the distinct natures or capacities of his creatures. An
Eternal Ordination, is neither past nor to come, but always present. So free
actions do proceed, as well from the Eternal Decree of God, as necessary; and
from that order which he has set in the world.

As the Decree of God is Eternal, so is his Knowledge. And therefore to speak
truly and properly, there is neither foreknowledge nor after-knowledge in him.
The Knowledge of God comprehends all times in a point by reason of the eminence
and virtue of its infinite perfection. And yet I confess, that this is called
fore knowledge, in respect of us. But this foreknowledge does produce no
absolute necessity. Things are not therefore, because they are fore known, but
therefore they are fore-known, because they shall come to pass. If any thing
should come to pass otherwise than it does, yet Gods knowledge could not be
irritated by it, for then he did not know that it should come to pass, as now
it does. Because every knowledge of vision necessarily presupposes its object.
God did know, that Judas should betray Christ; but Judas was not necessitated
to be a traitor by Gods knowledge. If Judas had not betrayed Christ, then God
had not fore-known that Judas should betray him. The case is this; A watchman
standing on the steeples-top, ^as it is the use in Germany, gives notice to
them below (who see no such things) that company are coming, and how many; His
prediction is most certain, for he sees them. What a vain collection were it
for one below to say, what if they do not come, then a certain prediction may
fail. It may be urged, that there is a difference between these two cases. In
this case the coming is present to the Watchman, but that which God fore-knows
is future. God knows what shall be; The Watchman only knows what is. I
answer, that this makes no difference at all in the case, by reason of that
disparity which is between Gods knowledge and ours* As that coming is present
to the Watchman, which is future to them who are below: So all those things,
which are future to us, are present to God, because his Infinite and Eternal
knowledge does reach to the future being of all Agents and events. Thus much is
plainly acknowledged by T. H. Numb. 11. That foreknowledge is knowledge, and
knowledge depends on the existence o^ the things known, and not they on it. To
conclude, the prescience of God does not make things more necessary, than the
production of the things themselves; But if the Agents were free Agents, the
production of the things does not make the events to be absolutely necessary,
but only upon supposition that the causes were so determined. Gods prescience
proves a necessity of infallibility, but not of antecedent extrinsecall
determination to one. If any event should not come to pass, God did never
foreknow, that it would come to pass. For every knowledge necessarily
presupposes its object.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXVI.
( a) [HE could add he says other Arguments, if he thought it good Logic,
etc. There is no impediment in Logic, why a man may not press his adversary
with those absurdities which flow from his opinion.] Here he miss recites my
words, which are I could add, if I thought it good Logic, the inconvenience of
denying necessity, as that it destroys both the Decrees, and Prescience of God
Almighty. But he makes me say I could add other Arguments; then inferrs* that
there is no impediment in Logic, why a man may not press his adversary with
the absurdities that flow from his opinion, because Argumentum ducens ad
impossible, is a good form of reasoning; making no difference, between
absurdities which are impossibilities, and inconveniences, which are not only
possible but frequent. And though it be a good form of reasoning to argue from
absurdities, yet it ^ no good form of reasoning, to argue from inconveniences;
for inconvenience may stand well enough with truth.

(b) [But let us view his Argument; If a man have Liberty from necessitation,
he may frustrate the Decrees of God, and make his Praescience false. This is
his Decree, that man should be a free Agent. If he did consider God as a most
simple Act without priority or posteriority of time, or any composition, he
would not conceive of his Decrees, as long since enacted, but as coexistent
with our selves.] Here again, he would have me conceive eternity to be Nunc
stans, that is an instant of time, and that instant of time to be God, which
neither he nor I can conceive, nor can without impiety say, as he does here,
that the Decrees of God are God; In which consists all the rest of his Answer
to this Number, saving that he puts in sometimes, that the foreknowledge of
God produces not necessity, which is granted him; but that any thing can be
foreknown, which shall not necessarily come to pass, which was not granted, ^e
proves no otherwise then by his assertion, that every instant of time is God;
which is denied him.

T. H. THis is all that has come in^o my mind touching this question, Number. 37.
since I last considered it And I ^umbly bes^ech your ^ordsh^p ^o communicate it
only to J. D. And so praying Goa to prosper your Lordship in all your designs,
I take leave and am my most Noble and obliging Lord.

Your most humble Servant T. H.


J. D. HE is very careful to have this discourse kept secret, as appears in
this Section, and in the 14. and 15. Sections, If his answer had been kept
private, I had saved the labor of a Reply. But hearing that it was
communicated, I thought my self obliged to vindicate, both the truth and my
self. I do not blame him to be cautious, for in truth, this assertion is of
desperate consequence, and destructive to piety, policy, and morality. (a) If
he had desired to have kept it secret, the way had been to have kept it secret
himself. It will not suffice to say as Numb. 14. that Truth is Truth; This the
common plea of all men. Neither is it sufficient for him to say, as Numb. 15.
That it was desired by me, long before that he had discovered his opinion by
word of mouth. And my desire was to let some of my noble friends see the
weakness of his grounds, and the pernicious consequences of that opinion. (b)
But if he think that this ventilation of the question between us two may do
hurt, truly I hope not. The edge of his discourse is so abated, that it cannot
easily hurt any rational man, who is not too much possessed with prejudice.


Animadversions upon the Answer to Numb. XXXVII.
IN this place I said nothing, but that I would have my L. of N. to communicate
it only to the Bishop. And in his answer he says.

(a) [If I had desired to have it kept secret, the way had been to have kept it
secret my self] My desire was it should not be communicated by my L. of N. to
^ll men indifferently. But I barred not my sel^ from showin it priv^t^ly t^ my
friends; though to publish it was never my intention* till new provo^ed by the
^nciv^l^ tri^nphing of the Bishop, in his own errors to my disadvantage

(b) [But if he think that this ventilation of the question may do hurt, truly
I hope not. The edge of his discourse i^ so abated, that it cannot easily hurt
any rational man, who is not too much possessed w^^h prejudice.] It is
confidently said but not very pertinently to the h^rt I thou^^^ might proceed
from a discourse of this nature. For I nevrr thought it could do hurt ^o a
rational man, but only to such men as cannot reason in those points which are
of difficult contemplation; for a rational man will say with himself, they whom
God will b^ing to a blessed and happy end, those he will put into an humble,
pious and Righteous way; and of those whom he will destroy, he will harden the
hearts; and thereupon examining himself, whether he be in such a way or not,
the examination it self would (if elected) be a necessary cause of working out
his salvation with fear and trembling. But the men who I thought might take
hurt thereby, are such as reason erroneously, saying with themselves, if I
shall be saved, I shall be saved whether I walk uprightly or no, and
consequently thereunto shall be have themselves negligently, and pursue the
pleasant way o^ the sins they are in love with. Which inconvenience is not
abated by this discourse of the Bishop, because they understand not the grounds
he goes on, of Nunc stans, motus primo primi, Elicite Acts, Imperate Acts, and
a great many other such unintelligible words.

T. H. POstscript. Arguments seldom work on men of wit and learning, Number. 38.
when they have once engaged themselves in a contrary opinion. If any thing do
it, it is the showing of them the causes of their errors, which is this; Pious
men attribute to God Almighty for honor sake, whatsoever they see is
honorable in the World, as seeing, hearing, willing, knowing, Justice,
Wisdom, etc. But deny him such poor things as eyes, ears, brains, and other
organs, without which, we worms, neither have, nor can conceive such faculties
to be; and so far they do well. But when they dispute of Gods actions
Philosophically, then they consider them again, as if he had such faculties,
and in that manner, as we have them. This is not well; and thence it is they
fall into so many difficulties. We ought not to dispute of Gods Nature, he is
no fit subject of our Philosophy. True Religion consists in obedience to
Christ's Lieutenants, and in giving God such honor, both in attributes and
actions, as they in their several ^ieu enancies shall ordain.


J. D. THough Sophistical captions do seldom work on men of wit and learning,
because by constant use they have their senses exercised to discern both good
and evil, Heb. 5. 14. Yet (a) solid and substantial reasons work sooner upon
them than upon weaker judgments. The more exact the balance is, the sooner it
discovers the real weight that is put into it. Especially if the proofs be
proposed without passion or opposition. Let Sophisters and seditious Orators
apply themselves to the many headed multitude, because they despair of success
with men of wit and learning. Those whose gold is true, are not afraid to have
it tried by the touch. Since the former way has not succeeded, T. H. has
another to show, as the causes of our errors, which he hopes will prove more
successful. When he sees he can do no good by fight, he seeks to circumvent us,
under color of curtesy, Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit auceps. As
they, who behold themselves in a glass, take the right hand for the left, and
the left for the right, ( T. H. knows the comparison) so we take our own
errors to be truths, and other men's truths to be errors. (b) If we be in an
error in this, it is such an error as we sucked from nature it self, such an
error as is confirmed in us by reason and experience, such an error as God
himself in his sacred Word has revealed, such an error as the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church in all ages have delivered, Such an error wherein we
have the concurrence of all the best Philosophers, both Natural and Moral, such
an error as brings to God, the glory of Justice, and Wisdom, and Goodness,
and Truth, such an error as renders men more devour, more pious, more
industrious more humble, more penitent for their sins. Would he have us resign
up all these advantages to dance blindfold after his pipe. No, he persuades us
too much to our loss. But let us see what is the imaginary cause of our
imaginary error. Forsooth, because we attribute to God whatsoever is
honorable in the World, as seeing, hearing, willing, knowing, Justice,
Wisdom, but deny him such poor things, as eyes, ears, brains, and so far he
says we do well. He has reason, for since we are not able to conceive of God
as he is, the readiest way we have, is by remooving all that imperfection from
God, which is in the creatures. So we call him Infinite, Immortal, Independent.
Or by attributing to him all those perfections, which are in the creatures
after a most eminent manner, so we call him Best, Greatest, most Wise, most
Just, most Holy. (c) But says he, When they dispute of Gods actions
Philosophically, then they consider them again, as if he had such faculties,
and in the manner as we have them.

And is this the cause of our error? That were strange indeed, for they who
dispute Philosophically of God, do neither ascribe faculties to him in that
manner that we have them, Nor yet do they attribute any proper faculties at all
to God. Gods Understanding, and his Will is his very Essence, which for the
eminency of its infinite perfection, does perform all those things alone, in a
most transcendent manner, which reasonable creatures do perform imperfectly, by
distinct faculties Thus to dispute of God with modesty, and reverence, and to
clear the Deity from the imputation of tyranny, injustice, and dissimulation,
which none do throw upon God with more presumption, than those who are the
Patrons of absolute necessity, is both comely and Christian.

It is not the desire to discover the original of a supposed error, which
draws them ordinarily into these exclamations against those who dispute of the
Deity. For some of themselves dare anatomise God, and publish his Eternal
Decrees with as much confidence, as if they had been all their lives of his
cabinet council. But it is for fear, lest those pernicious consequences, which
flow from that doctrine essentially, and reflect in so high a degree upon the
supreme goodness* should be laid open to the view of the world; Just as the
Turks do, first establish a false Religion of their own devising, and then
forbid all men upon pain of death to dispute upon Religion; Or as the Priests
of ^olech, the Abomination of the Ammonites) did, make a noise with their
timbrells all the while the poor Infants were passing through the fire in
Tophet, to keep their pitiful cries from the ears of their Parents: So (d) they
make a noise with their declamations against those, who dare dispute of the
Nature of God* that is, who dare set forth ^^s Justice, and his goodness, and
his truth, and his Philanthropy, only to deaf the ears, and dim the eyes of
the Christian world, lest they should hear the lamentable ejulations and
howlings, or see that rueful spectacle of millions of souls tormented for
evermore (e) in the flames of the true Tophet, that is Hell, only for that
which according to T. H. his doctrine was never in their power to shun, but
which they were ordered and inevitably necessitated to do, only to express the
omnipotence and dominion, and to satisfy the pleasure of him, who is in truth
the Father of all mercies, and the God o^ all consolation. (f) This is life
eternal (says our Savior)* to know the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom
he has sent, Joh. 17. 3. Pure Religion and und filed before God, and the
Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted from the world, says S^. James* Jam. 1. 27. Fear God
and ke^p his Commandments, for this (...) the whole duty of man, says Solomon,
^c^les. 12. 13. But T. H. has found out a more compendious way to heaven: True
Religion (says he) consists in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants, and giving
God such honor both in attributes and ^^^ions, (...) they in their several
Lieutenanc^^^ sha^ ordain That is to say, ^e of the Religion of every Christian
Country where you come* To make the Civil Magistrate to be Christ's Lieutenant
upon earth, for matters of Religion* And to make him to be Supreme Judge in all
controversies, whom all must obey* is a Doctrine so strange, and such an
uncouth phrase to Christian ears, that I should have missed his meaning, but
that I consulted with his Book, De Civ. c. 15. Sect. 16. and c. 17. Sect. 28.
What if the Magistrate shall be no Christiam himself? What if he shall command
contrary to the Law of God, or Nature, Must we obey him rather than God? Act.
14. 19. Is the Civil Magistrate become now the only ground and pillar of
Truth? I demand then why T. H. is of a different mind from his Sovereign, and
from the Laws of the Land concerning the Attributes of God and his Decrees?
This is a new Paradox, and concerns not this question of liberty, and
necessity? Wherefore I forbear to prosecute it further, and so conclude my
reply with the words of the Christian Poet.

Caesaris jussum est ore Galieni
Princeps quod colit ut colimus omnes.
Aeternum colemus Principem dierum,
Factorem Dominumque Galieni.

Animadversions upon the Answer to the Postscript Numb. XXXVIII.
HE takes it ill that I say that Arguments do seldom work on men of wit and
learning, when they have once engaged themselves in a contrary opinion
Nevertheless it is not only certain by experience, but also there is reason
for it, and that grounded upon the natural disposition of mankind. For it is
natural to all men to defend those opinions, which they have once publicly
engaged themselves to maintain, because to have that detected for error, which
they have publicly maintained for truth, is never without some dishonor more
or less; and to find in themselves that they have spent a great deal of time
and labor, in deceiving themselves, is so uncomfortable a thing, as it is no
wonder, if they employ their wit and learning, if they have any, to make good
their errors. And therefore where he says,

(a) [Solid and substantial reasons work sooner upon them, then upon weaker
judgments. And that the more exact the balance is, the sooner it discovers the
real weight that is put into it.] I confess the more solid a man's wit is, the
better will solid reasons work upon him. Bu if he add to i^ that which he calls
learning, that is to say, much reading of other men's Doctrines, without
weighing them with his own thoughts, then their judgments become weaker, and
the balance less exact. And whereas he says, that they whose Gold is true
are not afraid to have it tried by the touch, he speaks as if ^ had been
afraid to have my Doctrine tried by the touch of men of wit and learning;
wherein he is not much mistaken, meaning by men of learning (as I said before)
such as had read other men, but not themselves. For by reading others, men
commonly obstruct the w^y to their own exact and natural judgment, and use
their wit both to deceive themselves with Fallac^s and ^or quite those who
endeavor (at their own entreaty) to instruct them, with revilings.

(b) [If we be in an error, it is such an error as is sucked from nature; as
is confirmed by Reason, by Experience and by Scripture; as the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church of all ages have delivered; an error wherein we have the
concurrence of all the best Philosophers, an error that brings to God the
Glory of Justice, etc. that renders men more devout, more plous, more humble,
more industrious, more penitent for their sins.] All this is b^t said; and what
heretofore has been offered in proof for it, has been sufficiently refuted,
and the contrary proved; namely, that it is an error contrary to the nature of
the Will; repugnant to reason and experience; repugnant to the Scripture;
repugnant to the Doctrine of St. Paul, and it is p^^ty that the Fathers and
Dictors of the Church have not followed St. Paul therein; an error not
maintained by the best Philosophers, (for they are not the b^st Philosophers
which the Bishop thinks so) an error that ta^^t^ from God the Glory of his
Praescience, nor brings to him the glory of (...) other Attribute; an error
that makes men, by imagining they can repent when they will, neglect their
duties, ^n that makes m^n ^nt^an full for Gods graces, by thinking them to
proceed from the natural ability of their own will.

(c) But says he when they dispute of Gods Actions Philosophically, then they
consider them again, as if he had such faculties, and (...) such manner as we
have them. And is this the cause of our error? That were strange indeed; for
they who dispute Philosophically of God, do neither ascribe faculties to him*
in that manner that we have them, No^ yet do they attribute any proper
faculties at all to God. Gods understanding and his will is his very essence,
etc. Me thinks he should have known at these years that to dispute
Philosophically is to dispute by natural reason, and from principles evident
by the light of ^re, and to dispute of the faculties and proprieties of the
subject w^^reo^ they treat. It is therefore unskilfully said by him, that they
who dispute Philosophically of God, ascribe unto him no proper faculties. If
(...)* proper faculties, I would fain know of him what improper faculties* he
ascribes to God. I guess he will make the understanding and the Will, and his
other Attributes to be in God improper faculties* because he cannot properly
call them faculties, that is to say he knows not how to make it good that they
are faculties, and yet he will have these words, Gods* Understanding and his
Will are his very Essence, to pass for an Axiom of Philosophy; And Whereas I
had said, we ought not to dispute of Gods nature, and that he is no ^it subject
of our Philosophy, he den^es it not, but says I say it,

(d) [With a purpose to make a noise with declaiming against those, who dare
dispute of the nature of God* that is, who dare set forth his Justice; and his
goodness, etc. The Bishop will have much a do to make good, that to dispute of
the nature of God, is alone with setting forth his Justice, and his goodness.
He takes n^ notice of these words of mine, pi^^s men attribute to God.
Almighty for honors sake, whatsoever they see is* honorable in the World; and
yet this is setting forth Gods Justice, Goodness, etc. without disputing of
Gods nature.

(e) [In the flames of the true Tophet, that is Hell.] The true Tophet was a
place not far from the Walls of Jerusalem, and consequently on the Earth; I
cannot imagine what he will say to this in his Answer to my Leviathan, if there
he find the same, unless he say that in this place by the true Tophet, he
meant a not true Tophet.

(f) [This is life eternal ( says our Savior) to know the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, etc.] This which follows to the end of his Answer and of the
Book, is a reprehension of me, for saying that true Religion consists in
obedience to Christ's Lieutenants. If it be Lawful for Christians to institute
amongst themselves a Common wealth, and Magistrates, whereby they may be able
to live in peace one with another, and unite themselves in defense against a
foreign enemy, it will certainly be necessary to make to themselves some
supreme Judge in all controversies to whom they ought all to give obedience,
and this is no such strange Doctrine, nor so uncouth a Phrase to Christian
ears, as the Bishop makes it, whatsoever it be to them, that would make
themselves Judges of the supreme Judge himself. No, but (says he) Christ is
the supreme Judge, and we are not to obey men rather than God* Is there any
Christian m^n, that do^s not acknowledge that we are to be judged by Christ* or
that we ought not to obey him rather then any man, that shall be his Lieutenant
upon earth? The question therefore is, not of who is to be obeyed, but of what
be his commands. If the Scripture contain his commands, then may every
Christian know by them what they are; and what has the Bishop to do with what
God says to me when I read them, more then I have to do with what God says to
him when he reads them, unless he have Authority given him by him whom Christ
has constituted his Lieutenant? This Lieutenant upon earth I say is the
supreme civil Magistrate, to whom belongs the care and charge of seeing that
no Doctrine may be thaught the people, but such as may consist with the general
Peace of them all, and with the obedience, that is due to the civil Sovereign.
In whom would the Bishop have the Authority reside of prohibiting seditious
opinions, when they are taught (as they are often) in Divinity Books, and from
the Pulpit? I could hardly guess, but that I remember that there have been
Books written to entitle the Bishops to a Divine right, underived from the
civil Sovereign. But because he makes it so ^aynous a matter, that the supreme
civil Magistrate should be Christ's Lieutenant upon earth, let us suppose that a
Bishop, or a Synod of Bishops should be set up (which I hope never shall) for
our civil Sovereign; then that which he objecteth here; I could object in the
same words against himself. For I could say in his o^n words, This is life
eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 3. Pure
Religion, and undefiled before God is this, to visit the Fatherless, etc. James
1. 27. Fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12. 13. But the Bishop has
found a more compendious way to Heaven, namely, that true Religion consists
in obedience to Christ's, Lieutenants that is (now by supposition) to the
Bishops; That is to say, that every Christian of what nation soever, coming
into the Country which the Bishop^ govern, should be of their Religion. He
would make the civil Magistrate to be Christ's Lieutenant upon earth for matters
of Religion, and supreme Judge in all controversies, and say they ought to be
obeyed by all, how strange soever and uncouth it seem to him now, the
Soveraignity being in others. And I may say to him, what if the Magistrate
himself, I mean by supposition the Bishops should be wicked (...)* What if they
should command as much contrary to the ^w of (...) o^ nature as every any
Christian King did (which is very possible) must* we obey them rather then God?
Is the civil Magistrate become now the only ground and p^^lar of truth? No.

Synedri jussum est voce Episcoporum
Ipsum quod colit ut colamus omnes.
Aeternum colemus Principem dierum
Factorem Dominumque Epilcoporum.
And thus the Bishop* may see, there is (...) difference between his* Ode and
my ^arode to it, and that both of them are of equal force (...) conclud
nothin^.

The Bishop knows that the Kings of England since the time of Henry the 8. have
been (...) by (...) Parliament supreme Governors o^ the Church of England* in
(...) both civil and Ecclesiastical* that is to say (...) matters both
Ecclesiastical and civil, an^ consequently o^ this Church, Supreme head on
Earth, though perhaps he will not allow that (...) me of H^^d. I should wonder
therefore whom the Bishop would have to be Christ's Lieutenant here in England
for matters of Religion* if not the supreme Governor and Head of the Church of
England, (...) Man or Women whosoever he be* that has the Sovereign Power but
that I know he challenges it to the Bishops and thinks tha^ King Henry the 8.
took the Ecclesiastical Power away from the Pope, to settle it not in himself
but them. But he ought to have known that what (...), or Power o^ Ordai^ing
(...), the Pop^s had here in the time of the Kings Predecessors til Henry the
8. they derived it all from the Kings Power* though they did not acknowledge
it, and the Kings connived at it, either not knowing their own right, or not
daring to challenge it, til such ti^e as the behavior of the Roman Clergy
had undeceived the people which otherwise would have sided with them. Nor was
it unlawful for the King to take from them, the Authority he had given them, as
being Pope enough in his own Kingdom, without depending on a foreign one, nor
is it to be called Schism unless it be Schism also in the head of a Family
to discharge as often (...) he shall see cause, the Schoolmasters he enter
^ineth to teach his Children. If the Bishop and Dr. Hammond when they did write
in defense of the Church of England against imputation of Schism, quitting
their own pretenses of jurisdiction and Jus divinum, had gone upon these
principles of mine, they had not been so shrewdly handled as they have been by
an English Papist, that wrote against them. And now I have done answering to
his Arguments. I shall here ^n the end of all taee that Liberty of censuring
his while Book, which he has taken, in the beginning, of censuring mine. I
have says he Numb. 1. perused T. H. his answers, considered his reasons* and
conclude he has missed, and mi^^aid the question, that his answers are
evasions, that his Arguments are ^aralogismes, and that the opinion of absolute
and universal necessity is but a (...) some groundless, and ill chosen
Principles. And now it is my turn to censure. And first, ^o^ the strength of
his discourse, and knowledge of the point in question, I think it much
inferior, to that which might have been written by any man living, that had no
other learning besides the ability to wri^e his mind; but as well perhaps as
the same man would have done it if to the ability of writing his mind, he had
added the study of School Divinity. Secondly, for the manners of it (for to a
public writing there belongs good manners) it consists in railing and
exclaiming and scurrilous jesting, with now and then an unclean, and mean
instance. And lastly for his elocution, the virtue whereof lies not in the
flux of words but in perspicuity, it is the same Language with that of the
Kingdom of Darkness. One shall find in it, especially where ^e should speak
most closely to the question, such words as these; Divided sense, Compounded
sense, Hypothetical necessity, Liberty of Exercise, Liberty of specification,
Liberty of contradiction, Liberty of contrariety, Knowledge of approbation,
Practical knowledge, General influence, Special influence, Instinct, Qualities
infused, Efficatious election, Moral efficacy, Moral motion, Metaphorical
motion, Practice practicum, Motus primo primi; Actus eliciti, Actus imperati,
Permissive will, Consequent will, Negative obduration, Deficient cause* Simple
act Nunc stans, and other like words of nonsense divided besides many
propositions such as th^se, The Will is the Mistress of humane Actions, The
understanding i^ her counselor, The Will chooses, The Will wills, The Will
suspends its own Act, The Understanding understands ( I wonder how he mist
saying, The Understanding suspendeth its own Act) The Will applies the
understanding to deliberate; The Will requires of the Understanding a riview,
The Will determines it self, A change may be Willed without changing of the
Will, Man concurrs with God in causing his own Will, The Will causes willing,
Motives determine the Will not naturally but morally, The same Action may be
both future and not future, God is not Just but Justice, not eternal but
eternity, Eternity is Nunc stans* Eternity is an infinite point which
comprehends al time not formally but eminently* Al eternity is coexistent
with to day, and the same coexistent with to morrow, and many other like
speeches of nonsense compounded; Which the truth can never stand in need of.
Perhaps the Bishop will say these Terms and Phrases are intelligible enough;
for he has said in his Reply to Numb. 24. that his opinion is demonstrable in
reason, though he be not able to comprehend, how i^ consists together with
Gods eternal Prescience* and though it exceed his weak capacity, yet he ought
to adhere to that truth which is manifest* so that to him, that truth is
manifest, and demonstrable by reason, which is beyond his capacity, so that
words beyond capacity are with him intelligible enough.

But the Reader is to be Judge of that. I could add many other passages that
discover both his little Logic (as taking t^^ insignificant word above recited
for Terms of Art) and hi^ no Philosophy* in distinguishing between moral and
^^tur^l^ m^tion* and by calling some motions Metaphorical, and his th^r offers
at the causes of sight, and of the descent of heavy lies, and his talk of the
inclination of the L^ud-stone, and diverse other places of his Book.

But to make an end I shall briefly draw up the sum of what we have both said.
That which I have maintained is, that no man has his future will in his own
present power. That it may be changed by others, and by the change of things
without him* and when it is changed, it is not changed, nor determined to any
thing by it self; and that when it is undetermined it is no Will; because every
one that wills wills something in particular; That deliberation is common
to men with beasts, as being alternate appetite, and not ratiocination, and the
last act or appetite therein, and which is immediately followed by the action,
the only will that can be taken notice of by others, and which only makes an
action in public judgment voluntary; That to be free is no more then to do if
a man will, and if he will to forbear, and consequently that this freedom is
the freedom of the man and not of the Will; That the Will is not free, but
subject to change by the operation of external causes; That all external causes
depend necessarily on the first eternal cause God Almighty* who works in us
both to Will and to do by the mediation of second causes; That seeing neither
man nor any thing else can work upon it self, it is impossible that any man in
the framing of his own Will should concur with God, either as an Actor or as an
Instrument; That there is nothing brought to pass by fortune as by a cause,
nor any thing without a cause or concurrence of causes sufficient to bring it
so to pass, and that every such cause, and their concurrence do proceed from
the providence, good pleasure, and working of God, and consequently though I do
with others call many events Contingent, and say they happen, yet because they
had every of them their several sufficient causes, and those causes again their
former causes, I say they happen necessarily; And though we perceive not what
they are, yet there are of the most Contingent events as necessary causes as of
those events whose causes we perceive, or else they could not possibly be
foreknown, as they are by him that foreknoweth all things. On the contrary the
Bishop maintains; That the Will is free from necessitation, and in order
thereto that the Judgment of the understanding is not always practice
practicum, nor of such a nature in it self as to oblige and determine the Will
to one, though it be true that Spontaneity and determination to one may consist
together; That the Will determines it self, and that external things when they
change the Will do work upon it, not naturally but morally, not by natural
motion but by moral and Metaphorical motion; That when the Will is determined
naturally, it is not by Gods general influence, whereon depend all second
causes, but by special influence, God concurring and pouring something into the
Will; That the Will when it suspends not its Act, makes the Act necessary, but
because it may suspend and not assent it is not absolutely necessary; That
sinful acts proceed not from Gods Will, but are willed by him by a permissive
Will not an operative Will, and hardens the heart of man by a negative
obduration; That man's Will is in his own power, but his motus primo primi not
in his own power, nor necessary save only by a Hypothetical necessity; That
the Will to change is not always a change of Will; That not all things which are
produced are produced from sufficient, but some things from deficient causes;
That if the Power of the Will be present in actu primo, then ther^ is nothing
wanting to the production of the effect; That a cause may be sufficient for the
production of an effect though it want something necessary to the production
thereof, because the Will may be wanting; That a necessary cause does not
always necessarily produce its effect, but only then when the effect is
necessarily produced. He proves also, that the Will is free, by that universal
notion which the World has of election; For when of the six electors the votes
are divided equally, the King of Bohemia has a casting voice; That the
Prescience of God supposes no necessity of the future existence of the things
foreknown, because God is not eternal but eternity, and eternity is as standing
Now, without succession of time, and therefore God foresees all things
intuitively by the presentiallity they have in Nunc stans, which comprehends
in it all time past, present, and to come, not formally but eminently and
vertually; That the Will is free even then when it acts, but that is in a
compounded, not in a divided sense; That to be made, and to be eternal, do
consist together because Gods Decrees are made and are nevertheless eternal;
That the order, beauty, and perfection of the World does require that in the
universe there should be Agents of all sorts, some necessary, some free, some
contingent; That though it be true that to morrow it shall rain or not rain,
yet neither of them is true determinate; That the Doctrine of necessity is a
blasphemous desperate and destructive doctrine; That it were better to be an
Atheist that then to hold it, and he that maintains it is fitter to be
refuted with Rodds then with Arguments [And now whether this his Doctrine or
mine be the more intelligible, more rational, or more co^^ormable to Gords
Word, I leave it to the Judgment of the Reader.

But whatsoever be the truth of the disputed Question the Reader may
peradventure think I have not used the Bishop with that respect I ought, or
without disadvantage of my cause I might have done; for which I am to make a
short Apology. A little before the last Parliament of the ^^te King, when
every man (...) freely against the then present Government, I thought it worth
my study to consider the grounds and consequences of such behavior, and
whether it were conformable or contrary to reason and to the Word of God; and
after some time, I did put in order and publish my thoughts thereof, first in
Latin, and then again the same in English, where I endeavored to prove both
by reason and Scripture, That they who have once submitted themselves to any
Sovereign Governor, either by express acknowledgment of his power, or by
receiving protection from his Laws, are obliged to be true and faithful to him,
and to acknowledge no other supreme power but him in any matter, or question
whatsoever, either civil or Ecclesiastical. In which Books of mine I pursued
my subject, without taking notice of any particular man that held any opinion
contrary to that which I then writ; only in general I maintained that the
office of the Clergy in respect of the supreme civil power, was not
Magisterial, but Ministerial; and that their teaching of the People was founded
up n^o other Authority then that of the civil Sovereign; and all this without
any word tending to the disgrace either of Episcopacy or of Presbytery.
Nevertheless I find since, that diverse of them, whereof the Bishop of Derry is
one, have taken offense especially at two things, one, that I make the
supremacy in matters of Religion to resid^ in the civil Sovereign; the other,
that being no Clergyman I deliver Doctrines, and ground them upon Words of the
Scripture, which Doctrines they being by profession Divines have never taught.
And in this their displeasure diverse of them in their Books and Sermons,
without answering any of my Arguments, have not only excl^i^ed against my
Doctrine but reviled me and endeavored to make me hateful (...) things, for
which (if they kn^w their own and the Public good) they ought to have given me
thanks. There is also one of them that taking offense at me for blaming in part
the Discipline instituted heretofore, and regulated by the Authority of the
Pope in the Universities, not only ranks me amongst thos^ men that would have
the Revenue of the Universities diminished, and says plainly I have no
Religion, but also thinks me so simple and ignorant of the World, as to believe
that our Universities maintain Popery. And this is the Author of the Book
called Vindiciae Academiarum. If either of the Universities had thought it self
injured, I believe it could have Authorized or appointed some member of theirs
(whereof there be many abler men then he) to have made their vin^ication. But
this Vindex (as little Dogs, to pl^ase their Masters use to bark, in token of
their sedulity, indifferently at strangers till they be rated off) unprovoked
by me, has fallen upon me without bidding. I have been publicly injured by
many of whom I took no notice, supposing that that humor would spend it self,
but seeing it last, and grow higher in this writing I now answer, I thought it
necessary at last to make of some of them, and first of this Bishop, an Example.

FINIS.

