A CORDIAL AGAINST THE FEAR of DEATH.

Delivered in a Sermon before the University of OXFORD, May 28. 1654.

By THOMAS HODGES B. D. Rector of Souldern in Oxfordshire.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Thomas Robinson. 1659.

To his much Honored Friend Mr WALTER PELL of Aldermanbury in LONDON Merchant.
SIR,
SHould I be blamed for Printing this single Sermon, I desire the great and
Universal concernment of the Subject here treated on, the seasonablenesse of
it at all times, especially in these sickly times, after the observation of
three general Fasts for the diseases and mortality in several parts of the
Nation, together with the eminency of the Auditory, to which for the main, it
has been Preached, namely, the two Universities successively, may be my
Apology for adventuring it to the press. And if you should admire my
confidence in this manner of address to you, I pray you be pleased in part to
charge it upon your own account, and to assure your self, that your late
civilities and favors to me, and respects for me, have encouraged me to this
undertaking.

And if the observation hold good elsewhere, which I lately heard from a
Neighbor Mr Wild of Ayno.
Minister at a Funeral Sermon, namely, that God in this visitation seemed
especially to level at aged persons, having taken away 10 persons of his
parish in one year, all of them about or above threescore years old; when you
shall number your own days, and behold your own face in a glass, and see how
the fields are already white unto the harvest, and consider how the very
streets you walk in might in some measure be paved with the skuls of those,
who have dyed since you first lived in the City, though you should censure the
Preacher as impertinent, yet may you judge the Sermon here presented not
altogether improper. It Is true indeed, the mention of Death is an unpleasing
note in the ears of those usually, who are full of the comforts of this life:
I have heard or read of a King, who upon pain of death forbad any to mention
Death in his presence; and of a great Queen, who was highly displeased with a
favorite, for preaching a Sermon minding her how age had furrowed her face,
and besprinckled her hair with its meal: but I hope you have better learned
Christ, and sure I am, dare talk of death, and touch this harsh key your
self; and will not therefore (I persuade my self) judge me your enemy, merely
because I tell you the truth.

Now Sir, whilst I preface this Sermon to you, I desire I may Preach to my
self, and to all that read this Epistle, whether old men or maidens, young men
or children. Let us get oil in out lamps before the Bridegroom comes; and all
things ready for death before death comes: for who now so young, so strong, so
good, but there are younger, and stronger, and better already in their graves?
The Jews have a proverb, there are skulls of all sizes in Golgotha: and the
Apostle John tells us, he saw the dead small and great stand before God, Rev.
20.11, 12. Let us not then put far from us the evil day; but consider, that
some sudden blast may blow out the Candle, as well as it may go out in the
socket. Physicians say there are 300 diseases incident to the body of man: but
if we escape all other diseases, old age, that incurable disease, reckoned one
of the three messingers of Death, will creep upon us ere we are aware, if we do
not think of it. Oh! that we could as we dye daily, so get our selves more
ready for death daily. Let us meditate often how the two axes of time, day and
night, are continually chopping at the root of the tree of every man's life; and
how some fruits are blown off the tree, whilst in the bud or green, as well as
some others fall off, when they are ripe; and how some flowers of the field are
trod down or crop'd by man or beast, as well as others stand and wither till
they be cut down.

1 Let us know that death is the wages of sin: and forasmuch as all have
sinned, it is a Statute enacted by the Parliament of Heaven, that all must dye
once, so it is ordinarily: for it is thought, Lazarus dyed twice; and those who
shall be found alive at the day of judgment, shall not dye at all, but be
changed. Now if death be our wages, let us Consider, that wages may be paid in
any lawful coin, gold, silver, or brass; in any place, the house, street, or
field; at any hour of the day, or watch of the night, as the master pleases:
and so Death may be inflicted diverse ways and manners, at any time, and in
any place. Further, know we, that it is a solemn thing to dye, because after
death the Judgment: Eternity treads on the heels of death; so that there is no
place here for a second Error.

2 Let us often think of Death. It Is observed that Beasts cannot think of dying:
lets show our selves therefore men, meditate of it, not put far from us the day
of Death, that may be a means to make us secure: for we read that the wise
virgins slumberd as well as the foolish, whilst the bridegroom delayed his
coming; and it is observed, that God therefore keeps secret from us the day of
death and judgment, that men should watch always, and be ever prepared.

3 Though we think of death, which the beasts cannot do, yet let us not
slavishly fear it, but therein endeavor to be as the Angels of heaven, who
though they understand Death, yet do not fear it, being out of the reach of
it. Consider we may, that the sting of Death, which is sin, is taken out, and
our death is the Death of Death to us; that out of this eater comes meat, and
out of the strong, out of the bitter, comes sweetness. Indeed if we look upon
death as the punishment of sin, as the dissolution of the most excellent
creature on earth, as the parting of two old friends and intimate acquaintance,
the soul and the body, as an end and period of service to God and man in the
Church and comonwealth on earth, so it is rather terrible than desirable: yet
again, if we consider that it is a period to sin and sorrow, an inlet to glory, a
dark entry to a lightsome palace, no other than the Portall or entry into the
house of God, and the gate of heaven to the godly, and that death is ours, for
our benefit and advantage, as well as life; that our death is precious in Gods
eyes; and that when we are dead, and our vile bodies in the dust, when the
worms are spread under them, and the worms cover them, even then are we Gods
Jewels; when we are dissolved, then are we like gold melted in the furnace,
precious in the eyes of the owner thereof. Lets consider that we go to our
friends and acquaintance, who are gone before us to heaven; yea we go to God,
Christ, and the holy Angels, and all the company of heaven; and though our body
and soul part, yet the mystical union betwixt us and Christ the Head,
continues firm and indissoluble, and we are still members of his body; that
death is a sleep after our labor and travel here, and who fears to put off
his clothes to go to sleep in his bed? that Christ our Lord dyed to free us
from the slavish fear of death: I say if we consider all these things, we
shall not need to be always way in bondage through fear of death. Though death
was odious and accounted an enemy to the (...) Hesio. (...).
Gods of the Heathen, yet it has been welcomed and entertained as a friend by
godly Christians: I have heard or read of a godly man, who rejoiced exceedingly
when he saw the plague spots upon his arm, looking on them as certain signs
of his approaching dissolution; and of a gracious Gentlewoman, who, being told
by a friend, that her change probably was not far off, brake out after such a
manner, saying, Now bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me bless
His Holy Name; I would not go back again for a world, or to the like effect.

And 4ly, that we may not fear the approach of Death, lets prepare and provide
daily for his coming; put on the whole armor of God, especially the shield of
Faith, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God: Cant. 4.4.
this is like the Armory of Solomon, wherein hung a thousand shields, even the
shields of the mighty; Keep close to our Captain Christ, who leads us, and
loves us, and laid down his life for us, and ever lives in heaven to make
intercession for us; through him we shall do valiantly, through him we shall
tread down our enemies, and be more then Conquerors over Sin, Death, and the
Devil. Lets take heed of every Sin; get and grow in, and act (as we have
opportunity) every grace; labor to be abundantly fruitful in every good
thought, word, and work; and be sure to be found upon our watch, and upon our
guard when death comes.

And now Sir, to return unto you: having never preached to you from the Pulpit,
accept I pray this Sermon from the Press. You who fear God, do not you fear
Death: Let not such a man as you seek to flee; but rather stand in your tent
door, ready to meet him, when he comes. To this end be rich in Faith, and rich
in good Works: let your own eyes be your Overseers, and your own hands in some
good measure your Executors. Be eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; deal your
bread to the hungry, cloth the naked, show your faith by your works. Thus
whilst others may be compared to Dives, or to the rich fool in the Gospel, we
shall behold you as the wise Merchant in the Parable, who, though you have
indeed a great portion in the things of the world, yet are not contented to
have the world for your portion: and though you have had your share of the
treasures hid in the sands, yet not satisfied therewith, lay up for your self
treasures in Heaven.

Thus returning you hearty thanks for the favors and respects you have been
pleased to do me, hoping since you are reputed a lover of Ministers, you will
give a Minister leave still to love and honor you; I shall conclude, praying
for you, that when you shall have served your Generation according to the will
of God, and fall asleep, your soul may be received up into Heaven, and your
body rest in the Lord; so that when you shall awake in the morning of the
resurrection, and your body and soul be reunited, you may be still and ever
with the Lord, which is best of all.

Sir, This is, and shall be the Prayer of your Humble Servant in the Gospel of
Christ THOMAS HODGES.
Souldern, December. 23. 1658.
Heb: 2.15. And deliver them, who through fear of Death were all their life
time subject to bondage.


IN this and the verse immediately foregoing, we have a rational account of
the Incarnation of the Son of the God; why it was expedient that the Messiah
should be Emanuel, the Word should be made Flesh; wherefore the Son of God
should become the Son of Man, an everliving and all-quickening Spirit partake
of flesh and blood like unto us his brethren, only without sin, i. e. be of a
nature passible and mortal, or obnoxious to sufferings and Death: namely, it
was for these two ends, 1. That by his death he might destroy our great enemy,
there named the Devil, and described to be him, that had the power of Death.
And 2ly. That he might deliver us, his own brethren and friends, out of the
hands of this cruel tyrant, and out of the mouth of this roaring Lion, of whom
by reason of our sins, we either were, or had just cause to be all our life
time afraid, lest we should by him be punished both with temporal and eternal
Death.

There are three observations, which I desire to speak to, and which I suppose
contain the very marrow of these words.

1. That it is a grievous bondage to be all our life time in continual fear of
Death.

2. Unbelievers, or those who are out of Christ, either are, or have just cause
to be through fear of Death all their life time subject unto bondage.

3. Believers, or they who have part in Christ, and they only, are delivered
and freed by his death from this intolerable bondage.

Of the 1. I shall proceed by these steps, 1. To show that fear is a bondage.
2. That to fear all ons life time aggravates the bondage 3. That to fear Death
all our life time consummates the bondage.


1. Fear is a passion, which speaks a man a servant; it is the badge and
cognizance of a Servant: whereas Love is the principle and character of a
Child: to fear our Lords or our Masters anger is servile, servile est, ac
servum arguit, says Rolloc. in loc. And it is very observable, that Romans 8.15.
the spirit of fear is called a Spirit of bondage, but the spirit of Adoption, or
the spirit of Sons, is in the Scripture called a spirit of love, and
distinguished from that spirit of fear, or that principle of fear, whereby
servants commonly do act, or are acted rather, 2 Timothy 1.7. Fear has torment,
says the Holy Ghost, 1 John 4.18.

This foul fiend, this torturing Affection was worshipped by the Lacedaemonians
as a God: I suppose for the same cause that the Romans and Indians worshipped
the Devil, viz. that it should not torment them. And truly they say, Fear was
commonly adored and painted in their Temples with a Lions head, and so very
terrible, not unlike the Devil, that roaring Lion, who goes about continually
seeking whom he may devour: and truly if it be not like the Devil, yet some
have said, Cardan.
that fear does invite the Devil to come to us, timor attrahit ad se
daemonas. And surely it was not without all cause that Vives said, Nulla est
miseria major quam metus. Burton.
There is no greater misery then fear: No greater misery, no rack or torture
like it, says another.

2. But then to fear all our life time, that aggravates the misery and
bondage, that makes our lives (and life we use to say is sweet) bitter as
death, yea it causes some to choose (although they make an ill choice) death,
rather than life. The day-labourer waits for the even, and then he shall rest;
the servant for the end of the year, the Apprentice for his year of Jubilee,
when he is to go out free; and the forethought of liberty sugars the bitter cup
of servitude to them. But alas! to be under the terrible bondage of fear,
without any hopes or expectation of freedom, or of redemption all our life
time, this is a burden which neither we, nor our Fathers were ever able to
bear. Nay in death it self, I say not that the servant is free from this
master; when a man dies, he rather feels the evil which he feared, than is
freed from it. And although we must say, blessed is he that fears God always,
the Lord of life, with a filial, child-like, ingenuous fear; yet we may say,
miserable is he that fears death always, that hard master, that cruel tyrant,
with a servile and slavish fear. And so I come to the third and last degree of
the bondage.

3. To fear Death all our life time, is a burden and bondage which is
intolerable. Under the word Death I shall comprehend (with the generality of
interpreters) not only temporal death, which is the separation of the soul
from the body; but eternal death also, which is the separation of both soul
and body from God everlastingly. Now to fear death always is a terrible
bondage, quid miserius est, aut fingi potest (said one) quam metu mortis
perpetuo trepidare? Death is called by the Philosopher the terrible of
terribles, the most terrible evil that can be: by Job, the King of terrors.
Joh. 18.14.
It Is the fear of Kings, as well as mean men; and it is the King of fears: and
those who slavishly fear death are the veryest bondmen in the world, qui
metuunt mortem illi servi sunt, ac servili condition, non autem ingenui, neque
filii, Rolloc. in loc. and so Theoph. (...); they that fear death are the
servants of death. Not only his servants we are whom we obey, but his servants
and vassals we are whom we fear: and the little finger of the fear of death
will be heavier than the loins of all other fears and tyrants whatsoever. The
fear of other evils chastises us with whips, this with scorpions. Death is
an evil, a great evil, and an unavoidable evil, and therefore terrible. It is
usherd in, and accompanied, and followed with a black guard and train of
fears: the way and walk of death is very low and dark: we read of the valley
of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.
and in this valley there is too a Lion, yea many legions of roaring Lions,
waiting for their prey continually; yea certainly many thousands, if not
millions of men, who have gone down this way, have been sore wounded, yea
cruelly slain here, have lost their lives and their souls here. But more
particularly, death will appear ghastly and formidable, if we consider

1. That it has a venomous and deadly sting; it is an old serpent, and has a
poisonous sting, the sting of death is sin, and that is terrible. Sin is the
edge of the sword of this deadly enemy, it is the poison of the Dragon, it is a
greater enemy to us than death, than the Devil, than Hell it self. If sin was
not there, we should not die, or we should not need to fear Death, we might
easily shake off this viper into the fire, and rid our hands of it, as Paul did
of the viper Act 28. and feel no harm; but therefore death is death indeed,
and hell hell indeed, because it is the wages of sin.

2. Death will appear terrible, if we consider who impowers death primarily,
who has the absolute and supreme power of life and death, and from whom death
originally has his Commission, and that is God. The Lord kills and makes
alive, he brings down to the grave and raises up, 1 Samuel 2.6. And truly God
is a consuming fire: God the supreme judge of all the earth, and who cannot
err in judgment, has passed sentence upon us according to his holy, just, and
righteous Law; and it is deaths part but to be an executioner, to execute upon us
the judgment written. The avenging justice of Almighty God commands death to
seize upon the sinner, and to tear him in sunder like a Lion, yea to come
hissing upon him like a dragon with the sting of vengeance in the mouth of it:
morcem intellige cum ira Dei conjunctam, qualem necesse est extra Christum
esse, says Beza. It Is the justice and wrath of Almighty God which
commissionates death to kill, Psalm. 90.11.
and destroy, and take the spoil: and of Gods wrath it is said, according to our
fear so is thy wrath: our fears may be above the wrath of men, but the wrath
of God is greater then our fears.

3. Death is terrible, if we consider who has the power of death, i. e. not so
much a delegate power, such as Kings and Magistrates have, as a power by
consequence; let us call it so: such as an Executioner or an hangman has over
condemned persons to put them to death; and that is the Devil, v. 14. The Devil
may be said to have the power of death, either, 1. As a tempter, who seduceth
us to sin, James 1.15.
and so brings us to death. Sin being finished brings forth death.
Theophylact tells us, the Devil got the power of death, how? (...), (...): so
he, i. e. peccatum est fortitudo roburque mortis: he got it by Sin; Sin is the
strength and power of death. Or, 2ly As an Accuser of us unto Almighty God, and
urging the Law against us before God, continually soliciting pressing this
Judge to do justice upon us, urging God as the Nobles and Courtiers did
Darius, against Daniel, Daniel. 6.12.13.15.
that he might be cast into the Lions den: so he, that we might be cast into
hell, the den of the roaring Lion, and out of which we have no hope of
deliverance. Or, 3ly he may be said to have the power of death (sicut carnifex
habet imperium rotae and patibuli) as an executioner has power of the wheel or
gibbet, therewith to torment men, not whom and how he pleases, but condemned
malefactors, according to the direction and appointment of the Judge: thus the
Devil has the power of death: and surely it is a dreadful thing to fall into
the hands of this cruel tyrant and tormentor. Death comes to our chamber-doors
and to our bedside, accompanied and guarded with Legions of Devils, who all
greedily gape for their prey. And so we come to

The 4th and last consideration, in respect whereof death is very formidable or
terrible; namely, if we consider the Consequents of death: the second Death
follows at the heels of the first, i. e. Hell treads on the heels of death.
Death comes riding on a red or pale horse with a drawn sword in his hand, and
hell follows on a black horse with a flaming sword turning every way to cut
off all the branches of our tree of life; yea so to cut down the tree of life,
as that he leave us neither root nor branch. Ubi coram Deo reatus, ibi protinus
Inferi se ostendunt, says Calvin: where the soul is yet under guilt before
God, there hell stares us in the face: so terrible must death be to those, who
are yet in their sins, who are indeed out of Christ. And this is our second
observation:

That unbelievers either actually are, or of right have just cause to be
through fear of death all their lifetime subject to bondage.

Every unbeliever may be named magor-missabib, fear round about: within him
are fears, when all is calm, and there are no fightings without.

Four sorts of men there are in the world, whose condition is a condition of
fear. 1 Minors or children, and servants or vassals, who are under hard
Masters. 2. Such as are weak and of no strength, and yet have many powerful
and revengefull enemies. 3. Poor debtors, who owe millions, who have nothing
to pay, and yet have creditors, who will not abate them a ^arthing or mite. And
fourthly, malefactors or transgressors of the Law, who are obnoxious to
justice, and so liable continually to punishment for the breach of the Law.

Now the condition of unbelievers may be likened to all these, and therefore
must needs be a condition of fear.

1 And at best, he is under the Law as a schoolmaster, yea as a taskmaster too,
who requires of him difficultyes and impossibilities, demands brick and gives
no straw, and he is, or ought to be afraid of being beaten daily. Then he is a
servant, yea a slave to sin, the worst master, the greatest tyrant in the
world: he is as Paul said of himself Romans 7.14. Carnal, sold under sin, as to
his unregenerate part: or as it is said of Ahab, 1 Kings. 21.25.
he is one that sells himself to work wickedness: being a servant of Sin he is
made a servant of death; and serves him daily with fear and trembling, as often
as he thinks of him: yea he is carried captive by the Devil at his pleasure, so
right is that, quam multos habet Dominos qui unum non habet? How many Lords and
Masters has he that has not one, that is, God, for his Lord and master?

2 An unbeliver is weak, and of no strength, and yet has many potent enemies to
grapple withal. 1 he has one omnipotent enemy, and that is God, one who is
said to be angry with him every day, Psalm. 5.5. and 11.5.
and to hate him, who whets his sword, and bends his bow, and prepares for him
the Instruments of Death. And surely it is a fearful thing to be a child of
wrath, and to be liable daily to fall into the hands of this living God, as
ones deadly enemy; and yet this is the state of unbelievers. Again, all the
Angels in heaven, and all the creatures in heaven and earth, and all the Devils
in hell are his enemies: they all stand ready some nearer and some farther off
the Judges bench, as it were saying, Away with such a fellow from the Earth, he
is not worthy to live. He that kills thee may think he does God good Service.
An unbeliever (like Cain) may fear every one that meets him, lest he should
slay him.

3. He is extremely indebted unto the Justice of God, and is never able to pay
a farthing; and God will one day say (if he live and die in this state) take
him, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into the dungeon, into utter
darkness: verily he shall not come out thence, until he has paid the
uttermost farthing.

And 4ly, he is a transgressor, a malefactor: God looks on him so, in the womb
and from the womb; as soon as he comes into life, he is liable to the law,
sentence, and punishment of death: he is (as we say) a dead man in law, as soon
as he begins to live.

Yea, and that which aggravates his bondage and misery is this, that he knows
of no reprieve, no not for a day, or hour, or moment; death and hell may seize
on him every minute: behold as it were a flaming sword with a twine-thread
hangs over his head continually, so that all his honors, sweet pleasures,
wealth, is nothing to him, if his eyes be but open to see his misery: his head
is as it were always upon the block, and death is ready with his axe, for ought
he knows, to sever soul and body every moment; and (if he die presently) he
knows not what will become of his soul to eternity, or he knows that the
Devils will come and fetch away his soul: he looks on death quasi aeternae
mortis exordium. C. Alap. on death temporal as but the beginning or inlet into
eternal death; he enters into the prison of hell, as never hoping to come out
again. If the eyes of his understanding be enlightened, he sees Legions of
Devils ready to fly upon his soul, before his soul goes out of his body,
reaching after and catching at his soul, before his friends begin to scramble
for his goods, or the worms to feast themselves with his flesh.

To conclude this, an unbeliever has just cause to fear death, as one that
will deprive him of life, and all that he accounted happiness; and as a
Sergeant sent to arrest, attach, and hale him to prison and judgment, and so
deliver him up to the Devil, and the torments of hell for ever.

And now if any be troubled at these sayings, and say in their hearts, this is
a hard saying, who can bear it? who then can be saved? I answer, our Lord Jesus
Christ dyed to deliver all those, that will come to him for Salvation, from the
fear of death, under which they were before time held in bondage: and so we
come to treat of our 3d and last observation.

All true Christians, or those who are justified by faith

1 They are delivered, they do not slavishly fear death temporal and
eternal, or they ought not so to do. 2 They are delivered by Christ, and 3 by
Christ dying for them.

1 True Christians do not, or need not slavishly to fear death. I know nature
is averse to, and trembles at dissolution; and the pure and holy nature of
Christ did (with submission to his fathers will) decline suffering, and fear
dying; and it is sufficient for the servant that he be as his Master. A
natural, ordinate, moderate fear of death a Christian may have, but yet he
does not slavishly fear death or hell; he knows the one cannot hurt him, and
the other has nothing in him: a hair of his head shall not fall to the
ground, and not so much as the smell of hell fire shall ever pass on him.
Christians have no need to fear death: it can (let it do its worst) but kill
the body, it cannot cast body or soul into hell fire; and wherefore then
should Christians fear it? the shell, the body may in death be broken or
worm-eaten; but the kernel, the soul, that is untouched, the worms cannot
touch that. Besides, death is a hiding place or Sanctuary to Christians for a
time, till all the sore calamities of this miserable world are overpast; and
men in distress do not fly from, but to places and cities of refuge. Again,
they may look on death as a period of all evil, as a forerunner, as an in let
to all blessedness, a dark entry leading them to the father of lights: they
find death in the Inventory of their good things, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. For all
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, Revel.
14.13.
or life, or death. Even so says the Spirit, Blessed are the dead that die in
the Lord. Alacres accedunt ad mortem, tanquam ad aerumnarum terminum, and
melioris vitae exordium, Corn. Alap. They approach death cheerfully, as the end
of their troubles, and the beginning of a better life.

How unhappy were Christians, if they could not dye? they would not live always.
It is enough say they, (with Elijah, a little altered) take away our lives, 1
King. 15.4.
that we may be better with our fathers; nay, that we may be ever with the
Lord, which is best of all. Vitam habent in patientia, mortem in desiderio:
they are patient of life, or content to live, but desirous to dye. Of old it
was grown to a kind of Proverb, soli Christiani mortis contemptores: Christians
were the men who contemned death. In the Martyrologie we find Justus and
Pastor, the one of seven, the other of nine years of age, offering themselves
to Martyrdom for Christ. A godly man dies willingly, though at the stake,
saying with the first Martyr Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: Act. 7.59.
but it is observed by some, that the rich fool dyed unwillingly, this night
(says the text) do they require thy soul of thee; he would not dye, but he
must. Luke 12.20. gr.


Farther, Christians are freed by Christ, and by his dying, from the slavish
fear of death and hell, or temporal and eternal death. For

1 Christ has destroyed him that had the power of death, i. e. the Devil: non
quod personam, aut substantiam diaboli destruxerit, and annihilarit, sed quia
ejus regnum and imperium destruxit, Corn. Alap. He has not destroyed or
annihilated the person or substance of the Devil, but he has destroyed his
Kingdom and Empire. Christ has despoyled the Devil of that right or power,
which he sometimes had by permission or sufferance from God, to tempt and
torment them, by reconciling them by his death unto God. Now since Christ has
made our peace with God, the Devils power to tempt us in this life is much
limited and restrained, if we be in Christ; and his power to torment us after
death is totally abolished. He has delivered us from the power of Satan, Act.
26.18. from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13. Ita prostratus est (says
Calvin, speaking of the Devil) ut pro nihilo habendus sit, ac si nullus foret:
the Devil is so vanquished, as if he signified nothing now, as if there was no
Devil at all as to believers. And Christ conquered the Devil, beat him out of
his Kingdom and Empire, which he sometimes had over us his Subjects, with his
own weapon; he slew him as it were with his own sword: hostem suis ipsius armis
confecit Christus, says Beza. Christ by death overcame him that had the power
of death: when he hung upon the cross, See Colos: 2.15. and Ephesians. 4.8.
he spoiled principalities and powers; and when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them. The
Devil first got his power to torment us with death temporal and eternal, and
with the fear and horror of both, by tempting us to sin; and by that means
tyrannized over man, putting him to death cruelly and maliciously: but now
Christ became sin for us, our sins were laid upon him, and he died for our
sins, and by his death overcame the Devil: the great Leviathan did bite at the
flesh of Christ, or his humane nature, sed captus fuit hamo Divinitatis, but he
was caught by his divinity, as with a hook: yea the divine power of Christ is
such a hook in his nostrills, that he can and will hinder him from tyrannizing
over and tormenting (as formerly he did) those that are Christ's. And truly, the
Devil has justly forfeited his power for his malice against Christ, and his
presumption in setting upon Christ, the Captain of our salvation, when he once
appeared but in the Similitude of sinful flesh.

2. Because Christ has destroyed the power and dominion of Sin; he has by his
death taken away the condemning power, and purchased the Spirit to destroy the
commanding power of Sin in his; so that sin shall no more reign in our mortal
bodies, Sin shall no more have dominion over us, since Christ dying for sin
has condemned Sin in the flesh.

3. That Christ has delivered true Christians from the fear of Death,
appears, in that he has freed them from the damning power of the Law: the
strength of sin, as to its condemning power, is the Law; but Christ in this
regard, as to those that are Christ's, has nailed the Law to his cross: yea
the law was not made for a righteous man, says the Scripture, 1 Timothy, 1.9, and
such are justified persons by the death of Christ. Farther, it is said against
such there is no law, Gal. 5.23. and that we might be yet delivered from all
our tormenting fears, hear what the Apostle Paul says, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ.

4 In that Christ by his death has abolished death to the godly, I had
all-most said Name and Thing, he has taken away the sting of death, he has
beat out the teeth of this evil and venomous beast. Death came with open mouth
upon Christ, like a roaring Lion, as he went down that way, but Christ has
slain the Lion, and now out of the eater comes meat, and out of the strong
comes sweetness, to them that are Christ's the bitterness of death is past; any
child of God may now play upon the hole of this Aspe death; it is now to them a
sleep, a change, a gathering to their fathers: Revel. 20.6.14. v compared.
and it has been observed, that in the Revelations sometimes it does not go
in account as worthy of the name of death; for then the death of the Soul in
hell, which is called the second death, should have been called the third death:
but if it be any thing, we are assured 1 Cor. 15. that it shall be destroyed,
death is swallowed up of victory, v. 54. and Revel. 20.14. we read, that death
and hell were both cast into the lake of fire and brimstone: so that those that
are Christ's need not fear either the one or the other.

5 In that Christ by dying has procured the keys of hell and death to be laid
upon his shoulders, and none of his shall go into the chambers of death, till
he open the door; and that he will not do, until he has made and perfumed
their beds for them, and until it is the best time for them to go take their
rest: and as for hell, ye may be sure he will bar and bolt the gates of hell,
so that Christians need not fear it, they shall never go thither.

Besides, Christ will redeem them from death, by a glorious Resurrection of
their bodies at the last day.

And now if any say in their hearts, what then, must Christians for ever cast
of all fear, and rejoice in it as their portion, purchased for them by the
sufferings and death of Christ?

I answer

1 That Christians ought, notwithstanding all that has been said, to fear God
with an awful, reverentiall fear, and to have Reverend thoughts of him, and
demean themselves reverently before him, as becomes dust and ashes; especially
when he manifests himself to, and before them, either in his holy word and
ordinances, or in his extraordinary works and Providence. So Moses said, Heb.
12.21.
I exceedingly fear and quake, when God came down on Mount Sinai: Isa: 66.2.
Philip. 2.12.
and to him will I look (says God) that trembles at my word.

2 Christians ought, notwithstanding all that has been said, to take heed lest
they fall, to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling: they ought to
serve their Master in heaven with fear and trembling. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, psalm. 119.120. i. e. they
ought to have a watchful, careful, heedfull fear, that they do not offend
or displease God at any time: we must not cast overboard such a Religious
fear, as made Noah build an Arc, for the saving of himself and his house;
but as for such fears, as like Jonah, shall occasion such storms and
tempests, that though we row hard, and tugg hard, yet we cannot bring the
vessel safe to shore, let it be cast out.

3 Yet I say, that Christ has freed them by his holy life and innocent Death,
from anxious, distracting, perplexing, tormenting fear, either of temporal or
eternal death. Such a fear as may make them fly to God, as may consist with
love to God and goodness; such a fear of his goodness and mercy, as consists
with hope in his mercy; such a fear they have, and may, and ought to have, and
yet be good Servants, and no base spirited or base principled slaves; and yet
be loving Children, and not bastards, no unworthy base spirited Children.

Yea lastly, So far as they are unregenerate, the fear of sufferings may be a
bridle to lust, and a spur to duty; yea they may make use of the threatenings in
the word to deter them from offending, and as a Motive or means to keep
close to the way which is called holy: we find that God used a Commination even
to Adam in Innocence in Case of disobedience, In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17.

Again, if any say further in their hearts, how can this man save us? he did
not save himself from the fear of death, and how can he save others? and if
we read Math. 26. from v. 38. to 42. and Heb. 5.7. we may have cause to think,
that Christ himself feared death; and then how could he deliver us from it?

I answer, that Christ did fear death; but that his fear was not inordinate,
that it was principally the wrath of God, the terrors of the Almighty, which
made him pray with strong cries and tears unto God. He did conflict with death
in its full strength; with the Serpent with its sting and poison in it: Christ
endured the pain of sense in the garden, when he said, my soul is exceeding
sorrowful even to the death; the pain of loss, when he was crucified on the
tree, and cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? where, though
the grace of vision was for a time withdrawn from Christ, yet the grace of
union and unction still continued the same. So that as Christ entered into the
first degree of the first death, his soul and body were really separated, but
not into the second, i. e. his body did not see corruption: so he enterd only
into the first degree of the 2d death: the light of Gods countenance was hid
toward him for a while, as it were under a cloud, but God did not wholly
forsake him, nor was he totally separated from God. And truly, God heard the
prayer of Christ, that prayer of his upon the cross, Luke 23.46.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, i.e. says one, Father, if I dye,
yet deliver me from the power of death, deliver me out of death, preserve and
restore my spirit again: D. Hd.
and accordingly he had within 3 days a glorious Resurrection in answer to his
prayer.

I know there are, who take (...) to signify a reverentiall or religious
fear; and so make the sense of Heb. 5.7. where it is said, that Christ was heard
(...), to be, he was heard for his great piety and devotion, and not that he
was saved from, or out of the thing which he feared, namely out of death,
implying that Christ feared death: but therefore Christ feared it so much, that
we might not fear it so.

If any farther examine me, what is the Reason then that good men oftentimes
are so unwilling to dye, and so fearful of death? we read of good Hezekiah,
that at the tidings of death, he turned his face to the wall, and wept sore.

I answer, 1 concerning Hezekiah, that he was at this time childlesse, and that
might seem a dismal thing, for his Sun to set so long before night, and to
have no hope of rising again in his posterity. 2 That he had newly made a
glorious Reformation, and knew not but that after his decease the worship of
dead Idols might revive again, to the great dishonor of the living God, whom
he served. 3 He might fear lest his being taken away at such a time, and by
such a violent disease (it is thought by some it was the plague) might open the
mouths of his enemies to triumph and say, that this evil was therefore come
upon him, because he had broken down their Altars. 4 Possibly he himself might
upon the sudden look upon this message of death, as a messenger bringing him
tidings of Gods displeasure, and for this cause he might weep at the news of
death.

And secondly, as concerning other good men or women, who have feared Death, I
answer 1 that of right they ought not to fear it. Christ has set open the
prison doors, and if they use the means, they may be free from their fears;
it is their ignorance of their strength in Christ, and deaths weakness, which
makes them fear death. If the children of light be kept ever in darkness, and
not see that there are more for them then can be against them, they will be
afraid of death and his followers: or 2ly, it may be they neglect to put on the
whole armor of God, when they grapple with principalities and powers, and
particularly with the power of death; or they go out rashly in their own
strength, without seeking of auxiliary forces from heaven to help them; or it
may be they do not use their shield of faith in Christ, who by death overcame
death; and therefore it is that they are overcome for a while of the fear of
death. Or lastly, as it is said of Gad, so I may say of these, a troop may
overcome them, Genesis 49.19.
but they shall overcome at the last; and though their hearts fail them for
fear in the beginning, yet they shall be as David, and as the Angel of the Lord
strengthening him; they shall be courageous, and more than conquerors in the
conclusion, over death and hell, and all their fears of them:

And now if on the other side we see any wicked men, children of the Devil,
who seem to us undaunted at death; Job. 41.33.
who seem to us like the great Leviathan, concerning whom ye know it is said,
upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.

I say either 1 that the Devil it may be has blinded their eyes, that so he
might lead them into the bottomless pit, before they so much as fear or fancy
it. He is so subtle, that he will not torment them before the time, that he may
be more sure to torment them to all eternity. Again, they may ofttimes perhaps
have a hell in their consciences, whilst they seem to us to be in a fools
paradise. If they feel no fear of death temporal or eternal, it is surely
because they are dead in their sins and trespasses, and their consciences are
seared with a hot iron. I am persuaded the soul of the boldest wicked man on
earth was never so fearlesse all the time that it was in the body, but that
when it sees it must go out of the body, and go into hell, it fears and
trembles to go forth: how free and jolly would it deem it self, might it but
abide in the prison of the body for ever? but to say no worse of such, these
dye desperately, but the righteous has hope in his death.

Belshazzar, that it might fill him with fear, and that he might go home full
of fear, and that his fears (like some ghost) might haunt him, and give him no
rest, whilst he continues in his natural, unregenerate condition. I desire
this Doctrine may scare them, but not hurt them.

And you who are indeed (and know it) subject to this grievous bondage, the
fear of death and hell, I desire you would go to the heart, and hare, and such
like fearful creatures; that you would consider, and learn their ways, and
be wise.

1 They are very cautelous and watchful. It Is said of the hare, that she sleeps
with her eyelids open. Let us be vigilant and circumspect, and keep a constant
guard upon all the ways and inlets of sin; for sin, fear, death, and hell, all
enter in at the same port or door.

2 Fearful creatures are very nimble to fly from danger. Let us fly from sin
as from the face of a serpent; remembering always, that the sting of death is sin.

3 Fearful creatures get hiding places, to which they run and are safe: the
Heart that is animal timidissimum, a most fearful creature, has a hiding place
on the tops of mountains; hence that expression Psalm. 18.33. He makes my feet
like hindes feet, and sets me upon my high places: and the stony rocks are a
hiding place for the coneys, Psalm. 104.18. Let us get a hiding place in that
Rock, that is higher then our selves, in the Lord Christ, and then we need not
fear that mighty hunter, the Devil, when he pursues us. Lets hide our selves
in the clefts of this rock now, and then we shall not need one day to call for
the rocks to fall on us, and for the hills to cover us. Be convinced that by
nature we are dead in sins and trespasses, come to Christ by a true and a
lively faith, this is the way to pass from death to life: live in, and to, and
for Christ much for the time to come, and you need not fear temporal and
eternal death; for surely you have eternal life abiding in you. Fear God with
all your hearts, with a filial fear, this will provoke you to diligence, and
obedience, and watchfulness, and then you shall not, you ought not to fear
with a slavish fear, what death or the Devil can do unto you: time at mortem,
qui Deum non timet. Let him fear death, who fears not God. What shall I say
more, get abundance of love to God, and good evidences of Gods love to you; and
Love, both this and that, is as strong as death: and then having two such
strong and mighty champions with you and for you, you need not fear death, come
when he will, for you are more then his match. And so I come to Apply the third
and last observation.

freest men in the world; they are not in bondage, no not unto death: they were
not borne free, nor with a great sum of moneys obtained they this freedom,
but the Son of God has made them free, and therefore they are free indeed.
Again 2ly, hence we may be informed, that Christians are the valiantest and
most courageous champions in the world. If thus they are not afraid to look
death in the face, of whom then should they be afraid? they may by grace do
what it is said the horse does by nature, even mock at fear, when it comes. We
may say as David does, the Righteous is hold as a Lion. A righteous man may say
with David, Psalm. 3.6. I will not be afraid of 10000s of people, that have set
themselves against me round about: or as in Psalm. 46.2. Although the earth be
removed, and the mountains cast into the midst of the Sea, I will not fear.
Although the greater world fall, this lesser world need not shake or be moved.
And so we are here taught 3ly, the great Blessedness of Christians in
miserable times: these are the happy men and women in times of war, plague,
famine. Miser Christianus videri potest, non potest inveniri, he may outwardly
seem miserable, he shall never be truly miserable.

Are ye by Christ freed from the slavish fear of death temporal and eternal,
Simeon had got his Savior in his arms, he presently sings his Now let
thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke 2.29.
Rebeckah, that went so willingly with Abraham's servant to Canaan, to be Isaacs
wife, may rise up in the day of Judgment and condemn us, if we hang back, when
our bridegroom the Lord Christ comes or sends for us. She went to an earthly
Canaan, we to a heavenly; she went to Isaac, a type of Christ, we to Christ
himself; she to Sarahs tent, we to Abraham's bosom; she to a moveable tent or
Tabernacle, we to Mansions, to a building that has foundations, whose builder
and maker is God himself; she went from her own kindred and fathers house, to
live and die in a strange country, we go to our own country and fathers house,
to dye no more, death shall no more have dominion over us.

Consider (for I speak to those who are passible and mortal, and to whom no
day can bring a privilege, nor place be a Sanctuary from the arrest of death,
no though our breasts be full of milk, and our bones of marrow) consider I say
1. that death can but bruise our heel, he cannot break our head: when death
has killed the body, he has done all. God says to this destroying Angel or
Messenger of his, when he has taken away the life of our bodies, stay now
thine hand, it is enough, put up thy sword into the scabbard: and therefore do
not fear death, for the sword of death is like the sword of the magistrate, he
bears it indeed not in vain, but to be a terror to evil doers, and a praise
to them that do well. 2. Death will cure thee of thy body and soul diseases:
The long-sick writ upon his grave stone, hic ero sanus, here I shall be well.
And as for sin, the disease of thy soul, death will perfectly cure that
leprosy, and stop that bloody issue, and be the death of that body of death
within thee. 3. As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, so
shall the grave be to our drossy bodies: our bodies (like the China dishes)
after they have been buried for some generations under ground, shall be taken
up, and made vessels of honor, fit for our masters use in heaven. The soul is
now indeed a Pearl, but set in clay; but at the Resurrection, in the day when
God makes up his Jewels, when he takes them up out of the dust and dirt, he
will then set them in bodies of gold, yea in bodies like the Sun; for we shall
be made like unto the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3. Revel. 1.16.
last. And his body is like the Sun, when it shines in its full strength. 4.
Death is the beaten road to everlasting life: Christ the King of heaven and
earth went this way; and it may suffice Christians to walk to heaven, even as
Christ walked, in and by the way of death. 5. Consider, Death is Christ's
messenger, he will not run before he is sent; he is Christ's Angel or Minister,
sent out for the good of them, who are heirs of Salvation. In the 2 King.
6.32. we read, that when Jehoram sent a messenger to take off Elisha's head,
the Prophet bid shut the door, for (says he) is not the sound of his masters
feet behind him? But let us use death kindly, and not handle him roughly at the
door; but rather say, turn in, turn in my Lord, for is not the sound of his and
our Masters feet, is not the sound of Christ's feet behind him? 6ly and lastly,
consider that so long as thou art slavishly afraid of death and judgment, thou
art either not a son, or surely a son under age; thou art not made perfect in
love. I shall never think my soul in good case (said one) so long as I fear to
think of dying. And Luther in a Sermon on Luke 21.25. says, that until we can
from our hearts desire the day of judgment, we cannot say boldly that we are
Christians: he would therefore have us pray to God for this day, thus, fac, si
fieri potest, ut hac hora veniat. I desire it may come, even this very hour.

But yet truly I think that the house of our soul may sometimes lie so unswept
and out of order, that we may be for a season willing that our Lord and husband
should delay a little his coming. But it is our duty, and let it be our study
and endeavor, to set the house of our soul in order daily, not knowing but
that any day we may dye, and not live.

To this purpose lets meditate often on death; thus lets die daily, thus lets
acquaint our selves with it, and prepare for it, and so shall we be at peace,
and so shall we not be afraid. We read in the Gospel of one mad man, who lived
among the tombs; the world think all mad that do so, Joh. 19.41, 42. compared
with Math. 27.59.60
although but by meditation: and yet we read that devout Joseph of Arimathea
had his tomb in his garden, where he probably used to walk. And oh that my
people were wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they would consider their latter end, were some of the last words of
Moses. This is the way to prepare for death; and watchfulness and preparation
may prevent a surprisall, may turn death into a sleep: the longer and more we
watch for death, our sleep and rest will be the sweeter. In vita vigilant
justi, ideo in morte dicuntur dormire, August: the righteous watch whilst they
live, and their death is a sleep. And what weary long waking man is afraid of a
sound and sweet sleep?



Let us not fear the Devil; he is an enemy, but a conquered enemy, but an
enemy bound in chains; he is a Lion, but led in chains, and so muzled, that a
child of God need not fear him.

Lets not fear the day of judgment; it is a time of refreshing from the presence
of the Lord; it is the day of Redemption of our bodies. Let it be the object of
our hopes, not of our fears. Lets not fear the world, not all the evil the
men of the world can do unto us; let us march on in the way of truth and
holiness; and that although the whole world should be against us, although our
days should prove days of darkness, of clouds, and of thick darkness, days
of rebuke and blasphemy to us: yet let us Christians, whether Prophets, or
Prophets children, or professors of the Gospel, which is the truth, and the
Doctrine according unto godliness, let us be zealous and courageous for truth
against error, and for holiness against profaneness; let us quit our selves
like men, and be strong; let us stand up to and for the truth, our hearts never
once failing us for fear of what may come upon us; no not if it should come to
a worship the golden Image, or be cast into the fiery furnace: considering (as
one says) that Dei miles nec in dolor deseritur, nec in morte finitur, Gods
soldier is neither deserted in sufferings, nor ended in death. And again,
quanto plus tormenti, tanto plus erit gloriae: the more torment, the more
glory. For although we must not have amorem mercenarium, yet we may have amorem
mercedis, though not a mercenary love, yet a Respect to the recompense of
reward.

Let us know, that although it is a blessed thing to dye in the Lord, yet it is a
more glorious thing to dye for the Lord. Let us therefore look unto the cloud
of witnesses of the martyrs of Jesus, who have gone before us, either in the
Primitive, or in the Marian times; yea let us look unto Jesus, the Author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame, and is now set down at the right hand of God, from whom he came into
this world, that he might deliver us out of the hands of all our enemies, that
we might serve him without fear, (...), i. e. says Dr H. (...) in safety, in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

To conclude all, In all our qualms and faintings of heart, lets endeavor to
revive and encourage our selves with this sovereign cordial and Antidote,
that it was one great end wherefore Christ took upon him flesh and blood, which
could suffer and dye, that so by his death and resurrection he might not only
rescue one day our bodies after death from the power of the grave, giving us a
glorious Resurrection unto eternal life; but also might by his victorious
death on the cross destroy our Arch-enemy the Devil, who had the power of
death, a deadly power, or a power to kill, and deliver us, who through fear of
death otherwise ought, and should have been all our life time subject unto
bondage.

FINIS.

