THE PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION In Twenty Questions and Answers:
Whereunto is Added, A Compendious History of the most Memorable passages of
HOLY SCRIPTURE by way of Questions and Answers, for the use and benefit of the
Inhabitants of the Parish of WOTTON in Oxford shire.

By JOHN HOFFMAN B. D. Minister of Gods word.

1 TIMOTHY 4.8. Godliness is Profitable to all things.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield. 1653.

TO My Beloved Neighbors and Parishioners, the Inhabitants of the Town and
Parish of WOTTON In Oxfordshire.
Beloved in the Lord,
1. IT has been my greatest care, and constant endeavor, ever since by Gods
providence I was called to be your Pastor, how I might withstand, and hinder
the growth of sins, Prove. 14.34. Ioh. 17.3.
which are a reproach to any People: and how to build you up in the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, which is eternal life. To which purpose in the
ordinary course of my Ministry, as you know, I have gone over the principles of
Religion, by way of Catechizing more then once, that so I might, with the Lords
assistance and blessing upon my labors, lay a sure and a sound foundation, in
the tender hearts of the younger sort of people, who are so sweetly exhorted by
Solomon, (...)ccles. 12.
to know and to remember their Creator now in the days of their youth.

2. It has of late much troubled my spirit, what good course I might take in
these evil and unsettled times, to settle and establish you in the Truth of the
Gospel, (...)evel. 3.1.
to hold fast that which you have received, that no man may take your Crown:
and how to Preach the Word unto you, that all may profit, and upon my seeking
of God in private to direct me, and after much selfe-disputing, I resolved at
last, to look beyond all discouragements, and frivolous exceptions of persons
disaffected to Truth and Holiness, and in the integrity and simplicity of my
heart, to adventure upon this plain and easy way.

First to Compose and Print a short Catechize, containing the fundamentalls of
our Christian Religion, which being known and understood, will enable you to
give an account to every man, 1 Pet. 3.15.
that shall ask you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknes and
fear. Sermons without the knowledge and understanding of fundamental Truths,
are as if you should set a Brown Loaf and a Cheese, Heb. 5.13.14.
before Infants that call for Milk.

Secondly, for as much as it is a sad thing to consider, how many hear Gods
word, it may be every Lords day, yet understand little and remember less,
having never been acquainted with the Historical part of the Scripture to any
purpose, I have therefore very briefly contracted, and set down the most
memorable Historical passages thereof, the knowledge whereof, will, I am
confident, be very helpful unto you, to understand Gods mind, delivered in
those comfortable Doctrines, which upon the explication of any Text, are by
worthy Ministers of Christ commended unto you.

Thirdly, because without the Lords blessing nothing can do us good, I have
therefore in the latter end of this little Manual, set down a short direction
for younger Christians to pray by.

There are Four holy duties, which I heartily commend unto you, and entreat
you to practice.

1. To read Gods word much in private, and to pray with your Families, the
blessing of God is upon such Families.

2. To take heed of profaning the Lords Day, and instead of unnecessary
worldly works, or sinful recreations, to call your Children and Servants after
Dinner together before the second Sermon, to give you an account of some part
of the Catechize, and of the History of the Bible, which will put yours and
their hearts into a holy posture for the public exercises of the Church.

3. I would entreat you to examine all your Doctrines you hear, by the Word of
God, it is a way very pleasing to God, as we see in the Example of the Noble
Bereans.

4. I would desire you to search after, and to be well settled in the Doctrine
of justification, and of the Sacraments. Other duties there are, I should
speak of, but I would willingly be as short as I could. Now the Lord Jesus
bless you and yours, and so appear upon you, and my labors amongst you, that
in the day of judgment we may not be ashamed but stand with comfort before the
Tribunal seat of Christ, and receive an Fuge well done good and faithful
servants, enter into your Masters joy; Which shall be the daily prayer of

Your most affectionate Friend and Pastor to serve you in Christ. JOHN HOFFMAN.
From my study at Wotton Feb. 16. 1653.
A Short Catechism. OR Twenty Questions and Answers, Containing the first
Elements or Principles of our CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
The 1. Question. WHAT is every one by Nature?
The Answer.

Every one by Nature is a poor miserable sinner, not able of himself to do
any thing pleasing to God. Romans 7.24.

Q. 2. How came we to be so wretched?
A. 1. By the guilt of the first sin committed by Adam and Eve in Paradise.

2. By original sin, which is not only a want of Gods image, consisting in
holiness and righteousness, but also a pronenesse and inclination to all
sins.

3. By our daily Actual transgressions in thought word and deed. Psalm. 51.5.
Rem: 5.12.

Q. 3. What is sin?
A. Sin is a breach of Gods Law, making us guilty of Gods curse, and heavy
judgments temporally and eternally. 1 Ioh: 3.4. Gal: 3.10.

Q. 4. How may we be freed from this miserable condition?
A. Only by Jesus Christ, the alone Mediator 'twixt God and Man. 1 Timothy: 2.5.

Q. 5. What is God?
A. God is a spirit infinite in power, justice, and mercy, distinguished into
three Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one, 1 Ioh: 5.7.

Q. 6. What believe thou concerning God the Father?
A. I believe that he created me and all the World out of nothing, and that by
his Almighty providence, he upholds, and most wisely disposes of all things to
his own glory, and the good of his Church, Heb: 11.3. Math: 10.29. Prove: 16.33.

Q: 7. What believe thou concerning Jesus Christ's
A. I believe that he being God from everlasting, took man's Nature upon him in
the fullness of time, being conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin
Mary: That he fulfilled the Law of God for me, and suffered much misery, the
death of the Cross, and Hells Torments: That he was buried, and rose again
the third day: That he ascended up into Heaven, to the highest glory, and that
he shall ere long, come in great glory, to judge the quick and the dead. Phil:
2.7, 8, 9.

Q. 8. How many Natures has Christ, and how many Offices did he undertake for
us?
A. Christ has two Natures; the humane, and the Divine Nature, Ioh: 1.14. 1 Timothy: 3 16.

And he undertook three Offices for us.

1 To be our Prophet to teach us. 2 Our High Priest to dye and to pay for us. 3
Our Heavenly King to rule us by his word and spirit, Apoc. 1.5.
Q: 9. What believe thou concerning the Holy Ghost?
A. I believe that the Holy Ghost is God, and that he is sent to me, and to
all Gods Children, to guide us, to teach us, to make us Holy, and to comfort us
in all our afflictions. Ioh, 14.26.

Q: 10. How may we get God to be our God, and Father?
A. By Faith in Jesus Christ alone, Ioh: 3.16.

Q: 11. What is Faith?
A. A precious gift of God, whereby I persuade and assure my self, that God
for Christ's sake, has justified me, and will accept of me, imputing Christ's
righteousto me, and imputing my sins to him, 2 Cor: 5.21.

Q: 12. How may we get and increase Faith?
A. 1. By the hearing of Gods word of true and faithful Preachers, Rom: 10.17.

2. By Prayer, asking of God in the name of Jesus Christ, things lawful and
needful for soul and body, according to the Lords prayer.

3. By the Sacraments.

Q: 13. What is a Sacrament?
A. An outward sign and seal of the Covenant of Grace, Rom: 4.11.

What the Covenant of Grace is, see Heb: ^0. 16, 17.

Q: 14. How many Sacraments have we Christians?
A. Two only: Baptism and the Lords Supper, 1 Cor: 10.2,3. To these Sacraments
all those have right, to whom the promises are made; upon this ground we
Baptize the Infants of Christian Parents, and when afterward they come to the
years of discretion, and can examine themselves, we also admit them to the
Lords Supper, Act. ^.39. 1 Cor: 11.28.

Q: 15. What is required of one that will receive the Communion?
A. He that will receive the Communion, must not be utterly ignorant, nor
scandalous in his life, but must carefully examine and try aforehand: 1. His
knowledge of Christ. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance, which is a change from worse to
better, upon true sorrow for sin. 4. Love and Charity. 5. His obedience and
thankfulness.


Q: 16. What is it to eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ in the
Sacrament?
A. To believe and to assure my self, that what the Lord Jesus has done or
suffered, he has done it also for my soul, and that I am really, spiritually
united unto him, Joh: 6.54, 63.

Q: 17. What is expected of us, after we have received the Lords Supper?
A. 1. To try what spiritual strength and comfort we have gotten by it. 2. To
pay our vows. 3. To increase daily in Grace. 4. To praise God, that we have a
place in Gods Church among his people, Psalm: 116.12, 13.
Q: 18. What do thou mean by the Church?
A. The company of all Gods Elect, that have been, are, or shall be called out
of the World to be Saints, Acts 2.47.

Q: 19. What are the true Christians constant exercises?
A. 1. To keep a good Conscience, Act: 24.16. 2. To be much in Prayer and
Fasting. 3. To read and hear Gods word. 4. To keep the Lords day. 5. To do
good to all, but specially to Godly Christians. 6. To do as I would be done
by, according to the Moral Law, the Ten Commandments, which are the Rule of
man's life. 7. To repent daily of our daily failings and in all these duties to
believe, that God will accept of me for Christ's sake alone, without whom our
best performances are sinful and abominable, Romans 14.23. Heb: 11.6.
Q: 20. What are the Christians privileges?
A. 1. It Is a great privilege to be a Member of the true Church. 2 To have
Union and Communion with Christ and his Church. 3 To have the forgiveness of
my sins sealed to me in the blood of Christ. 4 To dye in the Faith of Christ.
5 To be raised up at the last day to eternal Glory. 6 To stand at Christ's
Right hand, and to judge the World and Angels. 7 That when the wicked shall
go away with the Devils to Hell Fire for ever: I shall with all Gods Elect
follow Christ into Heavenly Glory, to see God Face to Face, singing Hallelujah
to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever more. Math: 25.46.
Ioh: 5.28.
Glory be to the Lord. AMEN.
The History of the Bible in Questions and Answers.
GENESIS.
The 1. Question. WHAT is contained in this first Book of Scripture?

The Answer.

A. In Genesis is contained the History of the three first Patriarks;

Of Adam before the flood;

Of Noah in the flood;

Of Abraham after the flood.

And the History also of the other Three great Patriarks, Isaak, Jacob, and
Joseph.

Q: 2. What was done before the Flood?

1 A. God created Heaven and Earth, Adam and Eve, and all things in Six days
out of nothing, and rested the seventh day. 2 God prepared Paradise for our
first Parents, and put them therein, and for sin turned them out again. 3 Adam
in the state of Innocence according to the Wisdom bestowed upon him gave fit
names to all Creatures. 4 Cain killed his brother Abel. 5 Henoch walked with
God, and was taken up into Heaven. 6 The rest of those lesser Patriarks
invented diverse Arts cap: 5.
Q: 3. What was done in the days of Noah?

1 A. The whole World was drowned by a flood. 2 The cause was man's sin, and
want of Repentance upon warning given by Noah. 3 Noah and his Family, with some
Beasts of all kinds were preserved in the Ark. 4 The Rainbow was given for a
Token that God would never destroy the World by Water any more. 5 The building
of the Tower of Babel i^ undertaken by some, and punished.
Q. 4. What can thou say of Abraham?

1 A. Abraham was called by God out of his own Country, to sojourne in the
Land of Canaan, which God afterward gave to him and to his posterity for an
Inheritance. 2 He entertained Angels unawares, and prayed for Sodom and
Gomorah, and has a Son by Sarah. 3 He met with many afflictions in his
Travells to and fro with his Wife, Sarai, his maid Hagar, and his kinsman Lot.
4 He fought a great Battle with the assistance of his own Servants against the
heathen Kings, wherein he obtained the victory, and recovered his kinsman Lot,
that had been taken captive, and at his return Melchisedeck blesses him, to
whom Abraham paid Tithes of the spoils taken in that war. 5 Abraham built many
Altars to God, is careful to teach his Family the knowledge of God, and is
willing to sacrifice his son Isaak. 6 He had many troubles about Ismaell
Hagars son. 7 He purchased a piece of land to be a burying place for his
family, and there Sarah was buried. 8 He took great care to have his son
Isaak married in a Godly way. 9 After the death of Sarah, he Married again,
and had diverse children. 10 He dyed and was honorably buried.
Q. 5. What can thou say of Isaak?

1 A. Isaak feared God, as Abraham his father had done. 2 He loved Rebecca his
Wife. 3 He was a great man among the Philistims, rich in Cattle and Goods, and
had much contention with the Philistims about digging of Wells. 4 In his old
Age he blessed Jacob and Esau: he dyed and was buried by his Sons.
Q. 6. What can thou say of Jacob?

1 A. He fled into a strange land for fear of his brother Esan. 2 In his
Travells being once benighted, and lodging all night in the field, he had a
sweet dream, wherein he saw a ladder that reached from Earth to Heaven, the
Angels of God, descending and ascending. 3 He vowed a vow, and is entertained
by his Uncle Laban, to have the care and oversight of his Cattle. 4 He had
many troubles with his Uncle whose two Daughters Leah and Rachell he married.
5 He had twelve Sons and one Daughter, and grew rich by Gods blessing upon
him. 6 He returned to his Fathers house with all he had gotten at his Unckles,
and by the way in his return, he met with shrode troubles. 1 His Uncle
pursued after him, and charged him with theft. 2 His brother Esau came with an
Army against him. 3 His Wife Rachel died in Childbed. 4 His Daughter Dinah is
ravished. 5 His Sons Simeon and Levi committed Murder. 6 His eldest Son
committed Incest, and his son Judas whoredom.

After he came home and was settled his troubles about Joseph began.

In his Old Age he removed with all his Family into Egypt, and died there, and
his body was brought back into the land of Canaan end buried.

Q: 7. What can thou say of Joseph?

Joseph is a worthy pattern of Piety and Holiness, he feared God, and took
great care for his old Father Jacob, and for all his family.

He was sold into Egypt by his own brethren and was there wrongfully
imprisoned, but by Gods wonderful providence, he is advanced to great honor,
and became the Father and preserver of the Land in time of Famine.

3 He was married in Egypt, and had two Sons: he dyed and is embalmed.
EXODUS.
Q. 1. WHY is this Book called Exodus?

A. Because it contains the History of Isreal's going out of the Land of Egypt
by the mighty hand of God.

Q. 2. What became of Jacobs posterity after the death of Joseph?

1 A. They were miserably oppressed by the Egyptians. 2 By command from the
King, all the male children were drowned as soon as they were borne, the
Midwives showed much pity toward them. 3 Moses an Infant is miraculously
preserved, and bred up by King Pharao's own Daughter. 4 Moses and Aaron are
called, and sent to the King to let Israel depart quietly out of the Land. 5
Pharao hardened his heart, and refused to let them go, for which he is punished
with Nine plagues, which are these: 1 All the waters of the Land were turned
into blood, God gave them blood to drink for their cruelty toward the
Israelitish Infants. 2 God punished the land by Froggs. 3 By Lice. 4 By noisome
Flies. 5 Murraine on Beasts, and Boyles on Men. 6 By terrible hail thunder and
lightning. 7 By Locusts. 8 By dreadful darkness. 9 By killing the first Borne.

Q: 3. What became of Israel?

1 A. None of those Plagues touched them 2 They go out of Egypt in have. 3 The
Passover is instituted. 4 They come to the Red Sea.
Q. 4. What did God do for them there and afterwords?

1 He divided the Sea for them, and they went on foot through it, and the
Egyptians following, the waters returned and drowned them all. 2 He led them by
Moses into the Wilderness, and gave them the Law on Mount Sinai: and there
they having grievously finned by committing Idolatry, at Moses his prayer for
them are pardoned. 3 He commanded them to set up the Tabernacle, and gave them
Laws about Sacrifices.
Q. 5. How were they maintained in the Wilderness?

1 A. God gave them Manna from heaven, and water out of a Rock. 2 Their shoes
add Garments did not wear out for Forty years.
Q. 6. How did Moses govern such a multitude in the Wilderness?

1 A. He appointed Magistrates and Officers under him by the counsel of his
Father in Law. 2 God usually appeared to Moses to direct him. 3 He had the
Oracle of Vrim and Thumim, to ask counsel of God by. 4 The Lord went along
with his people, and led them by a cloud by day, and by a Pillar of Fire by
night.
LEVITICUS.
The Question. WHy is this book called Leviticus?

A. Because it contains the Laws and duties of the Levites or Ministers of
God under the Law before the coming of Christ in the flesh. -- Read often the
26. chapter of this book.

NUMBERS.
Q: 1. WHy is this book called Numbers?

A. 1. Because all the Males from 20. years and upward among the Israelites
were numbered in the wilderness by Moses at Gods command. 2. Because Isreal's
murmurings and punishments in the wilderness are here set down in order. 3.
Because their several stations and removalls in the wilderness are here
numbered.
Q: 2. Which were the great Rebellions of Israel in the wilderness?

A. Their Rebellions against God, against Moses, and Aron were many; but three
of them are most remarkable.

1. That of Miriam, for which she is punished with leprosy. 2. That of all the
people, upon the return of the spies out of the land of Canaan. 3. That of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed up, and all their company.
Q: 3. What became of Aaron the first high Priest under the Law?

A: He dyed and was buried in the wilderness, and his Son Eleazar succeeded
him.

Q: 4. What wars had Israel in the wilderness?

A: They had wars with the Amalekits, and with the Midianites, where we have
the history of Balaam, and of the zeal of Phineas, and of a great plague among
the Israelits, for committing whoredom.

Q: 5. What other memorable things have you in this book?

A: 1. The 72 Elders prophesyed. 2. The brazen Serpent is set up. 3. The Levits
are numbered, and diverse cases in law determined, as that of Zelophehads
daughters. 4. Moses is forewarned of his death, and his successor is named, to
wit Joshua. 5. The two Tribes and a half obtain the land on this side Jordan
for an inheritance, but with this condition, to assist the other. Tribes till
they also could be settled in their inheritances.
DEUTERONOMY.
WHat can thou say of this book?

1. This book is called Deuteronomy that is to say a second law, because it
contains a repetition 1. Of laws formerly given. 2. Of mercyes formerly
received.
2. This book is full of sweet admonitions and exhortations to Israel, to be
sincere and constant in Gods worship and service. 3. This book contains
Moses his swanlike song, his blessing and prophecy, his death and burial, and
Iosbua's succession.
JOSHUAH.
The Question. WHat read thou in this book?

A: 1. The history of the wars of Canaan. 2. The history of Isreal's going
over Jordan as on dry land, the waters giving way to them in a wonderful
manner. 3. The Circumcision in Gilgall. 4. Christ appeared to Joshuah as an
armed man. 5. The storming and taking of the City Jericho, and the saving of
Rahab the harlot. 6. The trouble about the City Ai, and Achan, who was the
cause of it. 7. At Joshuas prayer the sun stood still a whole day, that
Israel might have time to destroy the Kings of the Amorites in number 31. God
throwing down hailestons out of Heaven to destroy them. 8. The land of Canaan
is divided by Joshuah among Gods people. 9. The two Tribes and half return to
their inheritance, and the mistake about an Altar. 10. Joshuahs farewell
Oration or charge unto Israel to serve God according to his word and to beware
of Idolatry. 11. Ioshuas death and burial.
JUDGES.
Q: 1. WHy is this book so called?

A: Because it contains the valiant Acts of the Judges of Israel, whom God
raised up after the death of Ioshuah to fight the Lords battles against the
enemies of the Church.

Q: 2. What are the names of those Judges?

A: 1 Othniel, 2 Ehud, 3 Shamgar, 4 Doborah and Barack, 5 Gideon, 6 Abimilech,
7 Tola, 8 Iair, 9 Iephtha, 10 Ibsan, 11 Elon, 12 Abdon, 13 Sampson, 14 Eli, 15
Samuel.
Q: 3. Which are the chief histories of this book?

A: 1 The history of Abdonibezek. 2 Isreal's sad Apostasy from God to Idols. 3
The memorable battle fought by Deborah and Barak, against Sisera a heathen
General, who was slain by Iael inher tent. 4 The great deliverance given to
Israel by Gideen. 5 The wickedness of Abimelech a Bastard. 6 The history of
Ieththa and his vow. 7 Of Sampsons valor, of his sin, and of his death. 8
The sad history of the Benjamites about the Levites business.
RUTH.
WHAT is the sum and substance of this Book?

1 A. How Elimelech and his Wife Naomi with their two sons Malon and Chilion,
in a time of Famine, left their own Country Canaan, and sojourned in the land
of Moab. 2 Their two sons Married two Moabitish women Orpha and Ruth. 3
Elimelech and his two sons dye in that Country. 4 Naomi returns to her own
Country, and Ruth will needs go with her, and did. 5 They come to Bethlehem,
and Naomi so orders all things, that Ruth is married to Boaz, according to
Moses Laws. 6 Boaz has a son by Ruth named Obed, who was Grandfather to King
David.
The First Book of SAMUEL.
The 1. Question. WHY are these Books called the Books of Samuel?

A. Not because Samuel wrote them, but because it contains the History of
Samuels Life and Death, who being an eminent Prophet, and the last judge of
Israel, had done great service to Gods Church, he by Gods appointment, elected
and Anointed the two first Kings of Israel. These Books were written by some
holy man, who lived in those times.

Q. 2. What do thou Read of Samuel?

1 A. I read of his Birth and Education, and of the care his good Mother Hannah
took for him. 2 Of his coming to the High Priest Eli to serve under him. 3 Of a
sad Message Samuel brings to Eli from God, for winking at his sons
wickednesses. 4 Of Samuels wisdom and care to judge Israel in his days. 5 Of
his power with God in Prayer. 6 Of his incorrupt life, death, and burial.
Q: 3. What can thou say of Eli the High Priest?

1 A. How God punished him and his sons in one day. 2 How in his days the
Ark of God was taken by the Philistines. 3 The Philistines and others are
terribly plagued for their curiosity in looking into the Ark. 4 God causes the
very Enemies of the Church to restore the Arc with an Offering.
Q: 4. What can thou say of Saul?

1 A. He was the first King over all Israel. 2 He fought against the
Ammonites, and the Amalekites, and had good success, but because he did not
obey Gods command fully, he was rejected. 3 Israel in Saul's days was much
oppressed by the Philistines, against whom God gave Jonathan a great victory. 4
He takes David into his Court, and giveeth him his Daughter Michall to Wife,
for killing Goliath. 5 Saul wearieth himself in persecuting David. 6 Saul being
forsaken of God, seeks to a Wirch, and presently upon that he and his sons
are slain in Battle by the Philistines upon Mount Gilboa.
The Second Book of SAMUEL.
Q. 1. WHat is chiefly set down in this Book.

1 A. That David was the Second King over Israel. 2 His valiant Acts and
household troubles. 3 He endured much affliction, which made him compose many
sweet Psalms. 4 He lived among the Philistines in Ziglaik, till the death of
Saul. 5 He is not pleased with the messengers o^ Saul's death, and the sad death
of Isbbo^shet, but makes a lamentation for Sa^ and Jonathan. 6 He is first made
King in Hebron over Judah, and afterward over all Israel, and carried
himself wisely in the busiesse of Abner and Ioah.
Q. 2. What can thou farther say of David?

1 A. How he took Jerusalem from the J^busites, and brought the Ark of God
thither, intending to build a Temple for Gods worship. 2 He sinned grievosly
against Vria, for which he suffered much afterward of his own children, Amon,
Thamar, Absalom. 3 He had many troubles besides with She^ba, Shimei, and Ioab.
4 His kindness to the Gibeonites in a f^r^ famine, as also to Mephiboshet, and
Han^ King of Ammon. 5 He is victorious every where, all his enemies are subdued
round about. 6 He numbered the People, and all Israel is plagued for it.
The First and Second Books of KINGS.
The 1. Question. HOW many Kings reigned over all Israel?

A. Only three, Saul, David, Solomon.

Q. 2. What is said in this Book of David?

1 A. He commands his son Solomon to be made King, and not Adoniah. 2 He
grows weak in his old age, giveeth his son Solomon most heavenly
admonitions and directions, dies and is royally buried.
Q: 3. What is mentioned of Solomon?

1 A. His behavior toward Adoniah, Ioab, Abiathar, and Shimei. 2 His marriage
with the Princess of Egypt. 3 His Prayer for Wisdom, and the signs of his
Wisdom.
Q: 4. Wherein did Solomon's Wisdom eminently appear?

1 A. In the judgment he gave 'twixt the dead and the living Child. 2 In his
Songs, and Proverbs, and Natural Philosophy, knowing the nature of most
Creatures. 3 In the government of his Court and Kingdom. 4 In the building of
Gods Temple in Jerusalem. 5 By his prayer at the Dedication of the the Temple.
6 By his entertainment of the Queen of Sheba.
Q: 5. What evil do thou read of Solomon?

1 A. He had seven hundred Wives, and three hundred Concubines. 2 He committed
Idolatry, by the inticement of his Idolatrous outlandish Wives. 3 I read of
Gods anger against Solomon, testified by raising up Adversaries against him,
namely; 1 Jeroboam his own servant. 2 Hadad the King of Edom. 3 Rezon the King
of Syria.

Q: 6. What was done after Solomon's death?

A. After that Solomon died and was buried the Kingdom was divided. Ten Tribes
adhered to Jeroboam, and two only to Solomon's Son.

Q. 7. How many Kings reigned only over the two Tribes, that were Kings of
Judah?

A. The Kings of Judah were twenty whose names are these; 1 Rehoboam. 2 Abiam.
3 Asa. 4 Jehosophat. 5 Jehoram. 6 Ahaziah. 7 Queen Athaliah 8 Joash 9 Amazia 10
Azariah called also Vzziah. 11 Jotham. 12 Ahaz 13 Hezekiah 14 Manasseh 15 Amon
16 Josiah 17 Jehoaaz 18 Jehoiachim 19 Jehoiakin 20 Zedekiah.


Q: 8. How many Kings Reigned over the Ten Tribes of Israel?

A. The Kings over Israel were Nineteen, and none of them good: their names
are these; 1 Joroboam 2 Nadab 3 Baasha 4 Elah 5 Zimri 6 Omri 7 Ahab 8 Abaziah 9
Jehoram 10 Jehu 11 Jehoahaz 12 Jehoash 13 Jeroboam 14 Zachariah 15 Shallum 16
Menahem 17 Pekaiah 18 Pekah 19 Hoshea.


Q. 9. What is said of the first King of Juda Rehobean?

1. A. He neglected the good Counsel of old men, and so lost the greatest part
of his Kingdom. 2 For his sins and the sins of the land, the King of Egypt
came with an Army, and robbed the Temple, which Solomon had built and
beautified. 3 He dyed and was little lamented.
Q. 10. What is said of Abiam the second King of Ju^s?

A. He was very wicked, he Reigned but three years and died.

Q. 11. What can thou say of Asa?

1 A. He was a Godly King and reformed Religion. 2 He prospered in his Wars
against Baasha, and against the Ethiopians. 3 He and his Subjects entered into a
strict Covenant to serve God according to his word. 4 Two sins are laid to
his charge: 1 His unkindnesse to the Prophet Hanani. 2 His looking more after
Physicians then God.
5 He fell sick of a disease in his feet and died.
Q. 12. What is said of Jehosaphat?

1 A. He like his Father Asa maintained true Religion. 2 He is blamed for
keeping friendship with Ahah. 3 He walked in the first ways of David being
zealous. 4 He caused the Priests to go from Town to Town to Catechize the
people. 5 In a time of War, he seeks God and gets a great victory: he
Reigned gloriously and died peaceably.
Q: 13. What is said of Jehoram?

A: 1 He was wicked and Idolatrous, for which he is reproved in a letter from
the Prophet Eliah, but he despised it. 2 For his sins God smote him with an
incurable dsease and pain in his bowels where of he dyed. 3 His death was not
lamented, neither was he buried among the Kings of Juda.
Q: 14. What is said of Abaziah?

A: He was a very wicked King he reigned but one year and going to see the
King of Israel is slain there by Jehu,

Q: 15. What read thou of Queen Athaliah?

A: 1 She being the Queens mother undertaks to reign, and kills all the
Royal seed, excepting one young Prince Joash, who was secretly carried away,
and preserved by his Aunt Jehoshebah the wife of Jehoiadah the high Priest. 2
This Queen was afterward slain by the command of the high Priest, and Joash
the young Prince succeeded.
Q: 16. What is said of Joash?

A: 1 Joash is made King by Jehoiadah the high Priest and did well so long as
this Priest lived, taking great care for the repairing of the Temple. 2 After
the death of his Uncle the high Priest, he grows very wicked, and being
reproved, by his Uncles son then the high Priest, he caused him to be killed,
an ill requital to his Uncle, who had saved his life, and preferred him to the
Crown. 3 Jehoiadah dying is buried among the Kings. 4 Joash by a conspiracy is
slain by his Courtiers.
Q: 17. What can thou say of Amaziah?

A: 1 He was a religious Prince, and revenged his Fathers Murder. 2 He
challenged Jehoash King of Israel to fight with him, but he is worsted by him.
3 He hired soldiers out of Israel for an 100 shekells of silver: but being
advised by a Prophet, to let these Soldiers go back again to their own
homes because they were wcked Idolaters he obeyed and is content to loose the
money. God is able, says the Prophet to give thee much more, then this money
comes to. 4 He fights with the Edomites, and having conquered them,
worshippeth their ldole Gods, for which beingreproved by a Prophet, he
continued obstinate, and at last growing proud he is killed by a conspiracy.
Q: 18. What read we of Azaria or Vzziah?

A: 1 He was good King and reigned 52 years. 2 He overcame the Philistians in
Battle. 3 He was a Lover of Husbandry and Cattle. 4 At last he meddling with
the Priests Office, he is smitten with leprosy, and dyed.
Q: 19. What is said of Jotham?

A: There is little said of him, only he executed his Fathers Kingly office,
after his Father was leprous.

Q: 20. What is said of Ahaz?

A: 1. He was very wicked: the Scripture says this is that Ahaz to show the
greatness of his sins and wickedness, he offered his son to the Idol
Molech in the fire. 2 He lost part of his Cuntery, and hired the King of
Assyria to help him against the Syrians. 3 He put up an Idolatrous Alter after
the form of that he saw in Damascus, and made great changes in Religion for
the worse, and dyed.
Q: 21. What do we read of Hezekiah?

A: 1 He was one of the best Kings of Juda, and reformed Religion, and brake
the brazen serpent, set up by Moses in the Wilderness. 2 He kept a stately
passover, and persuaded all his subjects to bind themselves by a vow to serve
the Lord. 3 God delivered him and Jerusalem from the Army of Senacharth, an
Angel from Heaven fighting for them. 4 He fell sick, and upon his prayer God
added 15 years to his life. 5 He was a great builder and became exceeding
famous. 6 He offended God by showing his Treasures ont of vain glory to the
Ambassadors of the King of Assyra, and dyed.
Q: 22. What is said of Manasseth?

A: 1 He was one of the most wicked Idolatrous Kings of Juda, and dealt with
Devils, and wizzards and spilt much innocent blood. 2 He is led away captive
into Babylon, and upon his repentance he is restored again to his Kindome and
dyed.
Q: 23. What is said of Amon?

A: He was very wicked, and is slain by his own servants in his house.

Q: 24. What do we read of Josiah?

A: 1 He was one of the best Kings of Juda, and being very young, when his
Father was slain he was by the care of his Mother and the high Priest
religiously bred up. 2 The Prophetess Huldah foretells Gods Judgments upon
the land and a Blessing upon him, for humbling himself at the reading of the
Law. 3 He kept a most solemn Passover, and destroyed the Idolatry of Juda and
Israel. 4 He goes contrary to Gods command to war against Pharao Necho, and is
there unfortunately slain, whose death was lamented by all specially by the
Prophet Jeremy.
Q: 25. What is said of Jeboahaz?

A: He is taken captive by Pharaoh and dyed in prison in Egypt.

Q: 26. What is said of Jehoiakim?

A: 1 He was very wicked, and became Tributary to Egypt, and oppressed his
subjects. 2 The caldeans and other Nations invaded Juda, and distressed him
every way, and he dyed.
Q: 27. What do we read of Jehoiachin?

Nebucadnezar King of Babylon took him his Wife and Children and many of the
Nobles of Juda captives into Babylon, there he lived and dyed a prisoner, yet
in his latter days he had some enlargement granted to him in Babylon.

Q: 28. What is said of Mattaniah alias Zedekiah?

A: He was wicked and rebelled against the King of Babylon, whereupon the
Caldeans besieged the City Jerusalem and took it and brnt the City and
Temple, and carried away the King and all Juda captive into Babylon for 70
years according to Jeremys Prophecy.

Thus far goes the History of the Kings of Juda.

Here follows the History of the Kings of Israel after the Death of SOLOMON.

The 1. Question.

WHat is said of Jeroboam the first King of Israel?

1 A. Jeroboam for Solomon's sins is made King of the ten Tribes of Israel. 2
He setts up Idols in his dominions for fear his Subjects should go up to
worship in Jerusalem, and so fall off from him again: For which sinful policy
this mark of infamy is set on his name: Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin. 3 When one of Gods Prophets came to reprove, and to reclaim
him from his sins, he stretched out his hand against that Prophet, whereupon
his hand withered, but was again restored. 4 The same Prophet seduced by a
lying Prophet is slain by a Lion at his return. 5 Jereboams son dyed young,
because God saw some good in him. 6 He had perpetual wars with the Kings of
Juda and dyed.
Q: 2. What is said of Nadab his son?

A. He being wicked and Idolatrous like his Father, was slain by Baasha, one
of his own Subjects, in the second year of his Reign.

Q. 3. What read we of Baasha?

A: 1 He executed Gods wrath upon Jeroboams posterity, and was a great
warrior: 2 For his wickedness he is told by the Prophet Jehu that God would
deal with him as he dealt with Jeroboam.
Q: 4. What is said of Elah, Zimri and Omri the 3 following Kings?

A: 1 Elah being drunck at a feast is slain by his servant Zimri: 2 Zimri
having destroyed all Baashae's posterity is pursued by Omri he flees to his
Palace and burns himself and Palace. 3 Omri is made King by the Soldiers,
and prevails against Tibny his competitour, he built the City Samaria and
dyed:
Q: 5. What is said of Ahab, Omrie's son?

1 A. Ahab was worse then any of the Kings of Israel before him, for he brought
with his wife Iezabel the Idol Baal into the land. 2 In his days Jerico was
built: And for 3 years and 6 months there was no rain in the land, which
caused a great famine. 3 He caused innocent Naboth to be stoned, by his wives
instigation, to get his Vinyard. 4 Upon the Prophet Elia's message from God for
a heavy judgment he humbled himself for the present, whereupon the judgment is
put off for a time. 5 He was victorious in two great battles which he fought
with Benhadad King of Syria. 6 He goes against Ramoth Gilead to battle
contrary to the Prophet Micha's counsel and is slain in the field, Iehosaphat
King of Juda being with him. 7 In his days the Prophet Elia was famous.
Q: 6. What read we of Elia the Prophet?

A: 1. He foretells a famine upon the land. 2 He is fed by ravens. 3 He
increases the Widows oil and meal, and raised a dead child to life. 4
Obadia a good Courtier brings him to Ahab, Elia calls Baalls Priests to a
Sacrifice, and puts them to death. 5 At Elia's prayer God sent rain. 6 For
fear of Queen Jezebel he fled into a Wilderness, where he is fed by an
Angel, God appears to him and commands him, to anoint Elisha to be a
Prophet in his room. 7 Elia being sent for by King Ahaziah Ahabs son, caused
fire to come down from heaven, to consume the first and second Captains and
their fifties, he spares the third Captain, and goes with him to the King. 8
He was taken up into heaven in a fiery Charet, Elisha being by and beholding
it.
Q: 7. What is said of Ahazia Ahabs son, the eight King of Israel?

A. 1 He was wicked like his Father, Jehosaphat refuses his friendship. 2 He
dyed of a fall through a lettesse according to the word of Elia.


Q: 8. What read we of Jehoram?

A. 1 He was Ahazia's younger brother. 2. For Jehoshaphats sake he obtained a
great victory against the Moabites. 3 He is slain by Jehu one of his
Captains. 4 In his days Elisha prophesied.


Q: 9. What do we read of Elisha the Prophet?

1 A. He being with Elia going up to heaven got his Mantle, and therewith
divided the waters of Jordan as Elia had done before. 2 A. He healed the bitter
waters of Jericho. 3 He caused two Bears to destroy forty two Schoole-boyes
for nicknaming and calling him Bald-head. 4 He multiplied the Widows oil,
and raised the Shunamites dead child to life. 5 He healed the pottage. Caused
the Iron to swim. He fed an hundred men with a few loaves. He cured Naamans
leprosy. He punished his servant Gehazy for lying and for taking a reward. He
told the secrets of the King of Syria to the King of Israel. He smote the
Syrians who came to apprehend him, with blindness. He foretold sudden plenty
in Samaria, in a time of a grievous famine.
6 He entertained Hazael with tears, and told him of his future greatness and
cruelty. 7 Upon his deathbed he promised the King, who came to see him, three
victories against the Syrians. 8 He dyed, and in his grave, a dead soldier is
raised to life by touching his bones.
Q: 10. What is said of Jehu?

1 A. Of a Captain he is made King over Israel, he destroyed all Ahabs
posterity, he killed both the Kings of Juda and Israel, he caused Queen
Iezebel to be thrown out of a Window, and he killed all the worshippers of
Baal. 2 For his zeal against Baal and Ahabs house God promised him, that four
of his posterity should be Kings. 3 He was a great Warrior, but wicked and
dyed.
Q. 11. What read we of his son Jehoahaz.

1 A. He walked in the ways of Jeroboam, 2 When the Syrians invaded his land,
he cried to God, and he delivered him, and he dyed peaceably.
Q. 12. What is said of Jehoash?

1 He lived in his Fathers sin. 2 He fought with Amaziah King of Juda, and
overcame him, he was a great Warrior, and dyed.
Q: 13. What is said of Jeroboam and Zachariah?

1 A. Jeroboam was a great warrior, and had good success and died. 2 Zacharia
succeeded him, and reigned but half a year, and was slain by Shallum one of
his own Subjects.
Q: 14. What do we read of the other five, being the last Kings of Israel?

1 A. Shallum reigned one Month, and is slain by Menhaem. 2 Menhaem reigned
ten years, and oppressed his Subjects by taxes. 3 Pekaiah his son reigned two
years and is killed by Pekah a Captain of his Army. 4 Pekah is killed by
Hosheah. 5 In Pekah and Hoshea's days, Israel is carried away captive to
Babylon; and thus ended the Kingdom of Israel.
The First and Second Books of CHRONICLES.
Q. 1. Why are these Books so called?

1 A. Because in these are recorded many memorable things from Adam to those
times. 2 Because therein are contained some Histories of the Kings of Israel
and Juda.
EZRA.
Q. 1. WHat is the sum of this Book?

1 A. How the Jews after 70 years captivity returned, by command from the
Emperor Cyrus, into Judea, and set up again the Temple and Worship of God in
lerusalem, and built the City. 2 Ezra the High Priest being also returned
taught the People the Law of Moses, and caused all that had married outlandish
women, to send their Wives and Children away from them, because, Jesus Christ
being to come of the Tribe of luda, God would have a holy seed prelerved. 3 Old
people seeing the new Temple and City and remembering the Glory of the old,
wept, because nor so glorious and sttately, as was that built by Solomon, but
they are told by the Prophet that this latter Temple shall be far more glorious
then the former, because the Promised Messiah of the World should teach there
in prison.
NEHEMIA.
Q: WHAT is chiefly contained in this book?

A: 1. Nehemiah a captive Jew, and a great favorite of the Emperor Artaxerxes
has leave and means granted him to return to his own Country, and to set
forward the building of the City and Temple in Jerusalem. 2. Being returned he
is much opposed in the work by Tobia and Sanballat, yet protected of God, the
people being constrained to work with one hand, and to hold a sword in the
other. 3 He did much for Gods worship, and for his Countries good.
HESTER.
Q: WHAT is the sum of this book?

A: 1 How Hester a poor jewish captive maid is preferred to be Queen and
Empress to the Emperor Ahashuexus after that the former Queen Vasthy was
deposed, for refusing to come to the King when he sent for her, to show her
beauty to the Nobles being then assembled at a great feast the emperor had
made for them, which feast lasted 180 days, where none was compelled to
drink, but every man left to his freedom. 2 Haman a Noble man, and a great
favorite at that Court, obtained a decree from the Emperor to kill all the
people of God, the Jews in one day because Mardochy the Jew would not bow the
knee before him. 3 How Gods wonderful providence wrought for their deliverance
and preservation by the care and prayer and fasting of Mardochy and of Queen
Hester. 4 How Hamans intended mischeife is discovered to the King at a feast
and prevented, and how Haman was hanged on the same Gallows, he had set up for
Mardochy, for which deliverance the lews kept a yearly feast, called Purim or
Lor.
Q: 2, Why would not Mardochy how to Haman?

A. Because Haman was by Nation an Amalekite, which Nation was cursed of God,
and the Israelites were commanded to abhor them. Exodus 17.16. where Moses
says, that God will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

JOB.
Q. 1. What read we of Job?

1 A. That he was a very rich man, and a very Godly man, having seven Sons
and three Daughters, and a very great household. 2 God was pleased to give way
to Satan to deprive him of all his Estate, Children, Friends, and his health,
to try his patience. 3 Jobs behavior under his woeful loss, pain and sorrow
was exceeding comfortable, full of Faith and patience, blessing God for all. 4
Some of his old friends came to visit, and to comfort him in his distress,
endeavoring to convince him that God plagued him for some notorious sin, as
for hypocrisy or the like, whereupon follows a sharp and a witty dispute
between them.
The Question was, whether Job suffered for hypocrisy. His friends affirm it,
and ordered all their discourses accordingly.

Job denies it, and maintains his integrity. At last God himself is the
Moderator between them, Job is justified and his friends condemned, and Job
must pray God to forgive their mistakes.

Q. 2. What was the event and issue of Jobs triells?

A. The issue was most comfortable, for,

1 He recovered his former health and strength. 2 God blessed him with a
greater worldly estate, then he had at first. 3 God gave him as many Children
as he had before. 4 He lived 140 years after his troubles and dyed.
The Book of PSALMS.
The 1. Question. WHat say you of the Book of Psalms?

1 This Book of Psalms is one of the most excellent Books of holy Scripture,
wonderfully fitted for all men's occations, whether in adversity or in
prosperity. 2 It is thought by the Learned, that Esdras collected these
Psalms, and put them into this order we now read them in. 3 Christians in
former times were so in love with this Book, that one while they would read it
over every week, another while every months 4 It is a Book full of prayers
and thanksgivings: seven Psalms are called penitential Psalms, because
David composed them or some of them, at a time when he repenced for his sins,
fit to be often read by us, and they are these; The 6 The 32 The 38 The 51 The
102 The 130 The 143
5 In times of sickness or other troubles read also The 25 Psalm. The 39 The
88 The 22 The 44 with others.
6 In times of prosperity, when thou would give God thanks for a blessing
received, read or ling The 19 Psalm The 65 The 103 The 104 The 107 with others.
7 They are called the Psalms of David, because the Kingly Prophet David made
most of them, though not all, for many Psalms were made by other holy men
after David's death: Christ and his Apostles do often repeat things out of it.
This Book is very useful for the weaker and more ignorant people.

PROVERBS, ECCLESIASTES, CANTICLES.
The 1. Question. WHat say you of these three Books of Solomon?

1 A. The Book of Proverbs contains much heavenly matter in few words, every
Chapter, and sometimes every verse holding forth diverse Truths. 2 In the Book
of Ecclesiastes Solomon like a Preacher instructs us, how to look after true
blessedness, and convinces us, that all things under the Sun are vanity, and
vexation of Spirit, and he is exceeding earnest with young folks to serve God
betimes. 3 In the Canticles, Solomon sets forth the mutual and entire love,
betwixt Jesus Christ the Bridegroom, and all Believers his spouse.
This Book is to be read with all Christian reverence and holy affections.
Wanton and filthy people, are very unfit to Read this or any other part of holy
writ.

Of the Holy Prophets of the Old Testament.
Q. 1. HOw many Prophets have left us their Books in the Old Testament?

A. Sixteen: whereof the four first are called the greater Prophets, and the
other twelve are called the lesser Prophets, because they have not written so
largely as the four greater have done.

Q: 2. What say thou of the Prophet Esaias?

1 He and Jeremy Preached before the Babylonian captivity: Ezekiel and Daniel
Prophesied in the captivity. 2 Esaias speaks so sweetly and plainly of Christ's
Nativity and Passion as if he had seen it, and is therefore called a
Prophetical Evangelist.
JEREMY and LAMENTATION.
Q. 1. WHat say thou of Jeremy?

1 A. He was called to be a Prophet, when he was young. 2 He Preached in
Jerusalem, when the City was besiedged, and he often entreated King and People
with much importunity to hearken to Gods word, and to preserve the City and
Temple from burning, and themselves from bitter bondage. For which good
Counsel this Prophet is hated, and continually kept in woeful prisons. 3 At
last Jerusalem is taken by the Galdeans and destroyed whereupon Jeremy having
his liberty granted by the Caldean General laments over the sad ruin of his
Country in the Book of the Lamentations.
EZEKIEL.
Q: WHat can thou say of Ezechiel?

A: He preached to the Jews at Babylon in their captivity, convinced them o^
Gods just judgments upon them for their sins and assured them of future
deliverance, and of the rebuilding of Jerusalem and of the rebuilding of the
Temple, for which purpose he has many visions.

DANIEL.
Q: WHat is said of Daniel?

A: 1 He for his singular wisdom and Faithfulness is prefered to very great
honor under those three Emperors especially Nebucadnezar, Beltshassar, and
Darius. 2 Three of his fellow captives are thrown into a fiety Furnace; and
Daniel himself is cast into a Lions den, but are all preserved they trusting
in God. 3 God declared much of his mind to Daniel, concerning things to come,
by visions Angels, he speaks of the Resurrection and the day of Judgment in
the last Chapter.
The twelve lesser PROPHETS.
Q. WHat say thou of them?

A: 1 Of the twelve lesser Prohets, some preached before the Captivity, some
in, and some after it. 2 Their maine business was to persuade people to
repentance, and to threaten the impenitent with Gods wrath and to comfort the
penitent. 3 The last Prophet was Malachy, who Prophesied of John the Baptist
and of the Coming of Jesus Christ the Son of Righteousness.
APOCRYPHA.
Q. 1. WHat say thou of the Apocripha Books, usually bound up with the
Canonical Books of Scripture?

The Apocrypha Books are not the pure infallible word of God: Because,

1 They contain many fabulous things, as the History of Susanna, of Bell and
the Draggon, of Judith and the like. 2 Because they were not written by
Prophets immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost. For the Author of the Books of
the Maccabes in the latter end, asks pardon, if he have not done well, which
a^ greeth not with the Majesty of holy Scripture. 3 Because these Books
contain many things contrary to the Truth, as diverse passages in the Book of
Tobit and the rest testify. 4 Because they were not written in the Hebrew
Language, as the Canonical books of the Old Testament were. Neither is any of
them mentioned by Christ or his Apostles in the New Testament.
We may read them, and take notice of some passages concerning the people of
God in those days, we may also see in the reading of them, the difference
twixt the writings of mere men, and those that are written by holy Prophets
inspired by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.19.

The New TESTAMENT.
Q. 1. WHY is it called the New Testament?

A. Because it does discover to us the free Grace and Mercies of God promised
in the Covenant of Grace. For God made two Covenants with the World;

1 A Covenant of Works, which is, Do this and thou shall live. 2 A Covenant
of Grace, and that is, Believe and thou shall live, as it is in the Gospel.
Q: 2. What is the Gospel?

A. The Gospel declares the glad tidings of Salvation by Jesus Christ: where
^ote that The Old Testament speaks chiefly of the Acts of God the Father. The
four Gospells set forth the works of God the Son. The Acts and Epistles of
the Apostles show forth the works and wonders of God the Holy Ghost after
Christ's ascension into Heaven


Q. 3. Which are the chief Sermons of Christ a Christian should often read and
learn to understand?

A. There are four especially.

First Christ's Sermon upon the Mount i^ the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of S Matthew.
Secondly his Sermon to the Ministers of the Gospel in the 10. Chapter of S
Matthew. Thirdly his Sermon of the day of judgment and the end of the world in
the 24, and 25. Chapter of S. Matthew. Fourthly his farewell Sermon to his
Disciples in the 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of S, John.
To which Sermons add Christ's Heavenly Prayer for the Church, the 17. Chapter
of S. John.

S. MATTHEW.
Q. WHat say thou of S. Matthew?

1 A. He was called by Christ from the receipt of custom to be an Apostle, and
he was willing to forsake all and to follow him. 2 His Gospel contains
Christ's Nativity, his life, death and Resurrection. 3 S. Matthew writes some
things, which other Evangelists have not; as 1 The genealogy of Christ from
Abraham downward to Joseph and Mary. 2 The History of the Wise Men. 3 Joseph's
purpose to forsake his espoused Wife upon a mistake. 4 Christ's fleeing into
Egypt from the fury of King Herod. 5 The bloody murder of the Infants of
Bethlehem. 6 Some Parables, which the other Evangelists have not.

S. MARK.
Q WHat can thou say of S. Mark?

1 A. S. Mark was no Apostle, but an Evangelist, and a Disciple of S. Peter,
with whose help he wrote the History of Christ's Life, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension. 2 This Evangelist is more large in the description of Christ's
Miracles, then in other passages of Christ's Life and Death.
S. LUKE.
Q. WHat say you of his Gospel and of him?

1 A. S. Luke by profession a Physician was one of the 70 Disciples, employed
by S. Paul in the planting of the Gospel. 2 He observes many things, which
other Evangelists have omitted, as 1 The History of Zachary and Elizabeth, and
the Nativity of John the Baptist. 2 The Angel Gabriells salutation to the
blessed Virgin Mary. 3 The History of old Simeon, and of Anna the Prophetess.
4 Christ's disputing with the Doctors, when he was but twelve years old.
5 The time of Christ's Nativity, namely in the Reign of Augustus the Emperor
of Rome. 6 The manifestation of Christ's Nativity by Angels to the Sheapheards.
7 Christ's Circumcision the eight day. 8 The Genealogy of Christ upward to Adam.
9 The Parable of Dives and Lazarus, and of the Prodigal son, etc. 10 Christ's
praying whole nights in desert mountains alone. 11 The History of the two
Disciples going to Emaus on Easter day.
S. JOHN.
Q. WHat can you say of S. John?

1 A. He was one of the twelve Apostles whom Jesus loved, he outlived all the
Apostles, and dyed a natural death at Ephesus, if we believe the Church
History: All the rest of the Apostles were killed. 2 He begins his Gospel with
many arguments, to prove that Jesus Christ was God from everlasting, coaequall
to the Father, and to the holy Ghost. 3 Most of his Histories are omitted by
the other Evangelists, as 1 The calling of Nathaniel: 2 Christ's Miracle at a
marriage in Cana. 3 Christ's dispute with Nicodemus about regeneration. 1 His
discourse with the Woman of Sa. maria. 5 His healing of a man at the poole of
Bethesda, that had been 38 years sick. 6 His several disputes with the Jews
about his divine nature, and concerning his real Spiritual sense in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 7 His raising of Lazarus from the dead. 8 His
washing of the Disciples feet. 9 Christ's restoring of Peter to his former place
by a threefold confession of him, as he had before three times denied him.

ACTS.
Q: WHat say you of this Book?

A. The Penman of the Acts of the Apostles was Luke, the chief Histories
whereof are these,

1 Christ's ascension into Heaven. 2 The election of Matthias to be an Apostle
in the room of Judas the traitor. 3 The wonderful coming of the Holy Ghost
upon the Apostles on the day of Penticost. 4 The healing of a Criple by Peter
and John. 5 The sad end of Ananias and Sapphyra. 6 The Martyrdom, of Stephen.
7 The miraculous conversion of Paul. 8 The conversion of Cornelius by Peter,
and the conversion of many other Gentiles by Paul, as of Lydia, Sergius Paulus,
the Jaylour, and others. ^ The Martyrdom of James, the imprisonment and
deliverance of Peter by an Angel. 9 The woeful end of persecuting Herod, who
was eaten up alive by worms for his rage against the Church of Christ. 10
Paul's travells and great sufferings in diverse places both by Jews and
Gentills. 11 His Sermons before Felix, Festus, and King Agrippa. 12 His
dangerous Sea-voiage to Rome, and his behavior and conversation there.
The fourteen EPISTLES of S. Paul.
Q: WHat say you of these Epistles of Paul?

A. The Apostle Paul's end in his Epistles is.

1 To convince men of sin, and so of a necessity of Christ, the only Savior
of the world. 2 To set forth the unsearcheable riches of Gods free grace in
Christ to the world. 3 To exhort Christians to thankfulness, and to the
performance of their duties toward God, and toward men, whether our
superiors, inferiors or equals.
The Epistle of S. JAMES.
Q. 1. What say you of this Epistle?

1 A. This Apostle persuades Christians to show the truth of Faith by good
works. 2 The Doctrine of S. James about justification is not contrary to that
of S. Paul's in his Epistles, as Luther thought at first. For As S. Paul
teaches, that it is faith that does justify us before God; so S. James shows
what Faith it must be, namely not a dead, but a living fruitful faith.

The First and Second Epistle of PETER.
Q. WHAT say you of these two Epistles?

1 A. These two Epistles are called general Epistles, because they were
written, not to any particular Nation, or City, or Person, as those of Paul,
but to all Christians, whether Jews or Gentiles. 2 In these Epistles the
Apostle Peter's aim is, 1 To exhort Christians to make their calling and
election sure. 2 To exhort us to discharge our duties to God and Man. 2 To
forewarne us of damnable heresies, and false teachers, that would trouble Gods
Church in the latter times of the world.

The three EPISTLES of John.
Q: WHat can you say of these?

A: The Apostle John's drift and aim in these three Epistles is

1 To commend unto us the dear love of God in Jesus Christ to his Chosen
people. 2 To persuade us to Love God again. 3 To assure us that true Love to
God does appear by our true love to the Brethren. 4 He commends the Noble
Lady of Asia for her Piety and Charity. 5 He commends one Gajus a charitable
harbourer and reliever of persecuted Christians in those days. 6 He sharply
censureth one Diotrephes for ambition and pride, loving the pre-eminence and
seeking his own Glory more then the Glory of Christ, and the honor of the
Gospel.
The Epistle of JUDE.
WHat can thou say of this Epistle?

1 A: The Apostle exhorts Christians to constancy in Faith once received. 2 He
describes the evil manners and dangerous opinions of Apostates and Heretics
in the lattter time of the world.
The APOCALYPSE or REVELATION of S. John.
Q: What can you say of John's Revelation?

1 A: S. John for Religion was banished by the Emperor Domitian into a
solitary Island, there Jesus Christ appeared to him, and by his Angel revealed
to him, what should befall the Church of God tothe end of the world. 2 The
three first Chapters are historical, relating the history of the seven
Churches of Asia. 3 The whole book is very Mysterious containing visions and
very obscure things. Yet a specialll blessing is Promised to the careful
reading and meditation of it. Chap. 1.3. 4 In this book is told of 1 The evils
that should befall Gods Church under Antichrist. 2 The rise and fall of
Antichrist, or Pope of Rome. 3 A description of the day of judgment, of the
Resurrection, and of the heavenly Jerusalem, and of Gods peoples earnest
expectation and longing for the coming of Jesus Christ in glory. To whom with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory, Praise, and Thanksgiving for
ever and ever. AMEN.

A Prayer for Young People Mornings and Evenings.
1. O Most Holy Lord God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, my merciful Father in
Jesus Christ, Thou art light it self, and I am by nature darkness it self,
dead in sins and trespasses, Spiritually blind and poor, naked and
miserable, not able of my self to have a good thought, much less to do one
God-pleasing work, worse then the beasts that perish. For I am guilty of the
first sin of our first parents in Paradise, I was conceived and borne in
sin, and have lived in finne to this day, I have not kept one of thy holy
laws, I have not prized the Gospel of Salvation, neither have thy mercies or
visitations kindly wrought upon me, I have omitted holy duties, and I have
committed many evils in thy fight O Lord God, and so have deserved a thousand
ways to be cast out into utter darkness, to have my portion in Hell with the
damned for ever: Oh that I could bewail my sins, and mourn in secret bitterly
for them as I should: O Lord I abhor my self in dust and ashes, miserable
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

2. O Lord God, thou have sent thy dear Son Jesus into the World to save
sinners, and thy holy Word does assure me, that if I confess and forsake my
sins, I shall have mercy, and that if I repent and believe in Christ, I shall
not perish. I pray thee, holy Lord God, give me a broken and a contrite heart
and spirit, give me repentance unto Life, and true Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ that he may be all in all unto me: Oh let his pecious Blood cleanse me
from all my sins, let him be my Heavenly Prophet to teach me, my great high
Priest to redeem me, and to pray in Heaven for me, let him be my King to rule
and guide me by his word and holy Spirit, tha^ by him I may overcome the Devil
the world and the Corruptions of my heart, and so perfect holiness in thy
fear.

3. Keep me O Lord, from all such occasions and company where I may be tempted
to offend thee, help me to see how vain^ and uncertain all things of the world
are Oh give me a heart to love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and to think
nothing too much I can do or suffer for his sake, strenthen I pray thee my
weak Faith in thee, my unfaigned Love to thee, and make good to me all those
sweet and precious Promises of the Covenant of Grace, to write thy Law in my
heart and to remember my sins and iniquityes no more. Fit me for troubles and
trials, for sickness and death and for the coming of the Lord Jesus in Glory
that I may be found among the wise Virgins and be counted worthy in Christ to
receive the Kingdom prepared for thine Elect before the foundation of the
world was laid.

4. Be Merciful to Church and people in the whole world, Maintain thy Gospel
against all opposition of Hell and Antichrist acording to thy Promise. Have
mercy upon this Land of my Nativity, preserve truth and peace amongst us and do
good to all that are true of heart whether they be my Superiors, Equals or
Inferiors, and those that are Enemies the Lord pity them and forgive them. Be
Gracious to the place and family where I live, O suffer not sin to reign in
this place, pity all those of our Neighbors or Kinsfolks, that are carnal
and unconverted, Oh turn their hearts from sin to Grace, and from the power
of darkness to God, give me a heart to pray for them, and to watch and take
all oportunities to win them by my good example and those that are converted
keep them and me O Lord by thy power through Faith unto Salvation to the end
and in the end.

5. Bless the Ministry of thy Word, and all holy Ordinances to me and to all
thine, let thy Word be my delight, and my Councellor in all things, what I know
not, Lord teach thou me, that I may be built up daily in saving knowledge and
in grace.

6. Now blessed be the Lord for all the many testimonies of his love to me,
for my health and strength, daily preservation, and manifold deliverances, but
above all, for thy free grace, and everlasting love in Jesus Christ to me and
to all thine Elect, for bringing me to the knowledge o^ Christ, and for the
many oportunities o^ Grace, O Lord enable me to make a blessed use of all, that
I may not give thee just cause to repent of all the good, thou doe^ for me
daily.

Preserve and keep me and this place this Day Night from all evil, command thy
Holy Angels to pitch their Tents about us, oh let me find grace in thy sight,
I pray thee, for thy favor is better then life it self. Hear me and answer
me, and do^ more for me, then I can ask or think of and all for Jesus
Christ's sake, my dearest Savior and only Mediator. In whose holy Name and
Words I say; Our Father which art etc.

FINIS.

