THE Resurrection OF The (same) Body ASSERTED: FROM The Traditions of the
Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church. WITH An ANSWER to the
OBJECTIONS brought against it.

By HUMPHRY HODY, D. D. Fellow of Wadham College in Oxford, and Chaplain to His
Grace JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Non enim levia sunt illa de quibus contendimus, sed ejusmodi ut and illa scire
praestantius sit, and ignorare turpissimum.

St. Methodius de Resurrectione. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John
Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Paternoster Row, 1694.

REVERENDO ADMODUM IN CHRISTO PATRI AC PRAESULI Edvardo Stillingfleet, Grandi
Nomini, HISTORIAM HANC Resurrectionis Corporis, Sacellanus nuper, semper Cultor
Ejus Devotissimus, HUMFREDUS HODY, D. D. C.

TO THE READER.
THis Treatise contains a History of the Resurrection of the Body: The Grand
Design of it is to prove the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same Humane
Body to be the Doctrine of the Gospel. If that be proved, the Truth of it is
sufficiently demonstrated; and that is all the Author desires should be granted
him. What he lays down concerning the Heathens and Jews, and that which he
advances concerning the Resurrection, its being once a General Doctrine derived
down from Noah and the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, all that is ex abundanti, and
designed only for the more Curious. There is one thing more which he bad me
say, and that is this, That he treads not in any Man's Steps; but the
Entertainment which he has here prepared for thee, is wholly, and in all its
Parts, new, at least his own.

May ^6. 1694.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
Concerning the Opinions of the Heathens: That they held many Opinions which
were grounded on a Tradition concerning the Resurrection; and that some of them
hold the Resurrection in the true Christian Sense.

THeir gross Notions concerning the Soul in its state of separation, that it
has all the same Parts that the Body has, p. 3. A Mistake of St. Justin Martyr,
p. 4.

Their Opinion concerning the Transmigration of Souls, p. 6.

Their Opinion concerning the duration of the Soul as long as the Body lasted,
and its adherence to the Body after Death, p. 11.

They believe the some Men have a^cended up into Heaven in their Bodies, there
to live for ever, p. 13.

That others have done so even after Death upon a Re union of their Souls and
Bodies, p. 15.

The Opinion of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, etc. concerning the
Restitution of our Bodies, and of all other things in the World, to their
former state, after the revolution of ma^y Ages, by a new Birth or production,
p. 16.

The Opinion of some of the Genethliacal Writers, that the Soul returns, and is
united to the same Body in the space of 440 Years, p. 20.

The Opinion of the Stoics concerning the reproduction of all the same Men,
etc. after the general Conflagration, p. 20.

That Democritus asserted the Resurrection: Epicurus's Opinion concerning the
restoration of the very same Bodies after a great space of time, p. 26. Merick
Casaubon's Mistake concerning the Opinion of the Emperor M. Antoninus, p. 23.

The Resurrection asserted in the same sense as we understand it, by the
ancient Magi, and by the present Heathen Gaurs of Persia, the Relicts of the
ancient Magi, p. 29. By some of the ancient Arabians, p. 31. By some of the
Banians of India, p. 33. By the present Inhabitants of the Island of Ceylon, p.
36. Of Java, p. 37. Of Pegu, p. 37. Of Transiana, p. 37. By some amongst the
Chinese, p. 37. By the Arderians in Guinnee, p. 45. And by the ancient
Prussians, p. 45.

These Traditions concerning the Resurrection, not received from the Jews, but
transmitted down from Noah and the Ante-diluvian Patriarohs, p. 49.

PART II.
Concerning the Opinions of the ancient Jews, p. 53. to 107.

THE Doctrine of the Resurrection no Article of Faith, or Term of Communion
among them 'till about 100 Years after Christ, p. 53. etc. Not owned by the
Essens, p. 54. nor by Philo, p. 56. yet the common and general Doctrine long
before that time, p. 64. Their not making it a Term of Communion, no Argument
against the certainty of it. The Soul's Immortality it self no Term of the
Jewish Communion in those times. The Sadduces owned as true Jews, p. 89. The
Opinion of Josephus, p. 66. Of the Sapientes Mecar, p. 60. the Hemero-Baptists,
p. 61. and the Samaritans, p. 62. They that held the Resurrection understood it
to be of the same Humane Body. The Opinion of some of the Jews concerning the
passing of their Bodies underground to the Holy Land, and their Custom of
carrying the Bones of their Dead thither, p. 70.

The Transmigration of Souls held by many of the Jews, p. 78. and by some of
the Pharisees in the time of Josephus, p. 81. Whether held by any in our
Savior's time? p. 82. They that own the Transmigration, acknowledge withal a
Resurrection, p. 87.

Testimonies for the Resurrection out of the Old Testament, p. 96.

PART III.
Concerning the Doctrine of the Primitive Church.

THE Resurrection of the same Humane Body demonstrated from the New Testament,
p. 107, etc. and from the Doctrine of the Primitive Writers, which flourished
before the time of Origin, such as St. Clement of Rome, p. 133. Justin M., p.
141. Irenaeus, p. 142. Athenagoras, p. 143. Theophilus of Antioch, p. 144. The
Churches of Lions and Vienna, p. 144. Clemens Alex. p. 145. Tertullian, p. 145.
and others: And from the Creeds of the Primitive Church, and others in several
Ages, p. 171. The Inconsistences and Contradictions of Origin, p. 108, 109,
152, to 168. That he himself in some places of his Works owned the Resurr^ction
of the same Humane Body, p. 152. That the Primitive Fathers would never have
embraced the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same humane Body, if it had
not been evidently Apostolical, 180.

PART IV.
Objections answered:

The Qualities of the Body in the Resurrection. The Reason why it is to rise,
p. 184, etc.

The principal Errata are these.
PAge 9. Line 17. for their Souls read the Soul. p. 23. l. 22. r. Merick. p.
30. l. 12. r. Years, which. Ibid l. 9. r. Guebres. p. 53. l. 8. r. of the
number. p. 58. l. 25. r. will free. p. 59. l. 9. r. dissolution. p. 93. l. 12.
for Rights (...). Rites. p. 100. l. 9. r. unwilling. Ibid l. 15. r. do not
con^in. p. 109. l. 1. r. represent. p. 171. l. 24. r. (...) (...) from St.
Austin.

The Resurrection of the (same) Body asserted.
THE Resurrection is defined by Maimonides to be The return of the Soul into
the same Body from which it had been separated; and agreeable to this
Definition, the Catholic Faith, spread throughout the whole Christian World,
is this, That the same Body which died, consisting of the same Particles, shall
rise again out of its Grave in the Day of Judgment, and be reunited to the
Soul. But Origin heretofore, as you rightly observe, (my dear Philalethes) and
some other late Opinionists, have been pleased to advance another Notion, That
the Body to which the Soul shall be united in the next Life, shall not be a
Human Body, but a thin and Etherial one, and that too consisting of new
Particles.

In asserting the truth of the Catholic Doctrine (the Task you are pleased to
impose on me) I shall use all possible Plainness, and observe this Method.

I. I shall show it to be probable from the Traditions even of the Heathens
themselves, conveyed down to 'em from Noah and his Posterity.

II. I shall prove it from the Authority of the Old Testament, and the
Traditions of the Ancient Jews, and show it from thence to be, if not certain,
yet more than probable.

III. I shall demonstrate it from the Authority of the New Testament, and the
Unanimous consent of the Primitive Church before the time of Origin, and prove
it from thence tobe certain.

IV. I shall answer the Objections raised against it.

To pretend to make out the Probability of the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
from the Opinions and Traditions of the Heathens, may seem perhaps a very vain
Attempt. But it is no more than what many of the Ancients have endeavored to
do; and Photius mentions an Author, who published a large Work in Fifteen
Books, to prove, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection, with other Christian
Doctrines, was owned by many of the Gentiles. The several ^tions whose Opinions
that Author produced, were, as Photius tells us, the Greeks, Persians,
Thracians, Egyptians, Babylonians, Chaldaeans, and Italians. What success
either He, or any other Author that attempted the same, might meet with, I am
not concerned to enquire; but I think I shall be able to show, that many of the
Notions and Opinions of the Heathens were grounded on a Tradition concerning
the Resurrection; nay, that many of the Heathens in Ancient Times acknowledged
it, and that many of 'em do so to this Day. I shall first lay before you some
Opinions embraced by the Heathens, which, I think, carry with them no small
resemblance of the Doctrine of the Resurrection. And in the Second place shall
present you with others which plainly express it.

The first Opinion which I shall take notice of, is concerning the Human Shape
and Actions attributed to the Soul in its State of Separation. It was anciently
the common and received Opinion of the Gentiles, and so it is at this time
throughout the whole Heathen World, That the Soul (or Manes which remain after
Death) has a perfect Human Shape, and all the same Parts, both External and
Internal, that the Body has; and that when it leaves the Body, it Eats and
Drinks, and does all the same things that a living Man does. Now from whence
can we imagine this odd Opinion should arise, and be so generally propagated
all over the World? I shall leave it to be considered by you, whether it were
not grounded on an Ancient Tradition, That the Soul after Death shall be united
to a Human Body.

Cohort. ad Grac. p. 26.
Justin Martyr, to prove that the Doctrine of the Resurrection was known to
Homer, produces his description of Tityus's Punishment after Death, and what he
says of the Punishments of Sisyphus and Tantalus. Their Punishments, says he,
suppose not a Soul only, but also a Body. The same sort of Argument he makes
use of to prove, that Plato held the same Doctrine. He observes that Plato in
the Story which he relates concerning Eris, speaks of those that were punished
in Hell, as of Men compounded of Body and Soul, with the same Parts and
Countenances which they had when living here on Earth; that he makes Aridaeus,
and other Tyrants, to be bound Neck and Heels, and to be Flayed, and then to be
dragged through Thorns and Briars. Now, says he, for Plato to say, that the Soul
is judged with the Body, can signify nothing else but that he believed the
Doctrine of the Resurrection: For how could Aridaeus, and the rest, be punished
after that manner in Hell, if they had left their Bodies, their Heads, Hands,
and Feet on Earth? Sure they will not say, that the Soul has a Head, a Skin,
and Hands, and Feet. But this is a Mistake of that excellent Person. The Reason
why the Heathens described the Punishments of the Damned after this manner, was
not because they thought that their Bodies were not left here on Earth, but
partly because it was the vulgar Opinion, that the Soul had all the same Parts
that the Body has, and partly because such Descriptions do more easily move and
affect us; and it is not easy to describe the Torments of the Soul after any
other manner. Our Lord, in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, speaks of them in
the same manner, as if they had Bodies; though what is related of 'em is supposed
to be before the Resurrection, and their Bodies are supposed to be yet in their
Graves. I might mention others of the Ancient Christians that have made use of
Arguments of the like nature; but it is not my Business to confute those who
have written for the Resurrection; I shall therefore pass them by.

From what has been said concerning our Savior's speaking of the Soul of
Lazarus, as if it had a Body, though he did not believe it had; you may possibly
imagine that the Heathens did not really believe, that the Soul has all the
Parts of a Human Body, though they are wont to speak of it, as if they believed
it. But it evidently and undeniably appears, that that was, and is at this
time, their real Opinion. Hence the Custom so general in the World of leaving
Meat and Drink on the Graves of the Dead, and of burying together with the dead
Bodies all sorts of Utensils, Household Stuff, and Weapons, which they think the
Soul will make use of in the next Life. Hence also the Custom in so many
Countries, of putting to Death the Wives and Slaves of the deceased, that they
may wait upon 'em, and serve in the same Capacities in the other World. For
Brevity sake, I am content to seem a little Immodest, and to take it for
granted, that you believe I can prove what I have asserted.

The Second Opinion, that deserves to be considered, is that of the (...), or
Transmigration of Souls out of one Body into another. 'Twas (you know) the
Opinion, not only of the Pythagoreans, and Platonists, and some of the Stoics,
amongst the Greeks, but of many whole Nations of the ancient Gentiles; and it is
still the received Opinion of the greatest part of the Eastern Heathens, and of
many other Countries in diverse parts of the World, that when a Man dies, his
Soul passes into another Body, either the Body of a Man, or of some other
Creature. Now, on what could this Opinion be grounded, but on some broken and
imperfect Tradition, concerning the Resurrection of our Bodies? How came so
strange an Opinion to obtain in so many Countries? They had doubtless heard
from their Ancestors, the Descendants of Noah, that after Death, the Soul
should be reunited to a Body; and not knowing, by reason of the imperfectness
of the Tradition, how it was to be done, they invented a way for it, and
imagined it was to be by a (...), or by being born again. And as Error is
always fruitful in Inventions, and, one having taken Root, there is presently a
Superfoetation of many others, they afterward carried it on farther, and
fansy'd a Transmigration of the Soul, not only into another Human Body, but
also into the Bodies of other living Creatures, and even into Trees and Plants.
But the Transmigration of the Soul into the Bodies of irrational Animals was
never so generally received as its Transmigration into another Human Body. The
Author of the Book De Spermate, ascribed to Galen, tells us, that the
Philosopher Porphyry maintained That the Soul of a Beast passes into a Beast,
but the Soul of a Man, into a Man. And De Provid. and Fat^ ap. Phot. Cod. CCXIV.
Hierocles affirms, that the Soul of a Man passes only into a Man. Of the same
Opinion was Timaeus Locrus, with diverse others of the Pythagoreans: And the
same was likewise the Opinion of the ancient Gauls, as may be gathered from
what Bell. Gal. (...). 6. c. 14.
Caesar says of 'em. Imprimis (say he) hoc volunt persuadere: non interire
animas, sed ab aliis post mortem transire ad alios; atque hoc maxim ad
virtutem excitari putant, metu mortis neglecto. Appian Bell. Celtico.
writes of the ancient Germans, that they contemned Death (...), through the
hopes they had of reviving or living again. Which I understand, not immediately
of the Resurrection, but of the Transmigration of the Soul into another Human
Body. And in the same Sense I understand Lucan, where he speaks of the Opinion
of the S^ythians.

-- Populus quos despicit Arctos,
Felices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus haud urget lethi metus, inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animique capaces
Mortis and ignavum rediturae parcere vitae.
That the Opinion of the Transmigration was grounded on a Tradition concerning
the Resurrection, will appear more Probable, if we consider what l. 2. c. 123.
Herodotus writes of the Doctrine of the Egyptians: That the Soul being
departed this Body, after many Removes into the Bodies of all kinds of Animals,
and after a long Time, viz. 3500 Years, assumes again the Body of a Man. And to
this Day, there are great Numbers in Grand Caire, and some in other parts of
the World, that assert very near the same thing, and agree with those ancient
Egyptians almost exactly in the Number of Years. They will tell ye, that the^
Soul^ having passed into several Beasts, of the same Kind, and wandered out of
the Body of one to animate another, it will at last, after the Circle of Sir
Paul Ricaut of the Turkish Empire, l. 2. c. 12. p. 133.
3365 Years, return again to a Human Body, more purified, and refined than in
its first Principles. What is this but a broken Tradition concerning the
Reunion of our Souls with our Bodies at the end of the World?

But others of the Ancients come up yet more close to us: They tell us that the
Souls of those that are in Heaven or Elysium, continue there a long time, a
Thousand Years, or the like, and then shall come again into the World, and be
united to a Human Body. Thus Aen. 6. v. 751.
Virgil from the Traditions of the Ancients.

Quisque suos patimur manes: Exinde per amplum
Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arvae tenemus,
Donec longa dies perfecto temporis Orb
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
Aetherium sensum, atque aurai simplicis ignem.
Has omnes, ubi mill rotam volvere per annos,
Lethaeum ad fluvium Deus evocat agmine magno:
Scilicet immemores supera ut convexa revisant,
Rursus and incipiant in corpora velle reverti.
Clauclian. 2. Ruff.
Quos ubi per varios annos, per mill figuras
Egit Lethaeo purgatos flumine, tandem
Rursus a^ humanae revocat primordia formae.
St. Austin De tempore, Sermon. 139 and 142.
mentions this as the Opinion of the greatest Philosophers. That the Souls
(says he) of bad Men pass immediately into other Bodies; and that the Souls of
good Men are a long time in Rest, but after a great while come down from
Heaven, and assume Bodies again, Hoc dixerunt valde magni Philosophi.

I shall add no more concerning these Opinions, but only put you in mind, that
De Resur. c. 1. Sed Platonici immortalem animam (...) contrario reclamant: immo
adhuc proxime etiam in Corpora remeabilem affirmant; etsi non in eadem, etsi
non in humana tantummodo, ut Euphorbus in Pythagoram, Homerus in Pavum,
recenseantur. Certe recidivatum animae corporalem pronunciaverunt; tolerabilius
mutata quam negata qualitate: pulsata saltem, licet non adita veritate. Ita
saeculum, resurrectionem morcuorum, nec quum errat, ignorant.
Tertullian, Sic etiam conditionem renascendi sapientium clariores, Pythagoras
primus, and praecipuus Plato, corrupta and dimidiata fide tradiderunt. Nam
corporibus dissolutis solas animas volunt and perpetuo manner, and in alia nova
corpora saepius commeare. Addunt istis and illa ad retorquendam verjtatem, in
pecudes, aves, belluas, hominum animas redire. Non Philosophi sane studio, sed
mimico vitio digna ista sententia est. Sed ad propositum satis est, etiam in
hoc sapientes vestros in aliquem modum nobiscum consonare.
Minucius Felix, and L. 7. c. 23. Qua de anastasi Philosophi quoque dicere
aliquid conat^ sunt; tam corrupt quam Poetae. Nam Pythagoras transire animas
in nova Corpora disputavit, etc.
Lactantius, no less Men than they, were of my Opinion, That the Doctrine of
the Transmigration was founded on a Tradition concerning the Resurrection.

The Third Opinion which I think deserves to be taken notice of, is that
concerning the equal duration of the Body and Soul; that the Soul should indeed
remain after Death, but not unless the Body did so too. This was the Doctrine
of some of the Stoics, and my Author is Servius. Animam (says he) tamdiu
durare dicunt, quamdin durat. and Corpus. The Egyptians had an Opinion amongst
'em, much the same with this. It is commonly said by those that speak of the
Custom of the Egyptians, of embalming the Bodies of their Dead, such as Observe.
de locis memorab. in Asia, etc.
Petrus Bellonius, and others, that the Reason why they were so careful to
preserve their Bodies, was, because they expected a Resurrection. But this
indeed was not the Reason. The true Reason was this; They believed the Soul
never left the dead Body, but always adhered to it as long as it lasted, how
long soever that were; and after the dissolution of the Body they believed the
Soul was to enter into another. For this also Servius is my Author. So others
tell us, that they were wont to keep the dead Bodies of their Friends in their
Houses, and their Closets, and to set 'em at Table, as Guests, at Meals with
'em; believing that they had there the whole Man, not only the Body, but the
Soul too. Lu^ian De Luctu.
assures us, he himself had dined in Egypt with such Guests. Hence Silius, the
Poet:

-- Aegyptia tellus
Claudit odorato post funus stantia saxo
Corpora, and a mensis exanguem haud separat umbram.
The Fourth Opinion which I shall recommend to your Consideration, is this,
That these very Bodies of ours are capable of being made Immortal and
Incorruptible, and of being translated up into Heaven, there to inhabit
everlastingly in Union with the Soul? Did any of the Heathens believe thus
much? They did so. 'Twas the Doctrine of the Chaldaick Philosophers, and
likewise of the Greeks themselves. Psellus, in his Gloss on the Chaldaick
Oracles, tells us, that it was a Doctrine of those Philosophers, That a Man's
Body may by the Works of Religion (Lustrations, and the like) be so purged and
attenuated, the impure Matter being consumed by the Heavenly Fire, as that the
Soul may carry it up to Heaven with it. That Hercules, and Helena, and others,
amongst the Greeks, and Romulus amongst the Romans, were translated (like Enoch
and Elias) into Heaven in their proper Bodies, we read in diverse of our Ancient
Authors. The Emperor Orat. 5. p. 312. and Orat. 7. p. 408, 409.
Julian mentions the Assumption of Hercules. He went up (says he) (...). Though
he will not acknowledge, that his Body with which he ascended was a Body of
Flesh, but intimates, according to the Notion of the Chaldaick Philosophers,
that the gross parts of his Body were consumed by Heavenly Fire, or Lightening.
That the Romans, when Romulus was murdered, were made believe, that he had been
taken up in his Body into Heaven, I need only mention, not endeavor to prove.
It is what you know very well, and many of the Writers of the Roman History
speak of it. The Emperor Orat. 4. p. 289.
Julian believed it, tho he says, as he does of Hercules, that the (...), the
mortal part of his Body was consumed or licked up (...) by the Heavenly fire,
or Lightning. That Helena, being like to be murdered, was taken up publicly
into Heaven, De praetermissis ab Homero.
Isaacus Porphyrogennetus relates from the Traditions of the Ancient Greeks. In
Romulo.
Plutarch tells us that it was the common Opinion of the Greeks, that Cleomedes
Astypalensis was translated in his Body into Heaven, and that many others had
been so translated. Thus Vita Apollonii, l. 8. c. 12.
Philostratus doubts whether his greatly admired Apollonius Tyaneus ever died;
and tells us of a Report, that, going into a Temple in Lindus, he was never
seen afterward. He mentions moreover a Tradition of the Cretans, that he was
taken up into Heaven out of a Temple in Crete, a Voice being heard in the
Temple as of Virgins singing, (...), (...). Come from the Earth, come into
Heaven, come.

Fifthly, They did not only believe that many had been translated like Enoch
and Elias into Heaven, but they also believed that the Souls of some others had
been after Death reunited to their Bodies, and that so, by a Resurrection,
they had been taken up into Heaven. That this was generally believed of
Aristaeus the Proconnesian, is asserted by many Plutarch in Romulo. Herodotus,
l. 4. c. 13, 14, 15.
Heathen Writers. And l. c.
Plutarch assures us, that it was commonly believed that the Body of Alcmena,
the Mother of Hercules, was taken up into Heaven after her Death. It happened,
as they say, when it was carried out to be interred. Thus (says he) (...), p.
35.
they exalt those things which are by nature Mortal among the Gods. He does not
believe these Reports himself; on the contrary he calls it a Foolish thing to
place Earth in Heaven. The Soul (says he) only is from the Gods, from them it
came, and to them it returns, not with the Body, but separated wholly from it,
perfectly pure, clean, and freed from Flesh. The Soul, as Heraclitus says,
flies from the Body as Lightening does from a Cloud. While it is in the Body,
like a heavy and cloudy Vapor, it is difficultly kindled, and with great
difficulty it ascends to the things above. Therefore the Bodies of Good Men
ought not by any means to be placed in Heaven, contrary to their Nature, but we
ought to believe that the Soul alone ascends up thither. He disputes against
this Belief, and these Traditions of the Heathens, in the very same manner as
he would have disputed against Christians.

The Sixth Opinion of the Heathens which I shall present you with, is
concerning a Resurrection of the very same Human Body, after its dissolution.
In this only it differs from our Christian Doctrine, that it makes the Soul
return, not immediately to those Particles from which it was separated by
Death, and which were laid in the Grave, so as that those who died Men, should
rise of the same Stature, but first to those Particles, which were united to it
in the Mothers Womb: And afterward those Particles that constituted the Body
in its several Ages, are, according to this Opinion, to rise again, and be
united all in their due time to the same Soul; 'till at last the same Particles
that were buried shall be all reunited together, and constitute the Body in
the very same manner as formerly. They tell us, that after the expiration of
many Thousands of Years, when all the same Stars and Planets shall return to
the same Configuration and Respect that they formerly had to one another, there
shall be a Resurrection of all things to their former State, not only of Men,
but all other things in the World. Socrates, for Example, shall be born again
of the same Mother, and grow up in the same manner, with all the same
Circumstances, teach Philosophy at Athens to the self-same Scholars, eat the
self-same Diet, and wear the self-same Cloths, be accused by the same Accusers,
condemned by the same Judges, and die by the same Poison. You and I (my Friend)
are, according to them to, live here again in all the same Circumstances: Our
Friendship the same, and the same Correspondence between us. You are to send
again to me, to know what I have to say for the Doctrine of the Resurrection: I
am to send you this very same Treatise, written on the same Paper, and with the
same Pen and Ink; and the Hair, that now makes this Blot, must make the same
again. Thus all things must go on in a continual Round and Revolution, and by a
continual successive Resurrection. But who are they that tell us these things?
Who were they that taught this Opinion? The Pythagoreans, and the Platonists,
amongst the Greeks, and many of the Priests or Philosophers of Egypt, from whom
the Greeks learnt it. Would you have me quote my Author? It is Origin, and not
he only (though he alone were enough) but I have likewise several others. The
Followers of Pythagoras and Plato (says Contra Celsum, l. 5. p. 245.
Origin) say, that after a certain Revolution of the Stars, when they shall
return to the same Configuration and Respect to one another, which they
formerly had, there will necessarily be the very same Face of Things here on
Earth, which there had been before, when the Stars were in the same Position.
And according to this Notion, when the Stars shall return to the same Order,
which they were in in Socrates 's time, Socrates must be born again, and suffer
the same things which he did before; the same Anytus and Melitus accusing him,
and the same Areopagites passing Sentence upon him: And the same is the Dctrine
of the Egyptians. For Pythagoras, Porphyry Vita Pythag. p. 188.
likewise is my Witness It is well known to all, says he, first that he
asserted the Immortality of the Soul; and that he asserted that the Soul passes
into several kinds of Creatures; and moreover, that he taught, that after
certain (...).
Revolutions (of the Stars) those things which once had been, shall be again,
and that there is nothing properly new. For Plato I might produce his own
Words, and the Testimonies of others, such as Proclus, etc. But who has not
heard of Plato's great Year? I need not put you in mind, that this can be
nothing else but an old Tradition concerning our future Resurrection, a little
altered by the dropping of a part of it as it passed in a long series of time,
through the Mouths of several Persons.

It appears from the Testimony of R. Abraham Bar Chaia, cited by Ap. Pecock.
Not. in Portam Mosis, p. 146.
Abarbinel, that this same Opinion concerning the Restitution of all things to
their former State, after the return of the Planets to their former
Configuration, was likewise received by many of the Philosophers of India. Some
of 'em held that this should happen after the Term of 4320000 Years, other
assigned 360000 Years, others 49000, others 36000, others 12000, others 7000;
And Bar Ch^ia declares that he thinks they formed this Notion from the
Tradition which they had received from their Ancestors, concerning the
Resurrection.

M. Varro, the great Roman Writer, in the Books which he published Ap. S. Aug.
de Civ. XXII. 28.
De Gente Populi Romani, speaks of certain Authors, whom he calls Genethliaci
whose Opinion it was, that the Soul returns, and is united to the very same
Body, to which it had been formerly conjoined, by a (...) in the space of 440
years. His Words are these: Genethliaci quidam scripserunt, esse in renascendis
hominibus quam appellant (...) Graeci: hanc scripserunt confici in annis numero
quadringentis quadraginta, ut idem Corpus and cadem anima, quae fuerant
conjuncta in homine aliquando, eadem rursus redeant in conjunctionem.

Amongst others even of the Greek Philosophers, we find this Tradition
preserved more entire. The Stoics, though they looked upon the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, as preached by St. Paul at Athens, to be nothing but Babble, yet
they themselves, as least some of 'em, tell us all the same things that the
Egyptians but now mentioned, and the Pythagoreans, and the Platonists taught:
But in this they come up nearer to us, that they do not make the World Eternal,
but say, as we do, that the World shall be destroyed by Fire, and that this
Resurrection, or Restitution, of all things shall be after the general
Conflagration. My Author for this, is first of all C. Celsum, l. 5. p. 245.
Origin, and he a very good one in these Matters, who observes, not without
good Reason, that, tho they did not call it by the Name of a Resurrection, yet
the Thing was the same. The Stoics, says he, hold, that after a certain
revolution of Time, the Universe will be destroyed by a Conflagration, and that
immediately upon it all things will be restored to what they were before,
without any manner of Change. But there are some amongst 'em that do not come
up altogether to this Opinion, and They hold, that there will be some small
Alteration, and for some short Time. These Men tell us, that after the
Conflagration, P. 208. He says it was the Opinion of the Stoics not that
things should be numerically the same, but only in likeness; not that Socrates
E. G. should be born again, but some one exactly like him, with all the like
Circumstances.
Socrates, for Example, shall be born again, an Athenian, the Son of
Sophroniscus and Phenarete. And therefore, though they do not call it by the Name
of a Resurrection, yet they mean the same Thing. He shall be bred up, say they,
at Athens, and shall teach Philosophy there as before. So that Philosophy it
self is as it were to rise again, and be in the same State as formerly. Anytus
and Melitus shall rise again, and be Socrates 's Accusers, and the Council of
the Areopagites shall condemn him. And what is more ridiculous than all this,
Socrates is to wear the same Cloths that he did before, live in the same
Poverty, and with all the same Circumstances. So Phalaris shall again play the
Tyrant, and torment the same Persons in his Brazen Bull. And Alexander the
Pherean shall exercise his Cruelty on the same Persons that he did heretofore.
Tatianus Cont. Graecos, p. 143.
mentions the same Opinion of Zeno; that the World shall be renewed by a
Conflagration, that the same Men shall rise, and do the very same Things;
Anytus and Melitus shall accuse Socrates again, Busiris murder his Guests,
Hercules undergo the same Labors, etc. De Vita Beat^, l. 7. c. 23.
Lactantius produces these Words of Chrysippus, whom Cicero styles the Prop of
the Porch of the Stoics, out of his Book of Providence. (...).
This being so, it is manif^st, that it is not at all impossible, but that
after a certain revolution of Time, even We may be restored from Death to what
we now are. The Philosopher Ap^ Eu^. P^p. XV. 18, 19.
Numenius calls it in express Terms a Resurrection. (...), etc. That
Resurrection which makes that which is called the greatest Year. This Opinion
of the Stoics concerning the Renovation of things after the Conflagation, is
mentioned by many others, as by 2. De Not. De^rum, c. 46.
Tully, Quod mundus sit corruptibilis. p. 728.
Philo Judeus, Apolog. 2. p. 66.
Justin Martyr, Apolog. pro Christ.
Athenagoras, Strom. 5. p. 549. 599.
Clemens Alexandrinus, etc.

The Emperor l. 12. c. 12. 5.
M. Antoninus, who was chiefly addicted to the Sect of the Stoics, writes
doubtingly concerning the Life to come, to this purpose. How comes it to pass,
says he, That the Gods, who have ordered all things well, and with singular
love toward Mankind, have neglected this one thing, to take care, that Men,
especially the Good, and those who maintained as it were a frequent
Correspondence with 'em, and by their pious Works, and holy Offices contracted
a kind of familiarity with 'em; that those Men when once they are dead, do no
longer exist, but are extinct for ever? (...). If it be so, the reason, you
must know, is, because it ought not to be otherwise. This Place the learned
Notis in M. Antonin. and in his Book of Credul. and Incred. p. 23.
Merich Casaubon understands so, as if it had respect to the Resurrection of
the Body, in the true Christian Sense, and the Words, (...), he renders thus,
should never be restored to Life. That Antoninus (says he) intends it of the
Body (for the Soul, if not immortal, yet that it remained a long time after
Death, they believed) not of the Body alone, but of the Body and Soul to be
joined again into one and the same Person, may appear, because he says, (...),
as soon as ever dead, (...), not to be restored to Life again; to wit, the Man,
consisting (though not a precise Stoic in that) of Body and Soul for ever.
That the Emperor intended such a Resurrection, he further confirms by another
Passage in his Book, where he says, L. 7.. 2.
(...). You will easily be persuaded, that I am not at all prejudiced against
this Opinion of that learned Man: But let Truth prevail above all things. It
must be confessed, that he did not understand Antoninus's meaning, and that he
was mistaken in two Respects: 1. If Antoninus had intended a Resurrection, he
ought to have been understood only of such a Resurrection, as I have shown the
Stoics generally believed. 2. It is not true that he intended a Resurrection
in any Sense. In this last place he only alludes to that Opinion which the
Stoics commonly taught, not asserts it: And in the other Place he only speaks
of the duration of the Soul after Death, of which he himself doubted. It must
be acknowledged, that that Philosopher had too mean an Opinion of the Body, to
propose it as a thing to be wondered at, why the Bodies of good Men are not to
be raised again. And the Word (...), on which Casaubon lays a great Stress, and
which seems to be the Foundation of his Error, signifies not only, again, as he
renders it, but amplius, or in posterum. So in Philo Judaeus (...) is the time
to come, in Isocrates (...) signifies Posterity. In the same Sense it is used
by Plato, and others.

I might here observe, that the Philosopher Heraclitus, more ancient than the
Stoics, speaks not only of the general Conflagration, but says, See Clem.
Alex. l. 5. p. 549, 599.
that they that have lived ill in this Life shall be purged by that Fire. I
might likewise observe that both he, and Simplicius Com. in Arist. Phys. l. 8.
Anaximenes, and Ibid.
Diogenes Apolloniates, believed, That after the destruction of this World,
there will be another Created, and so on to all Eternity. But I rather choose to
entertain you with some thing that I think will be more surprising, and more to
our Purpose. Should I tell you that those two great Atomical Philosophers,
Democritus and Epicurus, believed, that our Bodies will hereafter be restored
again, and be made up of the very same Particles; should I tell you thus much,
you would take me perhaps to be rather pleasant than serious. But how strange
soever you may think it, it is nevertheless true, at least if my Authors were
not mistaken. They believed that this will happen after a vast distance of
time, and after innumerable changes, by a Second fortuitous concourse of the
very same Particles. Democritus (as I suppose) formed this Notion from what he
had learnt concerning the Instauration of all Things, by conversing with the
Egyptians, among whom (we know) he lived many Years to be instructed in their
Philosophy: And from him, it is likely, Epicurus received it. But how does it
appear, that those two great Corporealists, who believed that the Soul and Body
di^ both together, asserted this kind of Resurrection? For Democritus, Pliny is
my Author; for Epicurus, St. Jerome. Pliny L. 7. c. 55.
in his Not. Hist. opposes and derides this Opinion of Democritus (so he does
also the Immortality of the Soul.) Similis est de asservandis corporibus
hominum, ac reviviscendi promissa Democrito vanitas, qui non The Author seems
to intimate that Democritus spoke of a Resurrection which was to be in a little
time: But I believe he had not duly considered his Opinion.
revixit ipse. Quae (malum) ista dementia est iterari vitani morte? S. Jerome's
Com. in Ecclesiasten, c. 1.
Words concerning Epicuru^ a^e these: Vide, hoc novum est, and jam fa^um est in
seculo quod fuit ante nos. Cum superioribus autem congruit, quod ni^il novum in
mundo fiat, nec sit aliquis qui possit existere and dicere, ecce hoc novum est,
siquidem omne quod se putaverit novum ostendere, jam in prioribus seculis fuit.
Nec putemus signa atque prodigia and multa quae arbitrio Dei nova in Mundo
fiunt, in prioribus seculis esse jam facta, and locum invenire Epicurum, qui
asserit per innumerabiles periodos EADEM and eisdem in locis and per ^osdem
fieri. There is no reason we should change the Reading, and for Epicurus, read,
Chrysippus, as a Meric. Casaub. of Cred. and Incred. p. 22.
learned Man suspects we ought, since (as has been shown) Democritus himself,
whose Philosophy Epicurus followed, and from whom the Ancients tell us he
borrowed a great many of his Notions, maintained either the same or a like
Opinion.

I shall conclude these Opinions with those received among some of the Ancient
Arabians. The Harbanists Pocock. Specim. Hist. Arabum, p. 145.
, an ancient Sect among the Heathen Arabians, held, That after the space of
36425 Years, all the Species of Living Creatures that are in the World shall be
destroyed, and the Nature of the Universe shall again produce Two Pair of every
Species for every Climate of the Earth. And after this manner the World is to
continue by several Revolutions to Eternity. There were others among the
Arabians that agreed with the Pythagoreans and Platonists, or rather came up
more home to the Christian Doctrine than they did. They believed, that after
certain Circulations of the Heavenly Bodies, the Soul will return, and will
constitute the same Individual Man, and that the Man thus constituted anew,
will remember what had past in the former Life. Eutyc^io Vind. p. 417.
Abrahamus Ecchellensis mentions this as the Opinion of some Ancient Heretics
amongst the Mahometans in Egypt, and elsewhere: And you know the Mahometans of
Egypt were originally Arabians.

We have made, I think, by this time, a pretty tolerable Progress, and from the
View we have already taken, I believe you begin to be convinced, that the
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body was known and generally embraced in
the first Ages of the World. We will now extend our View, and look a little
farther abroad into the World, and show, that the Heathens had not only some
Opinions amongst 'em which were built on a Tradition concerning the
Resurrection, and that carry with 'em a very great resemblance of our Doctrine;
but that many of 'em in several parts of the World have held the same Doctrine
with us, and do to this day believe it, in the same sense as we understand it;
I mean, that they hold, That the Particles of the Body which died will be
raised again, and, without a new Birth, be united to the Soul, and constitute
the very same Man.

I shall not here take any notice of those Greek Verses which are extant under
the Name of Phocylides, that they plainly assert the Resurrection, in regard
those Verses are by all learned Men attributed, not to the Ancient Phocylides,
but to some Jewish or Christian Author. The First Instance which I shall
present you with, is that of the Persian Magi. I need not tell you that the
Magi were the Priests and Philosophers of the Ancient Persians. Theopompus, and
Eudemus Rhodius, two very Ancient Authors, in Pr^mio.
D. Laertius, tell us, that the Magi taught, That Men shall revive, and be
Immortal. (...) (...). And De Is. and Osir. p. 370. (...).
Plutarch assures us out of the Books of Zoroastres, that according to their
Doctrine there will be a time, when the Earth shall be made plain and level,
and all Mankind shall live blessedly together on Earth, in one common Society,
and shall speak but one Language. This is almost expressly the Millennarian
Doctrine of the Resurrection. They add, according to Ap. Plut. loco cit.
Theopompus, that this shall happen after the term of 6000 Years. Which is the
same number of Years that the Ancient Jews, and most of the Christian Fathers
allow for the duration of the World, before the Resurrection: And that the
Bodies of Men in that State will not have need of Food, but will be pure and
pellucid, or, as he expresses it, will cast no Shadow. Thus Theophrasto, p. 77.
(...).
Aeneas Gazaeus affirms that Zoroastres foretold, that there will come a time,
when there shall be a Resurrection of all the Dead. And this, says he,
Theopompus attests. To this I shall add what is also very remarkable, that the
same Doctrine is at this day preserved amongst the Heathen Gavrs, or Guebers,
at this time living in Persia, the Remains of the Ancient Magi, or Persians. My
Author is a late Ta^ nier. l. 4. c. 8. p. 165.
Traveller of good Credit, who gives us this Account: That according to their
Doctrine, there shall be an Universal Resurrection: And at that time all the
Souls either in Paradise or Hell, shall return to take possession of their
Bodies; that the Earth shall be made level, and Men shall have every one their
Apartment answerable to the Good which they did in their Life time, but that
their chief Delight shall be to behold and praise God, and (Zoroastres) their
Prophet. They add that before the Resurrection, those that are in Paradise do
not behold the Face of God. They likewise say, that their Prophet did not die,
but was carried up in his Body into Heaven.

My second Instance is of some of the Arabians. I showed but just now that some
of the ancient Arabians came up very near to our Doctrine: I shall now add,
that there were others of that Country, (which is very spacious and contained
very different Sects) that made a further Advance, and came up fully to us.
That the most ancient Arabians acknowledged the Resurrection in the Christian
Sense, we may probably gather from that noted Place in c. 19. (...). 26.
Job concerning the Resurrection, at least if the Words be rightly understood,
and were really spoken by him. I need not tell you that Job was an Arabian. But
you perhaps will tell me, that that was spoken by him only as an inspired
Person. I see no Reason for that: But this is not the only Argument I have to
prove, that the old Arabians expressly owned our Doctrine. I have the express
Testimony of several Arabic Writers, that some of 'em did so. There were some
among the Heathen Arabians (says Hist. Dynast. p. 101.
Gregorius Abulpharajius) that acknowledged the Resurrection of the Dead. He
adds, that they used to kill a Camel on the Graves of the Dead, that when they
should rise to Judgment (such was their Ignorance mixed with the Knowledge they
had of the Truth) they might ride upon it. The same is asserted by other
Arabic Pocockius Specim. Hist. Arabum, p. 134. Fuisse ex Arabibus dicit
Sharestanius alios qui nec praecessisse creationem crederent, nec futuram
resurrectionem; rerum or^um naturae, interi^um seculo deberi asterentes; alios,
qui res omnes creatas agnoscerent, at restitutum iri mortuos negarent; alios
demum qui utrumque ^aterentur.
Authors. I know that one Kossus (He of whom is that Arabic Proverb, More
Eloquent than Kossus) is reported by some to have taught the Arabians the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, as also the Unity of the Godhead: But that is to
be understood only of some, not of all the Arabians that owned it. My Opinion
is, that Kossus was no other than a Christian Presbyter, who first preached the
Gospel in some part of Arabia: For so the Word Kos or Kas signifies in the
Arabic Tongue; I mean it signifies a Presbyter, and his eloquent Preaching
might very well occasion the above mentioned Proverb. Now it does not seem very
probable, that they who are spoken of by Abulpharajius, who were wont to have a
Camel buried with 'em, were descended from any who had been enlightened by the
Gospel.

My Third Instance is of some of the Banians of Cambaia, in the East Indies. A
Traveller Mr. Rich. Wrag in Hackluit tom. 2. p. 310.
of our own Nation tells us, that a Banian of Cambaia gave an Acquaintance of
his this Account of their Faith, relating to the next Life. Law (says he) they
hold none, but only seven Precepts, which they say were given 'em from their
Father Noe, not knowing Abraham nor any other. 1. To honor Father and Mother.
2. Not to steal. 3. Not to commit Adultery. 4. Not to kill any Thing living. 5.
Not to eat any Thing living. 6. Not to cut their Hair. 7. To go barefoot in
their Churches. They hold there shall be a Resurrection, and all shall come to
Judgment, but the Account shall be most strict, insomuch that but one of 10000
shall be received to Favor, and those shall live again in this World in great
Happiness: The rest shall be tormented. And because they will escape this
Judgment, when any Man dies, he is burnt to Ashes, and thrown into a River. And
by this means they hope to escape the Judgment to come. As for the Soul, that
goes to the Place from whence it came, but where the Place is they know not.
That the Body should not be made again they reason with the Philosophers,
saying, that of nothing nothing can be made; beholding the course of Nature
that nothing is made but by a means, as by the Seed of an Animal is made
another, and by Corn cast into the Ground there comes up new Corn. So, say
they, a Man cannot rise again except some part of him be left undissolv'd, and
therefore they burn the whole. For if he were buried in the Earth, they say
there is a small Bone in the Neck which would never be consumed. Or if he were
eaten by a Beast, that Bone would not consume, but of that Bone would come
another Man; and then the Soul being restored again he should come to Judgment,
whereas now, the Body being destroyed, the Soul shall not be judged. For their
Opinion is, That both Body and Soul must be united together as they have sinned
together, to receive Judgment: and therefore the Soul alone cannot. Their Seven
Precepts, which they keep very strictly, they do not keep for any hope of
Reward they have after this Life, but only that they may be blessed in this
World. They say, the Three chief Religions in the World are of the Christians,
Jews, and Mahometans, and yet but one of them True. But being in doubt which is
the truest of the Three, they will be of None. For they hold that all these
Three shall be judged, and but few of them which be of the True shall be saved,
the Examination shall be so strict. They say these Three Religions have too
many Precepts to keep them all well, and therefore wonderful hard it will be to
give an Account, because so few do observe all their Religion aright. This
Account is the more considerable for what it mentions of Noah: and I should be
glad to tell you, that I find it confirmed by other Relations of those Parts.
But that, I must own, I cannot as yet do. On the contrary I know that the
Banians of Cambaia, and of other Parts, do not generally talk after this
manner, or own explicitly a Resurrection, but the Transmigration of Souls into
other Bodies. Nevertheless it is not improbable but that among those many Sects
of the Banians, or Gentiles, of Mogulistan, whose Opinions we find described in
our more vulgar Relations, there may be some, particularly in Cambaia, who have
these Traditions and Notions. And this is th more credible, because (as I shall
by and by show) there are other Nations in the Indies, which assert a
Resurrection. Those Brachmans of India, of whom we read in the Histories of
Alexander the Great, were either of that Country which is now called Cambaia,
or of a Country bordering upon it: And Palladius, in his Treatise of the
Brachmans, makes Dandamis, the most Famous and Considerable amongst 'em, speak
of the Resurrection. He, in his Discourse with Alexander, has these Words: Thou
shall not lie hid from God, neither shall thou have any Place to which thou
may flee at the time of the (...).
Resurrection. Neither shall thou escape his Vengeance. But as that Discourse
is altogether fictitious, so the Author's Judgment, who makes him talk after
this manner, deserves not to be regarded.

My Fourth Example is the Inhabitants of the Island of Ceylon, in the
East Indies. These People, says another Knox Hist. of Ceylon. p. 85.
Traveller of our own Nation, (who lived amongst 'em no less than 19 Years, and
could not but be very well acquainted with their Belief) do firmly believe a
Resurrection of the Body, and the Immortality of Souls, and a future State.
They hold that in the other World, those that are good Men, though they be poor
and mean in this World, yet there they shall become high and Eminent; But
wicked Men, they say, will be turned into Beasts.

The Fifth is the Inhabitants of Java, another of the East-Indian Isles, who
believe, as Trav. Part I. c. 24. p 97.
Le Blanc affirms, that after their Flesh is wholly consumed, their Souls will
reunite to the Body, and remain in Peace to all Eternity.

The Sixth is the People of Pegu, another Country in the East Indies. It Is,
affirmed by a Bomferrus cited by Sir Tho. Herbert in his Trav. p. 359.
Roman Missionary, who lived amongst 'em some years, that they believe a
Vivification of the Body after Death, and reunion with the Soul.

The Seventh is the People of Transiana, a Country adjoining to Pegu, on the
North of it; who, when they bury a dead Body, burn the Heart and Bowels, as a
Sacrifice to their Duma or God; then put the Ashes within the Corpse again, Le
Blanc. c. 36 p. 168.
That nothing, as they say, may be wanting at the Day of Resurrection.

The Eighth is some of the Chinese. Gaspar Da Cruz Treatise of China.
gives us this Account of the Opinions of some of that Nation. They make (says
he) many Heavens, some where there is Meat and Drink, and fair Women, whither
all living things do go. And to these they say, all Men do go, that are not of
the Religious. They place others higher, whither they say the holy Priests do
go that live in the Wildernesses, and all the Felicity they give them there, is
to sit refreshing themselves with the Wind. They place others yet higher, the
Gods of which they say have round Bodies like Bowls; those that go to these
Heavens have round Bodies as the Gods themselves have. The same Author tells
us, That they wear their Hair long, holding, that by it they shall be carried
to Heaven. That the Priests are generally shaven, for they say, They need no
help to carry them to Heaven. This might pass, I presume, with many for a full
and sufficient Proof, that they own a Resurrection: But I do not my-self rely
on it. These Opinions might be grounded on the gross Notion they might have of
the Materiality of the Soul. I mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse,
that the Heathens generally believe, that the Soul has all the same Parts that
the Body has: They believe that the Parts of the Soul, when the Soul is united
to the Body, are diffused throughout all the Parts of the Body, that if a man's
Body has Hair, his Soul has Hair too; and that if you cut off his Hair, you cut
off together with it the Hair of the Soul. That some in that great and populous
Empire acknowledge a Resurrection, is more plainly asserted by others. Pinto
Voyag. p. 145.
tells us of a Sect named Trimechau, who are of Opinion, That so long as a Man
lives in this World, so long shall he remain under Ground, 'till at length, by
the Prayers of the Priests, his Soul shall reassume the Body of a Child of
Seven Days old, wherein he shall live again till he shall grow so strong as to
re-enter into the old Body which he left in the Grave, and so be translated
into the Heaven of the Moon; where, they say, he shall live many Years, and in
the end be converted into a Star, which shall remain fixed above in the
Firmament for ever. The same Author (if he deserve that Name, and be not rather
in this, as he is in a great many of his Stories, a Romancer) has another
Relation which makes directly to our Purpose. It is somewhat long, and I fear
you will think it tedious, perhaps ridiculous; but however I shall here present
you with it, because, as I remember, you have not the Author in your Library. I
must ingenuously confess, I do not my-self much believe it: But I must not make
my Judgment the Rule of other Men's. It may perhaps be true, at least some part
of it, though the Prejudice which I have against the Relator, makes it seem very
doubtful to me. If after you have read it, you think it unworthy of this place,
before you show these Papers to any of your Friends be pleased to strike it
quite out, or let it be looked upon only as a Parenthesis. He tells us C. 35.
(...). 2. p. 140.
of a place in Pequin, the chief City of China, called the Treasure of the
Dead, in which are many little Houses, according to the Report of the Chinese,
no less than 3000, full of dead Men's Skulls, with Two great Mounts of their
other Bones: That there is a Register kept of those Bones and Skulls, to whom
they belonged. In that place, says he, there are Two great Idols, called The
Blowers of the House of Smoke, (so the Chinese use to call Hell) and the Figure
of a Monstrous Serpent, called, The gluttonous Serpent of the House of Smoke,
with a great Bowl of Iron on his Head, as if it had been thrown at him from
some other place; and near it another great Figure in the form of a Giant
holding a great Iron Bowl aloft in his Hands, and beholding the Serpent with a
frowning and angry Countenance, he seems as if he would throw his Bowl at him.
Round about this Figure is a number of little Idols on their Knees, with their
Hands lifted up as if they would adore it. But what means all this long Story?
What (you will say) are these Houses of Skulls, these Giants, Serpents, and
Bowls, to our Purpose? The Explication he gives of all these things, is this:
All this great Edifice, says he, was consecrated to the Honor of this Idol,
called Mucluparon, whom the Chinese affirmed to be the Treasurer of all the
dead Bones, and that when the Gluttonous Serpent beforementioned came to steal
them away, he made at him with the Bowl which he held in his Hands, whereupon
the Serpent in great fear fled away to the bottom of the profound House of
Smoke, whither God precipitated him for his great Wickedness: And farther they
affirmed, that he had maintained a Combat with him 3000 Years already, and was
to continue the same 3000 Years more; so that from 3000 to 3000 Years he was to
employ Five Bowls, wherewith he was to make an end of killing him. Hereupon,
they added, that as soon as this Serpent should be dead, the Bones that were
there gathered together, would return to the Bodies to which they appertained
formerly, and so should go and remain for ever in the House of the Moon. To
these Opinions (adds my Author) they join many others such like, unto which
they give so much faith, that nothing can be able to remove them from it. For
it is the Doctrine that is preached unto them by their Bonzees, who also tell
them that the true way to make a Soul happy, is to gather the Bones of the Dead
together into this Place; by means whereof there is not a day passes but a
Thousand, or Two Thousand, Bones are brought thither. Now if some for their far
distance cannot bring all the Bones whole together, they will at leastwise
bring a Tooth or Two, and so they say, that, by way of an Alms, they make as
good satisfaction as if they brought all the rest: Which is the reason that in
all these Charnel-Houses there is such an infinite multitude of these Teeth,
that one might lade many Ships with them. Thus far Pinto: I wish I could quote
you a better Author. Tho the silence of all other Travelers who have given an
Account of that Country, and particularly of the City of Pequin, and the
oddness of the Story it self, be enough to persuade one that the whole is no
better than an idle Fable; yet that which he says of the Combat maintained with
the Devil 3000 Years already, and to be continued 3000 Years more, comes up so
near to the Opinion of the Ancient Magi, those great Theologists of the East,
which De Is. and Osir, p. 370. Theopompus ai^ de Sententi^ Magorum vicibus 3000
annorum alterum Deorum superare, alterum succumbere: Et per alia 3000 annorum
bellum eos inter se gerere, pugnare, and alterum alterius opera demoliri:
tandem Plutonem deficere, and tunc Homines fore beatos, neque alimento utentes,
neque umbram edentes.
Plutarch gives an account of, that from thence it may be concluded that the
whole is not fabulous, but that there may be some truth in it. For it is not
likely that so illiterate a Person as Pinto, knew what Plutarch relates of the
Magi. I shall leave the whole to your Judgment, and to the Enquiries of such as
shall hereafter visit that City. Kircher China Illustr. p. 133.
mentions a Sect of the Chinese called Lanzu, which, says he, Paradisum
spondet, ex anima and corpore constitutis, and in suis templis quorundam
effigies exponunt, quos hac ratione ad Coelos evolasse fabulantur. Ad eam rem
consequendam exercitationes quasdam praescribunt, positas in vario sedendi
ritu, certisque precationibus, imo etiam pharmacis, quibus spondent una cum
suorum Divorum favore vitam in mortali corpore longiorem. We read in Hist.
Indiae Orient. l. 1. p. 93.
Joh. Ludovicus Gotofridus, that the Chinese celebrate the Memory of Twelve
certain Philosophers, who, they say, were for their Virtue Translated into
Heaven. And Herbert in his Trav. p. 377.
another affirms of the Chinese in general, That they believe a Resurrection:
And he brings this Argument to prove it, That sometimes they will lend Money to
be repaid 'em in the other World. This is reported of some amongst 'em by
several Travelers: But whether it be a sufficient Argument, I leave to the
Judgment of others.

The Ninth is the Eastern Tartars, who inhabit on the North of China. p. 162.
Pinto, whom I but now quoted, has a Relation concerning them much the same
with what he has given us of the Chinese. He tells us that he saw in that
Country, about the Temple of a Celebrated Idol, a great many Houses full of the
Skulls and Bones of dead Men; the Idol very vast and monstrous, with a great
Bowl of Iron in his Hands; and this is the Account he gives of it, from the
Mouth, as he says, of a Tartar of no mean Quality: That that Idol, or God, is
the Treasurer of the Bones of all those that are born into the World, to the
end that at the last Day, when Men come to be born again (he means rise again)
he may give to every one the same Bones which he had upon Earth. And that the
Bowl he holds in his Hands, is to fling at the Devil, when he should come
thither to steal away any of those Bones. I have told you my Author, one (as I
have already hinted) whose Relations I dare not Insure.

Out of Asia we will pass, if you please, into Africa, and then into the other
two parts of the World, and see if those parts afford us any other Examples.

My Tenth Instance is the People of Arder, a Country in Guinnee near Rio da
Volta. They believe (as the Dutch Relations assure us) that the Bodies of such
as are slain in the Wars, do rise again within Two Days after they are buried,
and go to another Life; and this they averr they have found by experience. This
Opinion is cherished by their Fetisero's, or Priests, who steal (as we may
suppose) the dead Bodies out of their Graves. They say that in the Bodies of
those that are not slain in the Wars, the Blood congeals, and therefore they
are not to expect a Resurrection.

The Eleventh is the Prussians here in Europe. That they, before they were
converted to the Christian Faith, believed, not only the Immortality of the
Soul, but also the Resurrection of the Body, is asserted by Christophorus
Hartknochius Apud Acta Eruditorum Lipsiensia. Vol. 12. p. 193.
, in his Borussia Vetus and Nova.

The Twelfth is the Virginians in America. A French Hist. of the Caribby Isles,
l. 2. c. 14.
Author tells us, That they have a small glimpse of this sacred Truth. And a
Smith in hi^ Virginia, l. 2. p. 36.
Traveller of our own, who lived long among 'em, and has written a large
Account of their Country and Manners, seems to intimate the same thing. His
Words are as follows: They think that their Werowances (i. e. their Governors)
and Priests, when they are dead, go beyond the Mountains toward the setting of
the Sun, and ever remain there in form of their Okee (i. e. their God, to whom
they attribute a Human Shape) with their Heads painted with Oil and Ponones (a
Herb so called) finely trimmed with Feathers, and shall have Beads, Hatchets,
Copper, and Tobacco, doing nothing but dance and sing, with all their
Predecessors. But the Common People they suppose shall not live after Death,
but rot in their Graves like dead Dogs. In a Marginal Note he calls this
expressly their Resurrection.

The Inhabitants of Louisiana, another Country in the Northern America, lately
discovered by the French, seem to hold, That the Soul after Death shall be
reunited to its Body. My Author's Words are these, Ap. Acta Lips. Vol. 2. p.
379.
Animas superstites esse corporibus fatentur, and in Regione amoena, resumptis
Corporibus, venaturos esse mortuos, nugantur; eaque de causa instrumenta, and
arma sepultis addunt, horumque utensilium spiritum etiam revicturum esse aiunt.

Jarricus Reru^ Indicarum Thesauro, To. 2. c. 28.
relates, That the Brasilians, enslaved by the Portuguese, used to boast that
their Friends who died some Centuries of Years ago, would come thither again in
a Ship, and free their Posterity from slavery, and root out the Portuguese: And
had this Opinion current among 'em, That no one that believed this would be
excluded Heaven; but they that did not, would be rent in pieces by wild Beasts.

It Is storied Reru^ Indicarum Thesauro, To. 2. c. 28.
of the People of Hispaniola, Praefat. in Benzonis Hist.
and the adjacent Isles, that the Spaniards carried away many of 'em to work in
the Gold Mines, by persuading 'em that they should be carried away to the Seats
of the Blessed where their deceased Ancestors were, and there live among them.

But these things may be resolved into that gross Notion which those ignorant
People entertained of the Materiality of the Soul.

That the Peruvians acknowledged the Resurrection of the Body, before ever any
Christians came into those Parts, is confidently asserted by several Authors,
by Trav. p. 256. 286.
Joh. Hugo Linschoten, Hist. Missionis Benedictinorum in America.
Honorius Philoponus, Trav. part 3. c. 11 and 14.
Le Blanc, Hist. Navigat. in Brasiliam p. 224.
Lerius, and others: and a Hist. of the Caribby Isles, l. 2. c. 14.
French Writer tells us, that most Authors affirm it. But I fear there are few,
or none, that speak upon their own Knowledge. He, whom all the rest follow, is
the Author of the L. 4. c. 124.
General Hist. of India, cited for it by Lerius. That Historian relates, That
when the Spaniards rifled the Graves of the Dead for the Treasures that were
wont to be buried with 'em, and carelessly threw about their Bones, the
Peruvians entreated them not to scatter the Bones of the Dead, lest it should
hinder their Resurrection. This is very plain and express. But I cannot (I
confess) but doubt of the truth of it. For I find that Hist. of the
West Indies, l. 5. c. 5.
Josephus Acosta, a very good Author, expressly asserts the quite contrary; That
though the Peruvians held the Immortality of the Soul, and that the Good are
rewarded after Death, and the Wicked punished, yet they were not come to the
knowledge of that Point, that the Bodies shall rise, and be again united to
their Souls. Neither do I find any thing concerning the Resurrection in the
large Royal Commentaries of the Inca Garcilasso.

You see (Philalethes) I am not willing to abuse you, by imposing upon you an
Argument, which I think I have reason to doubt of. And moreover, I must tell
ye, that it is not improbable but that there may be some others amongst the
Modern Instances which I have laid before you, as particularly that of the
Virginians, that hereafter may be found to be grounded on Mistakes. The truth
is, the First Authors of Reports of this nature are oftentimes such as are
either too Ignorant of the Language of those whose Opinions they give an
Account of, to understand 'em aright, or not sufficiently Knowing and Judicious
to distinguish rightly one Opinion from another. But, upon the whole, if you
please to reflect on all that has been hitherto said, and consider all things
together, I am of Opinion you will be very apt to lay down this Proposition at
the Foot of the Account, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection, as we now
understand it, is an old Universal Doctrine, derived down from Noah, and
grounded on the more ancient Revelations of the Antediluvian Patriarchs.

But why derived down from Noah? Why grounded (perhaps you may ask) on the
ancient Revelations of the Antediluvian Patriarchs? Might not the Heathens
receive this Notion from the Jews? I know many Modern Writers, and some of the
Ancients, who contend that the Doctrine of the Resurrection was in some measure
known to the Gentiles, give this account of it, that they learnt it of the Jews
by reading the Scriptures, or by conversing with some of that Nation: But I
leave it to your serious Judgment, whether this Account which I have given you
of it, be not much more probable. How could so many different Nations, Nations
so Ancient and so remote from Judaea, receive this Doctrine, or their broken
Traditions concerning it, from the Jews? I could offer you many Arguments, and,
I think, pretty good ones, to confute that common and ill-grounded Opinion,
That most of those Notions in which the Ancient Heathens agreed with the Jews,
were borrowed from them. But this is not a proper time for it. Are you apt to
suspect that the Notices of the Resurrection which we find among the Heathens
of these present Times were received from the Missionaries which the Church of
Rome has of latesent abroad into the several Parts of the World? I must needs
say, that, if I know any thing of these Matters, I know that that could not be.
Will you say they were received from some Christians, or Mahometans, who in
former times arrived in those Countries? This I grant may be true of some of
'em. But if you consider that before the times of Christianity there were
manifest Footsteps of this Doctrine to be found amongst the Heathens in diverse
Parts of the World as well as in these Days; and that the ancient Magi of the
East did plainly assert it; as you will be forced to acknowledge that the whole
cannot be accounted for that way, so (I think) it will seem very probable that
the present Heathens themselves are beholding to their first Ancestors, and not
to any Christians or Mahometans, for what they know concerning it. I take no
notice of another Opinion very common amongst the Fathers, That the Doctrine of
the Resurrection may be learnt from Natural Reason. I should be very glad to
have it well proved, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection might be discovered
to those Heathens of whom we have spoken, by that light of Nature. But for my
part I utterly despair of it. I know of no Natural Reason, no light of Nature
so bright and shining as to discover this Mystery; and have therefore purposely
forborne to make use of any of those Arguments which the Fathers, and some
Bishop Paerson on the Creed, p. 376.
of our Modern Writers are wont to produce from it. I look on this Doctrine as
one of those that could never be discovered but by an extraordinary Revelation.
Should God be pleased to ask me, as he did the Prophet, Son of Man, can these
dry Bones live? I can only appeal to him for the truth of it, and must humbly
answer in the Prophet's Words, Lord God, thou know.

I shall conclude this Argument with a Testimony of (a) St. Peter, which
confirms the Notion which we have advanced. He Acts 3. 21.
affirms, That the Resurrection was foretold by the Prophets from the very
beginning of the World. The Heavens (says he) must receive Christ until the
time of the Restitution of all things: Of which God has spoken by the Mouth of
his Holy Prophets, (...), since the World began, or, from the beginning of the
World.

These Traditions preserved among the Heathens, I have placed here in the first
Station, as an Out-guard upon my Main Force, the Authorities of Scripture which
contains the same Tradition of the Resurrection derived down first from Noah,
and again confirmed and ratified anew by other Revelations. I shall now in the
next place draw this out, and give you a full view of it.

I begin with the Testimonies of the Old Testament, and the Common Opinion of
the ancient Jews. It Is confidently asserted by De Resur. initio Epistolae Dedic.
Menasseh Ben Israel, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection was always so
received by the Ancient Jews, as that any one that denied it was rejected out
of number of the Israelites. But this is an Assertion which I cannot undertake
to defend: On the contrary, it must be confessed that among the Ancient Jews
there were many that did not acacknowledge it, who were looked upon nevertheless
as true Israelites. 'Twill be worth our while to enquire into this matter, and
the love of Truth, which has all along been, and, I hope, will always be my
Guide, obliges me to do it. I shall show,

1. That it was not always received among the Jews as a necessary Article of
Faith, or term of Communion, and who they were that did not acknowledge it.

2. That though there were some amongst 'em that did not acknowledge it, and it
was not always looked upon as a necessary Article of Faith, yet it was the
common and received Opinion of that Nation about the time of our Savior, as
well before as after.

3. That the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul was not received among the
Jews of those times, as a necessary Article of Faith, or Term of Communion:
From whence it follows, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection is not therefore
the less certain, because it was not always looked upon by the Jews as a
necessary Article of Faith.

4. I shall show that the Doctrine of the Resurrection is plainly alluded to in
the Prophecies of the Old Testament, and by them confirmed.

First, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection was not always received among the
Jews as a necessary Article of Faith, or Term of Communion, will appear from
some of the following Examples of such as did not acknowledge it.

1. The Essens, a famous Sect among the Jews, consisting of no less than about
Philo Jud. Quod omnis probus sit liber. p. 678.
4000 in number. That they did not acknowledge a Resurrection, nor the reunion
of the Soul with any kind of Body, may be easily gathered from that account
which Josephus gives us of their Doctrines concerning the Soul. In his Second
C. 7. p. 787.
Book of the Jewish War, where he speaks very largely of 'em, having taken an
occasion to speak of their being tormented by some of the Roman Soldiers; In
the midst (says he) of their sufferings they smiled, and laughing at them that
inflicted their Torments, they gave up their Souls with a great deal of
Constancy and Cheerfulness, as Men that expected to (...).
recover 'em again. This last Expression may seem to intimate that they
expected that their Souls would be again united to their Bodies, but from that
which follows it appears that our Author's meaning was otherwise. For they have
(says he) a most certain Opinion amongst 'em, that their Bodies indeed are
corruptible, and that their Matter shall not be perpetual: but that their Souls
shall always have a being; that, coming from out of the subtle Either, they are
drawn down into their Bodies by a natural sort of Attraction, and there are
detained as it were in Prisons: but when they are freed from the bonds of
Flesh, as it were from a long Enslavement, with a great deal of Joy they ^ee
away on high. And as for good Souls they agree with the Greeks, that they dwell
beyond the Ocean, in a perfect enjoyment of Happiness in a Country free from
all kind of Grievance, from Showers, Snows, and Heats, made insinitely pleasant
by the Western Gales arising out of the Ocean. But as for the Souls of the
Wicked, they are sent into certain Places exposed to Cold and Tempests, there
to remain in everlasting Misery and Torment. Josephus In his own Life.
tells us, that in his Youth he had made it his Business to enquire into the
Doctrines of the Particular Sects, the Essens, the Sadduces, and the Pharisees,
and to learn their Customs and Ways of living, being conversant amongst 'em
with great perseverance and application, that having informed himself of their
several Rules and Placits, he might adhere to that Sect which should please him
best. It is therefore evident that he could not be ignorant of the true Opinion
of the Essens: And this we must of necessity grant, that those Essens at least
with whom he had Conversed, professed the aforesaid Opinion. It is not enough
to say that Josephus was a Court-Writer, and likely to misrepresent their
Opinions that they might seem to agree with the Greeks and Romans, among whom
he lived: For that the aforesaid Opinion might be really the Opinion of the
Essens, will appear very probable from the next Example, which is that of Philo
Judaeus.

Secondly, That Philo, the famous Jew, who lived in the Time of the Apostles,
and is called by his Countryman Josephus (...) Antiq. l. 18. c. 10.
a Man every way Glorious, and was in his own Time so highly esteemed by the
Jews of Alexandria, where he lived, as to be sent their chief Ambassador to
Rome, to defend their Cause against their Enemies; that he did not own the
Resurrection of the Body, or that the Soul is hereafter to be united for ever
to another Body, is from many places of his Works undeniably evident. It is
certain that according to the Doctrine of Plato, he looked on the Body as the
Prison of the Soul, and he expressly asserts, that the purer Sorts of Souls do
fly from the Body as their Gaol, and live for ever in a State of Separation. If
on any account it be true what was commonly said of him by the Greeks, it is
chiefly so in relation to the Soul, St. Hieron. Catalog. Photius Cod. 105.
Either Plato Philonizes or Philo Platonizes, either Plato learned his
Philosophy of the Jews, or else Philo was a Follower of Plato. The last is the
truth. Let us hear now what Philo says. In his Book P. 455. Edit. Colon. 1613
Concerning Dreams, his Philosophy is this (...) That the Air between the
surface of the Earth and the Concave of the Moon, is the place of the
Habitation of Souls, which are there innumerable: Of these there are some which
descend to be joined and united to mortal Bodies, as many as are nearer to the
Earth, and desirous of union with 'em. After the time of separation assigned by
Nature, and their return again up into the Air, there are some still retain a
desire of Life and reunion, and these are again united to a Body (by a (...)
or (...).) but others are weary of the vanity of Life, and flee from the Body
as a Grave or a Prison, and nimbly flying into the upper Regions of the Either,
there fix their Abode and Habitation. In another P. 459.
place of the same Book, having cited those Words which God spoke to Jacob in
his Dream: Genesis 28. 15.
And behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou
go, and will bring thee again into this Land: For I will not leave thee
until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of: On those Words, And I
will bring thee again into this Land, according to his allegorizing way, he
thus Comments: This Place (says he) is perhaps to be understood of the
Immortality of the Soul; for the Soul having left its Heavenly Place, and
Traveling into the Body, the Father promises it, that he will not always
suffer it to be held in Prison, but will free it from its Bonds, and bring it
into its ancient Country, neither will he cease to keep it till his Promise be
perfectly fulfilled. And agreeably to this in another De Gigantibus, p. 222.
Book he says, that of the Souls which are dwelling in the Air, some are
Angels, and others descending into the Body, as it were into a River, are
sometimes overwhelmed in its rapid Gulphs, and sometimes bearing briskly up
against 'em do first swim out, and then fly back to the place from whence they
came. These (says he) are the Souls of those who are taught some Philosophy
from on high, which continually from the Beginning to the End desire the
dissolution of that Life which is by conjunction with the Body, that they may
obtain an Incorporeal and an Incorruptible Life, with the Unbegotten and
Incorruptible (God.) But those which are drowned, are the Souls of other Men;
who neglecting Wisdom, give themselves up to the uncertain blasts of Fortune,
which do not appertain to our better Part, but only to our Bodies, or else to
such Things as are voider than they of Life, such as Glory, and Riches, and
Power, and Honor, and those other things which Men, that look not on that
which is truly Good, do fancy and paint to themselves by false and erroneous
Notions.

Thirdly, That many of the Jews who held the Immortality of the Soul, did not
own the Resurrection of the Body, may be further gathered form a place of
Cornelius Tacitus Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
the Roman Historian, where he describes the Customs of that Nation. He says
thus of 'em in general: Animasque proelio aut suppliciis peremptorum, aeternas
puta^t. They believe that the Souls of such (Jews) as are slain in Battle, or
put to Death (by the Enemies of their Religion) are immortal. Though he speaks in
the same Place of their Custom of burying their dead Bodies (contrary to that
of the Romans, who were wont to burn their Dead) yet he speaks not a Word of
their believing the Resurrection of those Bodies. Which he could not have
omitted, if he had known that they believed it, it being so singular and
extraordinary a Thing; and he could not (one would think) have been ignorant of
it, if the Jews had so generally held it as they did the Immortality of the
Soul.

Fourthly, There were among the ancient Jews certain natural Philosophers, whom
the Rabbis are wont to call Sapientes Mecar, from their searching or enquiring
after natural Causes: To which appellation St. Paul the Apostle seems to have
had Respect in those Words to the Corinthians Epist. 1. c. 1. v. 20.
: Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Searcher (or Enquirer,
the (...), which we in our Translation render the Disputer) of this World. So
St. Jerome indeed has rendered it Proaem. in l. 3. Com. ad Galatas.
Ubi enim Sapiens? Ubi Grammateus? Ubi causarum Naturalium Scrutatores? Of them
its affirmed by Vide Drusii Observe. l. 4. c. 6.
one of the learned Rabbis, that they denied the existence of Demons, and
that some of them asserted that all living Things (not only Men, but all other
Animals) shall after Death rise again, their Souls returning into other Bodies
after a certain space of many Thousands of Years. This Opinion concerning the
Revolution of Souls they borrowed of the Heathens, and though it were originally
grounded on a Tradition concerning the Resurrection, yet the Doctrine is not
the same.

Fifthly, Another Sect that denied the Resurrection was that of the Sadduces.
That they denied it I need not endeavor to prove. I shall only here tell ye,
that though they did so, yet in the Time of our Savior and his Apostles, they
were not looked upon as Heretics by the Jews, but were properly Members of
their Body and Communion. This I shall prove by and by.

Sixthly, There was another Sect of the Jews called Hemero-Baptists, who
agreed, as Epiphanius assures us, with the Sadduces in denying the
Resurrection, and in their other Tenets; only in this they dissented from 'em,
that they esteemed it necessary, for the cleansing themselves from Sin, to
bathe themselves every Day, both Winter and Summer: From whence they had their
Name.

Seventhly, That the Prophet Ezechiel himself did not fully rely on the
Doctrine of a future Resurrection, but doubted once a little of it, as a
Doctrine at that time not sufficiently revealed, or almost forgotten, may be
gathered from the Answer which he returned to that Question of God Almighty,
Son of Man, can these (dry) Bones live? If the Doctrine of the Resurrection had
been at that time the common and received Doctrine, as it was afterward in the
time of our Savior, and the Prophet had been fully assured of it, he would not
have answered, as he did; Lord God, Thou know: But roundly, as Martha
answered our Savior concerning the Resurrection of her Brother Lazarus, I
know, Lord, that they can and will. It Is true, the Words, thou know are
capable of another interpretation, and may be so understood as to signify,
thou know that they can. But the true meaning seems to be otherwise, and
they seem to import thus much: Thou know whether they can or no; I do not.

Eighthly, To these we may add the Samaritans, who though they were not of the
Communion of the Jews, were however the Followers of the Law of Moses. If we
may believe some of those ancient Writers, who have given an account of their
Opinions, they were not only ignorant of the Doctrine of the Resurrection, but
rejected likewise that of the Immortality of the Soul. This is positively
asserted by De Sectis, Act. 2.
Leontius, and long before him by Com. in Mat. p. 486.
Origin. But it does not seem to be true: For in the Chronicon Samaritanum they
expressly own the Immortality of the Soul, and Rewards and Punishments in the
next Life; and it is plainly intimated by Catech. 18. (...), p. 215.
St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, that they did not deny the Immortality of the
Soul, but only doubted of it. But though they did not deny the Immortality of the
Soul, yet certain it is, that they denied the Resurrection of the Body. In this
all Authors agree with Origin and Leontius above cited, as St. Cyril Har. 4.
, Epiphanius, the Author of the L. 1. c. 54.
Recognitions ascribed to St. Clement, and the Tract. Sanhedrin, c. 11. 3.
Talmudists.

Secondly, though the Doctrine of the Resurrection was not always received by the
Jews as a necessary Article of Faith, or Term of Communion, as appears from
some of the foregoing Instances, yet it is certain that about the time of our
Savior, as well before as after, it was the received and common Doctrine of
that Nation. This evidently appears from the following Examples.

1. In the Answers which the Seven Martyrs give their Tormenters, which we read
recorded in the Second Book of Maccabees, there is a clear and open Profession
of this Doctrine: And it plainly appears from the Answer of the Third of those
Martyrs, that the Resurrection which they expected was of the same Humane Body.
Being called to his Torments, and holding out his hands, C. 7. v. 11.
These I had (says he) from Heaven, and for his Laws I despise 'em, and from
him I hope to receive 'em again. This happened about 165 Years before Christ.
It Is true, I am not fully persuaded that these Words were really spoken by that
Martyr. Since there were not any Jews then present who might think it worth
their while to commit the Words of those several Martyrs to Memory, it may be
reasonably supposed that the Speeches ascribed to 'em were made by the Author
of the History, as is usual with other Historians. Thus Josephus in his History
of those Martyrs makes 'em speak quite different Speeches; so likewise the
Arabic History which is extant in the Polyglot Bible, and (if I well remember)
the Hebrew Ben Gorion; all differing both from the Book of Maccabees, and from
one another. Yet this at least is to be concluded from these Words, that when
the Second of Maccabees was written, this Doctrine was generally received, and
'twas also then taken for granted, that at that time when those Martyrs
suffered, it was the general and received Doctrine. How ancient that Book is,
we do not certainly know, but we know from Clemens Alexandrinus, who cites it,
that it was extant within 150 Years after our Savior's Pas^ion; and from the
First and Second Chapters it may easily be gathered, that it was written long
before his Nativity, before the Jews were conquered by the Romans.

2. We read in the same C. 14. v. 46.
Book, that Razis the Jew, when he plucked out his own Bowels, and cast 'em
with his Hands upon the Throng, called upon the Lord of Life and Spirit to
restore him those again.

3. St. (...) Jo. 11. 24.
I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last day. Thus
Martha concerning her Brother Lazarus, when our Savior had told her that, though
he then lay dead and buried, yet he should rise again. She knows it, she says,
and does not at all doubt of it.

4. That it was the common and received Opinion of the Jews at that time, that
the Body in the Resurrection would be truly a Humane Body, is farther evident
from that Question of the Sadduces concerning the Woman that had been married
to Seven Brethren Mat. 22. ^8. Mark 12. 23. Luke 20. 32.
, Whose Wife she should be in the Resurrection?

5. It Is evident likewise from that Saying of one of the Jews at the Feast
where Christ was present in the House of one of the chief Pharisees. When
Christ had told the Pharisee that if he invited the Poor, etc. he should be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just; one of those that sat at Meat
with him made him this Answer, Luke 14. 14.
Blessed is he that shall eat B^ead in the Kingdom of God. Their Opinion was,
that they should Eat and Drink in the next Life as well as in this.

6. Josephus, the learned Jew, who was born in the Thirty Seventh Year after
Christ, professes himself a Follower of the Pharisees; and in another place he
tells us (the place I shall produce hereafter) that the Pharisees owned a
Transmigration of the Soul out of one Body into another: It should therefore
seem that he himself also held it. But it is not necessary that because he
chose rather to adhere to the Sect of the Pharisees, than to that of the Essens
or Sadduces, he should therefore be in all things a Pharisee.

In his Third C. 25. (Graec.) (...).
Book of the War, he seems to intimate that the Souls of the Wicked shall not
after Death be re-conjoin'd to a Body, but he plainly asserts that those of the
Good shall. And from this consideration he endeavors to dissuade his
Companions from laying violent Hands upon themselves. Such Souls (says he) as
are pure and obedient, obtain the most Holy place of Heaven, whence after the
great Revolution of the World, (or, after the circumvolution of many Ages,)
they shall return, and again inhabit Chaste Bodies. But they who lay violent
Hands upon themselves, their Souls are cast into Hell, and God punishes their
Sin in their Posterity. Whether he held the Resurrection, or only the
Transmigration of the Soul, we cannot from this place certainly conclude. But
from another place of his Works, (if he were the true Author of the Book called
Maccabaica) it appears very evidently that he owned the Resurrection. For he
cites there that place of the Prophet Ezechiel Ad finem. (...), etc.
where he speaks, of the raising up of the dry Bones. He tells us that the
Maccabees were encouraged by their Mother with the hopes and assurance of a
future Life. She proposed (says he) to her Sons the Saying of Solomon, That God
is the Wood of Life to them that do his Will: And that of Ezechiel: Can these
dry Bones live? Neither did she omit that Saying of Moses in his Song: I will
kill, and I will make alive. And from hence it likewise appears, that Josephus
believed, that at that time when those Martyrs suffered, the Doctrine of the
Resurrecti^n of the same Humane Body was the common and established Doctrine.
And that this was the common Opinion in his time, may be further gathered from
what he says concerning the Opinion of the Sect of the Essens, That they had a
most certain Opinion amongst 'em, that their Bodies indeed were corruptible,
and that their Matter should not be perpetual. This had been a very idle
Observation, if some others had not asserted the Perpetuity of the Body as well
as of the Soul. He therefore takes notice of that Opinion of theirs, because it
was contrary to the received and general Opinion.

7. In the Targum, or Chaldee Paraphrase of Jonathan, who is placed by some in
the same Age with the Apostles, there is mention made of the Second Death in
Hell, and that too of the Body. For thus he paraphrases the Sixth Verse of the
Sixty Fifth Chapter of Isaiah; Their Vengeance shall be in Hell, where the Fire
continually burns. Behold it is written before me; I will not give 'em an end
in this Life, but will be revenged on 'em for their Sins, and deliver their
Bodies to the Second Death. And here I shall observe by the bye, That though
Josephus seems to intimate that the Wicked are not to rise; and many of the
Rabbis affirm the same thing: Yet from hence it is manifest, that among the
Ancient Jews, there were others of the contrary Persuasion. And that in the
time of the Apostles this was the general and received Opinion of the Jews, is
apparent from those Words of St. Paul in his Apology to Felix Acts 24. 15.
: But this I confess unto thee, that I have Hope toward God, which they
themselves (the Jews) also allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the
Dead, both of the Just and Unjust.

8. The Chaldee Paraphrase of the Canticles has these Words, C. 8. V. 5. The
Prophet Solomon said, When the Dead shall revive, it shall come to pass that
the Mount of Olives shall be cleft, and all the Dead of Israel shall come out
from thence: And the Just too that died in Captivity shall come through the way
of the Caverns under the Earth, and shall come forth out of the Mount of
Olives. It asserts that famous Opinion, that the Jews that die out of Judaea,
when they rise from the Dead, are to pass through the Caverns of the Earth so
far as Judaea, and are there to rise. This shows that they believed the
Resurrection of the same Humane Body. This Devolution of the Dead, or Rolling
of the Caverns (as they are wont to call it) is asserted by many of the Ancient
Rabbis, and particularly in both their Vide Menasseh Ben-Israel de Resur. l.
2. c. 2. Vorstii Animad. in Pirke R. Elieser, p. 216. Pocockii Not as in Portam
Mosis, p. 119.
Talmuds. And though some of the Moderns, as Menasseh Ben-Israel, and several
others, reject it, and are willing that what the Ancients say concerning it,
should be taken not literally, but in an Allegorical sense, yet 'twas certainly
the Opinion of many amongst 'em. And even at this Day there are many that
acknowledge it. And that (as they tell us) was the reason why Jacob and Joseph
who died in Egypt, were carried into Canaan to be buried there, that they might
not be obnoxious to the trouble of the Caverns. Hence it is that the Bones of
so many Jews, who die in foreign Countries, are carried by their Friends into
Judaea. We are told by a John Sanderson Voyage to the Holy Land.
Traveller of our own, that in what part soever they die, and are buried, their
Bodies must all rise to Judgment in the Holy Land, out of the Valley of
Jehosaphat, and that therefore the greater and richer sort of 'em, have their
Bones conveyed to some part thereof by their Kindred or Friends. By which means
(says he) they are freed of a labor to scrape thither through the Ground,
which with their Nails they hold they must, who are not there buried, or
conveyed thither by others. Sandys Travels, p. 148.
Another assures us, that whole Barks full of Jews Bones are wont to arrive at
Joppa to be interred at Jerusalem. The reason he gives is this, Because they
imagine that the Soul is delighted by it, and at the general Judgment, they
shall have a quicker dispatch. The same reason is given by Morison's Trav. p.
223.
others. And by Travels, p. 184 part 1.
Thevenot we are told, that the Jews who now live in Jerusalem, give a Chequin
a Day for permission to bury their Dead in the Valley of Jehosaphat, that they
may be the sooner dispatched at the Day of Judgment, because, as they believe,
it will be held in that place. They think that they who are there buried will
be sooner dispatched, because they are the first that will make their
Appearance, it requiring some time for those who are buried elsewhere, to come
thither.

9. The Tract. Sanhedrin. c. 11.. 1.
Talmudical Doctors declare, that to deny the Resurrection is so great a Sin,
that they who deny it shall never rise. They tell us, Ibid.. 4.
that Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, believed the Resurrection, and that she
proposed R. Meir this Question, Whether they that rise, shall rise Naked, or
with Cloths on? R. Meir affirms, that they shall rise with their Cloths on, the
same in which they were buried. And the same is asserted by another very
ancient Doctor, In Pirke c. 33.
R. Elieser. The L. c.
Talmudists add, that one of the Roman Emperors objecting to R. Gamaliel the
difficulty of the Resurrection of a Body reduced to Dust, a Daughter of the
Rabbi undertook to give him an Answer, to this purpose: There are with us (says
she) two Potters; one makes Vessels of Water, the other of Clay; Which of them
is the best? He that makes 'em of Water, says the, Emperor: Then she: Did God
make Man out of Water, and shall he not much more be able to make him of Clay?
L. c.
That a certain Heretic (or Sadduce) objecting the same difficulty to R.
Ammin, he returned him an Answer by this Parable: A certain King (says he)
commanded his Servants to build him a Palace in a Place, where there was
neither Water nor Earth, for Mortar. It was done. That falling down, he
commanded it to be built in a Place where there was good store of both. They
tell him, that they cannot do it. He in Anger replies: What, when there was
neither Water nor Earth for Mortar, you could build one; and now you have both,
can you not do it? If thou believe not (says R. Gamaliel) get thee into the
Field, and see there a Mouse, which to day is partly Flesh and partly Earth,
but to Morrow by a quick and sudden Generation is become all Flesh. Perhaps
thou may say, that that is done in some space of Time. Go therefore out upon
the Hill, thou shall there see at present, but only one Snail: To Morrow when
it has rained, thou shall see the whole Hill covered with Snails. L. c.
(b) L. c.
That one saying to Gebiha Ben-Pesisa, Woe to you, ye Villains, that say, that
the Dead shall live. What, do the Living die, and shall the Dead live? He
answered; Woe to you, ye wicked Wretches, that deny that the Dead shall live.
Since they, who once were not did afterward exist, shall not they much more
exist, who once had a being before? Thus the ancient Doctors in the Gemara.

10. Of the 13 Articles or Foundations of Faith collected by Ap. Pocockii
Portam Mosis, p. 177.
Maimonides, and received by the whole Nation of the Jews long before his time,
the last is this: That there will be a Resurrection of the Dead. And Maimonides
tells us that whoever denied any one of those Articles, he is rejected out of
the Number of the Israelites, and is branded with the Name of Heretic, and
Epicurean, and ought to be destroyed. In the Office of Mourners, which is
extant in the Jews Common Prayer Book Entitled, The Mahzor of the holy Roman
Synagogue, they are directed, when they look upon the Graves of any of their
Nation, to offer up this Prayer: Blessed be the Lord our God, the King of the
World, who formed you with judgment, nourished you, preserved you alive,
delivered you up unto Death: who knows the Number of you all, who will raise
you up again, who will restore you again with Judgment. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who give Life to the Dead. Isai. 26. 19.
May thy Dead live, with my dead Body may they rise again. Awake and rejoice ye
that lie in the Dust, because the De Rore quo futurum est juxta Rabbinos ut
Deus vitae restituat mortuos. Vide Pocock. in Portam Mosis, p. 120.
Dew of the Light is your Dew, and the Earth shall cast out the Dead. The same
Prayer, or Benediction, is pronounced likewise by the Hazan, or Minister of the
Synagogue, at the Grave of one to be buried. In the Prayer which is sung at the
Grave by the Hazan, together with the rest of the Congregation, (which they
call the justification of Judgment) they have these Words: God is perfect in
all his Works. Who will say unto him, What do thou? He who governs in Things
beneath, and in Things above, who delivers up to Death, who gives Life, who
brings down to the Grave, and brings back again. To which they add those out of
Moses's Song in C. 32. v. 39.
Deuteronomy. See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me. I
kill, and I make alive. I wound and I heal. Neither is there any that can
deliver out of my Hand. After the dead Body is put into the Grave, they bow
themselves backward three times, and throw Grass over their Heads, signifying
their hope of the Resurrection with these Words, out of Isaiah, And your Bones
shall bud as the Grass. After that, in the Porch of the Synagogue; God shall
destroy Death for ever, and wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and will take
away their Reproach from all the Earth, for the Lord has spoken it.

If I had a mind to transcribe the Observations of Vide not. Pocockii in Portam
Mosis, p. 86. ad 234. and Menasseh Ben-Israel per totum opus de Resurrectione.
others, I could add to these, the Testimonies of 500 other Rabbinical Writers,
but I content my-self to have presented you with my own Observation. And from
what has been laid before you it abundantly appears, First, That the Doctrine
of the Resurrection has been look^ upon by the Jews as a necessary Article of
their Creed, from before the Date of their Talmuds. Secondly, That though it was
not received by 'em as an indispensible Article of Faith in the time of our
Savior, and for some time before and after, yet even in those times it was the
common and received Doctrine. Thirdly, That by the Resurrection they always
understood, not barely the re-conjunction of the Soul with a Body after Death,
but the resuscitation of the same Humane Body. I shall only add that the
Resurrection is acknowledged not only by the Rabbinists or the Followers of the
Talmud, which are much the greater Number, but also by those that are called
Karraites, who follow only the Scripture, disallowing Traditions, and are
therefore reckoned by the Talmudists as Heretics. These are said to be
descended from the ancient Sadduces. If so, it appears, that the Sadduces
themselves were at last convinced of their Error, and made Proselytes to the
Doctrine of the Resurrection.

'Twas about the end of the first Century after our Savior's Nativity, that
the Doctrine of the Resurrection began to be reckoned among the Jews, as a
necessary Article of Faith. I gather it thus. That it was not an Article of
Faith till after the time of Josephus, who lived till near the end of that
Century appears from hence, that neither the Essens, nor the Sadduces, were in
his time accounted Heretics. And that it was received as a part of their Creed
before the Year 140, appears from what we read in Justin Martyr's Dialogue with
Trypho, p. 306, 307. It appears from thence that the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, and that too of the same Humane Body, was at that time
acknowledged by all such Jews as were accounted Orthodox, and that the
Sadduces, who denied it, were at that time rejected as Heretioks.

I should here (Philalethes) have dismissed this Point, but it comes now into
my Mind, that there are two things relating to the Opinion of the Jews, of
which you desire particularly to be satisfied, which ought to be considered in
this Place. Your Queries are concerning the Transmigration of Souls out of one
Body into another by a (...), Whether that be not held by many of the Jews? and
if so, Whether they, that hold it, do not deny the Resurrection of the Body?
How that Opinion can be consistent with this?

To the First of these Queries I must answer in the Affirmative. It is very
true, that the Transmigration of Souls out of one Body into another, is by many
of the Jews, both ancient and modern, maintained. They call it The Revolution
of Souls, or The secret of the Revolution. Leo Modena speaks of it as of a
common Opinion, but he adds withal, that there are many that do not believe it.
And the Author Dr. Addison.
of The Present State of the Jews in Barbary, takes notice of it as received by
the Jews of those Parts. Another Traveller observes that it is likewise received
among the Jews of Asia. Of the learned Jews that assert it Menasseh Ben-Israel
is one, and the famous Abarbinel another. It Is likewise asserted by the ancient
Cabbalists in the Zoar, and by the Vide Hornbeckium de convertendis Judais. p.
541. ad 550. Menasseh Ben-Isr. de Resur. l. c.
Talmudists themselves. The Cabbalists tell us, that the Soul of Adam, David,
and the Messiah, is one and the same. We are told by others, that Vide Seld. de
Succes. Pont. p. 111, 112.
Phineas, the Grandson of Aaron, and Elias the Prophet were the same Man: By
which they must mean, either that the Soul of Phineas passed into the Body of
Elias, or that Phineas did not die, but that having lain hid for many Ages, or
having been translated, he afterward appeared again, and was called Elias. It
may seem more probable, that they believed the first, and it is generally taken
for granted by learned Men that they did so: Yet I cannot be confident of it:
for I find that some of the Rabbis Vid seld. l. c. p. 109.
had this Tradition and Opinion amongst 'em, that Phineas lived many Ages.

The Reason they give for the Transmigration of Souls, is the same with that
which is generally assigned by the Heathens, viz. That the Soul may be purged
and amended. But they do not hold, as the Heathens did, that the Soul
Transmigrates into many Bodies. They restrain it to Three. Thus the Soul of
Adam (they will tell ye) was purged by passing into the Body of K. David, and
by passing again into the Body of the Messiah, will be fully and perfectly
purified. A modern John Sanderson Trav. to Palestine.
Traveller tells us that this was the Opinion of certain Jews of Asia, with
whom he conversed; that the Soul, if it has not at first forgiveness, is twice
more sent into a Body to amend and become better, and then is rejected or
received by God according to its Deserts. That the Soul is to pass into Three
several Bodies, they prove from those Words of Job: C. 33. v. 29.
Lo, all these things works God thrice (which we render, oftentimes) with
Man. And of the Transmigration they understand the Chaldee Paraphrase of
Isaiah, Chap. 22. v. 14. where mention is made of the The Paraphrast means
Damnation, as appears, c. 65. v. 6.
second Death.

Neither is it only the Transmigration of the Soul into other Human Bodies that
is owned and received among the Jews. There are some amongst 'em, that, like
thorough-pac'd Pythagoreans, make it pass into the Bodies of Brutes. Not. in
(...) Vitam Pythagorae, p. 81.
Holstenius assures us that he himself had conversed with some in Italy, that
asserted it very zealously, and proved it from the Story of K. Nebuchadnezar,
whose Soul they affirmed to have really past into the Body of a Beast. They
proved it likewise from those Words of the Psalmist Ps. 21. v. 21.
Deliver my Soul from the Sword, my Darling from the Power of the Dog. Where
the Prophet (say they) begs of God, that his Soul being loosed from its Body,
might not pass into a Dog, or any other Brute.

It appears from the Testimony of Josephus, that the Opinion of the
Transmigration of the Soul into another Humane Body by a (...), was received
among the Jews even in his time, and that too by many of the Pharisees
themselves. In his Second Book concerning the Jewish War, where he gives us a
particular account of the Dogma's of the several Sects among the Jews, he
affirms of the Pharisees (in general) that they held C. 7. p. 783. (...).
That all Souls are immortal, That those only of good Men pass into another
Body, but those of bad Men are eternally punished. And agreeably to this, in
the Eighteenth Book of his Antiquities, where he likewise gives an account of
the Opinions of the several Sects, C. 2. p. 617. (...).
The Pharisees (says he) believe that the Souls of Men, both Good and Bad, are
immortal, That they have judgment passed upon 'em under the ground, according
to their behavior in this Life, and that those of bad Men are retained in
perpetual imprisonment; but to those of the good there is given the power of
returning to Life. From the words of Philo Judaeus, which I but now produced,
it appears that he likewise acknowledged it.

It Is believed by some learned Men, that this Opinion of the Transanimation was
commonly received, even in the time of our Savior, among the Jews. But I am
rather of Opinion, That this part of the Platonical Philosophy began to be
received just after our Savior's time, and that Philo, and those Pharisees
with whom Josephus had conversed, were the first that taught it. That it was
not known to the Jews in the time of our Savior, I gather from the Answer
which Nicodemus, the Pharisee, made him, when he had told him that no Man can
see the Kingdom of God, except he be born again. A Man be born again! It seemed
to the Pharisee a very strange Saying. John 3. 4.
How (says he) can a Man be born again? Can he enter the Second time into his
Mother's Womb, and be born? Had the (...), whereof we discourse, been at that
time known and acknowledged among the Jews, how could he who was a Master in
Israel express so much wonder at the hearing of a (...) mentioned? To this we
may add, that there is not any Argument produced to show, that this Pythagorean
(...) was received among the Jews in the time of our Savior, but what is
ineffectual, and grounded on a Mistake.

In the Gospel of C. 16. v. 14.
St. Matthew, it is said, that our Lord asking his Disciples, Whom do Men say,
that I the Son of Man am? They told him, that some said he was John the
Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. In the Gospel
of C. 8. v. 27.
St. Mark it is plainly intimated, that the most common Opinion concerning him
was, That he was John the Baptist. He asked his Disciples, Whom do Men say that
I am? And they answered, John the Baptist. But some say Elias, and others, one
of the Prophets. This Opinion of the People concerning our Savior, some
learned Commentators, as Munster, Maldonatus, and Drusi^s, take to be grounded
on the Pythagorean (...), as if they imagined, that the Soul of John the
Baptist, or of Elias, or some other of the Prophets, had entered into his Body
in his Conception. But how could they imagine it of the Soul of John the
Baptist, whom they knew to be just then put to Death? It Is very certain, that
they who took him to be John the Baptist, believed that John, who was beheaded
a little before, had risen again out of his Grave. And that this was their
Opinion, appears moreover from what C. 14. v. 2.
St. Matthew. says of King Herod, that hearing of the fame of Jesus, he said unto
his Servants, This is John the Baptist; He is risen from the Dead, and
therefore mighty Works do show forth themselves in him. St. Luke expressly
asserts, that the People who took him to be John the Baptist, believed that the
Baptist had risen from the Dead C. 9. v. 7, 8.
: Now Herod the Tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he was
perplexed, because it was said of some, that John was risen from the Dead: And
of some that Elias had appeared: And of others that one of the old Prophets was
risen again. As for those that thought him to be Elias, their Fancy was
grounded on the expectation the Jews had of the coming of that Prophet again
upon Earth, according to that of the Prophet Malachi C. 4. v. 5.
: Behold I will send you Elias the Prophet. They believed he would come again,
not by a (...), but in the same Body in which he was translated. When St. Luke
says, that they thought Elias had appeared, he plainly intimates, that they
thought he had descended in his Body, not been born again.

It is said in C. 1. v. 21.
St. John, that the Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to John the
Baptist, to know who he was, whether Christ, or Elias, or that Prophet? Grotius
in his Comment on this place, believes, that when they asked him, whether he was
Elias? they imagined he might be Elias sent down from Heaven, but they (says
he) that asked him that Question, showed plainly that they did not ^ow, of what
Father and Mother he was born, or at least doubted of it. But in another place
of his St. Mat. 14. 2.
Comments his Opinion is otherwise. He proves from this place that the Jews
before Christ, acknowledged a (...); and from them he thinks that Pythagoras
borrowed his Opinion. That they could not think John to be Elias any otherwise
than by a (...), or (...), he proves from this Consideration, that, he being of
the Sacerdotal Order, they could not but know him very well. But to this I
answer, that though he was of the Sacerdotal Order, yet he might very well be
unknown to the Jews that then dwelt at Jerusalem. How could that be? C. 1. 80.
St. Luke will answer for me: From his Youth he was in the Deserts, 'till the
day of his showing unto Israel.

Another place from whence Drusius, Beza, Piscator, etc. in Comment.
some infer, that the Transmigration of Souls was received among the Jews in
those times, is St. John ix. 2. where we read that Jesus passing by, and seeing
a Man who was blind from his birth, his Disciples asked him saying; Master, who
did sin, this Man or his Parents, that he was born blind? But it is not
necessary, that, because the Disciples believed that he sinned before he was
born, they should therefore believe, that his Soul had been before that united
to a Body. It is much more probable, that they thought his Soul might have
sinned in its solitary state of Pre-existence, and was therefore sent down into
such a Body. That this was their fancy, is agreed by most Commentators, St.
Cyril of Alexandria, and Grotius himself; and it cannot be denied but that the
Doctrine of the Pre-existence of the Soul was in those times received among the
Jews. Sure I am, it is at this time their common and established Doctrine.

I mentioned but now certain Natural Philosophers among the Jews, who were
called Sapientes Mecar, and that there seem to have been some so called in the
time of the Apostles. It is probable there were such even before those times.
It may seem from what I said of 'em, that some of 'em believed the Pythagorean
(...). But granting that some of 'em did so, yet it does not appear, that those
that did so were some of the most ancient, such as lived in our Savior's time,
or before. They might live long after those times, and I am of opinion that
they did.

To your Second Query, which is concerning the consistency of the two Opinions,
this of the (...), and that of the Resurrection, How one can be consistent with
the other? My Answer is this: Those Jews that hold the (...), do all, as well
as the rest, acknowledge the Resurrection, but with this difference: They do
not acknowledge the Resurrection of all Humane Bodies (for that cannot be) but
they tell ye, that either the first or the last of those Bodies, to which the
same Soul has been united, shall rise. Abarbinel is of Opinion that the
Resurrection is to be of the first; but so is not Menasseh Ben-Israel; he
alleges, that this does not agree with the Doctrine of the ancient Zoar. The
Cabbalists there declare for the last. And their Words are these: R. Hisquiha
says, If you tell me that all Bodies shall awake and rise again, pray tell me
what will be become of those Bodies which were informed by one and the same
Soul? R. Joseph answered: As for those Bodies which have deserved nothing, nor
done any good, they shall be so dealt with as if they had never had a Being,
and because they were as a dry Tree in this World, they shall also be as such
in that which is to come. But the last Body that was informed by the Soul,
shall rise again, because it was planted, and brought forth Fruit, and took
Root as it ought.

I am now in the next place to show, that, though the Doctrine of the
Resurrection was not received by the Jews as a necessary Article of Faith 'till
after our Savior's time, yet it ought not to be looked upon as the less certain
on that account. And this I shall make out by showing, that 'till after our
Savior's time there was nothing among them thought a necessary Article of
Faith, or Term of Communion, but only the believing and owning the Law of
Moses, and the worshipping in the Temple of Jerusalem; that the Immortality of
the Soul itself was not received by 'em as a necessary Article of Faith, or
Term of Communion.

The truth of this will evidently appear, if we can prove, that the Sadduces,
who denied not only the Resurrection of the Body, but also the Immortality of
the Soul, were admitted by the Jews of those Times as Members of their
Communion and true Israelites. Now that this was so, is apparent from these
following Considerations.

First, In the Acts of the Apostles it is said, that, when Peter and John were
preaching to the People in the Temple, IV. 1.
The Priests and the Captain of the Temple, and the Sadduces came upon'em,
being grieved that they taught the People, and preached through Jesus the
Resurrection of the Dead. And in the Chapter following, that there being a
continual flocking of the People to the Apostles, the High Priest rose up and
all they that were with him (which is the Sect of the Sadduces) and were filled
with Indignation. By which two places it appears, that the Sadduces in those
Days were the Companions and Associates of the Captain of the Temple and the
Priests; and not only so, but were also the most intimate Associates of the
High Priest himself. Which surely could never have been, had they been looked
upon as Heretics and out of their Communion.

Secondly, It appears from the 23 Chap. of the same Book, that a part of their
Sanhedrin it self, their great and Sacred Council, consisted of Sadduces, that
one part was Pharisees and the other Saddnces. Nay, from thence we may gather
that the Doctrine of a future Life might as well have been condemned by the
Sanhedrin as the contrary Doctrine: Else how could St. Paul cry out to the
Pharisees, that concerning the Hope and Resurrection of the Dead he was there
called in Question. He means not strictly the Resurrection of the Body, but the
Immortality of the Soul and the Life to come.

Thirdly, The Sadduces were not only the intimate Associates of the inferior
Priests and the Highpriests themselves, and Members likewise of the Sanhedrin,
but they were also advanced to the dignity of Highpriests, and owned as such
by all the Jews in general. Josephus is my Witness that Antiq. XX. 8. (...).
Ananus the younger, who was High Priest in the time of the Emperor Nero, was
by Sect a Sadduce, and that long before him, (above 100 Years before Christ)
(a) Hyrcanus, the first of that Name, from a Pharisee became (b) Antiq. XIII.
18.
a Sadduce.

Fourthly, Josephus tells us, that though the Sadduces were but few in Number,
yet generally the Ant. XVIII. 2. (...).
better sort of People, or Persons of considerable Quality, were of that Sect.

A learned Jew, with whom I once discoursed concerning this Point, in answer to
these Arguments, was pleased to tell me, that the Reason why in those times the
Sadduces were admitted into the Sanhedrin, and into the High Priesthood, was
because of the overruling and arbitrary power of the Heathen Governors, and
that Sect being in an especial manner encouraged by the supreme Governors, it
was on that account embraced by such as were of the greatest Quality. In Answer
to which, I might observe, that, in the time of Hyrcanus, Judaea was not in
subjection to any Heathen Governor; neither does it appear that the Sadduces
were peculiarly favored and promoted by the Roman Prefects. If they were, how
came it to pass that in so long a time, and among so many Highpriests, there
was only one Sadduce advanced to that Dignity. But I pass by these
Considerations, and for a full reply to this Evasion, shall referr you to the
following Arguments.

Fifthly, Though' the Sadduces were members even of the holy Sanhedrin, and one
of the High-Priefts had openly declared for that Sect, and another, that openly
professed it, had been advanced to that Honor, yet we do not any where read
that any of the learned Jews thought it unlawful or remonstrated against it.
Josephus indeed tells us, that Ant. XVIII. 2. (...).
the Sadduces had not any Power to speak of in the Government, but that when
they were advanced to any place of Command, though unwillingly and by
compulsion, they professed themselves Pharisees, because the Common People
would not otherwise endure 'em. This place may seem to make directly against
me: but in reality it does not. On the contrary it makes directly for me: For
First, It appears from hence, that they were not peculiarly favored and upheld
by their Heathen Governors. Secondly, It appears that it was not the learned
part of the Nation, but only the Common People, ((...)) that would not endure
to be under 'em. Though ^t was not a matter of Conscience, yet the People who
had firmly embraced the Doctrine of the Resurrection and a future Life, so much
hated the Opposers of it, as not to endure to be under their Government. That
it was not through a Principle of Conscience (as if it had been unlawful and a
Sin to be governed by 'em) that the People were so averse to 'em, but only
because the People were acted and governed by their Passions, may from hence
appear, that they could not endure to be under 'em in matters purely Civil,
such as did not relate to any of their Religious Ri^ts. Josephus speaks of
Government in general. To this we may add, that it plainly appears that even
the Common People themselves were sometimes contented to be under their
Government, and to obey 'em as Highpriests and Members of their Sanhedrin.
Josephus speaking of the High Priest Hyrcanus his turning Sadduce, observes,
that on that account the Ant. XIII. 18. (...).
Common People hated both him and his Sons. He does not say, that they thought
it unlawful to be subject to such a High Priest: But that they hated him. It
should seem by what he says of their hating his Sons, as well as himself, on
the account of his turning Sadduce, and abolishing the Institution of the
Pharisees, that his Sons themselves as well as their Father, adhered to that,
Sect: Yet at least two of 'em were after their Father successively Highpriests.

Sixthly, Josephus, though himself a Pharisee, is so far from thinking Hyrcanus
a Heretic and incapable of the High Priesthood, because he was a Sadduce, that
just after the account which he gives of his Conversion to that Sect, he has
these Words concerning him. Having appeased the Sedition, (which was raised for
the sake of the Pharisees) and living afterward happily and governing
excellently well, he died after he had been High Priest One and Thirty Years,
leaving behind him Five Sons, being judged by God worthy of the Three greatest
Honors, the Government of the Nation, the Dignity of the High Priesthood, and
the gift of Prophety. For he had Communication with the Deity, and had given
him the Power of foreknowing Things to come. In so much that he foretold that
his Two eldest Sons should not long enjoy the Principality after him. The same
Author speaking of the Three several Sects of the Jews, the Pharisees, Sadduces
and Essens, calls 'em the three several Sects of the Jewish Philosophy. (...).
Ant. XVIII. 2.
There were three Sorts of Philosophy that obtained long since among the Jews,
that of the Essens, that of the Sadduces, and a third of the Pharisees. Again
in another place (...). Bell. l. 2. c. 12.
, There was one Simon, a Galilean, that instituted a particular Sect, not at
all agreeing with the rest. For there were Three sorts of Philosophy professed
among the Jews, one by the Pharisees, another by the Sadduces, and a third by
the Essens. It Is plain that he looked upon these Three Sects to be no other
among the Jews than those several Sects of Philosophers were amongst the
Greeks; and that the Sadduces were no more accounted Heretics among the
Former, than the Epecureans or Stoics were among the Latter. I must here add
what I have already observed to you, that Josephus tells us, in his Life, (...).
that he had applied himself in his Youth to these Three several Sects, that
having fully informed himself of their several Placits and Institutions, he
might adhere to that which should please him best. So indifferent a thing was
it to the learned Jews, whether they were of this, or that, or the other. He
might have professed either of 'em, and been still a true Jew, but the Tenets
of the Pharisees best pleased him.

I have already told you what time it was that the Sadduces first began to be
condemned and rejected as Heretics by the rest of the Jews, that it was about
the end of the first Age after Christ, just after Josephus's Death: I shall now
only remark, that the day on which they were ejected out of the Sanhedrin,
which was the Seventh of the Month Sebat, or January, is remembered in the
Jewish Calendar as a Holy Day.

The Fourth and last thing I proposed to do, relating to the Opinions of the
Jews, was to show, that the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and that too of the
same Humane Body, was not only the common and received Doctrine of the Jews in
the time of our Savior, and as well before as ever since, but is likewise
alluded to by the Prophets themselves.

Eusebius in his Comment on the Fifth Verse of the First Psalm, where there is
mention made of the Resurrection and Judgment; (...).
Observe (says he) that David first clearly taught a Resurrection and Judgment,
and a promise of a future Life, Moses having delivered no such matter. Another
of the Ancients will not own that David himself speaks any where of the
Resurrection. It Is the Greek Scholiast on the Sixty. Fifth Psalm, which has
this Inscription (...),
, The Song of the Psalm of the Resurrection. On this Inscription, or Title, he
has these Words: (...).
The Resurrection of the Dead is not here meant (For David does not seem to
have taught it any where) but they that made this Title, by the Word
Resurrection seem to have meant the Return of the Jews out of the Babylonish
Captivity. The Author of the L. 1. c. 33.
Clementine Recogni tions makes Abraham the first that taught it. What my
Opinion is, that it was revealed and known to the Prophets before the Flood,
and by Noah transmitted down to his Posterity, I have already told you: I doubt
not but that it was known by that means to Abraham, and from him conveyed down
to the Jews, who were his Posterity. But as this Tradition was clearly worn
out, and utterly lost in some Nations, and in almost all others much altered
and corrupted, so even among the Jews, though it was always (so I think) the
common and received Doctrine, yet the certainty of it, and the necessity of
believing it, was doubted of by many.

That Abraham believed, that God was able to raise the Dead, and that his Son
Isaac should have been raised up again, if he had been sacrificed, the Author
to the C. 11. v. 19.
Hebrews assures us. By faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac: And
he that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it
was said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Accounting that God was able
to raise him up, even from the Dead.

I shall not trouble you with those several places which the Vide Menasseh
Ben-Israel de Resur. l. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. and Talmudistas in S^nhedrin, c. 11. 2.
and p. 314, 315. Ed. Cocceii.
Jewish Doctors are wont to produce out of the Books of Moses, to demonstrate
the Resurrection. They are generally very Idle and Impertinent Observations.
And so (to speak the truth) are many of those which are wont to be produced by
some of our own Vide Epiphaniu^, Vol. 1. p 25. and Vol. 2. p. ^8, 99, 100, 10^,
Eulogium ap. Phot.] p. ^86.
Writers. I shall lay before you only some few places out of the Old Testament,
which seem to me to contain very manifest Allusions to, and Proofs of, this
Doctrine.

1. See now, that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me; I kill, and I
make alive; I wound and I heal. Thus God, by the Mouth of Moses in his Song.
Deuteronomy. 32. 39.

2. The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the Grave, and
brings up. Hannah, the Mother of Samuel, in her Song, 1 Samuel 11. 6.

3. Thy dead shall live, together with my dead Body shall they arise: Awake and
sing, ye that dwell in Dust: For thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth
shall cast out the Dead, Isaish 26. 19.

4. The Fourth place is that of Ezech. C. 37.
where he speaks of the Valley full of dry Bones, that at the Word of the Lord,
the Bones came together, Bone to his Bone, the Sinews and the Flesh came up
upon 'em, and the Skin covered 'em above, and the Breath came into the Bodies,
and they lived, and stood up upon their Feet. It Is agreed among the Rabbis,
that in all these four places of Scripture, the Resurrection is foretold: And
the first, and this last are cited for it by Josephus himself. The Rabbis have
amongst 'em an Opinion, That the Bones, of which Ezechiel here speaks, were
really raised up, and restored to life, and they mention the Names of some, who
(they say) were descended from those that were then raised to Life.

Menasseh Ben-Israel tells us, that the Sadduces were wont to interpret these
places of Isaish and Ezechiel, of the temporal redemption of the People of
Israel. And so this Prophecy of Ezechiel is expounded by Origin, against whose
Opinion concerning an Ethereal Body, it would make directly, if understood of
the Resurrection. The same dry Bones are said to come together Bone to its
Bone, and to be covered with Flesh, etc. I am not unwillingly to grant, that
both those Prophecies are primarily intended of a temporal redemption of the
People of Israel: I freely own that they are. But at the same time, I dare
appeal to any unprejudiced Person, whether they do contain a clear and evident
Allusion to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and are secondarily intended of
it.

5. Another place is that of the Prophet Daniel: C. 12. v. 2.
And many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt: Which is
generally understood of the Resurrection, not only by our own Writers, but
likewise by all the Rabbis.

I must freely acknowledge, that the Word many makes this Text very difficult.
I know what the Expositors say, but I am not satisfied with any thing that I
have hitherto met with. Some tell us, that many is sometimes used in the
Scripture to signify all, as in the Fifty Third of Isaiah, where Christ is said
to bear the Sins of many, and afterward it is said that he bare the Sins of us
all: So, say they, in the Ninety Seventh Psalm, Verse 1. the many Isles (as it
is in the Original) signifies all the Isles. But this does not clear the
Difficulty. For there is a great deal of difference between many and many of.
All they that sleep in the Dust are many: but many of them that sleep in the
Dust, cannot be said to be all they that sleep in the Dust. So, the many Isles,
and, many of the Isles, are two quite different Expressions. Many of, does
plainly except some. I was once inclined to believe, and the Fancy was grounded
on this Text, That there may be some who shall not be raised up at all at the
last day: And who were they (think you) who I fansied were not to rise? Such
Heathens as live Morally well, and according to the Light that is given 'em. I
was loath to rank 'em among the miserable, and I could not see how they could
be saved. I was willing therefore to believe that there might be some middle
way contrived by Providence, and that was Annihilation. I was willing to
believe, that as all wicked Men, of whatsoever Sect or Denomination, are to
rise to Damnation, and all good Men that are within the Covenant of Grace, are
to rise to Salvation; so those good Men, who are not within the Covenant, shall
not rise at all, but be utterly annihilated. But this was a Fancy of but one
Moment only. It was presently dashed and confuted by our Savior's express
Assertion, that all they that are in the Grave shall rise, some to Salvation,
and others to Damnation. On these Accounts I should willingly close with those
Expositors who understand this Text, not primarily of the Resurrection, but of
the deliverance of the Jews from those Burdens and Pressures they were under in
the Reign of King Antiochus; and so by the Word everlasting, understand only
long, as (you know) it is often used. But on this side too there occurs a very
great difficulty. For if it were spoken of the Deliverance of the Jews from
their Sufferings and Persecu^ions, how could it be said, that some shall awake
to shame and contempt. I must own my Ignorance, how confident soever some
others may be; and shall only make this Remark, That if it were meant of the
temporal Restitution of the Jews, yet in the Expression there seems to be a
plain Allusion to the Doctrine of the Resurrection. It Is at least a Metaphor
taken from that Doctrine, which was then entertained among the Jews. And
Grotius himself acknowledges, that though not Primarily, yet Secondarily it is
a Prophecy concerning it.

I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter Day upon
the Earth. And though after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh
shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself and my Eyes shall behold and not
another, though my Reins be consumed within me. Job XIX. 25, etc. This place I
have already mentioned, to show that the Resurrection was known to the ancient
Arabians, supposing that it is rightly translated (which I am not very
confident of) and that they were really the Words of Job. I now produce it, (on
the same supposition) as the Testimony of an inspired Writer. It is generally
understood by our Writers of the Resurrection, so it is by our Church in the
Office of Burial; so it was by (...) Ep. I. ad Cor. p. 36. ed. Jun.
St. Clement Bishop of Rome, and by Com. in Mat. p. ^87.
Origin himself: But so it is not by any of the Jewish Doctors, though to prove
the Resurrection they are wont to catch at very small things. They all
understand it of the happiness of the next Life without any respect to the
Resurrection of the Body. If we follow the Vulgar Latin, we cannot understand
it any otherwise than of the Resurrection. For I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that at the last Day I am to rise from the Earth. And I shall be again
covered with my Skin; and in my Flesh I shall see my God. Whom I my-self shall
see, and my Eyes, and not another, shall behold him. This Hope is fixed in my
Bosom. The Greek Translation is thus: For I know that he is everlasting, who
shall deliver me on Earth, and raise up my Skin that suffered these things. For
all these things have been done upon me by the Lord. Of all which I am
conscious; my Eye has seen 'em, and not another: and they have been all done
unto me in my Bosom. For, raise up my Skin, the Alexandrian Copy has, And he
shall raise up my Body. But Origen's Copies agreed with that which is
published. St. Clement of Rome reads it thus: Thou shall raise up my flesh,
which has suffered all these things. The Chaldee Paraphrase has it thus: And I
know that my Redeemer lives, and hereafter his Redemption will arise upon the
Dust. And after my Skin shall be puffed up, this shall be. And in my Flesh I
shall see God again. Whom I am to see for my-self, and my Eyes shall see him
and not another. My Reins are consumed within me. The Syriack thus: I know
indeed that my Savior lives, and that in the End he will appear upon Earth.
And these things straightened (or encompassed) my Skin and my Flesh. If my Eyes
shall see God, they will see light. My Reins are quite perished within me. This
has nothing at all relating to the Resurrection. And the learned Grotius, and
others, are very positive, that this place cannot be understood of the
Resurrection without wresting the Hebrew very much. The Christiani non pauci
hoc textu usi sunt ad probandam Resurrectionis fidem, sed ut id facerent,
coacti sunt in versionibus suis multum ab Hebraeo discedere, ut notatum Mercero
aliisque. Hebraea sic sonant: Scio ego Redemptorem meum vivere, and illum
postremo staturum in Campo, (i. e. victorem suturum.) E^iamsi non pellem tantum
meam sed and hoc (nempe arvinam quae sub pelle est) consumerent, (morbi sc.) in
carne tamen mea Deum videbo (1. propitium experiar:) Ego, inquam, hisce meis
oculis; ego, non autem alius pro me. Defecer^nt renes mei in sinu meo, (1.
intima mea vorantur ex indignatione ob maledicta vestra.)
Translation, which he gives us of it, is different from all others: And he
expounds it of Job's sudden restitution to his former Health and temporal
Prosperity. You may read this Exposition opposed in our learned Bishop
Pearson's Comment on the Creed. He calls it a very new one: But in that he is
mistaken: For it is no more than what Catena in Job, p. 340. 1.
St. Chrysostom long ago thought on, and did not dislike. Having laid these
several Translations and Expositions before you, I shall leave this Text to
your Judgment, without pretending to decide the Controversy. If you will not
understand it of the Resurrection, yet what I undertook to make out, seems from
other places sufficiently clear.

I shall close this part of my Discourse, which is concerning the Traditions of
the Jews, and the Testimonies of the Old Testament, with an observation
concerning that Argument, which our Savior makes use of out of the Books of
Moses, to prove the Resurrection against the Sadduces. As touching the
Resurrection (says he) of the Dead, have you not heard that which was spoken
unto you by God, saying; I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob? God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. The most that this
Argument proves, is the Immortality of the Soul, that the Souls of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob did not die with their Bodies, as the Sadduces believed: From
whence I observe, that it was not so much the Resurrection of the Body, as the
Immortality of the Soul, that the Sadduces stuck at, and that if it could be
once proved out of the Books of Moses that the Soul was Immortal and did not
die with the Body, they were ready and willing to grant that there would be a
Resurrection of the Body. Our Savior thought it would be enough to convince
'em of the Resurrection of the Body, if they could but be convinced of the
Immortality of the Soul.

If the Doctrine of the Resurrection were not so clearly revealed to the Jews
as to be always owned as a necessary Article of Faith, if they saw it through a
Glass but darkly and obscurely; yet it is not so with Christians. If they knew
but in part, and prophesied but in part, yet he being come, which is perfect,
that which was only in part, is to us done away. I shall now in the next place
demonstrate the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same Humane Body to be the
Doctrine of the Gospel. And this I shall do by showing,

First, That it is the Doctrine of the New Testament.

Secondly, That it is the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

The Arguments which I shall draw from the New Testament, are these:

First, Our Savior's own Testimony concerning the place from whence the
Resurrection is to be. St. John, v. 28.
Marvel not at this: For the Hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves, shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done Good,
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation. This is a plain and express Declaration that the
Body that lies in the Grave is to rise again. To the same purpose St. John in
the Revelations XX. 13.
, And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell (i. e. the
Grave) delivered up the Dead which were in them: And they were judged every Man
according to their Works.

It Is confessed by Origin himself, that the Bodies, to which our Souls are to
be united in the Resurrection, will be raised up out of the Graves where the
Dead are reposited: Yet he advances an Hypothesis, which supposes a diversity
of Particles. He tells us, as Ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64.. 16. (...), etc. Sed dicet
aliquis: Quomodo resurg^nt mortui, aut quali cum corpore venient? palam illud
ostendit; primam subjectam materiam nullo modo resurgere. Nam si recte
propositum ab Apostolo exemplum accipimus, dicendum est, Seminis naturam, quae
frumenti grano insita est, vicina correpta materia, totam illam pervadere atque
illius pariter correpta specie, vires suas in id, quod ante Terra, Aqua, Aer,
Ignisque fuerat, transundere, earumque superatis qualitatibus, in illam ipsam
cujus est artifex, convertere: Atque hoc modo perfici spicam, quae a priore
grano mirum in modum, and magnitudine and figura and varietate dissideat.
St. Methodius and Adv. Jo. Hiero. sol. p. 117. Est, inquit, singulis seminibus
ratio quaedam a Deo artifice insita, quae futuras materias in medullae
principiis tenet. Et quomodo tanta arboris magnitudo, truncus, rami, poma,
folia, non viden^ur in semine, sunt tamen in ratione seminis, quam Graeci (...)
vocant: Et in grano frumenti est intrinsecus, vel medulla, vel venula; quae cum
in terra fuerit dissoluta, trahit ad se vicinas materias, and in stipulam,
folia, aristasque consurgit, aliudque moritur, aliud resurgit; neque enim in
grano tritici, radices, culmus, folia, aristae, paleae sunt dissolutae. Sic and
ratione Humanorum Corporum manent quaedam surgendi antiqua principia, and quasi
(...), id est, seminarium mortuorum, sinu terrae confovetur. Cum autem judicii
dies advenerit, and in voce archangeli, and in noviss^ma tuba tremuerit terra,
movebuntur statim semina, and in puncto horae mortuos germinabunt: Non tamen
easdem carnes, nec in his formis restituent, quae fuerunt.
St. Jerome represent his Opinon, that as a Grain of Corn, that is sown, has a a
Natural Principle or Faculty, by which it attracts the Particles of Matter that
lie near it, and so grows up, and produces new Corn: So in the Substance of our
Bodies, that lies dissolved in the Grave, there remain certain semina
resurrectionis; a certain Power and Faculty, by which, in the Day of Judgment,
at the sound of the Trump, the Dead shall in a moment grow up. There shall
spring up, he says, from those Seeds not the same Flesh, but another, and with
a form different from what we now have. The same Hypothesis he maintains in his
Work against Celsus L. 5. p. 246. (...).
: We say that as the Blade springs up from a grain of Wheat, so in the Body
there is a certain natural Principle or Faculty, which as it is never corrupted
itself, so there springs up from it an incorruptible Body. And the same we
find again in a Nos vero post corruptionem mundi eosdem ipsos futuros esse
homines dicimus, ^cet non eodem statu, neque in iisdem passionibus. Non enim
iterum ex conventione viri and mulieris erunt, sed verbi gratia: ea ratio quae
continet Pauli substantiam, Pauli autem nunc dico corporalis quae salva
per^inet: Et cum voluerit Deus secundum ea quae dicta sunt, per Sacramentum
tubarum in novissima tuba facere ut Mortui resurgant, per illam ipsam
substantiae rationem quae salva permanet, ut de terrae pulvere rescuscitentur a
mortuis ex omnibus locis, in quibus ratio illa substantiae corporalis in ipsis
corporibus permanebat, quae in terram prolapsa Dei voluntate iterum
rescuscitantur. Et hoc arbitror asserere volentem dixisse Aposto^um in 1 Ep. ad
Cor. Post assertionem enim resurrectionis mortuorum, cum proposuisset sibi ea
quae possent ab aliis objici; de resurrectione m^rtuorum sic ait: Sed dicit
aliquis, Quomodo resurgunt mo^tui? Quo autem corpore venient? Stulte, tu quod
seminas non vivificatur, nisi prius moriatur; and quid seminas; non quod
futurum est corpus seminas, sed nudum granum ut puta tritici, aut alicujus
caeterorum, Deus autem dat illi corpus prout vult. Cum enim manifestissime
ostendisser quia mortui resurgunt, and certum esset quia Salvator noster cum
ipso corpore resurrexisset, quod susceperat ex Maria, non autem satis clarum
esset quomodo resurrecturi essent caeteri, vel quale corpus habituri: Comparat
resurrectionem seminibus quae seminantur in terra, ut puta grano frumenti, quod
quum ceciderit in terram corrumpitur: Sed rationis illius virtus est insita in
interioribus ejus medull^s: Ipsa rationis virtus assumpra adjacentem sibi
terram, vel aquae humorem, seu aeris circumstantem temperiem, caloris quoque
sufficientem recipiens fomitem per divinam potentiam co-operantem culmi vel
spicae consurgunt: Et hoc est quod dicit: Tu quod seminas, non vivificatur nisi
prius moriatur: Et quid seminas, non corpus quod futurum est seminas. Ergo hoc
quod cadit in terram corpus nostrum, comparatum est grano frumenti.
Fragment produced by Pamphilus, out of his Second Book concerning the
Resurrection. Yet there he says, that after the Resurrection we shall be the
very same Men.

The Foundation of this Hypothesis of Origin, is St. Paul's comparing our
Resurrection to the growing of Corn; of which I shall speak by and by, and show
how unreasonable it is to argue against the Identity of the Body from that
Comparison. To show the Absurdity of this Hypothesis, let us suppose that the
Body was never buried, but exposed in the Air, or perfectly burnt to Ashes, or
drowned and dissolved in the Sea, and let this be done some Thousands of years
ago: I would ask an Origenist, Where are then his principia resurrectionis?
It Is impossible to conceive any such semina resurgendi, unless we will suppose
that there always remains some little part of the Body undissolv'd. And
therefore some of the Jews, who will have the Body to be made up in the
Resurrection by growing as out of a Seed (and from whom Origin seems to have
borrowed his Notion) tell us, that there is a certain little Bone in the Body
of a Man (they call it Vide Poco^k. in Portam Mosis, p. 118, 119.
Luz) which can never be dissolved. But in such cases as we suppose, it is
highly probable, that there may not be remaining, after so many Motions and
Transmutations, any two Particles or Atoms united together, which were united
in the Body when alive. At least it cannot be imagined, that there can remain
so many Particles united together as are necessary to the making up of such a
Semen. To this you may add, that the Earth is the proper and natural Matrix of
the Seeds of Corn, and the like, in which it is designed by Nature that they
should germinate, and produce their kind: But the Body of a Man is naturally
begotten and formed after a quite different manner. It is therefore very absurd
to imagine, that because the Grains of Corn contain such semina within 'em as
may germinate and bring forth in the Earth, therefore likewise in the Particles
of a Man's Body there may be such natural Semina from whence a new Body may
rise. I need not observe, that if our Bodies had any such natural Semina, it
must thence follow, that the Body which rises or springs up, would be, not of a
different kind from that which was buried, as Origin would have the rising Body
to be, but altogether of the same, since the Seeds of all things do naturally
produce their own Kind. From a Humane Body there would spring up a Humane Body,
not a Subtle and Ethereal one.

The Socinians (who deny the Resurrection of the same Body) to avoid the force
of this Argument which has been urged for it, are forced to deny that our
Savior there speaks of the real Resurrection. They affirm, that he only spoke
of a spiritual Resurrection, and that only the Graves of Ignorance and Impiety
are there intended. But this Evasion is very well confuted by a Bishop Pearson
on the Cr^ed, p. 382.
very great Man, who observes, that this Exposition cannot possibly agree with
what Christ says. He speaks expressly of bringing Men to Judgment, and divides
those which are to come out of their Graves into two Ranks, neither of which
can be so understood. The first are those which have done good, before they
come out of the Graves; these therefore could not be the Graves of Ignorance
and Impiety, from which no good can come. The Second are those which have done
evil, and so remain as evil Doers, and therefore cannot be said to have come
sorth out of the Graves of Ignorance and Impiety, or to rise by the preaching
of the Gospel, to newness of Life, because they are expressly said to come forth
unto the Resurrection of Damnation. And that those Words ought to be understood
not of a spiritual Resurrection, but of that which shall be at the last Day, is
confessed and proved by Vide Slichtingii Com. in locu^.
some of the Socinians themselves. I need not add, that the Words of St. John,
which I have cited out of the Revelations, are beyond all dispute concerning
the real Resurrection in the Day of Judgment. Neither shall I observe, that if
both these places were to be understood in a Metaphorical sense, yet even the
Allusion or Metaphor would afford a sufficient Argument: For our Savior, or
St. John, would not have alluded to this Doctrine after such a manner, if it
had not been true.

II. My Second Argument shall be taken from those Words of our Savior in St.
Mat. 10. 28.
And fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. Here he
plainly declares that the Body which will be in Hell is the same with that
which might have been killed.

III. My Third Argument is those Words of our Savior in the same Evangelist v.
29, 30.
, And if thy right Eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: Fot it
is profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy
whole Body should be cast into Hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it
off, and cast it from thee: For it is profitable, etc. He tells us here, not
only that the Body, which will be cast into Hell, is numerically the same, but
also that it will have all the same Limbs and Parts.

To these express Testimonies of our Lord, we may add these two following
Observations concerning Him:

IV. First, that when he had told Martha that her Brother Lazarus should be
raised up out of his Grave to Life, and she replied, That she knew that he
would rise again in the Resurrection at the last Day, speaking plainly of the
very same Body that then lay dead; He seems by his silence, to assent to what
she said.

V. Secondly, That when the Sadduces proposed him the Question concerning the
Seven Brethren who had married the same Woman, Whose Wife she should be in the
Resurrection? He does not take notice of any Error the Jews were guilty of in
supposing the Body would be a Humane Body; but only corrects 'em as to their
Fancy concerning Marriages in the next Life: For in the Resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
Heaven. -- As the Angels of God in Heaven? Yes: But he does not mean, as Com.
in Mat. p. 488.
Origin understands it, in respect to the nature and substance of their Bodies,
but in reference to St. Hieron. J. 1. adv. Jovin. In Resurrectione mortuorum,
non ^bent, neque nubentur, sed similes erunt Angelis. Quod alii postea in
Coelis futuri sunt, hoc virgins in terra esse coeperunt. Si Angelorum nobis
similitudo promittitur: inter Angelos autem non est sexus diversitas; aut sine
sexu erimus, quod Angeli sunt; aut certe quod liquido comprobatur, resurgentes
in proprio sexu, sexus non fungemur officio. Idem adv. Joan. Hierosol.
Angelorum nobis simili^udo promittitur; id est, Beatitudo illa, in qua sine
carne and sexu sunt Ang^li, nobis in carne and sexu nostro donabitur. Mea
rusticitas sic credit, and sic intelligit, sexum confiteri sine sexuum
operibus; homines resurgere, and sic eos Angelis adaequari. -- Similitudo autem
ad Angelos, non hominum in Angelos demutatio, sed pro^ectus immortalitatis and
Gloriae est. Vide St. Methodium ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64.. 33.
marriage, which was the Subject of the Question. Had he intended the nature
and substance of their Bodies, or if he had disliked the common and received
Opinion concerning the Humanness (if I may use that Word) of the rising Body,
he would not have used those Words, but such as these: For in the Resurrection
they neither marry, nor have humane Bodies, as your Question supposes, but are,
etc.

VI. My Sixth Argument shall be the express Testimony of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
53.
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
Immortality. That Body which in this Life is Mortal and Corruptible, St.
Hieron. adv. Joan (...). Quod vero dicit Apostolus Corruptibile hoc and
mortale, hoc ipsum corpus, id est, carnem, quae tunc videbatur, ostendit. Quod
autem copulat, induere incorruptionem and i^mortalitatem: Illud indumentum, id
est, vestimentum, non dicit corpus abolere quod ornat in gloria; sed quod ante
inglorium fuit, efficere gloriosum: Ut mortalitatis and infirmitatis viliore
vest deposita, immortalitatis auro, and ut ita dicam, firmitatis atque
virtutis beatitudine, induamur, volentes non spoliari carne, sed supervestiri
in gloria, and domicilium nostrum, quod de coelo est, sup^rindui desiderantes,
ut devoretur mortale a vita. Certe nemo superinduitur, nisi qui ante vestitus
est. Epiphanius Her. 64. c. 68. (...), etc. Non dixit M^rtale solum, neque
corruptibile solum, nec immortalem denique animam. Sed corruptibile hoc and
mortale, addito utrobique pronomine hoc.
the same in the next Life shall divest itself of those qualities, and put on
others, those of Immortality and Incorruptibility. To the same purpose are
several other places of the same Apostle.

VII. The Seventh shall be taken from the Testimony of the same Apostle
concerning those that shall be living at the Day of Judgment. He tells us that
they who are then living shall not die, but only be changed or altered. It is
therefore certain that the Bodies of those that shall be then living, will
continue the very same as to substance, though changed or altered as to
Qualities. It cannot be imagined that the change will be of all the Substance;
that the whole Body will be in a Moment destroyed, and the Soul be invested
with new Matter. For the Soul to be separated from all the Substance of its
Body together, what is that else but to die? But the Apostle expressly assures
us, that we shall not all die, but some will only be changed. What can be more
plain than those Words of the same Apostle (...). IV. 16, 17.
? The Dead in Christ shall rise first, then we (i. e. they) which are alive and
remain, shall Epiphanius Hae^. 64.. 70. (...), etc. Apostolus ai^, Nos rapiemur
nu^ibus in occursum illius: Ut hoc ipsum corpus vere esse, non praeter ipsum
aliud, o^tenderet. Nam qui rapitur, nondum est mortuus, etc.
be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air:
And so shall we ever be with the Lord. Now since the Bodies of that Generation
which shall be living at the last Day, are to consist of the same individual
Particles, how is it credible that the Bodies of those that are raised shall be
made up of New? Is it Credible that there will be in Heaven such a Disparity?
that some shall retain their old Bodies, others have new Ones? 1. Cor. XV. 52.
The Dead (says the Apostle) shall be raised Incorruptible, and they that are
living shall be changed: The Reason he gives is the same for both; For this
Corruptible must put on Incorruption, etc. And from thence it is evident, that
as are the Bodies of those that are only changed, such will be the Bodies of
those that rise.

But how does this agree with that Comparison, which the same Apostle makes,
between the Resurrection of our Bodies, and the growing of Corn? The Apostle
observes that the Corn which is sown, is not the same with that which shall be,
and he plainly applies this to our Resurrection. Does not that prove, that the
Body, which rises, will be no more the same with that which died, than Corn is
the same with that from whence it sprung? This is that Place (as I have already
said) on which Origin, and the rest of our Adversaries, chiefly groun'd their
Opinions. My Answer is this: There is no necessity we should take the
Comparison in all respects strictly. You know, we have a Maxim in the Schools,
that no Similitude walks on Four Feet: The meaning is, that Similitudes, and
Comparisons, are always Lame, and ought to be understood loosly, and only in
some respect. And so ought this Comparison, which the Apostle uses. All that he
means by it, is this, That as a Grain of Corn, which springs up, differs from
that which was sown; so the Body which rises, shall not be altogether the same,
but shall differ in some Respects from that which was buried. I observe that
the Question which the Apostle answers, is, (...); with what sort of Body the
Dead shall rise? I observe the Word (...); with what sort of Body as to its
Qualities? And as the Question is only concerning the (...), or Quality, of the
Body, so ought the Answer to be understood to intend no other.

There is nothing more certain than that of all Arguments, the weakest are
those that are taken from Comparisons; so loosly are Comparisons wont to be
used. I shall crave your Leave to give you here a few Instances, relating to
the Subject now before us. The Resurrection of our Bodies is compared to the
growing of Corn, not only by the Apostle, but by almost all the Fathers, yet
they at the same time own expressly the Identity of the Body. The Greek Church
uses boiled Wheat as a Symbol of it. In their great Festivals, after the
Sacrament, they have usually an Entertainment for the Congregation which they
call (...) the offering of the Colyba, which is boiled Wheat, mixed (for the
better relish) with some other things. The Priest goes about with a Charger
full of it, and distributes it to all that are present, as a Symbol of the
Resurrection, and in (...), ap. Eucholog. p. 658.
Memory of the Dead. The Archbishop of Philadelphia, Gabriel Severus, has left
us a particular Treatise concerning this Rite of the Greek Church. We are told
indeed by some Writers that in the beginning this Custom had no respect to the
Resurrection: But whatever was the meaning of those that first instituted it,
it is certain, that they who now continue it, referr it to the Resurrection. The
Muscovites are wont to use Eggs as Symbols of the Resurrection. Description of
Russia ap. Hackluyt to. 1. p. 318.
Every Year against Easter they die or color Red a great Number of Eggs, of
which every Man and Woman gives to the Priest of the Parish upon Easter Day in
the Morning. The Common People use to carry in their Hands one of these red
Eggs, the Persons of Quality Gilded Ones, on Easter Day, and Three or Four Days
after. And, meeting their Friends, one takes the other by the Hand, and one of
'em saying, The Lord, or Christ, is risen, the other answers, It is so of a
Truth: Then they kiss one another, and exchange their Eggs. The Jews make Grass
to be a Symbol of it. Some of the ancient Fathers are pleased to tell us, that
St. Macarius Hom. 5. St. Cyrillus Hierosol. Catechesi 18.
Trees and Plants putting forth Leaves and Flowers in the Springtime, and
bearing Fruits, are Types and Emblems of it. Some compare it to the healing of
Wounds: Others, and St. Clemens Romans Ep. ad Cor. p. 34. St. Theophilus Antioch.
ad Autol. I. 1. p. 77. Tertullian. Apolog. c. ult. and De Resur. c. 12. St.
Ambros. De Resur. Orentius in Commonitorio. Chrysologus Sermon. 57, 59, 118.
those too some of the chief of the ancient Doctors of the Church, to the
revolution of Night and Day, Darkness and Light, to one Month's following
another, and one Year's arising from another. Nay, they tell us that these
Alternations are manifest Proofs and Demonstrations of the resurrection. Now
from such Symbols and Comparisons as these, who would not be apt to conclude,
that they do not believe the Resurrection of the Same Body? Yet certain it is,
that they all profess and assert this Doctrine.

That St. Paul meant the very same Body as to Substance will further appear
from what I shall observe hereafter concerning the Incredulity of the
Corinthians in the time of St. Clement Bishop of Rome.

VIII. My Eighth Argument shall be taken from the Example of our Savior's
Resurrection. The Apostle tells us, That Christ was The first Fruits of those
that slept; that by him came the Resurrection of the Dead; that, as in Adam all
die, so in Christ shall all be made alive: Every Man in his own Order; Christ
the First Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Again, to
the Romans, he says, that He that raised Christ from the Dead, shall also
quicken our mortal Bodies: And in his Epistle to the Philippians, he assures us
in the most express Terms, That Jesus Christ, whom we look for from Heaven,
shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like to his Glorious Body.
From all which I infer, that Passionem quoque ejus in cruce and mortem ac
sepulturam, quae universa servavlt, ac resurrectionem veritate and non putative
confitemur: Qui and primo genitus ex mortuis, primitias massae corporum
nostrorum, quas in sepulchro positas suscitavit, pervexit ad coelum, spem nobis
resurrectionis in resurrectione proprii corporis tribuens, unde and omnes sic
speramus refurgere ex mortuis, sicut ille resurrexit. Non in aliis quibusdam
peregrinis and in alienis corporibus quae assumuntur in phantasmate: Sed sicut
ipse in illo corpore, quod apud nos in sancto sepulchro conditum resurrexit:
Ita and nos in ipsis corporibus, quibus nunc circundamur, and in quibus nunc
sepelimur, eadem ratione and visione speramus resurgere. Joannes Episc.
Hierosol. ap. S. Hieron. in l. adv eum. Eodem argumento, viz. Exemplo
resurrectionis Christi primogeniti mortuorum ac primitiarum dermientium utitur
St. Methodius ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64.. 39. and ipse Epiphanius in Ancor. c. 94.
as was our Savior's Body after his Resurrection, such will ours be in our
Resurrection. Now that the same Body of Christ which was crucified and buried,
was raised again, and that it continued a true Humane Body, there is no one, I
think, can doubt who truly believes the Scripture, or our Savior's own Words.
For what if by His Divine Power He was pleased to convey Himself into a Room,
when the Doors were, or seemed to be, shut? What if he vanished away out of the
Sight of those that conversed with him? This was done St. Hieron. (...). (...).
adv. Jovin. Certe in resurrectione ^adem erit corporum substantia, qu^ nunc
utimur, licet auctior gloria. Nam and Salvator in tantum ipsum corpus habuit
post inferos, inquo and crucifixus est, ut manus perforatas clavis and lateris
vulnus ostender^t. P^rro si clausis ingressus est oftiis, quod humanorum
corporum natura non patitur, ergo and Petrum and Dominum negabimus vera
habuisse corpora, quia ambulaverunt super aquas, quod contra naturam est. Idem
adv. Joan. Hicros^l. Dic mihi, acutissime disputator, quid est majus, ^antam
Terrae magnitudinem appendere super nihilum, and super aquarum incerta librare:
An Deum transire per clausam porta^, and creaturam cedere creatori? Quod majus
est tribuis: quod minus est calumniaris. Petrus super aquas ambulat gravi and
solido corpore, Mollis unda non cedit: paululum fides dubitar, and statim
naturam suam corpus intelligit: ut sciamus super aquas non corpus ambulasle,
sed fi^em.
to demonstrate his Power. I shall not allege with a late learned and
ingenious Dr. Wallis of the Sabbath. I. Part, p. 25.
Author, that by (...) is not meant that the Doors of the Room, into which our
Savior entered, were then actually shut, but only that it was then Night.
Though indeed it was in the Night that He appeared, yet because it cannot be
proved (as I think it cannot) that that Phrase is any where else used to
signify the Nightime, and it is likely that the Doors of their Houses were
wont to be shut (though perhaps not bolted) as well in the Daytime as at Night,
and therefore it could not be well used to signify the Nightime: I am content
to understand the Words in the common acceptance. Yet (I say) it cannot be
thence proved that our Savior's Body was not then a true humane Body. But if
the Doors were then really shut, and his Body were truly of the Nature of
Man's, how was it possible for him to enter into the Room? In answer to this I
ask another Question, How was it possible for our Savior to walk on the Water
as he did, and to make St. Peter do the like? Was not that contrary to the
Nature of a Humane Body? I shall not pretend to prescribe a way to the
Almighty. But this I am sure of, it was easy for Omnipotence to effect that
Miracle several ways. He might either open a passage into the Room which the
Disciples did not see, or rarefy his Body for that present Moment. So likewise
he might vanish away, either by an exceeding swift Motion, or by altering the
Medium, or the Sight of the Spectators. And thus St. Luke tells us, that when
he appeared to some of his Disciples in the way, and conversed with 'em, they
did not know him. What was the Reason of that? St. Mark says that he appeared
in another form: But was it really so? No, the difference was in St. Hieron.
adv. Joan. Hierosol. Noli potentiam Domini magorum praestigiis adaequare, ut
videatur suisse quod non fuit, and putetur comedisse sine dentibus, ambula^e
sine pedibus, fregisse panem sine manibus, loquutus esse sine lingua, and latus
monstrasse sine costis. Et quomodo, inquies, non cognoscebanteum in itinere, si
ipsum habeba^ corpus quod ante habuit? Audi scripturam dicentem: Oculi eorum
renebantur, neeum cognoscerent. Et rur^um, Aperti sunt oculi eorum, and
cognoverunt eum. Nunquid alius fuit quando non agnoscebatnr, and alius quando
agnitus est? Certe unus atqueidem ^rat. Cognosce^e ergo and non cognoscer^,
oculorum fuit, non ejus qui videbatur, licet and ipsius fuerit, etc. --
their Sight, not in his Conntenance. St Luke expressly affirms, that their eyes
were held that they should not know him: And as soon (says he) as their Eyes
were opened, they knew him. Whatsoever means his Almighty Power was pleased to
make use of, we have his own express Testimony for it, that his Body was the
very same with that which was crucified, and that it was still truly Humane,
consisting of Flesh and Bones. He ate with his Disciples as a Man, and had the
Holes, which the Nails had made, in his Hands and his Feet, and his Wound still
remaining in his Side. Which he therefore was pleased to preserve, that St.
Thomas, and all Unbelievers, might be fully convinced of the reality of his
Resurrection. When he entered into the Room amongst his Disciples, and they
thought he had been a Spirit, because they did not see the Door opened. St.
Luke XXIV. 39.
Why, says he, are you troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my-self: Handle me, and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and Bones as ye see me have. And according to this we
declare in the Fourth Article of our Church, that Christ being dead and buried,
took again his Body, with Flesh, Bones, and all things appertaining to Man's
Nature. Clemens Alex. in a Fragment of his Comments on the 1 Ep. of St. John,
which is extant in Cassiodorus, tells us of an odd sort of Fertur in
Traditiobus, quoniam Joannes ipsum corpus quod erat extrinsecus tangens, manum
suam in profunda misisse, and ei duritiem carnis nullo modo relu^tatam esse,
sed locum manui prebuisse discipuli. Propter quod and insert: Et manus nostrae
contrectaverunt de verbo vite; contrectahilis utique factus est qui venit in
carne.
Tradition, that St. John once touching Christ's Body, thrust his Hand into the
inward parts of his Body, the hardness of the Flesh not at all resisting it,
but giving way to it. But this Tradition was not concerning his Body after his
Resurrection, but even before he was crucified; and to this they imagined that
St. John had respect in these Words: That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the Word of Life. To prove the Humanness of Christ's
Body after his Resurrection, I might add, if need were, the Testimony of Ep. ad
Smyrnaeos, ap. Eus. Hist. III. 36. (...). St. Jerome in Catalogo Script. Eccles.
understands his Words so as if he had meant that he himself saw Christ after
his Resurrection. Super person^ Christi ponit Testimonium, dicens: Ego vero and
post resurrectionem in carne eum vidi, and credo quia sir, etc.
St. Ignatius. I know (says he) and believe that even after his Resurrection he
appeared in the Flesh. And when he came to Peter and the rest, he said unto
them, Take hold of me, handle me, and see that I am not an incorporeal Spirit.
And immediately they touched him, and believed. Instead of those Words in our
Creed, And ascended into Heaven, the Primitive Church asserted expressly in
their Creed, that he ascended into Heaven in the flesh. The Church (says St.
Adv. Haer. L. 2. Ecclesia per universum orhem usque ad fines terrae seminata,
and ab Apostolis and a Discipulis eorum accepit eam fidem quae est in unum Deum
-- Et in unum Iesum Christum Dei F. incarnatum pro nostra salute. -- Et in
CARNE in coelos assumptionem dilecti Jesus Christi Domini nostri, etc.
Irenaeus) spread throughout the whole World, to the ends of the Earth, has
received this Faith from the Apostles and their Disciples, that there is one
God, -- That Jesus Christ the Son of God was incarnate for our Salvation -- and
that he was taken up in the flesh into Heaven. etc. Ephremius Lib. de Sacris
Antiochae Legibus ap. Phot. Bibl. p. 794.
, Patriarch of Antioch, affirms that Christ is now known in the flesh. St.
Athanasius affirms that he carried up into Heaven the very same Flesh that he
had when living. And (to mention * Orat. 4. c. Arianos. (...).
no more) in the Synodical Epistle of the Church of Rome, under Pope Damasus,
there is an Anathema denounced against any one that shall not confess, That Ap.
Theodoreti Hist. v. 2. (...).
He sits on the right Hand of the Father in the Flesh, which he had when
living, and that he shall come in the same to judge the quick and the dead. The
same Anathema you may read in L. 6. De Trinitate inter opera St. Athanasii, p.
571. Si quis confitetur Filium Dei quasi phantasma, sic in homine visum fuisse,
anathema illi. Si quis confitetur, verum hominem, quem assumpsit, non vere
manducasse, aut bibisse, aur lacrymatum fuisse, sanguinem sudasse, and passum
fuisse, and resurrexisse, and in coelis ad dextram Patris consedisse, anathema
illi.
Vigilius Tapsensis.

IX. That our Resurrection will be of the same nature with our Savior's, and
our Bodies the same as his was, that is, numerically the same with those that
died, consisting of the same Particles, and still truly Humane, I shall farther
prove from the Example of those who rose out of their Graves at the time of his
Resurrection. And the Graves were opened (says St. Matthew) and many Bodies of
Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the Graves after his Resurrection,
and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto many. This was to show, that
Christ by his Resurrection had conquered Death, and the Dead were then raised
as an Earnest of our future Resurrection. We may here observe, First, That the
Bodies of those that appeared were not formed of other Matter, but the same
that lay buried in the Graves, arose. Secondly, That the Graves were opened
that the Bodies might arise, and come forth; which demonstrates that those
Bodies were not Subtle and Ethereal, but of a Gross Humane Substance. And this
is likewise evident from those Words, and appeared unto many. For what else can
be understood by those Words, but that they so appeared as to be known.

X. To these Examples we will here add those Types of our Resurrection which
are mentioned in the Old Testament; I mean the Translations of Enoch and Elias.
The Author to the Hebrews, tells us that Enoch was translated Heb. 11. 5.
that he should not see Death: And the same is true of Elias. It Is the Opinion,
I know, of some of the Rabbi's, that the Bodies, in which Enoch and Elias were
translated, were immediately dissolved, and that new ones were created for 'em
after the same likeness. But this is a Conjecture altogether groundless and
precarious. And it is not, I think, to be doubted, but that as they were
translated in their Bodies, so they still retain the very same, and will always
retain 'em. And this to me is another very clear The same Argument is produced
by St. Jerome, adv. Joan. Hierosol. Enoch translatus est in carne. Elias carneus
raptus est in coeium: ne^dum mortui and (...) jam coloni, habent membra cum
quibus rapti sunt, a^que translati. Quo^ nos imitamur jejunio, illi possident
Dei consortio, vescuntur coelesti pane, and saturaneur om^ verbo Dei: ^undem
habentes dominum quem and cibum. P^ulo p^st: En^ch and Elias tanto tempore in
eadem permanent aetate, qua rapti sunt. Habent dentes, ventrem, genitalia; and
tamen nec cibis nec uxoribus indigent. And by Epiphanius in Ancorato, c. 100.
and Pa^rio Haer. 64. c. 64.
Demonstration, that the Bodies to which our Souls are to be united in the next
Life, will be numerically the same.

XI. I shall conclude all these Arguments with another drawn from the proper
signification of the Word (...), or Resurrection, which is every where used in
the New Testament, and signifies rising again. If the same Particles of Matter
that were buried be not to rise, if the Body is to be altogether new as to its
Substance, how can it be said to be a St. Methodius, ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64..
35. (...), etc. Voca^ulum ipsum (Resurrectio) haec resurrectura esse corpora
ostendit. Nam resurrectio non de co, quod nunquam ce^dit, sed de eo quod
cecidit, atque iterum assurgit, usurpatur. Non enim quod non moritur, sed quod
moritur, inclinare dicitur. At moritur caro. Anima quippe immortalis est.
Quaprop^er si immortalls est anima, corpus vero cadaver est: Qui ita
resurrectionem fore confi^entur, ut came nihil ad carnem pertinere putent,
resurrectionem funditus negant. Quandoquidem non illud quod-^at, sed quod
cecidit, and inclin^t, exurgere dicitur: pro^o ac scriptum est. Number qui
cecidit, non resurgit? Jer. 8. 4. Eodem modo argumentatur Photius Epist. 1. ad
^inem.
Resurrection, a rising again? That Body which rises again, must be that which
once died: For nothing can be said to rise again, but that which once fell. If
a new Body be to be created, and united to the Soul, if all that we are to
expect be only this, that after Death our Souls will be again united to a Body,
certainly they would never have chosen so very improper a Word to express it,
as (...), or Resurrection.

It Is generally supposed by Natural Philosophers, that in the space of about
Seven Years, all the Particles of a Man's Body are changed: Now suppose (you
will say) that a Man should keep his Bed for above Seven Years together, and at
last should recover and rise again, though there be not one Particle in his Body,
when he rises, the same that he had when first he began to keep his Bed, yet
the Body with which he rises may properly be said to be the very same. The Body
in such a case may properly be said to rise again. I answer, that there is a
great deal of difference betwixt a Body whose Particles are gradually changed
in a continued union with the Soul, and a Body whose Particles are changed, not
gradually, but all together. Although in the case supposed, the Body is
understood to be the same, and may properly be said to rise again, though it has
not any the same Particles, yet when the Soul is separated from the Body, if
that Body be dissolved, and new Particles be formed into a Body and united to
the Soul, it cannot be said to be the same, or to rise again. I appeal to the
common Sense of Mankind.

I proceed now to show in the Second place, that our Doctrine of the Identity
of the Body in the Resurrection, is the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers, the
successors of Christ and his Apostles. The Fathers and ancient Writers of the
primitive Ages, whose Testimonies I shall produce, are these which follow.

I. St. Clement, Bishop of Rome, the Companion and Fellow Laborer of St. Paul
the Apostle. In his First Epistle to the Corinthians he endeavors to convince
that People of the possibility of the Resurrection, by the Example of the
Phoenix, which he says (according to the Opinion of those times) was produced
out of the same Matter of which the dead one was compounded. He intimates that
the Phoenix was designed by God Almighty as an Emblem of our Resurrection, to
assure us that he will certainly raise us up. Why therefore (says he) do we
esteem it a great matter, and wonderful, that the Creater of all things should
raise up all those that have served him holily, (...), etc.
since by a Bird he manifests to us the magni^cence of his Promise. And though he
makes use of several other Comparisons, yet he ehie^y in^s on this, as the most
apposlte, and is very long and particular upon it. Secondly, He endeavors to
eonvince the Corinthians of the possibility of it, by representing to 'em the
Almighty Power of God, and his Veraeity, that nothing is impossible to him, but
to lie, and the like. Thirdly, To prove the Doctrine of the Resurrection, he
produces those Words of Job; Thou shall raise up my Flesh. I observe the Word
Flesh. In the Greek Translation of the Book of Job it is Skin: This St. Clement
thought ^it to change, to express the thing more fully; and it is worthy to be
observed, that when he changed the Word, he called it not Body, but flesh.
Fourthly, in his Second Epistle he has these Words: (...).
Let no one of you say, that this flesh shall not be judged, nor rise. Do you
know in what you were saved, in what you were converted, unless it were in this
Flesh? We ought therefore so to keep our Flesh as the Temple of God. For as ye
were called in the Flesh, so shall ye come in the flesh. The Lord Jesus Christ,
who has saved us, being first a Spirit, was made Flesh, and so called us: So we
likewise in this flesh than receive a Reward. I know this Second Epistle is by
some suspected not to be St. Clement's: But as it is suspected, so it is only
suspected, not See Cotelerius in Scriptores Apostol. p. 103, etc.
proved; and this at least is certain, that it is exceeding ancient.

Having thus shown what was St. Clement's Doctrine, I shall now subjoin some
few Remarks.

1. That the First Epistle was written by St. Clement, not in his own Name only
(though his Authority alone were enough to demonstrate our Doctrine to be the
Doctrine of the Church) but in the Name of the whole Church of Rome. This
appears from the Title of it, and from the Testimony of St. Adv. Haer. l. 3. c.
3.
Irenaeus, Strom. l. 5. p. 586.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Hist^ l. 3. c. 16.
Eusebius, and others. Clemens Alexandrinus quotes it in one place, by the
Title of The Epistle of the Romans to the Corinthians.

2. That Eusebius. l. c.
in most Churches it was wont to be read together with the Canonical
Scriptures, not only in Eusebius's time, about the end of the Third Centry, but
(...) (as he himself asserts) in those Times which to him were the ancient
Times. From hence it is evident, that the primitive Church in general professed
the same Doctrine. It appears from Haer. 30. Number. 15.
St. Epiphanius, that in his time, not only the First but the Second too was
wont to be read in the same manner. St. Clement (says he) in his Circular
Epistles, which are read in the Holy Churches, etc. And in the last of the
Canons ascribed to the Apostles, the same is mentioned (together with the
First) as part of the Canonical Scripture.

3. That St. Clement writes to the same Church to whom St. Paul had written
before concerning the Resurrection. Now since he found that some of the
Corinthians persisted still in their unbelief, notwithstanding what St. Paul
had written to 'em, if the Doctrine of St. Paul and the Catholic Church had
been only concerning a new Ethereal Body, he would have told 'em so in the
plainest Terms that possibly he could, not have written so to 'em as plainly to
intimate (if not assert) the quite contrary. Why are you so hard of believe?
Has not St. Paul already told you, that the Body in the Resurrection shall not
be the same Humane Body, as you imagine, but a new one and of a quite different
kind?

4. It manifestly appears from this obstinate unbelief of some in that Church,
that they did not understand St. Paul of a new Ethereal Body. That the Soul
after Death is invested with an See Cudworth's Intellec. System. p. 785, etc.
Ethereal Body, was the common and received Opinion of the Greeks themselves,
the Pythagoreans and the St. Aug. de Civ. XX. 27. Plato Dixit ^ine corporibus
animas in aeternum ^sse non posse.
Platonists. And though they commonly believed, that the Soul has an Ethereal
Body or Vehicle, in its state of Prae-existence, and that it retains the same
even whilst it is united to the Humane Body, and also after Death; yet they did
not think it necessary that it should always be invested with the same which it
had before its separation from the Humane Body. Plato asserts; that The Soul
will always have a Body, but sometimes of one Kind, and sometimes of another.
And Porphyry Sent. c. 32.
affirms, that according as the Soul is affected, so it assumes a Body suitable
to its present Condition; that being thoroughly purged, it assumes a Body of
the purest Sort, the next in degree to Immateriality. And with that, according
to his Philosophy, it lives for ever in Heaven. The Conclusion is, that if the
Apostles had intended not the same Body that died, but another Ethereal One,
it is impossible that their Doctrine should meet with so great Opposition as it
did. Was this the Doctrine that the Corinthians could not believe? Could that
which their own Philosophers had taught 'em, seem so strange and incredible a
Thing, when preached by the Apostles? It is plain from St. Paul, that the
Corinthians to whom he wrote, thought the Resurrection a strange and incredible
Thing; and after they had received St. Paul's Epistle, they still continued to
think it so. They still thought it, as is evident from what St. Clement
answers, (...). (...) strange and wonderful Thing: Was the Union of the Soul to
an Ethereal Body after Death, so strange and wonderful a Thing to the
Corinthians, that they could not believe St. Paul, but forced St. Clement to
write again (and again) to 'em to convince 'em? Was it for this that St.
Clement to convince 'em was forced to insist so much on the Almighty Power of
God?

If the Epistle ad Tarsen^es were genuine, to St. Clement we might add St.
Ignatius, who was constituted Bishop of Antioch by the Apostles themselves. In
that Epistle they who assert that (...). 2. (...).
this flesh is not to rise, are reckoned amongst the Ministers of Satan. But
since that Epistle is spurio^s we must pass by Him, unless you will grant that
those Words of his concerning his being condemned to be devoured by wild
Beasts, had some respect to the Resurrection of the Body. (...). St. Iren^us
adv. Her. l. 5. c. 28. and ap. Eu^eb. Hi^. l. 3. (...). 36.
I am the Wheat, says he, of God, and am ground small by the teeth of Beasts,
that I may be ^ound pure Bread.

II. At the same time flourished St. Poly^, who was Disciple to St. John the
Ev^ngelist. When he was bound to the S^ake to be burned, he thanked God, that
he was now to suffer Martyrdom, and to partake of the Cap of Christ Ap. Eusebius.
Hist. l. 14. c. 15. (...).
in order to the Resurrection of everlasting Life, both of Soul and Body. You
may read his Prayer in the Epistle of the Church of (...), which is Extant in
Eusebius.

III. At the same time also lived Papia^ Bishop of ^rapolis. L. 5. (...). 35.
St. Iren^s tells us that he was Disciple to St. John (the Evangelist) and a
familiar Acquaintance of St. Poly^p's. This is certain See Eusebius. III. 39.
that he lived in the time of those who had been conversant with the Apostles,
and had made it his Business to collect the Doctrines of the several Apostles,
from the Mouths of such as had conversed with 'em. Now that He asserted the
Resurrection of the same Humane Body Eusebius plainly intimates, when he tells
us, that according to his Opinion (...). l. 3. c. 39.
Christ is to reign here corporally upon Earth, after the Resurrection from the
Dead, a Thousand Years. St. Maximus Schol, in Eccles. Hi^r. c. 7. (...). Vide
St. Irenaeum (...). 5. c. 33.
affirms that he held, that after the Resurrection we shall eat and drink as
before. Such an Opinion as this could never be built on mere Air. Whether true,
or false, it plainly shows that the Apostles did not preach the Resurrection of
an Airy or Ethereal Body.

IV. The Sibylline Oracles published by some Christian not long after these
times, within about Thirty Years after St. John the Apostle's Death, say, That
God after he has destroyed the World and all mankind by Fire, will restore
their Ashes and Bones, and form 'em again as they were before. And the (...),
etc. l. 4. ad fine^.
Verses, which tell us thus much, are extant not only in the Volume which now
we have, but also in the ancient L. 5. c. 7.
Apostolical Constitutions, where they are cited.

V. St. Justin Martyr, who flourished in the Year 140, and was first instructed
in the Christian Faith by one that was not only of Man's Estate, but of a
considerable Age, when St. John was yet living, not only speaks in Ad Graecos
Cohor. p. 26. Apolog. 2. p. 57.
several places of his Works of the Rising Body, as of the very same, and truly
Humane, but in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, he gives him this Caution,
that if he met with any that had the Name of Christians, but denied the
Resurrection of the Dead, he should not esteem them Christians. For I (says he)
and all those Christians, who in all respects hold the true Opinions, do know
that there will be a Resurrection of the (...).
flesh. He says expressly The Resurrection of the flesh. And the same Word he
used in the Title of a Book, which he wrote professedly on this Subject:
Concerning the Resurrection of the flesh. They did not call it in those Days
The Resurrection of the Body, because some of the Heretics who denied the
Resurrection of the Flesh, pretended however to believe the Resurrection of the
Body; but that all might know that they intended the Ver^ same Humane Body,
they called it in downright Terms The Resurrection of the flesh.

VI. Tatianus Syrus, who was Disciple to Justin M. in his Oration against the
Gentiles P. 146.
: We shall be restored (says he) to what we are, and be judged by God the
Creator. This we believe though you look upon us as silly triflers and bablers
for it. For as once I had no being, and then was begotten, so being born, and
again reduced by Death to what I was, I I shall be restored to my being again.
Though all my Flesh shall be consumed by Fire, yet the World contains the
evaporated Matter. Though I should be drowned and dissolved in a River or the
Sea, or be devoun'd by wild Beasts, yet I am laid ^p in the Repositories of
God. The Ignoran^ indeed and the Atheist know not where my Substance is
reposited; but God who reigns, and who alone sees it, will restore it in his
due Time to its former State.

VII. St. Iren^us, who was born before the Death of St. John, and was Scholar
to St. Polyc^rp, one of his Disciples, affrms that this was one of the Articles
of the Creed received L. 1. c. 2. Ecclesia per universum (...) (...) a^ (...)
(...) seminata, and ab Apostolis and Discipulis ^orum accepit eam fidem quae
est in -- adventum Christi ad recapitulanda universa, and resusci^ (...) Carnem
humani gen^ris.
by the Church throughout the whole World to the ends of the Earth, from the
Apostles and their Disciples That Christ shall come and raise up all flesh. And
he spends a great part of his C. 1. ad 16. etc. 31. etc.
Fifth Book in proving, against the Heretics, that we shall rise perfect Men
with the same Body of Flesh.

VIII. And to prove the same against the Heathens, is the whole endeavor of
that excellent Treatise Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead; written by
Athenagoras, the Christian Philosopher, who was Professor in the Divinity
School of Alexandria in St. Irenaeus's Time.

IX. Athenagoras tells us there were P. 65. c.
many that had written before him on this Subject; and that they were all
asserters of the Doctrine of the Identity he plainly intimates. He takes no
Notice of any thing in which they differed from him, but the Reason which they
assigned for the Resurrection. The same Author observes, that the Objection
concerning one Man's feeding on another, was in those days a (...). p. 43. D.
common Objection against the Doctrine of the Resurrection. From thence it
appears that the Doctrine of the Identity was the Common and received Doctrine.
He adds, that that Objection perplexed even Ib^d. (...)
some of those that were admired for their Wisdom. This Doctrine therefore was
the common and received Doctrine, not only of the Vulgar, but also of the m^st
Wise and Learned.

X. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, who flourished at the same time with St.
Irenaeus and Athenagoras, in his first Book to Autolycus (a Heathen) maintains
the same Doctrine. P. 77.
But you deny (says he) the Resurrection of the Dead, and say, Show me but one,
that has risen from the Dead, and when I see him, I will believe. But what
great Matter is it, if you believe when you see a thing done? Do you believe
that Hercules, though he burnt himself, is yet living, and that Aesculapius
revived after he was struck with the Thunderbolt, and yet disbelieve those
things which are revealed to you by God? etc.

XI. In the same Age, viz. in the Year 177, the Churches of Vienna and Lions
wrote that Epistle to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, which is extant in
Eusebius Hi^. V. (...).
, concerning their Persecutions. In that Epistle they complain, that their
Persecutors would not suffer the Bodies of the Martyrs to be buried, but threw
'em to Dogs to be devoured, and burned that, which remained undevour'd, to
Ashes, and threw the Ashes into the River. And (...), etc.
this (say they) they did, as if they could master God, and hinder their
Resurrection, that (as they said) the Christians might not have any hopes of a
Resurrection, through the belief of which they despised the greatest Torments,
and came willingly and with joy to their Deaths. Let us now see (say they)
whether they will rise again, and whether their God can deliver 'em out of our
Hands. The holy Pothinus, Bishop of the Church of Lions, who was martyred at
that time, was not only born, but was almost of Man's estate, before St. John
the Apostle's death.

XII. Clemens Alexandrinus, who flourished at the same time, though in those
Works which are now extant he speaks but very little of the Resurrection, no
where professedly, yet that he held the same Doctrine, may be gathered from his
Conjecture, Strom. I. 5. p. 599.
that Plato when he tells the Story of Eris's reviving after he had been dead
Twelve Days, had respect to the Resurrection.

XIII. Tertullian, who flourished toward the latter end of this Second
Century, has left us a whole Book concerning, and in defense of, this Doctrine,
entitled, De Resurrectione CARNIS. In another Book he affirms that this was
one of those De Virgin. Velandis, c. I. Regula qui^em fidci una omnino est,
sola immohil^s and irr^formabilis, credendi sc. in Christum venturum judicare
vivos and mortuos per carnis etiam resurrectionem. Hac lege fidei manente,
caeterajam disciplinae and conversationis, admittunt novitatem correctionis.

De Pr^script. Haret. c. 13. Regula est autem fidei, ut jam hinc quid
desendamus proficeamur, illa sc, qua creditur -- Christh^ venturum cum
claritate, ad sumendos sanctos in vitae aeternae, and promissorum coelestium
fructum, and ad profanos adjudicandos igni perpetuo, facta utrisque partis
resuscitatione cum carnis restitutione.


Articles of Faith which were received by the whole Church with one accord, and
which were immovable and unalterable, That Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, and that by the Resurrection of the flesh.

XIV. The Compiler of the Apostolical Constitutions, who lived about the end of
this Century, has a large L. 5. c. 7.
Chapter in defense of our Doctrine against the Heathens. God Almighty (says
he) will raise us up through our Lord Jesus Christ, according to his Promise
that cannot fail. And he will raise us up, together with all those that have
died from the beginning of the World, (...).
in the same form which now we have, without any mutilation or corruption. For
we shall rise uncorrupted. For whether we die in the Sea, or have our Particles
dispersed in the Earth, or are devoured by Beasts or Birds, He will raise us up
by his Power, by which he holds the whole World in his Hand. Not a Hair, says
he, of your Heads shall perish. -- Through this certain P. 246. (...), etc.
persuasion we endure Stripes, Persecutions, and Deaths. And in vain have we
endured these things, if we have not full assurance of those things which we
preach. -- As God created the World, in the same manner he will raise us up by
his good pleasure, not standing in need of any assistance. For it is an effect
of the same Power, to make the World, and to raise up the Dead. When Man had no
Being, He made him of different Parts, giving him a Soul created out of
nothing. And in the Resurrection he will restore to our Souls that do not die,
their Bodies which are dissolved, etc.

XV. The Author of the Recognitions of St. Clement, who lived in the same Age,
and is thought by Dr. Cave Hist. Lit.
a very learned Man to be Bardesanes of Syria, affirms, that the Souls in the
Resurrection of the dead will receive L. 1. c. 52. Ut in resur. morruorum cum
corpora sua receperint, ^psa jam resolutione purgata; pro his quae been
gesserant, aererna haeredi^ate potiantur.
their Bodies that were dissolved.

XVI. About the middle of the same Age, Celsus, the great Adversary of the
Christians, published that Book, which Origin in the following Age answered. He
disputes against this, as the received and avowed Doctrine of the Christians,
That Ap. Orig. l. 5. p. 240. (...).
the dead shall rise again out of the Earth with the very same Flesh. It Is true
he adds, that (...).
there were some even among the Christians that did not embrace this Doctrine,
but showed it to be horridly impure, abominable, and impossible. But what sort
of Christians those were whom he speaks of; that they were only such as were
condemned as Heretics, there is no one can doubt. We know that many of the
Heretics denied it, and wrote professedly against it; and it is usual with
Celsus, to mention those as Christians without any note of distinction, who
were even the vilest of Heretics, and owned by none of the Orthodox. He says,
for example, in one place, that L. 2. p. 70.
the Christians affirm that Christ did not really suffer, but only in
appearance: Which was only the Opinion of some of the Heretics. In another
place L. 6. p. 294.
he lays to the charge of the Christians a certain Opinion, which was only
received by the Ophiani, a sort of Heretics that were so far from being
Christians, that they hated Christ as much as Celsus himself, and never
admitted any one into their Society but such as first cursed him. Such as these
perhaps, or not much better, were those who denied the Resurrection, as impure
and abominable; such perchance of whom we may say, what Origin does in this
latter case: See what absurdity Celsus is guilty of, who mentions those as of
our Religion, who cannot endure to hear the Name of Jesus!

XVII. Lucian De morte Peregrini, p. 277. (...).
, the noted Atheist, a Writer of the same Age, has these Words concerning the
Christians: Those Wretches persuade themselves, that they shall be the whole
Man, (both Body and Soul) immortal, and shall live for ever. And on this
account they contemn Death, and many of 'em offer themselves voluntarily to be
put to Death.

XVIII. Minucius Felix, who lived in the beginning of the following Age, Who
(says Octavio, p. 326.
he) is so foolish and brutish as to deny, that God who first made Man, can
form him again as he was before? It Is harder to make that which before had no
Being, than to restore that which once had a Being. All Bodies when dissolved,
whether crumbled to Dust, or dissolved into Moisture, or reduced to Ashes, or
rarefied into Vapor, are lost to us, but to God, the keeper of the Elements,
they are still preserved. He brings in his Heathen objecting against the
Christians, that they believed this Doctrine of the Resurrection with so great
and firm an assurance P. 97. Renasci se terunt post mortem and cineres and
favillas: Et nescio qua fiducia mendaciis suis invicem credunt, putes eos jam
revixisse.
as if they themselves had risen to Life.

XIX. The Author of the Book entitled, Concerning the Cause of the Universe
against the Heathens, tells the Heathens, that God will raise us all up, not
shifting the Soul out of one Body into another, but raising up the same Bodies.
You, O ye Heathens, (says he) because you see that these Bodies are dissolved,
do not believe that they will rise again. But learn you to believe. For since
ye believe, according to Plato, that the immortal Soul was made by God, you
ought not to disbelieve but that God is able to raise up to Life this Body
which is compounded of the Elements, and to make it immortal, etc. The Author
of this Book was either Caius, the Roman Presbyter, or St. Hippolytus; who both
flourished in the beginning of the Third Age. St. Hippolytus wrote a Book
besides with this Title, Concerning the Resurrection of the flesh.

We are now come down to the time of Origin, who left the received Traditions
of the worthy Fathers his Predecessors, and endeavored to accommodate the
Doctrine of the Resurrection to the Notions of the Heathen Philosophers. He
himself owns that C. Cells. l. 5. c. 242.
the Resurrection of the flesh was the Doctrine preached in the Churches: But
he says that by the more wise it was not understood in so gross a sense as
Celsus represented it. If he means that the Wiser and Learneder sort of
Christians did not believe that the same Humane Body is to rise, it appears
from the foregoing Testimonies that that is not true. We have sought for Christ
not among the ignorant Common People, but among the Doctors in the Temple: And
the Authorities which we have produced are those of the mo^ Wise and Learned.
But this was not Origen's meaning. He means only thus much, That the wiser sort
understood that the Flesh in the Resurrection would not be just the same in
quality with that which was buried, but would be altered for the better.
Neither we (says he, P. 243. (...).
in his Answer to Celsus) nor the holy Scriptures, say, that the Dead shall
rise out of the Earth with the same Flesh, without any alteration for the
better.

So firmly established in the Church was the Doctrine of the Resurrection of
the same Body, that Origin himself, though in some places of his Works he
advances an Hypothesis not agreeable to it, yet in many other places he very
plainly asserts (...). In the Proem of his Books (...), where he reckons up the
several Doctrines which were owned to be certain and firmly grounded on the
Tradition of the Church, he lays down this for one, That there shall be a time
of the Resurrection of the Dead, when this Body that is sown in corruption,
shall rise in incorruption. In the Second Book of the same Work, Chap. 10.
where he treats professedly of this Doctrine, he disputes against the Heretics
that denied the Resurrection, after this manner: There are some (says he)
especially among the Heretics that are offended at the Church's Belief of the
Resurrection, as if we believed foolishly and absurdly concerning it. To whom
we may answer thus. If even they themselves confess that there will be a
Resurrection of the Dead, let 'em answer us this Question, what that is which
died? Is it not the Body? The Resurrection therefore will be of the Body. Let
'em tell us besides, whether they think that we shall have Bodies in the
Resurrection, or not? I think, since the Apostle St. Paul says, that it is sown
a natural Body, and shall be raised up a spiritual Body, they cannot deny but
that the Body is to rise, or that we are to have Bodies in the Resurrection.
Now since it is certain that we are to have Bodies in the Resurrection, and the
Body that fell are said to rise again (for nothing but that which fell, can
properly be said to rise again) there is no doubt but that our Bodies are
therefore to rise, that we may be again clothed with 'em. For this by a
natural consequence follows from that. For if our Bodies rise again, without
all doubt they therefore rise, that we may be again clothed with 'em. And if
it be necessary that we should be in Bodies, we ought not to be in any other
Bodies but our own. Now since it is true that they rise, and that they rise
Spiritual Bodies, there is no doubt but that they are to rise again without
their Corruption and Mortality: For it would be in vain for any one to rise
from the Dead, that he may die again. In his First Book Concerning the
Resurrection, as his Words are produced by Pamphilus in his Apology, he thus
disputes for it. Is it not absurd that this Body which bears the Scars of
Wounds received for Christ's sake, and which, as well as the Soul, endured
cruel Torments in Persecutions, and suffered the Punishments of Prisons, and
Bonds, and Stripes, which was burnt by Fire, cut with the Sword, devoured by
Wild Beasts, tormented on the Cross, and many other ways, should be defrauded
of the Rewards due to it for so great Sufferings? For does it not seem contrary
to all reason, that the Soul which did not suffer alone, should be rewarded
alone, and its Vessel, the Body, which served it with great labor, should
obtain no Reward of its Contentions and Victory? that the Flesh, which resists
its natural vicious Inclinations and Lusts, and preserves its Virginity with a
great deal of labor, which labor is more the labor of the Body than of the
Soul, or at least full as much, should be rejected as unworthy in the time of
Retribution, and the Soul only obtain the Crown. To the same purpose are those
Words produced by St. Jerome: Ad Pammachium adv. Joan. Hierosol.
We confess the Resurrection of Bodies, and of those too which were laid in the
Graves, or burnt to Ashes, that the Body of Paul shall rise, and be united to
the Soul of Paul, and that the Body of Peter shall rise, and be his Body again,
and so for all others. For it is not equitable that the Soul, which sinned in
one Body, should be punished in another: Neither does it become a just Judge to
reward a Body, when it was not that, but another which suffered for Christ. In
his Second Book Concerning the Resurrection, he had these Words: Ap. Pamphil.
Apol.
That the promise of the Resurrection of the Dead, is concerning this Body that
^en, appears from many places of the Holy Scriptures, and particularly from the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is styled the Firstborn from the
Dead. In the same Book he adds, that it is certain that our Savior arose with
that very Body which he received from Mary. Again in the same. If the Bodies of
Mankind be corrupted, they are able to exist again, being kept and preserved by
the Power of God to the time of their Resurrection. Now that they are to be
restored wheresoever they are, in whatsoever place they be, John thus declares
in his Revelation: And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and
Hell gave up the Dead which were in them. For by Sea there seems to be meant
all Waters in general; by Hell the Air seems to be understood; by Death the
Earth. Innumerable other places (says Pamphilus) He has to this purpose in his
Work Concerning the Resurrection. To these I shall add another out of the 28th
Book of his Comments on Esaiah, on those words, The Dead shall be raised up and
they that are in the Graves, shall rise. It is better Apud Pamphilum.
(says he) to say, that we shall all rise, that the Wicked may go into that
place where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth, and the Just may receive, every
one in his Order, according to the Merits of their good Deeds, when their
mortal Bodies shall be fashioned like to his Glorious Body. -- By the Graves of
the Dead here in this Place, and in many others, are to be understood, not only
those which are made on purpose for the reception of the dead Bodies, either
cut out in Rocks, or dug in the Earth, but all Places whatsoever, in which
either the whole Body of a Man, or any part of it lies. And though it may
happen that the several Parts of one and the same Body, may lie dispersed in
many Places, yet it is not absurd to call all those places in which any part of
the Body lies, the Graves of that Body. For if we do not so understand it, they
that are not buried in a Grave, but are drowned in the Sea, or lie exposed in
some desert Place, could not be reckoned amongst those of whom it is said, That
they shall be raised up out of their Graves. Which would be very absurd.

As he asserts in these Places the Resurrection of the Same numerical
Substance, so in many other Places of his Works he plainly asserts, that the
Body, when it rises, will be truly flesh, and retain its old Form and Shape.
His Apologist in Cod. 117. p. 295.
Photius, reckons this as one of those Tenets, which were falsely charged upon
him, That he denied the Resurrection of the flesh. So also his Apologist
Pamphilus, who produces the following places to prove that he asserted it, in
his Comment on the First Psalm: The same place is produced by St. Methodius.
ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64. c. 14.
As we retain (says he) the same species (of Body) from our Infancy to our old
Age, though the Characters may seem to be much altered; so we ought to
understand, that the very same Species which now we have, will remain in the
Life to come, but changed very much for the better. For it is necessary that the
Soul, which inhabits in Corporeal Places, should have such Bodies as are suited
to those Places in which it lives. And as if we were to live in the Sea, our
Bodies would be doubtless so ordered and constituted as is proper for such an
Habitation, as the Bodies of those Creatures are, which do there inhabit; so
now, since we are designed for the Celestial Habitations, it follows that the
qualities of our Bodies should be suited to the Glory of those Places.
Notwithstanding this the former Species will not be destroyed, though it be
made more Glorious. For as the Species of the Lord Jesus, or of Moses, or of
Elias, was the same in their Transfiguration with what it was before, so the
Species of the Saints will remain the same though made more Glorious. In his
Comment on the XVth Psalm, on those Words My Flesh shall rest in Hope: The Lord
Jesus Christ, says he, speaks this, whose Flesh first rested in Hope. For being
crucified and become the Firstborn of the Dead, and ascending up after his
Resurrection into Heaven he carried up with him his ^arthly Body, so that the
Heavenly Powers were amazed and astonished seeing flesh ascend up into Heaven.
For of Elias it is written, that he was taken up as it were into Heaven; and of
Enoch, that he was translated, yet it is not said that he ascended up into
Heaven. Let who ever will be offended with what I say: I confidently affirm,
that as Christ was the First Born from the Dead, so he First carried up flesh
into Heaven. Hence they say, Who is this that comes from Edom, i. e. from
among those that are born on the Earth,) with Garments died Red from Bozrah?
For they saw the Marks of the Wounds which were made in his Body: From Bozrah
i. e. in the Flesh which he took upon him. -- Alittle after. Because my Flesh
shall rest in Hope. In what Hope? not barely that it shall rise from the Dead,
but that it will also be taken up into Heaven. Here Pamphilus deservedly cries
out; What can be said by any one more evidently and clearly concerning the
Resurrection of the flesh? which he says will not only rise from the Dead, but
will also be taken up into Heaven (if it were the Body of a good Man) following
him who being the First Begotten from the Dead, first carried up the Nature of
flesh into Heaven. There were some that fansied that our Savior ascended up in
his Body no farther than to the Sun, and that there he left his Body. Which
ridiculous Fancy they grounded on those Words of the Psalmist (according to the
Greek) In the Sun He placed his Tabernacle. This Opinion was ascribed by some
to Origin, but Pamp^ilus shows that he was so far from maintaining that
Opinion, that he expressly opp^s it, and confutes it. Pa^lus concludes his
defense of Origin concerning the Resurrection, with these Words: Let them now
cease to be Impudent, who say that Origin confesses indeed the Resurrection of
the Body, but denies the Resurrection of the Flesh. Let them now leave off
reproaching him when they see that he places the Flesh of God the Word in
Heaven together with God the Word. I shall not here take Notice of the Dialogue
against the Marcionites, which is extant under Origen's Name, in which the
Catholic Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Same Humane Body, is zealously
asserted and maintained against those Heretics. I do not take it to be
Origen's. Yet it is certain that it is very ancient. There are some that reckon
Origin among the Asserters of the Millennarian Doctrine, which Doctrine
supposes a Resurrection of a true Humane Body: But I think it is a Mistake.

Quis haec audiens, resurrectionem carnis eum negare putet? So St. Jerome, after
those Words of Origin, which I but now transcribed from him. Who would believe,
that Origin, who in so many Places of his Works acknowledges the Resurrection
of the Same Humane Body, should in others advance quite contrary Notions and
Opinions? Whatever Pamphilus alleges in his behalf, it is too too True that he
did so. You desire me to give you a particular account of his Opinions relating
to the Resurrection: Huetius, I remember, in his Origeniana treats largely of
'em: But I have not that Work at present by me. You must therefore be contented
with what I have to present you of my own. In short they are These.

1. That in some places of his Works he advances this Opinion, That the Body in
the Resurrection is made up of new Particles, by growing, as Corn does, out of
a Seed, I have already shown.

In the First Canon of the Council of Trulla, it is said that He, and his
Followers, Evagrius and Didymus, spoke wickedly and contumeliously of the
Resurrection of the Dead. Aristinus tells us more particularly, that they
foolishly said, that these very Bodies that we now have are not to rise. They
denied, says the Anonymous Author De Synodis, the Resurrection of that Body
which now we have. They taught, says another Ap. Lambecii. Notas in Codinum, p.
182.
Anonymous Writer De Synodis, That our Bodies are not to rise.

Epiphanius Ancorat. c. 89.
tells us that the Followers of Origin acknowledged the Resurrection of the
Dead, and of our flesh, and of the Body of our Lord, the same that was
conceived of the Virgin Mary; yet they did not own that the same flesh shall
rise, but that another will be substituted by God in its Place. And the same
Ibid. c. 83.
he says was the Opinion of the Heretics called Hieracites, that there will be
a Resurrection of the flesh, but not of this which now we have, but another
which will be substituted in its Place.

2. St. Jerome De erroribus Origenis.
says, that the Followers of Origin, when urged by the Catholics, would
acknowledge the Resurrection, not only of the Body, but also of the flesh, and
if they were pressed very hard and were asked whether they owned the
Resurrection of this same Flesh which we now have, which is seen, and touched,
and walks and speaks, they would assent even to that too: But if they were
asked whether they owned that the Body in the Resurrection will have Hands and
Feet, a Belly, Breast, Teeth, and the other Parts which make up a Humane Body;
that they denied.

3. The same Ad Pammach. adv. Joan. Hierosol.
Author tells us that Origin in many places of his Works, especially in his IV.
Book Concerning the Resurrection, and in his Exposition of the First Psalm, and
in his Stromata, denied that the Body will rise with Bones, Blood, and flesh,
and such Parts and Members as now we have, or with difference of Sexes; and
affirmed that it will be Aereal, Ethereal, intangible, and invisible, and that
whereas we now see with our Eyes, hear with our Ears, work with our Hands, and
walk with our Feet; we shall then be all Sight, all Hearing, etc. That the Body
will be Subtle and Ethereal, he asserts in his Comment on St. Matthew: And in
his Second Book against p. 28.
Celsus, we are told that the Body of Christ after his Resurrection, was so
constituted as to be of a middle Temper between the fineness of the Soul, and
the grossness it had before his Death. St. Maximus likewise observes that in
some of his Books ((...), so I read it, as a Manuscript has it, not (...), in
one of his Books) he made the rising Body to be Ethereal.

4. The Account which St. Methodius gives of his Opinion, is this: He tells us
in one Ap. Epiphan. Her. 64. c. 14.
place, that Origin taught, That in the Resurrection we shall have the same
species of Body, the same Form or Appearance, yet it will not consist of the
same Matter; as our Bodies in old Age retain the same Species, yet have not any
the same Particles which we had in our Youth. In another Ibid. c. 38.
place he says, that Origin in his Comment on the LXV. Psalm, compared our
Bodies to a Bladder full of Water; if you let the Water run, and keep pouring
in new, the Bladder retains the same form, though the Water be all changed; so
(says he) it is with the Body in the Resurrection, it is not numerically the
same Body, yet the Form and Figure is the same, though made more Glorious.

5. The same Author Ibid. c 15. and Ap. Phot. p. 923.
adds, that according to Origin, though the Body in the Resurrection retains the
same entire Species (or form) yet it throws off its earthly Qualities; and though
it has the Shape and Figure of a Body of Flesh, yet it is not flesh. And this
(says he) he proves from that Assertion of St. Paul, that Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven (which is spoken only of the Infirmities
and Corruptions of Flesh and Blood) and from other Texts of that kind.

6. The same Author tells us, in P. 923.
Photius, that Origin made the Body in the Resurrection, to consist of Air and
Fire.

7. From the Ap. Photium, p. 907.
same and Anastasius Sinaita in Hexaem. 1. II. p. 339. Theophilus Alex. Epist.
Pasch. 3. p. 532.
other Authors, it appears, that he asserted with the Platonists, that the Body
is no part of the Man, but the Soul alone is the whole Man; and that the Body
is the P^ison St. Methodius and Theophilus Alex. locis cit. Epiphanius Epist,
ad Joan, Hierof. Vol. 2. p. 31^.
of the Soul, into which it is sent by way of punishment for some Sin it had
committed in a state of Pre-existence.

8. Agreeable to this is that Fancy of his concerning the Creation of our
first Parents, Adam and Eve, That they were created nudae mentes, and had not
any Methodius ap. Photium, p. 910. and ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64. c. 17. ad 25.
etc. 42. Epiphanius ibid. c. 63, 65, 66, and in Ancorato, c. 62. Anastasius
Sinaita in Hexaem. I. 11. p. 338. Anonymus de Synodis. Alii.
Bodies 'till after their Fall; that then God clothed 'em with Bodies by way
of Punishment. And this he says is meant by that place in Genesis, where it is
said, that unto Adam and to his Wife did the Lord God make Coats of Skins, and
clothed them. By Coats of Skins he understands Bodies.

9. In his Books L. 5. p. 244.
against Celsus, he tells us that the reason why the Body is to rise, and be
united to the Soul, is because the Soul cannot move without a Material Vehicle.

10. In other places he tells us that the Soul is Methodius ap. Phot. See
Cudworth's Intellect. System, p. 818, etc.
never without a Material Vehicle, and that it is not capable of being rewarded
or punished but in a Body, and that before the Resurrection it is rewarded or
punished in an Ethereal Body.

11. In other places he proceeds so far as to deny that the Soul will after
Death be united to any Body whatever, and to asfirm that at the end of the
World all Corporeal Substance will be perfectly annihilated. Photius Epist. 1.
tells us that He, and his Followers, Evagrius and Didymus, asserted, that our
Bodies are not to rise, but our naked Souls alone without Bodies. So also says
De Sectis.
Constantinus Harmenopulus. And In Hexaem. p. 339.
Anastasi^s Sinaita intimates the same. We are told by De Sectis.
Leontius, that he owned a Resurrection of the Body, but held withal that the
Soul being punished in the Body, is purged by degrees, and at last freed wholly
from it, and restored to its primitive state and condition. Theophilus
Alexandrinus Epist. Pas^h. 2.
assures us, that he made the rising Bodies corruptible and mortal; and
asserted, that after many Ages they will be annihilated. That all Corporeal
Substance will be at the end of the World annihilated, he affirms in several
places of his Books (...), translated by St. Jerome in his Epistle to Avitus. So
St. Maximus In. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7.
observes, that tho in some of his Books he taught a Resurrection of an
Ethereal Body; yet in others he denied it, affirming that all corporeal
Substance will be annihilated.

12. In one place of his Work (...), he tells us, that at the time of the
Dissolution of the World, all Matter will be changed into the same Substance of
which God himself consists. In the same he asserts,

13. That as soon as the World is dissolved, and all Matter annihilated, there
will be new Matter, and a new World created just like this, and after that
another, and so on to Eternity; and that before this World was created there
had been innumerable others.

14. That in the next World he that is now a Man may be an Angel, and that
which is now an Angel may be a Man, by being, for it is offenses, thrust down
into a Humane Body. If, after it is sent down into a Body, it does not behave
itself so as to deserve to be restored to its former State, it will then (says
he) become a Devil; and according to its Merits, be employed in diverse Offices
in the other Worlds. if after this it desires to amend, and become better, it
is sent again into a Humane Body, and being there punished and purified, it at
last becomes an Angel, as it was at first.

These were the Opinions of Origin, relating to the Resurrection; these his
strange Contradictions and Inconsistences. How dangerous a thing it is in
matters of Religion to forsake the Traditions of the Church, and to build upon
ones own private Fancy, we may learn from his Example. If once you begin to
indulge your own Fancy in Matters of Religion, without a due Regard to the
Traditions of the Primitive Church, you know not where it will end. It Is odds
but the headstrong Thing will at last, after many Turns and Wanderings, bring
you to a Precipice.

No sooner were these Opinions advanced and published, but the Church began to
be alarmed. Liberatus Diaconus affirms, that Origin was Bre^iario c. 23.
Origenes damnatus, est mortuus, quivivens olim fuit an^e damnatus.
condemned for 'em in his lifetime. His Apologist Pamphilus, who flourished
and wrote about the latter end of the same Century, tells us, that that which
made the greatest Noise, and was chiefly opposed Et qu^niam inter cateras
criminationes quas eiinferunt, est et^m, quam maxim^m ponunt, quod
resurrectionem, scilicet mor^uorum, deneget.
was his Opinion concerning the Resurrection. The same Author tells us that
Eos, qui e^iam scripta de hoc edere adversus eum non pepercerunt.
several had written against him on that Subject. One of them was St.
Methodius, (he whom I have several times quoted) Bishop of Tire, who was
martyred about the Year CCCIII. He wrote a Book with this Title Against Origin,
Concerning the Resurrection: of which a great part is preserved in Her. 64.
Epiphanius and Cod. 234.
Photius. The Opinion, which he opposes and confutes, is, First, That the
Rising Body will not consist of the same substance that was buried: Secondly,
That it will be not a Body of Flesh, but an Ethereal one. Another that wrote
against Origin Concerning the Resurrection was Antipater, Bishop of Bostra in
Arabia, who flourished long after, about the Year 460. A Third was Cited by S.
Maximus in coelest. Hierarch. By the same Author in Eccl Hierarch. c. 7. p.
421. he is cited by the Name of Olympius Hadr.
Ammon Hadrianopolites, whose Age I know not. To these I might add Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria, who writes against him in his Paschal Epistles; Vide Her.
64. and Epist. ad Joan. Hierosol.
Epiphanius, Vide librum ejus ad Pammachium adv. errores Joannis Hieros. and
librum de erroribus Origenis.
St. Jerome, the Emperor Vide Tracta^um ejus Contra Origenem ad Mennam Patr. ap.
Council. to. 5. p. 675. and Epistolam ad Concilium v. Genesis ibid. p. 679.
Justinian, and others.

In the Year 399, He, and his Opinions, were condemned and anathematized by
Vide Theophili Alex. Epistolas ad Hieronymum and Epiphan nium.
a Synod of Alexandria under the Patriarch Theophilus; who at the same time
expelled all those that professed 'em out of Egypt. In the Year 400, he was
condemned by a Synod called at Rome by P. Anastasius; after that by a Cyrillus
Scythop. Vita Sabae p. 364. 5.
Synod of Antioch under the Patriarch Ephraemius; a little after, by a Ibid.
Synod of Constantinople under the Patriarch Mennas; and at last by a General
Council, the Fifth, which was held in the Year 553.

I could easily fill you a Volume with the Testimonies and Authorities of the
Doctors of the Fourth and the following Ages; and could show you with how great
a Zeal the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same Humane Body has been always
maintained by the Church: But I remember I am to send you, not a Folio, but a
Manual; and I think the History of the Resurrection, which I have brought down
through the Two first and purest Ages of the Church, to the time of Origin, may
suffice to clear the truth of this Article of our Faith, by showing that the
Fathers of those Primitive times were Seconds to the Apostles, and abett the
same Doctrine which we deduced from Scripture.

The later Doctors of the Church we will call all together to a General Council
by their Creeds, and so seal our Doctrine with the great and Venerable Seal of
the whole Catholic Church. We have shown already from the Testimony of
Irenaeus and Tertullian, that in the Creed of the Catholic Church in their
time, the Resurrection of the flesh was one Article. It is so in that which is
extant in the L. 7. c. 42.
Apostolical Constitutions. It is so likewise in that which we commonly call
the Apostles Creed, which was generally believed even before the time of Expos.
in Symb.
Ruffinus, to have been written by the Apostles themselves. In our English
Translation we read, The Resurrection of the Body; but in the Originals, the
Greek and the Latin, it is, The Resurrection of the flesh. So 'twas read, as
Cum omnes Eccleliae ita sacramentum Symboli tradan^, ut postquam dixerant
Peccatorum remissionem, addant, Carnis Resurrectionem. Apol. adv. H^eron. See
Pearson on the Creed p. 371.
Russinus affirms, in all Churches. That the Latin Churches read Carnis
Resurrectio, appears not only from Rufsinus, but likewise from He intimates
that it was so in the Creed of the whole Catholic Church: In Symbolo fidei and
spei nostrae, quod ab Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in charta and
atramento, sed in tabulis cordis carnalibus, post confessionem Trinitatis, and
unitatem. Ecclesiae omne Christianae dogmatis sacramentum, carnis resurrectione
includitur. Adv. Joan. Hierosol.
St. Jerome, St. Austin, Chrysologus, and Maximus Taurinensis, whose Expositions
on the Creed are now extant, and from diverse others, That it was (...) The
Resurrection of the flesh in the Creed of the ancient Church of Jerusalem, is
apparent from Cateches^ 18.
St. Cyril Bishop of that Church. It is so in the Greek Creed, which is extant
at the end of K. Ethelstan's Psalter in Sir John Cotton's Library; and in that
of the Bodleian Library which is written in Saxon Characters, at the end of the
Acts of the Apostles; a Manuscript of above a Thousand Years old. In the Church
of Aquileia they had one Word peculiar to themselves. For instead of the
Resurrection of the Flesh, they read, to make it more express, (because some of
the Origenists would talk of a new Flesh) Ruffinus. See Pearson p. 371.
The Resurrection of this Flesh.

The several Councils which were called in the Fourth Century, relating chiefly
to the Controversies of the Arians, the confessions of Faith, which they
published, have not, for the most part, any thing express concerning the
Resurrection of the Flesh. The Nicene Creed, and those of most of the Synods of
that Age, express only thus much: That Christ will Come to judge the Quick and
the Dead. But that the Resurrection of the Flesh was the Doctrine of the
Council of Nice, may particularly appear from that Confession which the
Heretic Arius, and the rest of his Party of Alexandria, presented to the
Emperor Constantine, after they had been condemned by that Council, to persuade
him that they were truly Orthodox, and came up fully to the Doctrine of the
Council. In that Socr. 1. 26. Sozom. 11. 27.
Confession it is (...). So also in the Confession Socr. 11, 10.
of the Synod of Antioch, and in that of Epiphan. Har. 52. c. 3.
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra. And in that of the Eighty Ap. S. Hilarii
Fragmenta, p. 440.
Eastern Bishops who sided with the Arians at Sardica.

In the Creeds of the Second and Sixth General Councils, and in that which in
the time of Ancorato, c. 121.
Epiphanius was wont to be recited by the Converts that were to be baptized, it
is only, The Resurrection of the Dead. In that ascribed to St. Athanasius we
profess that all Men shall rise again with their Bodies. That of P. Damasus
delivers it thus: Ap. Op. B. Hieron. to. 4. p. 66. In hujus morte and sanguine
credimus emundatos nos and ab eo resuscitandos die novissimo in hac carne qua
nunc vivimus.
We believe that we shall be raised up in the same Flesh in which we now live.
I need not mention Ibid. p. 67. Resurrectionem etiam carnis consitemur, and
credimus, ut dicamus nos in eadem in qua nunc sumus veritate membrorum esse
reparandos, qualesque semel post resurrectionem fuerimus effecti, in perpetuum
permansuros.
that of St. Jerome. What his Belief was, appears sufficiently from the several
places where I have already cited him. He is positive in this, that it is not
possible to understand the Doctrine of the Resurrection as professed by Adv.
Joan. Hierosol. Ego libere dicam, and quanquam torqueatis labia, ^hatis
capillum, applaudatis pede, Judaeorum lapides inquiratis, ^idem Ecclesi^
apertissime consitebor. Resurrectionis veritas catholicae, sine carne and
ossibus, sine sanguine and membris intelligi non potest.
the Catholic Church, any otherwise than of a true Humane Body.

Ruffinus in the same Age, being suspected with John Bishop of Jerusalem, as
favoring the Opinion of Origin, to clear himself, and the Bishop, from that
Scandal, makes this Profession of Faith in his own and the Bishop's Name, in
the Preface to his Translation of Pamphilus's Apology for Origin. Nos autem,
s^cut traditum est nobis a sanctis patribus, retinemus quod fillus Dei in ea
ipsa carne in qua passus est, resurrexit a mortuis, propter quod and
resurrectionis spem humano generi tribuit. Carnis vero resurrectionem non per
aliquas praestigias, sicut nonnulli calumniantur, dicimus: Sed hanc ipsam
carnem in qua nunc vivimus resurrecturam credimus, non aliam pro alia, ^ec
corpus aliud quam hujus carnis dicimus. Sive ergo corpus resurrecturum dieimus,
secundum Apostolum dicimus, hoc enim nomine usus est ille: Sive carnem dicimus
secundum traditionem Symboli confitemur. Stulta enim adinventio calum^iae est,
corpus humanum aliud putare esse quam carnem. Sive ergo caro secundum communem
sidem, sive corpus secundum Apostolum dicitur quod resurget, ita credendum est
sicut Apostolus definivit, quia quod resurget in virtute, resurget and in
gloria, and incorruptibile refurget, and spiritale corpus, quia corruption
incorruptionem non possidebit. Salvis ergo his prerogativis futuri corporis ve^
caruis, resurrectio carnis credenda est integre atque perfect, ut and natura
carnis (...) servetur, and incorrupti ac spiritalis corporis status and gloria
non in^ringatur. Sic enim scriptum est. Haec in Hierosolymis in Ecclesia Dei a
sancto Sacerdote ejus Joanne praedicantur, haec nos cum ipso and dicimus and
tenemus. Si quis praeter haec vel credit, vel docet, vel a nobis aliter credi
quam exposuimus putat, anathema sit.
We believe, as it has been delivered down to us from the Holy Fathers, that
the Son of God arose from the Dead in the very same Flesh in which he suffered,
by which he gave us also hope of a Resurrection. We speak of the Resurrection
of the Flesh not in a shuffling and deceitful manner, as some falsely accuse us,
but we believe that this very Flesh, in which we now live, shall rise, not
another instead of it, neither do we mean any other Body besides this of Flesh.
If therefore we say that the BODY shall rise, we speak according to the
Apostle, for he uses that Word: If we say that the FLESH is to rise, we make
our Confession according to the Tradition of the Creed. It Is a foolish thing to
accuse us as if we thought a Humane Body could be any thing besides Flesh.
Whether therefore that which shall rise be called FLESH, according to the
Creed, or BODY, according to the Apostle, it is so to be believed as the
Apostle has set it forth, that that which shall rise, shall rise in Power and
Glory, and shall rise an Incorruptible, and a Spiritual Body, that Corruption
shall not inherit Incorruption. Saving therefore these Prerogatives of the Body
or Flesh in the other Life, the Resurrection of the Flesh is to be believed
wholly and perfectly, so that both the same nature of Flesh may be retained,
and the state and glory of an incorrupted and spiritual Body may not be
violated. For so it is written. These things are preached in Jerusalem in the
Church of God by the holy Bishop John. These things I, together with him,
profess and maintain. If any one either believes or teaches any other Doctrine,
or thinks that we believe any other than this we have now set forth, let him be
accursed.

The Creed of the Resurrectionem vero fu^uram humanae credimus carnis.

The same Council: Si quis dixerit vel crediderit corpora humana non resurgere
post mortem, anathem^ ^it.


First Council of Toledo, in the Year 400 has thus: We believe there will be a
Resurrection of the Flesh of Mankind. That of the Fourth Council of Toledo in
the Year 633. Resuscitandi ab ^o in qua nunc vivimus carne; and in ea qua
resurrexit idem Dominus form^.
We are to be raised up by Christ in the same Flesh in which we now live, and
in the same Form in which he himself rose. That of the Eleventh Council of the
same Church in the Year 675. Hoc ergo exemplo capitis nostri confitemur veram
fieri resur. carnis omnium mortuorum. Nec in aerea, vel, qualibet alia carne
surrecturos nos credimus (ut quidam delirant) sed in ista qua vivimus,
consistimus, and movemur.
According to the Example of our Head, (i. e. Christ) we confess that there
will be a true Resurrection of the Flesh of all the Dead. Neither do we believe
that we shall rise in an Aereal or any other kind of Flesh, (as some have
delirously fansied) but in that in which we live, have our being, and move.
Boethius in his Confession of Faith: Et hoc est principale religionis nostrae,
ut credamus, non solum animas non perire, sed ipsa quoque corpora, quae mortis
adventus resolverat, in statum pristinum futura beatitudine reparari.
This is principally required in our Religion, that we believe, not only that
our Souls do not perish, but also that our Bodies themselves which are
dissolved by death, are restored in the life to come to their former state.

Vigilius Tapsensis: L. 6. De Trin. ter op. S. Athanasii. Si quis confitetur
quod Deus animam hominis tantum fecerit, and Satanas ei corpus plasmaverit,
quod ab^it, anathema illi. Si quis confitetur animas hominum in revolutionem
^rsus in mundo, aut in hominibus, aut in pecudibus, aut in serpentibus reverti,
anathema illi. Si quis consitetur hominem in anima tantum in diem judicii,
resurg^re, and non cum corpo^e, quemadmodum Deus illum fecit, anathema illi.
If any one says that a Man will not rise in the Day of Judgment in the Body,
as God made him, let him be accursed.

To conclude, though the Church of England in the vulgar Translation of the
Apostles Creed, uses only these Terms, The Resurrection of the Body, yet in her
Form of Public Baptism, the Person to be baptized is asked, in his
Representative the Godfather, Do thou believe the Resurrection of the flesh?

I have now -- But I cannot yet say, I have now done. Before I put an end to
this History, I shall crave your leave to offer to your Consideration, what I
had almost forgotten, an Observation, or two, relating to some of those
Primitive Writers whose Authorities we have above produced.

My first Observation is this, That the greatest part of 'em were not only bred
up in the Prejudices and Infidelity of the Heathens, but were likewise by
Profession Philosophers and Lawyers: And what Opinion the Philosophers, and
learned Greeks had of the Doctrine of the Resurrection, as professed by the
Christians, is very notorious. I have shown in the beginning of this Discourse,
that even among the Greeks there were many Opinions which were founded on an
ancient Tradition concerning the Resurrection, and that it was in some sense
believed by many of their Philosophers: Notwithstanding it is certain, that, as
it was understood by the Christians, it was by all the Greeks in general
exploded. Not any one Christian Doctrine so generally, and with so much
contempt, rejected. There was not any one Sect (says U^ carnis resurrection
negetur de un^ omnium Philosophor^m Schola sumitur.
Tertullian) among all the Philosophers, but what denied it. They did (...),
with all imaginable opposition, contend against it, says the Author of the
Questions and Answers ad Graecos. Thus St. In nulla re tam vehementer, tam
pertinaciter, tam obnixe, and con^entiose contradicitur fidei Christianae,
sicut de carnis Resurrectione. Nam and de animi immortalitate multi etiam
Philosophi Gentium multa disputaverunt, and immortalem esse animum humanum,
pluribus and multiplicibus libris conscriptum reliquerunt. Quum ventum fuerit
ad resur. carnis, non titubant, sed apertissime contradicunt and contradictio
eorum talis est, ut dicant fieri non posse, ut c^ro ista terrena possit in
coelum ascendere. Expos. Psalm. 88.
Austin affirms that there was nothing in the Christian Religion, so
vehemently, so pertinaciously, and with so much contention and earnestness
opposed as the Resurrection of the Flesh. Of the Immortality of the Soul (says
he) many of the Heathen Philosophers have discoursed at large. And in very many
of their Writings they assert it. But when they come to the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Flesh, they do not so much as hesitate about it, but
vehemently oppose it, and they say that it is impossible that this earthly Flesh
should ascend up into Heaven. Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 7. Imperfectae vero in homine
naturae praecipua solatia, ne D^um quidem posse om^ia. Namque nec sibi potest
mortem consciscere, si velit, quod homini dedit optimum in tantis vi^ poenis:
Ne^c mortales aeternitate donare, aut revocare defunct^s; n^c facere, ^t qui
vixit, non vixerit, etc.
Pliny affirms that it is beyond the Power even of God himself to raise up a
Body to life when once it is dead. And it is Vide supra ubi de Democriti dogmate.
Madness to him to believe there will be any such thing. To Celsus this
Doctrine seemed abominable, or (...) ap. Orig. 1. 5. p 240.
worthy to be spit at, as extremly impure. Cont. Jul. 1. 7. ad finem.
St. Cyril of Alexandria tells us, that the Emperor Julian (...).
derided this above all the Tenets of the Christians. They (...), 1. 5. c. 7.
mocked at it, says the author of the Apostolical Constitutions. And Origin C.
Cells. (...).
says it was a common subject of Laughter. Cecilius in Minucius Felix calls it
Fabu^as aniles
an old Wife's Tale. And Tatian assures us, that the Heathens were wont to look
upon the Christians as (...), p. 146.
pitiful Triflers and Bablers for asserting it. My conclusion is this: That if
the Doctrine of the Identity, or Resurrection of the very same Body, had not
been looked upon in those Primitive Times as firmly established on the Authority
of Christ and his Apostles, if it had been looked upon only as a Scholastical
Doctrine, or a Dogma that might be dispensed with, those learned and acute Men
(of whom we speak) when converted from their Heathenism, would never have
embraced it, as I have proved they did.

In the Second place it is worthy to be observed, that those Books out of which
I have taken their Testimonies, were many of 'em written professedly in Answer
to the Objections of the Heathen Philosophers. And if the Doctrine of a new
Ethereal Body, which Origin afterward made bold to advance, could have been
warranted by the Scripture, and the Traditions of the Apostles, how gladly
would those Fathers have taken hold of it! That the Soul is never without an
Ethereal Body, was (as we have already observed) a common Opinion of the Greek
Philosophers: Now how easy had it been for those Fathers to answer all the
Cavils and Objections and Flouts of their insulting Adversaries, by proposing
this Notion! How easy had it been to remove that great Stumbling Block which
lay in their way to Christianity! They were too learned and too acute
Philosophers, not to think on it; but they knew it was not agreeable to the
Doctrine delivered to the Saints.

Perhaps it may be alleged, that the Reason why the Primitive Fathers believed
the Resurrection of the same Humane Body, was because they believed that after
the Resurrection Christ is to come upon Earth, and the Saints are to abide with
him here a Thousand Years.

Perchance you may be apt to suspect, that this was the chief Foundation of
that gross Notion which they so generally entertained of the rising Body.

To remove such a Suspicion as that is, I need only tell you, that not only the
Patrons of the Millennarian Doctrine, but such also as rejected that Doctrine,
asserted the Resurrection of the same Humane Body.

Though many of those ancients whose Authorities we have produced, asserted the
Millennium, such as Papias, the Author of the Sibylline Oracles, Justin M.,
Iren^us, Tertullian, and Hippolytus: Yet others there are amongst 'em, that did
not embrace that Doctrine. It does not at all appear, that either St. Clement
of Rome, or St. Ignatius, or Theophilus of Antioch, or Tatian, or Minucius
Felix, were asserters of it. On the contrary it appears that the wise and
learned Athenagoras did not believe it. I observe that he asserts, that after
the Resurrection there will be no such Things as Inanimate Beings, which is
plainly repugnant to the Doctrine of the Millennium. In his Discourse of the
Resurrection, he argues after this Manner: If God (says he) is unwilling to
raise the Dead, it is either because it is Unjust, or because it is Unworthy.
But it is not Unjust, for if it be so, it must be an Injury either to those
that are raised, or to some other being. It cannot be an Injury to any other
Being: For Intellectual Beings (or Angels) are not at all damnified by it,
(...), etc. p. 204. Ed. Oxon. 1682.
neither can it be an Injury to Irrational or Inanimate Beings: For after the
Resurrection there will be no such Beings. And to that which is not, there can
be no Injury done. But admit that there should be such things then in being,
yet the Resurrection of Mankind would be to them no Injury, etc. Neither was
Clemens Alexandrinus an asserter of the Millenium: I know it is suspected by
some learned Men that he was: But that he was not, I gather from a place in his
Treatise concerning the Salvability of Rich Men. He was (...) p. (...). 8. Ed.
Oxon. 1683.
made (says he, speaking of the Young Man re-converted by St. John) a Trophy of
the Resurrection that is hoped for, when in the end of the World the Angels
shall carry up those, who are truly Penitent, to the Supercelestial Habitations.

I have now done with my History and Proofs of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection. And by this time, I hope, you are so well satisfied of the Truth
and certainty of it, as to be ready to ask me that Question of St. Paul: How
say some among You that there is no Resurrection? The fourth and last thing I
proposed to do, was to answer the Objections of such as say, there will be no
Resurrection. And this I shall now in the next place endeavor to do.

The First Objection is taken from the Difficulty of it. There are not only
many Men whom Necessity and Famine have forced to devour one another, but there
are many whole Nations in the World that are wont to feed ordinarily on Humane
Flesh. You may add that we are all in some sense Canibals and Man-eaters, we
devour one another, we eat our dead Neighbors, our Brothers, our Fathers, the
succeeding Generation swallows down the former, though we prey not upon 'em, in
the same manner, as some other Canibals do, yet, by a subtle Cookery of Nature,
we eat 'em at second Hand. This is true in some Measure: From the Bodies of the
Dead springs up Grass, this when eaten by the Ox, is turned into Flesh; this we
eat, and the Flesh of the Ox becomes ours. Plutarch (...) Marii.
tells us that when the Cimbrians were defeated by Marius, there fell so great
a Number of 'em that the whole Field was dung'd (as one may say) with their
dead Bodies, and afforded the next Season an extraordinary rich and plentiful
Crop. Others tell us of a certain Roman who fed his Fishes with the Bodies of
his Slaves, whom he threw into his Ponds, that he might feed at second Hand on
Man's Flesh. Now since the substance of one Man's Body, becomes the substance
of another Man's Body, how (you will say) can the Bodies of both be raised
again?

This Objection is a very considerable one, and has been all along urged
against the Doctrine of the Resurrection, not only by our later Scepticks but
anciently (as I but now observed) by the Heathen Philosophers. I shall not
deny, as Athenagoras seems to do, that the substance of one Man's Body, when
eaten by another, turns to nourishment and becomes the Flesh of that other that
eats it. It sufficiently appears that they that eat Humane Flesh to satisfy
their Hunger, are relieved and cherished, and, of consequence, nourished by it.
But my Answer is this:

That God Almighty who has engaged his Promise that the Bodies of all Men shall
rise again, will take care so to order all things relating to our Nourishment,
as that that may not hinder his Promise from being fullfill'd. He will take
care that the Particles of One Man's Body shall never so become the Particles
of another Man's Body, as that the Resurrection of either should be thereby
rendered impossible. It Is an Observation of the most accurate Sanctorius,
grounded on infallible Statick Experiments, that not above the Fiftieth Part of
what a Man takes into his Body turns to Nourishment. From hence I make this
following Inference:

Should an Ox, for Example, feed only on such Grass as grew in that Field which
was impregnated by the Dead Bodies of the Cimbrians (but now mentioned) as the
Grass would not consist wholly of those Particles which belonged to the dead
Bodies, but would chiefly consist of other more common Particles, those of Rain
and the like, so not above the 50th Part (perhaps a much less proportion) of
the Grass which is eaten, would become the Flesh of the Ox, and not above the
50th Part of that Flesh of the Ox which is eaten by a Man, would be turned into
the Substance of the Man. Should a Man feed on Corn that grew in such a Field,
as the Corn would consist not wholly of the Humane Particles, but chiefly of
others; so not above the 50th Part of the Corn so eaten would become the Flesh
of him that ate it. The same may be said of him who ^ed his Fishes with the
Bodies of his Slaves: As the Fish must be supposed to receive their Nourishment
from those Bodies, not wholly, but only in part, so not above the 50th part of
the Substance of the Fish (you may say much less, considering the unfitness of
Fish for Nourishment) would become the Flesh of the Eater. It is plain, that
even according to the common course and nature of Nutrition, were there no
particular Providence concerned in the matter, there would be in such Cases but
very few Particles in any Man's Body which belonged before to another. Should
one Man devour another wholly (in this the great Strength of the Objection
lies) it appears from Sanctorius's Observation that not above the 50th part of
the Flesh of the Person devoured would become the Flesh of him that ate it. And
besides the other 49 parts of the Flesh, there would remain all the Bones
untouched, which make up a great (the most substantial) part of the Body.

It is further to be considered, that though the same Body that died is to rise
again, yet it is not necessary that all the Particles of it should be raised
up. It Is enough that such Particles are raised as made up the integrant and
necessary Parts of the Body. By necessary Parts, I mean those which remain
after the utmost degree of Maceration, without which the Body would not be
Integral, but Imperfect. And these are chiefly the Bones, the Skin, the Nerves,
the Tendons, the Ligaments, and the Substance of the several Vessels. As long
as these, and all that are necessary to Life, remain, the Body is truly Whole,
though never so much macerated. All the Flesh that is added makes nothing at
all to the Wholeness or Integrality of the Body, though it conduce to Strength
and Ornament. And this is that Flesh which would chiefly turn to Nourishment if
the Body were devoured. The Substance of the Vessels, Tendons, etc. are not so
apt for Nourishment. If the dying Body be extremely macerated, I do not doubt
but that in the Resurrection it will be restored by foreign and adventitious
Matter to its due and just Proportion. So in Bodies that are full and fleshy,
there is a great deal of substance that is not necessary, which if it become the
Flesh of another Man, the Body may be raised up without it, and yet be still
Physically Whole and truly the same. In Bodies that are Fat and Grass, there is
doubtless a great deal superfluons, which will never be raised up, though it
were never made the Ingredient of another Man's Body. To sum up all in a word:
I say that God Almighty, who has promised that the Bodies of all Men shall be
raised up again to Life, will so order all things relating to our Nourishment,
as that those Particles, of which the necessary Parts of one Man's Body were
compounded, shall never become the Particles of the necessary Parts of another
Man's Body: At least he will take care that they may not continue to be so at
the time of his Death.

If Providence has decreed that not only the necessary Particles, but that all
the Particles of the dying Body shall be raised up again, it will take such
care of our Nourishment, as that the Particles of one Man's Body shall never
continue to be part of another Man's Body at the time of his Death. God will
take care that no one shall die whilst his Body contains any Particles that
belong to another. But (as I said) it is not at all necessary that we should
believe thus much.

Mr. Boil in his Treatise concerning the Possibility of the Resurrection, in
answer to this Objection, which we have now examined, alleges, that it is not
necessary that any of the same Flesh should be raised up: It Is enough, he says,
if the Bones are raised up and clothed with new Flesh. And this he proves from
the Prophet Eccechiel's Description of the Mystical Resurrection, where (says
he) only the same Bones were raised up, and the Flesh, etc. was made up of new
Matter. But how does it appear that in that Resurrection the Flesh is to be
understood to be made up not of the former, but of new Particles?

He alleges moreover that the Body, which rises, may be said to be the same
with that which was buried, though it contain in it but a very small part of
the same Substance. He observes that St. Paul's comparing the Resurrection to
the growing of Corn, seems to justify the supposition of a Plastic Power in
some part of the matter of a deceased Body, whereby, being Divinely excited, it
may be enabled to take to it self fresh Matter, and so subdue and fashion it,
as thence sufficiently to repair or augment itself. This is wholly the
Hypothesis of Origin. He adds, that the Alcalisate Ashes of a certain Plant
like our English red Poppy, being sown in a Garden, has been known to produce
certain Plants larger and fairer than any of that Kind that had been seen in
those Parts. Which seems, says he, to argue, that in the saline and earthy, i.
e. the fixed Particles of a Vegetable, that has been dissipated and destroyed by
the Violence of the Fire, there may remain a Plastic Power enabling them to
contrive disposed Matter, so as to re-produce such a Body as was formerly
destroyed. However to this Plastic Power, residing in any Portion of the
destroyed Body itself, he is not willing to have recourse. He rather believes,
that God by his Omnipoten^e will perform the thing, and work up some of the
Particles of the deceased Body, together with the adjacent Matter, into a
Humane Body. And the Body which is so worked up may be called (as he tells us)
the same Body.

This is not to de^end the Doctrine of the Resurrection, but to give it up to
it is Adversaries, and to advance another Doctrine instead of it. For it is not
true that a Body so made up, may be called the same with that which died. How
can a Grain of Corn, that is grown up, be said to be the same with that which
was sown? I have owned already that the Identity of our Bodies in this Life,
does not consist in the Identity of Particles: I have granted that our Bodies
in our old age are the same with those which we had when Infants, or in our
Mothers Womb, tho they have not in 'em any one Particle the same. But I said
withal, and the same I say here again, that it does not therefore follow that
the rising Body may be the same with that which was buried, tho it have not
any, or but few, of the same Particles. The Identity of the Body here in this
Life consists in a sit Construction and Organization of successively fleeting
Particles of matter. The Identity of the Rising Body, or it is sameness with
that which died, can consist in nothing else but in the Restoration of the
same Particles of Matter, which made up the necessary Parts of the dying Body,
to their former Construction.

Another Objection concerning the Difficulty of the Resurrection, is this: We
are told by some, that allowing Five or Six Foot deep in Churchyards and
Burying-places, and One Foot deep in other parts of the Earth where the
Particles of Humane Bodies may be supsos'd to have been dropped and scattered by
the Wind, there will hardly be fit Matter enough in the whole Surface of the
Earth to make up so many Humane Bodies as there have been, and will be, in the
World.

Should I show that here in England alone, which is but a very small Part of
the Globe of the Earth, if you go but One single Foot deep, there is as much
Substance as would make up all the Bodies of Mankind that ever were, or ever
will be, though the World should last in all 10000 Years; should I show thus
much, I suppose it would be granted that the weakness of this Objection would
be sufficiently exposed. I shall not only undertake to prove that, but I shall
undertake to demonstrate that in less than the 17th Part of the Kingdom (which
is much less than the biggest of our Counties) there is more than enough to do
it. I demonstrate it thus:

1. It appears by the best Calculations, that there are in England about Forty
Millions of Acres: In every Acre there are 43560 square Feet. There are
therefore in the whole Kingdom about 1742400000000 Square Feet.

2. Its supposed by the most Judicious, that in all the World there may be
living at one time, old and young, about Three Hundred Millions of People. It
appears by the Weekly Bills, that there are born and die every Year about the
Thirtieth Part of Mankind. Therefore Thirty Years must be allowed for one Age.
Now if we multiply Three Hundred Millions by as many Thirties as are contained
in 10000 Years, the whole Number of Mankind in 10000 Years will amount to but
little more than 99999000000, which is not the Seventeenth Part of the Number
of square Feet contained in England. By allowing three hundred millions one Age
with another, I have allowed much more than three hundred Millions to be at
this time living in the World. For in the first Ages of the World, and after
the Flood, there were but very few.

3. A solid Foot of common Earth contains in it Substance more than enough to
make up a Humane Body, Men, Women, and Children considered one with another.
For it weighs about Fivescore and Thirteen Pound; whereas the weight of an
ordinary Man is no more than Ten Stone, or Sevenscore Pound. If therefore
allowance be made for the Bodies of Women, who generally weigh much less than
Men, and for those of Children under Sixteen Years of Age, who are half the
Number of Mankind (Infants under Five Years of Age, who weigh but very little,
are reckoned one Quarter of Mankind) I say, if we make this allowance, it will
plainly appear that the weight of a Humane Body, taking one with another, is
not so great as the weight of a Solid Foot of common Earth. It is manifest
therefore, that in less than the Seventeenth Part of England, if you go but One
Foot deep, there is as much Substance as would make up all the Humane Bodies
that ever were, are, and will be, though the World should last in all 10000 Years.

We will give the Objector leave to suppose that the World will last in all
20000 Years, and that there are in the World, one Age with another, Six Hundred
Millions of Humane Bodies, yet in less than one Quarter of the Kingdom of
England, there would be within a Foot of the Surface, more Earth than would
weigh down all. I need not here put him in mind that the Sea has devoured many
Millions of Bodies.

It appears from what has been said, that the Resurrection of all the Bodies of
Mankind is not impossible. And since it is not impossible, there is not any
difficulty in it. For all things that are possible, are equally easy to an
Omnipotent Agent. It Is an Assertion of Hist. Not. 1. 7. c. 7.
Pliny's (as has been already observed) That God himself is not able to raise
up a dead Man to Life. But whatever he thought of his Gods, and whatever were
his Notions concerning the Power of the Deity, there is no one now can doubt of
God's Power and Sufficiency.

I need not endeavor to demonstrate that he is able to distinguish and to
gather together the confused and scattered Particles of our several Bodies,
howsoever blended, and workt in with other Matter, and to range and mould 'em
as they were before. I need not endeavor to demonstrate that he is able to
provide that the Particles which compounded the necessary Parts of one Man's
Body, shall never belong to the necessary Parts of another, or that they shall
not be the Particles of another at the time of his Death. He that created all
the Particles that are in the Universe, He that made all the Bodies, that ever
were, out of 'em, He in whose Book are all our Members, and our Particles,
written, how can he be ignorant to what uses each Particle has been put, and
where they are all reposited? He who first created our Bodies, and formed 'em
of the Dust of the Earth, how can it be difficult for him to raise up the Dust
of the Grave, and make it declare his Truth? He that first commanded Man to
come as it were out of Nothing, what can hinder but that he should be obeyed
when he shall be pleased to command the Children of Men to come again? If so
mean a Thing as a Loadstone can distinguish and gather together the little
Particles of Iron that lie confused and undistinguished in the Dust; how much
more shall the Almighty Magnetism of Him that made the Loadstone, be able to
distinguish and raise up together the confused and lost Particles of our
Bodies? If Mercury, when dead and dissolved, can, even by the Power of Nature,
be reduced and restored to its Life and Being, how much more shall the great
God of Nature be able to reduce and restore our dead and dissolved Bodies to
their former State? I shall not any longer insist on these things. There is no
one can doubt of the Resurrection on the account of the difficulty of it, but
such as with the Athenians worship an Unknown God.

The Third Objection is taken from the unworthiness of these our Bodies, and
from their unfitness to be made the Habitation of the Soul in the next Life,
which is to be in Heaven, and Everlasting. The Consideration of the Impureness
of these our Bodies made the Heathen Philosophers deride and abominate the
Doctrine of the Resurrection. To hope for the Resurrection of the Body, says
Ap. Orig. (...). 5. p 240.
Celsus, becomes rather the Worms, than Men: And what Man's Soul, says he,
would ever desire to be reunited to a Body that is already rotten? Thus a
Naked Gospel.
late Author, to disgrace this Doctrine, is pleased to call the Body a Load of
Carrion, and to compare it to course nasty Rags.

I shall not say, in answer to Celsus, that the Soul will ever desire to return
to the Body purely for the Body's sake, Neither are we to regard what the Soul
might perhaps desire, but what God has ordered to be done. Were the Soul to
wish without any regard to the Will and Good-pleasure of God, I am apt indeed
to believe she would hardly desire to be re-conjoined to her Body. But neither
would she wish to be in any Body whatever: She would not be what she is, not a
Soul, but a Seraphim. But is the Clay to say to the Potter, Why do thou make
me thus? The Ambition of the Soul must stoop to the Pleasure of God. Her Wishes
and Desires must all con-center in the Will of her Almighty Maker and
Preserver. As she must be contented with that middle degree of Glory in which
God has placed her, so likewise she must be contented with that Colleague and
Companion which he shall think fit to assign her. When he shall be pleased to
command her to return to her old Habitation, though it were as to a Prison, she
must humbly and resignedly submit to his good Pleasure: Behold the Handmaid of
the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word.

But why should we imagine that the Soul, when she shall be remanded to her
Body, will look upon herself as sent to a Prison? That House, which was once a
Prison, may be turned to a Palace, and such a one too as the Owner of it would
be glad to live in forever. Were the wretched and disorderly House, in which my
Soul now lives, to continue always just such as it is, she would doubtless
think herself happy in being sent for abroad, and, with reason, be glad to
continue always from home. This Flesh, in which we now live, may at present be
deservedly styled a Prison, or a Burden, or an Enemy, or whatsoever else is not
Declamation and Irreverence. It Is our Church in her Office of Burial that calls
it the Burden of the Flesh: And it is the Author of Ecclesiasticus, that tells
us, that the corruptible Flesh presses down the Soul. Such indeed is our
Earthly House of this Tabernacle, so foul, so inconvenient and ruinous, that I
know not who would be very fond of it. Who is there that can say, It is good
for us to be here? Romans VII. 18.
I know that in my Flesh, as at present it is, there dwells no good thing. We
are now in a Body of Death, as the Apostle himself calls it, and well may we
desire with the Apostle (and with much more reason than he) to be delivered
from it. But is this Body to be always thus constitution'd? Is it always to
remain this Needy and Impure, this Passionate, Lustful, Restive Body? We have
hitherto looked but on one Side of it; let us now look upon it in the Reverse.
Immortal, Incorruptible, Powerful, Spiritual, Celestial, Glorious! These are
the Attributes of the Body that shall be raised. And where is now the
unworthiness of it? Where is the unfitness to be made the Habitation of the
Soul? Was there heretofore a Law in our Members warring against the Law of our
Minds? Were there heretofore continual Feuas between the Flesh and the Spirit?
There is now a perpetual Peace: Their Quarrels and Bickerings are all at an
end: They are now no longer Enemies, but loving and faithful Friends. It is not
properly in the Nature of Flesh to oppose it self to the Soul, and to revolt
from its Duty and Subjection. It is naturally Quiet and Passive, and though in
this Life the Wheels and Movements of the Noble Machine are sometimes
disordered, yet in the next they will all move regularly and in obedience to
the Intelligence that governs it. When God shall be pleased to raise it up out
of the Grave, it will drop all its Passions and Restiveness, together with its
Impurities, and carry up nothing with it but its Natural Gentleness, and a Will
to be governed. Those Traces, which sensible Pleasures had imprinted on it,
will be all perfectly Obliterated, and the new Impressions which it will
receive will be truly worthy of Heaven and Eternity. Had our Bodies heretofore
many Infirmities? Were they sickly, or maimed, or crooked, or old, or otherwise
deformed? These Infirmities and all Imperfections are now done away. The Body
is newcast, the Mold worked better, and the Metal refined: The whole Figure
comes out with Vast Improvements; though the same as to all the Ideal
Rudiments, yet a much more curious and delicate Piece of Workmanship. Whatever
it was heretofore, it has now no real Deformity, no Wrincle, or Blemish, but
all is turned to Comeliness and Beauty. At least we shall then have a truer
Notion of Beauty and Deformity, and that which now passes for Ugliness will
then appear to be no such thing.

Hoec est vera resurrectionis Confessio, quoe sic gloriam carni tribuit, ut non
auferat veritatem. So St. Jerome. And that Confession we must stand to. Now, how
far these Bodies of ours are capable of being exalted and glorified, so as
still to continue truly Humane, I shall not presume to determine. I am not fond
of walking in the Dark, especially when it is to little or no purpose: But
because you desire to know what my Sentiments are concerning our future State,
and are pleased to ask me that Question, How are the Dead raised up? And with
what Body do they come? I must own my-self inclined to believe that our Bodies
in the Resurrection will be, as to their Purity, Constitution, and Liveliness,
the same with that of Adam when first it came from the Hands of its Maker with
the Stamps and Characters of the Divine Goodness and Wisdom fresh upon it. That
was the true Exemplar and Original and Perfection of Humane Nature. All the
Difference, I think, will be this, That Adam's Body after some little Time
stood in need of Meat and Drink to supply its Evacuations, and was fitted to
make him the Father of Mankind; Ours in the Resurrection will continue always
the same, without Perspiration, or any other Evacuation. The Springs will
always have the same Bent, the Motions will all be equally Regular, the same
continual Round of the same pure vigorous Spirits, and the same Blood moving
forever in a brisk but even Circulation. The Apostles Epithets' of Powerful,
and Spiritual, and Celestial, and Glorious, and all that the Scripture says of
our Transformation into the Divine likeness, I take to signify no more, than
this even, and pure, and dispassionate, and incorruptible State of the Body,
with a perfect Refinement of all our Faculties. This perhaps is much less than
what some others are willing to allow to a glorified Body: But I see no Reason
why we should expect any higher Exaltation. And if such be the State and
Condition of it, I know no Reason why we should desire any higher. This
Heavenly Frame is enough to make us truly Happy and Blessed, no less than if
our Bodies were Ethereal, and our Souls were carried in those fine Celestial
Chariots which the Heathen Philosophers talk of. If Adam had not sinned, these
very same Bodies had then been Immortal and wholly exempted from Death: Why
then should we think it strange that the Immortal Bodies which God will bestow
on us in the Resurrection, should be truly Humane? The Immortality of these
Bodies was then intended as a Blessing; and shall we not think it a Blessing
worthy of the Donor, to have the same Body restored to a better State than that
from which it was fallen? Yes! This is enough, and This is all I desire, and
This I hope to obtain. Let this my Body, this very same Body, be made pure, my
Pollutions washed away, my Passions subdued my Wants removed, my Understanding
cleared, my sense of true Pleasure enlivened, let this be but done, and my Soul
will desire no more. Her old Acquaintance, when blessed with these happy
Transmutations will be truly welcome to her. Neither She nor the Angels will
ever be ashamed of his Company. Let this be but done, and I shall not think the
grossness of it to be any Diminution of my Happiness. I shall not envy the
Glory of Incorporeal Beings, but shall heartily thank God, that I am what I am.

A Fourth Objection is concerning the unfitness of a Humane Body to be placed
in Heaven on account of its Gravity. How can a Humane Body, that is naturally
heavy, be sustained in a pure Ethereal Heaven? I answer,

1. If those Regions of Heaven, where the Saints are hereafter to have their
Habitation, be all fluid and Ethereal, or even void Space, yet our Bodies may
without the least difficulty, and without any Miracle, or particular Care of
Omnipotence be there supported and sustained. There is no such thing as Gravity
in Regions purely Ethereal which are above the Reach and Activity of particular
Orbs. There is no High and Low in such Places. Our Bodies will be there
sustained, as the Globe of the Earth, and the several celestial Orbs, are now
sustained in the Air and Either. Which is not done by a Miracle: for they are
Naturally sustained there, and there is not any Low to which they may incline.
There is nothing indeed (properly speaking) Heavy in its own Nature, as there
is not any thing Light in its own Nature. And our Bodies even here in this
World do not of their own Natures tend toward the Center of the Earth; but
they are violently haled of pushed down. Had there been no external Causes of
what we call Gravity contrived by the Creator, there would have been no such
Thing, no High and Low, in the Universe. This no one can deny that considers
the System of the World.

2. That the place in which we are to have our Abode in the next Life, is all
pure Either, or Immaterial, is perhaps not so true as generally supposed.
Perhaps after all, our Heaven will be nothing but a Heaven upon Earth, or some
glorious solid Orb created on purpose for us in those immense Regions which we
call Heaven. It seems more natural to suppose that since we have solid and
material Bodies, we shall be placed, as we are in this Life, on some solid and
material Orb. Neither is this a new Opinion, but embraced by many of the
Ancients. That after the Resurrection we are to live for ever on a new Earth,
was, as Maximus tells Tomo 2. p. 244. 6, 7.
us, the Opinion of many in his time. And the same was asserted in the Third
Century by St. Ap. Epiphan. Haer. 64. c. 32. (...), etc. Et vero perturbandam
esse creaturam, velut in illa con^agratione perituram, ut iterum creetur non
tamen extinguendam esse, putandum est: Ut in instaurato mundo ipsimet
instaurati ac doloris expertes habitemus; quemadmodum in 103. Psalmo proditum
est. Emittes spiritum tuum, and creabuntur, and renovabis faciem terrae. Quod
nimirum ambientem a^rem temperatissimum deinceps facturus sit Deus. Cum enim
post saeculi praesentis exitum adhuc terra perseveratura sit, habitatores in ea
quosdam inesse necesse est; qui nec morituri sunt amplius, neque copulandi
nuptiis aut procreandae foboli operam daturi, sed Angelorum more fine ulla
mutatione immortalitatis statu optima sint quaeque facturi. Proindeque stultum
est quanam vitae ratione usura sint corpora quaerere, si nec aer, neque terra,
neque quicquam caeterorum sit amplius futurum.
Methodius, Bishop of Tire, in his Treatise Concerning the Resurrection. Epist.
2. c. 3. v. 15.
St. Peter himself tells us that after this World is dissolved there will be
new Heavens, and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness. He adds, that this
the Saints look for; with a plain Intimation, that there they are hereafter to
Inhabit. St. John also in his Revelations C. 21. v. 1.
makes mention of a new Earth, where the Blessed are to have their happy abode
after this World is destroyed. These places the Chiliasts produce to confirm
their Opinion; but they ought to be understood of the everlasting Habitation of
the Blessed. Our Savior tells his Disciples: S. Joh^ XIV. 23.
In my Fathers House are many Mansions: I go to prepare a place for you. And If
I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto
my-self, that where I am, there ye may be also. In the Regions of Heaven, though
before our Savior's Ascension there were many Mansions of Angels or Immaterial
Beings, yet those (it seems) were not thought fit for the Habitation of Men.
There was no Mansion proper for Men, none sufficiently suited to their Nature,
till Christ ascended up thither in his Body. He then created one proper for the
reception of his own Humane Nature, and for the Habitation of our Bodies. This
I take to be that New Earth, or Habitable Orb, which is spoken of by St. Peter
and St. John. There Christ at present remains; from thence (as he says) he will
come to judge this World, and the Good he will carry up with him, to live there
for ever in unspeakable Happiness. I know that St. John seems to intimate that
that new Earth, which he speaks of, is not in Heaven: For he says that the New
Jerusalem came down on that Earth from Heaven. But we ought not to understand
the Descriptions contained in the Revelations too strictly. By the New
Jerusalem coming down from Heaven on that new Earth, he seems to mean only
this, that in that new Earth the Throne of God, or his most especial Presence,
will be among Men. I leave these things to your Consideration, and proceed to

The Fifth and last Objection, which is concerning the uselessness of a Humane
Body in the next Life, and the unnecessariness of raising up the same that
died. Our Adversaries perhaps are willing to grant that there is no
impossibility in the Resurrection, and that the Body being purified and exalted
to the highest degree of Humane Perfection, may be worthy of the Heavenly
Mansions: But however, say they, it is not agreeable to the Divine Wisdom to
raise up the same Humane Body. Why not? Why, he acts, says the Etherealist, in
all things wisely, and for some end: But to what purpose should he raise up the
same Body, when a new one will serve as well? and to what purpose should he
again invest the Soul with a Humane Body, when the several Parts of it are
useless?

In answer to this, its commonly alleged, that the same Humane Body must rise
again, and be united to the Soul, that together with the Soul, it may be either
rewarded or punished for the Good or Evil we did in this Life. It would be
Injustice (they say) for God to punish or reward the Soul alone for what it did
not alone, but together with the Body. This Argument is commonly made use of
not only by the Schoolmen, and other Modern Divines, but by almost all the
Ancients, De Resur. p. 261. etc. and in Legate. p. 39.
Athenagoras, De Resur. c. 14, 15. and al^bi.
Tertullian, Orat. in Caesarium.
Greg. Nazianzen, Sermon. 7. in Genesin.
St. Chrysostom, the Author of the C. 7. 2.
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, Har. 64. c. 72. and in Ancorato, c. 89.
Epiphanius, De Resur.
St. Ambrose, De provid. Orat. 9. p. 432. 3. tomi 4ti.
Theodoret, Theophrasto, p. 66.
Aeneas Gazaeus, De Orthod. Fide, c. ult.
Johannes Damascenus, Hemil. 1. in Pascha ap. Photii Bibl.
Nilus, Epist. de Synodis, p. 12.
Photius, and several others of the ancient Greeks and Latins. They all agree,
that God is obliged in Justice to reward or punish the Body together with the
Soul. The same is asserted in one place (which I have produced) by Origin
himself. And this is the reason assigned for the Resurrection by the Talmudists
in the Tract P. 311, 312. Edit. Coc.
Sanhedrin.

I desire as much as any Man to pay a just Deference and Regard to the
Judgments of the ancient Fathers: But it must be confes'd, that though their
Authority be great in Matters of Tradition, yet the Reasons and Arguments which
they produce to confirm their Doctrines, are not always convincing. If we
seriously and impartially consider this Assertion, we shall find it not to be
true. My reasons, in short, are these. First, To speak properly, the Body is
not capable either of sinning, or doing well. It is only the Instrument of the
Soul. And the Arm that stabs, sins no more than the Sword. It Is the Soul only
that is the Murderer. Neither, Secondly, is the Body capable of any Reward or
Punishment. It Is the Soul only that is sensible, and nothing but what is
sensible can be capable of Rewards and Punishments. Thirdly, If it be Injustice
in God to punish the Soul alone without the Body in conjunction with which she
committed the Sin, then all the Matter which constituted the Body when the
several Sins were committed, must be raised again, and be reunited to the
Soul. For if some, why not all? But what Monsters of Men should we be in the
Resurrection, if all the Substance of which our Bodies consisted from our
Childhood to our Deaths, should be gathered together and formed into a Body.

'Twas the Opinion of some of the ancient Heretics, That the Souls of Men Die,
and are dissolved together with the Body, and revive and rise again with it in
the Resurrection. Which Opinion supposes the Soul to be material as well as the
Body, which many of the ancient Christians, who were not looked upon as
Heretical, believed. Eusebius Hist. VI. 37.
tells us of certain Christians of Arabia, in the Third Century, who advanced
and taught this Opinion concerning the Soul's Dissolution and Resurrection, and
that it was condemned by a Synod there called on purpose, in which Eusebius
intimates that it was the famous Origin, and so it is commonly taken for
granted. But the Author of the Synodicon, c. 18. Seems to intimate that he was
one of the Arabian Bishops; (...).
Origin was present, by whom, he says, they that maintained it were
re-converted. Gilbertus Gaulminus L. (...). c. 12.
, in his Notes on the Book De vita and morte Mosis, says, that the Arabic
Historians ascribe this Opinion, that the Soul dies together with the Body, to
Origin himself. But that Origin did not hold that Opinion appears very
evidently from a Hundred places in his Works. Tatianus, who was Scholar to
Justin M. and lived before these times, though he held that the Souls of the Good
do not die together with the Body, yet he Orat. c. Grac. p. 152.
asserts that those of the Wicked do, and that being dissolved, they are raised
up again, together with the Body, in the Day of Judgment.

There were others who maintained, that the Soul, though it does not properly die
together with the Body, yet after its separation from the Body it sleeps as it
were, and remains altogether insensible: That it is not capable of any
perception without the concurrence of an Organical Body. These are called
Psychopannychites. St. Maximus Vide ejus Opera, to. 2. p. 243, etc.
speaks of this as a prevailing Opinion in his time, which was about the middle
of the Seventh Century. We are told by some (but I think He only held that the
Soul does not at all enjoy tl. e Beatifick Vision before the Resurrection:
which was indeed the general Opinion of the Primitive Fathers.
untruly) that P. John XXII. maintained it. Stephanus Gobarus Ap. Photii Bibl.
p. 898.
speaks of some who maintained, that the Soul never leaves the Body, but
remains always in it, and is buried together with it, and is raised up with it
in the Resurrection. Whether these maintained that it properly dies, and is
dissolved, or that it only remains insensible, he does not say. Tertullian
himself, though in De Anima, c. 58. Omnes ergo animae penes inseros? inquis.
Velis ac nolis, and suppliciajam illic, and refrigeria. -- Cur enim non putes,
animam and puniri and foveri in inferis interim sub expectatione utriusque
judicii, in quadam usurpatione and candida ejus? Quia salvum debet esse,
inquis, in judicio divino negotium suum, sine ulla praelibatione sententiae,
tum quia and carnis operienda est restitutio, ut consortis operarum atque
mercedum. Quid ergo fiet in tempore isto? dormiemus? At enim animae nec in
viventibus dormiunt. Corporum enim est somnus, quorum and ipsa mors cum speculo
suo somno. -- Semper autem expectat anima corpus, ut doleat, aut gaudeat? nonne
and de suo sufficit sibi ad utrumque titulum passionis? -- Novit and apud
inferos anima and dolere and gaudere sine carne; quia and in carne illaesi, fi
velit, dolet, and laesa, si velit, gaudet. Hoc si ex arbitrio suo in vita,
quanto magis ex judicio Dei post mortem, etc.

De Resur. Carnis, c. 17. Simplicior quisque fautor sententiae nostrae,
putabit, carnem etiam idcirco repraesentandam esse judicio, quia aliter anima
non capiat passionem tormenti seu refrigerii, utpote incorporalis: Hoc enim
vulgus existimat. Nos autem animam corporalem and hic profitemur, and in suo
volumine probamus, habentem proprium genus substantiae, soliditatis, per quam
quid and sentite and pati poss^. Nam and nunc animas torqueri, foverique penes
inferos, licet nudas, licet adhuc exules carnis, probavit Lazari exemplum, etc.


other places he asserts the sensibility of separated Souls, and that of
itself it is capable of Rewards and Punishments, and is actually in some
measure rewarded or tormented before the Resurrection; yet in his Apology
against the Heathens, he expressly affirms that Certe quia ratio restitutionis
destinatio judicii est, n^cessario idem ipse qui fu^rat exhibebitur, ut boni
seu contrarii meriti judicium a Deo referat. Ideoque repraesentabuntur and
corpora. Quia n^que pari quicquam potest a^ima sola sine materi^ ^tabili, id
est, carne, c. 48.
the Soul is not capable of suffering at all, but in union with the Flesh, and
that that is one Reason why the Flesh is to rise. Again in his Book C. 4.
Affirmamus te manner post vi^ae dispunctionens, and expectare diem judicii,
proque meritis au^ cruciatui destinari, aut refrigerio, utroque sempiterno.
Quibus sustinendis necessario ^ibi suostantiam pristinam, ejusdemque hominis
materiam and memoriam revers^ram, quod and nihil mali ac boni sentire possis
sine carnis passionalis facultate.
de Testimonio Animae: To enjoy everlasting Happiness, or to sustain
everlasting Torments, it is necessary that thou should be restored to thy
former Substance, because thou art not capable of feeling either Pleasure or
Pain without Flesh.

If this Opinion were true, That the Soul is not capable in its own nature,
without an organized Body, of any Perception, (I take no notice here of that
other Opinion concerning the death and dissolution of the Soul) we should not
need to look any further for a reason why God has ordained that the Soul should
be again united to a Humane Body; since it would not otherwise be capable after
death of being either Rewarded or Punished. And it must be confessed that this
Notion is very consistent with the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and the
general Judgment, which is to follow the Resurrection. But here lies the
difficulty: I know not how to make it consistent with some other Places of the
Scripture. The Scripture is plainly against it. When our Savior tells the
penitent Thief upon the Cross, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, He
seems to intimate that he should be sensible of that happiness. That Wish of
St. Paul in the 1 st of the Philip. That he might depart and be with Christ,
seems yet more clear and convincing. The Apostle seems plainly to intimate,
that being with Christ, he should be sensible of it. That St. Paul believed
that the Soul after its Separation from the Body remains sensible, and is
capable of perceiving without any Organs of Sense, I infer moreover from that
Place where he speaks of his being rapt up into Heaven, which others (I think)
do not usually take notice of. He says that he could not tell, whether he was
rapt up into Heaven, and saw there those unspeakable Sights in the Body or out
of the Body. Now he could not have doubted of that, if he had not believed that
the Soul is sensible when out of the Body. To this we may add that Place of St.
John in the Revelations, where he says c. 6. p. 10.
that he saw in Heaven The Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God,
and they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, etc. There are
other places in that Book which confirm the same thing.

Tertullian in his Book De Resurrectione Carnis, where he owns that separated
Souls do not Sleep, but are sensible, and are actually punished or rewarded
before the Resurrection, says C. 17.
they are punished or rewarded before the Resurrection for those good or bad
things which they did without the concurrence of the Body, as for good or bad
Thoughts, Desires, and Contrivances; and he seems to intimate that though the
Soul is in its own nature capable of Rewards and Punishments, yet it is not in
its own nature Porro (...) haec (cogitatus, concupiscentia, voluntas) satis
essent ad plenitudia^m meritorum, ut non requirerentur and facta, sufficeret in
totum anima ad perfectionem judi^, de his judicanda, in quae agenda sola
suffecerat. Quum vero etiam facta devin^ ^at meritis; facta autem per carnem
administrentur; jam non sufficit animam sine carne soveri; five cruciari, pro
operibus etiam car^is, etsi habet corpus, etsi habet membra; qu proinde illi ^n
sufficient ad sentiendum plene, quemadmodum nec ad ag^ndum perfect. Denique,
haec erit ratio in ultimum finem destina^ judicii, ur exhibi^ione carnis omnis
divina censura perfici possit.
so capable as when it is united to the Body. It is capable, he says, of
greater Pleasure or Torment when united to the Body, than when in a State of
Separation, and therefore for those things which the actually did in
concurrence with the Body, the must be punished or rewarded in the Body, that
the Pleasure or Torment may be perfect. But this is very precarious; and if
once it be granted that the Soul is in its own nature, without an organized
Body, capable of Rewards and Punishments, it cannot be denied but that it is of
its self capable of being fully rewarded or punished.

We have not yet found out a Reason for this Decree of God Almighty concerning
the Resurrection: If we would give a true account of it, it is necessary we
should mount a little higher, and look a little farther. I shall pass by many
Conjectures which we find in the Schools, and in some of our ancient Writers,
and among the Jewish Vide Menasseh Ben Israel de Resur. (...). 2. c. 19, 20,
21, 22. Quare futura est sexus differentia in altera vita, rationem vide
assignatam ap. Quaest. a d Orthod. inter Opera S. Justini M. p. 4. B. 3.
Masters, and shall lay before you my own Thoughts.

If it be not Presumption to take upon one to search into God's Counsels, and
the Reasons of his Decrees, I should think that one Reason why he has been
pleased to decree that the Soul in the Day of Judgment shall be again united to
a Humane Body, may be this; That as we are Men when we sin or do well, so we
may be Men when by a judicial Sentence we are punished or rewarded for it. But
we cannot be Men unless we have Humane Bodies. St. Paul Cor. c. 5. v. 10.
tells us, that we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every Man may receive the Things done in the Body, according to that he has
done whether it be good or bad. And as we are to give an account for what we
did in the Body, so in the Body we shall give an account. If it be reasonable
that we should be Men when we are punished or rewarded for what we did when
Men; it seems much more reasonable that we should be then the same Men: But we
cannot be the same Men unless we have the same Bodies. It Is a great Mistake to
imagine that the Identity or Sameness of a Man consists wholly in the sameness
of the Soul. If Euphorbus, and Homer, and Ennius, had had one and the same
Soul, yet they would not have been one and the same, but Three distinct Men. In
what the Identity or sameness of the Body consists, that That of the Rising
Body can consist in nothing else but in the Restoration of the same Numerical
Particles, which made up the dissolved Body, to their former Construction, I
have already told you.

Another Reason why God has been pleased to ordain that the same Humane Body
that died shall rise again and be reconjoin'd to the Soul, I take to be this:
(and this indeed I take to be the First and the Chief Reason of that Decree.)
We had all been Immortal Men, if Adam had not sinned; 'twas God's design that
we should never die, but that our Souls should remain for ever united to their
Bodies. This gracious Design being frustrated by Adam's Transgression, he was
graciously pleased to ordain, that as in Adam all die, so by the Merits of
Christ, the second Adam, we should all at last triumph over Death, and be
restored to those Bodies, and that Humane Nature which he first designed should
be Immortal. By the Death and Resurrection of Christ our Losses are to be
repaired which Adam's sinning occasioned; but our Losses cannot be repaired
unless we are restored to those Bodies which by his sinning we lost.

Will neither of these Reasons satisfy the Etherealist? Well, then I will give
him another. I will give him a most certain Reason why God will restore us to
our Humane Natures, and why he will raise up the very same Body. he will
because he will. A very bad Reason to be given for the Actions of Man, but a
very good one for God's! He will because he has promised. I am the Lord, and I
have said it (says he) and who can say, What do thou? There is nothing, that
God does, but He does for a very good Reason: But who are We, that we should
call him to an Account for what he does? His ways and his Counsels are many of
'em unsearchable to us, and as 33. 13.
Job tells us, he gives not account of any of his Matters. It Is his part to
act, ours to admire and submit, and as long as our Reason and our Senses are
not plainly contradicted, we are only to enquire What, not How, or Why?

I would fain know of those who deny the Resurrection of the same Humane Body,
because they do not know what use we can have of the particular Parts of such a
Body in the life to come, whether they deny or doubt of the Existence of all
other things, the Reason of which they cannot comprehend? I should undertake to
quiet all the Scruples of those Men, and to satisfy all their queries, if they
would be but pleased to undertake to answer a few Questions of mine. I could
ask 'em the Reason of a hundred Things both in Nature and Divinity, but to
bring my Questions home to the Case before us; If they will not believe that in
the Life to come we shall have Humane Bodies, because they cannot see to what
uses our several Parts can then serve, let 'em tell me to what real Uses all
the Parts of our Bodies serve here in this Life. By that time they are able to
do that, I believe I may be able to assign them the uses of the several Parts
of our Bodies in the Life to come. If they please to cast their Eyes down on
their own Bodies, they may there see certain Parts of which there is no real
Use; such as were bestowed on their Bodies for Resemblance Sake only. Why
therefore might not God give us Humane Bodies in the next Life, merely for this
Reason (Suppose, if you please that there is no other) that they that Rise may
Resemble or be like those that Died, or be such as they were? I would ask the
Etherealist a Question or two more. Let him tell me for what Reason God gave us
a Body here in this Life, why he made us Corporeal Beings, since only to have
created so many Souls or Spirits, might have conduced as much, or, for ought we
can see, more, to His Glory, and our Happiness, than to make us, as he has
done, of Body and Soul. Let him tell me for what Reason we shall have in the
Life to come any Body at all (as he himself grants we shall have an Ethereal
one) since the Soul is in its own Nature, and without any sort of Body, Capable
of Rewards and Punishments? In a Word, the same Reason God had for making us
what we are, the same he will have for making us what we shall be, viz. His
good Pleasure. -- ^om read thou? -- Go, learn to be modest. Enquire first
what God has promised, then judge of his Wisdom by his Promises.

I fancy my-self talking (Philalethes) to a bold Refiner on the Promises and
Decrees of God Almighty, one of those little Dothings that call themselves
Philosophers, who first form to themselves Notions and Idea's, then deal with
Revelation as the Tyrant did with the poor Innocents on his Bed, either
violently stretch it beyond its natural Reach, or chop off a Part to make it
commensurate to their Inventions. This (I know) is what You are not guilty of.
You pursue the quite contrary Method. As a real Lover of Truth, and as becomes
a true Christian Philosopher, you first search the Scriptures, and then the
Traditions of the Primitive Church, and on these agreeing together, as on a
sure and certain Foundation, you raise and build the System of your Belief.
Those Doctrines which you find clearly revealed, you do not endeavor to puzle
with nice Objections and Scruples, nor pervert with anyp rivate Glosses and
Conceits of your own: But as you find 'em so you embrace 'em. You firmly
believe, and humbly acquiesce, and leave the Contrivance and the Reasons to
God. Concerning the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the same Humane Body,
which, in Obedience to your Commands, I have endeavored to confirm and
establish, I shall here, for the close of all, add, That among all the
Doctrines of Christianity (you understand me of such as are grounded only on
Revelation) there is not any one either more plainly delivered in Scripture, or
more clearly conveyed down to us by the Traditions of the Primitive Fathers, or
more universally received by the Catholic Church, than this is. It Is indeed so
clearly delivered down to us and so universally received, that to deny it, and
yet at the same time profess the Christian Faith, seems to imply a
Contradiction. He that would preach the one must likewise maintain the other.
We must do as St. Paul did at Athens: Preach Jesus, and not only the but This
Resurrection.

FINIS.

