VINDICIAE Medicinae and Medicorum: OR AN APOLOGY For the PROFESSION and
PROFESSORS OF PHYSIC.

IN ANSWER To the several Pleas of Illegal PRACTITIONERS; WHEREIN Their
Positions are examined, Their Cheats discovered, and their Danger to the Nation
asserted. AS ALSO An account of the present PEST, in answer to a Letter.

By NATH. HODGES, M. D. Coll. Land.

In medicis rebus tractandis non solum unusquisque tenetur quantum in se est
errores fugere and emendare sed and omnes qui in eos impingunt commonefacere,
antequam labes ulterius serpat in hominum exitium, Alsar. LONDON, Printed by J.
F. for Henry Broom. 1666.

IMPRIMATUR,

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, HIS GRACE GILBERT, BY DIVINE PROVIDENCE
Lord Archbishop of CANTERBURY, and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND, and one of His
MAJESTY'S Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
May it please your GRACE,
THe near alliance between DIVINITY and MEDICINE, whose relation is as intimate
as the Union of SOUL and BODY, has settled such a Sympathy in both Professions,
that they necessarily partake of the Infelicity and Prosperity happening to
each other; and thence it was, that when the REVEREND CLERGY (during the late
Rebellion) suffered according to their sworn Enemies implacable Fury, the
Professors of PHYSIC also by the prevailing Invasion of Empericks shared in
the common Calamity; and since not without a Miracle that Storm is over, and
the GOD OF ORDER has moved upon our CHAOS, so that the Heavens are divided
from the Earth, and our STARS shine in their proper Spheres, yiedling
continually Influential Virtues in good measure to dispose the Feculencies
below into a compliance with their refining Efficacies: I say, since the
Restitution of our RELIGION and CLERGY, Physicians do justly congratulate the
Success of both, and most heartily wish that the CHURCH may never fall again
into the hands of Empirical Divines who as rudely treated peoples Souls, as the
present Quacks in Physic do their Bodies, their crude and extemporary
Effusions directly answering the others unskilful and dangerous Medicaments.

And although the condition of Physic and Physicians is very little bettered,
as if it were to be quite excluded from the benefits of the PUBLIC
DELIVERANCE, yet we despair not by reason particularly of your GRACES Readiness
and Zeal to Patronize LEARNING, that the Profession of PHYSIC and legitimate
Physicians will after a long Confusion be separated and distinguished from the
Dregs of illiterate Practisers: Such it seems is the boldness both of our
common Empericks and upstart Pseudochymists, that they presume to entertain as
great hopes of their prevailing over all ACADEMICKS, as the CHURCHES Enemies
impatiently expect a Revolution, but I trust GOD ALMIGHTY in his Providence
will utterly disappoint both; it is in the mean time our Advantage that some of
our highest pretending Adversaries have made addresses to your GRACE, whose
Judgment we esteem as the Grand Test to discover all those Fallacies both in
Books and Men, which by reason of their cunning Adulteration pass currantly
with others; but so soon as their Mercurial Tincture is evaporated, the remain
will appear to be only Lead or some base Metal.

Because Your GRACE and many other Persons of great Honor and Worth do approve
CHEMISTRY as the most probable means to discover a sensible Philosophy, and to
furnish noble Medicines for the benefit of Mankind; some of our Mountebanking
Vulcans have presumed to appropriate these high Favors, as if Your
Countenancing all true Sons of Art did comprehend all who in order to their
Delusion of the People call themselves Philosophers by fire, having neither
satisfied the UNIVERSITIES nor any other legal Judges concerning their
Abilities and fitness to undertake the most difficult Profession of Physic: no
other Construction can be put upon that Transaction then a necessary invitation
of ACADEMICAL PHYSICIANS to seek out and prepare the most effectual Remedies by
Art acquirable, and to give the People a just esteem of this way of Practice,
to which because of the mis-carriages of Pseudochymists they are yet utter
Enemies: but as for ignorant Quacks, who being Master of Reason can suppose
that AUTHORITY will indulge them to abuse the People and oppose a Faculty
established by Law? As these are Diseases in the STATE, so wholesome EDICTS in
time may happily be provided to deal with their most obstinate Complications.

I shall not intimate any Distrust by the use of many Arguments importuning
Your GRACE to promote the speedy Enacting of convenient LAWS whereby Illegal
Practisers may be Restrained and Punished; as MEDICINES when judiciously and
according to ART applied, are worthily reputed (...), so Your GRACE in giving
an opportunity of their Right Use will merit the greatest share in their
Success and Commendations.

This small TREATISE and the AUTHOR being engaged to Encounter Multitudes of
Monsters, like those which Pliny mentions whose Eyes are fixed in their
Breasts, their Knowledge being naught else but Passion, have made bold to
shelter themselves under Your PATRONAGE. May it please Your GRACE to accept
this little Book on the account of the Subjects which it attempts to Vindicate,
and the Author as one who devotes himself to be

Your GRACES Most obedient Servant, NATH. HODGES.

AUTHORI CLARISSIMO IN VINDICIAS Medicinae and Medicorum.
Carmen gratulatorium.
INgenium Oxonii, dum Terrae Filius, Author
Protulit, and gratos sparsit ubique sales;
Aptius experto erexit Medicina Theatrum
Civibus hinc summo parta labor Salus:
Hic liber ingenium sapit Oxoniense, stupendum
Judiciumque Artitum Medicis dat opem.
Quum Te Discipulum clegit Turquettus in herba
Messem conspexit, foenora speque dotum,
Non instar tumuli condis documenta, magistri
Funus, at extincti spirat imago Senis
Quicquid Spagyrica Ars tibi suppeditare valebat
Calls, Galeni scriptaque nota tibi.
Sic been miscetur veterum medicina recenti,
Aetatem inventis Ars renovare solet.
Deficerent lauds si digna encomia tanto
Authore aggrederer, vel metra digna libro
Vindicias metuent hosts, calamumque volantem
Plectere, cum nequeant effugere art enecem
Victrices sic quondam Aquilas plaga barbara mundi
Horruit and simili cessit in antra fuga
Histrio, Tonsor, Anus, medicaster and omnis eodem
Succumbent fato, Vindiciisque Tuis.
J. B. M. D.
Carmina Encomiastica ad Amicum dignissimum Vindicias Medicinae and Medicorum
edentem.
NOn Te scribendi Cacoethes corripit, urgent
Sed pia Vota, Librum facit Indignatio, cum tot
Undique conspicias a crebro funcre doctos
Depopulaturos Patriam ni vindice strictum
Ostendente ensem, properantia Fata pavescant
Hi mortis Socii humanae vitaeque Tyranni:
Audet quisque sacram violare Machaonis Artem
Et miscere aegis laethalia pocula, spondens
A tumulo vitam, Phoenicem suscitat ignis
Non aliter prolem scintillae, damna salut is
Vivida spes reparet; neque morbo pressus ut olim
Expetat auxilium, cum sola pericula salvum
More novo reddant; medicinae insignia poscunt,
Carnifices, and quot capitalem infligere poenam
Officiose optant, scelus illud morte piandum
Siquis de morbo quaerat, proh! quanta latronum
Insidias aegro struat uni turba, crumenam
Et vitam simul eripiens, his maxima cura est
Infandis, ut nemo evadat, tollitur ansa
Tuto occumbendi, ad mortem mors altera ducit.
Acrius in medicos unita insania frendet
Quae modo Causidicos, Clerosque momordit, anhelans
Doctrinam reduci Invidia sub nomine tantum
Paeoniae artis plectere; vos exurgite somnum
Excutite altum, na^ fractis ruitura columnis
Ars Asclepiadis jacet, in vos ordine recto
Odia festinant, medicinae expulsa Facultas
Mox expectandae praedicit signa ruinae
Vobis Causidicis and cleris, quodque dolendum
Vere, amborum tunc erit immedicabile vulni^
Qui studia omnino spernunt Academic praxi^
Non volvendo libros certam se discere jacta^
Ast exercitio, dum pellem quilibet ips^^
Porrigat infaelix, and ut experiantur (...)
Arts concedat, dum caemeteria dignos
Testentur, merito Doctoratuque (...)
Astrologus, Nutrix, Obstetrix, (...) copol^
Tonsor, Anus, stultus, mendicus, Pseudochymaste^
Perditam eunt medicam conjunctis viribus Artem
Haec malesana cohors sistat vestigia, nondu^^
Voti compos, hic Author ab ipso limin^ Fat^
Faelici medicinam languentem art reduxit.
Splendescet posthac medicorum Famae perorbem
Non metuens Hosts: Sic nos servavit Apollo.
S. I. M. D

BElla per Angliacos plusquam Civilia campos
Grassata, immunis nec stetit ulla domus,
Per tot lustra suis jacuit medicina medelis,
Plebs and Apollineae surripit arma togae,
Horum par certamen erat, quot sustulit ensis
Martius, indocta tot cecidere manu:
Discrimen superest majus, cessante triumpho
Mavortis, gliscit perdere saeva cohors,
Et dum pace fruit liceat, quam poscimus, alta
Accelerat clades de grege quisque novas;
Nulla quies populo, sunt mortis mill fenestrae,
Certius occidunt Pharmaca, quam Gladius:
Sufficit exanguis quae parta est gloria palmae
Humanum extinguant ne Chymica Art Genus
Undique poscit opem Gens nostra laborat Agyrtis
Vindiciis pereat noxia turba tuis,
Nullus inexpertam post hac exerceat artem,
Pristina compenset damna futura salus;
Vindiciae praestant Patriae (Vir docte) perennem
Pacem, unum exitium morbus and hostis habet:
Eia agite O Cives tranquillam ducite vitam
Vivere non, sed ab his vita valere dolis
J. A. M. D.

Be pleased (courteous Reader) passing by literal Errors* to Correct these
following Mistakes which escaped observation.
PAge 49. for Spermatick, read Woe matick, p. 57. Lesbian, r. Lesbiam, p. 62.
proponabit, r. propina^it, p. 84. Pilats, r. Pilots, p. 62. gradatim est, r.
gradatim and, p. 93. arrive, r. arriving. p. 101. firmissa, r. firmissima, p.
109. but chemical, r. but difficult.

VINDICIAE MEDICINAE, ET MEDICORUM. OR, An APOLOGY For the PROFESSION and
PROFESSORS OF PHYSIC.
CHAP. I. Of EMPERICKS, and their Practices.
SELF-Conservation acted from an innate Principle, most powerfully inclines all
Creatures, especially Mankind, to a full Compliance with such Injunctions, as
may best conduce thereunto; which being our chiefest Natural concernment in
point of Interest, as well as Duty, requires our utmost Endeavor in avoiding
what may be prejudicial, and choosing what may promote this, so just and
necessary intent: External Dangers hereupon Impressing a deep sense of their
destructive Events, do incessantly solicit for suitable helps to rescue from
those threatening Mischiefs, and by a more Cogent propensity all the Powers of
Nature are set on work, and Medicine called in to assist with its Effectual
Cooperation to oppugn Diseases, in order to an happy Restoration to that State
which suffered by reason of their Invasion. So then, Medicine is commended to
us as the proper Means whereby the proposed end of Sanity may most probably be
attained; to which application is naturally made in sickness, from a well
grounded confidence of its corresponding Efficacy, which good opinion of
Physic, and the general conformity to those Primitive Dictates of
Self-conservation, give advantage and opportunity to very many of insinuating
their zeal and forwardness to contribute toward the better satisfaction of
this obligation to Nature; and most people being easily convinced of the
necessity incumbent on them to seek out for Help when seized by Sickness, and
not discerning the Deceits of mere Pretenders to the Science of Physic, from
the real abilities of true Physicians, are upon this account frequently
misguided to employ those who frustrate the end of Medicines, and miserably
disappoint their (otherwise regular) tendency, to preserve themselves.

That this Delusion may no longer prevail in Affairs of such Consequence as
Health and Life; I have essayed to distinguish between those who without
requisite Qualifications undertake the Practice of Physic, and such whom
Learning and Experience have accomplished for the accurate discharge of their
Noble Profession. I shall under the notion of Empericks treat of the first
sort; and however the term Emperick is notoriously known in respect of the vast
Omnes homines, viri aeque ac foeminoe, anus aeque ac virgo omnes inquam medici
videri pruriunt ut si omnes qui medicae artis cognitionem atque scientiam falso
nomine sibi adscribunt, numero comprendere velis, prius quot fluctibus mare a
condito aevo agitatum sit sermon atque oratione expedias Seidel in praefat.
lib. de morb. incurab.
swarm of them which pester all places, confidently pretending to Physic: yet
to avoid mistakes, I shall explain what I intend by it. I style him an
Emperick, who, without consideration of any rational Method undertakes to cure
Diseases, whose frequent Periclitations (as he conceits) surpass the notional
Theory of Physic, and his proof of Receipts seem to him more satisfactory then
the Scholastic odd rules of practice: But what can be expected from such rude
Experimentings, not respecting any Indications, or other circumstances very
considerable in the right effecting of a Cure? Who questions but that such
Morbos Andabatarum more impugnantes, Proceeding blindfold to their attempts,
must inevitably err? Indeed the Empericks voice up their Experience, and think
it an authentic Diploma, capacitating them to practice Physic; I shall
therefore enquire what Experience is, and then a right judgment may be made
whether these answer their pretenses herein.

True Experience is constituted of Reason and Sense; for as a judicial
observation of sensible Experiments produces apt Theorems, so thereby the
Intellect forms Universal conceptions and essays their confirmation by repeated
experimental Operations, whence issued what men call Science, together with all
its eternal and immutable Truths; henceforth unquestionable by Sense, which
having the Royal assent affixed to them are standing Laws not subject to future
Censures: So then there is no cause why we should return to the first more rude
and imperfect way, since the Science of Medicine is not only already invented
and discovered, but adorned with intelligible Rules and Aphorisms, and thereby
improved to general use. The Experience therefore of these Empericks being
altogether void of Reason and dissentaneous from the known Maxims of Medicine
is merely the effect of sense, and consequently brutish; for the enumeration
of their presumed successes because of this defect of Principles, is not
argumentative to conclude an attainment of Experience, in regard that Reason
did not make due collection from those trials and periclitations; but these in
their practice act not unlike some who take pains rudely to heap stones
together, designing thereby to erect an artificial Structure, the event being
far otherwise; for the higher the heap adspires, the nearer is its downfall and
ruin: And so when the Empericks multiply their inartificial Experiments to
meliorate their knowledge, and to acquire experience, fruitlesness attends their
labors, and destruction those who confide in their promised experience: They in
the mean time who have the luck to be the A B C of the Empericks first
attempts, and patiently submit to their Embrio experiments run no small hazard,
when their best grown Endeavors prove Molas-like, unshapen, and monstrous
Births.

It is confessed that the advantages to Physic have been very considerable
upon the account of dissatisfaction with some old Tenants, whereupon just
occasions of further search and inquiry were administered to make new and more
useful discoveries; but yet I cannot allow the inference by some late Writers
in favor of the Vulgar Experimenters, from hence deduced, as if because the
Medicinal Science by successive discoveries was so much improved, a through
alteration of what remains, seemed no less necessary to its compleatment and
perfection; and therefore Empericism ought to be encouraged as the likeliest
means to advance this hopeful work, for the consequence is altogether
illogical, and fallacious to conclude from some particular defects in Physic,
that the whole Art is thereupon impleadable of the same misprision of
insufficiency and uncertainty; and that reasoning equally absurd, which pleads
for the Empericks to be countenanced as if their experimentings might very much
further this pretended Reformation in Physic: the new Doctrines are so far
from designing the subversion of the ancient foundations, that they appear
considerable additions Multum egerunt qui ante nos fuerunt, sed non peregerunt
multum adhuc restat operis multumque restabit, nec ulii nato post mill saecula
praecludetur occasio aliquid adhuc adjiciendi, Sen.

Quod aevum tam rude aut incultum fuit quo non aliquod medicina sive ab ingenio
sive ab exercitatione additamentum ceu ornamentum quo locupletior quam ante
fieret acceperit, 1 Carolus Pisc. in praefat. lib. de serosa Colluvie.


confirming and establishing them, and they who have been prosperous in making
discoveries, did not in order to their scrutiny devoid themselves of all
artificial helps, but proceeded under the conduct of firm and allowed
principles to their succesful disquisitions, nay were it granted that not only
every Age (as is abundantly evident) but each person should take notice of
something before unobserved, yet would not these hereby ruin the settled
constitution of the Medicinal Science, which notwithstanding all such
successes, is still permanent and unshaken: indeed many who applaud their
Service, have troubled themselves rather to question Opinions in Physic, which
are conjectural and the Product of Fancy, then well formed Aphorisms drawn
immediately from sensible observation on which the Science of Physic is chiefly
founded: and to this purpose, not a few have misplaced their pains in examining
and disputing the Hypotheses of Hippocrates, Galen, and their Disciples about
the Humors, Qualities, and the like Sentiments of those Authors who thought fit
thereby to express their Conceptions, if any quarrel with those notions, they
may take the same liberty of substituting others more agreeable to the
Phenomenon of Nature; but the substantials of Physic are not altered by the
various dresses wherein they appear suitable to every Age.

As for the Empericks fitness to enterprise this pretended renovation of
Physic, there seems to be no sufficient ground for any such expectation
because they in their experimentings wanting directive precepts, can make no
true judgment of their performances; from whence also no Rule can be formed as
their natural result: they who would become Physicians are not educated as the
raw Lacedemonian Soldiers were wont to be, first learning to fight in the
dark, being emboldned to desperate attempts by this initiation in night
service; for gross ignorance is so far from accomplishing to attain the
greatest difficulties in Physic, that it utterly incapacitates for such
undertakings. When I have given an account of the several sorts of Empericks,
their inabilities to advance Physic, may be easily apprehended: of which in
the next place.

Empericks are such who try accidental and chance experiments on the diseased,
not having any sufficient ground of persuasion that the Medicaments thus proved
are proper: it may seem strange that any who pretend to Reason, should after
this manner sacrifice to Fortune, Inexperientia facit fortunam, ut experientia
Artem.
and yet they cannot be numbered whom good luck and presumptuous hopes of
success encourage to give Physic: the business is not so much, how likely or
contrary the applications are to the Disease, if a Cure is wrought thereby; and
I will not deny but that some of these are very prosperous by the use of
Medicines, not reduceable to any known Rules of Art; if the reason is demanded,
I know not how to avoid the attributing of their successes to any other power
then the Infernal Spirits assistance: the Divines term this an implicit
compact, for that person (as a reverend and late Writer notes) Who applies the
Creatures to those ends and uses, to which either by its own propensity or by
God's institution it was never inclined, is at length taken in the snare of
prestigious and diabolical delusion: And the excellent Matthias Mairhofer is of
the same judgment; Quando aliquis assequitur effectum propositum non adhibendo
causas legitimas and legitimas causarum conditiones licet sciens and deliberate
non expetat Diaboli auxilium, dat tamen operam in procurando effectu quibusdam
occultis dubiisque modis, qui a Viris bonis merito judicantur symbolum
Diabolicae operationis clam intercedentis (says he) When any person designs the
attainment of any effect without respect to natural Causes, and not heeding the
conditions necessary to its production, although he does not wittingly, and
with deliberation implore the Devils help, yet working by occult and dubious
ways he is most deservedly censured by all good men as guilty of a private and
more secret Covenant with the Devil to cooperate with him. I cannot
distinguish between Charms and other known and solemn methods of Sorcery and
Witchcraft, and these no less prestigious and hellish practices; in a business
of such consequence, I am willing to speak plain, that the busy and officious
people of both Sexes may understand their adventure, when either out of an
ambition to gain the popular repute of doing good, or for profits sake they
give Medicines at random, not being able either to satisfy themselves or
others concerning the true Virtues thereof, and the reason of application; if
what is thus given, succeeds not, then must they answer (at least to God) the
death of the Patient, if the party recovers, then is there just cause of
suspicion that the evil Feind is their Adjutor with his long experienced skill,
being willing to cure the Body of one to destroy the Soul of another: When
Learned and Experienced Physicians are at hand, what occasion is there that
these Empericks should hazard their best part, and so highly injure themselves
in hopes of doing good to others, or any people be so deluded, as to let the
Devil practice upon them, and even possess them with health.

The common plea of these Empericks in respect of the hazard of their
fortuitous experimentings is altogether vain, they perhaps thought the
Medicaments by them thus used at random to be innocent and safe; but I must
rejoyn that not only time and opportunity is lost by the interposition of these
Empericks with their supposedly harmless Medicines, and Nature thereby suffers
an interruption in her methodical course, on both which Physicians most
judiciously do lay great stress but granting that the things in respect of
their nature are not deadly, yet being indirectly given, the event may possibly
prove them such: for when a little Saphron (as a good Observator writes) did
immediately kill, a familiar Clyster presently occasioned death, a little Oil of
Roses (which I have seen) threatened the same fate, and an opiate Collyrium (if
we credit Avicenna) straight-ways deprived of life; I say, when the safest
Medicines are by these Empericks unduly and at all peradventure applied, though
contrary to the true and genuine indications of cure, they are so far
inexcusable upon the account of such hazards, as that they deserve the severest
censure, who kill with reputedly safe Medicines. Well then, there is no reason
why these Empericks should make a Lottery of men's healths, and in hope of a
prize or cure, hazard Natures stock; for in this business there is not only an
extraordinary number of blanks, mere negations of advantage and success, but
infinite positive evils destructive, and poisonous to men's bodies, and these
are most frequently drawn by the unfortunate Empericks: Ptolemeus therefore (as
a good Historian affirms) not upon a much different occasion, wisely answered,
(...), h. e. There ought not to be the same hazard of men's bodies as of Dice. I
shall conclude this Head with a weighty saying of a late Writer, Fortuita nullo
modo censenda sunt remedia; Chance applications deserve not the very name of
Remedies.

Empericks who make experiment of any Medicine or Receipt from an Opinion only
of its sufficiency and fitness to cure, as chance Periclitations prompted on
the others, so credulity spurs on these to practice Physic, who have no other
direction then what proceeds either from Fancy or History. Geber gives us an
apposite description of the first; Qui animam habent opinantem phantasiam
quamlibet, and quod credunt se verum invenisse, fantasticum est totum, a
ratione devium, errore plenum and semotum a principiis naturalibus, says he,
Such persons who are wholly guided by fancy, when they please themselves with
an Opinion of true discoveries, they are merely deluded and run into error,
wanting the safe conduct of Reason and natural principles to be the sure
foundation on which they ought to build their knowledge. But the Profession of
Physic requires the most improved judgment to a right management and exercise
of it, and by no means is the proper business of Fancy, which being incapable
of deliberation cannot weigh all necessary considerations in order to a regular
cure.

It Is true, that the operations of Fancy have oftentimes appeared very
powerful, so that many wonderful effects owe their production chiefly to their
energy; but yet I deny that the strong conceit of any person can naturally
empower any Medicine with new virtues to eradicate the Disease for which it is
to this end directed: the true Physicians endeavor to beget a good confidence
in their Patiens of their Abilities, the properness of the Medicaments
prescribed by them, but the design is only to compose the Spirits that they may
act uniformly in promoting the efficacy of the Remedies, whereas these
Empericks possess the fancies of the sick by the prevalency of their
imaginations, Sapienter Empedocles asserit nervos sapientiae esse non temere
credere.
and hope thereby to work something answerable to the impression made upon
them; and I question not but that the effect will resemble its cause, and the
presumed cure also prove fantastical and imaginary, yet by all possible means
do the Empericks strive to credit these Operations of fancy, persuading people
to obey the strange inspirations and secret impulses, which at any time either
they suggest, or else happen to those who give themselves up to follow such
delusions: did these consider that their fancies are frequently as diseased as
their own, or Patients bodies admitting impressions according to the acuteness
or greatness of the Morbifick invasion, they would seek to physic for help,
rather then profess it by the tutorage of fancy, or be matriculated in Bedlam
before they attempt such kind of practices: I shall produce a sad example to
caution others; a Revelation was communicated to one being indisposed, that she
must in order to her recovery drink the decoction of an Herb growing in such a
place; but alas! the herb proved Hemlock, and that impulse of fancy dispatched
the Patient to another World.

I pass over the fond conceit of many who pretend familiarity with their Genii
or good Angels, from whom, as they relate, they learn effectual Secrets to
remedy most Diseases; for since that the events are not answerable to such
extraordinary communications, there is just cause of suspicion that these
Empericks either most pitifully cheat themselves by their easy persuasion, or
others by imposture.

By History, I intend Medicines learned by reading and report, for the
Empericks do sometime study Receipt-books to stock themselves with Medicines
against most Diseases, and when they have proceeded so far, they are impatient
for an opportunity, to give an account of their ripe abilities; if also a
Receipt or Medicine is well vouched, many think that they may safely experiment
its admirable virtues, and as in some places the execution of the Prisoner
precedes his Trial, so it is here, for these being fully persuaded that such
Secrets are not inferior to the commendation of them, make proof, and
afterward (oftentimes too late) reason about their fitness for the Disease and
Patient, because so many employ themselves, their friends and purses, to
procure or purchase Receipts or Secrets in Physic: I shall enquire how far not
only such as are ordinary, but the extraordinary Arcana may enable to practice,
and if an ordinary measure of skill by the help of directions and cautions in
the use of either may be sufficient for persons not indiscreet.

Were it not confessed that Receipts do little in acute Diseases, I would
easily prove it, for almost every hour varies the case, Nature being in a
continual Agony to extricate her self by all possible means from the fury of
the Distemper, and solicitously finding out the most expeditious way,
respecting the peccant matter and parts chiefly affected, to free her self from
imminent danger, in which sharp dispute sometimes she gains and sometimes
loses, altering accordingly all the concomitating Symptoms, so that she must
be traced in all her anomalous motions, in which hurry what place can there be
for a set Receipt most commonly fixed to some general intent? Neither in
Chronical Diseases can ever the extraordinary Arcana be at the same time
Physician and Medicine, for such Diseases are never at a stand, but (if not
interrupted) do regularly observe their increase, state, and gradual
declination, in which several tendencies though obscure and almost
indiscernable, Nature is yet highly concerned to promote their methodical
completion* and if any defect or obstruction, either delays or stops this
orderly course, it is the Physicians business by his experienced skill
according to that exigency to remove all impediments, and effectually assist
Nature in the due prosecution of this hopeful transaction; but that these
Arcana should be so fitted to the successive alterations of Diseases, as by the
same operation to carry on different Agencies, seems to me as improbable as the
doctrine of elective Catharticks; I rather think that the Patrons of these
Secrets will urge their Universal power, as if they were Plenipotentiaries, not
tied up to a strickt observance of any either private or public instructions,
but left at liberty to act according to the exigency of affairs, and the truth
is, these need no Physicians if they can rationalize their noble Arcana; but
since that these pleaders for such like conceited Remedies cannot produce one
Medicine to verify and confirm their Assertion, we are not obliged to give
them credit: Fabrit. ab aquapend. p. 309.
Fabritius ab Aquapendente gives us another account, Nihil magis medicos in
facienda medicina preclaros reddat, quam distincta differentiarum intelligentia
cujusque morbi, and ea accommodata ad singulas remediorum administratio, ubi
indicationes potissimum attendendae, says he, The right distinction of
diseases, and apt prescriptions according to their several indications, do
chiefly advance the repute of Physicians. But how can these Empericks by the
help of their Receipts and Arcana, and the common directions about the Dose,
the manner and time of giving them, and such like circumstances be enabled to
know the Disease to which their Secrets are appropriated, distinguishing it
from others, which in most of the Symptoms agree with it, and exactly
discerning the strange intimate complications, of great consequence in the
performing of a Cure. These Empericks with their noble Arcana the lawful issue
of Physicians, but unhappily nursed abroad, seem not unlike him who having
procured the Pensils of an excellent Limner did conceit himself capacitated
thereby to draw Pictures to the life as the Painter was wont to do, whose they
were, but upon trial, he quickly found his error, for it was the direction of
the Pensil that produced such admirable Pieces of Work, wherein lay his
deficiency: So in Physic, an ignorant person may have Receipts and noble
Medicaments which avail nothing without an artificial application by them not
acquirable.

3. The most plausible part of the Empericks rely on their observation of what
does well or ill under their hand, with a resolution to prosecute or reject
according to their success or miscarriage, these herein presume to justle with
true Physicians, but should people be as prodigal of their Lives as these are
of their skill, or had they full license for their accomplishment to depopulate
whole Countries, yet cannot they make any certain and infallible observation to
be a sufficient Directory to them in their future undertakings: In medicina cum
laud facienda multa and poene infinita sunt animadvertenda quae a rudi
empiricorum popello non annotentur, Hieron. b^rd. p. 30.
I grant indeed that these Empericks do rudely imitate their preceding
Experiments, with what hopes of success I know not; for should we admit that
one of their Receipts or Medicaments wrought a Cure on a Patient, yet why
should it have the same effect on another, who it may be differs in many
respects more from the person so cured, then another Disease from that; and
therefore such a Preparation or Receipt may by the same rule as well respect
distinct Diseases as distinct Persons: Whereas a right practice of Physic
consists in a due appropriation of Medicines or methods to the several
constitutions and conditions of the sick; if the same body every moment
somewhat varies from what it was, and the repetition of the same Medicine upon
this account is not alike beneficial, what probable expectation can be had from
the same application to all who labor under the same Disease, which more
disagree amongst themselves, then the Clocks in London and Paris. The Dialogue
in Plato between Socrates and Phaedrus is very pertinent: Socrat. Si quis
dicat, ego quidem illa scio corpori admovere quibus and calescat pro arbitrio
meo and frigeat, and vomitus and dejectiones perficiantur and hujusmodi plurima
teneo, quibus cognitis and medicum me esse profiteor, and alium quemlibet
medicum me facere posse dico, quid alium responsurum autumas? Phaedr. Nihil
aliud quam percunctaturum nunquid etiam sciat, quibus, quando and quousque
singula horum sint adhibenda, quod si nesciat, necessum est eum insanire qui
quod ex aliquo medicorum audierit quicquam vel in medelas nonnullas inciderit a
se probatas neque artis aliquid intelligat medicum se evasisse putet, h. e.
Socrat. If any person says I can dexterously apply those things to the body
which at my pleasure shall heat or cool it, and I understand Emeticks,
Catharticks, and other ways of evacuation, besides very many Medicines, by
which I am not only able to profess Physics, but be a fit Instructor or Tutor
of others; what think thou a stander by would answer? Phaedr. I suppose he
would enquire of him whether he knew to whom, when, and how long those Remedies
might be useful, and if he satisfies not these Questions and Doubts, although
he fancies himself to be an expert Physician, yet seems he rather to be besides
himself and distracted, who adventures to give Physic by the help only of some
Receipt-books, or a few Medicines learned from Physicians, not being acquainted
with the very Rudiments of the medicinal Science.

Besides, it many times falls out that these Empericks in their strict noting
of the events of their Medicines, do greatly mistake in not rightly
distinguishing between a true effect and Cure performed by their vaunted
Receipts and the succesful labor of Nature, to be with the same pangs
delivered of their Medicine and the Disease for which it was appointed: That
deplorate Diseases may be sometimes cured by such desperate irritations is
altogether undisputable; as also that these Sibi egregie sapientes videntur
tamen in maxima rerum ignorantia versantur, and ignorantiae tenebris circumfusi
doctrinae causas intueri mentis suae acie nequeunt, Shegk. in epist.
ignorant Practitioners do commonly use such Medicaments, but let the World
judge what will be the issue, if the Empericks not apprehending how it came to
pass that the Patient recovered, shall be invited and encouraged to give the
like Medicines as having their Probatum annexed to them. Neither can these
Empericks tell when their Arcana, or Receipts infallibly cure, by which the
fierceness of the Disease may possibly awhile be checked, and the raging
symptoms so becalmed as if all was well, but soon after like flames
suppressed, the Distemper breaks out again with more violence. I shall instance
in the POX, for which every Emperick pretends a secret Receipt, and if
Nocturnal pains cease, the Gonorrhea stops, and the virulent Ulcers heal, it is
immediately concluded that the Patient is rescued from that tyrannical Disease,
and the excellency of the Medicine is cried up, as if it was powerful enough to
extirpate certainly this foul Distemper in all who shall make trial of it, but
within a few months at least a year or two, it becomes too manifest that the
Cure at first was only palliated, in regard that it returns so notably
improved, when many hundreds, thus abused, are witnesses to the truth of this
Accusation; I wonder with what face these Empericks can pretend from such
disappointments of their Patients to an observation, emulating the true
Physicians Collection (...), Gal. lib. 3. meth. med.
made by Reason and Experience.

Thus much for the brief discovery of the several sorts of Empericks, who
notwithstanding their insufficiency, would yet be tolerated and have full
liberty (as they phrase it) to do what good they can; it is not to be questioned
but that if such an universal license should be granted, these Empericks would
more boldly impose on the credulous people: When I consider the mischief which
would undoubtedly happen in Trade, if all persons at pleasure without serving
an Apprenticeship or allowance of the respective Company or Corporation, might
set up and enjoy the same Privileges as those who were trained up in those
Callings, this being the directest way to ruin Trade; since that hereby
Private Interest is advanced above the Public; he who has but half an eye may
foresee of what ill consequence this Universal indulgence will be in Physic of
an higher concernment then Trade; in this he who miscarries does chiefly ruin
his own Fortune, but in the other by how much more unfit the person is who
practices, by so much more hazard and danger attends all who have to do with
him: I cannot resemble the issue of such a toleration in Physic to any thing
better then to the Ocean which rests not because of its community, either one
Billow continually dashes against another, or many conspire together to crowd
themselves into a public storm: So such liberty to practice Physic will as
surely produce rude clashings amongst those who so earnestly press for it,
raise dismal storms endangering the Medicina infamis propter eorum qui eam
exer^ent imperitiam.
peoples lives, and shipwreck the most excellent Science of Physic.

I very much wonder that the honorable Mr. Boil Experim. philos. lib. 2. p.
220, 221.
should so much favor the practice of Empericks, he thinks that the knowledge of
Physicians may not be inconsiderably increased, if men were a little more
curious to take notice of the observations and experiments suggested by the
practice of Midwives, Barbers, old Women and Empericks, and the rest of that
illiterate Crew, etc. And in another place wills That we disdain not the
remedies of such illiterate people only because of their being unacquainted
with our Theory of Physic, etc. Which expressions seem very much to plead for
free practice, for should Midwives, Barbers, old Women, Empericks, and the rest
of that illiterate crew being unacquainted with our Theory of Physic, be
restrained, then might Physicians miss of that not inconsiderable increase of
knowledge promised; verily the accomplishments of Physicians are very mean in
the opinion of this honorable person, that may not be inconsiderably increased
by such inferior and improbable additions: but the case of Physicians as yet is
not so desperate, as that to prevent sinking they should grasp at small rotten
sticks and straws to be their treacherous support: did I not believe that these
lines fell as a casual blot from this honorable persons Pen, I should more
strictly examine them.

And since that not only a toleration to practice Physic is so much desired,
but an equal liberty to introduce new Maxims into the Medicinal Science, most
agreeable to the Experiments of these Empericks, I shall enquire whether hereby
Physic may be advanced, and this request may be gratified by Authority, as
conducing to the public good. I am so much a latitudinarian as to conceive
that learned and experienced Physicians are not obliged to credit the Dictates
of any Author against their own experience, not as if I supposed that the
private judgment of such dissenters did balance the authority of a continued
and general approbation: but yet none acting like rational creatures ought to
shut their eyes against new discoveries, when they have past a severe
examination by competent Judges: however the Empericks and others alike
ignorant ought not from this liberty very cautiously used by those who only may
lay claim to it, to fancy an enjoyment of the same privilege, for should such
unskilful persons have free leave to publish their rude Conceptions, they would
vent horrid and destructive notions suitable to their erroneous and
preposterous actings, neither would there be any end of their absurd opinions,
both in respect of multiplication and possibility of conviction; for these
illiterate Empericks will Quilibet etsi a veritatis s^^p^ saepe multum aberrans
tot techins f^catisque demonstrationibus suas palliare studet opiniones ut a
cunctis cuncta fere ingenia primo occursu seducantur: Gul. du Vai^ in nov.
mund. subl. anat.
endeavor passionately to maintain their Sentiments right or wrong, whose zeal
is the chiefest argument in the propagation of their absurd persuasions: it was
a good Law which commanded that all monstrous Births should immediately be
destroyed, as well to prevent their increase least also like Conceptions should
be formed by means of such impressions on the imagination of teaming Women; and
there is as much reason that the monstrous products of the Brain should by some
public Edict or censure be forthwith stifled to hinder their spreading and
progress, considering also how much they may influence in the practice of
Physic, to the great prejudice of Mankind.

I shall in the next place give some reasons which incline such a multitude to
invade the Profession of Physic, Nullum fere hominum genus est quod non alat
rivalitatem cum medicis, Freitag.
who if the restraint was taken off, would be numberless.

1. The Excellency of Physic invites so many Empericks to pretend to it, even
as the value of Gold makes it more subject to adulteration, when vile and
ignoble Metals are not regarded; the greatest Monarchs and Potentates in the
world have esteemed the knowledge of Medicine an addition to their Majesty and
glory, and the sublimest Wits and most enlarged Souls exercising themselves
herein, find copious matter adequate to their contemplation; the meanest people
also are ambitious to improve that common natural principle inclining them to a
desire of knowledge, apprehending that although they cannot reach the highest
and most obscure truths in Physic, they yet may gain as much skill as will be
necessary to their practice: such indeed is the abstruseness of Physic, that
few have by their indefatigable scrutiny attained to so much perfection, as
that all doubts were satisfied and uncertainties insured; some mysteries
surpassing and baffling humane reason and diligence: the Empericks taking
notice of these difficulties which puzzle the most Learned, immediately
conclude that they are in the same condition with the eminentest Physicians,
being as much Admirers of what is concealed from both as they, and thinking
themselves equally capacitated to understand vulgar notions in Physic as the
others: I say, the most ignorant of the Empericks despair not in a shorter time
then Trallianus his six months to commence lucky Conjecturers; and if to
profess the knowledge of nothing, in respect of the great improbability of a
right Conception is the sum of Ingenuity, and the shortest cut to true
knowledge, these have good hopes to deserve Promotion and be as soon Graduates
in Ignorance as any. Thus do the Empericks insinuate themselves into the common
peoples favor, who not being able to understand the fallacy, entertain their
suggestions as Oracles, and are willing to be deceived; but although the
excellency of the Medicinal Science may be one cause why so many desire to
profess it, yet there is reason why hereupon they should be discouraged, since
that they are insufficient to arrive at an ordinary measure of knowledge in
these profound Mysteries: I might instance in the several parts of Physic, but
having occasion elsewhere to treat of them, I pass to the next Reason of the
Empericks adventuring to practice; which is,

2. Because the Magistrates either want power to punish unskilful Practisers of
Physic, or are remiss in the execution of penal Laws upon them: So soon as
Barbarism was expeld the Confines of any Nation, and Government civilized men's
unnatural Cruelty into a peaceable Deportment to their Superiors and an
amicable Society, respecting the good and welfare of each other; Laws were
timely enacted to restrain the dangerous attempts of ignorant Practitioners,
but yet Physicians in all Countries have not causelessly complained that there
still wants another Law to command the due execution of the former. I shall not
set down the Arguments which moved the High-Court of Parliament heretofore to
guard both the People and Physicians with fitting Laws from the Injuries of the
numberless illiterate Pretenders to the Profession of Physic; for the passing
of those Acts imports the Grand Concernment and unquestionable necessity
thereof for the public good: and therefore since it appears that those Laws by
reason of some circumstantial omissions or defects, cannot be effectually
observed according to their true intent, we may easily believe that the present
Parliament being no less careful of the Nations Welfare then their
Predecessors, especially in an Affair of such Consequence, will either vigorate
the old Statutes with convenient Power and Enlargements, or make new to prevent
such notorious Abuses as are now without redress practiced on his Majesty's
Subjects.

In regard the People claim Liberty to employ whom they please, the Empericks
as well as Physicians, I shall enquire whether they ought to enjoy such
freedom; Fabritius Hild. p* 916.
Fabritius Hildanus thinks it unfit that they use whom they best approve, the
ignorant as well as learned and lawful Practitioners; Non licet unicuique
(quod nonnulli objicere solent) corium suum cuicunque libuerit venale offerre,
I know not whether the Law will adjudg them felones de se, who take destructive
Medicaments from the hands of others being well informed of the hazard they run
therein, as those who buy and use poisons with intent to destroy themselves;
indeed the first is a more solemn Conspiration then the latter, but they differ
not in the event, for thereby the King loses a Subject and the Commonwealth a
Member; and however these do not seem to design their own Deaths, yet when they
take the directest course to it, what good interpretation can well be put upon
such practices; it is at least the highest imprudence wilfully to run upon
death in hopes of life. Furor e st ne moriare, mori.
That all persons ought to be just to themselves will be easily granted, this
being their pattern in relation to others in their converse, and wherein can
they better express their sense of this Duty, then in the use of the best and
likeliest means to rescue them from Diseases? they then seem dishonest to
themselves who entrust their lives in the hands of those who more certainly
kill then cure, whereupon the Law which restrains the Empericks does chiefly
respect the people, that the opportunities of their harming themselves might be
taken away, and all mischief thereby prevented.

Why the World should so fondly dote on these illiterate, impudent and cruel
Practisers, as to prefer them before the most learned, modest and experienced
Professors of Physic, he cannot imagine who is unacquainted with the
Stratagems Em^irici maximam Arti faciunt injuriam infignem inurunt maculam, ut
periti apud vulgus non modo imperitum, verum etiam prob dolor ^sanioris judicii
homines obtineant authoritatem, Seid.
by which they insinuate themselves into the peoples esteem. It is my next Task
to discover the Empericks Practices, and to strip them naked of their plausible
pretenses.

1. The Empericks undertake to cure infallibly all Diseases in all Persons; if
we can think that certain news of recovery can be welcome to a dying man, surely
the Author of those comfortable tidings exceedingly merits an interest in him
who is to partake of such an unexpected and valuable a benefit as Life: so then
the Emperick hereupon is entertained, for great expectations do naturally beget
confidence, and self-love works easily a through conformity to multiplied
assurances of an escape from imminent danger; Pliny has a very remarkable
passage to this purpose, Adeo est cuique pro se sperandi blanda dulcedo ut
cuique se medicum profitenti statim credatur cum sit majus periculum in nullo
mendacio majus, says he, Every sick person does so please and satisfy himself
with hopes of a restoration to health, that he readily commits his body to the
care of any one who pretends that he is a Physician, whereas there is no such
cheat in the world as this. However if these universal Undertakers can screw
themselves into esteem with their Patients by promising what is incredible, not
within their, nay, many times any humane power, yet they hereby lay a sure
foundation of Popularity on which they build steadfast hopes that either by
well wishing Friends and Relations, or else by the Patients themselves they
shall be called in, that it may appear upon trial whether they fail in their
secured performance: so that the contrivance is subtle, for if these Empericks
are not employed, what ever they presume to say, speaks them to be no less then
what they pretend, there being no public or sufficient conviction of their
vain boastings; And if by the Artifice of promising a certain Cure they gain
such an opinion of their Abilities as to be employed then (be the event what it
will) their design of being entertained is thereby compassed.

The Digression may be pardonable, if before I take a prospect of the Empericks
sufficiency to carry on his rash undertakings, I spend a little time in
explicating what is commonly understood by incurable Diseases: by the Learned,
Diseases are reckoned incurable in respect of themselves, the Patient and the
Physician. Of the first kind are those Diseases which tincture the very
rudiments of our nature and being, which are conceived, born and grow up with
us; he therefore who imagines himself to be such an expert Engineer as to turn
the Microcosm at his pleasure, must have some unmovable point whereon to fix
his Instrument; who ever (I mean) attempts a total alteration of any man's
Constitution and Nature, must suppose some parts free by whose assistance he
may perform his engagement; but the deep stain of hereditary Diseases not only
antidating the Moors blackness, who are not unlike the Europeans some minutes
after they are born, but being as inseparable as that from its subject, cannot
by the Ocean of Pharmancy be washed out and changed: I might to this add the
Plague, at least that which is most fierce and severe, which being the Rod of
the Almighty to punish men's Impieties, cannot by any medicinal means be
frustrated of its designed execution, there being a vast disproportion between
natural Remedies and supernatural Causes, and hereupon the same Remedies being
divinely empowered, prove effectual to rescue some, when left to their own
virtues are baffled and become unsuccesful: I urge not this as if I conceived
that the same Medicines or methods were applicable to all seaz'd by the
Pestilence with good hopes of the same benefit, for in this sad Disease, as
well as others, respect must be had to all considerations necessary to a
regular cure; and hence it is that men are not only commanded but encouraged to
use all proper and lawful means upon the account of the frequent reprieves
which the great Majesty of Heaven issues out When and to Whom he pleases: But
fearing least I should transgress the limits of my intended Digression, though
I might produce many more instances, yet I shall pass to the Patients in
respect of whom some diseases are incurable; And I must in the first place very
much blame the carelessness and inadvertency of some Patients, who enjoying for
a long time good and uninterrupted health, when they find themselves only
indisposed, the disease as it were by stealth insensibly creeping on them, are
not awakened by such distant Alarms to prevent their enemies incursion upon
them, by which imprudent delay the Distemper takes deep root, and the fomes or
Minera being inconsiderable at first, quickly enlarges it self to the
circumference of the whole body, so that no part neither internal nor external
is free from its insinuation, till like Ivy it inevitably throws down its kind
support.

The impatience and refractoriness also of the Sick make their Diseases
incurable, some of them choose rather to sink under a Chronical disease, then
submit to a methodical cure, being more weary of necessary preparations then
the Grand Seigneour was of the tedious tuning the Instruments, when as a piece
of high Entertainment He was invited to hear a most harmonious Consort of
Music: Did these Patients rightly apprehend the strict regard that must be had
to the several intricacies of complicated Diseases, and that very often
contrary Symptoms are to be dealt withal at the same time, and many other like
circumstances, they might (I doubt not) more securely and speedily be recovered
from their Distempers, otherwise even upon this account incurable. Thus the
Leprosy, Quartane Agues, the Epilepsy, most Consumptions, the Stone, Dropsy
and Gout, and many others of the same family (if not hereditary) are chiefly
remediless by reason of the Patients obstinacy and irregularities.

Besides the tenderness and natural weakness of some persons incapacitating
them to struggle with very slight and easy distempers, much less with those
which are more formidable and dangerous, makes their condition helpless, when
robuster tempers affected with the same disease, by the help of convenient
Medicaments may be cured, To conclude this digression, Diseases may be
incurable in respect of Physicians, who by reason of the Medicina exact^
indiget contemplatione and laboriosa in operibus exercitatione, utpote quae
tantis rerum difficultatibus scatet, Alsat. p. 5.
inextricable difficulties which occur in the discovery of the Disease and
parts primarily suffering thereby cannot make a true judgment, and this may
sometimes be the case of those who are most able, not by reason of any
deficiency in them, but either from an ill relation or account from the sick,
or a strong and perplexing obscurity in the Disease; but however true
Physicians may (though rarely) in such obscure cases be nonplus'd or mistake,
yet they will not be over confident and secure, acting as if they fully
understood how to direct exactly what was most fit to be done, as in other
known diseases: This excuse will not serve the turn of our Emperical
Conservators, who want skill to distinguish between curable and incurable
diseases, engaging to cure both alike. Let Paracelsus who knew very well their
devices give the reason; says he, Quaestus proprii studio aegros suscipiunt
omnes quicunque demum offeruntur ipsis undecunque, Defens. 5. p. 259.
h. e. Hopes of gain prompts them on to undertake all who are willing to put
themselves into their hands; for let the Disease be what it will (that is not
the business) the caution Money not only rewards the boldness of their
enterprise, but secures their Patient to them; and besides the advantage made
by the Empericks of their Physic, good store of which must be bought in order
to a cure, when the Patient is well they expect a Sicut Prothagoras sophisista
qui discipulis and auditoribus relinquebat estimationem suarum lectionum, ut
quisque eorum tantum mercedis ei persolveret quantum existimaret se ex ejus
lectionibus profecisse atque didicisse, Aristo. Ethn. p. 838.
quantum meruit, A reward answerable to their pains and cure; If they chance
to die, they are then satisfied by the gain of their Medicines sold at an
extraordinary rate*

As these Empericks wanting the eye of Reason difference not a Mountain from a
Molehil, a great Disease from an inconsiderable Disorder, so do they often
respecting their advantage use the microscope in the discovery of diseases, and
what is as a mite almost imperceptible; being thus greatned is rendered most
formidable, hence it comes to pass that every stich, qualm or fancy of
infection, is esteemed the most dismal effect occasioned by some of the unheard
of epidemical Ferments.

As for this latter stratagem, although the fear into which these Empericks put
their Patients does so far prevail as that they immediately are employed, in
regard there is such an evident testimony of their skill in discovering a
disease not observable by any others, yet most commonly it happens that what
was even nothing when the Emperick began to tamper, by his indirect courses
proves dangerous, and then what remains, but that he make it answer his first
opinion of it least he be discredited in not rightly apprehending the Disease.

2. The Empericks pretend cheapness as a prevalent argument inducing people to
employ them, the poor shall be cured gratis to be decoys to some of better
fashion, who being crazy even force their diseases to a composition, and make
them accept of little least they should have no allowance at all, the whole
gang of these ignorant undertakers lay very great stress on this project, being
sensible that a cheap Market will never want Customers, and rightly
apprehending how much the mere pretense of Charity will commend them,
especially when they publish their zeal and affection for the public good,
beyond their own profit. I must confess that the Empericks herein have the
advantage of the true Professors of Physic, who (as affairs now stand) cannot
be so kind to the Poor as they most sollicitously desire or reasonably may be
expected; for although they freely give their direction to such necessitous
people, yet when their Bill comes into the Apothecary's hand, since there is no
set Tax on Medicines, it is in his power (notwithstanding the due care taken to
prescribe what might not be too chargeable) to make the Physician seem
uncharitable, for if the Apothecary exacts because the Physician took nothing,
then is his friendship abused, and some ground of suspicion (though altogether
without cause) that the Physician shares in the Apothecaries unreasonable
gains; but I shall have a fit opportunity in the next Chapter to discourse of
this inconvenience both to Physicians and the People, and therefore at present
I dismiss it. These Empericks (I say) ingratiate themselves by taking care that
their Physic may not be so chargeable as the Physicians, hereby preventing the
ruin of Families (as they would persuade the people) and the relapsing of the
sick, who are apt when cured, to regret at the great expense, and dislike that
life which was so dearly purchased; whereas price adds not to the efficacy of
Medicines which are only succesful, as they are rationally, and according to
Art directed: these Empericks may poison men's bodies for six pence if they
please, and people may be executed by the hand of these at as easy a charge as
by the hangman: in earnest I think it is a dangerous thrift that men to save
their purses (I mean they who are able) should be prodigal of their lives, It
is doubtless worthy the consideration of Physicians that by some special care,
provision be made for the poor, and though I know that every true Physician is
as willing to help the poor for nothing, as the rich for Fees, and cheerfully
embraces all public and private opportunities to express his readiness herein,
yet these not taking notice of their Charity herein run to Mountebanks, who by
their unskilfulness make their condition worse then they found it, rendering
those miserable Patients unserviceable to their Families and the Public, and a
continual charge to the Parishes wherein they live.

I remember an Expedient proposed not long since to some Physicians by an
honorable person which then seemed very rational to all present; it was to this
purpose: That either the Kings College in London would appoint certain of
their Members, or the Physicians by mutual agreement oblige themselves twice
every week at convenient places, the hour being prefixed, to receive an account
from the Poor who should bring Tickets of recommendation subscribed by the
Minister, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, he conceived that three or
four at one time in distant places might accommodate the City and Suburbs of
London, and that these having attended their Month, others should be appointed
to succeed them, and in relation to the Physic that the public Officers of
the respective Parishes might when they received the Bills, take care to
provide it at reasonable rates; those Physicians consulting (with respect had
to the Patients condition) the nearest and cheapest ways of cure: The whole
Company returned their hearty thanks, especially the Physicians, that a way was
thought on, whereby they might do their Country service, thinking it no
disparagement to wait on the meanest person in the faithful discharge of their
Calling.

As for others, there is no cause why they should be discouraged or hindered
from the use of Physicians, and run to these Empericks when they are sick,
because the one expects a better reward then the other; for the expense is
abundantly compensated by that success, which in all probability will be the
issue of the skilful Professors, whose chargeable education also extraordinary
difficulties in the attainment of their Art and restless care for their
Patients, are so many arguments pleading, that they deserve a better esteem and
respect then Empericks, who most of them are of the meanest rank, gained their
practice in two or three days time, Praxis qu^ ipsi utuntur trium dierum spatio
ab homine vel vilissimo acquiritur, Panar. epist.
and commit their Patient to the good usage of the Receipts, and the truth is,
the people pay dearly for these low prized Medicaments, when to boot they cost
them their lives: but the able and judicious Physicians do wisely manage their
trust, endeavoring to procure good and lasting health at as easy a rate as
possible they can, they daily experience that a common plant growing in every
field which costs no more then the pains of gathering, if the use is skilfully
directed, does oft-times outdo a precious Medicine, and frequently exquisite,
and elaborate remedies of an higher estimate only conquer the radicated
disease. The Physicians act prudently more regarding the Patients sickness then
purse, yet are they no less sollicitous, when safely they may, to medicate
according to their Patients ability; Strad. probos. p. 58.
let Strada determine between Physicians and the Empericks: Medici finis est
corporum salus quod si quis secus faciat ac Medicamenta contra quam finis artis
praescribit, usurpet, improbi civis ac proditoris personam gerit, multo magis,
si nulla ad salutem, omnia ad perniciem medicamenta conficiat, suique jactet
operis, pestem ubique spargere, cuncta venenis inficere and moliri exitium
humano generi, says he, The chief end and use of a Physician is to recover the
sick, but if any one pretending to Physic, shall provide Medicines not
answering that end, he is a profligate wretch and a treacherous villain, and
much more if in stead of wholesome Medicaments he vents those which in their
nature are destructive, propagating the Plague, poisoning all things,
destroying his fellow Citizens, and attempting the extirpation of mankind. If
the people would be so considerate as to weigh the hazard, when they employ
these Empericks for the cheapness of their Physic, I question not, but that
they would be more cautious to avoid such specious delusions, since that keen
Medicines Non licet bis peccare in medicina uti nec in bello.
unskilfully handled will certainly wound if not kill.

3. The Empericks as not the least compleatment of their subtle iusinuations
into the peoples esteem, do pretend new commanding and secret Medicines,
exclaiming against all ancient methods of practice as antiquated and obsolete;
these so much extolled and even adored Receipts either (as they suggest)
traveled out of some remote Country merely out of kindness to be acquainted
with those who desire their familiarity, or else they are reported to be no
less then the most precious Jewels ransacked out of Natures Cabinet, when she
was by them forced to surrender both her self and treasure into their hands,
and to color this design, these Empericks do usually bestow strange Titles on
their Medicines, as the Planetary Extract, the Cardiaupnotick Spirit, and
Magnetical Balsom; which terms are as Magical to the Vulgar, as Agrippa's
Vionatraba, Masgabriel, and Abuzana; hereafter I shall give some account of
these, and therefore I pass to the last of their practices.

4. The Empericks to advance their own reputation, do perpetually rail at
Academical and Graduated Physicians, accusing either their insufficiency, or
laziness; these observe that by how much more they decry and asperse with false
Calumnies, those whom their just deserts have made their Superiors, by so much
the more they gratify the Rabble, desiring to vilify that which
distinguishes others from them, when the Idol called Learning is removed, and
all people are left to their Mothers wit and common ingenuity, there being a
common road opened to the Science of Physic, what impedes but that every one
may without interruption journey to it? and certainly there cannot be imagined
a more persuasive argument to the Vulgar, then that if they will join and yield
their assistance to undervalue the true Professors of Physic; by the same
labor they make way for their own interest; and hence it is that the Empericks
in their Pamphlets and common discourses, talk so dishonorably of lawful
Physicians, not because of the Art they profess, for then they should condemn
themselves, but because of their University distinctions and the privileges
thereby derived to them: But until it be thought a fit expedient to put out the
eyes of the Nation both in order to Phylosophyzing, and also a better way of
practicing Physic, the true Sons of Art may keep on their course
notwithstanding the vain barkings of these Empericks.

Some perhaps may expect that before I conclude this Chapter of Empericks, I
say something concerning those now on the Stage in this Nation, who are as
busy and as ignorant as any of their Predecessors; I shall not defile my self
so much as to retaliate their abuses, this course being unworthy of a
Physician, and contrary to the direction of Hippocrates; but I hope they have
no reason to take it ill, if I remind them of the several Callings in which
they were educated, and ought still with care and industry to have exercised:
The most eminent of our Empericks are HEEL-MAKERS, GUN-SMITHS, TAILORS,
WEAVERS, COBBLERS, COACHMEN, BOOKBINDERS, and infinite more of the like quality,
beside a great number of the other SEX, and these for the Credit of the
business, either make every Post wear their Livery, or else procure some
Booksellers and others to be their PIMPS, on whose Stalls are hung large Tables
with fair Inscriptions; The Sympathetick Powder made by Promethean fire,
Pilulae Radiis Solis extractae, famous Pectoral Lozenges, Diaphoretick and
Diuretic Pills, Powders for all purposes, and what not: by which means many
simple people are Trapan'd to buy and use these Preparations, supposing they
may as safely venture on a Medicine out of a Booksellers shop, as read a Book:
but alas! some too late perceive their error, for what a man reads may be soon
blotted out of his Memory, but such stuff taken into the body and appropriated
to the Patient and Disease by the printed book or paper only, is not quickly
dismissed, being oft-times a continual and lasting disease to them: in the
Chapter of Chemistry, I shall more particularly give an account of these
Medicines and the way of their application: I shall conclude this subject with
one brief observation, That whereas it was manifest that some thousands died
more in London these last three or four years then the preceding, and it is as
well known that the lawful Physicians had less employment at those times then
formerly, we may rationally infer, that the true reason of such a Mortality was
not (as the Author of Medela medicinae ignorantly suggests) from the increase
and propagation of the Venereal, Scorbutic and spermatick ferments, but only
by the Emperick ferment and its pernicious malignity.

CHAP. II. Of practicing APOTHECARIES.
THat Physicians did originally provide and dispense their own Medicines, will
be (I doubt not) easily granted by those who are acquainted with the Writings
of the Ancients, wherein it is evident that Hippocrates, (...), etc. Hippocrat.
(...).
Galen, and the chief Physicians as part of their employment, prepared what
Physic they had occasion to spend in their practice: And although their strict
obligation to conceal their Sacred Art, least it should be prostituted to the
rude invasion of persons unqualified, might be one argument inclining them (as
the most likely way for its security) to confine their business to their own
Closets or Repositories; yet I conceive that other reasons might no less
persuade their furnishing themselves with all necessary Medicines both simple
and compound, for these hereby very much improved their knowledge in the Materia
medica, so that they were not only able to distinguish all Plants, Animals and
Minerals, and being abroad (if destitute of convenient helps) readily find out
what might satisfy the intent in the designed cure, but to prepare and
compound them till they become apt Medicines for their use, with all diligence
observing the several alterations which happened in taste, smell, or otherwise, by
which means they were thoroughly informed how to change, add or diminish, as
there was occasion, to advance the efficacy of the Composition; their Patients
also shared in the benefit of their industry and care herein, who having
committed themselves into the hands of those Physicians, looked upon them as
the only responsable persons in that undertaking; wherefore they prudently
considering that their Reputation lay at stake and the lives of their Patients,
durst not entrust others in a matter of such concernment to both, but managed
all the business themselves to a general approbation.

When the credit of Physic by the singular caution of these great Physicians,
had gained almost an Universal authority, so that most in their sicknesses
applied themselves to Physicians, the vast increase of practice not allowing
them leisure both to prepare their physic, and likewise to attend their
numerous Patients, and consult all things necessary to their condition,
constrained them to commit the charge of answering their Prescripts, to the
care of others, in whose integrity they could safely confide: and soon after
when the bounds of Physic were enlarged, being limited before to select
Families; as Physicians multiplied, so proportionably they increased whose
office it was to dispense Medicines: at length the Profession of Physic became
a Faculty, and being free to all whose laudable proficiency in its study and
knowledge deserved Academical Diploma's; the Apothecaries Art was likewise
opened to all, who understanding its mystery passed the approbation of
associated Physicians, continual additions of such who were trained up in this
Calling made their number so considerable, as that for their better regulation
they were constituted an incorporation, and since by means of innumerable
accession of Apprentices after a certain time of service made free; this
Society is advanced to a bulk greater then the Body from whence it came and on
which it depends, and as it fares when one member does monstrously enlarge it
self, the rest are emaciated; even so the vastness of this Company deprives
Physicians of their proper aliment.

I know that some give another account of the distinction of Physicians and
Apothecaries, as if the Magistrate apprehending the trust of life and death too
great for one, did thereupon appoint the other that by two different offices
all opportunities of mischiefing the people might be prevented; but Quercitans
answer is very pertinent to the Authors of this Conceit; Quer^. Phar. mac. p.
221.
says he, Quid aliud hi quam omnium Medicorum and Pharmacopoeorum iras in se
exacuant, quos tam improbae fidei notant, ut si seorsim operentur ac
medicentur, non saluti aegrotantium, sed morti accelerandae de industria
studeant? h. e. Both Physicians and Apothecaries have just cause to quarrel
with those, who by suggesting that neither ought to be solely entrusted, do
thereby brand them with unfaithfulness, as if they rather sought the death,
then life of Patients.

Another Plea is much insisted on by some of our Apothecaries, whereby they
endeavor to make a perfect separation between Physicians and themselves,
claiming a free exercise of their Trade as Members of the Grand Incorporation,
and fully enjoying all the privileges of the common Charter, whereby they are
authorized as well to buy and sell, as any other Company; but although they
accommodate Physicians in making up their Prescripts, yet that is a voluntary
undertaking, which they may either accept or refuse at their pleasure, it being
their proper business to provide such Medicines as the Supreme Power shall
allow for the peoples use, and to furnish their Customers, although there
should not be any Physician to write Bills: And thus under the pretext of
selling their Medicines to all who come to their Shops, they also take upon
them to advise what they think most agreeable to their conditions who are sick:
by this slight, ingratiating themselves with the people, and (as they conceive)
avoiding the just censure of practicing Physic.

I reply, that Physicians did never design to hinder the Apothecaries in their
known and lawful Trade of vending Medicines, but on the contrary have much
promoted it, by giving them daily opportunities to supply their Patients with
Physic according to their Prescripts; yet if these because of their settlement
as free Traders, shall hereupon destroy the relation between Physicians and
them, as if their interest did not much consist in the practice of Physicians,
they will have no cause of complaint, if the Professors of Physic take their
business again into their own hands, and imitate the most succesful practice of
their renowned Predecessors; And the Apothecaries may as freely as ever attend
their Trade in selling to those who will buy of them notwithstanding the
Physicians preparation of their own Remedies.

But I observe that very many Apothecaries are so far from deviding between
theirs and the Physicians Art, that they endeavor to unite them in their
undertakings, as much professing to direct Physic as to prepare or sell it,
and these I call practicing Apothecaries, although some who would seem more
modest and friendly to Physicians; suppose that none of their Society ought to
practice Physic, yet these would not have any one debarred the giving of such
Medicines as they should think fit, when there is a special occasion: but since
that these Apothecaries so much favoring their own advantage must necesiarily
be Judges of those exigencies, I know not how to distinguish this more close
and sly way, from that which being acted above board is owned and justified by
these Practitioners, for by practicing of Physic, is understood any
application to the sick in order to a cure, comprehending not only long
methodical courses in Chronical Diseases, but sudden directions in those which
are acute, respecting as well their beginning Principiis obsta, etc.
as their subsequent alterations.

The ordinary account we have out of the best Authors, describing the
Apothecaries office, mentions not a word of their Practicing Physic, omitting
what occurs in others, I shall only recite the opinion of Renodaeus; Renodaei
instit Phar. p. 6.
Officium solummodo Pharmacopaei est medicamentum tractare, and ad usum
salutarem medici probati jussu adhibere, quod ut faeliciter consequatur, debet
cognoscere, seligere, praeparare and componere, etc. h. e. It is the
Apothecaries business to meddle with Medicaments only, and in relation to their
use to follow the Physicians Prescript, and that he may be fitted to execute
his office he must be instructed to know Simples, to select the choicest, to
prepare and compound his Medicines. And if this be the utmost intent of the
Apothecaries Trade wherein they are educated; whence should these gain
sufficient accomplishments enabling them to practice Physic? as for their
knowledge of Simples and skill in Compositions, although these are necessary
qualifications capacitating them to be able Apothecaries, yet I understand not
how these should upon this account any more become Physicians, then Cutlers and
Gun-smiths by their judgment of the Metals goodness on which they work, and
their making and fitting Instruments of War, be thereby rendered most expert
Commanders: but these practicing Apothecaries pretend sufficient helps for
their instruction in the virtues of Simples, and the true use of Compositions,
from Physicians Bills which they constantly book; and by this means (as they
inform the people) having seen the practice of many Physicians, they may be as
good Doctors as any.

I shall enquire whether the Prescripts of Physicians can so far improve an
Apothecary as that by their assistance he may be able to practice Physic?
Indeed the De augm. scient. lib. 4. p. 2^3.
Lord Bacon's opinion, That there ought to be a religious observance of
approved Medicines as well to retain the benefit of Tradition, as to direct a
more steady way of curing Diseases: Seems to favor very much these
Apothecaries, who are well stocked with such Receipts, which they without any
alteration transcribe for their Patients; but I shall oppose what the learned
Alsarius relates, Alsar. de. quaes. per epistol. p. 309.
Medicinae leges non ad Polycleti immutabilem regulam referendae, sed ad
Lesbian normam, quam pro factorum personarum ac temporum conditionibus
magistratus aequitas commutare solet. h. e. The Laws of Medicine are not like
Polycletus's unalterable rules, but the Lesbian precepts which the Magistrates
might change and vary according to the nature of the Crime, the condition of
the Offender, and the circumstance of time, etc. That such Receipts without any
alterations or substitutions may very much conduce to the cure of Diseases, is
by that Noble and Learned Person rather presumed then proved: To omit what I
mentioned in the precedent Chapter concerning the insufficiency of those
Medicines, in respect of the vast difference of men's bodies, and a greater
variation of diseases incident to them; I assert that there is no Medicine
rationally prescribed, but what particularly relates to the principal
Indication which ought chiefly to be taken from the Cause, and not from the
Disease, according to the usual design of those Prescripts; which is confirmed
by Galen, Gal. de opt. secta.
says he, If Diseases indicated their proper Remedies, the Patients best
understanding what is to be done, might be most helpful to themselves: moreover
the Medicines show that not Diseases, but their Causes do indicate their use,
as being not primarily adverse to Effects but Efficients: So then it being the
highest concern of a Physician to form his Medicaments as he sees occasion, of
what use can Receipts be, which by ignorant undertakers cannot be accommodated
to the most prevalent indications respecting the Cause? These practicing
Apothecaries having another employment, which ought to take up their thoughts,
pains and time, may well be supposed incapable of knowing and making a right
judgment of the true Causes of diseases which not only alter frequently the
same Disease as to its appearance and symptoms, but much more in relation to
its Cure: I remember a story which I have read, to this purpose, A Patient by
the faithful advise of his Physician recovered from a most dangerous Disease,
but it seems not long after was ill again, the Apothecary visits him, and
apprehending that his condition was the same as in his former sickness,
immediately repeats the Medicines which the Physician had prescribed, but all to
no purpose, the Physician was then sent for, and the Patient telling him of the
Apothecaries ill success, demands the reason why those remedies which before
cured him, had not the like operation again, the Physician wittily replied,
Medicamenta illa non profuere, quia ego non dedi, h. e. Those Medicines were
not succesful, because I did not order the repetition of them; insinuating that
a Physician ought to judge as well of the Patients fitness for the Remedies, as
of the Remedies fitness for the Patients. To say no more, I cannot think that
the Apothecaries strict noting and transcribing of Physicians Bills can more
enable them to practice Physic, then Stenography to profess Divinity, the
penning of a Sermon verbatim, and committing it to memory being as infinitely
short of the qualifications requisite to a Divines preaching and exercise of
his Function, as the imitation of these Prescripts of the accomplishments
necessary to the Profession of Physic.

But these Apothecaries besides their unskilfulness to practice Physic, are
most injurious to Physicians upon several accounts, who entrust them with their
Bills, for when those Prescripts express their particular use, and as a weighty
trust to that end only, are committed to the Apothecaries care, if he ever
imploys them without the Physicians privity and direction, he is unfaithful in
that trust; and if his practice succeeds not, then does the reputation of that
Physician suffer, whose Prescript originally it was: As another considerable
branch of trust, the true dispensation of all Medicines directed by Physicians
is left to the Apothecaries, in whose integrity they place great confidence,
and therefore a good Author tells us, Praestat Pharmacopaeum esse virum bonum,
quam Socratem, h. e. It Is better that an Apothecary be an honest men then
Socrates, both Physician and Patient depending on his uprightness and the
punctual discharge of his office: If then this Apothecary shall engage in the
practice of Physic, he must necessarily spend much time abroad in visiting his
Patients, and leave his shop to the management of raw Apprentices, who wanting
instruction by reason of their Masters absence, and not understanding the
Physicians Bill, make odd and too often dangerous substitutions; neither are
the Physicians secure that such practicing Apothecaries do not out of design
suffer their Patients to be neglected or abused, that so miscarrying in their
hands, the repute of the others may seem thereby advanced, as if their practice
could not be more unsuccesful then the Doctors: certainly these Apothecaries
cannot give a satisfactory account of the trust reposed in them, and therefore
to me it is evident that they give timely warning by forsaking their Trade and
practicing Physic, that none commit the breeding of their Children to them who
have business of more concernment to mind, then to spend their time in teaching
(according to their engagement) their Servants the Art which they must be made
free to exercise, that the people be not hasty to employ them in either way,
who incapacitate themselves for both; and lastly, That Physicians send not any
Bills to them, lest they be guilty of prejudicing both themselves and Patients.
If then these practicing Apothecaries are so kind to Physicians as publicly to
acquaint them what may be expected at their hands; I hope no Member of that
Worthy Faculty is so stupid but that he will leave them and their Patients to
the same adventure which both run, and not be either forward to help them out
at a dead lift, or take the miscarriage on him for the advantage of one or two
Fees; but it is observable that some of these, conceiving that an open breach
between Physicians and them may be prejudicial to their design, do plead as an
excuse to acquit themselves that the importunity of their Customers prevailed
with them in such cases wherein was no appearance of Danger to direct what they
thought most convenient; L' obell. p. 6.
but let Rondeletius give these an answer, Pharmacopaeus inconsulto perito
medico nihil cuiquam proponabit, praesertim magnarum virium, sed neque
quantumvis parcarum, cum vires nesciat, and auxilia haec quamvis (ut videtur)
imbecilla, tamen quantitate, qualitate, tempore insalubria, magnorum saepe
morborum sunt occasio, and legitimam curandi rationem pervertunt, h. e.
Apothecaries ought not to give any Medicines without the foreknowledg and
direction of an allowed Physician, neither those which are more or less
operative, because they being altogether ignorant of their virtues may err in
those which seem weakest and most safe in respect of quantity, quality or time,
so as they may prove the causes of most dangerous diseases, the opportunity
also of a methodical Cure is by this means lost. Indeed such is the increase of
the Apothecaries Company, that all of them cannot reasonably expect employment*
who therefore hunt abroad after Patients, and prey one upon another business;
these inconveniences would be remedied if the counsel of a grave Writer was
observed, who advises the Magistrate to be very careful not to tolerate more
Apothecaries then are sufficient for the discharge of that Profession;
implying, that if they superabounded, they would most infallibly injure the
public, and rather then their Medicines for want of timely use should decay
and grow worthless, choose to spend them by their own practice, and think it a
less Crime to harm the people then suffer any damage in their shops; And when
these practicing Apothecaries have by their insinuations inveigled some to take
Physic of them, as it is not improbable but that these being ignorant of the
direct way of curing diseases must necessarily hereupon spend more Medicines
then Physicians who exactly knowing what is to be done, will not multiply
Prescripts to tire out their Patients and advance their charge; so how can such
Patients assure themselves that their Apothecary-physicians do not make use of
that opportunity as much to rid their shop of physic, as them of diseases:
however if the whole is cast up, such Patients will find no cause to commend
the cheapness of their Cure in respect of what it had been, if they had
consulted Physicians; not to mention that some of these do confidently take and
demand Fees for their Visits, besides the profitable income by their physic; I
may safely affirm that most of them cannot afford to be so charitable as to
wait on their Patients without some recompense for their time and trouble,
which are usually accounted in the price of the Medicines: So then, what a
delusion do they lie under who seek to these Apothecaries, hoping thereby to
save Physicians Fees.

I question not but that these practicing Apothecaries do also discourage the
people from seeking to Physicians, not only by undervaluing their skill, but by
misrepresenting the charge of such advice, exclaiming against their excessive
Fees for every little distemper, if they are called in: I answer, that if in
such little distempers (as they term them) any thing is to be directed, a
Physician ought to be consulted therein, for perhaps what these misjudging did
account light and inconsiderable, when better understood by those who are able
to look deeply into it, and have a right notion of the Causes, may prove a
business of great concernment, and being thoroughly known by the prudence of the
Physician in his timely applications the danger so much threatened may be
succesfully obviated, and the Patient restored without any great expense either
in the Physicians Fees or Apothecaries Medicines; I must add to vindicate the
Physicians from the false adspersion of exacting from the people more then the
condition of such Patients can bear, that no Society of men in this Nation can
in this point so much clear themselves as Physicians, who although they have no
public stipends (some few excepted) are yet so moderate in their takings, that
without a lessening the honor and repute of their Faculty they cannot well
condescend lower, and if the Seniors whose worth merits a greater respect, and
age requires more rest and quiet, shall excuse themselves from night calls, and
the drudgery of attending ordinary business; the Junior Physicians when sent
unto, most readily (desiring to appear conscientious in the discharge of their
calling) take care of the meanest people either gratis expressing their
Charity, or at a rate suitable to their condition who employ them.

Moreover these practicing Apothecaries are injurious to Physicians, by
encouraging others to the like attempts, who straightway conclude, that if
these whose chief concernment it is to advance the credit of Physicians, and to
be faithful to them in their Profession, shall so disesteem them as to enter
the list, and contend with them in their own Science; well may the common
Empericks be more emboldned to vilify them; nay, Physicians would have reason
to take it ill from such Apothecaries, if it appear that most of the Quacks are
not only supplied, but assisted by them in their undertakings, and that they
most approve of these because they help them with their best endeavor to empty
their Shops: I might proceed to show how much the Profession of Physic suffers
by such Practisers, and give instances of the fatal mistakes of these
Pretenders to the Medicinal Science, but I am not willing to prosecute this
Argument as far as the subject will bear; I shall insert some Edicts published
by the Magistracy of Brussels, to be a pattern to other States, and to manifest
that it is not so much the Physicians, as the peoples interest that the
Apothecaries be not allowed to practice Physic.

Statut. VII.
ADmissi Pharmacopaeii (jure jurando se prius adstringentes ad id quod in
articulis eos concernit) cavebunt absque medici praescripto medicamenta
elective purgantia vel scammoniata curandis aegris divendere vel medicorum
paradigmata immutare, aut Quid pro Quo substituere quod si vel in lectione,
sensu, aut forma compositionis laborent, medicum adibunt, qui eos dirigat,
instruatque sub mulcta septem Florenorum duplicandorum, and dividendorum ut
ante.

Statut. VIII.
NEquaquam vero absque medici probati and admissi licentia, venena, philtra,
opiata periculosiora, aut abortum mensesque provocantia pharmaca cuipiam
porrigant, vel per ministros suos tradi permittant sub mulcta, VII florenorum,
etc. h. e.

Statute VII.
THey who (being first sworn to observe faithfully the Statutes relating to
them) are admitted to exercise the Art or mystery of an Apothecary, shall not
without a lawful Physicians Prescript sell any purging Medicines either
Elective or Scammoniate to cure the Sick, neither shall they alter the
Physicians Bill, or substitute one Ingredient for another, and if they are
deficient in reading or understanding the Prescript, or skill not the
Preparation, they shall consult the Physician upon pain and forfeiture of VII
Florens to be doubled and divided according to the foregoing direction.

Statute VIII.
THe said Apothecaries shall not upon pain of the like Mulct without an
approved Physicians license, sell or suffer to be sold by their Servants any
Poisons, Philtrums, Opiates, or Medicines either provoking the Menses or
causing Abortion.

This Senate was doubtless no more concerned to Enact such Laws on the behalf
of the people under their Government, then any Prince for the welfare of his
Subjects: if then such Edicts were only the natural result of reason and
prudence, the like general principle commends the imitation of them to other
Countries, and certainly if these Apothecaries in this Nation did observe their
own Charter, they would not so much transgress as to assume liberty never
intended them, when they were made an Incorporation.

To conclude, these practicing Apothecaries are injurious to themselves as well
as Physicians, for when they fail in their Cures, which by reason of
misapplications are very unlikely to succeed, the people are apt to suspect
that such persons despair of excelling in their own Profession, upon which
account they betake themselves to Quacking: I do not think that the example of
the Author of Medela medicinae, is a sufficient encouragement to others that
they should be as free as he professes himself, Med. medicin. p. 432.
to instrust their lives in the hands of prudent Apothecaries; since that
person has not scrupled to adventure greater hazards -- then others, either in
this respect or any like case are obliged to imitate; and it is very probable
that these Apothecaries when they fall sick, will not retaliate his kindness,
and with the same danger entrust their lives in his hands.

That the design of this discourse may not be misconstrued by any, as if there
was an intent to reflect on the whole Society of Apothecaries, I shall in the
next place speak of those who utterly dislike these Irregularities of their
Brethren, foreseeing the event that except some effectual course be taken to
restrain such unwarrantable actings, the amicable knot between Physicians and
them will be either untied or broken, to the prejudice and disadvantage of
both, at least theirs; and therefore these being the worthier, and (I hope) the
major part of that Incorporation, taking notice that notwithstanding the late
public disobligements (the Physicians being yet so generous and friendly as to
trust them with their Prescripts and Patients) have an honorable esteem of
their practice and prudent deportment, sufficient to convince their
Adversaries, if they had not lost all sense both of humanity and their own true
interest, for although there are very many arguments which might persuade
Physicians to prepare their own Medicines, particularly to take off those
sugillations, as if either they know not how to make their Compositions, or
that they are unwilling to undergo so much trouble, and to improve their Art,
etc. yet had they rather lie under a vain conjecture of their insufficiency in
that business or laziness, then be guilty of destroying the Company of
Apothecaries, especially such who confine themselves to their own Profession,
and religiously over-see the dispensation of their Medicines.

This better part of that Society in testimony of their gratitude to
Physicians, for that excellent skill they have by their direction acquired in
the genuine preparations of Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, wherein they are
inferior to none of the like Profession in any Nation, do not only publish the
Physicians abilities, and prefer them before all Pretenders, but by their
improuement silence the idle Calumny of their Doctors being unskilful in
Pharmacy; these Members of that Company have diligently promoted an
acommodation between Physicians and them, and would gladly that the Law, to
restrain illegal Practitioners might reach any Offenders amongst their number
as others, being sensible how much the whole Company is prejudiced by the
extravagancies of some who in hopes of a little gain, do not care to ruin
their Society, there being at length a good correspondence between the College
of Physicians and the Incorporation of Apothecaries, each Member employing
himself in his Profession as the Law directs, all will go on with more comfort
in their several vocations, and the people reap the benefit.

CHAP. III. Of the Lord Bishops and their Vicar-Generals power to license
Physicians.
IT does not appear either by the Canon Law or Prescription, that the Bishops
and their Vicar-generals as Ecclesiastical Officers, had power to License any
to practice Physic, or that Physicians in respect of their Profession were
subjected to the Jurisdiction of Spiritual Courts; it is confessed that the care
of Hospitals did appertain to the Bishops who provided Physicians to cure the
Sick, but it would seem a strange inference to argue that the Bishops exercised
the like Privileges elsewhere, because to them was committed the supervision
of these Hospitals, or that they had a Legal Right to license Physicians who
entertained them; wherefore until good evidence is produced to make out their
claim to this Authority preceding the Statute; I cannot allow the opinion of
Episcopal Right of licensing to practice Physic, besides should I admit that
they had such a power in them as Ecclesiastics, yet they must demonstrate the
force thereof, since the Statute took place, but if it be found upon inquiry
that neither de jure nor de facto, the Bishops and their Vicar-generals did
license, and that the Statute is of full virtue, notwithstanding any pretense
of former Authority, it is unquestionable but that all persons therein
concerned, the Bishops and their Vicar-generals, as well as the people are
obliged to take notice of it, and to the end that the Original and extent of
their licensing Physicians may be fully known, I shall recite part of the
Statute relating thereunto.

NO Person within the City of London, Ann. 3. Hen. 8.
nor within seven miles of the same shall take upon him to exercise and occupy
as Physician or Chyrurgeon, except he be first examined, approved, and admitted
by the Bishop of London, or by the Dean of Paul's for the time being, calling to
him or them four Doctors of Physic; and for Surgery other expert persons in
that Faculty, upon the pain of forfeiture for every month that they do occupy
as Physicians and Surgeons not admitted, nor examined after the tenor of the
said Act, of five pounds, to be employed the one half to the use of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the other half to any person that shall sue for
it by Action of Debt, in which no wager of Law nor Protection shall be allowed;
And over this that no person out of the said City and Precinct of seven miles
of the same, take upon him to exercise and occupy as a Physician and Surgeon in
any Diocese within this Realm, till he be first examined and approved by the
Bishop of the same Diocese or (he being out of the same Diocese) by his
Vicar General, either of them calling to him such expert persons in the same
Faculty (as their discretion shall think convenient) and giving their Letters
Testimonials under their Seal to him, that they shall so approve upon like pain
to them that occupy contrary to this Act (as is above said) to be levied and
employed after the same form before expressed: Provided always that this Act
nor any thing therein contained be prejudicial to the Universities of Oxford
and Cambridg, or either of them, or to the Privileges granted to them, etc.

Thus the High-Court of Parliament was pleased (as the Statute imports) to
authorize the Right Reverend Bishops and their Vicar-generals, as a Trust, to
license all persons qualified to practice Physic, which business of Trust
intimates an extraordinary confidence in their faithful execution of it
according to direction, and that the same Authority may demand an account of
the discharge thereof, and accordingly either continue it in their hands or
alter it, as may best answer their intent in relation to the peoples health and
welfare: it is not to be doubted but that the Parliament was moved by very
weighty reasons to entrust the Bishops, etc. with the execution of this Law,
being satisfied that they whom singular Piety, Learning, and other Endowments
had advanced to those Dignities, would act circumspectly and prudently in the
management of a public trust of such consequence to the Nation, in the exact
performances of which, the people also promised to themselves much happiness,
expecting by means of this devolution of power on the Bishops sound minds in
sound bodies: And the Bishop being out of his Diocese, the power of licensing
descended with the same limitations to the Vicar-generals, who may not plead
Liberty to act otherwise then the Statute allows, because there is no penalty
annexed, as if thereupon they were not engaged to observe the several
conditions enjoined: Methinks the Parliaments good opinion of these Chancellors
integrity should so far prevail with them, as at least not to seek out ways how
they may safely break their Trust, and therefore offend because the Law does
not provide due punishment; I want words to express the exquisite dis-ingenuity
of such practices, which encourage the violation of all public and private
Trusts at pleasure, if thereby no penalty is incurred.

I shall in the next place briefly consider the Injunctions in the body of the
Statute, according to which both the Bishops and their Vicar-generals are to be
guided in granting their Licenses, and although the Bishop of London and Dean
of Paul's, may examine, approve and admit, yet they must call to them four
Doctors of Physic, a competent number to avoid all suspicion of favor or
partiality, and that the candidate be thoroughly sifted before he obtain a
License: Then it follows that the Bishop being out of his Diocese, his
Vicar General may license according to the Statute, whence I collect that if
the Bishop is in any part of his Diocese, his Vicar General may not exercise
this power, neither can any such interpretation be put on the Bishops being out
of his Diocese, as if this related only to his judicial attendance in Court,
and so often as he is not there, his Vicar General may license; for this is
contrary to the letter of the Statute, and (as I conceive) the designment of
it, which was primarily to authorize the Bishops and their Chancellors only in
the others absence from their Diocese. I further observe that this power of
licensing was by the Statute placed in the Bishops and their Vicar-generals, no
mention being made of their Surrogates or Officials, Foelix esset artibus si
soli artistae de illis judicarent, F^b.
in regard that this trust of licensing to practice Physic is no part of their
office by virtue of the Bishops Patent to them, I quaere whether they
commissionating Surrogates according to those Patents, can legally invest them
with the like Authority, since it is limited by the Statute to the Bishops and
their Vicar-generals? It is in the last place observable that four Doctors of
Physic must be called in before the person to be licensed can be approved and
admitted; I question then whether Certificates under the hands of three or four
Doctors of Physic without such examination in the presence of the Bishop, etc.
do answer the command of the Statute? In respect of the whole until these
Vicar-generals and their Surrogates can produce any Legal Authority
constituting them Interpreters of such Statutes so as to put what sense and
construction they please upon them most agreeable to their profit, and till the
Reverend Judges have otherwise determined, I hope it may not be unwarrantable
to understand the Statute according to the literal meaning thereof, and then
all transgressions of the power granted by it seem illegal, as that Bishops
should license without a previous examination by four Doctors, that the
Vicar-generals if the Bishop be in any part of his Diocese, should exercise
this power, and without the examination by Doctors, or that any Surrogates
should attempt to license, that Authority being incommunicable by Patent: and
lastly, that Certificates should be admitted, most of which probably may be
counterfeited: Besides I shall leave those who are learned in the Law to decide
whether since the President and Censors of the Kings-Colledg of Physicians in
London, by other Statutes of later date, were appointed to examine and allow
all Licentiates, unless such whom the Universities authorize to practice
Physic, the power of the Bishops and their Vicar-generals granted before,
Leges posteriores abrogant priores.
is not void in Law; and although the Bishops and their Chancellors proceed on
the License, yet whether such Licentiates without either the Universities or
Colleges examination and approbation can plead their Authority, so as to
acquit them from the penalty to be inflicted on illegal practisers?

To pass by other Points of great importance in this Controversy, because I
would not seem to entrench on the Profession of others; I shall endeavor to
show the inconveniences which happen to the Faculty of Physic and Physicians,
by reason of this power of Licensing placed in the Bishops and their
Vicar-generals: As for the Right Reverend Fathers in God the Bishops, if such a
weight of business did not lie on their shoulders, much more considerable, by
which they may possibly be taken off from looking after this Trust, it is not to
be doubted but that they would be very severe and just in this, as in other
affairs, respecting a due encouragement of those who have been equally Members
of the Universities as themselves, and thereupon grant out very few Licenses to
practice, especially in those places and Countries wherein are seated a
sufficient number of learned and experienced Physicians, who having performed
their Exercises are Graduates in Physic: Were the Bishops (I say) at leisure
to regard this business, the true Professors of Physic could not possibly be
more secure, or desire a better improvement of that power to the Honor of
their Faculty; but their Vicar-generals are well pleased that their respective
Bishops do at least permit them to License whom they think fit, and however
there is some engagement on them not only to follow the directions of the
Statute, but to be kind to the Faculty of Physic and its Professors; yet I
wish that there is no cause of complaint, as if too many of these multiplied
their Licentiates for their own more then the benefit of the public, and that
since his Majesty's most happy Restoration, every Court-day has not been a
Physic Act, the Fees being incomparable respondents, as if the custom of
Leiden had prevailed.

Accipiamus pecuniam, dimittamus Asinum.
His money's current, and will pass,
Though he who is licensed is an Ass.
For on the same account by the Master of the Revels, are licensed the dancing
horses and well-bred Bares.

I do not at present undertake to accuse any particular persons, as if they
have already licensed so many that there are left no more pretenders to physic
unfurnished, but I should wonder if all manner of rude and illiterate Quacks,
should at the charge of a Mark or some such inconsiderable rate, be as much
capacitated to practice physic, as those who are Academical Physicians:
Mantuan affords us a notable description of such Licentiates; His etsi tenebras
palpant, Mant.
concessa potestas
Excruciandi aegros hominesque impune nocendi.
Although the Art of Physic these don't skill,
To them are granted Licenses to kill.


Had these Vicar-generals and their Surrogates by Law an unlimited power to
license all who are minded to practice physic, yet should they exercise it in
the utmost Latitude, the people might suffer as much by the provision of that
Statute as they did before, there being little difference between the bold
attempts of those who then practiced, and very many since no less unfit to
undertake the cure of the Sick; indeed these last (pleading the Authority of
their Licenses) are without much scruple entertained, as if they had been
examined by four Doctors of Physic, and in every respect were allowable
according to the Direction of the Statute, and thereupon may take more
opportunities to injure the people then the others, who being well known never
could obtain to be trusted as persons of sufficient abilities: certainly the
whole Nation will be very sensible of a manifest grievance upon the account of
numberless Licentiates to practice Physic, for it would not serve the turn if
each Licentiate should apply himself to the cure of a distinct Disease, as the
Egyptians did heretofore in the like case, and that each Parish should employ
one, but every person will have a distinct spy on his body, who being his
Diaetical Genius must order every bit of meat and draught of drink, and after
this manner be inslaved to live physically.

As it does not seem probable that the Parliament did intend more, then that
the people instead of ignorant Practisers who abused them, should be provided
with learned and able men to help them in their sickness, so neither can we
think that any prejudice to the Universities was thereby designed, but if
notwithstanding that our Academies have sent forth a convenient number of true
Sons of Art, to take care of all that concerns their practice throughout the
whole Nation, these Chancellors and their Surrogates should at such a rate
license as if there were none to practice, unless such whom they pass, taking
no notice of the Universities provision, what other conclusion can be deduced,
then that such persons seek all opportunities to void the Privileges of the
Universities, to blast the hopes of many excellent Physicians, whose abilities
for want of exercise contract themselves and wither: and lastly, to disgrace
the Profession of Physic by admitting such who as they cannot avoid the
contradicting of their Instruments, so persuade the people that they do as much
as the Art can perform. Physicians do not yet despair that both their Faculty
and themselves may outlive the boisterous storms raised against them, because
the Lord Bishops sit at the Helm as most skilful Pilates, who (as before) being
chiefly entrusted, can direct the power of Licensing to the best advantage,
either taking it into their own hands, least they suffer in the peoples esteem
by reason of the mis-application of the Episcopal Seal, or resigning it up to
the Universities, whose concern it is to attend such businesses: when Church
affairs are completely settled, it is not to be doubted but that every Bishop
will take an account of all Licentiates within his Diocese, and inform himself
of their Abilities for such an Employment, by what means they obtained
Instruments authorizing them to practice Physic, and if the Conditions
expressed in the Statute were punctually observed, calling in all Licenses
illegally granted, and preventing any further abuses of that Parliamentary
trust by any of their Officers: Physicians (I say) are so well persuaded of the
Lord Bishops good inclination to uphold the Honor of their useful Profession,
and, to prefer those who are skilled in all kinds of Learning before others
whose Mother-wit and Mother Tongue are their chiefest Accomplishments, that
they cannot harbor in their breasts any thoughts unworthy of the religious care
of Their answering every just expectation, and of expressing a particular
respect and devotion toward Medicine of a divine extract, if we credit St.
Augustine, says he, Aug. lib. 3. de civitate Dei.
Corporis medicina si altius rerum originem repetas non invenitur unde ad
homines manare potuerit, nisi a Deo, cui omnium rerum status salusque est
tribuenda; h. e. If we strictly enquire after the Original of Medicine, it will
appear that God was the Author thereof, to whom every thing ows it
conservation. Should the time in which that Statute was made, be compared with
this present season, an argument might be drawn thence to show, that although
there was a necessity (in respect of the rareness of Academical Physicians)
that some should be licensed who satisfied the directions of the Statute, yet
since that the Universities can as well furnish the Nation with Physicians as
Divines, these Right Reverend Bishops will no more exert what Authority they
may have to make such Physicians then Priests, who never had relation to the
Universities, but spent their time either in following pass-times, in service,
or a Mechanical Trade.

CHAP. IV. Of a Collegiate way of Physicians, and the KINGS-COLLEDG in LONDON.
THe chiefest Argument inducing several Princes most graciously to institute
Corporations, was the advancement of Trade, all obstructions which hindered its
progress, being thereby removed, and apt Privileges granted to promote the
Interest and reward the diligence of the respective Members of such
Commonalties: And in order to the Perfection and Dignity of the Medicinal
Science, a Collegiate way was thought on and settled as a meet expedient to free
it from all those prejudicial encumbrances, which before were invincible lets,
and suitably enlarging its power and authority, to render it more publicly
useful and illustrious. The general obstacles as well in Medicine as Trade,
preceding their Incorporation as self-seeking, envy, discord, and want of
government, being taken away, community, union, and a decent regulation have
most fitly supplied those defects, and the additional advantages secured both
from all extraneous injuries, and established a full and lasting liberty to
improve them as far as they be capable of proficiency.

I need not acquaint the World with the wonderful success of Trade, which by no
other way could possibly arrive at such an height, all scattered and distinct
Professors by an happy coalition combining together to manage their several
Arts with twisted ingenuity and counsel, that they might eminently flourish;
the growth of Physic has been no less considerable in those Nations wherein
are founded Colleges of Physicians, nay, the Medicinal Science stood in
greater need of this course then Trade, being more subject to invasion, every
Omnes qui vix communem intelligere queunt sermonem, and opera similiter cum
difficultate discunt vulgo communia medicinam exercere ambiunt, Geb. lib. de
invest. sum. perf.
unskilful person (as is shown in the first Chapter) undertaking to profess
Physic, and the People rather applauding, then discouraging such practices,
whereas if any one uneducated in a Trade should adventure to set up, the People
would be quickly sensible of that injury, and exclaim against any such
encrochments as most destructive to Trading, and openly tending to undo them
who have spent much time and pains in the attainment of their Art or Mystery;
so that the common dislike of all (who in respect of Trade are competent
Judges) was more effectual to prevent an inroad into their Callings, then
severe Laws to restrain those who are ignorant from the practice of Physic,
besides there is no difficulty in the Profession of Physic ( as they presume
to practice it) which may equally deterr them from this as any other (though
the meanest and easiest) employment, for as Panarolus well observes, Praxis qua
ipsi utuntur trium dierum spatio ab homine vel vilissimo acquiritur: h. e. The
arrandest blockhead may learn all their skill and practice in three days time.
Moreover Trade in respect of the event not being of such concernment as the
Science of Physic, did not alike want Incorporation, for in traffic the
Buyers understand whether the Commodities are well conditioned, and fit for
their use, the Chapmans skill preventing all manner of circumventions and
cheats, more then the particular Laws of Societies; and one bad bargain may be
recompensed by future caution and vigilance, whereas it is otherwise in
Medicine, for very few know what belongs to the Medicaments they take, not
discerning the impostures of ignorant Practisers; and it is too late to repent
of inadvertency when once the deadly Bolus is swallowed, promises of
circumspection for the time to come being good warnings to others, but not
available to him who is by such delusions surprised; for this cause King Henry
the Eighth was most graciously pleased to found his College in London, as the
words of the Charter express; Cum Regii officii nostri munus arbitremur,
ditionis nostrae hominum felicitati omni ratione consulere: id autem vel
imprimis fore si improborum conatibus tempestive occurramus, apprime
necessarium ducimus improborum quoque hominum qui medicinam magis avaritiae
suae causa quam ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia profitebuntur unde rudi and
credulae plebi plurima incommoda oriantur audaciam compescere, etc. Collegium
perpetuum Doctorum and gravium virorum qui medicinam in urbe nostra Londini,
etc. public exerceant institui volumus atque imperamus, etc. h. e. Forasmuch
as to our Princely Care and Sovereignty belongs the welfare and happiness of
our Subjects, which cannot by any means be better secured, then by a timely
disappointment of wicked men's evil designs and practices, We judge it expedient
and necessary to restrain the bold attempts of impious and unworthy pretenders
to Physic, who acting from a principle of covetousness rather then
conscientiously, do injure and deceive those who are ignorant and too
credulous, etc. It is our Royal pleasure and command to appoint and establish a
College of learned and profound Physicians in our City of London, etc.

Dissension also amongst Physicians in respect of their Opinions, promoted
partly through emulation, and partly by the thirst of not a few after gain,
transcending what was in this kind observable amongst Traders, earnestly called
for a speedy and convenient remedy, and since the settlement of a Collegiate
way of Physicians, in the room of animosity, uncharitable emulation, and
private inconsiderable designs, are introduced a decent respect of each other
with all manner of mutual kindnesses, and the common interest and joint
improvement of the Medicinal Science for the benefit of the Public; if the
learned Johannes de Espagenet had reason to affirm, that Love was one of the
Principles to which all bodies owe their original; I may well assert, that it
is no more a principle of bodies Natural then Politic, especially in the
affairs of Medicine, by which means the great business of Consultation is
regularly carried on, distinct abilities concurring to overcome the strange
intricacies of complicated Diseases: This Love is the bond knitting the whole
associated body together by its gentle ligaments in due symmetry, so that the
Juniors do cheerfully adhere to what the Seniors propose, submitting to their
aged reason and experience, and the Seniors as heartily communicate their
Observations, and admit of Partnership in their vast stock of Knowledge.

As in other Corporations great care is taken for the education of Apprentices
to their several Trades, so a Collegiate way herein may be more profitable, and
I might hence take a fit occasion to recommend the practice of the Ancients,
who undertook the tutorage of young Students in Physic, which laudable
practice is still continued in some Countries, and helps more in the Profession
of Physic, then the bare turning over of Voluminous Authors, who (at least
many of them) designed chiefly their own Fame by their Books; the Junior
Physicians (I say) being after this manner initiated, can more safely fight
under such Conduct against the desperatest Diseases, and the Seniors will be
forward to transplant their abilities, and even immortalize themselves in the
continued Series of their Successors.

I hope now that the terms Doctor and College, do not suffer in the opinion
of understanding men, by reason of the unworthy language and vain scoffs which
the Author of Medela medicinae vents against them, for, Doctor (as Sergeant
Dodridg well argued) is no addition, but a Degree, Quia gradatim est
progressione Doctrinae provenit, being the Universities reward of Learning, and
the term College intimates a lawful association or constellation of Physicians
to preserve the Nation by a prosperous influence, and to advance and improve
the Medicinal Science: neither is that idle objection allowable, as if a
Collegiate way by differencing its Members from other Practisers, and seeking
for an effectual power to punish ill practice in Physic, tended only to make
the Profession of Medicine a Monopoly, for there is no stop put to the industry
of those who take a regular course to become lawful Physicians, the
Universities embrace and cherish all hopeful Students, and when fourteen years
are expired, being not wasted, but carefully employed in a most exquisite
search after the concealments of Nature, these having succesfully run through a
course of Natural Philosophy, they are thereby enabled to enter upon the most
difficult Study of Physic, till at length their abilities arrived at a due
maturation, and deserving the approbation of the Universities, they come
abroad, and may (satisfying the Statutes) be admitted Members of the College,
and by the same rule every Incorporation would be a Monopoly, but I need not
spend more time in answering such an empty Argument; every person may apprehend
the reason why not only that Pamphletter, but others of his Gang do so bitterly
inveigh against the Order and Government of Physic, were these capable either
to attain Degrees in the Faculty of Physic, or to be licensed by the College,
they would be as forward for Discipline in Physic, as now they are for Liberty.

It remains that I endeavor to vindicate the Kings College of Physicians in
London, from the scandalous suggestions of some, as if they had not answered
those ends for which their Society was founded; and although I am very sensible
of my insufficiency to undertake a just description of the Deserts and
performances of this College, and likewise that what ever I can say will be
judged the Product of Interest, yet I shall rather hazard their censure for my
deficiencies, then be guilty by silence of a seeming compliance with their
malicious Accusers, and that cannot be interpreted vain ostentation, when there
is no other intent then to vindicate our Society from the indignities of those
who would lessen its Splendour: Well then, since that the necessity of answering
such high provocations makes my Apology, and prevents the charge of immodesty,
I shall attempt to give some brief account of this College and its Members;
should I begin with the first Doctors whose names are recited in the Charter
granted by King Henry the 8th, and confirmed by Parliament, and continue the
Catalogue to this day, the Worth and Fame of each Collegiate would completely
evidence that they were according to direction Profound, discreet, groundly
learned, and deeply studied in Physic; Nay, I confidently affirm, that the
most considerable discoveries which in these later Ages have merited applause
and credit in the World, were most happily made by some Members of this
Society, witness the Renowned Doctor Harvey 's circulation of the Blood, Doctor
Jolive 's first observation of the Lymphaeducts, and many others, who, though
dead, do yet live in their Physical inventions, and not a few of the present
Members of this College have paid the first fruits of their vast seize,
whose Books having stood the brunt of humorous Contradiction unanswered, are
above censure, or my Panegyric, and their second prosperous voyages into the
America of Medicinal Truths, cannot but raise large expectations of further
discoveries, many of this Incorporation did heretofore Warehouse their Learning
and Experience, and hoarded up such plenty of all necessary accomplishments, as
if they intended to ingross the Medicinal Science, who being prevented either
by mis-guided modesty or untimely death, suffered their Acquirements to die
with them, leaving a Despair in their Successors to retrieve those hidden and
buried Treasures, and the rest of the College when they are secured from
injurious blasts, will in due time blow with mature and acceptable
performances, these are now giving the World an Edition of themselves, and at
length will publish their most elaborate Works wherein the progress of Physic
may be most legible. I shall further add, that since HIS MAJESTY HAS MOST
GRACIOUSLY PLEASED TO HONOR HIS COLLEGE WITH HIS PRESENCE, AND TO TAKE NOTICE
OF THEIR EXERCISES, THE WHOLE SOCIETY IS INFLAMED TO APPROVE THEMSELVES WORTHY
OF THEIR SOVEREIGNS FAVOR AND PATRONAGE!

The reason why these Collegiates do at present conceal their Abilities, is,
because they would avoid the prostitution of them, observing that even their
free converse has emboldned Amazon Practitioners to handle the two-edged Sword
of Medicine, since therefore the Profession of Physic is only guarded by the
prudence of Physicians, there is good cause why they should so far imitate the
Ancients as not to disclose those mysteries and depths in Physic which
distinguish them from others; and although Candor opens their Breasts to all
Sons of Art, yet their choicest conceptions will be fast locked up, till Law
secures them, and their Authors from Usurpation and Injuries.

CHAP. V. Of Chemistry, and the Pseudo-Chymists in this Kingdom.
THe fierce digladiations between the Galenists and Chemists, each party
contending not only to advance their Opinions, but to vilify their Opposites,
have in the judgment of most prudent men rather inconvenienced both, then
gained to either more credit or authority; I shall present some of these hot
disputes, by which all may observe the weakness of such ineffectual
argumentations, and merely rude and passionate censures, Zacut. lus. p. 14.
says Zacutus, Sanguineis lachrymis deploranda esset calamitas haec ab iis qui
Hippocratis and Galeni se filios esse gloriantur, and horum magistrorum
sanissimam doctrinam ex limpidissimis fontibus exhaustam combibere solent, quod
Chymici omnino adversam and contrariam Hippocratis legibus observantes
Disciplinam impune, proterue and indecore medicinam, summum-Omnipotentis donum,
dicteriis, facetiis and preposteris auxiliis infament, Medicus fugiat a
chymicis and documenta eorum parvi faciat: h. e. The true Disciples of
Hippocrates and Galen who have drawn all their accomplishments from their pure
Fountains of Learning, have cause to weep blood seeing that the Chemist who
profess a contrary way of Physic, are permitted without restraint by their
malevolent reproaches, scorns, and unartificial remedies to blaspheme Medicine
which is the gift of the great God: and therefore let every Physician take heed
of these, and lightly esteem their Doctrines. But in answer to this, Tract. de
sal^ Dom. de Neus.
Nemo docti and sapientis viri nomen aut titulum obtinere potest nisi sit
Chymista, quia nec principia naturalia, nec vera universalis materia cuipiam
unquam innotescent nisi per Artis Chymicae experientiam: h. e. He is most
unworthy the name or repute of a learned or wise man, who is not a Chemist,
because neither the natural principles nor the universal matter can be known to
any who are not skilled in the Spagyrick Art: Riol. in epist. dedic.
What Riolanus writes is not behind this, Princeps tenebrarum delectatur fumis,
and ministros habet fumi vendulos, Alchymistas, sufflones, carbonarios quorum
scientiam cur non appellem (...) cum proprie (...) dicantur fornacarii
Chymistae, sed veritas filia temporis perdet gratiam novitatis eorum, and fumus
iste disparebit: h. e. The Prince of darkness does affect Fumes, and his
Officers trade in Smoke; these Chemists busy themselves in kindling Charcoal
not differencing themselves from Colliers, since that amongst their Furnaces
they are not unlike Chimney-sweepers, I know no reason but that I may compare
their Art to Chimney-sweeping, but Truth is the daughter of Time, and when the
Novelty of their practice is over, their smoke will dis-appear. Penotus extols
Chemistry as much as Riolanus decries it; Quid jucundius quam ea noscere atque
oculis pene cernere manuque tractare quae procul a sensu and cognitione nostra
peccatum posuit? quam in ipsam penitus absconditam naturam descendere, quam
parts universi in particulas quasque minutissimas scindere? ipsaque Naturae
principia in manu habere? quid public, privatimque utilius, quam mortalitati
nostrae quantum quidem licet subvenire? morbosque aliaque corporis incommoda
arcere and depellere? and languentem proximum atque jacentem restituere, haec
omnia praestat ea Philosophiae atque medicinae pars quam Spagyricam vocant: h.
e. What can be more pleasant then to know by the sure information of the eye
and hand, those things which sin has so far distanced both from our sense and
apprehension? then to dive into the depths of Nature? then to anatomize the
Universe, and to handle the first principles of all things? what can be more
publicly and privately useful then to retard death as much as may be? to
vanquish Diseases? to recover our sick Neighbor? And all these Feats are
performed by Chemistry. Billichius on the other side tells us, Medicamenta
Chymica membris principalibus corporis pravam dispositionem imprimunt, calorem
nativum and spiritus individuos animae satellites destruunt, remediis itaque
Chymicis, quasi periculosis, inutilibus, and pestiferis, jus civitatis in
republica medica denegetur; And more particularly Gluckradius, Salia arrodunt
and extimulant, spiritus caput petunt, olea ventriculum conviscunt and
adherent: h.e. Chemical Medicines are hurtful to the principal parts of the
body, by fixing an ill disposition there, by dissipating natural heat, and
overthrowing the spirits which are the lifeguard of the Soul, and therefore
such Chemical Remedies ought to be expunged the Catalogue of Medicines, being
hazardous, unprofitable, and pestilential: And Gluckradius further adds, that
Chemical Salts are corrosive and irritate, Spirits injure the brain, and Oils
by their glutinousness and adhesion do even plaster the stomach. The Author of
the Pharmacopaeia Spagyrica tells us another story, Pharmac.
says he, Spargyr. p. 2.
Ars Spagyrica omnium scientiarum nobilissima, utilissima and praestantissima
nihil aeque medicum ornet, nobilitet, clarumque reddat, haec firmissa Naturae
claustra reseret, ei quandoquidem virtutum omnium, terrestrium, coelestium,
animalium, vegetabilium and mineralium clavis conceditur, in qua non modo rei
essentiae perpenduntur, verum in lucem conspectumque omnium adducuntur, purum
ab impuro segregatur, cortex a nucleo, contrarium a contrario, multa denique
miranda praestat, and multo majora, quam quae humanus intellectus excogitare
possit: And Faber seconds this, Fab. propugn alchym. p. 8.
Siquid est in Natura pulchritudinis nobilitatis and utilitatis, id omne a puro
ortum habet, quo sola Chymia uti novit, quae jure merito Scientias omnes
naturales tantum antecellit quantum purum illud reliquum Naturae superat and
vincit: h. e. Chemistry is the most noble, useful, and excellentest of all
Sciences, nothing does so much grace a Physician and make him eminent as the
knowledge hereof which readily admits him into Natures recesses, and discovers all
true virtues terrestrial and celestial, and the nature of Animals, Vegetables,
and Minerals; so that not only the essences of things are made intelligible,
but they are subjected to our touch and view, the pure hereby being separated
from that which is impure, the kernel from the shell, one contrary from
another; its effects to conclude are so wonderful, that they surpass man's reach
or understanding: And Faber writes to the same purpose; If there is any beauty,
excellency, and worth in Nature, it is the product of that which is most pure,
the ordering of which is the proper business of Chemistry, and therefore it
does as much outshine other Natural Sciences, as this pure the grossest
feculencies.

I perceive that I need an Apology to excuse this tedious recitation of the
absurd mutual Ut turpe esset in Senatu Patres dum de salute reipublicae
deliberatur a votis ad convitia descendere, ita pudend^m est eos qui scriptis
editis rem literariam auctam and amplificatam cupiunt rebus missis convitiis
certare. Sen. p. 844.
clashings of these Galenists and Chemists, who most earnestly endeavor to
persuade the people that they design the Sanity of Mankind as the common end of
their, though diverse, nay, contrary directions and practices; because most
Authors engaged in this Controversy instead of rational argumentations, do
chiefly abound with vain boastings and suspicious commendations of their way,
no less deriding all those who are not of their Mind; I thought my self
concerned to reflect on this fruitless opposition joining with Angelus Sala in
his just reproof of both. Clamant alii a partibus sumus Galeni, alii parts
tenemus Paracelsi mutuas contentiones and dissidia subinde moventes, and
interim paucissimi reperiuntur qui in sinceritate proximo suo succurrere
contendunt: Angel. Sal. de error. Pseudochym. p. 7.
h. e. Some devote themselves to be Galens Disciples, others are for
Paracelsus, jangling amongst themselves whilst very few endeavor in sincerity
their Neighbors restoration. In my opinion it is preposterous to conclude that
any person is to be therefore accounted a good Physician, because he stiffly
adheres to one or the other party, or thinks fit to conjoyn them; for to the
accomplishment of a true Physician is required an exact knowledge of all things
belonging to his practice, whether they relate to his right judgment of
Diseases and their Diagnosticks, or the regular applications of Medicaments
artificially prepared in order to a Cure, and so far as any one who undertakes
to profess Physic is deficient in any part of his business, he personally
errs, and falls under the censures of an ill Practiser, although he either
vaunts himself to be a Galenist or Helmontian: Physicians are Truths perpetual
Candidates, more allowing, nay, improving Chemistry (as part of their
profession) then any Pretenders to it, who not only employ themselves in the
advancement of Pharmacy by its help, but in completing the sensible Theory of
Philosophy and Medicine, of which with indefatigable pains our worthy
Predecessors have most auspiciously laid the sure foundation; should I use any
Arguments inciting Physicians by the assistance of Pyrotechny to analyze all
sorts of bodies, as if this was the probablest way to conduct them to all
acquirable knowledge of their Nature and Virtues, other courses proving
unsatisfactory, I might herein seem too much an Imitator of some late Writers,
who take upon them to blame the defects of Physicians in the study and practice
of Chemistry, for no other reason then that they by their experimental Essays
may be thought their Dictators, degrading them to advance their own reputation;
methinks these deal herein very unkindly in attempting to eclipse their
brightness from whom they borrowed all their Light: certainly Physicians need
no advertisement to observe the constitution of bodies in their discovering the
principles of them, and that the Universe after the Creation (when the Spirit
moved upon the waters) in an analogous way to Chemistry was methodized, the
more subtle and etherial parts ascending, and those more feculent, becoming the
Footstool of the Almighty, that also the grand Affairs of Generation and
corruption seem nothing else but Spagyrical processes, which I might illustrate
if I did not study brevity; hereupon (I say) Physicians wisely trace the true
original of bodies in the same order as they were made by an artificial anatomy
of Individuals, rightly judging of the whole in respect of the congruity of all
its parts.

Although Chemistry has not been so succesful to determine the number of
Principles some resting in the Trinity of Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, others
accounting five, Water, Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, and Earth* Zephyriel, Thomas
Bovius making the number eight, and it being not improbable but that our
Successors may discover more as simple as these, yet in respect of the apt
preparation of Medicaments, it has fully answered expectation, Physicians
being thereby furnished with noble Remedies, which skilfully used, give ample
proof of their activity in the extirpation of Diseases: but these Spagyricks
take great care in their opening of bodies, especially such as are most compact
that the innate or seminal virtues thereof be not altered or marred by
corrosive and poisonous Dissolvents, Corrumpunt mixtum perduntque, non autem
dividunt in sua simplicia.
or by destructive heat or fire, antidating the day of Judgment in respect of
those things which in order to their preparation it consumes Accidit iis qui se
igne oblectant and exhilarant quod ad extremum omne in luctum vertitur, ignis
enim multo subtiliora venena contra eos evomit quam minerae, Paracels. cap. 4.
tract. 2. de morb. metal.
and utterly spoils; the imitation of Nature in her most perfect operations do
best direct an Artist in his Experiments, and therefore as by the mutual
conjunction of the Celestial and Terrestrial Sun together with a due supply of
an homogenious and natural menstruum, a Vegetable is raised and empowered with
Medicinal virtues, so if the Physician conceives that this Vegetable needs a
further exaltation, at least a preparation to be unloaded of its clogging
feculencies, and desires to make a separation of the pure from that which is
impure, by the help of Chemistry he performs what he designed, choosing an
inlivening heat to advance the signatures of that Vegetable, and an apt
menstruum to which it may readily resign up all its efficacy and virtue, being
thereby freed from its useless excrements; which course is followed likewise in
the preparation of Animals and Minerals, not as if the same heat and menstruum
would serve the turn for all Vegetables whose virtues are contrary (as the
Pseudo-chymists ignorantly practice) which need diverse and proper menstruums,
and what sufficiently wrought on Vegetables will not operate alike on Animals
and Minerals; for although Physicians are better acquainted with the Universal
Dissolvent, then some fantastical pretenqers, yet they aim chiefly in their
Medicinal preparations at the preservation of the true genuine and seminal
virtues, and make not each Simple to be alike catholic as the menstruum
employed; besides they respect the safety of their Medicaments as much as their
prevalency in the cure of Diseases, and when by much industry and sweat such
powerful Remedies are provided by the true Physician, he does not expect that
they should work Miracles, help incurable Maladies, or raise the dead, but if a
just occasion is offered, he makes use of them, hoping that by reason of a
right application they may be effectual; however these do not because of their
expertness in Chemical preparations, impiously conceit that God has bestowed
on Mankind no Vegetables, Animals, nor Minerals as effectual helps to oppugn
the irreconcilable enemies of Life, unless they are renovated by the Hermetick
Art; for not only the constant experience of the greatest part of the World
contradict this fancy, few Nations understanding the use of Chemistry, and yet
the sick in those Countries by Nature* provision of Remedies recover; but an
observation may be drawn from Bruits, which I urge not, as if I imagined that
the Medicines curing them may be applicable to men, and that the Farriers skill
may accomplish a Physician; in this point the opinion of Jobertus Dec. 2.
paradox. 10. p. 523.
seems most rational, says he, Quod in brutis animantibus observare quis
potuit ad hominem traducere velle ineptum est, quoniam long lateque differunt
hominum brutorumque Naturae vel hoc argumento, sturni cicuta and helleboro
coturnices tuto vescantur, quae nobis sunt venena and pharmaca: h. e. It Is
absurd to appropriate the Physic of bruits to men whose natures are so
different, which is evidenced by the Starelings feeding securely on Hemlock,
and the Quails eating Hellebore, which to our bodies are poisonous and
medicinal: Bruits, I say, when diseased employ no Operators, but supply
themselves from Natures Laboratory with convenient Remedies, which succeed so
well with them that they outlive the proudest Pretenders to the great Elixir
or Panacaea, nay, as Seneca Sen. de brev. vitae, p. 559.
affirms by Aristotle's Authority, Quina and dena saecula edurant, They last
five, nay, ten ages at least some of them, having no other Medicinal help; and
hence it is that the true Physicians do not think fit to employ themselves in
gaining the Quintessence of every Simple they use, well knowing that many
Simples do irrecoverably loose their seminal virtues by ordinary preparations.
The Anomymus Author Pharmac. Spagyr. p. 3.
of the Pharmacopaeia Spagyrica before mentioned, does very well determine this
Controversy; Quando morbus non est admodum pertinax simplici medicamenti
preparatione subigi and everti queat, in diuturnis autem, gravibusque morbis,
in delicatulis and his quibus ventriculus nausea premitur, and qui solo
adspectu odorem and saporem perhorrescunt longiori artificio utimur nam crebris
coctionibus filtrationibus clarificationibus and distillationibus ea adeo
gustui palatoque grata reddimus ut ipsis aegris in delitiis veniant: h. e. If
the Disease is not rebellious it may be cured by an ordinary preparation, but
chemical and obstinate Distempers require more exquisite Remedies, and if the
Patients stomach is squeemish, or he cannot endure the sight or taste of the
Medicine, then by frequent coctions, filtrations, clarifications, and
distillations, it may be made so grateful, that the Patient may be delighted
with it. I shall add Solon's counsel, Consule non quae suavissima sed quae
optima: h. e. The Patient ought rather to be pleased with that which most
conduces to his recovery, then mind the satisfaction of his Palate, which is
vitiated in sickness, and hereupon true Physicians are not so sollicitous to
prescribe palatable Medicines Medici quidam adulando in pharmacis
administrandis aegros interficiunt Panarol. p. 135.
as those which may most powerfully overcome the Disease.

If I should launch out into a just commendation of the excellency and
usefulness of Chemistry, it would I am persuaded, by our Pseudochymists
(concerning whom anon) be interpreted an extorted confession, as if their
Pamphlets had opened our eyes, or forced us to close with them in the
advancement of its repute in the World; but I need not extol that in words,
which we more suitably praise by practice, and I shall comprehend what I intend
to say on this Subject under these two Assertions.

1. That Physicians have been the chief Promoters of Chemistry, and are best
qualified to bring it to perfection. 2. That the lawful Physicians in this
Kingdom are the truest Chemists.
He is a mere stranger to this Science, who is ignorant that the chiefest
Chemists were Physicians; I should insert a large Catalogue, if I did not
suppose that the truth hereof is famously known by their Learned Works, wherein
all Chemical Operations are more perspicuously delivered then in any other
Authors, but this will further appear when I have shown that the qualifications
of a Physician are the principal requisites for the study and practice of
Chemistry, of which in the next place.

I begin with the Physicians skill in the Tongues and in Philosophy, what De
difficult. alchym. p. 6.
Hoglandus writes concerning the necessity of knowing the Tongues is
acknowledged by all true Sons of Art, says he, Non putet quis libros chymicos
ca facilitate aut veritate in aliam linguam, transferri atque aliarum
scientiarum libros: h. e. He will be deceived who imagins that Chemical Authors
can be so faithfully translated as books treating of other Sciences: He then
who is a sufficient Linguist is most capable of interpreting truly and
beneficially the mystical and obscure Writings of the Ancients; And in relation
to Philosophy as Hippocrates requires a Physician to be excellent in it
Hippocrat. de dec. hab.
(...), Ubi desinit philosophus ibi incipit medicus.
so Arnaldus and Geber thinks this knowledge most necessary to accomplish a
Chemist, says the first; Qui vult ad hanc scientiam pervenire and non est
Philosophus, fatuus est, quia haec scientia non est nisi de occultis
philosophiae: h. e. He who is ambitious to attain this Science without
Philosophy, is in plain terms a fool, because this Science comprehends the
Secrets of Philosophers: And Geb. cap. 7.
Geber more fully, Oportet Artificem in scientiis philosophiae naturalis
eruditum and perfectum esse, quia quod per ingenium natural non adipiscitur,
hujus defectui per doctrinam subvenitur: h. e. The Artist must be completely
skilled in Natural Philosophy that his Learning therein may supply all defects
of his Ingenuity.

Sagacity is no less necessary to enable a Physician, upon which account the
forementioned Alsarius De quaes. per epist. p. 434.
tells us, Sapientissimus senex artem longam esse jure merito dixit ut tarda
and hebetia ingenia ab ea capescenda deterreret, fervida vero and vivida ad
comprehendenda atque retinenda medicinae mysteria magis inflammaret: h. e.
Hippocrates did most wisely pronounce the Medicinal Art to be long and tedious,
that he might discourage at their onset all those who were stupid and thick
skull'd, and provoke the acutest wits to pry into the knowledge and mysteries of
Physic, and Sagacity is as considerable in Chemistry, if we credit Moresinus,
says he, Ut quam ingeniose possint Chymici Naturae secretos Thesauros in usus
publicos depromere: h. e. That these Eagle-ey'd Chemists may pierce into the
secrets of Nature: Indeed there is nothing obvious in the Spagyrick Art, and
therefore answerable to the depths of knowledge sought after, are the
difficulties in the disquisition of them; he who observes himself to be
besieged with errors, ought to have his wits Debet chymicus errori subvenire
inpuncto.
about him, as well to secure him in his right proceedings, as to prevent a
surprise by false and erroneous suggestions.

To conclude, Studiousness and industry do complete a Physician whose knowledge
and pains increase alike, Sanch. p. 89.
for if Minima mundi res totius vitae contemplationi sat superque est: h. e.
The most inconsiderable thing in the world may employ the whole time of a man's
life to attain a perfect and unerring knowledge of it. Certainly then he has no
leisure allowed him who by his diligence is engaged to understand all the
affairs of the greater as well as the little World: and assiduity is requisite
in Chemistry, according to the advice of an excellent Adept in that Art,
Exerceat se Artifex donec studendo and experimentando cum laboris instantia ad
cognitionem pervenerit: h. e. The Artist must continually exercise and busy
himself that by his constant study and experiments he may gain knowledge. I need
not spend time in running over more qualifications both of Physicians and
Chemists, in which they also agree; by all which it is very apparent that
Physicians are best capacitated to be Chemists, to whom also the Spagyrick Art
is more advantageous then to any others who spend their time and pains in it:
Curiosity and Covetousness are the general ends propounded by all not engaged
in the Profession of Physic, moving them to erect Laboratories, that by the
help of Chemical Experiments, they may satisfy their earnest desire either of
Knowledge or Profit, but upon neither account can these be equally benefited
thereby as Physicians, not they who seek only to gratify their Curiosity,
because these rather hunt after Rarities in Nature then what is vulgar, and
then most applaud their happy discoveries when some strange and unexpected
effect does occur; Quod Naturae ludus illis miraculum; The sportings of Nature
delight them most: And indeed these may at pleasure, sever, mix, make and mar,
behaving themselves lasciviously toward Nature and her divine mysteries, and
at length if these err, their deceptions are not dangerous, so long as their
innocent affectation of curiosity is confined to try conclusions on vile and
ignoble bodies, which are then dignified when they afford real discoveries of
new truths, in subserviency to the good and welfare of Mankind: But Physicians
are not allowed liberty to pick and choose their work, they difference not the
subjects on which they operate so much by their disguised variety, as estimate
them according to the true and powerful virtues they afford for the recovery of
their Patients; being also obliged to more accurateness then the others, for if
they mistake in dissolving the intimate closure of bodies on which they work,
in stead of separating by such a preparation between what is sound and the
peccant matter, they possibly may part the near embraces of Soul and Body:
Physicians then being satisfied that their enterprises in Chemistry relating to
their practice be rational in the discharge of their weighty employment, more
benefit thereby then those Indagators invited to be Spectators only of Natures
curiosities. As for the Alchymists, although these out of an insatiable thirst
to gain wealth by the great Elixir or Philosophers stone, and such like
tantalizations do night and day moil amongst their Furnaces, yet are not they
so much profited by Chemistry as Physicians, for these being deluded, after an
endless search for the true matter, and as idle a Quest for the Mercury of the
Philosophers, that these two Natures whose essence notwithstanding is one, may,
being timely after copulation impregnated, bring forth an Ethiopian capable of
changing his complexion by virtue of the milk he sucks, and a suitable
education: I say, these Alchymists not understanding such and many more like
parabolical expressions after their fruitless expense and pains learn only the
insufficiencies of their processes, and howbeit they reiterate their work to
try if they can hit right, yet nothing comes on it, their skill at length
amounting to little more then a treasonable adulteration of coin, or a pitiful
circumvention of Novices who are invited to sow Gold plentifully in hopes of a
succeeding Harvest, or turning desperate Quacks in Physic; but on the
contrary, a Physician is never frustrated in his Chemical Essays, Mor. de
metal. metamorph.
as one well notes, faelices medici qui materiae differentias circa quas
versantur optime tenent. He knows the matter on which he works, and brings it
by his endeavors to that perfection he at first designed, powerful Remedies to
vanquish Diseases are the chiefest treasure he seeks after, the Spagyrical Art
which he professes, not being concerned to metamorphize base Metals into Gold,
but sickness into health, which as far excels that red though adored earth as
that the basest metal.

Physicians also are best qualified to bring Chemistry to perfection; that
something already has been performed in this kind, will appear if the long and
tedious processes set down by the Ancients be compared with those of later
date; 'twas usual with those primitive Operators to spend not only months but
years in preparing their Medicines which they esteemed according to the labor
bestowed on them, and styled them precious in respect of their cost, which
after all was done recompensed not either their trouble or charge, and if it
happened that any Patient stood in need of such Medicines, he usually had warning
to prepare for death before the Medicine could possibly be provided to cure
him; but this inconvenience is in some measure helped by the succesful industry
of Neotericks, who have found out more speedy ways of preparing their Chemical
Medicines then formerly were used, and questionless when the Profession of
Physic in all its parts and offices is established by Law, and the Apish
Pseudochymists stopped in their career, the World will have an account that the
present Physicians are acquainted with variety of powerful Menstruums by which
they can sooner obtain the virtue of any Vegetable, then by expressing its
juice or decocting it, and and so proportionably open both Animal and Mineral
bodies to answer all Exigencies how sudden soever in their practice; this I
insinuate not by way of ostentation, but that (if Authority shall require) a
public proof may be given of it.

It remains now that I evidence the Physicians in this Kingdom to be the truest
Chemists, for certainly they are most able who make it best answer the ends for
which it was invented, Sennert. de natura, chym. p. 755.
set down by Sennertus; Finis Chymiae internus est corpora naturalia concreta
purificare, solvere and componere alterare and exaltare, and ita elaborare, ut
vel parts seorsim and singulae vel omnes iterum junctae and compositae sint
quam purissimae and efficacissimae, atque ad usus in vita humana peculiares,
and necessarios aptissimae and commodissimae, finis externus est praecipue
Sanitas and corporis humani conservatio: h. e. The internal end of Chemistry
consists in purifying, dissolving, and compounding, altering and exalting, and
so ordering all concrete bodies that both the parts distinct or conjoined, may
be more useful and efficacious to cure Diseases, and the external end is
Sanity. I shall rather choose to prove my Assertion by showing that these
Physicians are skilful, faithful, and succesful Chemists: In the Universities
and College in London have flourished heretofore, some Physicians eminent for
their knowledge and practice of Chemistry, though not in those days valued
according to their Merits; but this inquisitive Age encouraging learned men to
employ themselves in Spagyrical operations can not only produce a greater
number of such Artists, but may boast of their accurate search into the
Phoenomena of Nature, as well making new observations, as experimenting the
truth of those doctrines they receive by tradition. Did I affirm that the
lawful Physicians in this Kingdom are as knowing in rational Chemistry as any
Society in the World; I should impose an hard task on him who would undertake
to oppose me herein: It Is not improbable but that the Dispensatory will be
objected to me as a public confutation of our Physicians skill in Chemistry; I
answer, that the persons (at least many of them) entrusted by the Supreme
Authority to compose the London Dispensatory, were excellent Chemists, I could
instance Sir Theodore de Mayerne, and many others: So then, if these who (as
will be easily acknowledged) knew more in this Art both as Operators and
Practisers) then our Pseudochymists, thought fit to insert no more Chemical
Preparations, certainly then we may conceive that they supposed their
Dispensatory as useful and complete without, as with them; however I must
inform these Pretenders to Chemistry, that no public Dispensatory is so well
stocked with Spagyrical preparations as this against which such clamors are
raised as if it was insufficient to furnish any prevalent Remedies: It is
clear, that the College were not enemies to the Spagyrical Art, when they
appeared for it before any Academy or Society of Physicians in Europe, and
owned it in their Pharmacopaeia as far then as safely they might, for their
Dispensatory was chiefly intended as a Direction to the Apothecaries, who
though at that time very capable of dispencing vulgar Medicines for ordinary
use, yet were they not sufficient Operators to prepare the noblest and most
difficult Remedies, wherefore the College most prudently attempted by more
obvious Operations at first to initiate them in Chemistry, reserving to
themselves the provision of what other Medicines they should need in their
practice, and those worthy Collegiates were so forward to promote this Art,
that some Physicians have rather blamed them for committing such Remedies to
the care and use too (as it since falls out) of every Apothecary, the mistakes
in both too often ruining Patients, and discrediting Physicians; wherefore it
seems more advisable that they who use Spagyrical Medicines would not confide
in common Operators who may disappoint their hopes and expectations, but see to
their Preparations, whereby they may satisfy themselves and all that employ
them, and when Physicians take this business into their own hands, they can be
fully secured that their Remedies are no less faithfully then artificially
prepared: the trust and confidence reposed in Physicians being as considerable
as Life, calls upon them to express singular readiness and integrity to
discharge their whole Office which consists not only in prescribing apt
Medicaments, but a due regard that they be well dispensed according to
direction; when so many Contingencies (especially in such almost unimitable
Operations) may intervene to spoil their Virtues, and deceive the confidence
reposed in them: the faithful Physician, I say, (unless he is extraordinarily
persuaded of his honesty and ability, whom he imploys) will not be guilty of
doing his work by halves; and being experimentally convinced that many who
undertake to be Operators, are either defective or fallacious, will not lie at
stake for another miscarriages which he so easily may prevent by preparing
what Chemical Preparations his Patients take: but if we compare the Physicians
practice of Chemistry with the pretenses of our Pseudochymists, according to
the old Axiom, Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt, The ignorance of the
latter will serve as a foil to set out the eminency of the former: Chemistry it
seems has not escaped the common fate of other Sciences, and, although by it
other things are brought to the test, yet very many illiterate persons, not
fearing the subtle exploration of the Fire, dare call themselves Filios Artis
hermeticae, Hermetick Philosophers, and because they erect Furnaces, spend
Charcoal, and break Glasses, do fancy and would persuade the World, that they
are prime Spagyrists, these observe that Physicians in some cases do
succesfully administer Chemical Preparations, and hence they take liberty by
strange Artifices to commend their absurdities to the People, inventing
quintessential lies to carry on their horrid designs, as if they could delude
the World by their zeal for the good cause of Chemistry, on the behalf of which
they express a ready submission to undergo all manner of persecution, and even
martyrdom it self, they mean (I suppose) by their own Furnaces: what ever is
produced to justify or advance the usefulness of Chemistry; these
Pseudochymists strive to interest themselves in it, as if they were the only
qualified persons to renovate the Science of Physic, and entrust Physicians in
their Profession: because our Pseudochymists have dared to solicit His
MAJESTY to Incorporate them, fondly conceiting that they could have deluded
Authority with the same Arguments wherewith they daily cheat their Patients: I
shall more particularly examine their Abilites, answer their Pleas, and present
the ill Consequence to the Faculty of Physic, and the whole Nation if they
should obtain a Patent or lawful settlement: I shall consider these
Pseudo-chymists either as University-men or Mechanics, the abilities of the
first seem questionable, because they shun trial, whereby (if they be found
worthy) they may not only obtain a License to practice physic, but an
opportunity of improvement will be offered them by the friendly assistance of
the whole Society: And when these procaim most impudently their unjust censures
of the learned College of Physicians in the World, I cannot but assent to the
Comaedians Character of insufficiency; Homine imperito nunquam quicquam
injustius, qui nisi quod ipse fecerit, nil rectum putat. No person is so
censorious as he who is ignorant, thinking nothing well but what he does
himself. Their association also with illiterate men, shows what may be expected
from them, according to our Proverb, Birds of a feather will flock together:
the truth is, these have so mixed with the mass of Quacksalvers, that I cannot
know one from another, whereupon I am apt to believe that these dealt
Chymically with the Universities when they took Degrees, and deluded them with
false assurances of their highly volatiliz'd Abilities, soon evaporating and
taking flight into the Land of forgetfulness, where I leave these, and return
to the Pseudochymists who were educated in several Trades suitable to their
Ingenuity; can we imagine that he who leaps out of a Shop into a Laboratory, is
fit to mend both Philosophy and Medicine? Indeed the Chemists who are
Shoomakers may be kind to the Peripateticks, and prevent their being gravel'd,
and the Tailors may patch a mystical Garment together taking pity of Truths
nakedness: But to be serious, Paracels. p. 289.
what Paracelsus said of their Predecessors, I may affirm of these; Dolendum
graviter tantam artem a tam inscitis, levibusque hominibus tractari, and eo
corruptelae agi ut ne ipsi quidem veritati deinceps fides addicatur: h. e. It Is
pity that such an excellent Art should be practiced by such ignorant and
unworthy persons, upon whose account Truth it self can scarcely be credited. I
cannot guess by what means these unlearned Pseudochymists should acquire that
knowledge they pretend to? these din in our ears the purity and efficacy of
their Preparations, but gross conceptions of the Phenomenon of Nature and
Medicinal truths, are of worse consequence in the practice of Physic then
Feculencies and excrementitious parts to hinder the full energy of any Medicine
in the cure of Diseases; should I undertake to discourse of the Abilities of
these Chemists, I should imitate him who attempted to treat de nihilo, for my
part I cannot allow them capable of being Spagyrical Apothecaries, because he
ought to be both well read and exercised too in Chemistry, who is a good
Operator and prepares fit Medicaments for the Physician, a good Author
alleges, Qui in legendis libris deses extiterit, in praeparandis rebus
promptus esse non poterit, liber namque librum aperit, and sermo sermonem
explicat, quia quod in uno est diminutum, in alio est completum non enim in
practica been assuescere potest, cujus men's in Theorica renuit desudare,
quoniam procedit ad practicam non secus ac Asinus ad coenam ignorans quomodo
and ad quid porrigat rostrum and os: h. e. He who is not well versed in Books
cannot be an expert Operator, one Book Comments on another, and one saying
interprets another obscurity, so that the mysteriousness and abruptness of one
is illustrated and completed by the perspicacity and fullness of another,
neither can he excel in the practical part, who has not by indefatigable
industry and pains acquainted himself with the Theory, for otherwise he comes
to practice, as the Ass to his supper, not knowing what choice to make of the
things set before him: Let me note that by Books, Arnoldus did not intend
Shop-books, as if any one skilled in them, might thereby be enabled to operate
in Chemistry: If then these Pseudochymists are not fit to be allowed the
preparations of Spagyrical Medicines, what qualifications have they to practice
Physic, the artificial Collying of their hands every morning will no longer
serve their turn to shadow their Ignorance, for Experience shows that they are
rather nigro carbone notandi; To be known from black sheep, Methinks the
blackness of their hands seems a proper Emblem or Hieroglyphick of Death to all
who unhappily come under them: Abrah. e port.
let a Jew inform us Christians concerning these Pseudochymists, Leon. mant. p.
126.
says he, Multum de Art pollicentur qui eam vix a limine salutarunt unquam,
quid mehercle magna remedia aurumque potabile in votis habere, and minimis
morbis ne tantillum opis adferre, Artis magistros convellere, and inscitiae and
supinae ignorantiae incusare, nonne est audax and temerarium facinus? quorum in
pollicitationibus nulla veritas, non modo calumniatores verum insignes mendaces
and garruli impostores apud probos merito censebuntur: h. e. These promise much
in an Art in which they are scarcely initiated, but what do they tell us of
noble Remedies and potable Gold, who cannot rationally cure the most
inconsiderable Disease? are not they very impudent and unadvised, who dare
boldly censure the ablest Professors, accusing either their ignorance or
laziness? there is no truth in their promises, wherefore all good men will
account them slanderers, notorious liars, and prattling impostors; Although the
just repulse which these Pseudochymists lately suffered when they petitioned
for a Charter, has as effectually answered all their Arguments as Wisdom and
Prudence can determine for the welfare of the Public, yet because they cease
not to make continual addresses both in Print and Discourse to the People,
seeking to elude Authority, and to persuade the Nation that the design set a
foot by them will yet be countenanced; I shall examine the strength of their
Arguments which are grounded on the uselesness and imperfection of vulgar
Methods and Medicaments in the curation of Diseases, the most certain
improvement of Physic in all its parts by Chemistry, and that there is not any
expedient so proper to renovate the Art of Physic, and to rescue Mankind from
the tyranny of Diseases, as that a Society of Chemical Physicians be founded,
who will be obliged to spend their time and pains in promoting this most
necessary work altogether unregarded and slighted by the Scholasticks or
Academical Physicians: In the next Chapter I shall endeavor to show how far
the old Methods and Medicaments are useful and sufficient, and what rational
Physicians may expect from them, as also the ignorance of these Pseudochymists
who undertake to censure them; As for their commendation of Chemistry, the true
Physicians think them as much unable to express its worth and excellency, as to
practice it with credit; if these Pseudochymists by any means can mis-represent
the lawful Professors of Physic to the World, describing them to be mean and
dangerous Practitioners, they imagine that the common voice will be for them
and their Preparations, but the College did no less heretofore take care to Quo
vide ant pseudochymici and metito nomine medici celeberrimum hoc nostrum
Londinens. Collegium singulis praeceptis singulisque instrumentis utriusque
philosophiae affluere and abundare in arenam descendo, etc. Tho. Rawlins in
praefat. alphabet: ceu admon. pseudochymic.
prevent such injuries, then are still vigilant to secure themselves from their
assaults.

When these plead a necessity that a Corporation of Chemical Physicians should
be instituted, because no particular Society takes care to advance the
Spagyrical Art, I must plainly tell them, that their information is notoriously
false; for all Academical Physicians, especially Collegiates (as said before)
have ever accounted Chemistry part of their Profession, and if this should be
taken from them and committed to the management of others, by the same rule
more Pretenders may request the like Privileges of exercising distinctly all
those Offices which jointly appertain to the accomplishment of a Physician, and
then one Corporation might undertake to feel Patients pulses, another to view
the Water, and a third visit the sick, no more entrenching on the Physicians
proper business, then these in their presumption to claim the sole use and
authority of Chemical preparations: but it seems these Pseudochymists conceit
that their challenge, or appeal to the Magistracy is an unanswerable argument,
imitating herein their vainglorious Leader, Van Helmont, to whom his
Contemporary Henricus ab Here affords no better a character then to call him,
Observat. medic. in Spa. cap. 7.
Semi-virumque Asinum, semi-Asinumque virum, quo Arcadia non peperit Asiniorem;
Cap. xxv.
And in another place rails against his Preparation of Euphorbium, nay, it is
well known that when he was in England (where he learned most of his notions)
he generally failed in his Cures: but yet his Disciples like those of Jacob
Bhemen will presume to understand more then the Author, and admire what is not
intelligible: The reasons which prevailed with the learned Physicians in that
Age, not to answer him in his folly, hinder us from such unworthy encounters,
since that by other ways the impostures of these Pseudochymists may be
discovered then by tolerating their desperate practice to experiment their
unskilfulness; their strange promises of curing certainly sixteen Patiens in
twenty laboring of Fevers, are intelligible evidences of their deceitful
proceedings, seeking only to gain employment by such presumptuous engagements;
if not by chance, but according to a sober expectation two or three more die
then they allot, nay, all the twenty, as these cannot make satisfaction for one
life, much less for so many, so will not they abate their confidence which
stands them in such stead, recommending them to the credulous multitude.

Furthermore, that no manner of crafty insinuation may be omitted, no stone
left unturned, these Pseudochymists print lists of their pretended Cures; it is
not worth any ones pains to examine the truth of them, their expressions and
language do sufficiently discover how little they understood the Diseases which
they treat of, and did not they conceal their Preparations, there is no doubt
but that the meanest capacity might censure their worthlesness or danger. I
having accidentally met with some of their performances, content my self to
judge of the rest thereby; One of this select Society of Pseudochymists found a
Patient entered on a course of Salivation, to whom (it seems) by a Chyrurgeon
without acquainting either the Patient or his friend, an apposite Mercurial
Medicine had been given; This simple Quack looking into the Patients mouth and
taking notice that his Gums were very much tumified, forthwith pronounced that
the Disease was the Scurvy, which was arrived at the height; and in order to
the Cure he sends an Antimonial Medicine which (not without much hazard) both
vomiting and purging the Patient, inhibited the Flux by a speedy evacuation and
revulsion of the serous humor whereby it was maintained, and this is reckoned a
wonderful Cure: Another being called to see a large Tumor, which by able
Physicians and Chyrurgeons was known to be an Aneurisme, and accordingly dealt
with by them, most readily undertakes the Patient, and promises present help;
then he falls to work, and foments the parts affected with hot Chemical Spirits
and oils, till the Tumor blushed at his ignorance: Another when his Patient
complained that his Cough hindered him from sleep, gave a Narcotick; but alas!
expectoration being thereby suppressed, the Patient was suffocated and slept
quietly. These few Examples may suffice to warn others that they entrust not
their lives in the hands of such unskilful Practitioners who are altogether
ignorant of the Causes and Symptoms of Diseases, right methods of curation, and
proper remedies.

The ill consequences are so many which would be manifest, if such a Charter
should be granted, that they cannot be easily reckoned up, for not only
Physicians would be debarred the exercise of a considerable part (as has been
showed already) of their Profession, or two distinct Charters grant the same
Privileges; but the Apothecaries Company will be prejudiced, who are
authorized to provide as well Chemical as other Preparations, and can more
skilfully execute both, then these pretended Operators, some of them having
spent only three or four weeks with Mr. Johnson Operator to the College; others
professing Chemistry by the assistance of a small Crucible or a Bal. Mariae,
and not a few being such titularly, knowing as little in the Spagyrical Art as
in other qualifications necessary to the practice of Physic: It was a laudable
custom (expressing the honorable esteem heretofore had of the Profession of
Medicine) that Spurius ad Medicinam non erat admittendus; No bastard might be a
Physician: If this deserved observation, then certainly no spurious brood of
Pseudochymists ought to be admitted to practice being neither legitimate
Physicians or Apothecaries: But the Universities will mostly suffer if such a
Corporation should be established, for who will spend their time and pains in
those places, when a Society calling themselves Chemists shall not only scorn
and vilify their Book-learning, but be empowered to take in an allotted number
of Members as they shall think fit, by which means in a few years the most
excellent Science of Medicine will necessarily fall into the hands of ignorant
and illiterate Practisers; and as the University will then be deprived of one
Faculty, so the People ere long would be sensible of their loss, when they must
rely on such Assistants as Gun-smiths, Heel-makers, Tailors, and the rest, etc.
He who pretends not to the Spirit of Prophecy may foresee what will be the
event, for these already slight Anatomy, which all true Physicians account a
most useful and necessary Introduction to the knowledge of Medicine informing
them concerning the admirable fabric of Man's body, its structure, confo^mation
and consent of parts, the various liquors and juyces contained in several
vessels, their changes and alterations, as also the causes and symptoms of
Diseases, and the right use and application of Medicaments: We as much approve
the Anatomy of Bodies by Pyrotechny as they, but judge him an incomplete
Practitioner who knows not what or where the defect is in the noble Engine of
Man's body, and what Remedies whether Chemical or others are most convenient to
rectify what is amiss; and therefore true Physicians take especial care to
conform their Medicaments to this exquisite Machine, and when they observe as
Bausnerus elegantly expresses, In corpore humano nihil sine lege, nihil sine
ordine, nihil sine pondere, mensura and numero, nihil deficit, nihil redundat,
nihil otiosum aut superfluum omnia sum utilia, semperque operantia: h. e.
There is nothing in man's body without Law, Order, and Concord, nothing without
proportion, measure and number, there is no defect nor redundancy, nothing idle
and unnecessary, but all parts are primarily useful and continually operative:
So in like manner, nothing ought to be prepared for, and given to the body
without rule and method, without a due correspondency with it, no imperfect or
empyreumatical preparation, nothing must be ineffectual or superfluous, but all
act vigorously and effectually to set to rights all disord^rs in the body: But
these Pseudochymists rightly apprehending their deficiency in Anatomy to
conceal their ignorance, disallow it, at least judge it not of such importance
as Physicians commonly affirm in the curation of diseasees.

Also Phlebotomy and Purgation are by them condemned, the first styled impious,
and the other reputed destructive; I am sure that Botallus was of another mind
in relation to Phlebotomy, Leonard. Botall. de curat per miss. sanguinis, p.
155.
says he, Nos non opinamur, sed cognoscimus and certo scimus in missione
sanguinis plus esse opis ad curanda^ maxma^ morbo^u^ partem (si rite usurpetur)
quam in quoquam alio artis auxilio, immo dicere ausim quam in caeteris aliis
omnibus simul junctis; Non propterea nos caetera praesidia a medicina
excludenda esse censemus, sed omnia suo tempore and modo usurpanda: h. e. I do
not guess, but experimentally know that letting of blood (if regularly ordered)
is more efficacious in the cure of most Diseases then any other direction; nay,
I may add then all other Remedies put together, and yet I exclude not the use
of other helps, which in their season may be beneficial; because in the next
Chapter I shall particularly discuss these Opinions about Phlebotomy and
Purgation, I shall at present dismiss them.

If these Pseudochymists shall still prosecute their design and yet dream that
a Patent may be obtained, I doubt not but that the College (when they shall be
called to deliver in their Objections against the settlement of such a Society)
will offer such weighty reasons, that the expectation of these Pretenders will
be frustrated. This I thought fit to insert least any one should imagine that
my Arguments do conclude the College, what is observed by me may possibly
inform the People concerning the most dangerous project of these
Pseudochymists; if I have discharged the duty of a faithful Scout in descrying
the common enemies of Mankind, I return into my rank again, being not engaged
to oppose my self to their body drawn up in Battalia, my work is done if the
intelligence I bring of our Adversaries approach alarums every one to arm
himself against their public and private assaults.

CHAP. VI. Of the Ancient and Galenical way of MEDICINE.
BEfore I enter upon the examination of the Doctrines delivered by the
Ancients, it is fit that I remove some stumbling blocks laid by the
Pseudochymists in our way to imprint a Prejudice against the Truth and
Authority of their Writings; the first Accusation laid to their charge, that
they were Pagans, implying that Christians hereupon ought not to credit their
Books; because all the Learning transmitted from them to us, either stands or
falls according to the validity or weakness of this censure, I shall spend a
little time in discussing it, 'twill not be expected that I defend the Opinions
of these Philosophers and Physicians relating to Religion, the Soul and other
knowledge distinguishing us as Christians from them, but the task I undertake is
to evince that Hippocrates, Galen, and the rest (though Heathens) were capable
of understanding the appearances of Nature, and might discover useful truths
for the benefit of their Posterity; I am not ignorant that many have taken
great pains to prove that most of these both Philosophers and Physicians saw
the Books of Moses, and many Arguments are brought to declare their devotion
and piety; I shall not dispute the reasons urged by these Advocates of the
Ancients, but rather grant that they were Heathens: Well then, since that the
knowledge of which we discourse is acquirable by sense and reason, I scruple not
to assert that the Heathens might attain it as well as Christians, for their
sense was sufficient, if not more exquisite then their degenerated
Posteritie's, and they possessed rational Souls which could readily improve all
the communications of their sense; nay, who doubts but that God endowed these
Heathens with extraordinary gifts and abilities for the good and welfare of
Mankind, that their Successors might more profitably contemplate the Universe
with all its admirable furniture; when the little Ant is constituted our Tutor,
and almost every creature by Divine appointment instructs us in natural
mysteries, much more may be expected from rational Pagans, who diligently
observing the Causes of things, and their true effects, the several alterations
of bodies, and what possibly could fall under their cognizance, might invent
and publish those Humane Sciences we still enjoy; the most elaborate works of
these Authors do abundantly express their indefatigable pains, which in spite
of opposition to this day continue accurate Comments on the book of Nature;
considering then that these Pagans lay under no impregnable difficulties
hindering the success and issue of their Studies, what could intervene to
frustrate their public undertakings, or render their industry vain and
fruitless? But I would not be mistaken as if I thought these infallible in
their discoveries, if the Moon, nay, the Sun is spotted, well may these have
their imperfections; yet Errorem in homine calumniari, est toti ipsi
mortalitati convicium facere: h. e. The exprobation of error in any one is no
less then an accusation of all Mankind; But why Heathens? This appellation
having neither relation to their mistakes, nor true opinions in natural
knowledge: indeed when these ancient Philosophers and Physicians soared so high
in their thoughts, and contended to pierce into the Magnalia Dei, such profound
secrets might disappoint their scrutiny and search, and it is apparent that
they never erred so grossly as in their attempts to discover such close
concealments: if these did not make use of the knowledge bestowed on them as
they ought, and from second causes ascended not up in their contemplation to an
owning and adoration of the first, being unacquainted with the deep mysteries
of Religion, we ought not to condemn them who have not made the difference
between them and us, but gratefully receive their endeavors and carefully avoid
any unjust reproaches of those who spent themselves to be Promoters of their
Successors in knowledge, at least pointed out directly the way to us in our
disquisition of natural truths.

Another Objection is brought in against the Ancients, as if they exercised
Tyranny over their Successors, cramping their industry and strictly confining
them to their Dictates, the aggravation of this pretended Crime stuffs most of
the late Writers books; but I must answer, that most of our Innovators may be
well suspected to condem what they either never read or understood, for
Hippocrates enjoins us to make Truth the Standard of all the Notions we
entertain; Galen also and the rest are so far from this kind of usurpation,
that they not only by example, but by particular direction exhort their Readers
to examine well all Traditions before they give their assent to them: But
suppose that the Ancients had been so severe as to seek the inslavement of
their Posterity, yet what restraint could they lay on any Physician to conform
to their Precepts? if any person who is at liberty will subject himself
voluntarily to the government of another, he makes his own condition servile,
and the brand of Pedantism may possibly reach these who of their own accord
swear allegiance to their Masters, choosing rather to err with them, then to
think right with the Neotericks: But I cannot be informed what effectual
obligation the Ancients can lay on them who follow Reason only and are Sons of
Truth, indeed Antiquity commands a just veneration when it still triumphs in
its mature and aged conclusions only capable of successive confirmations; but
whenever true Physicians cannot be fully satisfied that some old doctrines
are true, they as freely and cheerfully leave them, as any Traveller that path
(though pleasant and easy) which may misguide him in his Journey; However when
these recede from the Positions of the Ancients, after due reading, and well
pondering the Arguments on both sides, they adhere to that which affords clear
manifestations of its certainty, contrary to the practice of our Innovators who
are zealous to demolish the ancient structure of Medicinal truths under the
pretense of a Reformation, before they have taken an exact survey of its
faults, or laid a new and more rational platform, acting thus not for want of
ignorance; the Palace must be turned into Cottages suitable to such
Inhabitants; the works of these incomparable Physicians because they surpass
their capacity, deserve their severest censure, and envy prompts them on to
poison these Fountains that the reputation at least of all may be destroyed who
come thither in order to the satisfaction of their thirst after knowledge; but
true Physicians take another course and first inform themselves what progress
the Ancients have made in their Medicinal discoveries, and then note their
defects which they supply with new choice observations, and since that by
reason of the restless endeavors of Physicians in their continual search after
the hidden treasures of Nature, no Science has been so considerably advanced
as Medicine, they heartily and gratefully receive the new Doctrines, and
expunge the old, but do not imitate him who foolishly commanded that his house
should be pulled down because the rain pashed in through three or four faults
in the Covering or Roof, so these do not think fit to cast off the whole
Science of Physic which they received from the Ancients for no other reason
then because some defects are detected therein: Physicians also are not so
unworthy as to calumniate the Ancients, being ascertained that they did not
write with design to deceive and abuse their Readers or Disciples: to conclude
these are so prudent as neither to dote on old errors or admire new phrensical
Hypotheses. Did I not avoid prolixity, as also suppose that all sober men are
satisfied that the lawful Physicians in this Kingdom have sufficiently asserted
their liberty by forsaking the Ancients when they forsook Truth, I should here
produce all those new Opinions which are received as irrefragable conclusions
though not consonant to the Dictates of Hippocrates or Galen: That Physicians
do still savor the old, I mean, the Galenical way of Medicine no other account
can be given, then that it is most agreeable to their reason and experience,
and transmitted to them from such skilful Practitioners that deserve more to be
credited then their Antagonists who profess Medicine without any rational
Method, slighting those Rules of Art which they cannot observe by reason of
ignorance. I should exceed the intended bounds of this discourse, did I
undertake to run over the Body of Galenical Physic, and subject each part
distinctly to examination; it may suffice therefore that I trace our
Pseudochymists in their opposition of those Tenants which seem to them most
questionable, relating either to the Theory or Practice: it is well known that
every Scribler thinks himself highly concerned to bawl against the three
Aristotelian Principles; Matter, Form, and Privation, the four Elements; Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth; the four first Qualities, Hot, Moist, Cold, and Dry; the
four Humors, Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholy; the Temperaments and other
Opinions of Galen, and his followers, not unlike these: but when Physicians do
rightly understand that these terms of Art are the Products of fancy, and by no
means the Fundamentals of Medicine (as I hinted before) these spend their time
in beating the Air and fighting with shadows which elude their strokes, when
other more apposite terms are found out not alike fantastical, we shall soon
exchange the old for new: because Physicians are obliged in the Universities to
read Aristotle, Hippocrates, and Galen; must they needs approve all their
Notions? did these apprehend that the Mind does change as much or more then the
Body, and as this alters by new accessions of Aliment, so the other is
progressive in its Conceptions by further illumination and discoveries, Heroici
viri quamvis nullam artem quam humana excogitavit industria absolutam nobis
reliquerunt praeclara tamen in omnibus artibus indefessis laboribus
longissimisque observationibus in venerum posterisque instar testamenti
fideliter tradiderunt, Bruel. in pref.
they would not so peremptorily conclude the Physicians knowledge by the Books
which they are engaged to turn over: if the Ancients have not been happy in
their expressions, so that their Writings are dark and uncertain, yet ought we
to esteem them for their noble attempts to reason out and discover the first
inclinations of Nature; should I insist longer on these Notions, or plead for
the necessity of retaining them both in our Philosophy and Medicine, or repeat
the Arguments against them, I might deserve as sharp a censure as he who was
solicitous to determine whether a Crow or Goose-quill might be most serviceable
in writing.

Because these terms are by so many accounted prejudicial to right conceptions
of Natures Operations, and thought worthy of no better an Appellation then
Figments; I shall enquire whether the case is much altered by a substitution of
other Notions more agreeable (as our Innovators would persuade the World) to
the Phenomenon of Nature; and in the first place the term Specific occurs, and
although most late Writers endeavor to reduce the whole of Pharmacy to this
notion, yet none have been so kind as to interpret what was intended by it, if
they explain themselves by the internal and seminal virtues, that is ignotum
per ignotius: I shall guess at what they mean, and I suppose that hereby they
would express A peculiar virtue flowing from the essence of any Simple, whereby
in operation and effect it is distinguished from another, as it is approp^iated
to the cure of a particular Disease. Well then, every Simple according to this
doctrine is specifical, or else this pretended Universal notion comprehends not
the true virtues of all Simples, but if every Simple is distinctly in respect
of Use specifical, then it necessarily follows that there are as many Diseases
as Specificks, otherwise this defect of a correlate would contradict their
chief intent of being Specificks; but let the World judge what an absurd fancy
it is to conceive that there are so many different Diseases to which Mankind is
subject, as there are distinct Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals whose virtues
are different, as if the Great Creator did equally furnish the Universe with
Diseases as with Simples, and notwithstanding the Patrons of the term have not
unriddled its obscurity, nor declared the sovereignty of Ares, yet do they most
confidently assert that Diseases may chiefly be cured by their irresistible
power, and least Physicians should not know where to look for such excellent
helps, by good advice they are sent unto illiterate Practisers, and common rude
Empericks, in whose hands (it seems) such Specificks may be found, because
these being altogether ignorant of Methods, do wholly rely on them, by frequent
experimentings attaining knowledge of their proprieties. But as it is evident
that no Specific can be produced which will certainly cure that Disease to
which it is appropriated, and that if such Remedies help three or four, yet
failing in the fifth, Illa habentur specifica quae omnibus differentiis
alicujus morbi, omnibus hominibus, and omni tempore prosunt, Fab. p. 476.
the miscarriage is chargeable on their insufficiency, and not on any mistake
in application, because the same person might as probably by mistake cure the
first, as fail in the last; so there is no Specific but what may be easily
reduced to some common intention as much answering that in diverse Diseases as
the same.

The Doctrine also of Fermentation is as intricate and mysterious as some
opinions of the Galenists which are laid aside, and thought useless in the
explanation of the appearances of Nature: I confess that the learned Treatise
of Doctor Willis has fully satisfied very many scruples, and yet they who have
made the greatest progress in the discovery hereof, are conscious that they
understand little in respect of what is unknown about this Doctrine; before I
pass from this subject it may be expected that I take notice of the three
notable Ferments mentioned by the Author of Medela medicinae; if I was
appointed to determine, I could not readily judge whether Mr. M. N. through
ignorance does more abuse this term then the Galenical notions condemned by
him, for because the famous Doctor Willis tell us, that atomical effluviums may
act instar fermenti, Analogously to ferment: this Author disputes not to call
them Ferments, and because Hippocrates acquaints us that there are (...),
morbid expirations which may pass from one body to another, and in other
Authors he reads that not only the Pox, but the Scurvy are contagious Diseases,
and that there have happened peculiar putrefactions of the Air producing worms;
hence he wisely infers, That no body is secure from the most subtle
insinuations of those active particles as powerfully penetrating another body
at distance as by an immediate contact: Should I critically set down this
Authors errors in these assertions, the Reader would be tired with their
absurdity; for in the whole I observe he misapplies the design and intent of
those learned Authors he cites: but that which I chiefly intend is to
distinguish between those who are infected with the mentioned Ferments, and the
rest who are free. I shall in few words state the business, we deny not that
the Pox and Scurvy may be contagious Diseases, but a learned Author affirms,
Non omnem luem esse contagiosam, Hercul. Saxon. de lue ven. p. 3.
and plerunque minus contagiosa^, esse vetustam and confirmatam, quam recentem
and mediam and lues quae ex tophis tantum seipsam prodit non est contagiosa,
and the same Author gives us two or three Histories to confirm his Opinion, I
shall not transcribe them least any should be encouraged to that vice from
which they are deterred by the severity of this punishment, and however Mr. M.
N. has put a plausible excuse into their mouths who have deserved the Pox,
teaching them to plead that some infectious Air passed only through their pores
insensibly which has so wonderfully wrought upon them by its power that no
part is free from pain and torments; yet as his fantastical Ferments reach not
those who avoid impure contacts, so all sinners can experimentally difference
the time of their health, and sickness when they meet with persons who
communicate that horrid Disease to them. Mr. M. N. should have set down the
conditions necessary to contagion, as that there be such little particles
continually transmitted from unsound bodies, a fit medium or vehicle to receive
and carry them to their journeys end, a disposition in the other body to
receive them, and a due stay there; for if any of these necessary conditions
are wanting, contagious Diseases cannot be propagated mediately or at distance.

1. It Is granted that to this kind of infection a sufficient emission of minute
substances or corpuscles tinctured with the infection must invade another body;
it is possible that in the French Disease, as also the Scurvy some venomous
effluxes may happen, but by no means such as M. N. fancies rendering these
Diseases as contagious as the Pestilence, because the putrefaction in these
being imperfect in respect of that, cannot communicate a venom which it was not
capable of producing: what kind of taint arises from the Pox and the Scurvy,
and how forcible it is to transmute a distant body, is a business above the
reach of M. N. and not my task at present to inform him, I shall only object
against his vast collection, that experience confutes his Romance of the most
powerful effluxes of such venereous and scorbutic Ferments, it being most
apparent that they who eat, drink, and familiarly converse with, nay, dress the
Ulcers and sores of both Pocky and scorbutical Patients are not infected; to
say no more, if these Diseases are generally so contagious as without any
corporeal commerce to infect, how comes it to pass that some parts in that body
from which these exhalations expire are more free then others.

2. To Contagion a fit medium or vehicle is required, Authors do very well
distinguish inter fomitem perflatum and non perflatum, between Contagions which
may by the air be diminished, dissipated, and extinguished, and others wherein
notwithstanding the several alterations of the Air, infectious particles
preserve their malignity till they fix in some apt seat or place of abode, and
such as pass from body to body directly by reason of (as it were) the
stagnation of the Air; had M. N. affirmed that no change in the medium could
prevent the power of his three Ferments from possessing distant bodies, I would
have answered him in the words of an Author not inferior to him for abilities,
Si medium tantum aut calescat aut refrigeretur, siccetur aut humectetur aut
aliam quamlibet qualitatem nudam suscipiat, alterabitur similiter corpus
proximum and non proinde suscipiet morbum corporis long positi: h. e. If the
medium only is hot or cold, dry or moist, or is otherwise qualified then it
was, the adjacent body is equally changed, and hereupon not subject to
contagion; and I hope he will not adventure to say, the Air may be so quiet
between two remote bodies that rays may as indisturbedly pass from one to the
other, as between the Needle and Loadstone, since that the motion or agitation
of the Air will hinder their operations, which being natural are within their
Sphere more potent then such preternatural Ferments he mentions.

3. There must be a disposition in the body to receive their impression,
whereby I do not only mean passages open to let them in, although to atomical
penetration such figures are requisite which fit the pores or passages
admitting them, but a similitude in respect of impurity in the body to be
infected, I now speak of mediate contact for that which is immediate being more
prevalent and discharging more venomous or infectious particles needs a less
fomes or preparation of matter disposing to receive such a tincture; whereas by
how much more the bodies are distant from each other, which communicate and
receive such contagious Diseases, answerable to the intermediate space must be
the apparatus morbificus, or fomes to entertain the malignity; if then all
bodies do not abound with humors which tend to such putrefactions, it is vain to
imagine that the pretended Ferments do prevail upon those which are free from
such impurities, as on others, which being loaded with them, do most easily
suffer by such venomous effluxes; I might here question whether a common or
peculiar putrefaction of congested and mixed Feculencies, or of some particular
juice or humor did more especially if not altogether dispose to the
entertainment of the pocky and scorbutic Ferments, but such speculations would
take me off the business at present designed in this Chapter.

4. The contagious effluxes must have a due stay in the body they infect, but
if man's body in a state of health is (...), in all parts transpirable, or a
thorowfare, these contagious corpuscles may be as soon passed out as let in,
and by this means do no execution on other bodies where they lodge not, but if
these vapors (as some conceive) are viscous, which cannot well be granted,
seeing that they so easily separate from their Mine, or rather if they meet
with any glutinous humor they immediately are entangled, and may infect that
body in which they are long detained.

If then so many impediments may prevent these most dreadful Effluxes from
affecting (to use the expression of M. N.) All the families of mankind, which
are not infected by immediate contact, but most by these fine and subtle
corpuscles darting into grosser bodies, which there settle somewhat of their
nature, tincture, or leaven, disposing them by degrees to be unsound; as also
if experience otherwise informs us, with what confidence can this Author broach
such Opinions? and with his corrupted Ink infect more Families then the
severest contagion that ever happened to Mankind? But He explains his meaning,
and as he takes good care never to want Patients who can so easily persuade the
whole World that they are diseased, so is he also very kind to provide
Remedies, Med. medicinae, p. 37.
for he writes, That he has on purpose invented fit Remedies, the nature of
which is to fight against humors both great and small, in old or young, which
have been any way touched with such tinctures either through their own default
or by figillation of those seminal principles which contribute toward the
being of Mankind in the act of Generation, etc. And this is the natural result
of his design: I cannot divine what the Medicines are which he has invented,
but I am confident no slight, and at the long run pernicious preparation of
Antimony and Mercury will perform what he promises. But it is probable that such
pretenses both of inventing Diseases and new Remedies may not seduce the World
into a credit of either: if any be of such an easy persuasion as to entrust
themselves, and neither of the hazardous preparations by vomiting and purging
violently can effect a Cure, they may be dispatched into the Country Air with a
sovereign and rare chemical Cordial made by the infusion of three or four Dates
in a Pint of Malago: What this Author writes concerning Worms is no news to
Physicians, because they are fully acquainted with the several products of
corrupted matter, and in relation to the cure of Diseases, take especial care
as to prevent any stagnation and putrefaction of humors so to expel all
verminous matter, and worms if any whether in acute and malignant, or chronical
Diseases are bred in the body.

I might produce some other Opinions besides these of Specificks and
fermentation, which not being sufficiently explained and demonstrated continue
as liable to exception as some Galenick notions very much disliked by those who
affect novel errors rather then old truths; but I shall come to that which is
of greater concernment, and endeavor to defend the practice of Phlebotomy and
Purgation, which are accounted by the two Champions of the Pseudochymists, the
Supporters of the Galenick Physic, M. N. Page 374. writes that there is seldom
any tolerable cause for bleeding in our Climate: Afterward in the head of his
pretended Arguments, p. 383. he pleads only That we ought to be very wary
thereof, as if Physicians were not of the same judgment being most circumspect
in their direction of Phlebotomy; but if M. N. had been as diligent to
understand their Books as to cavil at shadows, he would never have mistaken
Cautions and Contraindicants set down frequently in their Writings, as reasons
to abolish its true use: what is alleged concerning our Climate proves
nothing, and might pass without observation, if the vanity of such triflers did
not beget a dotage in the People to imagine that Cause to be just which with
verbosity is pleaded.

His first Objection is, because the Scurvy is predominant in most of our
Diseases, and consequently a crude acid serum in the mass of blood, p. 383,

I answer, that neither of his Suppositions are apparent in practice, for we
see often in most acute Diseases, Crises, Digestions and Separations orderly
made by Nature truly governed, nor if they were would they hinder the use of
bleeding when its indication happens; he had done well to explain himself what
he means by the words Scurvy and scorbutical tincture frequently mentioned, for
I do not remember in all his book one sensible sign or symptom set down to
discern them by, and am apt to believe that his young studies are not yet
acquainted with such speculations; to say they are signified, when there is in
the blood a crude or an Acid Serum (which are all one with him) implies that
the blood must be first seen and tasted before that Disease can be discovered;
wherefore I may well suppose that he undertaking practice before he understood
Physic and meeting with difficulties and diseases, not yielding to his
opinionated Receipts, fathered his failings on this universal disease, thinking
to excuse his ignorance of particulars thereby.

2. It Is urged that the spirituous part of the blood being but little and less
in our Northern bodies then those of other Climates, it must needs be a
pernicious course to make it less, p. 393.

I very much wonder by what Staticks he measured the proportion to make our
spirits fewer then others: we have larger, stronger, and more active bodies,
why not then as many spirits? it is not good to be fond of an unreasonable
Opinion, and then dream absurdities to make it plausible, I know not what
reason this Author has at this juncture of time to dispirit his Native
Country.

But the main drift and Argument against Phlebotomy is, That the letting out
the spiritous part of the blood with the rest is a pernicious course, which G.
T. urges likewise with a subtle distinction of Sanguis and Cruor never to be
found in any living man's veins, as if hereby many vital spirits were lost, good
blood and bad put out together, and the remainder left more liable unto
diseases. But what is all this? by the same Arguments they might dissuade
procreation, suckling of Infants, least some vital spirits should be spent,
whereas Nature is not so penurious of her store, but still furnishes the whole
body plentifully to execute all necessary offices whereby life is prolonged,
and diseases conquered, and after bleeding like a Lamp freed from its choking
snuff shines forth brighter: the want of strength is reckoned amongst the
Ancients as a contra-indication of Phlebotomy, but the loss of a few vital
spirits were never accounted a sufficient bar to the practice of Physicians
who respect the inestimable benefit accruing to their Patients by it, though
perhaps it may not be approved by Empericks and Nurses from whom these gather
their knowledge and instruction; And I think that their dislike of Phlebotomy
because they discern not when it is proper and useful is very commendable, and
if they would likewise refrain from other ways of curing Diseases upon the same
account which are as dangerous, if mistaken, they would free themselves from
much guilt not of shedding men's blood, but of keeping it in their veins to
their ruin and destruction, and of giving Vomits and other Medicines
unseasonably whereby not a few miscarry. In his other Objections are recounted
some Cases besides the true intention of Phlebotomy, when the blood is
depauperated who opens a vein? His conjecture or supposition that our blood in
this Climate is more inclinable to coagulation proves nothing, neither has he
showed that Sanguification succeeds not well after Phlebotomy judiciously
directed, every Physicians observation overthrows such imaginary prejudices by
bleeding; it is well known, that some aged persons have for the space of thirty
or forty years opened a vein Spring and Fall, if not oftener, losing seven or
eight Ounces each time, by which evacuation chiefly they avoided the great
inconveniences which otherwise they might justly fear much threatened their
lives. I might likewise instance the female Sex whose blood is not so
spirituous as Men's, and yet these suffer not by their Customary tribute to
Nature, but very much when this sanguinary expiation does not succeed: The
Physicians by this Author termed Galenists are so rational, as that they
respect strictly the Indications of Phlebotomy, and if these signify a
necessity of bleeding they stick not to order it even in the small Pox,
malignant Fevers, nay, in the Plague it self, as knowing what service the
Patient will reap by it, and the danger of such a considerable omission: but I
am apt to believe that this Author and his brethren not understanding the
Indications of bleeding, may by some miscarriages be deterred from using it;
for my part I think that he deserves a severe censure who lays open the secrets
of Medicine to such bold Practitioners; had this Author been versed in the
Writings of the ablest Spagyricks he might have taken notice that some of them
being Germans commended bleeding in most Diseases to their Countrymen whose
bodies (as he suggests) are most like ours in this Kingdom; but perhaps he will
answer, that these wanted such Arcanums which he and his Associates pretend to,
as might prevent bleeding: I shall be so charitable as to suppose that he was
not ignorant of the practice of these Chemists, but rather that he willingly
passed them by, least their authority should justify the Galenists in this
point. To sum up all, although this Author adventures to judge of the state of
our blood without any good and warrantable foundation, and thereupon disswades
bleeding, and at length plays the Mountebank by promising such Remedies as may
allay the fermentation of the blood, and cure Diseases without Phlebotomy; yet
cannot Physicians by such a weak plea be persuaded to forbear the use of this
evacuation which Nature directs to by hemorrhages and constant experience
confirms, when there is a just cause and proper Indication.

When so much is said against Phlebotomy, it may seem strange that Hippocrates
should be blamed, because he (as some interpret the Aphorism) dislikes it in
teeming women, I shall recite the Aphorism, and then we shall see who is most
culpable (...). Lib. 5. Aphorism. 31.
It Is urged that Physicians being misguided by this Aphorism have suffered
multitudes of female Patients to die under their hands, who probably might have
been rescued by a discreet Phlebotomy; But had such Censurers of the Physicians
practice heretofore apprehended the right sense and import of the words, and
the construction which has bin continually put upon them by the ablest
Commentators, their charity would have preceded their zeal to carp at not only
the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, but the practice of skilful Physicians who
admired and conformed to these succinct Aphoristical sentences; I shall produce
amongst many (writing to the same purpose) two Authors who explain the meaning
of Hippocrates, Christoph. a Vega, p. 846.
Christoph. a Vega says, Non putare oportet Hippocratem omnino denegare
sanguinis missionem utero gerentibus, sed eam esse vult de indicationibus quae
dehortantur a sanguinis missione, and est scopus qui viribus correpugnat and
docet minori copia sanguinem esse mittendum quam alias: h. e. It Is not to be
imagined that Hippocrates did absolutely forbid the bleeding of women with
Child, but only when there happen Contra-indications to it, and there is a
sufficiency of strength, and he cautions to take away a less quantity in such
cases then otherwise might be allowed: And the same Author after he has
declared the usefulness of bleeding such Patients ratifies his Opinion with an
eminent example and tells us, That he has taken away ten ounces of blood twice
in the eighth month with very good success and advantage to his noble Patient
and the Child; But he aptly concludes, Non tamen vult Hippocrates esse
exercendam sanguinis missionem in utero gerentibus nisi magno urgente usu,
praesertim ubi faetus est major: h. e. Hippocrates advised not to blood teeming
women, especially if the Child is big, unless there be a necessity or important
cause. Heurn. in Aphorism. p. 358.
Heurnius also after he has affirmed that the upper veins ( as he terms them)
may be opened, more positively gives us his sense of this controverted
Aphorism, Loquitur Hippocrates de larga sanguinis missione quae non solebat
esse libra minor, hodie autem minorem sanguinis effusionem non aversamur modo
vires admittant, morbusque validus id suadeat: h. e. Hippocrates did only
oppose the exhausting of the veins by drawing a great quantity of blood which
in those days was not less then a pound at a time, but we may safety take away
a less quanity if the Patients strength will permit and the Diseases require
this evacuation: If then the most excellent Hippocrates did not by this
Aphorism restrain a cautious bleeding of women with Child, as well to prevent
Abortion as to cure Diseases to which their condition is liable, and his
legitimate Disciples have constantly phlebotomized such Patients both by their
great Masters example and authority, when ever a proper indication discovered a
necessity of this course; I understand not with whom our Adversaries contend,
stigmatizing them with the brand of Murderers, and aggravating their crime
which at once destroys both the tree and fruit, the Mother and Child; what!
must Physicians be accused for suffering their female Patients to die because
their Accusers mis-interpret this weighty Aphorism? imitating those who having
sore eyes or the Jaundice, imagine all others on whom they look to be in their
condition? All that I shall observe from this severe Animadversion, is, that
such persons do express a great disrespect toward the Ancients, who rather
then fail will invent a charge against them, and this example gives a
sufficient cause of suspicion that other censure of them are as contrary to the
common principles of humanity, as besides the sense of their exquisite Writings.

To proceed, our Pseudochymists inveigh also against Purgation, which by the
Galenists is reckoned a Medication, (...), whereby the body is drained from the
mass of vicious and peccant humors which are at least the fuel of Diseases, and
by their timely removal and expulsion oftentimes a Cure is performed: The
Argument urged against Catharticks, is, That they purge out of the body both
good and bad together: We are sensible that the Patient does very much suffer
when he is causlesly purged, and when good and bad are promiscuously emptied,
but when Catharticks are given to those who need them not, he errs who
indirectly prescribes them; whereas true Physicians do imitate and assist
Nature in her critical elimination of concocted humors, and not in her
Symptomatical excretions wherein by means of some powerful irritation the
alimentary juice is evacuated, and the spirits be exhausted; it is confessed
that Catharticks operate by way of irritation, upon which account also natural
dejections are caused, and when these succeed not well, it is the Physicians
office to quicken Nature in her work, who therefore do artificially graduate
their Catharticks according to the quantity, quality, seat, and motion of these
excrementitious humors, and this is not only effected by varying the Dose of
some Purgers, but by selection and choice of those which may best answer their
designment; acting otherwise then our Empirical Pseudochymists, who when they
are most wary do only alter the Dose of their Antimonial preparation, and then
very much boast of the safety and inoffensiveness of their Emetico-catharticks,
inviting the people by the smalness of the Dose to make use of it, being
ignorant that one or two grains may impregnate a mass of humors, and diffuse
into them the same Emetick and Cathartick virtue; and hence it comes to pass
that by such small quantities of that Powder most dreadful evacuations are
caused, enervating Diarrhaeas, hazardous Dysenteries and fatal colliquations,
nay, sometimes periodical vomitings and purgings (of which I could produce not
a few examples) these Patients continually languishing until they died; I hint
this because many Patients are so apt to nauseate wholesome Galenical Potions
preferring Nihil juvare videtur nisi quod e sanctuariis chymicorum depromptum
tamque attonita quorundam animos persuasio occupavit, ut prodesse nisi chymica
non putent, Billish. in epist.
these which offend not the sent and taste, but the event does sufficiently
prove the difference; our Senna, Rubarb, Cassia, Manna, Agarick, etc. are
benign Catharticks, and so safe that they may be given to teeming women, young
children, and in such Diseases where other Purgers may do harm: our Colocynthis
likewise and Scammony, etc. being more prevalent to extimulate when
artificially prepared, and rationally directed are sufficient to cleanse an
Augaean Stable; and whereas these Pseudochymists boast their Catharticks to be
also Diaphoretical, I confess that by accident they are so, for most who take
them fall immediately into cold sweats: Thus do they deal subtlely who would
have such Agonies be reckoned an advantage to their Patients. I have followed
our Adversaries in their way of argumentation who first oppose purgation in
general, and then considering that they vomit and purge oftener and more
violently those who employ them then any Pretenders to the practice of Physic,
admit the use of Catharticks which yet they limit to their Mercurial or
Antimonial preparations, His parium and superiorum contemptus acsi iis solis
cerebrum and cor Natura formasset, and reliqui vel in truncos and stipites
abiissent, vel peponem pro cord fungum pro cerebro gererent. Jonst.
concealed from all others, least they should judge of their malignancy, and
justly censure these arrogant Pseudochymists then they all those who dissent
from them.

Galenick Medicines in the next place are by our Pseudochymists condemned as
languid, insufficient, and faulty both in respect of their preparation and
composition, In relation to their preparation, the Galenists do not pretend to
that accurateness which the Chemists promise, but yet they suppose that their
way does more preserve the true and seminal virtues of the Simples used by them
then the other, since that it is questionable whether Spagyrical Distillations,
Calcinations, and other like Artifices do not destroy the proprieties of those
Ingredients on which they work and substitute something else effected and
produced by their operation; if this doubt is cleared, and it is demonstrated
that by Chemistry the Virtues of such Simples are exalted only, and not
altered, I shall willingly fall in with the ingenuous determination of this
Point by a Galenist, Nemo inficiatur, remedia chymice praeparata in morbis
propulsandis efficaciora, palato gratiora, and in exigua Dosi exhibenda, si
dextre exhibeantur, ea ratione Galenicis palmam eripiunt. Hoc tamen asseverare
ausim, si qui obtigerint aegri in assumendis pharmacis morigeri, non
nauseabundi and delicatuli, quin per vegetabilia aeque Galenicorum, praesertim
a medico prudente in cognitione morborum and methodo medendi probe exercitato,
a gravissimis and desperatis affectibus liberari, and citius in integrum
restitui queant: omnia probanda, quae bona observanda, non autem omnia vetera
promiscue rejicienda, and cum animi vehementia sceptice traducenda: h. e.
Medicines chymically prepared are undoubtedly more efficacious and powerful,
more grateful to the taste, and may be given in a far less Dose then Galenical:
but yet if Patients will be obedient and not so nice and squeemish, by the
direction of an able Physician who understands the Disease and a right method
of curing it, they may more securely and certainly be helped by Galenick
Medicines: it is convenient to experiment all things, and retain what appears
most rational, however they err who promiscuously reject and passionately
censure all the Remedies which the Ancients left us as the fruit of their
experience.

The Galenick Compositions in respect of the vast and exorbitant number of
Simples mixed together are likewise esteemed rather pompous then beneficial
Medicines, Treacle by some reckoned a confused mass of Ingredients, the dream
of waking Andromachus, and Discordium a fermented heap: much may be said on
behalf of these grand Dispensations comparing them to a well disciplined Army,
wherein are some Field-officers able in respect of their skill in Martial
affairs singly to conquer the Enemy, but these commanding the body of the Army,
will more probably by their conjunct fortitude and courage become Victors; I
might also liken them to a well governed State, in which every Member in his
place and station acts uniformly to oppose all who endeavor to disturb the
public Peace; what these at first view do think to be only a Farrago or
hotchpotch of many things jumbled together, when more strictly examined will
appear most artificial and admirable compositions to encounter the several
complications of Diseases: I need say no more in their defense, then that long
experience has given them a repute in the World which cannot be prejudiced by
the Satirical Invectives of such who like nothing but their own conceited
preparations: Physicians also in this Age may without any imputation of
ignorance in the knowledge of Simples, and their peculiar Virtues, be allowed to
form long Compositions not only because of complications which are more
frequent and intricate Olim non opus erat remediis diligentibus nondum in
tantum nequitia surrexerat, nec tam late se sparserat, poterant vitiis
simplicibus obstare remedia simplicia, nunc necesse est tant^ operatiora esse
munimenta quanto valentiora sunt quibus petimur, etc. Sen. p. 785.
then heretofore, but that they may hereby conceal their skill, for when the
Medicine is disguised by putting in such Ingredients which obscure its
intention, but hinder not its virtue, they are puzzled who would make an
indirect advantage of such a Prescript; there will be no occasion for this
Stratagem, when Physicians to rescue their Profession from the abuses of
unworthy and illiterate Practisers do dispense their own Medicaments, who may
then more securely use one Simple then now a perplexed composition, and when
they have occasion to add auxiliary forces to them in Complications, prevent
those inconveniences which, as the case now stands, they cannot avoid.

But why should I insist longer on particulars when the whole method of Physic
is rejected by our Pseudochymists as useless, and if multitudes of words would
prevail, scurrilities were argumentative, as their stiling it (...), Satan's
device and plot to destroy Mankind, and telling us of vast numbers being
methodized into their graves, If aenigmatical hypotheses had power to persuade,
or the novelty of their Notions to bewitch; the old Galenistical method had
long received its doom, and its Adversaries had triumphed over its ruins; but
true and rational methods Ubi de salute humana agitur non standum uniuscujusque
judicio sed eorum qui authoritatem longo tempore sibi compararunt, Caesalp. p.
10.
take deeper root by means of these boisterous agitations. I cannot understand
the meaning of some Stories which I meet with in our late Writers, who give us
an account that some Physicians were not sollicitous if their Patients died
secundum Artem, by the fairest method in the world; I cannot excuse any
personal miscarriages in Physicians, but I should be unjust to the most
faithful Physicians if I did not vindicate them from the failings of others,
these subtle Accusers of all Methodists would not approve of a retaliation, and
that I should affirm that one who professes himself to be a Philosopher by
fire, is not ashamed publicly to thank God that he is no Scholar. If that good
Law was observed, Qui affectat ignorantiam est puniendus: h. e. He who affects
Ignorance ought to suffer severe punishment; Our Pseudochymiaster would fall
his Crest and cease to be proud of his blindness; or did I relate the words of
a famous Pseudochymist, who when the Patient did suddenly die after a Dose of
his Antimonial Pills, commended the excellency of such Medicines Laudo tuam
experientiam qui non finis infirmos computrescere sed eos statim e vita
liberas, Strat. philos.
which dispatched without much pain and procured an easy death: It were no
difficult matter to parallel any Stories they can produce to make the
Methodists infamous, but the meanest people can discern the Sophistry of such
Argumentations, and may suppose that they observe the same way in their
curation of Diseases; As for the Methodus medendi, our Adversaries complain
that by it the cause and nature of Diseases are not sufficiently discovered,
their Symptoms not rightly described, and that the Remedies set down are
impotent, and rather increase then cure Diseases: Certainly they presume that
their own bare negation or affirmation of what they dislike or approve, is a
persuasive Argument to others who expect satisfaction in particulars, and are
cautious to escape the cheat and delusion which lies in such universal
conclusions; nay, to assert that because some errors may be found in it, the
whole hereupon ought to be proscribed and deserted were alike mad and impious
practice, as immediately to bury that man whose toes are sphacelated, when an
expert Chyrurgeon by a mature amputation of the joints which are mortified may
preserve the life of his Patient; But I shall choose to deliver my sense in the
words of a learned Author, as I have throughout this Treatise done in matters
of Controversy, says the experienced Seidelius, Seidel. p. 133.
Nullus unquam morbus qui curatus art humana aliter curatus est quam juxta
veteris and verae medicinae fundamenta, methodumque; objicient hic statim,
nonne curavimus nos quamplurimos a vobis pro desperatis relictos? quibus
respondeo, nescire me illud, neque hactenus certo rem ita se habere comperisse,
praeter privatas enim praedicationes atque lauds and domestica testimonia in
conventiculis clandestinis ad libitum conficta levissime, aliud fide dignum
nihil auditu percepi; quot vero homines diris modis jugulaverint, de quo
publicis quorundam scriptis sunt accusati id altissimo silentio obruunt and
interim de quintis, atque arcanis essentiis immani precio Auri extractis
nugantur ut imperitis fucum faciant, etc. h. e. There was never any Cure
wrought by humane Art and skill which derived not its succesfulness from the
sure foundations and method of the ancient and true way of Medicine: but here
they will object, have not we recovered very many forsaken by you, I answer,
that I know no such matter, neither am I satisfied that what you speak is true,
for besides your vain boastings, self-commendations and forged Subscriptions
and Certificates made in your Conventicles, I perceived nothing that was
credible, but they are willing to conceal how many men by their most horrid
devices have been murdered, they crack of their Quintessential Medicines and
precious Extracts with design only to delude and cheat those who want capacity
to understand their impostures. This Author has afforded us such a description
of our Pseudochymical non-methodists, that I need say no more concerning them,
nor write a Comment when the Text is so plain and obvious, but because the
opposition both by M. N. and G. T. is made between the Writings of Galen and
Helmont; I am willing before I end this Chapter ( in which many things are
omitted) to show the difference between them according to the judgment of
Thonerus, whose authority in another case is allowed by M. N. says he, Thon.
epist. medic. p. 32.
Plaustris librorum carere facile poterit qui scripta Galeni sibi familiaria
reddiderit, dum omnes Authors exin velut e magno Oceano depromant and
hauriant, ut qui in Galeno non sunt versati, existiment ab eorum ingenio
profecta, suam hinc prodeuntes imperitiam dum omnia a Galeno sint mutuati, and
goes on, Quid esset ipse Helmontius, ni quicquid boni ex Galeni and Hippocratis
monumentis primitus deprompsisset, sed post omnia corrumpens and invertens suas
exin nectens argutias, malam rependens gratiam in eos retorsit, aquam veritatis
limpidam ex illorum font haustam suis sophismatis inquinavit, and totaliter
faeculentam reddere attentavit, fretus arguto and insolenti genio: h. e. He
needs no Library who is well versed in the Writings of Galen, from whom all
Authors as from the Ocean derive their streams, and they who have not read
Galen conceit what notions they broach are the products of their own brain and
invention, betraying their ignorance, when Galen was the Author of those
Opinions; and what is Helmont if stripped of the most considerable truths, which
he transcribed out of Hippocrates and Galen? and at length he corrupted them,
introducing his own whimsies, like an ungrateful person illy requiting them who
informed him in Medicinal knowledge, sophisticating their sincere doctrines,
being of a subtle and insolent temper.

It may be expected that I should vindicate the Doctrines of Critical days and
Pulses (which are opposed by M. N. But since that nothing is brought against
them worth observation or an answer, and considering also that these are not of
such concernment to Patients as to Physicians, who daily experience the
usefulness thereof in their Profession, and can discern the motions and
concoctions of the peccant and morbifick matter, as also the strength by the
Pulse, and what other information they can afford, as also that this Innovator
who measures the knowledge of others by his own, has effected nothing by his
pains; so until something to better purpose without the mis-interpretations and
abuses of Authors is offered, I think my self excused from particular replies
to his most impertinent Cavils.

CHAP. VII. Of the Pseudochymists pretended Panacaea, or universal Medicine.
AMongst the vainglorious boastings of the Pseudochymists, there is no
pretense so universal as their acquirement of a Panacaea to cure all Diseases,
generally deceiving hereby all those who through too much credulity become
their Patients: for not to repeat what has been already said concerning the
incurableness of some Diseases, or to add a discourse of the inhability of
Subjects and of other Impediments which may frustrate the highest and most
probable attempts of Curation, it does not appear to a rational Inquirer that
there can be any such Medicine which in respect of its puissance can infallibly
vanquish all the enemies of man's health: the great disagreement of Authors
about the matter of this Panacaea sufficiently expresses their uncertainty,
conjectural suppositions, or fond hopes in relation to their attainment of it,
whilst some place it in the essence of individual Vegetables, Animals, or
Minerals, choosing those which are most energetical, and fancying that the more
incorruptible part of these being by Art separated from all terrestrial
impurities, and advanced to the condition of the Heavens, is the true Phaleia,
and as one commends it, Poterit vitam servare and quodamodo producere and tum
ratione similitudinis quam habet essentia haec cum calore insito, tum quia est
quodamodo quoddam incorruptibile and temperatum omnibus morbis medicamentum
esse contrarium: h. e. Such an essence is not only powerful enough to preserve
life, but to prolong it, and because of its likeness to and correspondence with
our innate heat, as because of its incorruptibility and temperature overcomes
all Diseases: But should it be granted that the Principles constituting that
body from which this essence is drawn were Catholic, yet when once they are
firmly linked together, and most intimately united, their artificial resolution
may possibly alter the individuum, or substitute another particular product,
but not reduce it into its original universality; and however some Individuals
are of a more durable nature then others, and these are used to imprint their
perpetuity on bodies more subject to putrefaction, yet such essences being
capable of change by that body into which they are received, do lose their
supposed universality in operation. The History related by Crollius, That he
saw a man with one drop of a certain spirit from a dying condition in the space
of one night perfectly restored to health, the celestial heat of that Medicine
being immediately communicated to the heart, and soon after diffusing its rays
throughout the body, This, I say, and such like Histories do not prove the
effect of it in all Diseases, or evidence that the preparation of an Individual
may not perform as difficult a Cure; I know that some conclude that by the same
rule an Individual especially if essentiated may change the body from a
diseased state to a condition of perfect health, as that which is poisonous may
cause such a sudden alteration, as that the person who even now was well, may
quickly expire by reason of its destructiveness, but such venom has the
advantage on the bodies proneness to putrefaction, and may sooner dissipate the
spirits which are upon the wing, then the other fix them or illuminate their
darkness; so that what promotes the effect of the one is the greatest
impediment imaginable to the other: I deny not that an Individual may remedy a
particular Disease, and notwithstanding the proneness of our Nature to
corruption, act so vigorously as to cure a threatening distemper, and I suppose
that very many have seen as much done by Laudanum; and other Medicines, as
Crollius mentions in that Patient, but yet it were a vain conclusion to infer
that such an essence, or that Laudanum would hereupon cure all Diseases and
perform the like impossibilities as are spoken of the Panacaea; no person can
be ignorant of the Experiments made on Gold, because it (as many think)
contains in it all necessary conditions to the universal Medicine which I need
not recount; but unless something is performed by the Diaphoretical virtue of
the Menstruum, no wonders have been wrought by it, so that Billichius calls
Aurum potabile, aurum putabile; since that all true Philosophers in their
Preparation of their Medicinal stone did not mean the common Gold, but that of
the Philosophers, as they misspent their pains who sought out dissolvents to
make our Gold potable in expectation of making thereby the Elixir, so it would
be to as little purpose to discourse the possibility of gaining a Dissolvent
not corrosive to elicite its medicinal tincture which at length will satisfy
only a particular intention.

The hyperbolical Encomiums which have been given to the essences of
Individuals, might easily delude those who approve all things according to
their commendations; and doubtless in many respects such noble preparations
might deserve a just esteem: but the more prudent and wary of the Hermetical
Philosophers Multi sunt qui ex particulari materia medicamentum
universalissimum clicere volunt frustra tamen omnia fuisse experientia
attestatur universalissimum siquidem ex universalissimo elici debet.
observing the absurdity to expect an universal operation from a limited Agent,
did busy and employ themselves to find out the universal matter which is so
enygmatically discoursed in the Writings of Chemical Authors, as if they rather
designed to encourage Humane Industry in the search after that which for no
other cause they would seem to have known, then give them any hopes of
interpreting and unriddling their most obscure, perplexed, and mysterious
descriptions of it, says one, Fove fodeam usque ad genua and accipe terram
nostram in qua est rivulus and unda viva scilicet universale menstruum and
aquam nostram ponticam, in qua habitat sal armoniacum nostrum, and spiritus
vivus universi qui omnia in se continet: h. e. Dig a Pit knee deep, and take
our earth in which is a living stream, viz. our universal Menstruum, and take
our Pontike water in which is found our Sal Armoniack, and the universal spirit
which contains all things in it; and says Bacon, Elegant rem supra quam
Naturae tantum primas operationes incepit: h. e. Such a matter must be chosen
on which Nature has only done her first work. He who is acquainted with the
parabolical expressions of the Ancients relating to this Subject, will be
convinced that although they who write best, hint a necessity of some universal
matter which may yield by a Philosophical Preparation a most noble Medicine to
cure Diseases, may yet apprehend their dissentions about this matter, and the
improbabilities of others finding it out by their direction; but if I should
grant that the true Sons of Art might rightly understand the Ancients and gain
the knowledge of the universal matter, yet in regard that there is not an
universal intention in the cure of Diseases, I cannot see of what use it can be
in Medicine; to comfort the Archaeus and to garrison the heart which is the
Royal Fort with invincible virtues, answers only a particular intention: That
all Diseases do spring from one root is only the supposition of some who would
patronize this Panacaea, whereas others more rationally inform us that Sanity
consists not in indivisibili, but that different members in the body enjoy a
different Sanity, and having a diverse complexion, conformation, and operation,
stand in need of a variety of Medicines to cure their distinct and sometimes
contrary Diseases: What though there sometimes happens a Metastasis of the
Morbifick matter, which varying its seat alters the symptoms according to the
parts in which it fixes, it is not proved that hereupon what opposed it in one
part is as proper and applicable notwithstanding the remove as before, and that
in curation no particular respect ought to be had to the parts constitution
which is affected; it may be, that before the Metastasis 'twas convenient to
use Diaphoreticks, and afterward if the matter lodges in the breast, what may
evacuate it by promoting expectoration, if in the lowest Ventricle Catharticks
or Diuretics which may discharge: he certainly knows little of the causes of
Diseases who discerns not their difference in respect of the vessels or parts
which they seize or most afflict, whereupon the Methodus medendi is to be
altered, I need not enumerate the several causes of Diseases which the
Galenists reckon, but content my self with an observation that the best
Chemists do account two grand Causes of the constant alteration in man's body,
disposing it to Diseases and death, which are the consumption of radical
moisture and the putrefaction of humors; it is therefore incumbent on the
Pretenders to a Panacaea, to prove that by the same Medicine they can prevent
this putrefaction of humors, and hinder the consumption of radical moisture:
The Universalists have been very sollicitous to appropriate to their Medicine
such virtues as might answer the indication both of a drying virtue to
withstand and resist putrefaction, and of moisture or unctuosity to supply the
decaies and spendings of natural heat, and therefore they assert that their
Panacaea in respect of its activity and solar heat does brighten, fortify, and
increase our innate heat, and hereby evaporates and dissipates all Morbifick
Meteors which otherwise would stagnate and putrify, in respect of its
substance is oleagenous fixed and incombustible, aptly recruiting any loss or
spending of the radical moisture: It this Panacaea can certainly do what is
pretended, it may seem strange that they who were esteemed Possessors of such a
Medicine, did not defend themselves and their Patients from the disease of Old
Age, and from Death; for Old Age creeping on gradually, may more probably be
opposed then violent Diseases, but when its apparent that neither in themselves
nor others they were able to stop the course of old age and disappoint the
stroke of death, they would excuse their Art and Medicine by blaming some great
neglects whilst they were young, and tell us that if they had then taken such
a Medicine it might have effected much in the prolongation of life; but others
well pondering the Virtues attributed to it Unde fit restauratio corporum per
morbos debilitatorum prompte and perfect ea curans and postea juventutem
primumque vigorem diminutum and per frigidum annorum acconitum fere extinctum
restituens: h. e. It is sufficient to restore the decaies of men's bodies, most
expeditiously and perfectly helping all Diseases, changing the ruins of old
age into youthfulness. These (I say) being convinced by experience that such
empty vaunts of the Panacaea are ridiculous, do otherwise state the business
and make little difference between the Polychresta of the Galenists and these
more noble Medicines, and if the Panacaeas which have been or at present are
pretended to in the World are duly examined, they undoubtedly will be found to
answer some more general intention, and by no means deserve the appellation of
universal Medicines in the common and known sense and notion of the term, I
might instance in Begwins preparation of Vitriol, Quercitanus of Antimony, etc.
But above all others Andwaldins Panacaea in the highest esteem, which as
Hoffman relates in Sherbius's judgment was poisonous, and another Author gives
us a more accurate account of it, Thon. epist. med. p. 14.
Panacaea Anwaldina summopere in propulsandis morbis decantata eum effectum
assecuta est, non tam Naturam confortando quam vi diaphoretica operando quam
Libavius per (...) ignis probavit and deprehendit concinnatam ex hydrargyro and
Cinnabari quae duo mineralia nullam corroborandi facultatem obtinent: h. e.
Anwaldins universal Medicine of such fame for its wonderful effects in the cure
of Diseases did not operate by comforting Nature but by provoking sweat, and
Libavius examining it by Pyrotechny detected that it consisted of Mercury and
Cinnabar which have no corroborating virtue in them.

Every true Chemist who is acquainted with artificial either simple or compound
Preparations especially Mineral, very well skills their efficacy in the
satisfaction of either general or particular intentions as they are skilfully
applied, these know that a just mixture of Mercury, Antimony, and Gold, or apt
Chemical Compositions will do more in the curation of some Diseases then either
of them in like manner singly prepared and given, but to conceive that any
Medicine can keep off old age, and by the same way cure all Maladies, is an
opinion which no sober person did ever entertain; if then by a Panacaea is only
signified any noble preparation which respecting some general intention which
in the curation of Diseases is observable, it is not improbable but that the
true chemical Physicians do not only assent to them, but are furnished with
some as powerful as any yet known in the world; for we must grant that the
Polychresta of the Chemists do infinitely excel those of the Galenists, but yet
it is considerable that even those Authors who are famed to be Masters of these
Panacaeas, did in most cases both use for themselves and others Galenical
Medicines as they had occasion, or the known Rules of Art required.

But our Pseudochymists it may be by purchase obtaining one of these noble
Preparations, and not understanding the true use of it do in hopes of custom
proclaim the Virtues of their Medicine, as if it would most speedily and
certainly cure all diseases, strengthening the Archaeus, to whose error and
debility they adscribe all the several affections of man's body, and enabling
Nature to discharge her self by the most convenient ways according to the
condition and quality, or seat of the Morbifick matter, and if all manner of
evacuations or most of them can be caused by the same Medicine then a proof (as
they suppose) is given of the wonderful efficacy of their Medicine, and a
notable stratagem devised to seduce them that are most pleased when they are
under the hand of a cheating Montebank: hence it is that one cries up his
Mercurial preparation, another his Antimonial remedy, a third spirit of Salt
which is diuretical, and almost every Pseudochymist would be accounted the
Inventor or Professor of one; but methinks people should be better advised then
to give ten shillings for a grain, or five shillings for a drop of that which
being either illy prepared or mis-applied, more universally kills then cures,
and stake their lives against the brags of such Empericks, Creed and salvus
eris, promissis certa fides, nam
Cum te interficient morb^ curaberis omni.


Believe, all is well, trust them, there word is sure, In killing thee they work
a perfect Cure.

Although I have pretermitted very much which might be said on this Subject,
yet I hope that it is sufficiently made out that there is no Panacaea to cure
all Diseases in the vulgar acceptance of the word, and as a confirmation of my
Assertion I shall produce the testimony of Angelus Sala, with whose words I
conclude, Angel. Sal. de Chrysol. p. 422.
Quis non vanitatem eorum agnoscat qui vel ipsi persuasissimum habent, vel
aliis persuadere conantur esse in rerum natura vel artis beneficio confici
posse medicamentum quod instar universalis cujusdam universalissimi nullis vel
limitibus, vel terminis circumscriptum, non tantum qualitates elementares
aequali proportione commensuratas in se contineat, sed and omnibus insuper
proprietatibus specificis quae vel ex varia illarum commixtione, vel a certa
aliqua praedestinatione oriuntur, abundantissime dotatum sit? quod suppresso
calore suo jam refrigerare possit, jam humectare, sicut exiccandi potestate
nihil damni faciat, jam adstringat, jam incrasset and contrarias interim
facultates plane occultetquod idem interdum pervomitum, interdum per fecessum
purget, sudores cieat, urinam provocet, venenis tanquam Alexiterium resistat,
somnum conciliet: denique ut in unum omnia conferam omnes alios effectus quos
causarum morbificarum tam particularium quam universaliu^ diversitas requirit
omni tempore and loco, in omni sexu, aetate, complexione and personarum
constitutione praestet, omnibus adeo infirmitatibus medeatur, ac nulla unquam
ratione corpus offendat? h. e. How conspicuous is their vanity who either
believe themselves or would persuade others that either Art or Nature can
produce any Medicine which shall be empowered with the operations attributed to
the most universal Medicine being unconfined and boundless in its efficacy, not
only containing in it all the elementary qualities in exact proportion, but
endowed with all Specific proprieties flowing from their mixture or essence,
which notwithstanding its heat can sometimes cool and sometimes moisten, not at
all suffering in its drying virtue, can adstringe or bind and incrassate, and
in the mean while conceal its contrary faculties, that now can vomit, anon
purge, sweat, prove Diuretical, become an Antidote against poison, and cause
sleep; and to say no more, can certainly remove and take off all effects
flowing both from the diversity of universal and particular Causes at all
times, in all places, Sexes Ages, Complections, different Constitutions, curing
all these Diseases without any prejudice to the Body?

FINIS.
A Letter to the Author FROM a Person of Quality.
SIR,
YOur most wonderful preservation during your late employment of visiting the
infected families within the City of LONDON and Liberties thereof, has justly
provoked all your friends in our Country to congratulate your success in that
great and hazardous undertaking; you have doubtless by a faithful discharge of
your Duty as a PHYSICIAN in that adventure, when few were free to engage in
such service, highly meritted of those Honorable persons on whose behalf you
endangered your life, and no less obliged all ingenuous persons to esteem your
worth:

Sir, You may easily suppose how big we are with expectation to receive from
your hand, an Account of what Remarkably happened in this severe Visitation; your
promptness to give rational satisfaction, especially in most perplexed Cases,
wherein Difficulty promotes the Birth of your happy Products, is the only
argument I shall use inviting you to this task; be pleased also to acquaint me
in your next what is become of them who assume liberty to qualify themselves
Chemical Doctors, in opposition to the KINGS COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS in LONDON;
I crave pardon for this interruption of your more weighty business, and shall
earnestly expect your answer, which will be most acceptable unto

Sir, Your humble Servant C. W.

The Authors Answer.
SIR,
YOur candid acceptance of the Observations, which I have made on this P^st, is
a most prevalent argument to encourage the communication of them in answer to
your desire: But before I engage in this task I must crave your pardon, if I
proceed not in that method, which is requisite in an exact Treatise; for in
this brief answer I can only point out cursorily some discoveries, which
doubtless will be improved by your most sagacious judgment.

To omit therefore all those most obvious notions of the Pest in general
occuring in every Author writing on that Subject; I shall confine my self to a
particular disquisition of the peculiar nature of this Plague as severe as any
recorded in our Annals.

That LONDON or other Populous places are seldom free from Malignant and
Pestilential diseases, is confirmed by the long experience of able Physicians,
who find that Humors upon several occasions acquire a venenate Quality, and
hereupon prove most pernicious; it is not pertinent to my business in hand to
state the Question; Whether such Ferments are sometimes generated in man's body,
which may be exalted to a condition aemulous of the most exquisite poisons, or
of the PEST it self? hence is it that some term such putrified humors,
Arsenical, aconital, etc. as they seem to correspond in operation with such
Poisons, I may without all dispute affirm, that where the Pest meets with
matter so prepared, it more inevitably destroys.

The highest degree of malignity flowing from the putrefaction of congested
humors, however it may be most fatal to the body, wherein it was produced,
being yet but the effect of a private cause, is limited at most to an
hereditary propagation, and cannot be imagined the Original of Epidemical
diseases, especially of the Pest, whose original is adaequate to its effects:
but in regard the cause of the Plague is most mysterious, and not yet hitherto
plainly discovered, most Writers after a disappointment in there scrutining the
Series of natural causes, do betake themselves to supernatural, and acknowledge
a (...) in this disease: I cannot think that because God does frequently send
out the Plague as his severe judgment to punish mankind, we ought wholly to
desist from all manner of search into natural causes, on the knowledge of which
depends the Cure, procured both by our devotion, and the commanded use of
natural means.

Amongst Natural Causes the Conjunctions of some Planets, Eclypses, Comets, and
such like appearances in the Heavens, are by many accused as the Authors of the
Plague, and upon this account some addicted to Astrology observing such
appearances the forgoing year, have confidently asserted that our Pest was the
issue of those malevolent influences; I shall not at present determine how far
these have contributed to the spreading, if not the Original of our Plague, but
passing by all other opinions, deliver my thoughts touching its rise.

After a most strict and serious inquiry, by undoubted testimonies I find that
this Pest was communicated to us from the Netherlands by way of Contagion, and
if most probable relations deceive me not, it came from Smirna to Holland in a
parcel of infected goods, whether it began there, or in any other place being
unresolved, I shall not entangle my self in a conjectural discussion of its
Cause, or give a tedious narrative of the nature and effects of Pests in those
hot Countries; give me leave to hint, that the same Pest grassant in diverse
Regions of a different temperature, may so much vary in its Phaenonema, that it
may seem totally changed, which I premise least our Plague should be judged of
another nature from that in Smirna or Holland, because its Symtomes are not
exactly the same in all these places.

Before I proceed, I must advertise that the Pest, does complicate with most
maladies which happen during its grassancy, especially such as are Contagious,
every little disorder at such times (which I might confirm by many examples)
turning to the Plague, and infectious diseases more nearly combining, and
symbolizing with it: hence I collect that the Scorbute being popular and
Epidemical in Holland, the Pest when it fell in with it, did very much partake
of its nature, which afterward invading this Kingdom gave ample testimony by
its Symptoms of this Association; in which condition I shall throughout this
discourse consider it: if then the Pest by reason of its most subtle and
excessive venenate nature is most feral and destructive, when it conforts with
another Ferment most powerfully (though not so suddenly) corrupting the juyces
of our bodies, how Prodigious must be the issue!

As I have designedly waved at present to deliver my Theory concerning this
PEST, so I upon the same account do forbear to intermeddle with the Hypotheses
of others, but because the Learned Kirchers late experiments have put most
inquisitive searchers into sensible truths upon the quest to discover that
animated matter in the Air mentioned in his treatise of the Pest, I shall
transiently deliver my observations touching this particular: I must
ingeniously confess, that notwithstanding my most careful and industrious
attempts by all means likely to promote the discovery of such matter, and that
I have had as good oppertunities for this purpose, as any Physician; it has
not yet been my happiness (if such minute insects caused this Pest,) to discern
them, neither have I hitherto by the information of credible testimonies
received satisfaction in this point; whereupon I infer, that in regard Pests
are of a different nature, though I allow that famous Authors experiments in
that Plague at Rome, yet it follows not that ours was caused by the like
production of Worms or Insects, as some have rather fancied then demonstrated.

The consequences of putrefaction are so well known by an ordinary inspection
into the transactions of Nature, that the production of Worms and various
Insects upon this account may not be rightly judged a new discovery,
considering especially, that malignant diseases do not less then the Plague
evidence putrefaction by such products; indeed amongst all that vast number I
conversed with during the Visitation, I noted very few to have either vomited
Worms, or by unerring symptoms to have given an indication of verminous matter
lodged in any part of their bodies, I only had a relation of one, who in
vomiting threw up a strange figured insect, which appeared very fierce, and
even assaulted such as were busy to observe it, whereupon it was crushed by a
rude hand, so that its shape is not very discernable; but it is as absurd from
such a particular instance, to draw a general conclusion, as to argue from
private causes to universal effects.

Since that the Nature of this Pest in relation to its primary cause is most
obscure, we cannot more surely arrive at the knowledge of it, then by the
discoveries it makes of it self in propagation; when therefore I do well ponder
the wonderful energy of Pestilential effluviums, which can instantaneously
imprint indeleble characters on bodies before found and healthful, and conform
them to the like efficacy in contagious communications, I am induced to think
that its principles are chiefly saline, which appears by its activity and
power; I need not produce examples to illustrate the inexpressible vigor of
these Ferments, it being well known that many have dyed without the least sense
of Contagion or apprehension of illness thereby: it is reported by such who
have seen experiments of the poisoned darts in India, that a fleshy part being
pricked or scratched with them, the person so hurt, is not only killed in very
few moments, but his body is so putrified, that one limb falls from the other;
the like is written of some Pests in hot Countries by which some places have
been depopulated, whether any poisons artificially prepared do in power and
activity excel the Pestilential tincture which is animal, is besides my
business at present to decide.

I come in the next place to the manner of the Pests invasion, which is
unanimously agreed on to be by Contagion, viz. When venenate expirations are
transmitted from infectious bodies to others working a like change and
alteration in them; whereupon I conclude, that no person is seized with the
Plague except he receives into his body these Pestilential effluxes, which
however they do more effectually infect by how much nearer the bodies are, yet
it is not to be doubted but that at a very considerable distance where no
person is sick, these most malignant corpuscles being carried in the motion of
the Air, may so preserve their venom, as to surprise such bodies amidst their
greatest securities; and I am apt to think that such effects are oftimes
appropriated to imagination, the operations of which can easily ferment the
juices of the body, and raise Symptoms not unlike those of the Pest; I was
called to three or four affected after this manner, whose conditions at first
did seem as bad as theirs who by reason of abode with some laboring of the
Sickness most apparently took the infection, but upon a strict inquiry into
these cases, I addressed my self with success to settle the fancies and bodies of
such Patients; whence I opine that Pestilential and poisonous emissions or
ferments (as I noted before) do solely contribute to the spreading of the
Contagion.

Notwithstanding that infection is so apparent in the Pest, yet some have
lately in their discourses and pamphlets, argued that it is not Contagious,
such persons deserve rather the magistrates censure then my refutation: the
Order published by Queen Elizabeth was in those days the most proper expedient
to suppress that opinion, which is not otherwise now then by Authority to be
silenced: these ground their hypotheses upon the escape of some persons who
converse with the infected, but this proof is not admittable as sufficient,
because there are very many causes why such bodies are not equally obnoxious to
Contagion as others; for besides the particular Providence of God who is
pleased to protect some in the same danger in which others do perish, the
security of such persons may be attributed to the shape of their pores not
admitting pestilential atoms of a disproportioned figure, or vigor of the
spirits to expel this enemy before he can fix in their bodies, certainly such
persons might as rationally affirm that Bullets will not wound and kill,
because some in the hottest battails amidst showers of small shot walk untoucht
by any of them, when as these escape rather upon the account of the various
happy postures they are in during the charge, then their fancy of being
shot-free.

These infectious irradiations flowing from bodies inflamed with the Pest, as
they constantly issue out by transpiration, and other more open passages, so
they diffuse their malignity accordingly as they are more or less subtle and
spiritual; if therefore the snuff of a candle, which emits a gross and visible
fume, can in few moments so taint the circumambient air in a large room, so as
to render it most offensive to our smell; certainly Pestilential exhalations by
very many degrees more fine and subtle, can insensibly and beyond such narrow
limits spread their poison, corrupting the air, and making it pernicious to
bodies disposed to receive such impressions; the motion of these malignant
corpuscles cannot by any help be discerned, neither can any account be given of
their sent as some do vainly imagine: touching the steam of infected bodies, I
confess that when Buboes are opened, Carbuncles cast off their Eschar, the
Pestilential emanations being imbodied in grosser vapors issuing from such
sores, may possibly be hereupon sensible to the Nose, as in opening other
impostumes, and dressing common sordid ulcers is evident; the like reason may
be given of their vomitings, stools, and sweats; hence it is that some have
perceived the moment of their seizure, which sent they could not otherwise
express, then by a cadaverous, and as it were a suffocating stanch; but
(although I have been very inquisitive in this particular) I may confidently
aver, that not one in two hundred has been apprehensive by sent of the
infection, the venenate particles communicating their malignity in a way
imperceptable to our Senses.

How these Pestilential effluxes do operate on man's body comes next under
consideration, supposing that the infection has newly insinuated it self, the
blood and juices do immediately receive the Alarm as being to undergo the
first assault; the blood in some by the deleterious quality of the poison in
few moments is mortified, not unlike what happens in the death of such who are
killed by lightning; in others the blood is forthwith put into a fermentation,
either higher or lower according the state of the blood before infection, or
the condition and degree of the Contagion, on which also depends the depuration
of the blood producing Blaines, Buboes, and Carbuncles, and such patients
except something accidentally intervens to contraindicate for the most part
escape, but most commonly in this fermentation the blood coagulates in fewer or
more vessels, and according to the dissolution and discharge of these grumous
parts before further putrefaction, the condition of such persons is more secure
or dangerous, if the coagulation increases, a period at length is put to the
bloods circulation; lastly, the blood does sometimes suffer a Fusion, for when
the sulphurous parts are consumed, the Pestilential tincture proves a
Dissolvent, and destroys the fibers of the blood, not only by way of liquation
making it most fluid, but corrupting its saline particles: I have observed that
such blood in Hemorrhages would not coagulate, but remained like a tinctured
ichor, the reduction of such blood to its former state being impossible the
case of such Patients was most desperate, medicines affording not the least
ease or relief: the nervous liquor did also share in this common calamity, and
according to its quality suffered as great and many alterations as the blood:
In fine those juyces and parts of the body did principally suffer in this Pest,
in which the Scorbute first discovers its self, but I shall have occasion to
discourse this more at large in another place.

Before I proceed to the Symptoms of this distemper, it may not seem
impertinent transiently to give some remarkable observations which occurred in
the propagation of this disease; as that the infected, were commonly seized
after the same manner, and generally had the like issue in respect of a
recovery, or death as those from whom they took the Contagion, except any thing
happened extraordinary in the case of one more then the other, so that the
effects of the Plague not only in relation to the number of Buboes, Blaines,
or Carbuncles, but the part and place, did abundantly evince its peculiar and
strange designation: Physicians in their practice do frequently meet with
Pestilential ophthalmie's, Angina's and Pleurisies, which (as some express it)
specifically communicate their malignity, but these diseases are fixed in this
course afflicting always after the same manner all those to whom they are
imparted; whereas although there has appeared a great variety in this Pests
propagation in respect both of it self and the subjects it meets with, yet
notwithstanding all this difference, there has been noted a tendency in the
malignant corpuscles, as acting by a natural impress, idea or signature to
produce their like without any assistance of the fancy, or more immediate
disposition of such parts to those particular disafections.

Furthermore, that opinion that the Pest invades no person a second time, if
his sores at first sufficiently discharged purulent matter, is now plainly
confuted by two many experiments during this sad Visitation; I have known many
who although all things succeeded well the first and second time, and each cure
was perfected, yet the third seizure upon the account of a new infection, and
not a relapse has proved fatal to them; some this last year fell the fifth,
others the sixth time, being before very well recovered, each of these
invasions I supose was not only from an higher degree of malignity, but a
diverse complication of the Pest, besides nature being much weakened by
preceding assaults, was thereupon more unable to make her defense: such
therefore who by Gods blessing, and the use of proper remedies are restored to
health, may by these examples be duly cautioned, not to run unnecessarily
(according to the practice of some) into infected houses, presuming that their
condition is more safe then others.

The Symptoms of this Pest were many, but I shall content my self, to set down
such as were most common and notorious; most persons upon their first invasion
by the Sickness perceived a chilness to creep on them, which produced in very
short space, a shivering not unlike the cold fit of an Ague, which shivering
was doubtless an effect of the pestilential ferment insinuating it self into
the blood and juices of the body, and rendering them either sharp, pungitive,
or so corrupt by its venerosity that hereupon there happens a vellication of
the nervous parts, whence proceeded convulsive motions; soon after this horror
and shaking followed a nauseousness, and strong inclinations to vomit, with a
great oppression, and seeming fullness of the stomach, occasioned by the poison
irritating the Ventricle, which being a nervous part, is and thereupon most
sensible of what will prove so injurious to it; the Pest did sometimes seat it
self in the stomach more eminently showing it self there in Carbuncles and
mortifications: a violent and intolerable headache next succeeded by reason of
the bloods tumultuousness and ebullition exceeding by distending its vessels
and convulsing them, hereupon some fell into a Frenzy, and others became
soporose and stupid, according to the quality and nature of the malignity;
afterward a Fever began to discover it self, without which no person escaped
during this visitation, when therefore the blood was thoroughly impregnated with
the Pestilential firment, then the blood fermented and the economy of the body
was violated, all parts both internal and external extremely suffering and
expressing their several conditions in this extreme agony upon the account
either of idiopathy or Sympathy. I shall not here dispute, whether the true
Pest is always accompanied with a Fever, I conceive that in some Pests, as
also in the highest degree of this, the several parts of the blood have
instantaneously been separated, there being no time for any ebullition; but
since that I undertake only to deliver my own observations, I must ingeniously
confess, that during this Pest, (except in the case of such who suddenly died)
I met not with any one Patient free from a Fever, which in some was more slow
and occult, in others peracute and notoriously apparent, as the blood did more
or less abound with sulphurous particles apt to kindle and be inflamed; and
more particularly I noted that those who were overrun with the Scorbute, and
afterward took the infection of the Plague, had a more obscure and remiss
Fever, so as it seemed many times very doubtful whether they labored of any
or no, which I cannot attribute to any thing else then to the state of their
blood by reason of its much abounding with a fixed salt, the like assertion
will hold true of the several other defects in the blood: in relation to the
paroxisms which were observed in this Fever, it is most certain that generally
there was some kind of remission so as that the Patients could easily find
their condition altered thereby, but these fits were altogether irregular and
uncertain, however they seemed in some much to resemble a double tertian, I
conceive those often exacerbations did proceed rather from the violent impulses
and prevalency of the malignity, then from any certain and set ebullitions of
the blood, yet in many when the virulency was expelled and spent, these fits did
keep and observe their types, and became either pure or bastard Tertians.

So soon as this Fever began to appear strange faintness seized the Patient,
which was seconded by most violent palpitations of the Heart; and hereupon many
have suspected that the Pest by a peculiar disposition most vigorously bends
all its strength to storm the Heart which is the most royal fort, but since
that we are well assured that the Heart does principally suffer by reason of
this heterogeneal matter mixed with blood, and circulating with it through this
noble part, I cannot think that the heart is otherwise injured, then in being
hindered in its office of animating, and inflaming the blood by its innate
ferment to perform its appointed stage of circulation, for if the Heart cannot
alter or overcome these pestilential ferments mixed with the blood, with its
utmost vigor it attempts to expel and dissipate them, and and if the poison of
the disease is so powerful as to destroy the ferment of the Heart, the blood
soon coagulates, the sequel of which is death.

Here I might particularly take notice of that strange lassitude which was very
observable in most affected with this scorbutical Pest, as well by reason of
the distention of the vessels, as the immediate mixture of the malignity with
the serous humors abounding in such bodies, but I shall not any longer insist
on the Symptoms which are common in Pestilential Fevers, but descend to those
diagnosticks which most peculiarly discover the Pest, as Blains, Bubo's,
Carbuncles and discolorations, vulgarly called tokens, of which briefly in
their order.

Blains, are pustles, or rather blisters, sometimes greater, or sometime less;
and for number, fewer or more, according to the quantity, or quality, of the
Pestilential matter segregated from the blood, and other liquors of the body by
their fermentation, these were obscurely incircled, and colored according to
the serous humor either flowing to, or discharged upon those parts where they
appeared, but as no place could plead exemption, so those parts were most
subject to these blaines which did lie nearest to this poisonous humor when it
was forced out; the liquor, contained in these blysters was of the same nature
with that which produced Carbuncles, but more diluted and dispersed, wherefore
the Pest was rightly judged not so dangerous where only blaines were
discovered, however if these grew numberless, as I observed in one, who from
head to foot was full of them; as the condition of that Patient was most
desperate, so a multitude of these blaines do indicate the excess of malignity,
and great hazard thereupon.

Bubo's are tumors of the glandules, if under the ear they are called
Parotides, others happen under the arms, and in the groin; Pestilential matter
in circulation with the blood being retained in these glanduls whereby they are
tumified and inflamed: that some persons without any sense either of the
Contagion, or any illness by it have complained of these tumors, must be
ascribed to the mildness of the malignity, having before upon others spent its
virulency; but most commonly these Buboes were an effect of the second sweat
promoted by proper Alexipharmical remedies, and such risings gave hope of the
Patients recovery; some of these tumors were indolent and hard continuing so
many months notwithstanding means either to discuss or suppurate them, and when
these were unadvisedly opened by incision, nothing else but an ichor gushed
forth, and the part wounded was very apt to mortify: but these risings were
generally so painful that most could not endure the fierce and frequent
lancinations, and the extreme burning they felt until the time of suppuration
approached, which upon this account was hastened by suitable applications of
Cataplasmes and Plasters: the number of these Buboes was not certain, some had
two, others three, many four, neither was their bigness limited, the risings in
some being very large, so as to equal an halfpenny loaf, in others not
exceeding an hens egg; very many of these tumors were discussed if the patient
at first submitted to effectual sweats, and if afterward they increased, great
care was taken to further their enlagement, and to break them, the Fever
usually going off and declining as these tumors ripened, and were fitted for
apertion; and here I must not omit, to intimate, that according to the
condition of the Pus discharged, these Buboes were more or less secure, but I
shall discourse more of these when I come to the method of curation.

A Carbuncle, is a Pestilential sore, appearing at first with a very small
pustle, and a circle about it of a red flaming color, which pustle either
opening, or rather the liquor in it being spent by the extreme heat of the
adjacent part, soon hardens and grows crusty, the incompasing inflammation
spreading it self, and by reason of the corrosive quality of the humor
cauterizing that place where it fixes: I have seen Carbuncles in most parts of
the body which proved more or less dangerous in respect of the part affected,
and the degree of the malignity; here I might produce innumerable cases which I
have met with during this Visitation, but I shall only relate two or three; I
was called to one Patient who had a Carbuncle within two or three fingers
breadth of a Bubo in the groin, though they were differently handled in
relation to the cure, yet the business succeeded very well; also one recovered
when there was a large Carbuncle directly opposite to the Heart, a third with
one in her breast, at the same time she gave suck, and the child discovered no
other infirmity then a looseness during his mothers cure; another was afflicted
with a large Carbuncle very near the bottom of the stomach, and she lived until
cicatrization, but then the malignity retiring within took her away; my
designed brevity in this answer forbids me to relate all necessary
circumstances in these histories.

Carbuncles are sometimes very large, I saw one on the thigh above two hands
breadth with a large blister on it, which being opened by the Surgeon, and
scarisication made where the mortification did begin, the Patient expired under
this operation; but most commonly these Carbuncles do not exceed the breadth of
three or four fingers, after few hours the skin shrivels into a crustiness of a
duskish or brownish color: at certain times and in some especially scorbutical
bodies these Carbuncles did mortify, and except timely care was taken by
immargination, scarifications or applications of actual Cauteries, the Gangreen
in few hours overspread that part, and destroyed the Patient; this most saline
corrosive humor was not easily and by ordinary means brought to digestion, and
consequently not without much difficulty cured, I shall not at present enlarge
on the accidents attending these Carbuncles, but proceed to the Tokens of which
in the next place.

These tokens are spots upon the skin of a diverse color and figure,
proceeding from chiefly extravased blood, which by reason of its stagnation
putrefies and produces such mortifications discoloring the skin, so then
those spots which are the true tokens, are profound mortifications caused by
the extinction of natural heat upon the account of highly prevaling malignity,
because many spots arising upon the skin were only cutaneous, and so far
imposed on many Searchers and unskilful veiwers of them that they declared them
to be true tokens, experiment was always made upon these discolorations by a
lancet or large needle to try whether that part so affected was sensible, if
not, then it was most apparent that such persons had those fatal marks upon
their bodies which were most certain forerunners of death, but if the Patient
did discover sense upon the pricking or incision, then such spots being only
cutaneous were not esteemed deadly, and I have seen very many recover who were
in this condition.

Anatomical observations have likewise informed us that these tokens have their
original and rise from within, and afterward externally show themselves, which
is evident because the basis of them is larger then their outward appearance,
and the internal parts are found very often spotted when there is no
discoloration visible on the skin: the figure of these tokens is not always
certain, but generally they are orbiculary shaped as I suppose by the pores, to
which the extravasated blood most readily tends, and for want of circulation
fixing there, corrupts; the pores thus closed up by any cold check, the
dyaphoresis whereupon the malignant corpuscles being retained in the body their
attempt to sally out proves unsuccesful, so that they cause a very great
putrefaction in the parts where they settle, and soon after, if a speedy vent
is not given, these tokens straightwaies appear, foreshewing the event of the
distemper, not to number up all those ways by which these deadly
mortifications are produced, I shall only assert that wherever these marks are
found, they evidently express a full conquest of natural heat by the highest
degree of malignity.

These tokens are not of one size or bigness, some being broader then a single
penny, others at first very small, by degrees enlarging and spreading
themselves, to the touch they seem hard, not unlike little kernels under the
skin the superficies being smooth, yet I saw one where these tokens put out
with little blisters upon them: very many were puzzled to distinguish aright
between these marks and the Petechiae pestilentiales, or pestilential
appearances in spotted fevers, as also Scorbutical spots frequently
interspersed amongst them, I have taken notice of many mistakes upon both these
accounts: some of our Mountebanking Chemists much vaunted of their in
comparable medicines effectual as was pretended to cure such who were
stigmatized with the tokens, when as they not for want of ignorance opinionated
those little rednesses like fleabites to be these true signs of the Pest, which
indeed were Scorbutical marks and soon vanished, and if other contracted fever
spots were discovered, though these with one sweat usually disappeared, they
concluded them to be nothing less then the tokens, and the removal of them an
absolute cure of the Plague in its worst condition.

The color of the Tokens was various, in some reddish with a circle inclining
toward a blue, in others they represented a faint blue the circle being
blackish, many were of a brownish dusky color, like rust of iron or moles in
some bodies; that the reddish and blackish tokens were from blood is most
evident, but whether the others might not proceed from the nervous liquor
extravasated, concreted, and mortified by the malignity, is more doubtful; when
I assayed to prove them, I found them almost impenetrable. I do at present
only mention this, that further experiment may be made by such who have fit
opportunities.

Although no part of man's body is secure from these most pestilential marks,
yet the neck, breact, back and thighs are most apt to them, but these things
are so vulgar that I may very well spare my pains in giving any further
account: that which did seem at first most strange to me, was that many persons
who had continued in a delirium throughout their sickness, so soon as the
tokens appeared, they came to themselves and apprehended that they were in an
hopeful and recovering condition, I might here relate two eminent stories,
which I can only without circumstances mention, one was of a maid whose temper
seemed good, her pulse equal and strong, her senses were perfect at that time
when I was called to see her, she complained of no disorder or pain, and
concluding her self secure, but when I veiwed her breast and discovered very
many tokens, I left her with a Prognostic, and within two or three hours she
died, not long after I visited an ancient woman and found her at dinner with a
chicken before her on which she fed greedily, and had eaten half before I came,
after a due inquiry into her case, finding no satisfaction either from her
pulse or temper I searching her breast observed the tokens, and she expired
within one or two hours: these clear intervals (as I conceive) did happen when
all manner of fermentations were ceased, the Pestilential ferment having gained
a complete victory, and quieted all oppositions which Nature made in order to
her preservation: that the tokens do sometimes appear after death, is to be
attributed to the high ferment in the pestilential matter which vainly seeking
to force its way through the skin, imprints there indeleble characters of its
excessive malignity: To these tokens I might add those oblong strokes like
lashes discovered on the backs of some, but because I saw during the whole time
only one thus marked, and have not been informed of many, I suppose that these
are not common* however their cause is the same with the tokens, and they are
to be esteemed of the same consequence, the contiguity of these marks not at
all altering their nature or effect.

What is often mentioned in most Authors concerning the flexibleness of bodies
killed by the Pestilence, has not been confirmed in this Plague, for although
such bodies were not so soon rigid and stiff as those which dyed of chronical
or common acute diseases, yet due time being allowed, or if the bodies were
exposed to the cold air, there appeared no difference between them and others,
but I shall not hence conclude that in no Pests there is not to be found this
flexibleness.

The Prognostics in this Pest were very fallacious, for oftimes when all
things presented fair, and the Patient seemed past danger, on a sudden the case
was altered by the near approach of death, and on the contrary in some whose
condition upon many accounts was judged desperate, an unexpected change at a
dead lift happened, which gave full assurance of a speedy recovery, besides
considering that the Pest did primarily seat it self in the Spirits, it was not
easy to determine positively the success of their contest, for the spirits
which for a while were almost suffocated and extinguished being almost
over-powred with the pestilential venom, did frequently like the fire for some
time suppressed, break out into an aspiring flame and thereby evidence their
victory; and many times the spirits which maintained the combat very well the
first charge, by the second onset were utterly defeated; so that the
transactions of the spirits are not so certainly foreseen as the progress of
diseases fixed on any internal or external member of the body, the best
Prognostic is taken from the strength of the Patient under a skilful hand
directing a proper and methodical cure.

Before I come to the cure of the Pest, I shall say something touching the
great business of Preservation from it, nature instructs us that by all means
possible we preserve and safeguard our selves from all things prejudicial to
our lives, and Art has most happily by its discoveries furnished apt remedies
for this purpose, and the great success of proper and fit preservatives does
irrefragably plead from their use: in this answer I shall not publish any
prescripts, but only hint the intentions which are always to be observed in a
true and regular Preservation from the Plague.

Care in the first place must be taken to free the body from superfluous
humors, which may be a fit fomes for the pestilential ferment, this ought not
to be performed by violent catharticks but gentle and yet effectual
de-obstructing medicines, and then the noble parts must be corroborated, their
ferments and use maintained, and lastly the blood kept in a due and equal
briskness; and hereupon all Passions especially fear and anger are worthily
censured by Physicians as conducing much to the introduction of the Pest, a
moderate and wholesome diet must be cauteously observed, and no error committed
in the other things termed non-natural, to conclude the society of infected
persons is carefully to be avoided, for certainly it is an high presumption,
that because some preservatives are and have been effectual to secure some
persons, others taking the like Antidotes should thereupon adventure into the
utmost danger, as this opinion has cost many their lives, so I fear, if the
fire should break out again (which God forbid) some will be bold
notwithstanding the miscarriage of others, to attempt the like adventures.

The Therapeutick part comes next in order, but before I enter upon this
subject, if the scruple made by some whether the Pestilence is curable, was
grounded either on Authority or reason I would endeavor to remove it, for
however medicines do prove alike effectual to rescue all infected persons from
the jaws of death, mortality amongst people denoting the plague; yet since
that by Gods blessing and the care and skill of experienced Physicians very
many recover, these living testimonies do suffficiently evidence the absurdity
and great impiety of that suggestion; I rather think that a cogent argument may
be drawn from the deadly nature of this distemper provoking all persons
concerned to look out speedily for suitable help, especially considering that
dispondency is so considerable a promoter of the Pests fatality.

In relation to the cure of the Plague, all the intentions which offer
themselves must be diligently observed and truly answered, otherwise no better
account can be given of proceedings then what is produced by ignorant nurses,
or our pretended Chemists, who are arived at such an height of confidence, as
that by warranting simple people their lives in order to their entertainment
and thereupon advancing some rude and dangerous preparations not fitted to any
intention, they do surpass even the Pest it self in destructiveness: so soon as
any person finds or apprehends himself to be seized by the contagion (every
little illness in time of the Plague being justly suspected) it is advisable
that he forthwith do betake himself to his bed, taking warning by the
miscarriage of very many, who if they were not violently sick at first would
struggle with the disease, and vainly imagine by walking abroad in the fields
to overcome their distemper, until the best opportunities of applying remedies
were ircoverably lost; besides when the Patient is in that condition, nature
may more certainly show the ways she designs to expel the malignity and
discovering her deficiencies, directs the Physician who is always intent on
her motion to succor her by his Art: although it is found most convenient that
the Patient secure himself in his bed, yet it is not allowable that he sleep
until a check is given to the venenosity, indeed some not well advised finding
themselves drowzy, who perhaps were seized with a stupidness or dullness
signifying the worst quality of the Contagion committed themselves to rest, and
little thought that by calling in the pestilential matter from the habit of the
body and fixing it in the brain, such sleep was only preparative to their
deaths; if then any find themselves thus disposed they must be kept waking and
roused up by vesicatories their use, number, and places, the Physician who is
called in will advise; if the Patient vomits, judgment must be truly made
whether the stomach is clogged and loaded with undigested meat or fruit or
ought else taken unseasonably or immoderatly that may burden it, and become a
fit fomes for the Pest, if the stomach suffers upon this account by Carduus
Posset drink taken in a large quanity with Oxymel of Squills, not ascending
much higher it must be disburdened and cleansed, but if such vomittings are
only symptomatical, as indeed most were, proper remedies must be directed
which may stop those inclinations to vomit, and expel out of the stomach that
Pestilential matter which so strongly irritates, restoring likewise the ferment
of the stomach much weakened and injured by this means, for which purpose I
cannot too much commend the Fixed Salts of Wormwood, Carduus, Rue, Scordium,
Masterwort, etc. if likewise symptoms appear of the poisonous ferment fixing
in the bowels, and a Flux hereupon happens, it is not safe without a most
urgent cause to use Catharticks, least a dysentery ensue, and the pestilential
matter be drawn by such evacuations from the circumference to the center; our
ignorant, but bold practisers, not understanding either this or any other
danger in their desperate undertakings, have chiefly dealt in Emetocatharticks,
not regarding the sad event which generally attended such attempts, and acting
herein in opposition to the advice given by the College of Physicians in their
Book; these rash Medicasters not so much valuing the lives of the sick, as
their appearing in a contradictory way to the skillfullest and most learned
Society in Europe; and when these Chemical cheats have spent the Patients
strength by such evacuations, they immediately as to a refuge fly to
Narcoticks; and if the violent workings of such Medicines are a little quieted
thereby, and procured sleep alleviates somewhat, and refreshes, they applaud
their accomplishments until the approaches of death do too plainly manifest
their unpardonable abuse and delusion of people in the great concern of their
lives. But to return unto my business in hand, the chief intention in the cure
consisting in an early expulsion of the malignity, proper Alexipharmicks did
mostly contribute to this end, which by the expert Physicians skill were
adapted to the constitution and present condition of the Patient, their virtue
and power perfectly preventing the great danger threatened by delay or the use
of insufficient Medicines; for although in the Cure of other diseases a
progress from lower to higher and more prevalent processes is very allowable,
yet in the Pest where occasion must be taken by the foretop the slip of one
opportunity being infinitely disadvantageous, all true Sons of Art employed
their utmost abilities to select most proper Sudorificks, one Dose of which
might provoke a seasonable and effectual sweat whereby the blood and juices of
the body were depured and freed from that pestilential ferment with which they
were lately imbued; and since that this intention was chiefly to be observed
all other directions having respect unto it, Physicians were hereupon very
cautelous least they should by any means either divert nature from this course,
or prejudice her in such designments, hence was it that Phlebotomy was justly
censured as a matter of dangerous consequence in the Pest, by which the
fermentation of the blood was abated, the spirits took flight, and Nature
became so debilitated that she could no longer combat with her implacable
Adversary. I am not ignorant that in some Plagues bleeding has proved very
successful, but in this complicated with the Scorbute it was upon every account
inconvenient, the confirmation of which truth two many have sealed with their
lives, who being easily persuaded by ignorant practisers, did prodigally wast
Natures treasure, and soon were imprisoned in their Graves. It was also matter
of great deliberation, to determine, Whether in some urgent cases Glisters
might safely be administered least the poison of the distemper shall take
downwards, and the Diaphoreses be thereby interrupted; of such high concernment
it was to maintain a constant and free transpiration, which every fifth or
sixth hour, oftener or later, as there was just cause, was to be forced by
repetitions of remedies mightily promoting its expected success and benefit,
and here another grand difficulty arises, Whether during these sweats it is
convenient to nourish the Patient? Which I shall thus resolve, if by reason of
such sweats the Patient finds his condition to be bettered, his appetite not
much dejected, his thirst abated, and the paroxisme in declination, as also his
strength near spent, in such a case it is most advisable that the Patient be
often indulged Chicken-broath or what ever may recruit all losses of spirits in
the encounter, and by this means that person being refreshed, will be enabled
to undergo cheerfully the succeeding paroxisme and to continue his breathings,
but if all requisites showing the necessity of allowing nourishment, do not
concur, it is far better to abstain from this course, then adventure its
inconveniences which are so many that I may not at present recite them; such
Patients may by taking of Cordidials fit themselves for a more opportune season
of nourishment.

The continuance and length of such sweats were rightly measured by the
Patients relief and sufficiency of strength to bear them, but unless I should
state the several cases which happened in the Pest, it is impossible that full
directions can be given, especially considering that applications in Medicine
altogether relate to individuals, and therefore as there is a difference in the
same disease seizing many persons, so likewise not only various methods of
cure, but diverse Medicines are subservient to that end, upon which account I
forbear to set down the remedies, vegetable, animal and mineral, which were
used in the curation of this distemper.

Sir, it is now high time that I should make my Apology for this rude
entertainment of your with a most imperfect and confused discourse on this
subject; the truth is I have intentionally omitted very much which may seem
pertinent to this business, as to assign the reason why the poor were mostly
infected which I might have adscribed to the rotten mutton they fed on the
preceding Autumn preparing their bodies for the Contagion, their being crowded
in little rooms and close alleys, as also their unrestrainable mixing and
converse with the infected, and their great want and poverty notwithstanding
the Magistrates industrious provision for them, I have likewise forborne to
express the cause why children were most subject to the Plague and so many dyed
of it that it may be fitly called the childrens Pest; neither have I touched
upon the business of Amulets, though many suffered by such as were Arsenical,
and other things very significant are passed by, as nassalls, issues, fumes,
etc. nor have I particularly related any medicines or their designment, or
delivered the several ways to treat Patients in different conditions, relating
to the several complications with the Pox, Scurvy, etc. But all these
pretermissions may fitly serve to inform you of a design in hand to publish a
complete History of this PEST in Latin, which I hope will recompense the many
defaults in this account; to the end therefore that there may be no deficiency
in so great an undertaking, if legitimate Physicians, who have made
observations, specially our learned friends in your Country, would do me the
favor to communicate their notes, I shall own their kindness and faithfully
insert both their names and such observations. I am so well assured of your
candor that you will not measure that work by this loose and hasty Essay, penned
in an hurry and tumult of other businesses, in which great care is taken not to
prevent the novelty of those Histories and notions which will then be produced:
I shall not detain you with any more excuses, least I be forced to supplicate
for them also.

As to that part of your letter wherein you desire satisfaction concerning our
pretended Chemists, I can only make you this return, that the people are now
convinced of their designs, their most admired preparations proving altogether
unsuccesful, and their contrivances being chiefly bent upon more secret ways
and a shorter cut to gain estates, their intituling Medicines by strange names,
as the Quintessence animae mundi, oil of the heathen gods, etc and requiring
three pounds for a Dose, is a trifling and slow way to grow rich by, when as an
estate may be gained by giving one little but most effectual draught; now the
vulgar perceive the practice of the Philosophers by fire who can soon upon
advantageous accounts sublime men's souls, you will doubtless ere long have a
better and more particular information of their transactions, which I at
present forbear to recite.

These scandalous opposers of the College are now for ever silenced, since that
so many members of that most honorable Society have ventured their lives in
such hot service, their memory will doubtless survive time who dyed in the
discharge of their Duty, and their reputation flourish, who (by Gods Providence)
escaped: certainly the Magistrate will protect and suitably encourage all
legitimate Physicians who have appeared most ready to serve their Country in
the greatest exigency.

Worthy Sir, I am Your most faithful Servant, N. H.
MAY 8. 1666. From my house in Red Lion Court in Watlinstreet.
FINIS.

