THE Bristol-Narrative: OR, A JUST ACCOUNT OF THE Imprisonment and Death OF
JOHN THOMPSON, A Conventicling-Preacher there.

Given upon Oath by THOMAS HOBSON Gent. Keeper of His Majesty's Goal of
Newgate, within that City.

Wherein the Phanatick-Relations concerning his Usage and Death, are found
false and impudent.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid. M.DC.LXXV.

Imprimatur.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis, Jun. 1o. 1675.

THO. TOMKYNS.

IN regard that the turbulent Spirit of Phanaticism cannot promote its
Interest, or delude the People, unless they are made to have an ill opinion of
their Lawful Governors and Pastors, it has always had recourse to Forgery and
Lying, as its principal Sanctuary, defending it self, and endeavoring to
appear Innocent by other men's reproaches. Which has ever been the way of
upholding Faction; and (although it be most horribly detestable) has had its
dangerous designed Effects in a very great measure, while credulous men too
readily receive and countenance the Authors of malicious Relations. One Example
whereof we have in this, that is the occasion of this ensuing Narrative, which
his Lordship the Right Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Bristol has
permitted to be Published to undeceive those, who have been abused by the bold
and notoriously false Reports concerning Mr. Thompson's Imprisonment and Death.
For whereas it has by these men been commonly discoursed and affirmed, that
the said Thompson was by the Bishop's procuring thrown into a filthy Dungeon,
where the stench of the place, and of a Jakes near it, together with the want
of meat and drink, and other necessaries, had partly poisoned, partly starved
him to death; and that his Friends and Acquaintance were forbidden to
administer to him such things as he needed: The contrary is most true; he
having the command of the fairest Lodgings in the Prison, being never
unaccompanied or free from Visitants, and scarcely having intermission from
eating and drinking, until he had by a Surfeit (whereof he dyed) made himself
incapable of those pleasures to which he had been accustomed. The baseness of
these Arts, so unlikely to proceed from men professing so much zeal to
Godliness, the following Declaration, subscribed and sworn before the Right
Worshipful Ralph Olliffe Esquire, Mayor of the said City, will sufficiently
manifest.

BRISTOL. 1o Maii, 1675. Right Reverend Father in God, and my very Good Lord;
IN Obedience to Your Lordships Commands, and for my own Vindication from those
causeless Calumnies which the malicious industry of some evil Agents have
scattered far and near concerning me, and my Usage of the Nonconformist
Preachers committed to my charge and custody, as being Keeper of His Majesty's
Goal, I humbly crave leave to give Your Lordship this brief Narrative
following, viz.

On the Tenth of February 1674, Mr. John Thompson was committed by Ralph
Olliffe Esquire our Mayor, Sir John Knight Knight, and others His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace here, upon the Act of Parliament, made for restraining of
Non-conformists from coming into Cities and Corporations; to remain a Prisoner,
without Bayl or Mainprise, for Six Months.

The next day after his Commitment I offered Mr. Thompson (being a corpulent
man) the liberty and favor to walk upon the Leads, and take the fresh Air,
(which is not usually allowed to other Prisoners) which offer was by him
willingly embraced. I accompanied him thither, whence we took a prospect of the
City, and Country adjacent, and Mr. Thompson was pleased to declare the Air
there to be very wholesome; and he walked there several other times afterward
(being allowed the Keys for that purpose) as often as he pleased; he having
Company with him, and not being denied the enjoyment of the Society of any that
came to visit him.

But within three days after his Commitment he complained to me he was sick in
his Stomach, and said he would take a Vomit: I told him, I supposed a Vomit not
safe for him by reason of his corpulency, and therefore did, in some measure,
dissuade him from it. But by advice of Dr. Chancy he took a Vomit, which, as I
verily believe, did not work kindly with him: For, the Afternoon of the same
day wherein he took it, he complained to me that he was very Sick, and had a
great pain in his Head; which Distemper continued, and increased violently on
him till his Death, which was the 5th of March following.

The first four days of his Commitment he had for his Lodging the privarest
Chamber in the House, being no part of the Common Prison, but of the Apartments
belonging to my self, (as Keeper) and my Family, and the best Room that was
then void, and at my command, and had the company of his Wife till the Monday
after his Commitment, being the 15th of February; when Mr. Hardcastle and Mr.
Weeks were committed to my custody, for the like offense against the same Act.
Whereupon Mr. Thompson, Mr. Hardcastle, and Mr. Weeks, with several Friends of
theirs solicited me to spare them the largest, fairest, and most pleasant
Chamber in the Prison, which some of Your Lordships Servants well know to be
such.

This Room (though taken up by several other Prisoners, who lodged there before
Mr. Thompson's Commitment) I was willing on the request of Mr. Thompson, Mr.
Hardcastle, and Mr. Weeks, and their Friends, to procure the former Prisoners
to quit, and resign to them; which was accordingly done.

In this Chamber (having in it two large Feather-Beds, and furniture
answerable) these three Gentlemen were lodged, until that Mr. Thompson's
Sickness increasing, and his company proving more troublesome, Mr. Hardcastle
and Mr. Weeks desired to have another Chamber, wherein were two other
Feather-Beds; which was granted them, and they continued there till Mr.
Thompson's Death.

Mr. Thompson being dead, I caused an Inquisition to be taken, (as the manner
is) a Copy whereof Signed by one of the Coroners, I lately sent to Your
Lordship. During all this time of Mr. Thompson's Imprisonment, he was
Accommodated both in his Health and Sickness, with variety of all sorts of the
best Provisions and Wines our City affords; and with three Physician,, who
attended him in his Sickness, His Distemper whereof he dyed, was, as his
Physicians all agreed, a violent and malignant Fever; being dead, he was
decently interred in Christian Burial.

I had almost forgotten to acquaint Your Lordship of Andrew Gifford's
Commitment, who came in about ten days after Mr. Thompson, for the like Offense
as the rest.

And whereas it is reported that these Gentlemen were put into a Dungeon, and
denied necessary Provisions, and constrained to suck Liquor through a
Tobacco-pipe, and that this and such like Barbarous usage was through Your
Lordships order and direction: I utterly deny that any such usage ever was, not
was there any direction or order of Your Lordship, or any other for that
purpose.

But on the contrary, the Imprisonment of Mr. Thompson was, and that of the
other three is managed with so much Christian tenderness toward them, that
they were admitted to partake of all the Kindnesses their Friends were pleased
to heap on them; which consisted in daily entertaining them with all sorts of
the best Provisions and Wines. If I should tell Your Lordship what farther
Favors and Kindnesses these Prisoners have been indulged, since their
Commitment, I may possibly subject the Sheriffs (my Masters) and my self to
just Censure and Penalties; and therefore shall beg Your Lordships pardon, and,
in have, rest

Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, THO. HOBSON.
Thomas Hobson, Keeper of His Majesty's Goal of Newgate, makes Oath, that
whatsoever is contained in this and the three preceding sides of Paper, is in
substance true.

Tho. Hobson



Jurat' primo die Maii, 1675. coram me

RALPH OLLIFFE, Mayor.

