MATHE.'HALE Miles Capitalis Gustic de Banco Regis Ano 1681 For W. Shrowsbery
at the Sign of the Bible In Duck Lane
(...) sculp(...)


A DISCOURSE OF THE Knowledge of God, and of our Selves,

I. By the Light of Nature. II. By the Sacred Scriptures.
WRITTEN BY Sir MATTHEW HALE, Knight, late Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
in his younger time, for his private Meditation and Exercise.

To which are added A Brief Abstract of the Christian Religion; AND
Considerations seasonable at all Times, for the Cleansing of the Heart and Life.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed by B. W. for William Shrowsbery, at the Sign of the Bible in
Duke-Lane. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
IN the Publication of this Book I design for the Reader a double Benefit: 1. A
useful and profitable Book: 2. A clear Prospect into an Exemplary Life of a
very eminent and famous Person. The Book, I may be bold to say, is of it self
such; and yet I have good reason to hope that the great and known Worth of the
Author (which yet this very Book will further discover and demonstrate) and the
Esteem the World has always had of him, will make it more such. But lest I
should prejudice both it and its Author by unseasonably raising the Reader's
expectation, I must, to do Right and Justice to the Author, acquaint the Reader
with some particulars, fit for his notice and consideration concerning the
Author's Intention, his manner of Writing it, and the Work it self.

And, 1. I may with much Confidence, upon what I knew of the Author's mind and
design in general in all his Writings of this kind, and upon some Observations
peculiar to this, assure the Reader that it was not written with any Intention
or thoughts that ever it should be published. He had undoubtedly no other aim
or design in it, than what I have already mentioned in the Preface to the first
Volume of his Contemplations. He was a man who had an extraordinary faculty of
doing much in a little time: And yet did he as highly value, and was as great a
Husband of his time, as any man I have known or read of. But of no part of his
time was he more frugal, than of that which was set apart for Sacred Uses, that
none of that might be suffered to run waste: especially of the Christian
Sabbath or Lord's Day, he was most religiously observant, both in Public and
in Private, in his Family, and in his Study. And his religious Observation
thereof, did not only procure to himself (as he always believed) a special
Blessing upon his Employment of the rest of his time in his other Studies, and
Secular business, but has moreover produced (which he little expected) what
may prove of great use and benefit to many others. For that part of those days
which did intervene between Evening Sermon and Supper-time, he usually employed
in Pious Meditations: and having a very ready hand at writing, he usually wrote
his thoughts, that he might the better hold them intent to what he was about,
and keep them from wandering. This was his first and principal reason for it. He
had indeed some thoughts of some other Uses, that he or his might make thereof:
as, that afterward reviewing what he had written long before, he might see what
Progress he had made in the mean time; and possibly they might be of some use
or benefit to some of his Family: But what I first mentioned, was the first and
principal occasion and Motive to it. Of the shorter Discourses, I found diverse
of the Originals in the hands of his Children and Servants, and a great part of
the rest in a very neglected condition, till I persuaded, and prevailed with
him, to let them be collected and bound together in Volumes. But of these,
among which this was one, I am well satisfied, there were none which he
intended when he wrote them should ever be Printed, though he has since wrote
others which he intended for the Public. But upon this occasion has he
written first and last many pious and useful Discourses, which, whether
intended by him for the Press or not, I am of opinion may do much good in the
World, if they were printed.

2. His usual Manner of writing these things was this: When he had resolved on
the Subject, the first thing He usually did, was with his pen upon some loose
piece of paper, and sometimes upon a corner or the margin of the Paper he wrote
on, to draw a Scheme of his whole Discourse, or of so much of it as he designed
at that time to consider. This done he tap'd his thoughts and let them run, as
he expressed it to me himself; and they usually ran as fast as his hand (though
a very ready one) could trace them; insomuch that in that space, as he has
told me, he often wrote two sheets, and at other times between one and two; and
I have my self known him write according to that proportion, when I have been
reading in the same room with him, for diverse hours together. So that these
writings are plainly a kind of extempore Meditations, only they came from a
Head and Heart well fraught with a rich Treasure of Humane and Divine
Knowledge, which the famous Legislator Justinian makes the necessary
qualifications of a complete Lawyer. And here it is farther to be observed,
that all his larger Tracts, such as this, which could not be finished at one
time, were written upon great intervals of time, and such wherein much business
of a quite different Nature had interposed, which usually interrupt the thread
of a Man's thoughts.

3. Concerning the Book it self, the Reader may of himself perceive that it was
not finished, but that he had designed to have continued it farther. He has
written a particular Tract Of doing as we would be done to, which is the
Subject at which this is left off. But that, as I take it, was written long
since this, and not intended for any Continuation of it: but it had been very
proper to have been joined with it, had I had any Transcript of it.

Upon perusal of the Manuscript of his own handwriting, it may be further
observed; 1. That it was the Original draught, and no Transcript; for therein,
as I remember, may in some places be seen, some of those very Schemes which he
first drew, when he began to write. 2. That he had not so much as revised any
part of it, it being for the most part as fair, and without any Alteration as
if it were a Transcript. 3. The Original is one continued Discourse, without
any Distinction of Parts or Chapters, or so much as any Title superscribed: But
I conceive it a very methodical Discourse, and such as may very aptly be
distinguished into those Parts and Chapters, and under those Titles which I
have assigned, as it now appears in the Print. And this is a further evidence,
that he did not design it for the Press.

Of the two Parts of it, the first is wholly Scholastical and Metaphysical, and
therefore somewhat above the Capacity of ordinary Readers; but it is but short:
but the other is for the most part plain and easy, such as may be of great use
to the meanest Capacities, and yet full of matter worthy the Contemplation of
the greatest. But of the whole I must farther observe, that it was a work of
his younger years; that he afterward much improved his Metaphysical and
Scholastical Observations and Discourses. and somewhat altered his opinion
touching some Points in Controversy, especially between the Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants. But as in what is Scholastical, there is nothing but what
is agreeable to the Sentiments of the most eminent Writers in that kind of
Learning; so neither in the rest, is there any thing disputable, but what is
maintained by eminent Men of the Church of England as the Doctrine of this
Church: And since his opinion neither first nor last was other than what has
been, and is at this day asserted to be the Doctrine of this Church, or at
least within the bounds of what is so asserted, (For he was always very
moderate in these things.) I conceive I need not trouble the Reader or my self
farther about it.

And now if these things only, which I have hitherto mentioned, be duly
considered, I conceive they will afford so just Excuse and full Vindication of
the Author against all Censures, Cavils and Exceptions to any thing in this
Work, that I think they are not to be feared from any, but such as have little
ingenuity or sense of Humanity. And the Censures and Cavils of such, I am of
opinion, ought to be contemned. And for my own part, I hope I shall never be
affrighted from any good and justifiable work, by any such Bug-bears.

But I intend not only to do Right, but to do Honor, and yet no more than is
justly due, in what I do, to our excellent Author. And to this end, I must take
notice of the Time, when this was written. And that was about the same time,
when he began his Practice at the Law. He had at that time gone through, and
made himself Master of a long and intricate Study, of a quite different nature
from this; had read and abridged all the Old, and all the New Law then extant,
in two Volumes in Folio still to be seen, had read over a great part of the
Records, as may be seen in his marginal Notes and References in diverse of his
Books, and in the Transcripts of much of thom now in the Library of Lincoln's
Inn; (for he spared neither pains nor charge in those things before ever he
began to practice;) had looked into the Civil and Canon Laws, so far as they
are in use with us, or were subservient to the complete Knowledge of our Laws;
in short, had read what ever either of Law, History or other Books, in Print or
Manuscript he thought could any way conduce to complete his Knowledge and Skill
in his Profession of the Law. And for a Man thus industriously employed in such
Studies, and yet to have made such a Progress in Philosophy and Divinity, as
appears by this Book, nay and to write such a Book under such Circumstances, as
I have mentioned before, and at such an Age, viz. about thirty, or one and
thirty, having been till then so busy in other Studies, must needs, I am
persuaded, in the judgment of all candid persons, raise him and his Book not
only above all need of other Excuse, but to a high degree of Admiration.

The truth is, what he performed in his Studies, is almost as incredible, as it
is most certain and true. But as he was admirably qualified by Nature for
Studies, so I doubt not but he had an extraordinary Blessing attending his
Labors therein. For if this be reasonable to be believed of any, then
certainly must I believe it of him upon diverse Considerations: as, 1. His great
Piety and Devotion, and frequent application to Almighty God in the midst of
his secular Employments; 2. His religious observance and employment of times
set apart for sacred uses; And 3. His conscientious application to, and use of
his Civil Profession. Of all which in him, I think, I have as certain knowledge
both by my Conversation and discourse of matters of Religion with him, by
perusal of his Writings of all sorts, and by observation of his Actions, as
ordinarily any Man can have of another.

And therefore though the Representation of his great Industry, Learning, and
Abilities be much for his Honor, yet is it a greater Honor than all this,
which I intend to his Memory in the publication of this Book. And that is to
demonstrate from thence the true Principles of all his Worth, and of those
great and generous Actions, which have made him so famous in his Generation,
and like to be so in future Ages; and thereby give the Reader the clearest and
truest Prospect into the whole course of his Life. Had he not been very
cordially and deeply affected with these things, it is no way credible, that a
Man so very intent upon other Studies of so different a nature, for the six
days together, could upon the seventh so entirely have withdrawn his Mind from
them, as to apply it so closely to these. And this being written at his very
entrance upon his Practice, and his Actions ever since being so reducible to
the Principles discovered in this, nothing could give a more true and
satisfactory Prospect into the Fundamentals of the future part of his Life, and
consequent Actions.

He was indeed the most Heavenly-minded Man I have ever known. He had had a
Religious Education from his Childhood; and he very early made his Religion,
the Religion of his Judgment and Choice, not of his Education only. He read the
S. Scriptures to know it; then studied the Works of Creation, Providence, and
the Moral Evidences of the Christian Religion, to know the Truth of it. And
having laid so deep a Foundation, he ever after built firmly upon it: and by
his faithful observance of it, arrived to that full Satisfaction and Knowledge
of it, which our Savior mentions, John 7.17. He began these Studies very
early; how early I do not precisely know: but this I know from his own mouth,
that he was very busy in them while he studied at Oxford: For when I first
perused part of this Book, I told him, I perceived, he had before he wrote it,
been acquainted with the Schoolmen: and considering when it was written, and
how hard a Student he had been in the Law till that time, desired to know when
he could have had leisure for those Studies? and what Authors he read? He told
me, At Oxford; and that he there read Aquinas, Scotus, Suarez, and others, whom
he particularly named; but these I remember.

And here by the way, we may take notice, how much he is misrepresented and
injured in that Story, printed in the Relation, which very unadvisedly and
improperly bears the name of his Life, concerning his neglect of his Studies at
Oxford. The truth of which, to do him right, is this,: His natural Genius
inclined much to things of Wit and Gallantry, and the Players coming to the Act
at Oxford while he was a Student there, he began at first to be taken with the
Plays; but having before, among other religious Observations, habituated
himself to keep a strict Watch over his Heart and Actions, he quickly reflected
upon it: and therefore the more he perceived himself affected with it, the more
resolved he was to correct it; and left it should in time prevail, so as to
divert him from more serious Studies, or at least, rob him of too much time, he
made a solemn Vow, or Resolution, which he ever after observed, never to see
Play more; and so returned to his Studies again before the Players went out of
Town. And certain it is, he was as hard a Student there, as he was afterward at
London; though he held Acquaintance and some kind of Converse with the most
ingenious Persons at both places. But so much for that.

These Studies, which he began so early, he continued to the very last, so long
as he was able to write, within about a fortnight or three weeks before he
died. And here he did, as he did in the Law, spared neither Pains nor Cost upon
any thing any way conducing to his main Design, tending to discover and
manifest the admirable Providence of God, whether in the Composure, Powers and
Course of Nature, or in the Government of the Actions of Men; insomuch, that if
a true Computation was made, I am persuaded, that, as much time as he spent,
and pains as he took in the Study and Practice of the Law, and Business of a
not ordinary Judge, but Chief Baron and Chief Justice; yet the Time he
employed, and the Pains he took (if I may call that Pains, which afforded so
much Pleasure and Satisfaction to him) in these Studies, and for that purpose,
would be found to exceed them. The Benefit whereof, I hope the World may
receive some time or other: but the Effect thereof upon himself was, that his
so much contemplating the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God, discernable in
his Creatures, and observable in the Providential Government of Men, especially
that admirable Mystery of our Redemption, imprinted in his Soul a most enlarged
apprehension and deep sense of the Glorious Excellence and Majesty of God, and
his unconceivable Goodness to all who duly apply themselves to him. This filled
him with a most awful Reverence and devout Affection to him continually: which
further produced great Constancy, Faithfulness, and Readiness in his Obedience
and Service, and converted his very Civil Employments into a kind of continual
Course of Religion; so that that laborious Life of his, was in a manner
entirely sacrificed to, and continually employed in, or in order to, the
Service of God. And all this, with those divine benign Influences, which are
never wanting to Souls thus disposed, filled him with an humble Confidence, and
made it, as it were, natural to him, to retire into himself with secret
application to God upon all occasions in the very midst of his Business. And
certainly this Life was Heavenly and Holy, and yet not more Holy than Happy.

All this is very true: but he had very early taken up a Resolution to abstain
from a high Profession of Religion ('it is his own expression) and he was so wary
and cautious in it, that very little of what I have said, was perceived by any
of his most intimate Friends, but my self. Insomuch, that one of them, whom I
know he much valued, and who had frequent converse with him, has diverse times
since confessed to me, how much he was mistaken in him in that respect, before
he saw his Contemplations in Print. And I should almost doubt of finding Credit
in what I know to be true, with those who do not know me, had I not pretty good
Attestations from this, and a constant Course of most pious Meditations
committed to writing under his own hand. Were we now to take a View of his
whole Life, we might consider it as acted either in private, or in public. His
Actions in public were visible to the World, and yet it may be feared, that
much of the remarkable particulars thereof will be lost for want of competent
Observers and Relators. The private part of it was most employed in Retirement
and Studies, and of this the greatest part in Pious Meditations, the
Contemplation of God, of his Works of Creation and Providence, the great and
admirable Mystery of our Redemption, and the Sacred Scriptures, and the
Evidences of the Truth thereof. And as this did influence all his Actions in
public, so being once well understood, it must needs give the clearest
Prospect into the true and genuine Principles and Tendency of them, which is
the principal thing to be considered in them. And this can never better be made
appear than by his own Writings, if they were published, as I conceive they
ought to be.

* Having done this Right to the Author, I thought it but reasonable to do some
Right to my self, and to the World; to show, by what Right I have published
this, and what Right the World has to expect the rest of his Writings. To
which Purpose I had written another Sheet, to show that the Author had, upon
new Motives and Consideration of Occurrences afterward, changed his Mind before
declared in his Will, wherein he had prohibited the printing of any of his
Writings after his Death. But upon further Consideration, I think it may be
sufficient for this place to let the Reader know in general that he had done
so, and to reserve the more particular Discourse of that, if there be occasion
for it, to my Memorials of him: And therefore I have suffered but few Copies of
that Sheet to be printed off, for the Consideration of such, as it may most
concern.

Of the Two little Discourses annexed, I have only this to say, That the First
was one of his Later Writings, and perhaps, may a little vary from some of his
Former: and that the Latter was more ancient. But neither of them was finished,
though the Printer, according to the usual Mode, has put a Finis to them both:
But otherwise, I hope, he has acquitted himself reasonably well; For I was at
too great a distance to peruse the Sheets as they were printed off. The Copies
he had, were carefully examined by the Originals: and I thought it most
suitable to my Design, to let them be printed as near as might be, according to
them, without any Alteration; presuming upon the Candor of the ingenuous
Reader, upon due Consideration of the Circumstances before mentioned.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS
OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. OF the Existence and Attributes of God. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Works
of God, of Creation and Providence. Page 27 CHAP. III. Of Man, his Excellence
above other Creatures. Page 39 CHAP. IV. Of the Supreme End of Man. Page 61
CHAP. V. Of the Means of attaining the Supreme End of Man. Page 80 CHAP. VI. Of
the Credibility of the Sacred Scriptures. Page 99
The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. OF the Existence and Attributes of God. Page 117 CHAP. II. Of the
Acts and Works of God: and 1. Of his Eternal Counsel. Page 123 CHAP. III. Of
the Execution of the Eternal Counsel of God, in his Works of Creation and
Providence. Page 145 CHAP. IV. Of the Providence of God in special, concerning
Man, in order to his supreme End. Page 150 CHAP. V. Of the Restitution of Man
by Christ. Page 169 CHAP. VI. Predictions and Types of Christ. Page 176 CHAP.
VII. Of the Efficacy of the Satisfaction of Christ, and the Congruity of it to
right Reason. Page 195 CHAP. VIII. Of the great Work of our Redemption, What it
is; How effected; and for whom. Page 201 CHAP. IX. Of the Means, which God has
appointed to make this Sacrifice of Christ effectual, viz. Union with Christ,
and how the same is wrought on God's part. Page 231 CHAP. X. How our Union with
Christ is wrought on Man's part, viz. By Faith, Hope, and Love. Page 243 CHAP.
XI. Why, or by what reason the act of Faith works our Union with Christ, and
so our Justification in the sight of God. Page 262 CHAP. XII. The Effects of
our Union with Christ. Page 268 CHAP. XIII. Concerning the putting off the Old
Man: and 1. What it is. Page 276 CHAP. XIV. How the Old Man is to be put off,
and 1. by Repentance. Page 288 CHAP. XV. Of Mortification, and the Means
thereof; and 1. Of Meditation. Page 295 CHAP. XVI. Meditation of the
Unreasonableness of the Dominion of Lust. Page 302 CHAP. XVII. Of Prayer. Page
324 CHAP. XVIII. Of Watchfulness, and first in respect of God. Page 328 CHAP.
XIX. Of Watchfulness in respect of our Selves, our Senses, Words, and Appetite.
Page 332 CHAP. XX. Of Watchfulness over our Affections, and Passions of Love,
Anger, and Fear. Page 335 CHAP. XXI. Of Watchfulness over our Hope, Confidence,
and Joy. Page 343 CHAP. XXII. Of Watchfulness over our Grief; 1. In reference
to God, for Sin; 2. In reference to Externals. Page 353 CHAP. XXIII. Of
Watchfulness over our Will, Conscience, and Spirit. Page 364 CHAP. XXIV. Of the
new Life, or Sanctification, and the necessity of it. Page 379 CHAP. XXV. Of
the Means of Sanctification, and 1. On God's part, his Word, and his Spirit.
Page 386 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Means of Sanctification, 2. On Man's part, viz.
Faith, Love, Fear, Hope. Page 392 CHAP. XXVII. Of the Extent and Degrees of
Sanctification. Page 403 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Parts of Sanctification, and 1.
In reference to our Selves, Sobriety. Page 413 CHAP. XXIX. Of Sanctification in
reference to our Neighbor, viz. Righteousness, the Habit and Rule of it. Page
435 CHAP. XXX. Of the general Precepts of Righteousness given by Christ: and 1.
Loving our Neighbor as our self. Page 447 CHAP. XXXI. Of the second general
Precept of Righteousness, Doing as we would be done unto. A Brief Astract of
the Christian Religion. Page 461 Considerations Seasonable at all Times for the
Cleansing of the Heart and Life. Page 475
A SUMMARY Of what is contained in this DISCOURSE OF THE Knowledge of GOD and
of our Selves.
PART I. By the Light of NATURE.
Chap. I. Of the Attributes of God: I. OF Knowledge, what it is, and how
wrought, Page 1, 2 II. That there is a First Being, and Cause of all things.
Page 4 What may thence be deduced concerning it. Page 7 viz.
1. His Eternity. Page 8 1. Without Beginning. ibid. 2. Without Succession. ib.
3. Without End. Page 9
2. His Immensity, which includes His. 1. Exemption from Circumscription. Page
10 2. Omnipresence. ib. 3. Exemption from Succession or division of Parts. Page
11
3. His Indivisibility, in Opposition to 1. Divisibility. ibid. 2.
Multiplicity. ib.
4. Simplicity. Page 12 5. Perfection. Page 13 Whence it follows, That he is,
1. A most pure Act. Page 14 2. A substantial Act. ibid. 3. Ens vivens. Page 15
4. An Intellectual Being and Omniscient. ib. 5. Ens Liberrimum. Page 16 6. Ens
sum Bonum. ib. Whence arise these Conclusions:
1. That he is perfectly happy. Page 17 2. The supreme End of all things. Page
18
7. Most just. Page 21 9. Immutable Page 24



Chap. II. His Acts Immanent, and Emanant. Page 25 1. Creation. Page 27, 28 2.
Providence, disposing all things to their several Ends. Page 31 In respect of
1. Himself. Page 32 2. The things produced, viz. ib. 1. Natural Page 33 2.
Contingent. Page 35 3. Voluntary. Page 36


Chapter III. Of Man considerable in 1. What he has in common with other inferior
Beings. Page 40 2. His Eminence above them, in his Soul, 1. Its Substance,
which is 1. Immaterial Page 40 2. Immortal. Page 41
2. Its Faculties. Page 44 Page 1. The Understanding, which has Page 1. A
threefold Power. 1. A Receptive or Passive. Page 45 2. Retentive. ib. 3.
Active, or discussive. Page 46
Page 2. Several Acts and Habits, as 1. Knowledge. Page 46 2. Wisdom. Page 48
3. Conscience. Page 51

Page 2. The Will, its motion in respect of 1. The Object. Page 56 2.
Principles. Page 58 The immediate Cause of Man's miscarriage
Page 1. His Understanding. Page 2. His Will.




Chap. IV. The Supreme End of Man, I. What, viz. a Good commensurate to the
Soul, and therefore 1. Immaterial. Page 63 2. Immortal. Page 64 3. Distinct
from the Soul it self. Page 65 4. A true and real Good. Page 66 5. An infinite
and Universal Good. ibid. And therefore nothing but God himself. Page 67

II. And how that may be, that God can be the adequate Object of Man's
Felicity. Page 68 Chap. V. The Means to attain it. 1. What naturally they were?
ib. 2. Whether still the same? Page 84 1. The Defects in 1. His Understanding.
ib. 2. His Will. Page 89
2. The Consequents. Page 92
3. What now for his Restitution. Page 93 1. Not any thing in Man or the
Creature. ib. 2. But by God, 96. revealed in The Holy Scriptures 98. their

Ch^p. VI. 1. Credibility. Page 99 2. Contents, v. Part 2.

OF THE Knowledge of God and of our Selves. PART II. By the Sacred Scriptures.
Page 117.
THE Contents of the Holy Scriptures, concerning I. God, 1. His Existence. Page
117 2. His Nature and Attributes. Page 118 3. Manner of Subsistence Page 122 4.
Acts and Works. Page 123
II. His Counsel, which is 1. Eternal. Page 123 2. Immutable. Page 125 3. Free.
Page 126 4. Wise. ibid. Which is eminent in
1. Predetermining the means. Page 127 2. So as they move according to their
own Nature, whether 1. Necessary. Page 129 2. Voluntary. Page 131 3.
Contingent. Page 133
3. Independent upon one another. ib.
5. Irresistible. Page 135 6. Universal. ib. Two Difficulties, How the
Predetermination
1. Of the Acts of voluntary Agents can consist with the Liberty of the Will.
Page 136 2. Of the sinful Acts of voluntary Agents can consist with the Justice
and Purity of God. Page 138

III. The Execution of it. 1. Creation: 1. In general. ibid. 2. Particularly of
Man. Page 148
2. Providence: 1. In general. Page 150 2. Special, concerning Man. ib. 1. As a
Creature. ib. 2. In order to his chief End. ib. 1. Before the Fall of Adam. ib.
1. Partly examined before. ib. 2. What the Means. Page 153 1. The Law of Man's
Creation. Page 154 2. The Obligation of it. Page 156 3. The Sanction or
Penalty. Page 157

2. After the Fall. Page 164 3. In Christ. Page 169 1. The sum of it. Page 170
2. The Particulars. ib. 1. The Motive. ib. 2. The Object. Page 172 3. The End,
Remission of Sin; and Happiness. Page 173 4. The immediate Instrument, Christ.
Page 174 Predictions concerning him, Page 176 1. Prophetical. ib. 2. Typical.
Page 177







I. The Efficacy and Virtue of Christ's Satisfaction. Page 195 The Congruity of
it to right Reason. Page 199
II. This great work of our Redemption 1. What it is, 1. A Removal of the Wrath
of God. Page 201 2. By the accepting of Christ's Satisfaction for our Guilt and
Punishment. Page 202
2. How effected; ten Positions Page 203 1. That Christ the Mediator was
perfect God. Page 204 2. Perfect Man. Page 205 3. That both these Natures were
united in the Person of Christ our Mediator. ib. 4. The Necessity of Christ's
having both Natures thus united in one Person. Page 207 5. The Eternal Word did
in due time take Flesh of the Virgin into the Unity of one Person. Page 209 6.
The whole Life of Christ, till his Passion, had in it Satisfaction by way of 1.
Suffering. Page 210 2. Righteousness. Page 211 3. Instruction, and that of 1.
Example. Page 212 2. Doctrine. Page 213

7. That Christ suffered the Wrath of God for the Remission of our Sins. Page
215 This suffering of Christ was,
1. Voluntary. Page 216 2. Meritorious and Expiatory. Page 217 3. Full and
Perfect. Page 218 4. Universal. ibid.
8. That Christ rose again from Death the third day. Page 220 9. That Christ
after his Resurrection, ascended up into Heaven. Page 223 10. That Christ
exercises a threefold Office there; ibid. 1. The Power of Dominion. Page 224
2. The Communication of his Spirit. ib. 3. Intercession for his People. Page 226


III. For whom this Satisfaction of Christ was made. Page 227 IV. The Means to
make this Sacrifice effectual for us. Page 231 Our Union with Christ is wrought
by a double Act.
1. On God's part. 1. His Eternal Love. Page 233 2. Sending his Son. Page 234
3. Conveying the Knowledge of this Mediator unto us. ibid. 4. The Work of the
Spirit. Page 237 Under a threefold Consideration,
1. Of Power. Page 238 2. Of a sound Mind. ib. 3. Of Love. Page 236

2. On Man's part. Page 243 1. Faith. ibid. 2. Hope. Page 247 3. Love. Page 248
1. How wrought. Page 249 2. Its Effects. Page 254 1. Right Intention. ib. 2.
Conformity. ib. 3. Fear. Page 255 4. Endeavor of likeness to him. Page 257 5.
Contempt of the World. Page 258 6. Sorrow for Sin. Page 259 7. Obedience. ib.
1. Sincere. Page 260 2. Perpetual. ib. 3. Universal. ib. Why and how Faith
works our Union with Christ, and so our Justification in the sight of God,
is, because
1. It is the Will of God. Page 263 2. Faith is the first Act of the new Life,
wrought by the Spirit of God, etc. Page 264





V. The Effects of our Union with Christ, are, 1. Remission of Sins. Page 268
2. Justification. ibid. 3. Peace and Reconciliation. Page 269 4. The Spirit of
Christ, and that taken two ways, 1. The Communication of the Holy Spirit. Page
270 2. The Mind of Christ, Conformity to him, Sanctification. Page 271 A double
Principle.
1. Change of the Nature. Page 273 2. Love to God. Page 274


I. Putting off the Old Man, I. What this Old Man is. Page 276 1. Its strength
1. In it self. ibid. 2. Accidentally from the Devil. ibid.
2. Wherein seated. Page 277 1. In the Understanding. ibid. 2. In the
Conscience. ibid. 3. In the Will. Page 278 4. In the Affections. Page 279

II. How this Old Man is to be put off, viz. 1. By Repentance; the grounds of
which are 1. A Conviction of the Understanding concerning our natural ways and
conditions, which are 1. Irregular, deformed, and crooked. Page 289 2.
Unprofitable and fruitless. ib. 3. Vnbecoming, ungrateful, and undutiful
Returns. Page 291
2. The Love of God, providing a means of Pardon and Acceptance. ibid.
2. By Mortification; The means whereof are 1. Supernatural, 2. Moral, 3.
Natural. Page 295 1. Meditation of 1. The Love of God Page 296 2. The Hope of
Salvation, and incongruity between it, and continuing in Sin. Page 297 3. The
Presence of God. Page 298 4. The Nature and Consequences of Sin. ib. 5. The
Shortness of Life. Page 299 6. The Unreasonableness of the dominion of 1. Lust
1. In the Rational Appetite, and that is the lust of the mind in 1. The
Intellectual Faculty. Page 302 2. The Will; and Affections which are 1. The
Irascible. Page 304 2. The Concupiscible. ib.

2. In the Sensitive Appetite, are, 1. Lusts of the Flesh. Page 306 2. Lust of
the Eye. Page 310

2. Pride. Page 318

2. Prayer. Page 324 It becomes a Means of our Mortification upon a double
ground. Page 325, 326
3. Watchfulness; The Objects of which are 1. God, in 1. His coming to
Judgment. Page 328 2. His Word. ibid. 3. His Presence. Page 329 4. His
Providence. ib. 5. His Spirit. Page 331
2. Our Selves. Page 232 1. Our Senses. ibid. 2. Our Eyes. ibid. 3. Our Ears.
Page 333 4. Our Tongues. ibid. 5. Our Appetites. ibid. 6. Affections and
Passions. Page 335 1. Love. ibid. 2. Anger. Page 336 3. Fear. Page 337 4. Hope
and Confidence, etc. Page 343 5. Joy. Page 349 6. Grief in reference to 1. God,
for Sin. Page 353 2. Externals. Page 359

7. Will. Page 364 8. Conscience. Page 367 9. Spirit. Page 375
3. Temptations. Page 379




II. Of the putting on the New Man, or Sanctification. Page 379 1. The
Necessity of it. Page 382 2. The Means, 1. On God's Part, Page 386 1. His Word
ibid. 2. His Spirit. Page 388
2. On our Part, 1. Faith. Page 392 2. Love. Page 396 3. Fear. Page 398 4.
Hope. Page 400

3. The Degrees. Page 403 1. Sincerity and Integrity of Heart. Page 404 2. An
overmatching the power of Sin, by the power of Sanctifying Grace. Page 405 From
whence arise these Consequents:
1. Universality of Obedience. Page 407 2. Constancy and Perseverance. ibid. 3.
Increase of Grace. Page 409 4. Renewed Repentance. Page 410

4. The Parts in reference to 1. Our Selves. Page 413 1. In the Esteem of our
Selves. Page 414 2. In our Sensual Appetite. Page 420
2. Our Neighbor, Righteousness. Page 435 1. The Habit. ibid. 2. The Rule.
Page 436 1. Natural. Page 436, 437 2. The Word of God, absolutely in it self.
Page 438 1. The Law, 1. Moral. Page 438 2. Ceremonial. Page 441 3. Judicial.
ibid.
2. The Prophets. Page 442 3. The Gospel, which contains a most excellent Rule
of Righteousness, in, 1. The Example of Christ. Page 443 2. The Precepts and
Counsels. Page 444 Page 1. General. 1. Love of our Neighbor. Page 448 2. Doing
as we would be done unto. Page 456
2. Particular, things, Page 1. To be done. Page 2. To be suffered.




3. Parts.
3. God.


A Brief Abstract of the Christian Religion. Page 461 Seasonable Considerations
for the Cleansing of the Heart and Life. Page 473
A DISCOURSE OF THE Knowledge of God, and of our Selves.
PART I. By the Light of Nature.
CHAP. I. Of the Existence and Attributes of God.
I. ALL things but the Soul it self are extrinsecal to the Soul: and therefore
of necessity the Knowledge of all other things is extrinsecal to the Soul: for
Knowledge is nothing else but the true impression and shape of the thing known
in the Understanding, or a conception conform to the thing conceived. And
although the Soul in its own nature be apta nata to receive such impressions,
and does therefore naturally desire and affect it; yet it is as impossible for
the Soul to know till the Object be some way applied to it, as for a
Looking-glass to reflect without first uniting of a Species of some Body to it,
that may be reflected.

The Means whereby the Scibile, or thing to be known, is united to the Soul,
and consequently Knowledge is wrought, is threefold, viz.

1. Supernatural. Thus Almighty God, in the first Creation of Man, did fasten
certain Principles of Truth in Man by his immediate discovery, especially the
Knowledge of Himself and his Will, which was properly the Image or Impression
of God in his Understanding. This was not essential to the Soul, but a Habit or
Quality, which God put into his Understanding; and therefore though his
Knowledge decayed by his Fall, yet his Soul continued the same.

2. Artificial. Thus Knowledge is derived from Man to Man, by signs of those
impressions of Truth, etc. that are wrought in his Understanding, that
communicates it. Thus Knowledge is acquired by Writing, Speech, and other
Signs, that are agreed upon to communicate Intelligence from the understanding
of one Man to the understanding of another, though mediante sensu. Thus the
Relics of the knowledge of God in Adam were derived to his Posterity, though
still it grew for the most part of Men weaker and corrupter.

3. Natural. And this may be divided into these three branches, viz.

1. Simple Apprehension. Thus when any object singly by the Ear, or Eye, or
other Sense, is let into the Phantasy, and so shown to the Understanding
without either affirming or denying any thing concerning it.

2. Complex Apprehensions, whereby either duo scibilia are joined together in
an Affirmation or Negation: and this is a Proposition, which again is of two
kinds, viz. either that which is most universal, and therefore the first
proposition that is framed in the understanding, viz. that it is, or est, or
est ens. For that notion does necessarily and upon the first view of any object
join it self with it in the understanding. Other propositions are more complex
or remote, as that God is good, etc. For the first question, in the
Understanding, is, Whether it be, to which that general proposition answers;
and in the next place, What it is, to which the second sort of complex notions
answer. Now of this second kind of complex notions there are two kinds, viz.
either such as without the help of any Discourse or Ratiocination present
themselves from the object to the understanding; as this, The Man is red; the
Man and the red, being both objects of Sense, and meeting in the same subject:
or else such as either the thing affirmed, or the thing whereof the affirmation
is, or both, are things that do not immediately fall within our Senses, as the
Man is a substance, or, the Spirit is a substance. These though originally
derived from sense, yet they are refined by the help of Discourse.

3. Conclusions drawn either from these simple or complex apprehensions, which
flow into our understanding immediately by our Senses: and this is Rational
Discourse, a Faculty or Power put into Man, whereby he is beyond all other
visible Creatures; and whereby all his actions, whether Civil or Religious, are
and ought to be guided. This is that Power, whereby we may improve even
sensible Objects, Apprehensions, and Observations; to attain more sublime and
high discoveries, and rise from Effects to their Causes, till at last we attain
to the First Cause of all things.

So we may conclude that the Knowledge of our Creator, though it fall not
within the reach of our Sense, and so falls not immediately within the reach of
our Understanding, yet by the ascents and steps of Rational Discourse, so much
may be gathered, as may leave an Atheist without excuse, God having given to
Man, even in his lapsed condition, besides other Providential helps, a stock of
Visibles, and a Rational Faculty to improve that stock to some measure of the
Knowledge of himself: For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power, and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, Rom, 1.20.
Therefore, as on the one side we are to avoid curiosity in measuring the
infinite Mysteries of Truth by our own finite Understandings; so on the other
side we must beware of Supineness, and Neglect of employing that treasure of
God's Works, and his Light or Reason in us, to that end for which it was
principally entrusted with us, even the knowledge of our Creator; yet still
humbly concluding with Elihu, Job 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me.

II. The first and most Magisterial Truth in the World, upon which all other
truths do depend, is this, That there is a First Being and Cause of all other
Beings. This is evident by clear Reason.

1. Either we must admit a First Cause, or else an actual infiniteness of
Succession of Causes. The latter is impossible in Nature; because it is
impossible there can be that which is infinite and yet successive; for then it
would follow, That that which is actually infinite in number should be yet more
infinite, because there are new Successions on Causes and Causations

Again, it is impossible that there should be an eternal dependence of Causes
one upon another without a First, because then the whole Collection of those
Causes taken all together must needs likewise be actually depending; and if so,
then upon themselves; and that is impossible, for the immediate Cause of the
Effect does not depend upon its Effect, but immediately upon its Cause.
Therefore this bundle of dependent causes must depend upon some one among them,
which is independent.

And impossible likewise in Experience. Take but the instance of one Creature,
Of this the Author has written more largely in his Origination of Mankind.
Man: It is plain that the World does every day grow fuller and fuller: that,
which is now almost a Nation, we can with a little help derive into one Man
five hundred years since, so that it is not imaginable but that at length we
must necessarily come to a First Man: If so, how had that Man his being? It is
true that there be some living creatures, that we may trace their beginning to
the corruption of some preexisting matter, which by its own temper and the
concurrence of other second causes, may produce a living creature, as Worms,
Mice, etc. But if there should be such a production of Man at first, why is it
not so at some time since, viz. that a Man should be produced out of the ground
by some concurrence of the disposition of the matter with second causes? If it
be said that that is now needless, and Nature does nothing in vain; the answer
is unsatisfactory: For, 1. where such productions are, as of Mice, etc. it is
as needless, because they propagate their kind as well as Man. And 2. if Nature
does nothing in vain, it is plain that whatever is so called Nature, is in
truth the first cause, though miscalled Nature; for not to do any thing in
vain, is an act of a Voluntary and Rational Agent; a mere natural Agent cannot
but work uniformly, whether in vain or not in vain, when the matter is
uniformly disposed. Therefore we must needs have recourse to a First,
Voluntary, and Intellectual Agent, that did at first make Man; and by his free
Power did advance the piece of red Earth above its own disposition, and beyond
the causality of second Causes, to produce Man; and that has not since done
the like: but as to those other imperfect creatures has planted in second
Causes such a strength and causality as out of a prepared matter to produce
other living creatures without any concurrence of his immediate or
extraordinary Power.

2. In every Successive Motion it is necessary to arrive to some beginning of
it, and it is impossible it should be eternal; as in case of the motion of the
Sun, which is successive; it cannot in reason be but there must be a time or
instant, wherein it either was not, or did not move; for otherwise the
revolutions would be actually infinite in number, and yet that infinite number
of revolutions be still augmented by daily new revolutions, which would be in
it self a contradiction, that that which was before actually infinite, should
yet receive an increase, as necessarily it must if the motion of the Sun had
never a beginning: Therefore of necessity it had a beginning. If it had a
beginning of its motion, it could not have it from it self; for why did it not
then move sooner? But of necessity it must have the beginning from another; for
though animate creatures move themselves, yet they receive still the original
cause of their motion from something without them, as well as of their being.
Who, or what, was it that gave it that motion, or principle of its motion? And
if any could assign any other than the First Cause (which is not almost
imaginable) yet still my enquiry must rise higher, what was that that gave
being or causality to that cause? So that in sum the motion of the Sun or
Heavens cannot be Eternal, because Successive: It must have a Cause of its
motion from without it self; that Cause, if the First Cause, then a First Cause
must be granted; if not the First, yet by the same reason, that in all
Successive motions we must admit a beginning, we may conclude in all
Successions of Causes there must be a beginning, because the being and
causation or motion of second causes is likewise Successive, and therefore can
be no more infinite than the successive motions of the same subject can be
infinite. It is impossible that any thing should be Eternal that is not
Indivisible, ut videbitur infra. So that the Succession of Causes and Motion is
that which does necessarily enforce a first cause.

To these we (may) add those All which, and diverse others, the Author has
largely prosecuted in another Work in the 6. first Parts.
Considerations which arise from the Observation of the created World, the
subservience of one thing to the perservation of another, the inclinations of
Creatures without choice to means conducible to their preservation, the
ordering and fitting of things whereby confusion and uselesness of creatures is
avoided; all which do bespeak the admission of a Voluntary, Intellectual,
Supreme, and Universal Cause of all things.

Now a First Cause being admitted, we are to consider what may rationally be
deduced from thence concerning this First Cause. This he has likewise more
largely handled in the 7. Part of the same Work.
And those are of two kinds: First, such as absolutely concern his own Being:
Secondly, such as concern him in relation to those Effects, which proceed from
him.

For the former of these we say, That a First Cause of all things being granted,

I. It necessarily follows that he has no bounds of his existence or being.
The bounds of Existence are either in Duration or Extension: the exclusion of
the bounds of Existence in Duration is Eternity; that in Extension is Immensity.

Now first for Eternity. Whatsoever is Eternal must be without Beginning,
without Succession, without End.

1. Without Beginning: For if it be a First Cause, it cannot have a Beginning;
for then he must have a Cause of his Being, which would be a contradiction:
Neither could he have a beginning from himself; for that were to suppose a
pre-existence in himself to himself, which were also repugnant.

2. Without Succession: There is nothing past, nothing to come, for all is one
indivisible Succession, and those notions of Time, past, present, and to come,
are only the consequences of a Successive Motion: for Time is nothing else but
that conception whereby we measure successive motion: were there no successive
motion in the World, it would be impossible that there should be any of those
affections of Time; and consequently, Time is not any thing real, but a
relation to Motion. Now before that the First Cause did set a continued motion
in the World, there could be no Succession, but all was wrapped up in one
permanent instant: for the Being of the First Cause, and his Motion, what ever
it was, or is, is indivisible, as shall be shown. Then when he produced second
Causes, and consequently those moved in their several causalities and courses,
and consequently their motions, beings, and causalities being successive, there
was a prius, and posterius, and succession; yet this did not alter the
indivisible nature of that duration, which that indivisible being had before,
and at, and with that motion, which he after produced. The First Being has a
co-existence with the Successive Motions of the creatures, but his duration is
not measured by it, or co-extended with it, but is of the same indivisibility
as if there had been no successive motion produced, and consequently no
successive time.

3. Without End: For first, what should or can determine his being, in as much
as all things else are his productions, and cannot have any causality upon him?
Secondly, End is inconsistent with Eternity; for that is a permanent and fixed
indivisible, and takes in all past, present and to come, without any difference
of notion. The present subsistence of the First Cause was the same numerical
instant that he had a thousand years since. So that End, as well as Succession,
is but of those things that are measured by time, not of an indivisible being:
To suppose him to have an end were to suppose him not ever to have been;
because past, and present, and to come are all indivisibly conjoined in his
duration.

This indivisibility of duration is proper only to the First Cause; for nothing
else can upon any sound ground be said to be of indivisible duration, though it
may be of a perpetual. Suppose we the Being of an Angel, or the Soul, though
admitted to be Everlasting, yet that is rather a multiplied extension of
duration than any indivisible duration: for of the First Cause I may say truly,
the instant of the duration, that is now, and that was a thousand years since,
or a thousand years after, is the same: but I do not think the same may be
affirmed of any other thing whatsoever: 1. because their essence is not
indivisible and simple, as is that of the First Cause; for it is evident they
are perfectible, compounded of Act and Power, not pure Acts: 2. because some
things might be affirmed of them in a time past, which cannot now be affirmed
of them; as the creation, continuance in the Body, separation, reunion, etc.
3. their being is dependent.

II. From this admission of a First Cause does necessarily follow Immensity,
which includes three things.

1. Exemption from Circumscription or bounds of his being. There is a twofold
exemption from Circumscription: 1. That which arises from the disproportion
between the thing that should circumscribe, and be circumscribed: thus a Spirit
of what kind soever is not circumscribed, nor is in any determinate place, for
that is proper to a Body, that has extension of parts; yet though we cannot
say, It is here, yet we are sure we cannot say, It is every where. There is 2.
another exemption from circumscription, which arises from Infinitude, that it
exceeds all place and circumscription: Now that it is thus with the First Cause
is evident; for if he had a Being before any thing else, nothing then could
bound his Being; if it should, then he could not be the First Cause, there
being something else that had limited him, which had a pre-existence to his
causation: and it is impossible for any thing to have a limited or bounded
Being, unless it were so limited or bounded by something without it. That which
is without a cause of his being, must needs be without bounds of his being:
Neither could those effects, which he after produced, straiten the extent, as I
may call it, of his Being, or shut him out from them. From whence follows

2. His Omnipresence, not only vertually and potentially, but essentially in
and with all things, though the manner of it be incomprehensible, because a
consequence of his Infinitude. This is Exemption from Exclusion; for it is not
possibly imaginable, that the production of new Effects should exclude or
straiten that indivisible extent, which that being had before those Effects
were produced.

3. Exemption from Succession or Division of Parts; for otherwise he could not
be Immense; for whatsoever has Succession of Parts, as his Parts are
measurable, so is the whole, and therefore cannot be actually Infinite in
Extension, as I may call it. And this does consequently exempt him from
Materiality, Succession of Parts being an affection of a material substance,
and therefore it is an indivisible Immensity. What is said of the Soul may
explain it, Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part.

III. Hence it follows, that the First Cause is Indivisible, and that in a
double opposition.

1. In Opposition to Divisibility, which is partly touched before; and though
this be common to all things that are incorporeal, for Divisibility is an
effect of Quantity, yet it is most eminently to be affirmed of the First Cause.

2. In Opposition to Multiplicity; and this is the Unity of the First Cause,
viz. that there is but one First Cause of all things; for if there were two, or
more First Causes, either all must be infinite in Being, and consequently in
Operation, and that is impossible, viz. that there should be two Infinites,
because one must of necessity bound and limit the other, both in Being, and
Power: 2. or else both must be finite, and then of necessity each must have a
Cause of his Being; for what is it that should prescribe the bounds to these
Beings, unless the Cause of their Beings? if so, they can neither be the First
Cause: or 3. one must needs be Infinite, and the other Finite and Subordinate;
and then of necessity, those Finite Beings cannot be the First Causes, but
merely Second Causes, depending upon that Infinite Being, both in their
Essence, and Operation; for nothing can have limits of his being, but what has
causes of his being, which should prescribe those limits.

IV. From hence likewise follows, that the First Cause is Ens Simplicissimum,
and excludes all Composition of what kind soever, either of Power and Act, of
Substance and Accident, or Matter and Form: for every mixture does of necessity
suppose some pre-existing Cause to join these together; and indeed the very
membra componentia have in nature a pre-existence to the being so compounded:
and so the admission of any kind of Composition, is inconsistent with a First
Cause. And from hence it is evident, that all things that are affirmed
concerning this First Cause, are but improper, and serve only as notions to
render him unto our Understandings. 2. From hence it also follows that
whatsoever is affirmed of the First Cause is the same with his Essence, and one
the same with another, though they are conceived by us under different notions,
and conceptions; as for instance, we see an effect of the First Cause, which in
case of a Man we derive from that habit in Man, which we call Mercy; and
another effect, which in Man we would conclude to come from such a quality or
habit, which we know by the name of Justice: hence we style the First Cause
Merciful and Just; yet in truth neither of these are proper, for they signify
Qualities; neither, if they were proper, were they distinct, for they are the
same one with another, and both the same with his Essence; otherwise it is
impossible he should be Simple; for should his Being and Attributes be several,
he should be compounded of Substance and Accident; or should the same thing,
which we call Justice, be the same with his Essence, and not the same with his
Mercy, he must needs consist of several beings divided one from another: the
like for all the rest of his Attributes: by the same Essence he is, and he is
what he is: they are divided notions in us, but in him neither divided from his
being, nor one from another. And hence it likewise follows, that though the
emanant Actions, that flow from this First Cause are different, and represented
unto us under different Notions, as, this is an act of Power, this of Goodness,
this of Knowledge or Wisdom; and upon these we frame notions to our selves,
whereby we represent that from whence these acts move, by several Names or
Attributes of Mercy, Power, Wisdom; yet these proceed not in truth from several
Qualities in the First Cause, but from one simple, absolute, unqualified Being.

V. From this consideration, that he is the First Cause and Being, it follows,
that he is Ens Perfectissimum: For that is Perfect to which nothing is wanting:
Now it is impossible, that any thing can be wanting to the First Cause; for
there can be nothing besides him but what proceeds from him, and that which
proceeds from him cannot possibly either add any further degree of Perfection
to him, or include that Perfection, which was not in the First Cause most
eminently. The First Cause had a preexistence to all things else; nothing then
could be wanting to his Perfection; because there was nothing else but himself.
The production of the Second Causes could not possibly include any greater
Perfection than what was derived to them. It is true in the working of Second
Causes there may be a production of an Effect, that may be more perfect in its
kind, than the Cause that immediately produced it; as the production of a Worm
out of putrefaction, a Plant out of the Earth, etc. but there the Effect is not
purely due to the Second Cause, but to the Original Operation of the First
Cause, that did put that activity in the Second Causes to produce such Effects;
for every Second Cause works and moves in the virtue and efficacy of the
First Cause, and has its causality from it, as well as its being, without
which, though it had its being, it is impossible it should be operative.

This Perfection in the First Cause is in truth inconceptible, because
impossible for humane Understanding to receive it without Divine Revelation;
and much more impossible to comprehend it, because Infinite. Therefore to help
our selves herein we do, and that rationally, attribute to the First Being that
manner of Being, that we find most Perfect. Therefore from this Perfection it
follows

1. That the First Cause is a most pure Act without any mixture of Passibility
or Power: for if there were any Power, as it signifies a susceptibility of some
further act or impression, that were an Imperfection; for whatsoever is
susceptible of some further act, as all Power is, it is impossible it should be
perfect. And from hence follows his Omnipotence, for all inability to do any
thing proceeds from the want of activity in the agent to overcome that
resistance, that it finds in the thing to be done. Now in the First Cause there
wants no activity; for it is a most pure Act, and were it not a most pure and
Infinite Act, it were impossible it should be the First Cause; because that
supposes a priority of being in the Cause to the Effect, and consequently
requires an Infinite Activity in the First Cause, because it must produce that
which before was not at all; and the motion between being and simply not being
is infinite, and therefore requires an infinite activity.

2. From the consideration of this Perfection it follows, that this First Being
is a Substantial Act, not an act that flows from another thing, or depends upon
another thing; for then he could not be Ens Primum, nor yet Ens Perfectissimum:
but it is an Act subsisting by it self.

3. From this consideration of this Perfection it follows, that he is Ens
Vivens. Life adds a degree of Perfection to the substance in which it is: and
the more Perfect the Life is, the more perfect the Being: hence the Sensitive
Life is perfecter than the Vegetative, and the Rational Life than the
Sensitive, and the Life of a Spirit than the Life of a Body. Now this First
Cause, being an Infinite and Pure Act, he has an infinite perfect Life.

4. From hence it follows, that he is an Intellectual Being; and as all his
Works bespeak him so, so does this consideration of his Perfection necessarily
evidence it, for otherwise he should not be Perfect, because an Intellectual
Being is a more Perfect Being than that which is not so. And this Understanding
of the First Cause is commensurate to his Essence, viz. Infinite and Eternal,
whereby he perfectly sees himself, and all things else that are or can be, in
one Eternal Indivisible act. And from hence rises the Omniscience of the First
Cause, without which he could not be Perfect: for if any thing, that is or
might be, were hid from him, then by the discovery of that to him, he would
receive a degree of Perfection, that he had not before. And this Knowledge has
a threefold Object:

1. His own Essence, which requires an Infinite Knowledge to comprehend it,
because an Infinite Essence.

2. All things that are; for his Knowledge being Infinite, it must necessarily
extend to all other things.

3. All things that may be, because otherwise upon a further act of his Power,
that should be a new extension of his Knowledge, which stands not with his
Perfection.

And all this with one Eternal Indivisible act, not by Succession, not by
mediate representation. Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me.

5. From hence it follows, that he is Ens Liberrimum: though he be most
necessarily what he is, yet he is free: first, for that the Freedom in agency
is a degree of Perfection above a necessary agent, and therefore this Liberty
must of necessity be attributed to the First Cause. Again, it is impossible but
that the First Cause must be a Free Agent, for whatsoever works necessarily,
has that necessity put upon it by somewhat without it, which is inconsistent
with the First Cause; for if any thing else did put that necessity of working
in him, then that which imposes that necessity was the First Cause. Again
every Necessary Agent, omnibus aeque dispositis, works uniformly; now nothing
was as equally disposed to become something from Eternity, as at the first
production of any thing, the motion from not being to a being, being the
adequate effect of the First Cause: therefore if there were not a Freedom in
the First Cause, the first Effect had been as ancient as the First Being.
Therefore we must necessarily affirm, concerning the First Being, that he is
Ens Liberrimum and Voluntarium, and that according to his Will he works.

6. From hence it follows, that he is Ens sum Bonum. Concerning this Goodness
of God we affirm

1. That it is an Essential Goodness, and his Goodness is not any thing divided
from his Essence, for that is inconsistent with his Simplicity, so that his
Essence is his Goodness, and his Goodness the same with his Essence; which is
also to be observed in all his Attributes, though our Understanding cannot
apprehend this Indivisible Being all at once, but step by step. And from hence
it follows that whatsoever may be affirmed concerning his Essence, may be
likewise affirmed concerning his goodness, viz.

1. That it is Infinite, for so is his essence. The Essential goodness of an
Infinite Being must needs be Infinite: and hence it is not capable of any
increase or diminution: and therefore the production of the Effects, and the
Communication of his goodness to them, did neither add unto, nor take from his
goodness.

2. That it is Perfect; for that which is Infinite must needs be Perfect,
because it excludes any mixture of any thing that is not good.

3. That it is Eternal, that is evident, for it is the same with his Eternal
being.

Now from this consideration of the goodness of the first Being arise these
Conclusions:

1. That he is Perfectly and self-sufficiently Happy; because in the enjoyment
of himself he enjoys an Infinite goodness, which is the same with his being,
and impossible to be severed from it. Good is of its own nature the object of
desire; the desire and the object being severed breeds pain and unhappiness;
the conjunction of good to the desire is fruition; and if the good be
proportionable to the desire of (it), then in the Union of that good to the
desire there is a full rest and complacency. Now the first cause is moved with
an Infinite love (as I may with fear say) to that Infinite good, which is most
Essentially and Indivisibly the same with himself, and consequently he has an
Infinite rest and complacency in himself, and that without the contribution of
any thing without him; for he had the same boundless happiness in himself
before the existence of any effect, as he had after, because he had the same
measure of goodness, and the same perfect fruition of it before any such
production, as after; the productions of new effects are the emanations only of
his Essence, and produced no alteration in him; neither did it dilate his
Essential goodness, or add a new degree of fruition of good to what he before
had; for he loved the productions of his Will in himself and for himself.

2. That the First Being, as it is the First Cause of all things; so it is the
Supreme End of all things, because he is the Supreme Good, and the only
adequate object of himself. So that in the production of any effect, the effect
that was produced, or any thing without the First Being, could not be the
ultimate End, for which it should be produced; for his Will was and is filled
with an Infinite Good, viz. himself. So that it was impossible he should take
any thing into that Will, which was not in order to himself: He made all things
for his own self. And upon this ground it follows that nothing without him is
an End to it self, because he, that is the First Cause of all things, must
needs be he, that must be the Master and appointer of the End of all things so
caused.

3. From hence it follows that all the Goodness, that is in the Creature, is
nothing else but the print or impression of that Goodness, which is in the
First Being, though according to the different degrees of things the
impressions are more or less genuine; for it is impossible that any thing can
be denominated Good, but by a conformity in some measure to that which is the
First Goodness. That conformity is nothing else but that impression of Divine
Goodness upon the Creature. This impression of the Goodness of the First Cause
upon the Creature is not by any transmission of any part of the Essential
Goodness of the First Being into the Effect, for that is incommunicable; nor by
any physical action of that Goodness upon another thing, but the mere will of
the First Mover. Now we find a fourfold Goodness in the Creature.

1. An Essential Goodness, which is communicated with the very being of it:
thus every thing that is, is Good in it self (though relatively it may be evil)
because in that it is, it is conformable to the First Cause, who wills it to
be. This Goodness in any being is that by reason whereof every thing desires it
self, and is moved to its own preservation, and is intrinsecal to the being of
the thing.

2. An Intrinsecal, but not an Essential, Goodness; when a thing has all those
qualities or requisites in it self, which are suitable and conducible to those
acts and operations that belong to the degree of its being, and the variety of
the degrees in these qualities denominate it more or less Good: thus were all
Creatures in their Original perfectly Good: though every kind had a several
degree of Perfection, yet every thing had a perfection in its kind. This
Goodness is likewise communicated from the First Being. And the suitableness of
those qualities in the creatures to the exigencies of their own conditions do
most evidently manifest the impression of that Goodness, that is in the First
Being.

3. Relative or Communicative Goodness, viz, whereby one thing is conducible or
useful for the preservation or perfection of another thing, and is therefore
desirable or good for it: for though the Essential Goodness of any thing, being
as indivisible is the Essence it self, and therefore in that abstract notion is
not capable of degrees, yet there are degrees of perfection, which a finite
being is capable of, and different degrees of perfection in several beings in
their concrete notion, as a Man is a more perfect being than a Beast, a Spirit
than a Man, though one be as equal a being as the other. This then imports four
things:

1. A Vacuity or absence of some Good, whereof that being is receptible, and
consequently a receptibility of that which may supply it.

2. A Motion or Desire of that being, that has this vacuity and receptibility,
unto that which may supply it, and a desire of Union to it, this it has from
the cause of its being; for the cause of its being must needs be the cause of
this appetite or motion to its farther perfection; and this is sometimes so
strong and active that it carries the creature by way of consequence to the
destruction of that being, which at present it has, to attain a higher being.

3. A proportion between the Vacuity or necessity of the subject desiring to
the thing desired: as a Man to supply his Hunger desires not Clothes, but Meat;
and when cold, desires not Meat, but Clothes; because these hold proportion to
that exigence that the creature desires to fill: And hence it is that Temporal
Good satisfies not a Spiritual substance, nor a Spiritual Good satisfies a
Carnal substance, because they are not proportionable.

4. An Activity in the Good desired to apply it self to the supply of that
exigence which desires it, and to unite it self to it. All these do infallibly
evidence the Goodness of the First Being communicated to the second Being: for
who put into the Creature a Motion or desire to unite it self to that which
might supply its want? who framed a proportionable Good to that Vacuity and
desire? who placed that Activity in any thing to let out and unite that
Goodness, that is in it, to that desire and Vacuity? the very warmth of our
Clothes, the nutriment of our bodies, do bespeak an Infinite Rational
Communicative Goodness, that defined these correspondencies, and has taught
the creatures those mutual motions for their own and each others Good, while
they themselves know not what or why they do it.

7. From the former considerations it follows most evidently that he is most
Just, and that it is impossible he can be otherwise, and this as it necessarily
results from the admission of his Goodness (for Justice is nothing else but
Goodness in a rational Being endued with Will) so it flows from this
consideration that he is the First Cause of all things. Nothing can be said
Unjust which is not contrary to the prohibition of some Law given by something
that can exact obedience to it: Nothing can give the First Being a Law or Rule
but his own will, and consequently he can do nothing but what is most Just,
because it is impossible that any thing else can be a Rule of Justice but
himself: not any thing without him, for then he were not the First Being; not
his creature, for over that he has a most supreme and absolute dominion; How
can that which receives his being, his subsistence, his rules of Justice from
the First Being, prescribe a rule to him, by whom it is, or exact the
performance of it? So that nothing can be the rule of Justice to him but his
own will; and therefore what he wills cannot be but Just, because he wills it:
and as it is impossible for him to act but what he wills; so it is impossible
for him to will but what is Just, because his will is the only rule of his
Justice: and though ex natura rei he might have willed what he does not will,
yet that which he had so willed had been just, yet de facto the act of his will
being Eternal and immutable, it is impossible any unjust thing should be done
by him, because impossible he should do contrary to his own will, which is the
only measure and rule of Justice.

And from this we may clearly evidence,

1. That there is a most absolute unlimited Dominion and Power in the First
Cause over its Effects, and he is bound unto it by no other obligation but his
own Will, which though it does manifest it self in all Mercy, and Tenderness,
and Goodness, and Wisdom toward it, yet it is only because it is his Good will
so to do.

2. That therefore whatsoever Rule or Law the First Cause does prescribe to his
creature, that is capable of a Law, it ought unquestionably to be submitted
unto; for what soever he wills must needs be just, inasmuch as there is no
measure of Justice or Injustice but his will, although we are not to look upon
any thing required by the First Cause but flowing from a most Wise, as well as
a most absolute Will, and so holding a proportion with the ability of that
creature from whom it is required.

3. From hence we find where is the Original of all Justice in the World; it
must all be resolved into that will of the First Cause, and that in a double
respect:

1. In respect of Conformity; for were there no precise Law given to rational
creatures, it is true there could be no Obligation, yet a Conformity in the
actions of rational creatures to the similar actions of the First Cause toward
his Creature would be Comely and Just in a rational Creature: and questionless
as the irrational Creatures have certain Instincts planted in them by their
first creation, which though they are not properly Laws, but Inclinations, to
Man, as he came out of the hands of his Maker with the impression of his Image
upon him, had some conformity to the supreme Justice without any reference to
any Command, which is not clean lost, but even in Men without education does
strangely manifest it self in diverse particulars.

2 In respect of Obligation; for there can be nothing imaginably Unjust,
without these two considerations, viz.

1. A Law commanding or forbidding a thing under a pain: whatsoever falls not
within the command or Prohibition is permitted, and cannot be unjust.

2. A Power to exact an Obedience to that Law, and to inflict the punishment
that follows upon the breach of this Law. Otherwise the Law were ridiculous and
vain.

Now as to the first, without all question the First Cause, in the first
creation of reasonable creatures, did, by what way we know not, give him a Law,
whereby he should live, and which he traduced to his posterity as the Commands
of the First Cause, though in succession of time those grew weaker and
corrupter every day than other. These are those Jura Naturalia, Of the Law of
Nature, the Author has written a particular tract.
which have an influence into all the Laws of Men, as to worship God, to keep
our Promises, etc. and when we come so far as to be persuaded that they are the
Laws of God, then it binds in a fear to offend, because thereby we become
liable to punishment, which we are sure he has Power and Right to inflict, his
Power being universal and unavoidable, and his Right, and Dominion over his
creature absolute and uncontrolable.

Thus we find a plain Obligation in those Laws that are given by the First
Cause, and consequently admitting such a Law, we have a clear Rule, whereby to
measure what is Just, and what is Unjust: and when I can resolve any thing into
the Command or Prohibition of this Law, I find my self bound in Conscience,
viz. under pain of Guilt, to obey. If I enter into a society and agree to be
bound by the Laws, that the greater number of that Society makes, they make a
Law: here be now but two things that can bind me to observe this Law, and
consequently to denominate my disobedience thereunto Unjustice, viz.

The Power of the Society, but that is but a thing extrinsecal, I may avoid
their power, and then I am absolved; and if external power were enough to
denominate my disobedience Unjustice, then if I could procure a power to
overmatch theirs, their obedience to their own Law were injustice.

The Promise and agreement to submit to that Law so made: but what is that that
binds me to keep my promise? if nothing binds me to it, then is not my
disobedience any Unjustice; for the obligation of the Law is resolved into my
agreement; and if nothing above me bind me to keep my agreement, I have no
obligation at all upon me: therefore the Dominion, Power and Justice of the
First Cause is the only Bond, whereby we are bound, and whereunto all Humane
Justice is to be resolved both in point of Conformity as to its Pattern, and
Obligation as to its Law.

But how these Laws were at first given to Man, whether by a formal Command, or
whether by an immediate Impression in the understanding and will, or whether by
an implanted Propension or inclination in the will, or partly by one, partly by
another, it is not easy to determine. Sed vide infra. But what ever way it was,
it is impossible to have any notion or imagination of just or unjust among Men,
without resolving it in its original into the Rule or Law that was given to Men
by the First Cause of our being.

9. From the consideration of the First Cause and of the premises, it must
needs follow, that he is Immutable: for Mutability is inconsistent

1. With his Perfection. It is impossible that a Pure Act can have any Change;
for all Change does necessarily infer Passibility and Receptibility of what it
had not before: and to suppose that, were to conclude he were not Actus
Simplicissimus and Perfectissimus; for all Receptibility imports Potentiam or
Passibilitatem.

2. It is inconsistent with his Eternity: for all Changes too of necessity
suppose a Succession of Duration in the thing changed; it is not to every
intent the same simply, that it was before it had that change, which does of
necessity import Succession, which is inconsistent with Eternity; for
whatsoever is Eternal has no Succession, and consequently whatsoever is
affirmed of it at one instant must necessarily be affirmed of it Eternally:
this cannot stand with any change; for before that change, that could not be
affirmed of him, which might be affirmed after, if it should be admitted.

3. It is inconsistent with his Simplicity. Some things have accidental
changes, which yet in Essence continue the same, as from ignorance to
knowledge, from one color to another: but such accidental changes cannot be in
that, which is Ens Simplicissimum, because there can be nothing in him, which
is not his Essence.

4. It is inconsistent with his Infinitude; for to whatsoever any thing can be
added that it had not before, that cannot be Infinite, because still capable of
a farther accession.

And as this Immutability is affirmed of the First Cause in point of his
Essence and Nature, so in some respects it is concerning his Acts. These are of
two kinds, viz. the Immanent Acts, such are the Acts of his understanding and
Will; and these are Immutable as well as his Essence, for indeed they are but
notionally divided from it. In us our Will is one thing and our willing
another, but that is inconsistent with the Simplicity of the First Cause; hence
it is that as his Essence, so his Will is immutable; he wills nothing now but
what he ever willed, and understood from Eternity what he now knows; for
Eternity has neither now nor then in it.

2. The Emanant Acts; those are nothing else but the Execution of that
Immutable Will; these are subject to mutation, but without the least mutation,
either in the Essence or will of the First Cause.

1. Not in his Essence. It is true here is a new relation that was not before:
for when the First Being produced an Effect, it is true the Relation of a Cause
and an Effect is now produced, which was not before, and so when more Effects
are produced, the Relations are multiplied; but Relations breed no Change at
all in the subject concerning whom they are affirmed: the being was the same
before it put forth it self in a causation, as it was before; it does of
necessity import a change in the thing effected, viz. a motion a non esse
simpliciter, or a non esse tale, but not in the Cause, which had an absolute
being before, though not actually as a Cause before.

2. Not in his Will. It is true, when any Effect is produced that was not
before, here is an execution of what was not before, but the will of that to be
then was from all Eternity. Again when a being is either changed or
annihilated, that is not by a Change of the will in the First Cause, but only
in the term or execution of that Will; for by the same indivisible and eternal
act of his Will, he willed this or that to be made, and after to be annihilated
in time; the Change is in the terminus or execution of his Will, not in the
Will, or the Immanent Act of it.

But how can we then conceive that there should be one Immutable Act of his
Will, when a thing is past? How can he be said to will that which is already
executed and past? That the Willing still continues the same, shall be, and is,
and has been, are the several relations of the thing willed, which is capable
of these successions of duration: they are not relations that may fall upon
that will which is incapable of them, or upon the acts of it.
For which we must return to what has been said, viz. that past, and to come,
are but the measure of Successive Motions, and therefore though they are
applicable to them, yet they are not applicable to an Indivisible Being or Act;
the measures of successive motion do not fit Eternity, which, though it be a
Duration, that consists with the Successive Motion and Duration of the
Creature, yet, it holds no proportion with it. The Motion of the Heavens,
though 10000 times swifter than the motion of a Tortois, have yet a proportion
one to another, because both successive, and so Time measures both: But the
Duration of the First Cause is the Duration of an Indivisible Being, and
consequently holds not proportion with Succession. And hence it is, that it is
but our gross conception that do imagine any part of Eternity past, or any part
to come, or that Time does divide the fore part of Eternity from the future
part of Eternity: It is an indivisible permanent Duration, nothing past,
nothing future, but the same fixed instant; consequently the Act of the Divine
will always one, always present. This Knowledge is too wonderful for me.

CHAP. II. Of the Works of God of Creation and Providence.
THUS far have we proceeded in those inquiries, which rectified Reason suggests
to us concerning the Nature of the First Cause: Now we consider the Emanant
Acts of his Will and Power upon things without him; for from this
consideration, that he is the First Being, it likewise follows that All things
besides him must needs have their being and subsistence from him. This falls
into these two Conclusions:

1. That all thing besides himself have their being from him.

2. That all things are directed and governed unto their several Ends by him.

Touching the former, viz. That all things besides him have their original
being from him, that is a necessary consequent of the admission of a First
being: for whatsoever is not first, there was a time when it was not; for
otherwise it must be eternal, the contrary whereof is before evidenced. That
then which once was not, and now is, and consequently had a beginning of its
being, could not have it from it self; for nothing has a power or activity of
it self to produce any thing; therefore that second being must needs be
produced by the First Being; the consequences whereof are these.

1. That all things except the First Cause had a beginning of their being, and
consequently there was no Eternal Matter, out of which any thing was made.

2. That all Beings had their first being from him that is the First Being.
This is evident by what goes before.

3. That the first production of all things by the First Being is purely and
solely by way of Efficiency; and not by derivation of substance from himself?
for that is impossible; his Essence is Immaterial and Indivisible.

4. The manner of this Efficiency, or his Causality is not any act distinct
from himself, but only the me^e act of his mere Will, which is essentially the
same with himself, and with his Infinite Power.

And herein the first production of second Beings differs from that manner of
causation, which is ordinary in subsequent productions of things: for the first
production of beings was an infinite motion, viz. from a simple not-being to a
being, and therefore was acted immediately by the Infinite Power and Will of
the First Cause, there being no instrument to be used; or if it had been, yet
any instrument had been infinitely disproportionable to such a motion. But in
the subsequent production of most things, the matter preexisting, and so the
motion not being a non esse simpliciter, the causation of the First Cause is by
instruments and second Causes.

5. That as the first production of all things was the immediate act of his
will, so the disposing of all things into that Order and frame, wherein they
now are, was the immediate Act of his Will, and Power, and Wisdom. This is
evident upon a double ground, viz. First because whatsoever had its being from
another, had its esse tale from him. 2. It is not conceptible that if all the
things in the World had been put together, they being all irrational
substances, they should ever have marshalled themselves into that order they
are in, unless the First Being had so willed it. And if it should be admitted
that the Forms and Qualities of the several beings would naturally have
inclined them to their several places and stations, which though all things had
been wrapped together, would by degrees have severed and taken their places. That
as it is impossible to imagine would ever have been, unless the substances
themselves as well as their active qualities had been divided: so if it were
granted, it were equally to be resolved into the Will of the first Being to put
such Forms, Qualities and Inclinations in things conducing to, and effecting
such an order, as if that Order and Fabric of things had been by the immediate
call of every thing into its Order and Rank by the First Cause.

6. That the production of Mankind especially was the immediate work of the
First Being. This is touched before.

7. That all these Activities that are in Second Causes are put into them by
the First Cause, and they work in the virtue of the First Cause; so that
although the Effect be not the immediate production of the First Cause, yet the
Activity and Power, that is put in the second Cause to work, is originally due
to the First Cause. And hence it is that a more ignoble being does produce
sometimes a being of a higher nature than it self, as the Earth produces
Vegetables, Putrefaction Sensibles, because the vigor and Activity that causes
it, was at first put into the second causes by the First: so that though they
move uniformly, omnibus recte dispositis, yet they act in virtute Primae Causae.

8. Though Second Causes work naturally and uniformly for the most part, where
all things are equally disposed, and this by the virtue of that Activity, which
by the will and Power of the First Cause was at first put in them, yet this
Activity is managed and ordered so that it neither breaks the Law of its
causality or motion, that was at first put into it, nor yet disturbs or
disorders the universal fabric of Nature, things being at first framed in that
order, that each should be a corrective to the other in case of exorbitancy, de
hoc infra.

9. From hence it follows that the constant and uniform Course of Nature is not
to be attributed to it self, but only to the Will of the First Cause, that
wills it to continue in that frame, though he has ordained Means subservient
to that end.

10. From hence it follows that as all things in actu primo owe their being to
the will of the First Cause, constant and uniform Course of Nature is not to to
be attributed to itself, but only to the Will of the First Cause, that wills it
to continue in that frame, though he has ordained Means subservient to the
will of the First Cause, so in actu secundo, viz. their continuance and
subsistence is due only, to that Will: they were made because he willed it, and
they continue because he wills it. And this, as it is most true in respect of
the whole frame of Nature, which has no adequate means of its subsistence, but
the Will of the First Cause; so it is true likewise, as in the beings, so in
the continued subsistence of Second Causes, which though they are, and are
supported immediately by Second Causes, Qualities and concurrences, yet the
Activity and Power, that is in these Second Causes to produce or continue these
Effects, is due to the First Cause, and continues in them by virtue of that
Will, that at first planted it in them.

2. The Disposing of all things to their several Ends, whether remote or near,
belongs to this First Cause.

Every Intellectual Agent works for some End or other; the First Cause we have
showed to be an Intellectual Agent; therefore what he works, he works for some
End answerable to the Work and Worker, and it must of necessity be that he that
is the First Cause, or Efficient of all things, must needs be the appointer of
his own End in that Work.

The End, though it be last in execution, is first in intention; for it moves
the Agent to the work, or otherwise, though he work not without an Event, he
does it without an End. Now that which is first in Efficiency must needs be the
first designer of his own End, which is but the result of his Work; A Second
Cause, though he may have an End in his Causation proportionable to the
causality wherewith he is endued; yet as his Efficiency is subordinate to, and
derived from the Efficiency of the First Cause, so must his End be: it may be
an Ultimate End in respect of it, it is but interlocutory, or rather no End at
all, in respect of the First Cause, but only a means conducing to the Execution
of the End of the first Cause. When a passionate Ambitious or Covetous Man
drives mainly and wholly at the satisfaction of those lusts as his End, and
that End draws out his activity and strength to compass them, yet a wise
Statesman, according to the convenience or exigence of the Public, can manage
and order this Ambition, and the Satisfaction thereof unto a higher End, which
the other never so much as dreamed of.

As we therefore divide all Beings and Causes into First and Second, so we
distinguish all Ends into the Ends of the First Cause, and of Second Causes.
Touching the End of the First Cause, we say it is twofold.

1. That which is the End in respect of himself. This is nothing but the
Satisfaction of his own Will. As we must resolve the being of all things into
the Will of the First Cause in point of Efficiency, so in this respect we must
resolve all things into that same Will in point of Finality; and this is the
most adequate and Ultimate resolution of all things, they are because he wills
them to be. For the First Cause, being absolutely and infinitely Perfect and
Good, cannot originally be moved by any thing without him; that would import a
Passibility, viz. to be moved and impulsed to any thing by any thing without
him; and an Imperfection, which might be supplied by the acquisition of that
End, for which he works: both these are necessarily to be admitted in any case,
where any End extrinsecal to the Efficient it self is admitted: for 1. the End
has an impulsion or action upon the efficient, and 2. it necessarily supposes
a vacuity or emptiness quoad hoc, which shall be supplied with that End
acquired, be it an End of Supplement or Delight. Neither of these are possibly
to be admitted in the First, who is an Infinite Good commensurate to the
Infinite measure of his own Will. The Final Cause then of all things is, He
wills because He wills. His Glory is a consequence of his Work in the Work, not
the ultimate End of his Work, because nothing that he made can contribute ought
to his Glory or Happiness.

2. In respect of the thing produced, the ordination of every particular thing
to its particular End, either in order to it self, or to some thing else, or
both, the Intermediate Ends of all things being different according to their
several natures and the several dispensations of the Divine will. That this may
be so, is evident upon the consideration of that Infiniteness of Wisdom, Power
and Presence of the First Cause, which before is considered: and that it must
be so is likewise evident upon the consideration before expressed, viz. that
the Will of the First Cause is the Cause of all beings and operations in the
World: Nothing can be, unless he wills it to be: and this will must needs be
extended to every individual thing and motion in the World, for as well as any
might evade the determination of his will, all things might.

There be three degrees of things, Natural, Contingent, and Voluntary: Now the
Means of carrying things merely Natural to their several Ends, ordinarily is
that Rule and Order, which he has set in things Natural, and those Propensions
and Inclinations, which are planted in things, to the observance of that Law.
Now this has a threefold reference to the First Cause:

1. Of Position or giving; for it is not imaginable that this Rule was taken up
by the things themselves: the Law of Nature, and the Frame, order and Course of
thing according to that Law, does most necessarily conclude a Lawgiver, and
although the motion of the Law or Rule of Nature is for the most part uniform,
yet it does in no sort follow that therefore it moved not from a voluntary
Agent. But though it infinitely speaks his Wisdom, that did so foresee and
order all things, that one uniform Law or Rule should serve, without any
alteration; for a change of a Rule imports Imperfection in the Rule, and a want
of foresight, in him that makes it, of those emergencies that induce such an
alteration. Now in as much as nothing could be, but it was first in the Will of
the First Cause, and consequently in his Knowledge, all those Propensions, Rules
and Orders of Nature, which he has put into things, are exactly subservient to
those purposes, and consequently to the effects produced by it.

2. Of Concurrence with it, all things depending upon the First Cause, as well
in the support as in the Original of its subsistence.

3. Of Subordination to it. Hence it is that extraordinarily the Ordinary Rule
of Nature is intermitted: for though the most exact uniform Rule unalterable in
the least point may nevertheless proceed from a Free Agent, because the
uniformity of the Rule proceeds not from it self, but because the First Cause
wills it to be so, and yet has exactly fitted it to the bringing about his
Ends; yet because Mankind is apt to mistake, sometimes there is an intermission
or interruption of that Course of Nature: this Subordination likewise appears
by the Direction and forming of it to special purposes, wherein whiles the
Second Cause moves according to the Rule of Nature that is set in it, yet by
the Concatenation and Conjuncture of other things, which happily moved
naturally thither, some strange effect is produced beyond the reach of that
Natural Agent: as when an Artificer, by conjuncture of several things together,
makes use of the natural motion of the Lead poise to work a circular, or other
strange motion in a Clock or Engine.

Now the Law or Rule of Nature, as in diverse other particulars, so in these it
most evidently shows it self to be nothing else but the Course, that the
great Master of the World has put in things.

1. Those Propensions that are in things for their own Preservation and
Protection. Hence those motions of Inanimate things as it were to their several
homes and stations appointed by the First Cause, Multiplication of their kinds,
Specifical Inclinations incident to a whole kind.

2. The Subserviency of one thing to the use and exigence of another, wherein
for the most part the more Imperfect is still subservient to the more Perfect,
and all to Man.

3. The Disposition of things in those places and ranks as may be most useful,
and as may best prevent that disorder and confusion, which contrary qualities
would produce; as appears in the Elements, in hurtful creatures.

4. The Subordination of the particular Inclinations and Dispositions of any
particular to the prevention of that which is contrary to the Law of the
universe.

5. The admirable Concurrence of things endued with contrary qualities and
destructive each to other in t^^ ^onstitution of mixed bodies, showing a hand
that tempers and overrules them in their operations and causalities.

2. Contingent Effects. In reality there is nothing in the World Contingent,
because every thing that has bin, is, or shall be, is praedetermined by an
Immutable Will of the First Being: But we therefore call a thing Contingent
because either we find no constant Rule or determination of the immediate cause
to the production of the effect, or an effect resulting out of the conjunction
of causes that have no natural connection one with another. When the Prophet
that prophesied against Bethel, returned back, met the Lion, and the Lion slew
him, here was a Voluntary Act in the Prophet, viz. to go, a Contingent Act in
the meeting with the Lion, a Natural Act in the Lion to kill him: now because
this death of the Prophet had no necessary connection with all the causes that
concurred to it, neither had the journey of the Prophet any necessary connection
with the walk of the Lion that they must needs meet, the death of the Prophet,
though it had a kind of natural connection with the next cause that preceded it,
was in the estimation of Men Contingent; yet in respect of that
predetermination that was of all this business, (which was not therefore
predetermined because spoken by the old Prophet, who had only a revelation of
That counsel) the whole frame of this business was necessary, yet note that
this predetermination did not alter the nature of the intermediate causes: the
journey of the Prophet was nevertheless voluntary, the meeting with the Lion
Contingent, the death of the Prophet by the Lion in effect necessary. So the
Divine Predetermination of Effects predetermines them in their several Causes,
and takes not away the truth of the denomination of Necessary, Contingent, and
Voluntary: it predetermines the being of each; but the being of the first but
to be necessarily, because it predetermines it to depend upon a necessary
cause, as the Eclipse of the Sun; it predetermines the being of the second, but
to be contingently, because it predetermines it to be upon contingent and
unconnexed causes; it predetermines the third to be, but to be voluntarily,
because it has predetermined it to be upon a voluntary cause. All things to
him have the same necessity of being, though distinguished in their manner of
being, which are represented to our understanding under the notions of
Necessary, Contingent, and Voluntary.

3. We have considered the influence of the First Cause upon the creature in
actu primo, which is giving it a being, or creation, and as to things Natural
and Contingent, in actu secundo, which is Providence or Government: Now
concerning the relation that Man, the only visible Intellectual and Voluntary
being in the World, [hath] We must premise to this consideration what has been
partly observed, viz.

1. That the first disposal of every thing to its several End does of right
belong to the First Cause.

2. That this End is twofold: 1. In respect of the First Cause the mere
fulfilling of his own Will: 2. In respect of the Creatures: 1. relatively one
to another, a Subordination of one thing to and for another, as the more
imperfect to the more perfect: 2. absolutely, the End that is planted in every
thing is its own Preservation and Perfection.

3. That as the implanted End of every thing is his own being and perfection,
so the being of things being different, both in nature and degrees of
Excellence, so are their Perfections different, the Perfection of Animate above
the Inanimate, the Perfection of the Sensitive above the Animate, and of the
Rational above the Sensitive.

4. That as the several Creatures are moved to their several Preservations and
Perfections, as to their several Ends, so they have suitable Inclinations,
Dispositions and Motions placed in them conducible to those Ends: as the
Motions of Bodies to their several stations; the generation of Vegetables, and
their attraction of supplies of nourishment answerable to their tempers; the
fading of Sensitives, and assimilation of the nourishment to their own nature,
supplying the decays thereof; Natural Instincts of every species to avoid those
things, places, and foods that are destructive, providing for varieties of
Seasons, multiplication of their Species; and infinite the like, which is
nothing else but that Rule, Law or Means, that the First Cause has put in them
for the attaining that End, which he has put in them, viz. their Preservation
and Perfection. And this is the great Wisdom, as I may call it, of the
Creature, that it pursues that End, by that Law, which the First Cause has
given it.

Mankind has some things in him common with other inferior Beings, and in
respect thereof has the same Natural End, viz. the Preservation of his
Subsistence by the same Law of Nature, which he does, and may, and ought to
preserve, as other Creatures do. But if he have a higher degree of Being than
other Creatures, then consequently he has these two things different from
other Creatures.

1. A higher End than other Creatures planted in him by the First Cause,
whereinto he is, or should be carried.

2. A higher and different Law given by the First Cause in order to that End,
which whiles he follows he is most wise, because most conformable to the Will
of his Maker, and moves to a suitable End to himself, by a suitable Means, and
which when he declines, he is more brutish than the Beast, because he either
moves to no End, or by such a Rule, by which it is impossible he should attain
it.

The Conclusion then is, That Man was by the First Cause made for an End
answerable to his own Perfection by such a Rule or Law as was by the First
Cause ordained to be conducible to this End: That therefore all other Ends and
Perfections that are below the uttermost hight and Perfection of Man may
consist with this End; for we are not to conceive so improvidently of the First
Cause, that he should put a thing in such a degree of being, that the Ends and
Rules incident to any consideration of him should be inconsistent with his
Supreme End; all stood together; but if by any casualty it should fall out that
there were an inconsistency, all the Subordinate Ends must give way to this
Supreme End: That the pursuit of this great End, whatsoever it is, by this
Rule, is exactly conformable to the Will of the First Cause; by this, Man does
two works at once, God's work and his own: That this is the Great Business of
Man, the highest act of Wisdom, deserves all his labor, study, and endeavor,
and all the rest of his Business in the World is either lost labor, or worse,
if not subservient to this great End.

We are therefore to enquire into these three things:

1. Wherein consists the Eminence of the being of Man above other Creatures;
for without this we cannot know that Perfection which must be the object of his
desire.

2. What is this Perfection, that is thus to be desired and attained.

3. By what Means, and how it is attainable.

CHAP. III. Of Man, his Excellence above other Creatures.
THE Goodness of the Wise Creator was communicated to his Effects, 1. in giving
them a Being, 2. in assigning to every thing a portion of Perfection in
themselves answerable to the degree of their Being, 3. a Motion or Desire to
the attaining and conserving that Perfection, and consequently of their Being,
which is the Vessel wherein that Perfection is held, 4. a Rule or Law wherewith
it is endued to regulate and direct and enable his Motions in the attaining of
that Desire.

Thus we find in all Creatures below Man, every thing moving to its own
Preservation and Perfection by a strong Desire and constant Rule, and enjoying
a kind of Happiness in the Fruition of that End, which the First Cause gave it
as its Portion: Nay in the very Dissolution of the Creature, this is that which
moves the ingredients thereof to part themselves, or concur in the production
of some third thing, the thing corrupted struggling nevertheless as long as it
can to keep it self entire.

Man, though in his lower part he has somewhat common with other, V. Originat
1. c. 2.
especially sensible Creatures, and therefore in that respect resembles them in
his Motions Fruitions and Ends; yet he has something that is of a higher
Constitution, and consequently capable of a higher Perfection, whereunto he
moves as his End, by a Law or Rule answerable to so great an End, this latter
being of a higher Frame, yet answerable to that in other Creaturers, which we
call the Law of Nature, Instinct, or Natural Inclination.

The first thing therefore examinable is, Wherein consists this Perfection of
Man above other Creatures: And questionless that is in his Soul, which
actuates, animates, and directs his Body: and therefore before we can find out
what is that End, that is answerable to the degree of Man's being, we must
enquire what this Soul is, wherein Man's Perfection consists, whereby we shall
be able to measure out what End will serve it.

The Soul of Man is considerable:

1. In its absolute Essence we must conclude it to be an Immterial Immortal
Substance. This though it be a certain truth, yet it is impossible naturally to
demonstrate it: the reason is, because nothing can come to our Understandings
demonstratively but either by our Senses, or by Discourse and Reasons deduced
from such things as so come to our Senses. It is true the First Cause falls not
under our Senses, yet by necessary deduction [from what falls under our Senses]
we necessarily conclude, That he is, and in some things, What he is: but the
Being of the Soul, as it is not conspicuous to the Sense, so it is not
deducible by Demonstration: it is a Truth which is revealed at first
supernaturally, and afterward traductively. It is true that when we have the
knowledge of it, we may find many reasons to fortify it, diverse difficulties
thereby reconciled, which without that admitted were almost impossible to be
broken through; which stings the most bold and adventurous sinner or Atheist
with an invincible suspicion of the truth of this Truths yet I cannot find how
merely by Natural Reason a Man can first find out the truth of this
Proposition, That the Soul is a Substance Immaterial. We owe this truth in its
original to Divine Revelation, though when discovered, the contribution of
rectified Reason may conclude it at least probable.

But that being granted, it does of necessity follow, that it is Immortal and
Incorruptible: for that which is Immaterial, is actus simflex, which excludes a
composition of Matter and Form, not Simflicissimus, which excludes the
composition ex Ente and Essentia, or ex Actu and Potentia. Now concerning those
Reasons those Reasons that conduce to prove the Of this the Author has written
a large Tract, which he finished but a little before his Death: and it was the
last Work he meddled with.
Immortality and Spirituality of the Soul;

I. From the manner of its Operation:

1. In the understanding, which though it takes its rise from things that pass
through the Sense, yet it refines them from their Materiality, concludes from
them things, which are not conveyed in by the Senses, abstracts, rises to the
consideration and apprehension of Spiritual Truths.

2. In the Will, which is carried to affect a Good that falls not within the
reach of Sense, controlls and commands the Sensual Appetite, takes it off from
those things which it pursues as naturally and violently as the hungry Lion
does his Prey, and imposes a Law of Reason upon them.

3. From the Conscience, that startles at the committing of a horrid Offense,
though with the greatest secrecy and outward security in the World. Sed de his.
Latius infra.

2. From the Justice of God. It is questionless certain, that as God put in the
several Instincts and Propensions in the inferior Creatures, whereby they are
carried to their Ends; so there was some Rule given to Man, that was answerable
to the several dimensions of those Abilities he had above other Creatures, viz.
Understanding and Will. And questionless, as those Propensions are internal to
the inferior Creatures, and do not only rule their Actions, but also their
Inclinations, so this Law that was given to Man, extended not only to his
outward Actions, but to those inward Motions of his Soul, by the violation of
the least part of which Law he incurred a Guilt, which is an Obligation to
Punishment, according to the Penalty of this Law. Now it is impossible that
this Justice should be executed, considering especially the outward
dispensation of things, without the Object of this Justice survived his Body.

3. From the Wisdom of God, who surely gave not his Creature an Understanding
that might arrive to know him, a Will rationally and ex deliberatione to obey
him, and yet that all this should die with the Body! But who is sufficient for
these things?

Here is the first Eminence then of Man above other things, that he carries
about him an Immaterial and Immortal Soul, which survives his Body, and this
necessarily concludes that the Good, or End, or Happiness answerable to this
Perfection, cannot be either Material or Mortal.

1. Not Material, because it holds not proportion with that Nature and
Receptibility of the Soul. And from hence as it is most rational to conclude,
that any Object of the Sense can never be that Good that the Soul drives at, so
it is most evident by two Experiments.

1. In the Weariness, Nauseousness, and unsatisfactoriness of them. If a Man
had all the Wisdom and Contrivance in the World, and the most eager and intense
desire after these Objects of Sense, or the Sensual Appetite, that can be
imagined, and all those Supplies and Opportunities that might conduce to the
filling of these Desires, yet in the midst of those Enjoyments he would find a
Nauseousness, a Satiety, a Weariness. And that is the reason that voluptuous
Men travel from one Pleasure to another. Which though they are exquisitely
proportionable to that Sense they are framed for, yet there is somewhat within,
which is still empty and craves, who cannot relish nor taste those Enjoyments,
and cries after something that may be more suitable to it, and the Man not
knowing what that is, travels from one thing to another to find somewhat to
satisfy that Desire, but cannot till he light upon that Good that is
Immaterial.

2. In that the more Spiritual the Object is, the more satisfaction it breeds.
Hence the Soul does in effect Spiritualize all that comes into it by
abstractions and rational deductions. And from hence among mere natural Men,
the Contemplative is the most happy, because he fits his Soul with Food in some
measure answerable to it. And according to the levity or weight, vanity or
reality of the Object, this Enjoyment is diversified.

2. Not Mortal or perishing. As the want of a proportion between the Immaterial
nature of the Soul and Material Objects, renders them unpleasing and
unsatisfactory to the Soul; so if there were a suitableness between their
Natures, yet if there were a suitableness in their Duration, it wants that
which is necessarily required to Happiness, or an End answerable to the Soul,
and that upon a double Reason.

1. In the Fruition. The very Enjoyment of a suitable Good, which I am sure
must leave me, mi^gles fear and preapprehension of the loss of my present
Enjoyment, and consequently cannot possibly be Happiness. And from hence
likewise grows that Vexation, which is dipped in the highest Enjoyments: every
Man in the very Enjoyments, has the present apprehension of an inevitable
future loss of them, especially in Death, which does take away that possibility
of farther uniting of external Objects to Man.

2. In the Loss of it. That cannot be a suitable End to an Immortal Being, that
must be severed from it.

The Conclusion therefore of this Consideration is, that the Wise Maker of Man,
as he has made him a living corporeal Creature, did put into his hand such a
Good, as was common with other Creatures, which he may justly enjoy: so, as he
furnished him with an Immaterial Immortal Soul, he did order that Soul to an
End answerable to it self, and above other Creatures, viz. an Immaterial
Immortal Good. And less than this cannot be an End answerable to the Wisdom of
the Worker, nor value of the Work.

2. Thus concerning the Nature of the Soul; now concerning the Faculties,
whereby it is enabled to move to that End. And these have a threefold use:

1. First they serve as fit Receptacles to entertain, and be united unto that
Good, which is the proper End of the Soul, and hold some proportion with that
Object, wherein the Happiness of the Soul consists.

2. They serve as Receptacles to receive that Rule or Law, which must conduce
to that End, and therefore they are likewise fitted for that.

3. They serve as Helps and Instruments actively to move to that End. these
three are seen likewise in inferior Creatures: 1. They have a Receptibility of
that Good, which is answerable to their Nature: 2. A Receptibility of that
Instinct, which is their Law, whereby they are directed to that Good: 3. An
Activity in them to carry them on to that Good, according to that Rule or
Propension.

The two great Affections, that every Being is endued with, is the Truth of its
being, and the Goodness of it: answerable to those are the two great Faculties
or Powers of the Soul; the Understanding, which is conversant about the former;
and the Will, which is conversant about the latter. Yet in the very same
Faculties both these are conjoined under their distinct Notions, the
Understanding taking into consideration the Truth of that which is propounded
as Good, and the Will being carried with a desire to the Knowledge of Truth as
Good.

Now concerning the Understanding, it has a threefold Power:

1. A Receptive or Passive Power, whereby it takes in those Objects that are
conveyed to it by an impression from without, whether it be by the ordinary and
natural way of the Sense, or by a supernatural impression, or by artificial
means, as Speech, or Reading, or other Signs. And thus it receives not only
simple Apprehensions, but likewise Complex, or Propositions Now without this
receptive power, it were impossible for any knowledge to be in the Soul,
because our Knowledge is not by Intuition, as the Divine Knowledge is, but by
reception of the thing known, into the Soul. And hence it is plain, that all
Knowledge is extrinsecal to the Soul; for though it be apta nata to receive the
species or object into it, yet without such reception it cannot actually know
it.

2. A Retentive Power of the Object or Proposition received. Without this it
were impossible for the Discursive Power of the Understanding to hammer any
thing out of it.

3. An Active and Discursive Power, whereby the Understanding is able to work
upon those Objects thus received and retained, and deduce Conclusions and
Consequences from them: So that though the foundation of this intellectual
Motion be from those things that are impressed from without upon the Soul, yet
when they are once there, this active and discursive part of the Understanding
can draw millions of Conclusions, create millions of Mixtures, and entia
rationis, which present not themselves at first to the passive Understanding.

The Rule whereby this Active Power of the Understanding works, is that we call
Reason, which is but a beam of the Divine Light, a part of the Image of God in
Man, and of singular use in all his Actions, if rightly used. De hoc infra.

Now as all Receptive or Passive Powers are perfected by the receipt of the
Object which may fill that vacuity, which is in the Power; and as all Powers
are likewise perfected by Acts and Habits; so are these Intellectual Powers;
they have their several Acts and Habits, whereby they are perfected and moved:

1. Knowledge, and this I may call of two kinds:

1. Passive Knowledge, which answers to the Passive part of the Understanding.
Such is the Knowledge of Simple Apprehensions, which come through the Senses,
and the Knowledge of Principles, and these are of two kinds:

1. Such as are per se nota, and without any Argumentation are subscribed unto,
as many Principles in the Mathematics.

2. Such as are inscribed in the Heart of Man by the Maker of Man. Thus without
all question at first, God did indite his Law in the Heart of Man; but this
being not essential to the Soul, though he retained his Intellectual Soul; his
Principles of this kind were obliterated: and therefore it was the Mercy of God
from time to time to inculcate them into Man's Posterity. Sed de hoc infra.

2. Active or Discursive Knowledge. This bottoms it self upon those simple
apprehensions, that are in the Passive Understanding, and upon those Principles
that are in the Soul, and by purifying things from their materiality,
abstracting, rising from the Effect to the Cause, and so downward, by the aid
of that Light and Rule of Reason, which the God of Wisdom has put into the
Soul, arrives to those Truths, that lie in the Creature, as Gold in the Stone,
beyond the reach of Sense to acquire.

Now in this respect the Understanding of Man is of vast and boundless
Capacity, and is capable to receive all the things in the World, and nothing
that is finite can satisfy it. And hence it is, that it moves from one thing
to another, to meet with somewhat that may satisfy the vast Comprehension of
it. It is true, the higher and more noble the Object is that is known, the more
delight and satisfaction it gives: but yet all is too strait and narrow to
satisfy it. If it could meet with an Object to which it might be united
perfectly, and that were large enough to fill it, then this Faculty of the
Understanding in this act of its Knowledge had its Happiness, because it then
had found that to which it most naturally moves, and wherein it rests. Now
nothing can do this, but the First and infinite Truth. My Understanding is as
capable of comprehending the whole Earth, as it is of a Tennis Ball; and, could
there be a means to unite the Object to my Understanding, were as capacious of
the comprehension of the Compass of the Heavens, as it is of either of the
former; yet when I had acquired that knowledge, I should still have a vacuity,
which might comprehend a million of Heavens more: For my Understanding pares
off the bulk of quantity, and the vastest body take up no more room in my
Understanding than an atome. Therefore certainly I conclude that the Wise God,
that has put my Understanding into such a motion, that it cannot rest in the
knowledge of the Creature, and is too comprehensive for it, has appointed
himself to be the End of my Understanding in this act or habit of Knowledge,
wherein I shall find an Object infinitely more than answerable to the value,
worth, and comprehension of my Understanding. This then is the End, and
consequently the Rest and Happiness in point of Knowledge, to know my Creator.

2. Wisdom. This is nothing else, but sound Reason; and though it respect the
whole Man, yet it principally resides in the Understanding. This is diversified
according to the different Objects, about which it is conversant, and
accordingly, gives the denomination of a Wise Commander, a Wise Statesman, etc.
But that which is the adequate Wisdom of a Man, denominates him a Wise Man.
This consists in three things.

1. In the discovery of the true and adequate End of Man. Man has several
particular Ends, to which he is ordained, though in several degrees and
stations; and every one of these Ends do, and may consist one with the other:
but that Man, that arrives not to the Ultimate and Supreme End, has not that
Wisdom, which is commensurate to the Nature of Man.

2. The discovery of the right Means and Rule to attain to that End. Man, as we
have said, has several Ends, and several Means there are conducible to that
End. Conservation of the Compositum, is an End common to Man and other
Creatures; and in order to this, he has several Means conducing to this End,
as choice of his Diet, and moderation in it: Securing himself from Injuries,
and in order to this, acquiring of Riches, and Power, and Friends; Settled
Societies and Commonwealths, and in order to these Policies, Laws, Trade, etc.
Perpetuating of his kind by Propagation. These Ends, and those Means, when
known, do denominate a Man Wise; though this Wisdom differs in degrees,
according to the several values of these Ends: But any, or all of these, do not
rise to that Wisdom, that is the proportionable Wisdom of a Man; because these,
as they are but temporary, and die with the Man, so they are but extrinsecal,
and come not up to the value of the Soul. The Wisdom answerble to a Man, is
that which orders him to his Everlasting and Spiritual End, by those Means that
are suitable to it.

3. The due Prosecution of this End by these Means. There are three great
Follies in the Actions of Mankind:

1. In making that an End of his Actions, which in truth is not, but only a
means in order to something else: for instance, Riches are in truth nothing but
a Means tending to our outward preservation and support against Injuries and
Necessities; the like of Honor, and Power; but when a Man shall move toward
Riches, or Honor, or Power, to that end that he may be rich or great, here is
a mistake and a folly in resting in that as the End, which in truth is nothing,
nor of no value, but in order to Preservation of it self, and of that Society
wherein he is, and consequently of himself.

2. In misapplying Means to that End at which he drives, which though the End
be right, is folly; but if the End be mistaken, is double folly. He that makes
Riches his End, if he endeavor to attain it by playing at Dice, or other unfit
Means, he misses both his End, and Means of it.

3. In Prosecution of inferior Ends immoderately, and without subordination to
higher Ends. The Wise God has so ordered all things, especially Man, with that
order and subordination, that all his Ends may be prosecuted by all due Means;
yet one End, Means, or Prosecution, not injurious, but rather helpful to
another: and the want of distinction in our Ends, Means, and Prosecutions,
breeds that disorder, confusion and folly among men in their actions and Ends.
Meat and Drink is necessarily conducible to my preservation; I may, and by the
Law of Nature am bound to use it: Wealth and Riches are a means conducible to
provision of those supplies, and to the propulsion of the injuries of necessity
and Men: Honor and Power in Civil Societies, are conducible to the support and
well ordering of that Society, which is my defense against the Injuries that I
may receive from another man or men: All these may be used, and all so far from
hindering one another in my preservation and outward Felicity, that they are
all conducible to the same End; and not only so, but may be consistent with the
prosecution of my high and supreme End, and assisting to me in it, when I use
them with subordination to it: But without this right use of things to their
own Ends, and with their due Subordination, all things prove unuseful and
destructive to it self, and one to another: My eating and drinking turn to
Luxury and Excess, and become destructive to me, and consume that Wealth, which
should be the provision of my conveniences, and my support against Injuries: My
pursuit of Wealth turns to Covetousness and Sordidness, whereby I straiten my
self in the supply of my own Conveniences, and lay my self open to detestation,
curses, and envy of others; whereby it is become the means of my ruin, which
well dispensed, might be the means of my preservation: My Honor and Power is
turned into vanity and tyranny, whereby I become the envy, scorn, and
detestation of that Society, wherein consists my outward safety, exposing my
self to be ruined by the Society whereof I am a Member, and the Society to the
ruin of others, by my improvident managing of my Power. And in this inordinate
prosecution of any of them, without the due subordination of all to my supreme
End, I lose my Happiness, miserably mispending the utmost and height of my
Endeavors to the attaining of that, which is below me, and yet lose the End,
which may be had by them, if pursued with due subordination to my great End.

By what has been premised, we see a double difference: 1. between bare
Knowledge and Wisdom; 2. between that Wisdom which is particular, and that
which is the Supreme Wisdom.

The difference between the two former is, 1. In their Object; though every
Scibile is the Object of Knowledge, it is not of Wisdom. 2. In the Use; Many
things are known only, that they may be known; but Wisdom is in order to Action
and Motion to the thing known, as profitable, or from it, as hurtful; it is an
act of practical Understanding, not purely speculative.

The difference between the two latter: that which is particular Wisdom, is but
temporary, subservient principally to the Body, subordinate, and when it wants
its due subordination, proves irrational: but the other is perpetual, because
fixed upon a perpetual End, principally concerning the Soul; supreme and simple
without mixture of any thing in it below Reason.

3. Conscience. Which is a high act of the Understanding; for as Wisdom looks
and moves forward, by the right Rule or Principle, to the right End, so
Conscience looks backward, and measures the acts and motions of the Soul, by
these Rules or Principles, and consists of three Propositions:

1. It does of necessity presuppose a Rule or Principle given unto Man,
directing him in his motion to his Supreme End. We see all things natural have
some Principle, Instinct or Law, whereby they are carried to their several Ends
and Operations: That which is in them an Instinct, was to Man a Law, because
being endued with Understanding and Will, he was susceptible of a Law, which
inferior Creatures were not. Now as the interruption of that Law or Rule in
Natural things, brings an Obliquity and Irregularity in their motions, and so
diverts them from that End, to which otherwise they would arrive; so the
Violation of this Law or Rule given to Man, does at once subject him to a
threefold Mischief:

1. A Loss of that End, which the regular motion, according to that Rule, which
God gave him, would have carried him unto: for the Wise God, having disposed
all things to their Ends; has done it in, and according to those ways, which
he has prescribed them to move in to those Ends.

2. A Deformity and Vncomeliness contracted by the violation of that Rule. When
the Creatures came out of God's hands, they were Good and Beautiful: that
Beauty and Goodness consisted in nothing else but a Conformity to the Will of
God in their Beings, Motions, and Ends: if any of that Conformity be altered,
there arises presently a Deformity, uselesness and uncomeliness in the
Creature. The same it is with Man: he received, questionless, a Rule to live
and move to a most suitable End, and conformable to the Will of the First
Cause, that ordered him to that End: as long as he moves conformable to that
Rule, he moves according to the Will of his Maker, to a most suitable End: but
when once he violates that Rule, he contracts a Deformity, Ataxy, and
Uncomeliness by such violation.

3. An Obligation to some Positive Punishment annexed to the violation of that
Law: for let us suppose any Creature, wanting Will and Understanding, that did
notwithstanding, not move according to this Rule, by this he would most clearly
contract the two former, viz. Loss and Deformity: but where a Law is given to a
Creature endued with these Faculties, the violation of the Law so given,
includes in it, not only a Privative Offense, as I may call it, to which a
Privative Punishment may be answerable, but a Positive Rebellion, Rejection,
and Disobedience to that Duty, and Subjection he owes, and is enabled to
perform to his Maker: and therefore it is most just and rational, that there
should be added, as a Sanction to that Law, some Positive Penalty to revenge
such a violation; that as the Obedience to that Rule, would carry a Man to a
Positive Good, so the Disobedience thereunto should be followed with more than
a bare privation of that Good.

This then is the first Proposition, that is laid in the Understanding or
Conscience, this or that is Commanded to be done or omitted, as the Rule or Law
given by God, to carry me to my supreme End and Happiness, the violation
whereof, subjects me to Loss of that Happiness, to a Deformity and Discrepance
to the Will of my Maker, to the Curse or Sanction of that Law.

Without the knowledge of this Proposition, the great work or act of Conscience
is asleep; therefore it is necessarily to be presupposed, for it is the supreme
Resolution of all Obligation in the World, both of Laws, Contracts and Oaths,
as appears before. And according as this Principle is either true or false,
clear or dubious, so are the actings, and conclusions of the Conscience, true
or erroneous, quick or dull. It concerns us therefore to enquire, How these
Principles come into the Understanding.

We find in the Creatures, several Instincts, incident almost to every
Creature, which are connatural with it: We may observe likewise in Man,
dispositions and inclinations of several kinds, common to whole Nations,
Climates, Families, which though they incline the Men to actions and carriages,
suitable to those several dispositions, yet are not Laws or Principles of
Nature.

These Principles therefore of the Divine Law, called Natural Principles of
Conscience, are in the Understanding these ways:

1. Supernaturally. Thus Almighty God did at first give Man a Copy of his Will,
showed to his Understanding and Will, commanded him to obey it: and this
perfect discovery he made at first, and when it decayed after the Fall of Man,
it is evident he did by Divine Inspiration and Revelation, reinforce and
discover it, as appears by the holy History.

2. Artificially, by Tradition, from the first Man to his Posterity, and from
one Man to another. For though the first Man lost much of his Light and
Knowledge, by the Fall, yet he was not without diverse of those Principles,
which God at first showed him.

3. Naturally; viz. by the help of Reason and Discourse; for although if a Man
were bred up from his Infancy without any manner of Instructions, it would be
very difficult for him to take up of himself any sound Principles of Nature,
yet I do believe that the Divine Law given to Man, has that Justice and
agreeableness to right Reason, that when once the motions of Reason had any
materials of Observation to work upon, it would incline such a Man, though
weakly, to some, though not all of those Divine Laws, which were first
perfectly written in the Heart of the first Man. The Precepts of the Divine
Law, though they be not congenite with us, yet many of them are so rational,
and hold such a conformity with right Reason, that Reason exercised, would
light upon some of them. Hence several Nations, that we know not ever to have
had correspondence one with another, yet agree in many Natural Observations and
Customs, as agreeing to the common Reason of both, and the Wise God having so
ordered the Business of this World, that those Laws, which he gave to Man, best
and most rationally conduce to his Good here, as well as hereafter, as is most
evident in the Precepts of the First and second Tables. Thus much for the first
Proposition of Conscience.

2 The second or Minor Proposition of Conscience, is the stating of what I have
done, whether in Conformity or Violation of that Law, which is nothing but a
Reflex act of the Soul, looking into the Intellectual Memory, and impartially
stating what I have done. And by this a Man may see that the Divine Law does
not look at all upon the outward act, as the violation or performance of it,
but so far sorth only, as it is an effect of the Soul and Will. And hence it
is, that the judgment of the Conscience looks upon the work within. It is true
when the act of the Will is full and complete, it is testified by the outward
action, but it is not the outward action that makes the violation or
performance. This then is the second Proposition or Assumption, This or that I
have done or omitted.

3. The third Proposition is the Conclusion, either of acquittal or
condemnation, of obligation to that Guilt, which arises upon the breach of
that Law, Loss of my End, Deformity, and liableness to the Curse.

Thus far concerning the Understanding, and the Acts of it, the second great
Faculty is the Will, whereby the Soul is moved to the Desire and Prosecution of
that which is Good. It is true, that all Powers carry with them a Natural
Appetite or Motion to that which is the Object of that Power, and consequently
comes under the Name and Notion of Good: the Understanding naturally moves to
know its Object, as to a Good suitable to that Power: the Senses move to their
Objects; the Eye is not satisfied with Seeing, nor the Ear with Hearing: the
Natural Appetite moves to the enjoyment of such a Good, as may fill and answer
the want or exigence of the thing that has that Appetite. But the difference
between the Motions of the Will and other Faculties, is considerable in two
things:

1. In the object. Generally the Object of the Will is Good: and this
distinguishes it from the Understanding, whose Object is Truth: so that though
the same thing is the Object of both, yet those Faculties fasten upon it under
several Notions, as the same body may be the object of my Eye as colored, and
of my Touch as hard: and though Good and Goodness is an Object of my
Understanding, as a Scibile, whereby my Understanding examines the Truth, the
Nature, the Circumstances, the Degrees, the Suitableness of it; yet it is an
Object of my Will, as appetible or desirable, which is nothing else, but the
motion of the Soul to Union with that it concludes to be Good, and such a Good
has these Qualities:

1. It must be ^ Possible Good: and this has a double Reason: 1. Because this
is an Inclination put into the Soul by the Wise Maker of the Soul, who never
did any thing in vain; and therefore never put any motion in any thing, to such
a thing which is unattainable ex natura rei: It is true de facto it may fall
out that Good to which the Soul is moved, may not be attained by reason of some
extrinsecal intervenience; and yet ex natura rei the Good may be attainable. 2.
Because the Will is a Rational Faculty, and though of it self, it moves
indeterminately to all Good, yet when it moves to any determinate Object, it
moves upon the predecision of the rational Understanding: Now it were a mere
irrational act to move, and impossible thing that it should move to that which
the Understanding does not in some sort conclude possible to attain: for the
end of Desire is union to the thing desired; and were there not a Possibility
of Union concluded in the Understanding, there would be an impossibility to
will it, or move after it.

2. It must be a Suitable Good to the Exigence, Nature and Condition of the
Subject that desires it: 1. To the Exigence of the Subject: And this is evident
in all motions of all things: they move to that which is apt to fill up and
supply that vacuity, which is in the thing desiring it, even in natural, as
well as rational Appetites: the Hungry Man his Appetite is not for Clothes, but
Food. 2. According to the Condition of the Subject: A Sensitive Appetite moves
to a Sensitive Good; and a Rational, to a Rational Good; and an Immortal, to an
Immortal Go^^. And although Man consists of several Pieces, and therefore has
several Exigences and Conditions, and consequently moves to several Ends
answerable thereunto, and the Will is carried to those Ends: yet when the Will
is rationally and regularly moved, it moves to the Inferior Ends or Good, with
subordination to that whch is the Greatest Good, and therefore rests not in
them, nor is satisfied with them: Nay, though by reason of Ignorance or other
Accident it mistake, or know not, or forget its Supreme End, it takes no full
Satisfaction in those Inferior Goods: Though it know not what to desire, yet
in all the Enjoyments of these inferior Desires, it finds that it has not
what it should, and that breeds discontent, weariness, and changeable pursuits
of empty and unsatisfying pleasures and profits, and contentments.

Now the Will is carried to its Object, by a double Principle of Motion:

1. Original: That Great and Wise God, that has put in all things,
Inclinations to their several Ends, has put this will in Man, to move to his
End: wherein he has at once fulfilled his own Will; He did it because it
pleased him; and led Man to his Happiness; for this we may most clearly see in
the Frame of all things; His Wisdom and his Goodness is such, that the Duty and
the Happiness of his Creature, are never severed; When the Creature moves to
the fulfilling of his Maker's Will, he moves in the same act to his own
Perfection and Happiness.

2. Immediate: The Understanding is the Seat where God has set his Light, the
Light of Reason: the Decision or Determination of Reason is, or should be, the
Guide of our Will: Now the Determination of Reason and Understanding is twofold:

1. General, That whatsoever tends to the Good of the Subject, is to be desired
and prosecuted, and that according to the several degrees of that Good,
accordingly ought the desire and prosecution to be: if there be two Goods
propounded, the one more perfect, universal, etc. than the other, then though
both may be pursued, yet this with subordination to that.

2. Special, Specificating and determining this or that to be Good, and giving
the degrees thereof, which is or should be the measure of the motion of the
Will. This is the last act of the Practical Understanding: For though all Good
be the Object of the Will in its Latitude, yet the Will fastens particularly
upon that Good, which by the Understanding is presented to be his Chiefest
Good: and in order to the Union unto this Good, is the Motion of the Will; and
subservient to this Motion, are the several Passions and Affections of the
Soul, which are but the impressions of the actions of the Will upon the Blood
and Spirits, whereby the Will exciteth and produces those external actions in
the body, which tend to the execution of its commands, and therefore I omit
them.

Upon what has been said, may appear, wherein lies the immediate Cause of
Man's miscarriage to his Supreme End: It lies in the Defects of his
Understanding and his Will.

1. For his Understanding: If this has either no Light, or a false Light, the
Will is misguided: The Soul of Man will be moving to some thing or other under
the notion of Good; this sets the Understanding a work, which, if not rightly
Principled, takes up that for his Good, which either the temper and
constitution of the body and fleshly appetite, or the present opportunity
suggests and affects, and puts the intention of the Will upon it; as Pleasures,
or Profits, or Honors, or empty Speculations: and yet in the pursuit of these
a Man (that has almost any Intellectuals, though it may be he arrive not to
the true and positive Knowledge of what is his Supreme End) most commonly
finds, that this is not; and though sometimes he knows not why, yet he is sick
and weary of them, as unsatisfying and deceiving things; wheraas the true cause
is that disproportion they bear to the nature of the Soul, and are not that
End, to which it is ordained and would move, if it knew it, and how to attain
it. Again, though the Understanding does sometimes find, that these are not the
things will make me happy, but I spy the true and Everlasting Happiness, yet
the Conviction is not so strong and evident, that it dares conclude the pursuit
thereof to be preferred before the present Enjoyment of those delights, which
we are sure of: and from hence it comes to pass, that the competition of these
present Enjoyments will soon starve and famish these uncompleat Convictions,
and all pursuits in the Will of them. These and the like defects happen in the
Understanding.

2. In the Will, which has lost her Liberty to follow her Light, and is
captivated by the Sensual Appetite. The Understanding, being rightly
enlightened, presents to the Will several Ends; the Subordinate Ends,
Preservation of the Compositum by Meat and Drink, acquisition of Wealth, to
provide these Conveniences, obtaining of Power to secure that Wealth; the
Supreme End, Blessedness, and that wherein it consists; shows the Will, that
the Value of these Ends must be the measure of her pursuit of them, viz. with
subordination to the Supreme End in order to it, and bids her beware of turning
the Subordinate Ends to Ultimate Ends: But the Sensual Appetite, either before
the Counsel of the Understanding, has precipitated the Will into a violent
pursuit of those present and sensible Goods, or so bewitched her after in the
enjoyment thereof, that it can no more listen to the entertainment of the
pursuit of a future Spiritual Good, than if it had no Reason: the Beast in Man
has got the Man upon his Back, and runs away with him, contrary to the cries
and dictates even of Reason that should rule it. And of these and the like
defects, all Mankind is sick, both in his Understanding and Will, and cured we
must be, before we can clearly and uniformly move to our Supreme End, which,
what it is, as the next Inquiry.

CHAP. IV. Of the Supreme End of Man.
WHAT is that Good for the Sons of Men? as it was the greatest Inquiry of the
Wisest of Men, so it is that Problem that has tortured the Wits, and wearied
the pursuits of most of the Children of Men, that have been in the World. The
universality of the question grows from that restless motion in the Soul of Man
after some End, which puts every Man at last, upon the prosecution of somewhat
as his End, though it may be not upon the speculative and critical inquiry
concerning it. As the ordinary rational faculty of the Soul, teaches a Man to
conclude rationally, though he have not that artificial Reason of Reason, which
is acquired by speculation and study. And as this is the cause that puts many
upon the Inquiry, and all upon the Prosecution of some End, so the difficulty
of the Decision does produce that variety of Judgments and Practice concerning
this, which are impossible all to be sound and true, but possibly they may be
all false, in as much as there can be but one Supreme Good and adequate End of
Man, which is his Happiness. And from hence it is, that amongst the several
determinations of Men concerning this matter, each do abundantly convince the
other, to be errors and mistakes, and though none do sufficiently satisfy and
convince a Man, that it is the right, yet does abundantly satisfy, that the
adverse Opinion is mistaken concerning this Point, because the Truth is but
one, the rest are all Errors; and though some carry more likelihood of Reason
than others, yet it carries so much distance from Truth, that it is discernable
not to be the Truth, and the mistake is not only evident to Reason, but even to
Sense it self. That Man that would go about to persuade me, that Happiness
consists in Corporal Pleasures, outward good of Body or Fortune, Wealth or
Honors, Knowledge of all created Beings, practice of Moral Virtues, etc. I
need no other conviction of the falsity of these, but this, That in the midst
of any, or all of these, I still find those affections in my Soul, that cannot
consist with Happiness, but mingles Misery with this thin and empty Happiness:

1. Desire of somewhat more, or somewhat else, which I have not, which arises
not from the Goodness of what I enjoy, but from the Emptiness and Narrowness of
it.

2. Consequently Grief for what I want, and have not.

3. Fear of Loss of what I have.

And never any Man in this World, in all the Enjoyments he ever had, or was
capable of, except that which we now intend to speak of, but in the midst of
all, had these three Affections about him, actually working, which can never
consist with Happiness.

Now the general Grounds of these mistakes in the practice of Men is, 1. The
Error of their Judgment, 2. The Impetus or force of the Sensual Appetite, which
precipitates and captivates their Judgment. The Speculative Error arises from
Ignorance,

1. Of the Subject, Man; for let it be but once granted, that the Soul of Man
is an Intellectual Immortal Substance, all those Opinions, which place
Happiness in this Life, will be convinced clearly false and vain. But though
the Knowledge of this be sufficient to tell me what is not my Happiness, viz.
That no temporal thing, no carnal pleasure, no contemplation of the Creature is
commensurate to the Nature and duration of the Soul, which is the best part of
Man, and consequently is not, nor can be his End. Yet this, though it take him
off from the wrong ways, it sets him not in the right way, but leaves him at a
stand. Therefore

2. The second Impediment, is the Ignorance of the Object of this Happiness,
the want of the Knowledge of God, which is the only Object of all our
Happiness: the proof and demonstration whereof, ensues.

By what has been before said, it is evident,

1. That by the Wise appointment of God, every thing is ordained to an End, to
which it moves.

2. That this End is such a Good, as is answerable to the perfection of the
Creature, which moves to it: a mere Natural Agent moves to a Natural End, a
Sensitive, to a Sensible Good.

3. That the highest Perfection of the reasonable Creature, consists in his
reasonable Soul, by which he is a large degree above the Sensitives.

Therefore to find out, Wherein that Good consists, that is the End of Man, we
must take measure of the Soul, wherein consists Man's Perfection; and When or
Where we can find a Good commensurate to the Soul, there, and there only can we
fix Man's Happiness.

1. The Soul of Man is Immaterial, and consequently, that wherein consists
Happiness, cannot be Material. This takes off all Sensible Objects, as
Pleasures, Wealth, Outward Pomp, nay, all the visible Creatures, from being the
Object of Man's Felicity. It is as impossible to satisfy a Spirit with these
things, as it is to feed a Body with a Spirit: they hold not a proportion or
conformity one to another. And from hence it is, that in that small slender use
that the Soul makes of the Creature, as it cannot enter into the Soul, till it
be spiritualized in the species, which are refined more and more the nearer
they come to the Soul, first in the Organ, then in the Fantasy, so neither
can the Soul make use of them to any purpose, being received, till by
abstraction it has made them of the same nature with her self. And from this
disproportion between the Soul and those external Enjoyments, do arise that
Unsatisfactoriness, that comes by them to the Soul: for though they are useful
to the Body and the outward Man, and therefore they are desirable by the Soul
it self, in order to that End, yet they reach not so far as the Soul, their End
falls short of it; and hence it is, that the Soul rests not in the enjoyment of
them, nay, though it see not its proper End, yet it finds a nauseum in the
excess of these, and therefore is restless, and moves from one Pleasure to
another. And this is likewise the reason, why every outward Pleasure is greater
in the Expectation, than in the Fruition, because the Imagination of the Soul,
which is the Creature that the Soul forms, can bring it nearer to the Soul than
the Creature, when it is enjoyed, can come: and this Imagination, as it does
delude the Soul, so it likewise takes off much of that Content which may be
lawfully found and used in the Creature; it makes the Pursuit too eager, and
Fruition flat, in that it was over expected.

2. The Soul of Man is consequently Immortal, and its Felicity cannot therefore
consist in that which cannot be co-extended with it. Were there a Good
imaginable, that in its own nature, held proportion with the value of the Soul,
and yet were perishable, it were impossible, that in the enjoyment of this
Good, could the Felicity of the Soul consist: and that upon these Reasons,

1. Because the Duration of the Soul, is not divisible and successive, taking
it apart from the Body: A temporary Felicity would be no Felicity. It is true,
we measure out our time by parcels, as years, and weeks, and days, and hours,
and minutes, but the Soul does not so; for though the duration thereof is not
simply indivisible, as in the Duration of Eternity, yet it is far more swift
than ours, and so would be almost insensible of a temporary Good, though of
long continuance.

2. Because the determination of that Good, would consequently determine its
Felicity, so it can be no perfect Happiness.

3. The very enjoyment of a most perfect Good, that the Soul looks upon as
determinable, is in that very enjoyment mingled with a discontent, grief, and
fear, which are abundantly sufficient to rob the Soul of Felicity in that very
enjoyment, when the Soul shall be taken up with such sad preapprehensions and
preexpectations as these: I now enjoy a good answerable to my desires, and that
fills up every the least vacuity and craving of my Will; yet I foresee that it
is not lasting, a time must come when I must lose it, and it will die under my
hand, and yet my Immortal Being shall have continuance to all Eternity, when my
present Enjoyment shall serve but to increase my emptiness and misery with the
sense of what I had, and lost. This Handwriting upon the Wall, is enough to
turn the highest Enjoyment, that is but temporary, into bitterness in the very
enjoyment, much more those vain and thin Pleasures of this World, that never
came near the Soul, but in a deceitful Imagination. So then to the constitution
of true Happiness for an immortal Substance, there is re-required an immortal
Good.

3. It must be a Good divided in its own Nature from the Soul. There can
nothing be the End and Supreme Good to it self, but the First Cause, which
alone is self-sufficient: And that is manifest in the Motions of the Soul; for
if it self were the End of it self, it has its End, and consequently, would
cease to move; but it is evident, that the Soul is not a Pure Act, but
receptive of something distinct from it self, to which it moves, as to its End
and Perfection.

4. It must be a True and Real Good: for since the Perfection of the Soul,
consists in these two active Faculties, the Understanding, whose Object is
Truth, and the Will; and the principal use of every Faculty, is in order to the
Supreme End of the Soul, which is his Summum Bonum; it is necessary, that that
which is pursued by the Will, as Good, should likewise be entertained by the
Understanding, as True; and the highest Perfection of the Understanding, is
about the Truth of that which is the Supreme Good; because that Truth is the
Supreme Truth. The Truth of this Goodness stands in opposition, 1 to that which
seems to be Good, and is not at all; such are merely imaginary and fantastical
Goods, when the Soul works an imaginary Good, and then works it self into the
belief of it: 2. to that, which having a being, seems to be good, and is not:
3. to that, which though it be good, seems to be the Supreme Good, but is not.
It must therefore be an Intellectual Real Good.

5. It must be an Infinite and Universal Good. The former qualifications,
though each exclude something, yet none excludes all Creatures from being the
Supreme End of the Soul: Angels and Spirits are Immaterial, Immortal,
Intellectual Good, yet they want this one qualification, without which it is
impossible, that there can be the Object, wherein consists true Happiness. The
reason is this, because nothing below an Infinite Good, can satisfy the
infinite motion of the Soul. The motion and comprehension of the Understanding,
though actually, it does not understand all things finite, it may comprehend
all finite things in the World: which is clearly evidenced by Experience: the
most knowing Man in the World has as much room for more Knowledge, as he had
before he knew any thing: if a Man therefore knew all the finite things in the
World, yet were not the Understanding so filled; but were there more to be
known, he would have room for it, and consequently a desire to it: Nothing then
can fill and satiate the Understanding, but Infiniteness: yet we are not
therefore to conclude, that the Understanding is commensurate to the infinite
nature of the First Being: no, that has an actual Plenitude beyond the
comprehension of the Understanding: but the meaning is, God has placed in the
Soul of Man an Understanding potentially infinite, that cannot be filled with
what is actually finite, as all Creatures are. And as the Motion of the
Understanding is infinite and restless, till it be filled with him that fills
all in all, so is the Motion of the Will, nothing below an infinite Good can
satisfy it. And now, as we have argued upward from the Capacity and Vastness
of the Soul and its Faculties, that nothing below an infinite Good can be its
End, so we must argue downward too; The Great and Wise Creator, who has the
disposition of all things to their Ends, and who in his Infinite Wisdom, has
put motions and capacities in all things, conducing and fit for those Ends, for
which he has ordained them, has appointed himself to be the End of his
Immortal Creature, and therefore has put in the Soul, a Capacity too large for
any thing below himself, and Motions restless in any thing, but himself. The
Conclusion therefore is, the Immortal Invisible Creator of all things, that is
infinite in Goodness and Truth, has been pleased to appoint himself to be the
End of Man, wherein consists his Supreme Good.

But it may be here considerable, How God can be the adequate Object of Man's
Felicity, seeing Man consists of a Soul and Body united, which was ordained to
an End of Happiness as well as the Soul? To omit the consideration of the
Resurrection, de qua infra, I do conceive that God is the adequate Object of
Man's Happiness, in respect of his Compositum, as well as singly of his Soul,
though in a different way of Communication: The Communication of himself to the
Soul, is more immediate and sublime: the Communication to the Body and
Compositum, mediate by Second Causes, enabling and blessing their operations.
And I cannot question, but in the first Creation, when the Soul enjoyed God as
the Object of her Happiness, the whole Compositum did partake of that influence
in communications of Happiness answerable to every exigence and degree of its
being. Sed de hoc infra.

Now in as much as the First Cause, is the last End of Man, and the only Object
of his Happiness, it remains to be inquired what this Happiness is, or the
Formal Reason of it: for it is possible, that there may be a Subject capable of
Happiness, and a Being that may be proportionable to that Capacity, yet the
Subject not truly happy. The Beatitude therefore of the Soul consists in the
Union of the Soul unto this Object of his Happiness: and this Union
presupposes a double act:

1. An act or Propension in the Soul, moving it unto God, as to its End and
Perfection: and as the Great Creator did appoint himself to be the End of this
his rational Creature, so he implanted in him a Propension and Motion in him to
that End; and that Propension and Motion is not a mere natural Inclination, but
arises from the fitness of those high Faculties of Understanding and Will for
so excellent an Object. In these he has placed a Capacity or Receptibility in
some measure of himself: and as every Power is ordained in reference to
something else, that may actuate and perfect it, and consequently moves after
that Object whereunto it is ordained, so this Receptibility, which God has
placed in the Soul, does, or at least naturally should, move to that Object,
which alone can fill its vacuities and receptiveness.

2. In as much as God is a Free Agent, though he gave the Soul these Faculties,
yet so much is his Being and Perfection beyond the reach and attainment of any
finite Being, that this Motion of the Soul can never overtake his Happiness,
unless there be likewise an act of Condescension and Communion of himself to
the Soul: therefore there is necessarily required to the Happiness of the Soul
a Communication by God unto the Soul: And by this reciprocal act, 1. of the
Soul to God, as the only perfection of it, 2. of God to the Soul, filling the
desires thereof with himself, this Union and Happiness is wrought. This
Communication by God, is not of his Essence or Being, for that is
incommunicable, and cannot be mingled with any Creature, but as objective; and
for a fuller explication of this, God is pleased to communicate himself to the
Soul, according to the nature of these great Faculties, which he has planted
in it, viz. the Understanding and the Will. And as without relation to both
these, it is impossible that Man should be truly happy; so if both these be
fully satisfied, there cannot want any thing to complete his Happiness, because
there is no other Faculty in the Soul, which can receive any further portion of
Happiness.

1. The Communication of God to the Understanding, is that whereby he fills the
same with the Knowledge and sight of himself. Here the Understanding has an
object that satisfies and fills all the restless motions of it, wherein he
reads the satisfaction of all his doubts and inquities, wherein, though upon
the first view, it finds more than enough to fill its vastest comprehension;
yet every atome of its duration, makes new discoveries of what i^ thought it
wanted not, the Object being infinitely too large for all the successive
actings of created Understanding, to attain unto, much less in one act; an
Object wherein the Understanding finds not only amplitude, but unimaginable
delight, whiles it gazeth on an infinite Perfection; an Object, which by the
same act fills and inlargeth the Faculty and Capacity of the Understanding,
wherein the Understanding, though it enjoy his Object is not satiated, but it
rests in it, is not tired with it. Every Power, in the enjoyment of its full
and adequate Object, has complacency and acquiescence; which nevertheless is
nothing else, but a circular and reciprocal motion between the Object and the
Power: the Power is moved with a full desire to the Object, the Object being
enjoyed, returns it self adequately to the desire, and this is so swift and
imperceptible a motion, that it is called the Rest of that Power. Thus it is
with the Understanding, when it has attained the knowledge of some excellent
Art or Object below; It is true, this breeds some delight, but because the
Object that is known, is not adequate to the extent of the Understanding, it
returns not an answerable return to the Understanding; and therefore, though it
take some delight in it, yet it is but faint and weak, but at utmost, it rests
not in it, but moves to something else: but this Object is more than adequate
to the largest Understanding, and therefore when the Understanding is filled
with it, it cannot choose but rest in it with the most absolute complacence and
delight, that that Power is capable of.

2. But though the Understanding were able to read all the Infinite Perfections
of God, yet if that other Great Faculty be not satisfied, as it is impossible
the Soul should be completely happy, so it is possible, it may be extremely
miserable, if whiles the Understanding contemplated the Greatness, Power, and
Goodness of God, the Soul should not partake of it, but that Power engage
against it: Therefore the second part of the Happiness of the Soul, is the
Communication of the Goodness of God to the Soul, whereof it is capable, and
which the Will desires, by letting in upon the Soul the beams and light of his
Love, his favor, his acceptance, his delight in the Soul, whereby as the Soul
most eagerly moves to him as his Chiefest Good, so it pleases him to entertain
those motions, and fills them with enjoyment of himself, and the sight and
sense of his love to it. This Union of God to his Creature, either in filling
it with his Knowledge or his Goodness, we are not able to discover, only herein
consists Man's Happiness, when his Understanding is filled with his Maker's
Light, and his Will with his Love; which creates a kind of mutual propriety
between God and the Soul: I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

Now though this may be the Happiness of the Soul separated, but how can this
be said to be the Happiness of Man, which consisting of a Body and inferior
Faculties subservient thereunto, and to his subsistence as a Man? or whether,
and how can this Happiness be acquired or enjoyed by Man in this life, since
his Soul now acts and moves organically, and according to the temper and
accommodations of the Body, and so is not capable of that clear and undisturbed
Knowledge of God, or sense of his Love? and if it were, how could that
accommodate the necessities of his outward Man?

These things are to be considered to answer this Question:

1. What are the Degrees of Happiness, attainable by the Soul in this life? and
wherein it consists?

2 What Happiness is attainable for the whole Compositum or Frame of Man in
this Life, and wherein it consists?

Touching the former, we say:

1. There is not the same degree of Happiness to be expected for the Soul in
this Life, as there is when either it is freed from the Body, or the Body freed
from those imperfections of mixed Body Which we carry about us. The reason is
evident in both the great Faculties: in that of the Understanding, it works now
by Organs and Instruments of the Body, and is straitened in its operations,
according to the condition of those Organs and Instruments; it sees now with
the Eyes of the Body, though it works out of that sight higher conclusions, and
if it had, as once it had, a more clear and immediate Vision of God, yet it
could not be so capacious within the limits of the Body, as when the Soul were
merely spiritual, or the Body spiritualized. Again, as to the Will, it cannot
exercise the utmost of his activity in the Love of God, because the necessity
of the humane condition requires some of its thought, provisions, and motions:
neither can it be so receptive of that infinite Love and Goodness of God, being
confined and straitened with a corruptible Body, as if it were at large.

2. That the Wise God did provide a proportionable degree of Happiness to the
Soul in this Life; and this upon the reasons already given. Now in as much as
the actings of the Soul in the Body are more incomplete and imperfect, that
Happiness that was so ordained for it, though it were fully proportionable to
the perfection of the actings of the Soul here, yet it was not so perfect as
that Consummate Happiness, which was provided for it hereafter; it was
perfectly proportionable to the condition of the Soul as it was in the Body,
though not proportionable to that enjoyment which the Soul might have, when
freed from the straitness of the Body; and as the Happiness of the Soul in the
Body, was inferior to the Happiness of the Soul separate, so questionless, as
the Soul in the Body receives improvements and abatements in its actings in the
Body by the conjunction with it, according to the variety of the temper, frame
and constitutions of the Body, so the present enjoyment of Happiness in the
Soul might be more or less, if Man had continued in his perfection; a Child had
not had the same measure of internal Happiness as a Man bad, for though the
substance of the Soul were the same, its operations in the Body were
diversified in their perfections, according to the variety of the temper of the
Body, which naturally the Soul exercises in its operations.

3. That though ex natura rei, Man was ordained to temporal Happiness in his
Soul, yet it is evident, that somewhat has intervened, and daily does
intervene, whereby that Fruition is diverted and disturbed, what ever it be. Of
this more infra.

The highest degree of Happiness of the Soul in this Life, consists in these
things:

1. In an Anticipation, or Expectation, or Prevision of that Happiness, which
it shall enjoy: This, though it be not a real Fruition, yet it is very near it
in the Soul: if a miserable Pilgrim should have a certain assurance, that after
twenty years walk, he should be sure to be invested in a perpetual Kingdom,
wherein he should have perfection of Ease and Delight, this Prevision of this
Happiness is so present in his Soul, that it is in effect, presently enjoyed,
and over-weighs the present tediousness of his Journey.

2. In a Conjunction of the Soul to God in Knowledge of him, Love unto him, and
return of his Love to us, in a measure proportionable to the capacity of our
Understanding and Will. This, though it be not perfect, but admits of
increases, yet ex natura rei may be proportionable to the most perfect
operations of our Soul in the Body, and does as far exceed all other Happiness
in the World, as far as it falls short of that perfect Knowledge, Love, and
sense of the Love of God, which shall be enjoyed hereafter. Were a Man from the
highest Honor and Reputation in the World, cast into the greatest Scorn and
Ignominy, that the most exact and exasperated Envy could impose or wish; or
were his Body laden with as many Necessities, Miseries, and Torments, as
Hunger, and the most sublimated and ingenious Malice could inflict or contrive;
could as well the highest sense, as the most imminent expectation of Death, the
greatest of Evils, be felt, and yet protracted for an age; yet if under all
this, the Soul can look upon these Miseries as such as must end, and see,
though at a distance, a Fruition of an Everlasting Beatitude, infallibly
expecting upon the close of these Miseries, the Expected Happiness is made
Present by Faith, and over-ballanceth the Present, but Ending Misery: How much
more when in the instant of these Sufferings, the intention and bent of the
Soul is to her Maker, and the Great God shall by the secret, yet real, beams of
his Favor send into the Soul Messages of Acceptance and Love? How small and
low does this render the highest Contempts and Malice of Men and Devils! and
how much rather would this Man choose to enjoy these effects of the Love of his
Maker with these Miseries, than barely to see the Experiments of his Power and
Justice in removing or revenging them!

2 How far forth this Union of the Soul to God, does conduce to the Happiness
of the Compositum, the Whole Man? or Whether it does so or no? Wherein we say:

1. That the Happiness that is answerable to the Compositum, without
considering the great relation of the soul, does consist in the perfecting and
continuing of his subsistence and kind; and whatsoever the Compositum desires
and moves after, it is in order to these, and not otherwise, as in that one
instance of Meats, the Wise God has given him the Sense of Tasting, whereby he
takes delight in those things that please the Appetite, but this is in order to
the taking in of those Nourishments that may preserve the Compositum; the like
of the other Senses. Now as long as the Man in these things moves to these
Ends, he moves naturally and orderly; but when in stead of moving to this End,
he rests in the Means, then he moves inordinately, and out of the way to that
temporal Happiness, the support of the Body, as when he eats and drinks to
excess; the like for all other outward matters, as Honors, Riches, Women, etc.
When they are not enjoyed to those Ends, for which they are ordained, then is
the Man out of that way to the temporal Happiness of the Compositum, viz. the
due Support and Subsistence of it.

2. That the Felicity of the Soul may consist with this Felicity of the
Compositum ex natura rei. The reason a priori has been already given, because
the Wise God in the first Institution of things, did order every thing to their
several Ends with that Wisdom, that there was no clashing of the several Ends
of the same thing, or of several things, but one did and might Consist with the
other; the Felicity of the Soul might, and ex natura rei may consist with the
Happiness of the Body and Compositum. Therefore it follows:

3. That Inconsistency of the Happiness of the Soul with that of the Body is
not real: but because, however it comes to pass, we have misplaced and mistaken
the Happiness of the Body, we now place the Happiness of the Body in turning
our selves over to Sensuality in excessive using of the Creatures, in excessive
Lusts. These are clear mistakes, for it is most apparent, that these are
enemies to the very subsistence of the Body and Composium.

3. That this Felicity of the Body, is inferior to the Felicity of the Soul;
and therefore if ex accidente it falls out, though it seldom does in truth,
that the temporal Felicity of the Body is in hoc individuo inconsistent with
that of the Soul, right Reason tells us that the greater End, and that of more
concernment is to be preferred; so that as there is, and ought to be a
subordination of those Faculties and Powers placed in the Body, to those Ends
for which they were implanted, viz. the preservation of the Compositum, so
there ought to be a subordination, both of these Means, and that End to the
Great End, the Happiness of the Soul.

4. As the Great End of Man does consist with the Happiness of his Body or
Compositum, so it does much and effectually conduce to it. And as this is
apparent in the original creation of Man, when the Happiness of his Mind by the
Knowledge and Presence of his Maker was accompanied with the Felicity of his
Compositum; and as it was likewise apparent in his Fall, as he contracted
Misery in the one, so he did in the other; so it is most rationally evident in
the present state and condition of Mankind, as will be evident in consideration
of these ensuing particulars:

1. It shows a Man the right use of the Creature, viz. to be subservient, and
in order to the preservation of the Compositum. The want of a true and rational
use of secular matters is a great cause of the great unhappiness of Man, as
when he desires Riches, because he would be rich, or Honors, because he would
be great, or delicate Fare, because he would eat. Now when Men mistake the use
of things, resting in that as an End, which is only useful to something else,
this breeds these disorders in, and among men, which does disturb even their
outward Peace and Happiness: This is regulated, when the Heart is set upon the
Love of God, it takes off any inordinate Love to any thing else, but in order
to that End, to which it is properly conducible, and therefore in order to that
only, rationally desirable.

2. It adds a sweetness to the enjoyment of the Creature, which cannot be had
without it, because it mingles with it the sight of the great Master of this
Family of the Earth, that provides it, the sense and security of his Love that
gives it, and so brings up the enjoyment of the Creature to a higher station,
and nearer to that, which is the true Felicity of the Soul. A Blue Ribon bought
in a Shop, and a Blue Ribon given by a King in token of Honor, is the same
thing, but with the latter, there is a mingling of somewhat else with it, as it
imports a Gift from a King in token of Honor, and therefore higher-prized.

3. It takes away all that Sollicitousness in the Enjoyment, and all that
Anguish in the Loss, and all that Anxiety in the Provision of external
Accommodations, though in very truth, the real Happiness of the Compositum, is
its subsistence, according to the perfectest degree of his Being, which is the
perfection of the Compositum; yet it is clear, that the Tumultuousness, or
Quietness of the Mind, does much conduce to the Happiness, or unhappiness of
the Compositum: That Man that lives contentedly with 20. l. a year, is happier
than he that lives as well with the same or a greater Portion, but with an
anxious, troubled, craving, unsatisfied Mind. Now when the Soul truly knows,
and is truly set upon his Supreme End, it knows its duty, and therefore is not
idle, it knows the Power of his Maker, therefore is not anxious; and knows the
use and value of the Creature, and therefore values it no farther, than it is
useful to its proper End; it knows the Love and Wisdom of his Maker, and
therefore refers all to him, as he that wants neither Power to provide for it,
nor Wisdom to proportion, nor Love to communicate, according to the exigence of
my condition; and admit he does, his Will must be done, and not mine, I am
provided well enough; for if here I am contented, and hereafter saved, this
sweetens any Losses.

4. Though the Great God be absolute Lord of his Creature, and is not bound
farther to him, than it pleases him, though his Creature were most conformable
to his Will, yet I do not think, but, if our Hearts were and did continue right
set upon our great and Supreme End, and could hold to it, that we should want a
convenient Portion of these outward Blessings, which would make our Lives
comfortable and happy: but here is the Misery of Man, that any confluence of
Externals presently take off his Soul from a perfect pursuit of our great End,
and fasten upon those Externals: therefore the Wise God oftentimes cuts out to
the best of Men, a small and an unpleasant viaticum, that they may not linger
in the way to their great End.

And as it is thus with the whole Compositum in this Life, so in the
Resurrection, when the Soul shall be reunited to the Body, both shall have a
perfect Fruition of Happiness in the enjoyment of the Presence, Favor and
Communion of God. How far forth the Soul separated, is capable of its own
nature of any new knowledge, which it had not before, in an angelical way: or
how far it is able to retain or improve those Conceptions and Species that it
had here; and whether it has a complete operation, or what degree of Fruition
it has of the sight of God, it is above our reach to determine; only this we
may conjecture, that the Soul is not placed in that perfect degree of being and
subsistence as are the Angels, in as much as it is made in order to a Body, by
which in it, it exercises its motions, faculties, and operations: and
therefore without all question, when it shall hereafter be reunited to a most
perfect spiritualized Body indissolubly, it shall not thereby receive any
diminution or abatement of its Perfection and Felicity, but will thereby become
more capable of a more perfect and full Fruition of that Supreme Good, which
will then be communicated perfectly to the whole Compositum. But this by the
way, latius infra.

CHAP. V. Of the Means of attaining the Supreme End of Man.
HItherto we have proceeded in the examination of these 2. Parts: 1. What the
Nature of the Subject is of this Happiness; and 2. What the Object of it: Now
the third thing rests to be sought, viz.

3. What is the Means of attaining this Supreme End of Man, his Union to God:
and herein we shall examine these three things:

1. What naturally might be conjectured to be the Means of acquisition of this
Happiness?

2. Whether, as things stand with Man, the same Means be to be found or no?

3. If not, then whether there be any Means left for Man to attain this Supreme
End of his or no? and what it is? and how to be known?

Touching the first: Though God by his power might carry every thing to his
proper, mediate, or ultimate End, without the intervention of any Means; yet,
as it is his own peculiar Prerogative by his Will to appoint every thing to its
proper End, wherein is seen the Glory of his Goodness; so the same Will of his
has ordered, has appointed every thing to move to this End by a certain Rule,
and certain Means, and herein is seen the Glory of his Wisdom: such are the
Instincts and Inclinations of the Creatures, by which they move to their
special Ends and Perfections: And as these Inclinations are planted by God in
the inferior Creature, the like was done, though in a different manner, in Men
at first, in all probability of Reason, the difference being only thus, in the
Creature all that is conducing to their End is made a piece or quality of their
Nature, in Man not altogether, as shall be seen. We have found Man endued with
two great Faculties, Understanding and Will and in these principally consists
the receptiveness of his Happiness, and the motion to it.

1. Touching the Understanding, it is a Faculty receptive of an Object that may
be known; but that Object is not of the nature or essence of the Understanding,
but distinct from it: So that Man might be created an intellectual Creature,
yet till such time as naturally through the Senses, or supernaturally by the
immediate infusion or demonstration of God, he was but rasa tabula. The first
thing therefore, that was put into the Understanding in order to his supreme
End, was a stock of Knowledge of God, and of that Will of God which concerned
Man. And this Will of God concerning Man was that Means, which, if known and
pursued, would guide a Man to true Happiness: for, as is before observed, every
thing is so far forth Beautiful and Happy, as it holds Conformity with the Will
of God; and such is his Wisdom and Goodness, that when the Creature moves
according to the Law and Will of its Maker, it does without fail attain that
Happiness, whereof it is capable; because it moves to that End, for which it
was appointed by the First Cause: Now because God has made Man a Rational and
Intellectual Creature he appointed a rational and intellectual way to move him
to this End, viz. the Knowledge of himself, and of that Rule or Law, which
should lead him to that End.

2. The Understanding being thus enlightened with the Knowledge of God and his
Will, the Will was endued with a Rectitude to move on according to that Rule,
in order to the right End: and that, which was in the Understanding sub ratione
Scibilis, was to the Will sub ratione Legis, a thing not only shown to the
Understanding, as the Means to bring him to Happiness, but also enjoined to the
Man as his Duty, under pain of Guilt and Vengeance: for herein consists the
difference between the Instincts in the inferior Creatures, and this Law given
to Man; in those it is not properly a Law, because they are not intellectual
nor voluntary Agents, therefore their receding from that Instinct, though it
subjects to a loss and deformity, yet it subjects them not to any Guilt; but
the Rule given to Man, was given to a Creature endued with Understanding to
know what it was, and with Will that might obey it if he would. Therefore by
the violation thereof, Man must needs incur not only a loss of that End, which
this Rule alone could guide him to, but likewise a positive guilt, or
obligation to such farther punishment, as the rebellion of a Creature against
his Maker might deserve.

The Conformity then to this Law necessarily induced two things: 1. Beauty in
the Creature being conformable to the Will of his Maker, which only denominates
the Creature beautiful, and consisted principally in these three things: 1.
Knowledge of God, and of his Will by the immediate demonstration or inscription
of God himself: 2. Righteousness or Justice; for as the Will of God, and Law
that proceeds from it, is the only ground of all Obligation to any thing under
the name of Just; so it is the only Rule and Measure of Justice of Man toward
God, Man, and himself. 3. Holiness, viz. a Conformity of Man's Will, and
consequently his Actions, to the righteous and holy Will of the most Holy God:
And as this was his Beauty, so it was his Happiness initiate, and his way to
consummate Happiness.

And as this Conformity to the Law of God produced this Beauty and Happiness in
Man, so of necessity, the violation of this Law must introduce, 1. Ataxy and
Deformity in the Creature. 2. Punishment; and that of two kinds:


1. Privative punishment, whereby he lost what he had or might have had; and
that is double:

1. In reference to his Supreme End, an irrecoverable loss; for the Link is
broken, the Violation of that Law, the exact performance whereof was possible
and the only means to attain that End, has cut off that ordination that this
Rule had to Man^ Felicity.

2. In reference to the Means. The Light of the Understanding is put out, or
much weakened, the Rectitude of the Will disordered, and that irrecoverably.
The Soul continues substantially the same, but these extrinsecal adventitious
habits in the Understanding and Will are removed. And as this Punishment of
loss is a natural consequent of this Violation of this righteous and blessed
Law, so it is enforced with the Sanction of that Law, which could do no less in
justice than withdraw that Light, and that Purity, which was but a consequent
of that Law that is so unjustly violated.

2. Positive Punishment. For were it given but as a means to attain another
thing, a punishment of loss of the End must necessarily follow the violation of
that, which is the only means to attain that End; But Man was endued with
Understanding and Will, capable of the Knowledge and Observance of a Law, a Law
framed by the Wise God, exactly suitable to those abilities Man had to perform
it, who gives Rules in all things proportionable to the nature of the thing to
which he gives it: This Law promulged by the exact inscription thereof in the
Understanding, who both knew what it was, and by whom, and for what End given;
the Violation of this adds Rebellion to the Violation, and obliges ex natura
rei, to more than a Loss.

2. Let us now examine, How things stand with the Children of Men, in order to
the discovery and prosecution and attaining of this supreme and great End of
his Creation: All things in the World besides Man, come and keep very near unto
the Law of their Creation, though some disorder we may find in them: The reason
is because they move not freely, but naturally, and the Rules, by which they
move, are Inclinations, Qualities, and Propensions woven into their very
Nature: But in Man it is otherwise; the Principles, especially in his
Understanding, whereby the whole Man is much steered, are extrinsecal and
adventitious; and so without any essential change in his Nature, those Habits
or Principles may be lost. And let us but examine the temper of Mankind, we
shall find a general disorder in all his Faculties, and want of those Rules,
which should lead him to his Supreme End.

1. In the Understanding: We have shown that Man had not only a vessel
receptive of that Light and Knowledge, which was his initiate, and his way to a
consummate Happiness; but also had that Lamp of his fitted with that Oil and
Light, which though it was not part of his Essence, was the high Perfection of
that Power or Receptivity: But we do now plainly find, that take any Man in
puris naturalibus, he has scarce so much as a knowledge either what himself
is, or what his beginning was, or what his End is; and differs little from the
highest degree of Beasts: His Understanding and Reason is essential, but the
matter or furniture of these is wanting. The supply of these defects must needs
be therefore extrinsecal, which is either by Instruction and Information, or
Tradition from others. Thus doubtless much of the Knowledge that is in the
World is propagated even from the first Man: but this, the farther it was from
the original, it grew weaker and weaker, and more corrupted, partly through the
defects that were in those that propagated it, partly through the supineness
and negligence of those that received it, and partly through the mixtures of
the Fancies of Men, every Man adding a new piece of his own to what he
received; and all truths the farther they are from the original grow the more
corrupted; and by this means a little truth passing through diverse hands, and
receiving almost from every hand some addition and mixture, in process of time
it has grown as difficult to sift out those small grains of Truth, which were
thus communicated in the Ear, and crowd of other erroneous addittaments, as to
retrieve those Truths which the neglect of Men has in effect lost.

And as thus some Truths have been discovered, and transmitted from Man to Man,
so by diligent Study and Observation some of those Truths, that have been in
effect lost since the Creation of Man, have been recovered, and others, that
have contracted erroneous superstructions or accessions, purged, both matters
natural and metaphysical. This has been the business of the exacter sort of
Men, which as it is not without the special Providence of the Almighty, so the
highest endeavors of Men in this kind has been still mingled with much
darkness: and it is seldom that the Wit or Learning of the succeeding
Philosopher discovered some Errors of him that preceded him, but the same
natural imbecility appeared likewise in him, in producing some erroneous
Opinion, which as much deserved an expurgation, as that which he before
corrected.

And as this defect in the Understanding is visible in Mankind, so it is most
visible in that which is the way or rule unto our Supreme End, viz. Religion,
that though Men of several Ages and Centuries, Nations, Dispositions,
inclinations, Educations, agree in some common Principles concerning other
matters, yet in matters of Religion, the differences have ever been wonderful.
The reason is not only from the defect of our Understanding, but likewise from
the nature of the Object, which falls not easily within the reach of those
Mediums, whereby the understanding arrives to the attainment of other Truths,
and therefore stands in need of some extrinsecal help to set him right in this.

It is true, that the great points of Religion, viz. the knowledge, that there
is a God, and some things concerning his Essence; that he is the Cause of all
things; that he made all things for his own End, and those other things before
mentioned, may be acquired by the Light of Nature and Reason: yet such is the
height and remoteness of the Subject, that it requires much Industry and
Consideration to carry us step by step unto this height: But when we have
arrived to this (which few attain unto) yet there is so much confusion in these
Notions, and they are so far fetched, that they make not that clear impression
upon the Understanding as is fit: But admit they did, yet we are still to seek
what is that Rule, whereby to lead us to attain to our great End; and this we
rove at.

In the ways of the Children of Men concerning Religion, we may observe these
Several steps of Ignorance:

1. An Ignorance, whether there be any God or no: This is the grossest
Ignorance, because it is against the first and most universal Principle; for
the affirmation of the being of any thing is the first foundation, whereupon
every Inquiry is built: this is Atheism and mere Brutishness.

2. When a Man has once stated that question affirmatively, That there is some
Superior Power, the next question, and the next step of Man's Ignorance is
concerning the Nature of this God; What he is, Whether one or more, Whether
visible, and if so, What visible, etc. This, though it may by natural Reason be
stated very far, as appears before, and so this Ignorance receive a cure in a
great measure; yet so far are our Intellectuals darkened in this matter, that
Men are hardly set right in this: And hence grew those strange varieties of
Gods in the World: this is the cause of Idolatry, and Polytheism.

3. When a Man is rightly Principle'd concerning God, and consequently
concludes that he is the Cause of all things, the next special question is,
Whether God has given to every thing his several End, and Rule or Law
conducing to that End? and consequently, Whether he has appointed to Man any
End and Rule, conducing to that End different from other Creatures? or, Whether
he be left to do as he pleases, and not confined by the Will of God to some
End and Rule conducing to it? the Ignorance of this is the Cause of Supineness,
Epicurism, Impiety, and professed Injustice.

4. When a Man, finding that God is a free and intellectual Agent, and sees, as
he may by natural Reason, every thing ordered to a suitable End to his Being,
and by a suitable Means or Rule conducing to that End, and finds a higher
degree of being in himself than in other Creatures, and consequently an higher
End, and consequently an higher Rule conducing to that End, he does most
naturally resolve this Rule into that Law, which by the Will of God is given to
Man conducing to that End, the Subject of which Rule must be all his Internal
and External Actions, both in reference to God, to himself, and to others: but
here then is the next question, and the next degree of Ignorance in Men, viz.
What that Law or Will of God is concerning Man? and from hence grow those
Varieties and Errors in Worship of God. And though happily most Men, knowing the
true God, may by the same Light of Nature concur in the general and
fundamentals of Worship, viz. That God is to be feared with all Reverence;
loved with all intention; obeyed with all sincerity, cheerfulness, and
exactness: all which are but natural conclusions from the Nature of God, the
Nature of Man, and the Relation that he bears to God, as his Creator, Lord,
and Preserver: yet, because we know not what that Will of God particularly is,
we frame several ways and Rules of Worship, according as our several Fancies
persuade us to be agreeable to that Will, which are either unnecessary and
superstructive, or erroneous and offensive; and, which is the most dangerous
Ingredient, conclude both his own way necessary, and the other dangerously
Erroneous.

These Defects in the Understanding must needs be the cause of much Error and
Obliquity in the whole Man and his Actions: And these defects are most clearly
visible in the whole World; nay in the most knowing Climates, Times, and
Persons thereof. In the last part, concerning the Worship of God, we see
several sorts of Men highly opinionated concerning their own particular Way or
Worship; and most Magisterially condemning the way of others, as bad as
Paganism; when it may fall out, This the Author has elsewhere considered in
two or three several little Tracts upon this Subject.
and so for the most part it does, that what is superadded beyond the plain and
sincere Fear of God, Subjection to his Will, Thankfulness for his Mercy, Belief
of the great Means he has provided for our Salvation, and those other grand
Principles, whereof before and anon; are but mere Superstructions of Humane
Invention, Ignorance, Imbecility or Policy, and yet made the greatest part of
the business, and inquiries, and differences among Men in matters of this
Nature.

2. In the Will we find several Defects:

1. Those that are consequential to the Ignorance or darkness, or impotence of
the Understanding, whose Decisions does, or should, preceed the act of the
Will: Were the Understanding truly principle'd with the knowledge of God, of
his Perfection, Power, and Will; with the knowledge of our selves, our Nature,
and the Dependence we have upon him in our being and continuance; those
practical Conclusions, that would most clearly and necessarily arise from
these, viz. of Love to his Majesty, Fear of Offending, Care to conform to his
Will, Dependence upon him, Thankfulness to him, Contentedness and Cheerfulness
in him, Valuation of the World according to its true Estimate, etc. would most
effectually follow in the Will, and those Affections that are subservient to
it, and consequently in the Life and Actions of Men, one Divine Principle,
soundly and clearly seated in the Understanding, would improve it self into
infinite practical deductions for the regulation of the Will: But where these
are wanting, the motions of the Will must needs be excentrick: But where they
are but weakly and doubtfully received in the Understanding, the operation of
the Understanding upon them is but weak; the inclinations in the Will weaker,
and easily overmatcht with the least difficulty, and seldom arrive to action,
or constancy in the life; for according to the measure, and intention, and
clearness of the Conviction of the Understanding concerning any Object, the
more fruitful, rational, and powerful are those practical Conclusions deduced
from it; and the more intense and natural is the motion of the Will according
to these Conclusions; and according to that intensiveness of the Will are the
Actions that are commanded by the Will: a faint Conviction moves the Will but
weakly, and a weak Volition seldom ends in Action.

2. Impotency: Not only that which arises from the Impotency of the
Understanding, the Convictions there; but that Impotency which is in the very
Faculty it self, which is evident in this, that it is brought under the
inferior Faculties, over which it ought to govern, the Passions and Sensual
Appetite: For though it be certain, that oftentimes the misplacing, or
overacting of our Passions, and the violent pursuit of Pleasures, arises from
the mistake or blindness of the Understanding, yet it is clear that oftentimes
contrary to those very Convictions and Rational Decisions of the Understanding
the Will is precipitated, and carried away with the violence and importunity of
those Faculties, that in right Reason, and by the Law of Nature are subordinate
to her.

3. Privation and absence of Inclinations conformable to the Will of God,
Righteousness and Holiness. The whole Soul was formerly the seat of God's
Image: that part of it, that was most conspicuous in, and consonant to the
Understanding, were the Principles of Truth, or Conformity to the Divine
Understanding: those Principles that were most proper to the Will, were the
Principles of Holiness and Justice, or Conformity to the Divine Will. Now as
Truth is not of the Essence of the Understanding, which is only a Power
receptive of it; so neither is Holiness and Justice of the Essence of the Will.
And as Man in a great Measure has lost that stock of Truth, whereby he is
ignorant; so it is apparent he wants that stock of Righteousness and Holiness
in his Will, which should incline and move the Will according to the Will of
God.

4. There are not only these privative Evils in the Will, but it is likewise
evident, that there is a Positive Malice or Inclination against Righteousness
and Holiness, a propension and inclination to that which is Evil. Certain it
is, that the Sensual Appetite of the Sensitive Creatures is good, and
conformable to their Nature, and does not carry them to any thing beyond the
convenience of their own Nature: and questionless, Man in his original had a
Sensual Appetite no less conformable, and suitable to his own sensitive Nature,
than the sensual Appetite of another Creature is to his: and besides that
parity between other Creatures and Man, he had an advantage of a Reasonable
Soul, which might supply and regulate the defects or irregularities of the
Sensual Appetite, if any were: How then comes it to pass, that the poor sensual
Creatures move conformable to their Nature, and by a kind of Rule, and Man
alone runs into those Excesses and strange Prodigies of Vices, whereof an
inferior Creature is capable, but abhors the Committal? For instance, God has
ordained the Preservation of the Sensible Creature, by eating things suitable
to the Nature and Constitution of the Creature; and in order to the use of that
Means, has planted a natural Appetite in the Creature to those Meats; and the
more to excite that Appetite for the use of that Means to that End, has put a
conformity between the taste of that Meat and the Palate: Yet we do seldom see
the Appetite of the Sensitive Creatures carry them in eating or drinking beyond
moderation, or that End, for which that Appetite is given; but the motion of
their Appetite is commensurate to the Means of their Preservation: but in Man
we find in all Ages and Places strange Excesses, beyond the convenience of
Nature, and that with iteration and professedness. Again, in Creatures we find
God has appointed the Conjunction of the Male and Female to be the means of
continuation of their Species; and the more to excite the Creature to the
continuation of its Kind, there is a Delight mingled with that natural Action;
yet we never see the Sensible Creature divide the Action from the End: But
among Men we find in all times those Prodigies of Lusts, as Prostitution,
Beastiality, Buggery, and other unnatural commixtions. The like Instances might
be given of Cruelty, and excogitated Tortures, and Crimes of like nature,
whereby Men do not only against Reason, but also against, and beyond the
natural inclination of the Sensitive Appetite. So that it is evident, there is
not only an Imbecility in the Will of Man, whereby it is subordinate to its
Servants and Handmaids, but likewise a Depravation and Positive Maliciousness
against the Rule of the Will of God. Much Labor has been in the World by the
wiser sort of Men, what by moral Persuasions and Precepts, what by Government
and Humane Laws, to suppress or reform the Defects of Men's Natures; which as
they evidence in themselves, that Man is not what he should be, so the daily
new Remedies do sufficiently evidence the fruitfulness of the Disease, and the
weakness of the Remedy.

These things considered, three things are the evident Consequents, viz.

1. That, as things stand with the Children of Men, they are not in a condition
to attain everlasting Happiness, by reason of these two eminent Defects in
those Faculties, by which we must attain to it, viz. the Understanding and Will.

2. That, although these two Defects could be cured, yet it is impossible for
us, in that condition wherein we are, to attain it; because we have violated
that Rule, which unless uniformly kept, it is impossible to attain it; the chain
is broken.

3. That this violation of this Rule has not only made us liable to the Loss
of that Good whereunto it might have conduced; but has added Rebellion to our
Fault, and Obligation to Punishment, as well as Loss.

Therefore, before he can possibly attain that End, to which he was created, he
must be put in the same condition, in which he was created, and which alone
could make him capable of that End; which is in a Conformity to Truth in his
Understanding, or Illumination, a state of Conformity to the Will of God, in
his Will by Righteousness and Holiness; a state of Innocence, or Freedom from
Guilt, which is the cause, both of his merit of Loss and Punishment. Till these
be in some measure attained, it is impossible for a Man to attain true
Happiness, and when attained, then he may, because now restored to the same
condition in effect, in which created.

3. These things being premised, we are now to seek out, What that Means is for
the Restitution of Man, to that Capacity of Happiness, in which we have
reasonably concluded he was created, and from which it appears by experimental
observations he is declined: Concerning which we shall conclude:

1. That it is not in Man, nor in the whole compass of created Nature, to put
himself in that condition of Knowledge, Justice or Innocence, which might make
him capable of that Happiness, for which he was at first created. Let us look
into our Understanding, it is evident, as before, that all Knowledge is
extrinsecal to the Understanding, and every Object is originally received from
without, and that if it be a corporeal Object falling within our Senses, then
by means of them, though after they are received, the Intellect, being
furnished with Materials, makes pretty work out of them by its own strength;
but if it fall not within the reach of Sense, some other means must be to
convey and reach it unto our Understanding. It may be in Nature there are
objects or qualities in corporeal Bodies that do not suit with any of our Five
Senses, nor are receptible by them; yet it is as impossible for us to imagine
what they be, as to frame in our selves a Conception or Sense that might
receive them. It is true, that by the strength of Reason, we do find out diverse
Truths of a high Nature, concerning God and his Works, yet in these we may see,
1. a great deal of difficulty and rarety to attain them, especially without
some pre-existent means of discovery, even of the things themselves, by some
Tradition or Revelation, and so we rather assert the Truths discovered to our
hands, than discover them: 2. A great deal of confusion, darkness, and
disorder, in those things we so discover, as the new cured Man saw Men walking
like Trees: 3. A great deal of diffidence and distrust of those things we
discover, scarce daring to trust our own Judgments with what we have by our
diligence retrieved. But whatever may be said concerning the discovery of the
same Truths, yet sure we are, that there are diverse Truths, that infinitely
concern us, that all our Inquiry shall never discover, without some extrinsecal
help of a higher nature than Sense. There were some, and but some Men by their
natural helps, and yet not without the help of long Tradition, discovered, or
rather more clearly illustrated the former kind of Truths, viz. concerning the
Deity, the Creation of all things, the Immortality of the Soul, etc. But of
this latter, never any Man had, or could have, any discovery, without a
discovery from a higher original, such are the Covenant of God with Man in his
Creation, the Fall, the Restitution of Man by Christ, the last Judgment, and
Resurrection, etc. whereof anon.

And as it fares thus with our Intellectuals, so the Principles of Justice
toward God, our selves, and others, in our Will, can never be recovered by all
the helps of Nature. It is true, that by Tradition from Father to Son, which
nevertheless is extrinsecal, some general Principles of natural Justice and
Holiness are traduced; but the farther and the elder they grew from their
Original, the more corrupt still they were; and it was the Business of the
wiser part of the World, still to repair and heal these Defects, which grew
hereby: but as their Helps and Remedies were ever too weak to meet with the
corruptions of Man's Will, so they were for the most part defective; for they
still provided for that part only or principally, which concerned the Civil
Society of Men, which was the thing that was visible, and visibly prejudiced by
those Enormities of the Will of Men, and never looked higher to the great
relation between God and Man, but only made use of that as a politic piece in
order to the government of the Civil Society: although even in that part, that
concerned the Mutual Offices between Men, which has been the greatest Business
of the wisest Philosophers, we shall find that absurdity, difference, and
injustice even in the Wisest of them, that it is clear, they were not their
Crafts-masters, even in that piece of Morality, wherein long Tradition and the
Experience of the daily inconveniences which did spring from the distempers of
Man's Will even in matters of Civil Society and Commerce.

But suppose we all this were curable, yet what cure can we find for any one
Offense against the Covenant, which we have made in Nature with the God of
Nature, which, as we have before stated, subjects to a double penalty of Loss
and Sense? none can take away an Obligation, but he with whom it is made, By
what imaginable means can any Man, that has contracted a guilt against his
Maker, expiate that guilt? It is true, the God against whom it is committed
may, if he please, of his own free Power and Goodness, remit it, without any
satisfaction. But how do we know whether it be his Will to do it? or if it be,
upon what Terms? or by what Means he will do it? or what Means is there in the
World that may be imaginably proportionable to it? the Obligation of the
Creature to God is infinite, because he owes him his Being, which is a thing of
the most boundless Conception; the Violation of that Obligation, is therefore
an infinite Obliquity, because a breach of an infinite Obligation. What then
can we imagine proportionable to such an Offense? If we do all that is
imaginable, it is still but what we are bound to do, and therefore cannot
expiate for what we were bound not to do; nor is there any thing in the World
of an infinite Value, besides the great God, and therefore not answerable to
expiate the breach of an infinite Obligation.

2. Now therefore it remains, that we look out for a higher Means for the cure,
than what we find within the Verge of created Nature, viz. from the great God,
who first infused into the Soul those Objects of Truth, which were the means of
Happiness, in the Understanding; that Rectitude, which was by him at first
placed in the Will; that Innocence, which was at first in Nature, which is now
lost by the violation of that Law, which was the Means of Man's Happiness, and
the removal of that Guilt which was contracted by that Violation.

The Defect in the Understanding consists, as before, in two things: Want of a
clear Light to entertain the Object; and Ignorance of the Object, which should
be entertained. For the cure of this, we must of necessity derive from God a
double Cure: First, an addition of Light in the Understanding: Secondly, an
Union of those Truths or Objects, necessary to be known, unto the Faculty thus
enlightened by some means of discovery.

The Defect of our Wills consisting in an absence of these practical Principles
of Justice, Holiness, and Conformity to the Will of God; and in the weakness
and disorder of the Will, there is required to the cure thereof, a conveying
unto the Will of these Persuasions to conform to the Will of God, and a
Strengthening and healing of the weakness and perverseness of the Will, that it
may effectually entertain these Persuasions.

The contracted Guilt must have a double Cure, viz. Of Absolution from the
positive Punishment, and Restitution of the Loss contracted by it. The former
frees him from positive Misery incurred, the latter restores him to the
capacity of enjoyment of the Happiness lost.

It being therefore clear, and to be granted, That as things stand with Man, he
has not this means of his Cure in or from himself, but must derive it, being
now lost, from him, who at first gave it him, the next Enquiry is, Whether God
has appointed any Means for the cure of Man's Ignorance, Perverseness, and
Guilt, and consequently to lead him to Happiness, and what it is? wherein we
conclude,

1. That God in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness has revealed, and conveyed to
the Children of Men, the Means of their Happiness, in several times, by several
ways, and in several degrees in all successions of times.

2. That this Discovery and Means of Happiness, he has by the course of his
Providence put together, and diffused to Mankind in the Compilation of the Old
and New Testament, wherein are contained, not only the clear Discoveries of
things to be Known and Believed, conducing to Man's everlasting Happiness; but
likewise things to be Done, and effectual Persuasions for the doing of it.

3. That in the Use thereof, there are not only the natural Means of discovery
of Truths necessary to be known, of things to be done, and most effectual and
powerful Persuasions beyond all other moral Arguments to the Obedience thereof,
but likewise a strong Concurrence of the Power of God (according to his Will)
subduing the Understanding to believe, and the Will to obey.

4. That by this Belief of those necessary Truths, and Obedience to the Will of
God thus revealed, Man shall be conducted to his everlasting Happiness, which
was the great End of his Creation.

CHAP. VI. (...) the Credibility of the Sacred Scriptures.
THESE things be of easy consequence, if once this be clearly proved to be the
Word of God, for then we argue demonstratively, and a priori, from the Cause to
the Effect, viz. Because that whatsoever is the express Word of God himself,
which is the God of Truth, cannot choose but be infallibly true, and beyond all
disputation: But the question will be upon the Assumption, viz Whether this be
in truth, the Word of God? which, if once granted, all the rest will need no
proof. The Understanding of Man has wrought in it a fourfold Assent to every
Truth, whereunto it assents.

1. An Inherent Assent, that is of such Principles, if any be, which are
connatural to Man. Thus the Understanding ass^^ts not to this Proposition, That
the Old and New Testament, are the Word of God.

2. Knowledge wrought by Demonstration, or Scientia per causam. Thus* though
there be many Truths in the Scripture, that are demonstrable; yet, that these
Scriptures are the infallible Word of God, is not naturally demonstrable.

3. Belief, which is the taking up of a Truth upon the Testimony of him that
asserts it. This, that it may be firm requires two qualifications: First, a
firm and absolute persuasion, That what the Author affirms, is tr^ And thus a
Man once admitting, That this is (...) lord of God, does most unquestionably
believ^, because the truth of the Author is demonstrably unquestionable: 2. A
firm and clear Assent, That this is the Word of that infallible Author. And
this is wrought only by a secret and immediate work of the Power of God upon
the Soul, and is as firm Assent, if not more firm, than Science it self.

4. Persuasion or Opinion, which rises upon probable grounds. And although
this can never arrive to Belief or Knowledge, yet according to the strength,
concurrence, and multiplicity of Arguments concurring to the Persuasion, it may
arrive to the very next degree, to Belief or Knowledge. Thus it may be firmly
concluded, That this is the Word of God, and the Means which he in his
Providence has appointed to guide Man to the attaining of his last Happiness.
This Persuasion, Of thi^ the Author has p^o^^ss^, and more largely w^^tten in
other Works.
though it be not Faith, it does prepare the Heart for that high and noble
Assent, and mighly strengthens it, being attained. These are in the next place
to be considered.

1. It does discover those Truths clearly and satisfactorily, which has
perplexed all the Labors and Enquiries of the wisest Men, and thereby
unriddles and renders easy most of those difficulties and doubts in natural
and moral Philosophy, which could never, or not without strange uncertainty and
reluctation, be so much as guessed at by them. The abstrusest Truths are hardly
discovered and found out, which is one cause of those several absurd Opinions
and Positions, which have been invented and imposed by Men's Fancies, to make
out, supply, and reconcile those Difficulties which the Ignorance of, it may
be, one Truth, does most necessarily occasion: but when that Truth is once
discovered, it does most clearly resolve those Difficulties, and scatter those
Absurdities, and procure an easy Assent from that Reason in Man, which could
not at first easily discover it. To consider this in some Particulars*

In Matters Natural: Whence grew all those strange Chimera's concerning the
first Matter, Its Eternity, Its undeterminateness, and a thousand disputes,
Whether it is? What it is? and all end in nothing but unsatisfactory and
unresolving Disputes; concerning Eduction of Forms out of the power of it, and
by what Agent; concerning the eternal succession and concatenation of Causes;
concerning the beginning of Motion, especially of the Heavens; the endeavoring
to reconcile an eternal duration to a successive motion; concerning the
different activities and qualities of simple Bodies, their mutual actings one
upon another, the cause of the disgregating of the simple Bodies one from
another unto that convenient distance, and of their concurrence in production
of mixed Bodies; the production of Creatures, especially Man; the nature of the
Soul; the fitting of Objects and Powers in the Senses and Intellect. All these,
and millions of Disputes, rise from the ignorance of that Truth, which at one
view, we may with satisfaction read, resolved in the First of Genesis, and in
no Book in the World beside, but what has been borrowed from thence.

Again, Touching the orderly Position of the Creatures, The convenience of one
thing, to the exigence and necessity of another; The moderation and government
of things endued with destructive qualities each to other; The concurrence of
several contingent Causes to the producing of Mutations in States, Religion,
etc. as if those contingent Causes had been as it were animated with one Soul
or Spirit; and the like. The observation of these, and the like things, and the
want of true knowledge, have put Men to those exigences of invention, which
resolve them into Fate or Destiny, into the power of the Stars, into the Law of
Nature; and yet we are still where we were, not knowing What that Fate is, What
that Order or Power of Heaven is, Whence that Law of Nature came, or was given.

But if we look into this Book of God, we find all these difficulties
extricated: we find the preservation of this Order in the Creatures, to proceed
from, and depend upon the Wisdom and Power, and Government of an infinite and
intellectual Being; who, whiles his Creature for the most part moves according
to the Rule of his own Nature, yet wonderfully manageth them to Ends and Events
which they dream not of; who, whiles the several contrary qualities, that he
has planted in Bodies, could be destructive one of another, he has so fenced
their extremities one from another, that one destroys not another, and yet so
tempers and allays them, that they concur in the constitutions of other things.
There we find the various and most contingent motions of the Creatures,
marshalled by a Wise Providence to the production of those Events, that the
secret Counsel of the great God had appointed; so that whiles with one Eye we
see seemingly accidental casual motion of the World, like the Finger upon the
Dyal* we may with the other Eye see in that Book, that wheel of Providence,
moving and turning it rationally, and with election, for those Ends, that it
pleases the Wise Governor of all things to order.

Again, in matters Moral, what perplexed Questions have Men made concerning the
Law of Nature in Men? Whether there be any? or if any, What it is? Whence it
has its Obligation, since all Men are by Nature equal? What is the original
and radical Rule of of Just or not Just? What the Standard of it? or, Whether
any at ah? Whether there be any Chief Good of Men? What it is? Whether
attainable? Hence have grown those infinite Disputes de summo bono, every one
stating his own Opinion, and yet each sufficiently co^f^ting another. All these
Perplexities we find soon resolved in that Book of God, showing us, That Just
and Unjust, is only measurable by the Will of God; that the Obligation of Just
or Unjust, arises from the mere Command of God, and that relation of Duty
which Man owes to his Creator, and to the injunction that he gives: showing us
the falsity of every of those Positions concerning the Chief Good, and teaching
us that it is to be had, and to be had only in the enjoyment of our Creator.

True it is, that many of these, and the like Truths, may be arrived at by the
light of Reason: But 1. It is not without much Difficulty and Labor, and that
of the most choice Men: 2 It is not without the help of Tradition, at least of
some small Veins of these Truths: 3. It is not without much mixture of
corruptions, errors and mistakes: 4. Not without much hesitancy and doubting.
Our natural Reason as it lies in the Ore, and therefore must be disgrossed from
its dross, by study and Education; so it is weak and must be supported. And
where the strength of Reason is the same, that Truth that another discovers, is
entertained with more confidence, than if a Man singly had discovered it; so
that by the Scriptures, Reason is enlightened and strengthened in those Truths,
which carry in them a consonancy to Reason, and might happily, though in a weaker
measure, and with more difficulty, have been extracted out of sound Reason and
Observation.

2. It does contain diverse Truths, which could never be discovered, but by God
himself: as what the Will of God was, that Man should do, or the Law of God;
What the purpose of God was, concerning Man, both in his Fall, and Restitution
by Christ; The Covenant which he made with the Jews, and with us in Christ; The
uniting of the Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of Christ; The last
Judgment; The motion of the great God toward his Creature, in Mercy and
Judgment, and the like. These, as they are beyond the discovery of any Man, so
they were too high for any Man to invent or surmise. It is true, the Heathen
Lawgivers and Philosophers, to gain Credit to their Laws and Dictates, durst
sometimes to patronize them upon Heaven: but in them, a considerate Man might
clearly find those Laws to have arisen from a mere observation of the visible
Inconveniences to public Societies, and a prudential application of such
Rules, as might meet with those Inconveniences: the original of them was
attributed to Divine Institution, to gain Reputation and Opinion in the Vulgar:
but in truth all, or at least those that were the best, and best grounded, were
as naturally deducible from the observation of the Conveniences and
Inconveniences of a civil Society, as the Conclusions of Geometry or
Arithmetic, are grounded upon their Principles: and therefore for the most
part, Humane Laws did in substance agree in the Points consisting in the
relation between Man and Man, as being more obvious and plain; and did for the
most part disagree and differ in those Points that concerned Religion, as being
more distant and difficult:

Now i^ it be said, That the distance and remoteness of those supposed Truths
from natural Reason or discovery, ^enders the Scriptures the more incredible;
or at best, not credible thereby to be the Word of God; for upon the same
reason, any improbable Relation may be obtruded upon us as a Divine Truth,
because not to be else imagined by Humane Reason.

In Answer to this, we must premise two things,

1. That it is possible, there may be some intelligible Objects and Truths in
the World, that never any Man did, nor without the help of a foreign discovery,
never can find out. If a Man were supposed to be born without the Faculty of
Seeing, it were not possible for him to discover that quality or motion of a
natural Body, which we call Light, or Color; nay, scarce to understand it,
though a very rational Discourse were made concerning it. And what Man can
conclude, but that there may be, and are, diverse qualities or motions of
natural Bodies, which are without the Verge of any of our Senses, and
consequently, never fall into humane discovery? We clearly admit Spirits, and
we have notions of their motion locality, and substance; yet it is impossible
for any Man by natural indagation, without the help of some extrinsecal
relation, to find it out: We may therefore conclude, That as it is possible
there may be, so it is probable there are some intelligible Objects and Truths,
which we cannot discover without an extrinsecal help or discovery.

2. That of necessity many of those Truths contained in the Scripture,
especially concerning the Deity, the Will of God, the Fall of Man, and the
Means of his Restoration, are things that cannot be collected or concluded by
any natural Reason, partly in respect of the sublimity of their Nature, being
beyond the Verge of Sense and natural Discourse; partly because they are
Emanations of a free Agent, whereof no other Reason can be given, but the Will
of the Agent, and consequently, not deducible into Knowledge or Assent, by
rational Conclusions.

3. That though the discovery of, or assent unto those Truths, cannot be
elicited by natural Reason, yet they are not contrary to natural Reason, but
may be Truths, notwithstanding any reason that can be given against them. It is
true, that they, being above the reach of Reason, cannot be by force of Reason
assented unto; yet there is no reason against the truth of them. Natural Reason
has a privative opposition to the knowledge of them, viz. an absence of a
necessity of assenting, not a positive opposition, or a (...) by necessity of
Reason to disassent to them (...)

4. That though these Truths are (...) ^ry of Reason, and beyond the (...)
sent, yet they carry (...) gr^ (...) alt^ (...) up^ (...) p^ (...) wi^ (...)
infra, (...) Thus the Fall of Man, (...) Truths unimaginable by Natu^ (...)
^itness one to another; and the Ju^ (...) Mercy of God bears witness to both
The m^ ^y of the Soul, and the last Judgment, bear witness each to other. And
as there is that mutual attestation by way of Congruity of one of these sublime
Truths, to another of the same nature, so the Congruity that these Truths have
to those Truths, which rationally challenge an Assent from us, That all things
had a beginning from the First Cause, is a Truth evident in Nature, but in what
way, or by what manner, is not possible to be known without a discovery. How
excellently does that discovery of the manner of the Creation serve, as I may
say that Principle? So again, that Man, being endued with a rational and
immortal Soul, was ordered by the First Cause to an immortal End, by a rational
Means prescribed by God, may be concluded by rational inferences and
deductions; but what that Means was, or clearly, what that End was, is not
discoverable by natural Reason; for it depends upon the Will of God. How
admirably does the Scripture discover that Means, viz. the Law of God, and that
End, the Vision and Fruition of God, especially in the point of the
Resurrection. Again, That the Violation of that Rule, must incur a Guilt
irreparable; a loss of that End, is rationally evident; yet although that Man
by that Guilt, is justly deprivable of that End, is clear; yet that God should
be disappointed in this End, seems somewhat hard. How clearly does the Point of
our Redemption by Christ (a point inconceptible by Nature) serve to extricate
and untwist this difficulty, gives God the Glory of his Justice, and of his
Mercy, of his Wisdom, and of his Creature? Thus the subservience of a Truth
more difficult to the exigence of a Truth, that is more clear to Nature,
renders the former not only possible, but probable.

3. The third Evidence, That this is the Word of God, are those strange
Predictions of most contingent Events, fulfilled in their several times; the
Prediction in one Age, and declared by one Instrument of God, the fulfilling in
another Age, declared by another, or seen by our selves. This gives testimony,
both to the Truth and Divinity of the author or inspirer of it. To omit those
Predictions of Joseph, concerning the removal out of Egypt: The Prediction of
the Jewish Captivity, and the Restitution by Cyrus, by Name; The four Empires;
The destruction of Jerusalem; take notice but of these two, viz. The Prophecies
of the coming of Christ, describing his Nature, Genesis 3.15. his Lineage of
Abraham, Genesis 22.18. of Judah, Genesis 49.10. of David, Isa. 11.1. the place of
his Birth, Micah 5.2. his Office, Isa. 61.1. his Mother, Isa. 7.14. his Death,
and the Ends of it, Isa. 53. the time of his Death, Dan. 9.2. and diverse other
Circumstances, fulfilled precisely in our Savior.

2. The Rejection of the Jews, and Calling of the Gentiles to the Faith of
Christ, Deuteronomy. 31.29. and 32.21. Isa. 11.10. Isa. 42.6. Isa. 49.6. this Prophecy
fulfilled even in our own view, yet upon such disadvantage of natural Reason,
as had not the same power effected it, that at first declared it, it could
never have been effected, considering, 1. The utter Enmity between the Jews and
Gentiles. 2. The extreme contrariety in Religion to it, 3. The small and
inconsiderable means of effecting that Conversion. 4. The great Scorn and
Sufferings of those that professed it, 5. The visible impossibilities of making
any temporal Advantages by it, etc.

4. The Consent and Harmony among the several parts of it. When several Men, in
several Ages, not brought up under the same Education, write, It is not
possible to find Unity in their Tenets or Positions, because their Spirits,
Judgments, and Fancies are different: but where so many several Authors,
writing or speaking at several times, agree not only in matters dogmatical, of
sublime and difficult Natures, but also in Predictions of future and contingent
Events, whereof it is impossible for humane Understanding, to make a discovery
without a superior discovery made to it, I must needs conclude one and the
same Divine Spirit declared the same Truths to these several Men.

5. This Book alone, and none besides, but by derivation from it, contains
matters of the most noble and useful nature. The generality of all humane
Learning, do either in their Object or Use, or both, expire with this Life; and
none ever arrived to the discovery of the great and adequate End of Man. This
is not only evident in these Arts or Sciences of Natural Philosophy, the
Mathematics, Physics, Politics, Laws, etc. all which at their highest, are
but only subservient to this Life, but in those two great and noble Sciences,
that Speculative of Metaphysics, that other Practical of Moral Philosophy: The
former, though it arrive to as high Truths as Nature can discover, yet it rests
in the knowing of them, and in a mere Speculation, and does not show wherein
consists Man's true Happiness, much less, what is the way to attain it; for the
latter, the most sublime piece of it, is framed only for the Meridian of this
Life, both in the Use and End. Without all question, the Great and Wise God did
write in Man's Nature, Habits exactly conducible to his internal Contentment
and Felicity, in reference to his living in this World, as those which were of
a higher Constitution and End, as his communion with his Maker. The wisest of
Moral Philosophers, though they have imperfectly copied out diverse Positions of
the former, as Justice, Temperance, Contentedness, Undervaluation of the World,
Patience; yet they never arrived at the latter; no Book in the World but this,
shows a Man the adequate End of his Being, his Supreme Good, his Happiness; nor
directs the Means of acquiring it. This does not only enforce the nobleness and
value of the Book, but also the original of it, for when I shall see a world of
the most exact humane Wits, turning every stone, as it were, within the reach
of humane discovery, and yet none of them all lighting upon this great Subject,
the way to eternal Happiness, I must needs conclude, That this discovery is of
a higher extract, than a mere humane invention; and although, when we have
discovered that subject, we begin to wonder that Mankind has thus long roved,
and wasted its labor in those other impertinent inquiries, and were so far
from discovery of this Vnum Necessarium, that they scarce so much as imagined
there was any such Business; yet we may justly forbear that wonder, for this is
a Path which the Vultures have not seen; the great God alone gave Man his End,
and appointed the way to that End; we had once the knowledge of both, but have
lost it, and we must owe the discovery of it to the Author of it: And to Man he
said, Behold the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, is
Understanding, Job 18.28.

6. It does discover the whole Duty of Man to his Maker, to himself, and to
others, far beyond all other Books or Documents in the World. Man by his Sin
has lost the greatest part of his Light and Perfection; his own discoveries of
his Duty are lame and imperfect; and till the God, that first planted these
Principles of Knowledge and Conformity to his Will, give us a new Copy of them,
we shall never clearly attain unto them in our knowledge or practice. There are
these Eminencies touching Moral Precepts, which this Book of God has above all
other Books in the World.

1. No other Book in the World does discover the true ground of the Obligation
unto Moral Precepts. The Moral Philosopher persuades me to Temperance, to
Justice, but what Obligation lies upon me for it? If he tells me, That it is
his own Authority, my Answer is, He has none over me, more than I have over
him: If he tells me, the Law under which I live, binds me to it, I shall
enquire what binds me to observe those Laws, but Power, which if I can avoid by
the like power or secrecy, I am not bound; or my own Consent, which I am as
well Master of, as I was before I consented: If he tells me, the Law of Nature
binds me, I am still unsatisfied who gave that Law, or when, or to whom; and
there the Philosopher is to seek, as well of my Conviction, as of my Obedience:
But this Book shows what that Law is, from whence the Obligation of Obedience
to it arises, even from that most Just and Uncontrollable Authority that God
has over his Creature.

2. No other Book or Learning in the World persuades the observance of those
Laws, it injoyns with the like convincing and satisfying grounds of Reason that
this does: The highest ground that ever Moral Philosopher could fetch to
persuade to submit to Moral Precepts, were but one of these: viz. The
Reputation and general esteem of Men, which dies with me, and while it lives,
is nothing else but a Fancy, and contains no Reality; or the Cohortion of the
Laws, which if I can avoid with secrecy or force, I escape the strength of the
Persuasion; or that Congruity, that sound Moral Precepts hold with Prudence,
and the permanent enjoyment of good here; for it is a most certain Truth, as
appears before, That the due observation of the Rules of right Reason has a
most clear connection with Happiness in this Life; and that the violation of
these Precepts of Nature, do necessarily introduce a loss of temporal Felicity:
These are the highest Motives of Obedience to these humane Documents: But let
us look upon the Motives that the very same Precepts are enforced with, in this
Book of God, we shall find them of a higher Constitution; we are there shown,
they are commanded by that God, to whom we owe our Being, and therefore may
justly challenge our Obedience as his Tribute; by that God, from whom we daily
receive our Preservation and Mercies, and therefore may justly expert the
return of our Love and Thankfulness in the Observance of his Will; by that God,
that has annexed a Sanction to the breach of his Law, which he both can, and
will inflict; this may startle our Fear; by that God, that has propounded and
promised a Reward to our Obedience, both in this Life, and a future, which he
will certainly confer; this does quicken our Hope. These and the like grounds,
and motives of Obedience, fall upon the most active Affections, with the most
powerful and rational Persuasion, and are able to conquer more difficulties in
the Obedience of these very Precepts, that are materially the same, than all
those faint and thin Persuasions, that the wisest of Men could ever teach. The
great God, that knows the frame of the Soul of Man, has not only given
rational Laws to lead him to his great End, and rational Means to draw out his
Obedience, by appointing Rewards or Punishments of his Obedience or
Disobedience; but also by the same Wisdom of his, planted in him Affections,
which might be proper to receive the impressions of those Rewards and
Punishments: and by this Word of his conveys those Notions into his Heart,
which stick upon those active Affections of Love, Hope, and Fear, in the most
exact, full and adequate manner: This is therefore none else, but the Finger of
God. And this is not only evinced by the Threatenings and Promises in this Book,
but by the Historical part of it, applying the Truths of both; wherein we may
see unriddled most of the varieties of Events, that fall upon a People, or
Person, especially knowing God, which without this Light, seem to be confused,
and merely contingent. Israel sins, Israel is punished: she repents, and is
delivered. We are shown by the very Historical passages of the Old Testament,
that when we are punished, we eat but the fruit of our own ways.

3. As the Eminence of the Scripture above other Learning, and consequently its
Original, is discovered in the two former, so in this, that it does distinctly
and clearly evidence, and set forth those Moral Precepts, which are confusedly
and imperfectly only delivered by the best of humane Writers, especially in the
Worship of God: All agree God is to be worshipped, but when they come to show
how, then they are to seek; for indeed, as it is folly for any one to think,
that there can be any Worship of God acceptable, but what is agreeable to his
Will; so it is vain to think, that this Will of his could be discovered by any
but himself. And from the want of this grew Idolatries and other Vanities in
Worship.

4 The original of the Scriptures is discovered in this, that it does contain
in it Precepts of a higher Constitution, and therefore of a higher Pedigree,
than the best of all humane Learning ever did arrive unto: such as are the
Cleansing of the Heart and Thoughts from all Sin; That the Formality of Sin
consists in the Will, even before it expresses it self in Act; That the
outward Conformity of the Act to Virtue, without the internal Conformity of the
Will and Mind, is but Hypocrisy, and the seeming virtuous Action is at least
dead, and not of value, if not sin; That a Virtuous Action done out of any
other End, than in Obedience and Love to God, that enjoins it, is not an Action
rightly Principled, nor acceptable to God; The right directing of our Passions
and Affections, that nothing is worthy of our intense Love but God; that
nothing deserves our Hate but Sin; and therefore teaches us in the former, to
despise the World; in the latter, to love our Enemies. The right temper of our
Minds, in reference to all things without us, or befalling us in any Affliction
and Trouble; It teaches us to improve it in discovery and repenting of the
cause of our sin; in adhering to God, in whom there is no variableness; in
keeping a loose And remiss Affection to the World; in Contentedness, and
cheerful resignation of our selves to God, that is Lord of his Creature, and
though it should not be meritoriously deserved, might be justly inflicted: In
times of Prosperity and Comfort, it teaches us to look to the Author, and take
more delight in the hand that gives it, than in the Blessing it self; to value
the measure of my Comfort, more by the favor and good will of the Giver, than
by the extent of the Gift: In the enjoyment to be Watchful, that I be not
ensnared by it to forget the Giver, to be moderate, humble, wise: In the whole
course of our Lives to look above this World to another Country, and so we may
enjoy the the Favor of our God, and the Fruition of that Country; to be at a
point with all the Pleasures, Profits, Preferments, Honors, Comforts, and Life
of this Life; to be so fixed in our Obedience to our God, as not to go out of
the Path he has put us in, though it be strewed with all the Scorns, Miseries,
Torments, and Deaths, that Men or Hell could scatter to hinder us. These and
the like Precepts are given in that Word: and these and the like Effects it
does, by the concurrence of God's Grace, work in the Heart, which are as far
beyond the most sublimated Documents of the most exact moral Philosopher in the
World, as theirs are beyond the most gross Paganism: These do proclaim
therefore their original from a higher Principle than humane Authority, or
Invention. And it is observable, that these are not only Principles of a high
and noble extract, but of a singular use in this Life: If all Men were of this
Constitution, it would questionless, reform all those Inconveniences, which do
happen either from one Man to another, as Enquiries, breach of Contracts; or
from Man to himself; of discontent, vexation and unquietness of Mind, or
disorder in any Condition.

Now if it be said, That it seems strange, that God, who could have preserved
Man in the same Integrity of Mind, in which he was created, and could have
supplied Man with as uniform a motion to his End by a constant Means, as other
Creatures by their Instincts, which are fixed and constant in them, should take
this Circuit, in restoring lost Man by such a Means, it is answered, That God
having endued Man with Reason, Understanding, and Will, does rather choose to
bring about his purposes concerning him, by Rational Means conform to those
Faculties of Understanding and Will, putting Light into the one, and Regularity
into the other, by such means as is suitable to his Condition and Nature, and
not by the actual exercise of his extraordinary Power, though not without the
concurrence of his special Grace and Providence; as in those other actions of
Men, in preserving the natural or civil Subsistence of Men, and Societies, he
does use the instrumental means of natural and politic Provisions, rationally
or naturally conducing to such preservation.

By what has past before these things, are rationally concluded,

1. That there is a First Cause of all things.

2. That this First Cause is Infinite, Incomprehensible, etc.

3. That this First Cause, as he was the first and only Cause of all Beings, so
he appoints in his Wisdom and Justice, the several Ends, or Perfections of all
things.

4. That the several particular Ends of all things are proportionable to their
several Natures.

5. That every thing is carried to his several End, by Rules proportionable to
the End and Nature of the Creature, given by the great Governor of all things.

6. That Man is a Creature of higher Constitution than other Creatures,
principally in respect of the Immortality of the Soul; the Immateriality of it,
the Faculties of it, Understanding and Will.

7. That therefore he was at first ordained by the wise God to an End
proportionable to these Excellencies, an immaterial, immortal, intelligible,
desirable God.

8. That there is no other Object of this Happiness, but God himself.

9. That the same Wisdom of God, that ordained all things to their End, and
planted in every thing conducible Motions and Rules for that End, has likewise
appointed unto Man a Rule leading him up to that End; and without the
observation whereof it is impossible to attain it.

10. That this Rule depends merely upon the Will of God, what it should be; and
that in the Conformity to this Will, consists Man's present Enjoyment, and
Hopes and Means of future Happiness.

11. That as things stand with Man, he is at a Fault, and knows not what his
End, what his Rule is, nor has a Will to obey it.

12. That consequently he can never attain his End, till his Understanding and
Will be reformed, and the Guilt contracted by the violation of that Rule, be
taken off.

13. That the Discovery, Reformation, and Cure, can be by no other Means, than
by God himself.

14. That this Book of the Old and New Testament are that Means, which God
himself has given in his Mercy, Providence and Wisdom to be the means of the
discovery unto Man what his End, what his Means to attain that End was, how
lost, how to be restored; and contains most effectual and rational Means
conducible to it.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the Existence and Attributes of God.
AND now we have drawn down the great Business of Man, by dark and intricate
steps and windings to a clear Light, which does not only clearly and
compendiously unmask and unfold these Truths, which with so much difficulty of
discourse, and search by Reason, we dimly arrive unto, but diverse other Truths,
which all the Reason and Learning of the Sons of Men, could never attain unto;
yet such, as without which all the Passages even of this Life, are dark and
obscure, and uncomfortable: We shall therefore now fall to the consideration of
those Truths, which are contained in that Book, that are of the greatest
concernment to the Sons of Men, in order to their supreme End, and to evidence
their Congruity with sound and rectified Reason.

1. This Book teaches us, That there is a God, which although it be deducible
by natural Evidence, yet this declaration in the Scripture is of singular use,
as well for the speedy and easy discovery of it, as also for the ratifying and
confirming of this Principle, as we may observe, even in Truths of an inferior
nature; which, though by the discursive operation of the Understanding, they
may be discovered and assented unto; yet these discoveries, and that consent,
is facilitated and strengthened, when in the Writings or Dictates of others
they are set forth, as in the several discourses of Men in matters Natural,
Metaphysical, and Moral. And we may observe, that even in this fundamental
Truth, That there is a God, where these and the like Instructions are wanting,
Men, that are naturally endued with the same Faculties of Reason and
Understanding with us, have not, or not so clearly this Principle, as among
Atheists and Pagans.

2. This Book shows us clearly the Essence, Nature and Attributes of God, as
far forth as is comprehensible by our humane Understanding. Many of these are
by the help of natural Reason and Discourse, legible in the things that are
seen, so far forth, as to leave our Ignorance thereof unexcusable, Romans 1.20.
yet as in the former, so much more in this, our Reason is helped and
strengthened in our speedy discovery, and firmer assent thereunto, as likewise
appears by the many Errors of Men of the same Faculties with us, even
concerning these Principles.

Herein we learn his Unity: Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our ^^d is one Lord. His
Self-sufficiency, and Subsistence of himself: Exodus 3.14. I am that I am. His
Imm^sity: ^ Kings 8.27. Behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee: His Vbiquity, Deuteronomy. 4.39. The Lord he is God in Heaven above, and
upon Earth beneath: Psalm. 13.9. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or fly from
thy presence? Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself, that I shall not see him? Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth? His Eternity: Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World, even
from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. His Omniscience and intellectual
Nature: Psalm. 94.10, 11. The Lord knows the thoughts of Man, that they are
vanity. Prove. 15.11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more
the Hearts of the Children of Men? His Omnipotence: Genesis 17.1. I am the
Almighty God. Psalm. 145.3. His Greatness is unsearchable. His Wisdom: Jer.
10.12. He has established the World by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the
Heavens by his Discretion. Psalm. 147.5. His Understanding is infinite. His Will
the only motive of all his actions: Prove. 16.14. The Lord has made all things
for himself. Exodus 33.19. And will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and
will show mercy to whom I will show mercy. Isa. 43.25. I am he that blotted out
thy transgressions for my own sake. Himself the End of all de does: Prove. 16.4.
The Lord has made all things for himself. Irresistibility: Prove. 21.30. There
is no Wisdom nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. Invisible: Exodus
33.19. No Man can see my face and live. Immutability: Matthew. 3.6. I am the
Lord, I change not. Psalm. 102.6. Thou art the same, and thy years have no end.
Isa. 40.28. Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary?
there is no searching of his Understanding. It is true, in these and the like
Expressions or Attributions unto the Divine Nature; we are nevertheless to
observe,

1. That it is impossible for any thing below God himself, fully and clearly to
understand the Nature or Essence of God; because he is actually Infinite, and
nothing besides himself has, or can have, an Act of his Intellect, spacious
enough to comprehend what is actually Infinite.

(...) Hand, Arm, Goings, Ways: wherein nevertheless the Scripture, whiles it
uses these Expressions to help our Understanding, and excite our Affections,
it nevertheless provides Cautions to avoid grossness and mistakes, that so it
may appear, that they are only helps to us, not derogations to the
incomprehensible Purity, Perfection, and Majesty of God: and for that very
reason, not any one thing so much fenced out by it, as Image-making, and
Worshipping.

3. By this Book, we are taught the manner of his Subsistence in three Persons,
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and that these three are one. The
Plurality of Persons in one Essence is a Mystery that is not attainable by all
the Reason in the World, and is but obscurely hinted in the Old Testament, Genesis
1.26, etc. and therefore it seems not understood by the Jews; but in the New
Testament more plainly related: the diversity of Persons of the Father and Son
in one Essence, John 14.9. John 17.5, 22. The Spirit -- All three together,
Matthew. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. The Manner of the Subsistence in Unity of Essence,
and Trinity of Persons is of that transcendent and incomprehensible Nature,
that, as it could never be discovered without an immediate revelation from God
himself, so being discovered, it is scarce conceptible by us. The Disputes
concerning it, farther than it is there revealed, are groundless and dangerous;
for it is utterly impossible, that the Notion of Personality or Subsistence, as
we take it up from these inferior Beings, can fit that, which is the highest
and most arcane Mystery of the infinite Being; and consequently those Disputes,
which are built upon those disproportionable Notions, are not without a
necessity of erring.

CHAP. II. Of the Acts and Works of God: and 1. Of his Eternal Counsel.
4. THE next great Point that we learn in this Book, is concerning the Acts or
Works of God:

1. His Eternal Counsel.

2. The Execution of that Counsel: 1. Creation. 2. Providence:


1. General, Concerning all things.

2. Special, Concerning Man.

1. Concerning the Eternal Counsel of God, whereby he did predetermine all
things that should be from all Eternity: This, as it evidently appears in all
the Prophecies of the Old Testament, which were fulfilled in their times, so by
diverse Affirmations, even of God himself by his Spirit: The Creation, Prove.
8.27. When he prepared the Heavens, 29. When he appointed the Foundations of
the Earth. Job 38.4. When I laid the Foundations of the Earth, 10. and brake up
for it my decreed place.

The Redemption of Man by Christ, 1 Pet. 1.20. Who was foreordained before the
Foundation of the World. Acts 2.23. Him by the determinate Counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, etc. Election of his Church and People,
Romans 9.11. The Purpose of God according to Election:

The Successes of Nations and Kingdoms, Isa. 14.26, 27. This is the Purpose
that is purposed upon the whole Earth, etc. For the Lord has purposed, and who
shall disanul it? Dan. 4.35. The Extorted Confession of Nebuchadnezzar.

The particular and voluntary motions of Men, Isa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the Rod of
mine Anger, etc. yet he thinks not so. Jer. 10.23. The way of Man is not in
himself. Prove. 20.24. Man's goings are of the Lord. Prove. 21.30. There is no
Wisdom nor Counsel against the Lord.

The most contingent and inconsiderable Events that are, the casting of a Lot,
Prove. 16.33. The falling of a Sparrow, Matthew. 10.29.

Now touching the Counsel of the Almighty, we are to distinguish between the
act of Counsel, and the act of Knowledge: the first is properly an act of his
Will, predetermining what shall be; the latter, an act of his infinite
understanding, which foresees what shall be, without any actual Causality upon
the things. These, though they are not so much as accidentally differing in
God, yet in our Apprehensions there is a difference; so that we conclude, there
is not only a Prescience in God of all things that shall, or may be: Known unto
the Lord are all his Works from the beginning: but likewise a Predetermination
by his Divine Will of all things that shall be, and of the several means
conducing to it. And this Counsel of God is in truth the supreme Cause of all
things: for as that Power, whereby all things do move themselves or other
things, is put into them by the great maker of all things, by the mere and
immediate act of his Will, as has been before observed; so the managing of all
these several Powers, to the production of the several things in the World, is
the act of the same Will of God: they move in their several Series, according
to that Counsel of the great God of Heaven.

Now this Counsel of God is represented to us in the Scripture under these
several qualifications. 1. An Eternal Counsel. 2. An Immutable Counsel. 3. A
Free Counsel. 4. A Wise Counsel. 5. An Active and Irresistible Counsel. 6. An
Universal Counsel.

1. It is an Eternal Counsel, a Purpose and Counsel before the Foundation of
the World, the indivisible and unsuccessive act of his Will. It is true, the
Counsels of Men, as their Conceptions are successive, one consideration
supplying the defect or imperfection of the former: and oftentimes the Counsels
of Men are taken up pro re nata, principally because they have not either the
power to manage all the Emergencies and Ingredients into an Action according to
their own Wills, nor to foresee those Accidents that might enervate or impede
the fruit of his Counsels; but the Will of God is the Cause of all things; and
therefore as nothing can have a Being without his Will, so nothing can impede
or hinder the Counsel of his Will.

2. From hence it follows, that it is an Immutable Counsel; otherwise it cannot
be Eternal; for what began to be otherwise, than it was before, cannot be
Eternal. The Change of Counsels and Purposes among Men arise from one of these
Causes: either from an intrinsecal Unsetledness and Unconstancy, which is their
imperfection; or from some extrinsecal Emergency, which either was not
for^seen, or cannot be mastered: but neither of these can fall upon God. It is
true; what he wills, he wills freely, and therefore ex natura rei he might not
have willed it; yet what he wills, he wills from all Eternity: Jam. 1.17.
with him there is no variableness nor shadow of turning: I the Lord change
not, Mal. 3.6.
therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. And as there is no ground of
change in himself, so neither is there any possibility of change from any thing
without him; because the same Act of his Will, which is his Counsel, is the
cause and measure of the being of all things, and therefore it can no more
hinder or alter his Counsel, than it can give it self a Being against his Will.
But because there be some things that owe not their Formality to the Counsel of
God, as Sin (which how far it falls within the Counsels of God, shall be
hereafter considered) yet that cannot any way elude the Counsel of God, as
shall be hereafter shown: Therefore those several passages in holy Scripture,
that tell us, that God repented of Evil, when Man repented of Sin, Joel 2.14.
Jonah 3.4. are not to be understood of the Nature or Counsels of God: for in
that respect Balaam spoke a Truth of God, Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man, that
he should lie, nor the Son of Man, that he should repent: For the same Counsel
of God, which appointed Jonah to be the Instrument of Nineveh's Repentance,
ordained likewise their turning upon that preaching, and ordered the diversion
of that Judgment, which the same Counsel had ordered to be imminent, but not
executed: But because there was the execution of such a real change, which in
Man is ordinarily the effect of a change of purpose, or repenting, therefore it
is called a Repenting: yet the very same Counsel, that appointed the
denunciation of an imminent Judgment, appointed their repenting upon that
denunciation, and that diversion, upon that repenting.

3. It is a Free Counsel: it is nothing else, but the act of the Will of God.
It is true, the determination of that Will imposes a necessity of the
existence of the thing willed, yet the determination it self was an act of the
freest Agents. This excludes any Stoical Necessity.

4. It is a most Wise Counsel. And this is evident, even in the lowest and most
inconsiderable execution of this Counsel: and therefore Isa. 28.29. the
dispensation of this Counsel of God, even in the sowing and threshing of
Fitches, concludes this also comes forth from the Lord, who is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in working: This Wisdom is eminent in this:

1. In that it does not only predetermine the End or Event, but likewise all
those Means, that are conducible to the bringing to pass of this End. It is
true, God by an act of his Power might, and sometimes does, per saltum bring to
pass his own Purpose, by his own immediate Power: but this is not the ordinary
course of the execution of his Counsel, but produces the End Decreed, by
Decreed Means, Acts 27. Paul's dangerous Voyage is predetermined to end in a
safe Arrival, Verse 24. Yet Verse 31. Except these Men abide in the Ship, ye
cannot be saved. This Persuasion of Paul's becomes prevalent, and they stay.
The Counsel of God, that determined the Ship's safe arrival, predetermined the
stay of the Men in the Ship, to be the means of that safety, and the persuasion
of Paul to be the means of their stay. Here is the Link of God's Counsel,
coupling the Event to his Purpose, with subordinate and purposed Means. When I
see a Counsel of God discovered, that had not its complete Execution in many
hundreds of years after; and observe how many thousands of strange connexions
of Accidents do intervene between the Counsel discovered, and the Execution of
it; although till the execution, the event seems as unlegible as any thing in
the World; nay, oftentimes these Antecedents, that seem most probable of any to
the producing of the expected Event, with a contrary wind quite driven off and
blasted; yet when after all these several Meanders of Successes, I see the
Effect come to pass, even by most improbable and accidental Means, I must needs
acknowledge, this seeming Confusion is methodically managed by the same
Counsel, that predetermined the End; I must conclude, as the Wise Man does in
another case, Eccles. 7.14. God has set the one over against the other, to the
End, that Man should find nothing after him. Let us consider it in the great
Business of our Redemption by Christ: God in his Eternal Counsel had appointed
Man to be partaker of his Glory by the death of Christ, who was the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the World: Man is created in a glorious, happy, free
Estate; he has a Covenant made with him, which he may keep or break at his own
liberty; he is left in his own hands, and not necessitated to break that
Covenant, which he but even now made with his Maker; if he had done so, the
sending of Christ had been needless: Man falls, now is Christ promised, Genesis
3.15. and after confined to the Line of Abraham, Genesis 18.18. and after to the
Line of David. See what a World of Interventions of Accidents and Success
interposed between the Promise and the Event, the Birth of Christ, any one
whereof, if it had miscarried, had disappointed the whole Success: When he was
born, what strange Events happen for the fulfilling of all the Prophecies
concerning him. So in the fulfilling of the Prophecy made to Abraham, that
after four hundred years bondage, his Posterity should enjoy the Land of
Canaan, Genesis 15. ver. 13, 18. What a world of strange Interpositions were
there, conducing to the fulfilling of it, between that and Exodus 12.40. and
Joshua 18.1. The Births of Isaac, Jacob, and the Patriarchs; the Dream of
Joseph, that caused envy against him; and that very Envy conducing to the
fulfilling of his Dream: he is sold to the Ishmaelites; by them to the
Egyptians; he is injured and imprisoned; Pharaoh's Butler is imprisoned in the
same Prison, and then dreams; this interpreted by Joseph; the Butler delivered;
Pharaoh dreams, Joseph is mentioned, and interprets it, is advanced, furnishes
Egypt to be the Magazine of Africa; the Famine pincheth Jacob's Family; this
lead his Sons to Egypt; Joseph is discovered; Jacob sent for, he and his
Family; sixty six Persons go down into Egypt: What a Circle is here of the
Divine Counsel, managing these seeming Casualties, to fulfill that part of the
Prophecy to Abraham, That his Seed should be Strangers in a Land that was not
theirs! Well, for their Deliverance from thence, they must be oppressed; that is
not enough, the Males must be killed; had not this been, Moses had not been
exposed, Pharaoh's Daughter must come just to prevent his drowning, and to give
the opportunity of a learned Education; this was the Instrument of their
Deliverance. The like we might pursue in the following Passages, wherein we may
see the Wise God by his Wise Counsel marshalling the Means, fitting them most
admirably with Circumstances and strange Conjunctures, for the fulfilling of
his purposed Ends. And herein is the Excellency of the Scripture, that shows us
a Hand, ordering and disposing by a most Wise Counsel* these seeming tumultuary
and disorderly Passages in the World, to most admirable and fixed Ends. This is
the first thing wherein the Wisdom of this Counsel of God is seen in chaining
all things one to another, by the very same purpose whereby he determined the
End.

2. That in the disposing of Means and Ends, every thing notwithstanding, moves
according to that Law, that he has given to its particular Being. We usually
distinguish the actions or successes of things within our observation into
three Ranks or Ranges: viz. Necessary, Voluntary, Contingent:

1. Necessary Effects are such, as their Causes being admitted, have a
necessary conjunction therewith, or consequence thereupon, according to the
usual course of Nature. Such are the Consequences that rise upon the motions of
the Heavens, as the positions of the Planets; the Consequents that arise upon
the contiguity or conjunction of the Elements; and diverse such things, that
hold a constant course in Nature. These, although the great God may, and
sometimes does, interrupt by the extraordinary acts of his Power, and to show
his Freedom; yet most admirably he does not hinder, but uses them to the
production of his own most sure Counsels. And this evidenceth the Infinite
Wisdom of the great God, that has so admirably framed his Works and his
Counsels, that while the former move uniformly, according to that prescript
Rule and Law, which the God of Nature has put into them, yet the latter shall
not be interrupted, but effected by them, though they know it not, nor mean it
not. As when we see in a curious Watch, the uniform motion of the Spring,
serving to produce several artificial motions; as of the hour of the Day, the
day of the Month, the age of the Moon, and the like; we commend the Wisdom of
the Artist, that has so tempered the Spring, that by one uniform motion, it
may be useful for all these; and has likewise so directed and managed this
natural motion of the Spring, to serve exactly those different intellectual
motions; and do conclude, that the contrivance of this piece of Work was all at
one time, otherwise it were impossible, that every part should hold that order:
So when we see the natural moti^ns of the Creatures, conducing to the
production of those rational Ends, which God has appointed, we may justly
admire the Wisdom of God, that while he intends a Purpose above the conception
or drift of a natural Agent, he brings it about without the violation of the
Rules or Laws, which he has appointed to be constant in Nature; and may most
justly conclude, That the Law of Necessity in the natural Agents, is but the
Effect of that ^^ry Counsel, that has predetermined his own Purp^^^s by them;
and that they are all of a piece, all laid at the same time. And from thence
grows the subservience of the natural Agent, in the most rigid Law and Rule of
his Operation, unto the free Counsels of the great God, that does most sweetly
and infallibly ^ffect the latter, without the violation of that Rule, which he
has given to the former. And hence it is, that those Effects, which are
produced naturally by natural Causes, we do and may call Natural and Necessary;
and yet it excludes not the Counsel of the Divine Will in the production of it:
for it is the same Counsel, that has made this necessary connection between the
Cause and the Effect, that did predetermine the Effect to be produced. Here
then is conspicuous the Wisdom of God, that while his Creatures, in whom he
has placed an uniform Course of Working, fulfill his Will, yet they keep their
Law of Unformity and Necessity.

2. Voluntary. And this is admirable, that whiles Voluntary Agents do most
necessarily fulfill the Counsel of God, yet they do it without the least
diminution of their Freedom. The Jews did most freely crucify Christ, yet it
was by the predeterminate Counsel of God: Pharaoh did most freely refuse to let
Israel go, yet Almighty God tells him, for this purpose had he raised him up to
show his Power upon him, Exodus 9.16. And from hence we may observe the reason
why Almighty God in all times has used rational ways for the reducing of Men
to the Obedience of his Will, not but that he could, if he pleased, force the
Wills of all Mankind to what Dispositions or Actions he pleased; but that were
to infringe that Law, which he at first planted in Voluntary Agents. Here is
the Wisdom of the great God, his Will shall be effected, yet Man's Will not
forced: Psalm. 110. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. So that
the Conclusion is, The Wills of Men are ruled by the Counsel of God for the
producing of his Ends, yet without violation of Man's Freedom. This is done by
a rational Means. And the Courses, that God's Counsel uses to work the Will of
Men to his Purposes, are most usually these,

1. By propounding Rational Objects or Motives conducing to the winning the
Will to act those things, that are conducible to the Purpose of God. In that
one Instance, concerning the hardening of Pharaoh's Heart, God had a Purpose to
be honored upon Pharaoh, in the miraculous delivery of his People: it is
propounded to him, to let the People go; it was a rational occasion for him to
deny it, for then he should lose their Work, which was beneficial to him: Moses
to confirm his Embassage, casts down his Rod, it becomes a Serpent; the
Magicians, that were of a contrary Counsel to Moses, did the like: this Object
hardens the Heart of Pharaoh. The like we may say concerning Persuasions,
Afflictions, and those other Dispensations of the Divine Will brought upon a
Man in ictu opportuno.

2. By giving and administering Extraordinary Aids and Inlightenings,
strengthening the Faculties of the Soul.

3. By withdrawing the ordinary Supplies and concurrence of God's Assistance.
We are to know, that as the Being of all things is from God, so the very
natural supportation of all things in their several Powers and Activities, is
from him: and if he withdraw his Concurrence and Assistance, our Wills will
move freely, but to other objects, or in another manner, than they did when
assisted by him.

Now these we must not imagine to be Expedients or Helps pro re nata, as it
happens among us, that when a thing beyond our expectation is gone beyond our
mastery, then to devise some helps to reclaim it, or allay it: But the whole
Platform of all and every Circumstance was laid and set by the Purpose of God,
before the being of any thing. Man shall work freely, yet I will draw out that
Freedom of his into these and these actions, by this and that rational means:
supply or subduction of my aid, of his Will, shall not elude or defeat my
Counsel; nor yet the fulfilling of that Counsel violate the Freedom of that
Will, which I purpose to allow him.

3. Contingent Effects; which are such as arise from the conjuncture of several
Causes not subordinate one to the other: and this casual conjuncture of Causes,
denominates the Event neither Voluntary nor Necessary, although it perchance
arise from Causes of both or either Nature: but these having no natural
conjunction or connection one with the other, the Event, that arises upon this
conjuncture, is Casual or Contingent: And this Consideration leads us to the
third thing, wherein the Wisdom of this Counsel is eminent, viz.

4. In ordering, marshalling, and managing of several Causes, of several
Natures, wholly independent and unsubordinate one to another, to the fulfilling
of his own Eternal, Infallible Counsel. And this consists in the drawing out of
the several activities and causations of things, at such a time and such a
distance, as may be subservient to the Effect; wherein, though the Causes apart
perhaps, move simply according to their Nature, yet the meddling and mingling
of them together, is a clear Evidence of the Unity and Wisdom of that Counsel,
by which they are governed. In that admirable Piece of the Execution of God's
Counsel concerning Joseph, this is ligible almost in every pas^^ge of it: t^is
the Purpose of God, he shall be advanced for the preservation of his Father and
Bret^^^n: see but the last act of this Counsel preceding h^ (...) He is
^^mmitted to Prison by the a^ (...), the chief Butler* by the Command of (...)
and Phara^^ were several Voluntary A^^nts* yet these acts of theirs, drawn out
upon seve^^l grounds, and independent one upon the other, occ^^ion a me^ting
between Joseph and the Butler in Prison, and there they might have continued
unacquainted till their deaths: an Act of Divine Providence draws out an
occasion for their Acquaintance: the Butler is delivered, and his Promise
forgotten: another occasion given by Phara^h's Dream: this had not been useful
for Joseph, unless communicated by Phara^^ to the chief Butler: this
Communication draws out another Act of his, viz. the remembrance of Joseph^
thus these several Voluntary Acts of Agents, independent one upon another, are
drawn out to meet together in such a conjuncture of time, as serves to produce
that Event, which if any one had failed, could not have been effected. The like
is easily observable in all the great and predicted Changes in Commonwealths
and Kingdoms, how several Causes are without straining, as it were, interwoven
and married together for the production of such a change. And the like for the
natural motions of the Elements in the constitution of mixed Bodies. Though
every Cause apart mov^^ according to that Causality and course of Nature that
is in him, yet that Activity is drawn out in such a distance, at such a time,
and with such Concurrences* that makes appear at once the Efficacy and Wisdom
of the Counsel of God, that whiles every Cause moves according to his own
Nature, yet they are strangely mingled in the production of such an Effect,
that neither of them did foresee, or intend, but only the God that guided them.

5. It is an Active and Irresistible Counsel. This is evident, by what has
been before observed, viz. because it is the cause and measure of the being and
power of every thing without it: it is therefore impossible to be resisted,
because that strength, that any thing has, it has merely by the efficacy of
this Purpose of God. Although in the Divine Nature, there is no difference in
the Power or Act of his Understanding and Will, yet for our Conceptions sake,
they are propounded under a different Notion: his Purpose or Counsel is
referred immediately to his Will, and is not only a Foreknowledge of what shall
be, but has an operative influence into the being and operations of all
things: His Prescience or Foreknowledge, we conceive as an act of his
Understanding, by which he actually knows whatsoever shall be: This Prescience
is not an objective impression of the things themselves upon the Divine
Understanding, for that were to suppose a kind of Passibility, which is
incompetible to the Divine Perfection, and supposes a kind of Priority in
Nature of the Object to the Power, and a kind of dependence of the Act upon it:
But as all things have their Being by the Act of the Divine Will or Purpose, so
in that Purpose of his, he sees the things purposed; and it is impossible to
sever the act of his Purpose, from the act of his Knowledge, of the things
purposed, though notionally they differ.

6. It is an Universal Counsel, and therefore Universal, not because confused
and indistinct, but it does particularly and distinctly extend unto all the
things, actions, and motions in the World; for to suppose any thing could
happen, or be without the particular determination of this Counsel, would be an
admission that that thing were independent upon his Power, and would
necessarily make an utter incertainty in the whole dispensation of the World,
and so disappoint his Providence. It is most evident, that the greatest Events
in the World have depended upon a Compages and Conca^^nation of several
Interventions, that in themselves have been most inconsiderable, which if they
had not been, it had been impossible the Event, though never so eminent, could
have happened: David raised to be king of Israel, a thing eminently in the
Purpose of God, yet had he not been sent to the Army with the Provisions for
his Brothers, the means of his Advancement, and consequently the Advancement it
self had been disappointed. If therefore the same Counsel, which had determined
his being King, had not determined his Message to the Army, that great Effect
had been utterly without the determination of the Divine Providence: for that,
which de facto was the necessary Concurrent to his Advancement, being casual,
and not within the care of Providence, so must all the dependances that had
been upon it. And the same we must conclude in all the actions of Voluntary
Agents. Two Difficulties occur:

1. How the Predetermination of the Acts of Voluntary Agents can consist with
the Liberty of the Will?

2. How the Predetermination of the Sinful Acts of Voluntary Agents can consist
with the Justice or Purity of God?

Touching the former, we conclude,

1. That although Almighty God has been pleased to give Voluntary Agents a
Liberty of Will, yet he may most justly of his absolute Power, interrupt that
freedom when, and in what he pleases. The reason is, He is absolute and
unlimitted Lord of his Creature; and in as much as the Creature can have no
Being, but by his Will, he cannot claim any Right, but what consists with his
Maker's Will: if he wills an interruption of that course, which he has
regularly settled, that interruption is as just, as that course which he
interrupteth: for both equally depend upon the same Will.

2. That though he may most justly, if he please, alter that course, which he
has settled in Natural or Voluntary Agents; yet such is his Will, that he does
it not, but has been pleased to hold that course in Natural, but especially
Voluntary Agents, that they move according to that Liberty, with which he has
endowed them.

3. That nevertheless, all the voluntary actions of Men fall under the
Predetermination of his Counsel: otherwise it were impossible, but that the
World should be governed at random, the contrary whereof is most clearly
evidenced by daily observation, and several passages of the Holy Scripture, and
by what has been before observed.

4. It is evident, that this Predetermination of the Divine Counsel is without
any Violation of the Liberty of a free subordinate Agent; because the Action
predetermined is elicited by such means, as at once consists with the
infallibility of Divine Providence, and the nature of the Agent. The great
motive and object of all the actions and aversions of Men is Good and Evil: the
great means whereby Men are carried unto these actions or aversions, are
Convictions of the Understanding, arising from the union of these Objects to
the Understanding; the act of the rational Appetite or Will following that
Conviction, if not perturbed; the Passions or Affections partly managed by the
command of the Will, partly by the temper and constitution of the Body. And
certainly, if one Man had an exact knowledge of the frame, temper, and
constitution of another Man; and had power to apply his Object so exactly to
his Understanding and Affections: as to meet with them exactly; and could
discover the motions of the Soul upon that Object proposed, and could apply to
every opposition a suitable answer or qualification; this Man might easily
predetermine what the other should do, and yet in drawing out that action, no
way injure his Liberty. How much more can the Infinite and Omnipotent God, who
put that Liberty, Understanding, and Affections in Man, positively predetermine
such an act to be done, and yet draw out that act by such means by him decr^^d,
as may notwithstanding suit with the Li^^^ty of his Will; the freedom of the
action being no less predetermined, than the action it self: Especially, if we
consider the Power of this God, in adding or withdrawing of the extrinsecal
Helps and Concurrences of his own immediate Assistance, which have a more
intimate and powerful operation upon the Soul, than barely objective, which yet
hurts not, nor hinders the intrinsecal Freedom of the act of the Will.

2. To the second question, concerning the Counsel of God, tou^^ing Sinful
Actions: We are to consider therefore, that Sin is the Violation of a Law,
given unto a Voluntary Agent, by him that has power to give that Law to the
Will. In this description, we have those several terms, all necessarily to be
admitted, before there can be any Sin:

1. A Law given: for where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression.

2. A V^lunt^^y Agent, to whom this Law is given; for it is impossible, that
any thing can be capable of a Law properly, but a voluntary Agent; because the
proper Effect of a Law, is to put an extrinsecal Restraint Under a Penalty upon
that which has choice to obey it, or not. Natural Agents, though they move
according to a Rule, the interruption whereof, causes a Deformity, yet they
move not by a Law; and therefore not capable of Sin.

3. An Authority in him, that gives the Law, to give it to the Will. A Man,
that has an extrinsecal Power over me without my consent, may give a Law to
me, and exact the Obedience of it; but the Violation of this Law is no sin,
because he has no power upon my Will, but God has a power to command my Will,
and exact Obedience of it. Hence it is, that there can be no Sin* but against
God, because all Obligation is reductive only to him.

4. A Violation of that Law, by the act of the Will: and herein we have two
things:

1. The Subject denominated: that is the Action, which precisely considered,
cannot be sinful; but it is therefore sinful, because it is the product of my
Will, contrary to this Law. Hence it is, that no action that is enforced, can
be said to be sinful: and every evil action has so much of sin in it, as it
has of Will; and does receive degrees of Evil, according to the measure of
Consent and Concurrence of the Will. And hence it is, that the Act of the Will
against that Law, is equally sin, as if it had proceeded into act; which was
that most rational and clear Doctrine of our Savior.

2. The thing denominating that action sinful: it is the Obliquity of the act
of the Will; for the last act of the Will, which preceeded the action, is the
Sin; and the action divided from that act of the Willing is not, nor can be
sinful: It is therefore called a sinful action, because it is the fruit or
expression of an act of the Will, moving contrary to this Law of God. And by
this it is evident, that the Sin is not inherent in the external action
produced by the Will, but in the Will it self: and that the Sin has a
pre-existence, such as it is in the Consent of the Will, before the action is
produced: And according to the measure of the freeness and fullness of that
Consent is the measure of the Sin, and not according to the action; though it
be regularly true, that that consent of the Will, that is strongest, produces
most ordinarily an action. Hence it is, that an action contrary to the Command
of God, produced either through Incogitancy, Fear, Surprise, Passion, is not so
great a sin, as a deliberate, studied, resolved Sin, though in truth it be not
produced into act, by reason of some extrinsecal impediment: because there is a
fuller Consent of the Will in the latter, than in the former.

These things being premised, we may conclude,

1. God's Counsel does not predetermine the Will to any evil: for although it
is true, the Obligation of a Law is the necessary Antecedent of every Sin, and
it is impossible, that the Laws, which God gives to man, do bind the Lawgiver,
yet this is inconsistent with his Purity, Truth, and Justice: Inconsistent with
his Purity; for certainly there is an intrinsecal Justice and Holiness in the
Law of God, whereof he cannot cause the Violation: Inconsistent with his Truth;
the Will of his Counsel never crosses the Will of his Command: Inconsistent
with his Justice, to require an Obedience to that Law, whereof he does
necessitate the breach; And in this case predeterminating the Action by way of
necessitating the Will, and to predetermine the Obliquity, differs little.

2. Much less does he infuse Obliquity or Evil into the Will, to serve the
Series of his Counsels.

But then it seems the Evil Actions of Men are out of the Counsel of God; or
God must take up new Counsels upon the Vision, or at least Prevision, of the
actions of Men. No: But here we must remember, what has been before premised,
that here is seen the great Justice and Wisdom of this Counsel, that it puts
nothing off from that manner of operation wherewith the God of Nature has
endued it. Thus he draws out infallibly the action of a free Agent, even in
things sinful, and yet the Will moves freely in what it does, and consequently,
owes that Sin to it self: The Counsel of God is active in these particulars:

1. Proposing of an Object: The Babylonish Garment was no cause of Achan's sin;
for it was propounded to him merely objectively, and was passive to his Choice*

(...) Permitting extrinsecal Moral Persuasions unto (...) This is Temptation.
Adam was created without (...) yet with Liberty to sin: He was left wholly in
the hands of his own Will: here was an Object presented; the fruit was fair to
look upon; and Moral Persuasions by the Devil, that there was no danger, that
it would make them wise: the Man eats: This is most clearly a most free act;
for neither the proposition of the Object, nor Persuasions, do any way derogate
from the freedom of the action: God could in his Counsel have intercepted the
Object, or impeded the Persuasion: he does neither: the sin is committed; and
that without the least color of imputation to the Counsel of God; for the
Man's Will was not necessitated, he sinned freely.

3. By withdrawing those efficacious Aids of his Grace and Dispensation, which,
especially since the Fall of Man, are the great impediment to that Career of
sin, that Man would run. And this is no violation of Man's Nature or Freedom:
for they are extrinsecal to his Nature, and therefore not due to him; nor is he
injured if withdrawn from him, especially, since for the most part, Man thrusts
them away before they are taken: Such are the outward dispensations of his
Providence in Education, Affliction, Prosperity, the Preaching of his Word,
Advice of Friends* giving external Allays to the humors of the Body: These and
the like, God lends to the Sons of Men, and may take them again when he will.
And as he has such outward operations, so without question, such is the
Vicinity of God to our Souls, that there are Secret Inward Persuasions sent in
by the Power of God to our Souls, which as they do not violate the Liberty of
our Wills, but direct them, so they are not due to the Creature debito
justitiae, and may be withdrawn without injustice.

4. By Ordering it: Thus the Wise God oftentimes, brings Good out of Evil, by
the restraining the sin quo ad hoc, by the Dispensation of his Providence; as a
wise Politician will order the Ambition, Cruelty, Lust, etc. of Men for
bringing good to the Commonwealth. The Depravation of Man's Nature is
Universal; and like as the Water would diffuse it self over the whole Surface
in the pursuit of its own motion and Nature, so the corrupted Nature of Man
being now become universally evil, would diffuse it self in all disorders: but
as a wary Artist, will by external Provisions, not only confine this natural
motion of this extravagant Element, to this or that course, but also make its
natural motion serviceable for artificial ends; so the Wise God does not only
set Bars and Doors, and says to this Sea of Mischief, Hitherto shall thou go,
and no farther, and here shall thy proud Waves stay; but also so manageth the
same, that whiles Man sins, he works his Creator's Will, which he knows not: O
Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. howbeit he means not so, neither does
his heart think so, but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a
few, Isa. 10.7. A sinful and unthankful Israel deserves a punishment: an
ambitious and cruel Assyrian flies at all opportunity of Rapine and Spoil: the
Wise God shuts him up upon all sides, but that which is toward Israel, and
there he finds a passage, and breaks out, satisfies freely his own ambitious
ends, which only he pursued, yet fulfils the Will of our Creator, which he knew
not, nor thought of: This also comes from the Lord, who is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in working. Those ways of God and the manner of his
Concurrence in those actions are evident in Scripture, Exodus 7.3. I will harden
Pharaoh 's he^rt, etc. Verse 11. They cast down their rods, and they became
Serpents, etc. and he hardened Pharaoh 's he^rt, that he hearkened not unto
them. Exodus 8.15. When Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had said, ibid. Verse 32. and
diverse other parts of the History. The Lord hardened his Heart by Permission of
the Magicians Miracles, by permitting objective presenting to him the Profit of
the Jews Labors, by Withdrawing that external Concurrence and operation of his
Grace, which might have softened it: and Pharaoh actively hardens his own Heart,
2 Samuel 24.1. Israel had offended God, and must be punished; but there was an
Impediment to the Execution of this Judgment, David's Integrity, who was
concerned in the good or evil of his People: if God withdraw his assistance
from David, and let in Satan to tempt him, David will sin as well as his
People, and so both deservedly punishable. And he moved David to number the
people; yet 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked
David to number the people: Here were three Parties: God moved by permitting
Satan to provoke, by withdrawing a powerful Countermotion, by Ordering David's
sin for the means of the punishment of Israel's sin: Satan provoked, incited,
and persuaded, either immediately, or mediately; for now the Watchman is gone,
God has withdrawn his Hand, and Satan loses not the opportunity: David
numbers; David's Heart was as corrupt and vainglorious as another, and as
easily surprised by a Temptation, when the Keeper of Israel is absent, and
remoto impedimento sins as freely, and more naturally, as before it walked
conformable to the Will of his Maker; this Sampson has lost his Locks, and he
becomes as another Man. In the mean time, let us ever admire the Justice of our
Maker, who never necessitates us to incur a Punishment by necessitating our
Sin; and his Mercy in rewarding that Obedience, which he alone performs in us.
Also to thee, O Lord, belongs mercy, for thou renderest to every Man
according to his Works, Psalm 62.12.

CHAP. III. Of the Execution of the Eternal Counsel of God, in his Works of
Creation and Providence.
NOW we come to consider the Execution of that Counsel in those two greater
transient Acts, viz. Creation and Providence:

1. Touching the Creation. This we consider in general, and particularly as
concerning Man: In general, we resolve the work of Creation into three parts.

1. The original production of all things out of nothing. This is simply
Creation Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the Heaven, and the Earth. (God
Created:) This is the greatest conceptible motion, viz. a non esse ad esse; and
though it be an act of Faith to believe it, because related, Heb. 11.3. yet it
is a conclusion of Reason to know it, as it appears by what has been before
observed concerning the impossibility to have any eternal subsistence but one:
And this truth, though it be deducible by necessity of Reason, if a God be once
admitted, yet so infinite is the distance between Nothing and a Being, that
diverse of the acutest Naturalists were ignorant of it; the ignorance of which
Principle caused many of their absurd and unintelligible Positions and
Superstructions, to supply those difficulties, which by this only Truth are
avoided, as concerning the First Matter, the Eductions of Forms out of the
power of it, by I know not what Agents. (God created:) This infinite Motion
could only proceed from an infinite Power, who by the mere act of his Will,
constitutes something out of nothing. (In the beginning:) Time could not be,
before there were something that had succession of Being, for it is the measure
of a successive Being; and therefore the beginning of created Beings, must
needs be the beginning of Time, and Creation was the beginning of created
Beings. (The Heavens and the Earth:) The indigested matter of the Heavens and
the Earth.

2. The dividing and ordering of this Mass; calling out the particular
Subsistences, and furnishing of them with forms and qualities. This was
subsequent to the creation of the Matter: and we find the Manner of this
production in two Expressions:

1. The motion of the Spirit of God upon the face of the Waters; Verse. 2.
containing an act of the Divine Power, whereby he fitted every thing to be
ready for his call: for though by the same instantaneous act, the Divine Power
could in the first instant of Creation have put things in their several Beings,
yet it was his Will to work successively, first creating the Matter, then
breathing upon it, and fitting this confused substance with aptitude for the
things to be thereout produced.

2. The Word of Command: Let there be Light, etc. in the several works of the
six days. And here we may observe the admirable Wisdom of God, as in diverse
particulars, etc. so especially in these: 1. In the Order of the creating
particular Creatures, proceeding 1. to the finishing of Fundamentals, then to
Superstructions, though of more curiosity and perfection, yet more dependant
upon those of the first creation: 2. in the Variety of the Creatures, and
accommodating them with Qualities, and Conveniences suitable to their Kinds,
whereby one does not desire to encroach upon the Conveniences of the other's
Subsistence: For an Instance, the Beasts, Fishes, Fowl, endued with Appetites
suitable to their Being, yet the several Kinds affecting several Nourishments,
several places of Residence, etc. Herbs of contrary qualities, drawing several
Nourishments of several Natures, even from the same Clod of Earth.

3. In the Position and Situation of created Beings, both for Beauty, and
Convenience, so that the Wit of the most envious Atheist, cannot imagine how
the Elements, the Heavens, the several Creatures could be more beautifully, or
usefully placed: every thing serves to accommodate and fit the other, and
speaks the Wisdom and Goodness of the Creator: the Position of the Earth, the
Water, the Air, with exquisite Convenience, that they may meet for the
constitution of mixed, and the subsistence of animate Creatures: The Earth and
other Bodies have dependence upon the power and influence of the Sun and
Heavens; each is fitted with a Figure, and the Heavens with a Motion, that may
with admirable convenience dispense that Influence: the variety of Seasons,
depending upon the ecliptical motion of the Sun, giving variety to the
Creature, and intermissions to the Earth, whereby she may recover strength in
the Winter, for the supply of the Summer: The very imprefect Creatures, the
Rain, the Winds, Snow, etc. of admirable use for the Earth, Air, and Water: The
Elements so placed and ordered, that whiles their contrary motions and
qualities of Rarety and Density, preserve the extremity of their contrary
active qualities from meeting, yet their Vicinity is such, that one allays the
violence of the other, and so are in a fit position and temper for production
of mixed Bodies.

3. The planting in every thing a radical Activity and Causality, by which it
moves. This is by Virtue of that Word of the Power of God: the very
Multiplication of the Creature, Genesis 1.22. The warming of our Garments by the
South Wind, Job 27.17. The Nourishment that comes from our Bread, Deuteronomy. 8.3. is
due to this Word of Command and Benediction, that the Lord at first spoke to
the Creature.

Now concerning the particular Creation of Man; not to enter into the
consideration of the manner of his Creation, his Essentials, the Body, the
Soul, or the nature of either; but we shall enquire, What is meant by the
Likeness or Image of God? There was a twofold Image of God:

1. Essential, viz. A participation in his very Essence, of a Conformity to the
Divine Nature, which consisted in three particulars:

1. That he had an Immortal Soul: this is that which, Wisdom 2.23. is called
the Image of his Eternity:

2. That he was an Intellectual Being:

3. That he was a Free Agent.

These, being essential to Man, were not lost by him: and for this reason, God
required the same severity against Murder, as if Man had never fallen, Genesis
9.6. For in the Image of God made he Man.

2. An Accidental Image, which consisted in an adventitious Perfection, which
God added to Man.

1. Dominion, Genesis 1.26. And let them have Dominion, etc. So God created Man in
his own Image. The Dominion, which he gave to him, made him resemble God: and
hence it is, that those that have power of Command, are called Gods, Exodus
4.17. And thou shall be to him instead of God. Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are
gods. Vid. Genesis 9.2. This Dominion consisted not only in his Power to enforce
his Commands by the advantages of Wit and Strength above other Creatures, but
likewise in a Subjection in the Creatures to his Dominion.

2. An incorruptible Union between the Body and the Soul, Genesis 2.17. The day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Hence Romans 5. the Apostle
concludes Death the fruit of Sin. This might have been either by reason of the
excellence of his natural Constitution; or by supplying it with special
Assistance, by which means, the Lives of the Fathers before the Flood, had so
long a duration; or by assuming of him into Heaven, without any dissolution of
Soul and Body, as was Enoch, Genesis 5.24.

3. A filling of the Intellectual Faculty with the Light and Knowledge of all
things, especially of his Maker. And herein consisted his high degree of
Happiness. But as the Object, or the Union of the Object to the Faculty, is not
of the Essence of that Intellectual Nature, wherein that Faculty resides, but
may be removed without any essential change, so was this: and that herein
consisted the Image of God, appears by Colos. 3.10. The Renovation by Christ,
which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

4. Holiness, or Conformity of the Will to the Will of God. This appears
likewise by the state of Renovation, Epes. 4.24. Put on the New Man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness; which, as it
presupposes a true Knowledge of the Will of God, so it was a free choice of
Obedience to it. This was not essential to the Will, because the Will was
essentially Free, but had been necessary to the Will, in case the Understanding
had not been abused.

CHAP. IV. Of the Providence of God in special, concerning Man, in order to his
supreme End.
THUS much shortly touching the Creation, and Man's Constitution in it; the
second part of the Dispensation of this Counsel, is God's Providence: and
herein we shall pass over that part, which is the General Providence of God,
and consider of that Special Providence or Dispensation of Divine Counsel,
which concerns Man, and that not merely as a Creature, but in order to his
everlasting End. We shall consider therefore the course of this Providence of
God, in order to the Eternal End of Man, under those three Conditions, or
Times, wherein we find Man; Before the Fall; After the Fall; In Christ.


Concerning the estate of Man before the Fall, or sin of Adam; we have already
examined certain Generals, that are conducible to this point, viz.

1. That God did appoint Man to some End, or Good, answerable to the
constitution and value of his Nature; and this is his Happiness.

2. That this Good must therefore be an Infinite, Immortal, Intelligible Good;
otherwise it could not be answerable to the Nature of Man.

3. That there is not, nor can be, any such Good but only God.

4. That the Actual Enjoyment of this Good is by the Union of the Soul to God,
and the Communion of God to the Soul.

5. That the only Means of attaining this Union and Communion must needs be
such, and such only, as the Will of God pleases to appoint.

We shall now descend to these two particular Inquiries, viz.

1. What was that great End or Happiness, which Man did, or might enjoy in his
created condition?

2. What was the Means, whereby to attain and keep that Happiness?

1. Concerning the former, viz. What was Man's Happiness in his Creation? we
shall consider him in those three degrees of Living which he had:

1. As a Vegetable Creature; an exact Constitution and temper of Body, which
though naturally corruptible, yet by the interposition of the Divine Power, not
subject to corruption: those things that were for his use and sustentation, the
Air, the Water, the Fruits of the Earth, most exactly conducible to the
perpetuating of his Life without Pain or Sickness.

2. As a Sensible Creature; Exquisiteness of Sense, and receptive of whatsoever
the Creature could afford conducing to his Use or Delight; and the Creature
likewise fitted for the supply of those Senses, every Herb given him for Food,
all the Creatures came to him to receive their Names, he had Dominion over
them, a most pleasant Garden planted by God himself for his Habitation, with a
Tree of Immortality in it:

3. As a Rational Creature.

1. A most just and sweet Subordination of the inferior Faculties to the
superior, the sensitive Appetite, the Passions, and Motions of the Spirits.

2. A most exact fitness and perfection of those Organs of the Body, which are
necessary for the operations of the Faculties of the Soul; and a perfect and
just Union of the Body and Soul, whereby the Soul might clearly and perfectly
exercise all her Faculties.

3. Which is the height of all the rest, fitting of those Faculties with the
most perfect and suitable Object, even God himself: for all Faculties or Powers
receive their perfection by their Objects: to have an Understanding as
comprehensive as Heaven, to have a Will of as vast Desires as infinitude it
self, and not to have an Object suitable to either, were a greater Unhappiness
than to want the Faculties. In the Creation therefore, God filled the
Understanding with the sight and knowledge of Himself, of his Majesty, Glory,
Bounty, Goodness; with the knowledge of his Will and Mind concerning Man; with
the knowledge of his Works, and of his Workings. This could not choose but work
in the Mind of Man answerable returns to the nature of this Object.

He is fully conceived to be the highest and most supreme Good, and therefore
must needs take up the highest and choicest Desires to attain and keep him: God
is pleased to communicate himself to these Desires, his acceptance of them,
and intimate Expressions of Love to his Creature: This as it is the highest
Happiness, and the Rest of the Creature, so it cannot choose but engage the Soul
to return Love and Obedience to the Will of his God, especially when all those
Engagements to Obedience are likewise presented to the Soul, that it owes its
Being to him, that his will is most righteous and fit to be obeyed. And this
Obedience arising from these Principles of Love to God, as it was without all
Hypocrisy, so it was without all pain and tediousness; for it did arise from
an inward and active Principle, and was acted by most obedient and active
Faculties: Man took no less delight in his Obedience, which was the fruit of
his Love and Duty to his Maker, than he did in the knowledge of the Beauty and
Goodness of his Maker, which was the cause of that Love and Duty. And as the
actings of the natural Appetite upon a proper and seasonable Object, when they
exceed not their proportion, are delightful; so the actings of the rational
Appetite, consisting in Love and Obedience to God, wherein they could not
exceed their just proportion, were the delight of the Soul: his Holiness,
consisting in the returns to his Maker of Love and Obedience, and the Goodness
of his God, in communicating himself and his favor, exciting and accepting
those returns, did both conduce to the fulfilling of his Blessedness. All this,
as it was derived from the Blessing of God, 1 Genesis 28. so it ended in the
Perfection of the Creature: And God saw all that he had made, and behold it was
very Good. Ib. Ver. 31.

2. The Means whereby he attained, or rather preserved this state of Happiness,
which was in effect congenite with (though not essential to) his Being. This
was only Obedience to the Will of his Maker. In all inferior Creatures, we see
a kind of inclination or instinct to follow the Rule of their Nature: This
conducts them to that degree of Felicity and Beauty, which is commensurate to
their Nature: herein, though they follow the Will of their Creator, in the Law
of their Creation, it is not properly Obedience, nor that instinct properly a
Law: the latter is only given, and the former only performed, by such a
Creature as has Liberty and Choice, and consequently, Knowledge and
Understanding, without which it is impossible to have the other. Man alone of
all visible Creatures, is endued with both, and so fitted to receive a Law, and
to obey it: Being thus fitted, he has a double engagement of Obedience, viz.
of Duty and of Profit: 1. Of Duty: he received his Being from his Maker, and
that Being furnished with Happiness: This is an infinite and boundless
engagement of Duty, even to the utmost of his Being. 2. Of Profit or Advantage:
this stock of Happiness, that was but now freely conferred upon him, is put
into his hands under this Condition, if he break his Condition, he forfeits,
and that most justly, his Happiness. But yet if this Law were beyond the
capacity of his Nature, then there might be some excuse of his Disobedience:
But as this Happiness was fully commensurate to his Nature, so was this Law,
which was the subject of his Obedience. We shall therefore consider these three
things: 1. What was the Law of Man's Creation? 2. Whence the Obligation of it?
3. What the Sanction or Penalty?


1. What the Law was? Obedience was the Duty of Man to the Will of his Creator:
the Law was the Specification of that Will, in this or that particular Command,
or Prohibition: The Laws that God gave to Man therefore were of two kinds:

1. Such as did bear a kind of proportion or convenience to the Nature of Man:
such are all those moral Dictates, which we call Laws of Nature, as keeping of
Faith, worshipping God; and most, if not all those Precepts in the Decalogue,
are but Expressions of these Laws. These, though they have no Obligation, but
by the Command of God, yet they have a kind of Congruity with the very Nature
of Man.

2. Such as though they have their original Justice of Obligation upon the same
ground as the former has, viz. The subordination of the rational Creature to
the Will of God, yet in hoc individuo, there does not appear that Congruity of
Nature of Man with this Command: such was the Command of forbearing the
forbidden Fruit: and answerable to this, in all times, God has been pleased to
give Commands of these two several kinds, Genesis 9.14. At the same time God
forbids Murder, which holds Congruity with Humane Nature; and eating of Blood,
which does not appear to hold such Congruity, Genesis 17.2. to Abraham, Walk
before me, and be perfect, which is a Rule of natural Justice; and a Command of
Circumcision, the reason whereof does not so naturally appear; so to the Jews,
not only the Moral Law, but diverse Ceremonial Rites, which have no such
necessary conformity to Reason. The reason of this, and why the first Man's
Obedience was tried upon this Precept, was because that in the Obedience to
such a Command, is given the clearest and most free Obedience to God; for we
hereby acknowledge his Freedom to command what he pleases, and our just
Obligation to obey what he commands, merely because he commands.

Now because it is impossible, that any Law can bind, unless it has some
Promulgation or discovery from him that gives it, or somewhat equivolent unto
it, we are to consider, How these Laws came to be published? As for the latter*
it is most certain and clear, that it was by express injunction from God. And
the Lord God commanded Man, saying, etc. Whether this was by an audible Voice,
or by an immediate infusion of the knowledge of it into the Mind, it will not
be material to enquire: But certain it is, that in as much as the Obligation of
this Precept does not arise from any intrinsecal conformity of the thing to
Humane Nature, there was an express injunction and command of God in it. But as
touching the former, though they were discovered to Man, to be the Will of God,
yet they did hold a kind of intrinsecal proportion and conformity to the very
Nature of Men. And hence it is, that though by the Fall, a general deficiency
was in Man, yet the tracks and footsteps of those Laws remain in his very
constitution. Though this cannot be the cause of their Obligation, yet
questionless, this was part of the means of their Publication to Man, Romans
2.14. The Gentiles not having the Law, do by nature the things contained in the
Law. And although much were due to Education, and Tradition, and the course of
God's Providence in propagating the Knowledge of the Moral Law, yet such a
convenience it has with the nature and use of Men, that when they once come to
an actual exercise of right Reason, they have in all successions of times and
places taken up those Laws of Nature, which we call the Moral Law, or the most
parts of them.

2. Touching the-Obligation of these Laws, it was twofold: 1. From the
Injunction and Command of God, who had an Universal, Infinite, and Unlimited
Power over his Creature, and might most justly require his Obedience. And into
this Power of God, together with his actual Command or Prohibition, is all the
Obligation of all Laws, whether Natural or Positive, and of all inferior Laws,
Compacts, or Agreements, to be resolved. And without the due consideration of
this, Mankind is loose. Though the natural Congruity of the Moral Law to the
Nature of Man might be the means of its Publication, it is the Command of God,
that is, and ever was, the cause of its Obligation.

2. From the Compact and Stipulation of Man. God put into Man's hands a stock
both of Blessedness and Liberty; and though he might have commanded his
Creature, and it had bound eternally, yet, to add the greater engagement upon
him, he enters into Contract with him, concerning his Obedience. Hence it is
called the Covenant of Works. And in all ensuing times, when it pleased God to
reinforce the Law of Nature or Obedience, he does it by way of Compact or
Covenant, as well as Command; to add another Obligation as well of Contract as
Duty. And from this grew the Universality of the Guilt that was contracted by
Disobedience: Adam covenanted for him and his Posterity, Romans 5.19. As the
Obedience of Christ is effectual for his Seed, by way of Contract and
Stipulation with God the Father; so was the Disobedience of Adam binding upon
his Seed, partly by reason of his Contract and Stipulation; and so they are
made there parallel. Sed de hoc infra.

3. The Sanction of the Law given to Adam. The Violation of any Law given by
him, that has Power, contracts Guilt, that is, Obligation to Punishment: the
measure of this Punishment is that Sanction, which God did put upon the
Violation of this Law, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest, thou shall surely
die: Herein are four Particulars: 1. The Offense, eating the forbidden Fruit;
2. The Punishment, Death; 3. The Time of the inflicting of it, in the day. 4.
The Extent of it, thou shall die, etc.

Touching the first: The thing specially prohibited, was eating the forbidden
Fruit; but that which was in the Mind of God to enjoin, was Obedience to his
Command: and although this particular was by God made the Experiment of Man's
Obedience, yet questionless, the same Injunction, and under the same Penalty,
was given to Men, touching those other Moral Dictates, which were received,
Exodus 20. which lost not their Obligation by the Fall of Man, no more than if
he had continued in his Integrity, Genesis 4.7. If thou do not well, Sin lies
at the door: and Verse 14. Cain acknowledges Death to be the consequent of
that Guilt, which he contracted by his Murder, Every one that finds me shall
slay me: The like of Lamech, Verse 23. For the Formality of any Sin, as has
been before observed, consists in the disobedience of the Will to the Command
of God: By one Man's disobedience sin entered into the World. And as the object
of Man's obedience was whatsoever God had enjoined, so the disobedience to any
one Command had contracted the like Guilt, and were under the like Penalty as
this, though this being purely a positive Command, wherein only the Obedience
or Disobedience of Man could be seen, was that which is here mentioned, because
that wherein he offended.

2. Thou shall die: God made not Death, says the wise Man, Wisd. 1.14. but,
Death entered into the world by sin, Romans 5.12. It imports three things:

1. A loss or loosning of that strictness of Union which was between the Body
and Soul, or temporal immortality. This is the Argument that the Apostle makes,
that from the time of Adam's transgression till Moses, sin was in the World,
because Death reigned all that while: and in the place before mentioned, till
sin the Kingdom of Death was not upon the Earth: This immortality was not
essential to the Nature of man, but was freely super-added to it by the Divine
Will upon those terms of Obedience; and he that gave it might with all
imaginable Justice give it upon what terms he pleases; and he does it upon
terms of Obedience; Obedience to himself, which but even now gave Man his
Being, and might justly exact the utmost of his Being; Obedience to a Law most
possible, easy, and quadrate to the Powers and Aids given to man; Obedience
engaged by a world of Blessedness attending it, and an inevitable loss ensuing
the breach of it: This was his Vegetable loss.

2. A loss of that Happiness, which accompanied this immortal Being, in respect
of his Senses, viz. an uninterrupted stream of Pleasure and Contentment, and
instead thereof Shame, Genesis 3.7. Pain, and Slavery, Verse 26. Sorrow, Verse 17.
anxious and painful Labor, Verse 19. a Curse upon the Earth, Verse 17. A loss
of Eden, Verse 23.

3. The withdrawing and stopping of that stream of Light and Love, that passed
between God and the Soul of man; which filled his reasonable faculties brimful
of Happiness and Contentment; and instead thereof, in the understanding,
darkness, distractedness, a continued motion to know, and yet for want of Light
not knowing what to pursue, and therefore pursuing trifles and follies: In the
Will, loss of the Good that it before enjoyed, yet a craving Appetite after
somewhat, but it knows not what; and to satisfy this unsatiable desire taken
in whatsoever the Suggestions of the World, Flesh and the Devil offers, fills
it self with Vanity, and then with Vexation: In the Affections, especially our
Love, it has lost what did take up the whole Vigor and Comprehension of it,
and what it loved it enjoyed; but now raves and boils like the Sea after
Follies and changeable and unsatisfying pursuits: The Conscience, that Chamber
of the Soul, wherein the beams of the Light and Favor of the Creator, and of
the Love and Duty of the Creature, met as it were in the point or angle of
reflection, and carried those comfortable Messages of Sincerity and Obedience
of the Soul to God, and delight and acceptance from God, to the Soul, is now
become the Chamber of Death, and, like the Spleen to the Body, the receptacle
of the Melancholy and sad Convictions of a guilty and ungrateful Soul, and of
an injured and revenging God, and pre-apprehensions of farther Misery: But if,
in the midst of Millions of Miseries, he could see his Creator inviting him to
dependence and recumbance upon him, the Miseries were nothing, they are born by
his strength upon whom he leans: But when the Lord of Heaven shall give him a
trembling Heart, and failing of Eyes, and Sorrow of mind, as in that most
lively Expression he threatens the Jews, Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66, etc. and when he
comes to his Creator, the last and supreme refuge of Man, God himself shall
write bitter things against him, and eternally reject him. Here is the Death of
Deaths: This, and much more than this, is included in that Sanction, Thou shall
surely die. And this appears to be a most just and righteous Sanction.

3. Thou: But we are taught, Romans 5.12. By one Man sin entered into the World,
and Death by sin, so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned: Here
it is inquirable,

1. Whether the Guilt of Adam 's sin did extend farther than Adam's Person? and
by what means or Rule of Justice that came to pass?

We must conclude in Adam all sinned, Romans 5.19. By one Man's disobedience many
were made Sinners; and as Sin passed over all, so Death passed over all. And
this the Apostle uses as the Argument of the Universality of sin, in the same
place; and, 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all died, so in Christ all shall be
made alive. The sin of Adam was the sin of his Posterity by a double Means:

1. For that he contracted with God for him and his Posterity; and as in Nature
including, so in Law personating them all. And in this respect, Romans 5.14. he
is styled the Figure of him that was to come: As Christ contracted for his Seed
by Faith, so Adam contracted for his Seed by Nature. It is true, regularly the
personal sin of the Father, or of any Person, is not charged upon his
Posterity: Ezekiel. 18.20. The Soul that sins it shall die; the Son shall not
bear the iniquity of the Father; conform to that Law of God, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The
Children shall not be put to Death for the Father: But yet by way of Covenant
or Contract, the Child, as it may be interessed in the benefit of Obedience,
may contractively be sharer in the Guilt and Punishment of the Father's
disobedience.

2. For that by this his offense he contracted a Loss of that natural Disorder
and Deformity, which he propagated to his Posterity; and the Constitution of
Adam's posterity after his fall, was of the very same Distemper and Corruption,
that Adam himself had contracted by his Fall. And herein the Case of Adam
differed from all Mankind besides: The best of men born of Adam has the very
same natural obliquity that the worst of Adam's Children has, and if he
traduce his Nature to his Child, he traduceth as good as he has, or ever had:
But that Nature, which Adam had, and was traducible to his Posterity before his
fall, though the same essentially which it was after in specie rationali, yet
by the Will and Dispensation of God had been accompanied with those
Qualifications, that had put them in the same Degree of Blessedness and Power
of conserving it, that Adam had: So then the Sin of Adam engaged his Posterity
in the Guilt: 1. By his personating of them; 2. By his traducing Corruption to
them; hence Genesis 6.5. every imagination of the Heart of Man was only evil
continually.

And as we by this see how Adams sin was the sin of his Posterity, so upon the
same ground we see the Justice of traducing the Punishment to his Posterity. By
the Law of Nature and Reason, the power of the Father over his Child,
especially unborn, is the most absolute and natural power under God in the
World; so that even by the Universal Rule, among men especially, where another
Government is not sub-induced, he had the power over his Life, his Liberty, and
his Subsistence: Man contracts for him and his Posterity in a part of loss and
benefit; his Posterity had a share in the latter in case of Man's Obedience, and
it is reason he should bear a part in the former in Case of Disobedience: the
sin of a public Person draws a Punishment upon those whom he represents
politically, as David's sin in numbering the people; much more when to the
political Representation is added a natural inclusion: And thus he visits the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the the Children, viz. when the Father contracts
for him and his Children in a Covenant of benefit and loss; as he shows Mercy
unto thousands in them that love him; the Children of Abraham, notwithstanding
their own personal Sins, had the benefit of that Promise, which was made to
Abraham, because by way of Covenant, Genesis 17.2.

Further the engagement of the Creator to his Creature could not be farther
than he himself pleased; neither could Man, or his Posterity, challenge any
farther degree or perfection of Being, than God gave, and upon those terms
only, upon which he gave it: If he had resumed it of his own Will from Man, or
his Posterity, after a day or a month, Man had had that for which to be
thankful in the enjoyment, not to murmur in the loss: But it was not so here,
the stock of Blessedness for Man and his Posterity is put into the hands of the
Father, while he had his Posterity within himself; and not only so, but put
into his hands with a power to keep it for him and his Posterity; the Father
proves prodigal, and spends his stock, and if the Child was so, he has none to
blame but the immediate Author of his Being: This is enough most clearly to
interest the Posterity of Adam, at least in the Punishment of Loss of Happiness
and Immortality, and those outward Curses, which followed upon Adam's Nature,
and the Creatures, by Adam's Sin.

4. The time, In the day thou eatest. And this was put in Execution the same
day, as well as Sentenced: the same day Shame, and Guilt, and Fear fell upon
him, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy Voice and was afraid because I was naked: The same
day shut out from the Vision of God, and the place of his Happiness; Verse 24.
the same day set to his work, to Till a cursed Ground, with Labor and Sorrow,
Verse 23.

So now we have seen Man what he was, and what he lost: The next thing
considerable is, How it could come to pass, that Man, having such a portion of
Perfection, both in his Faculties and Fruitions, could be drawn to commit this
Sin upon terms of so great and visible disadvantage to himself and his
Posterity: Negatively we say it was not any inherent Corruption or Malignancy
in the Nature of Man, or any defect of what was necessary to his perseverance
in his Original righteousness; for he was very created good: Neither was it any
Predetermination that did necessitate him to fall; for God, as he gave him a
Power to obey his Will, and a Law wherein to exercise that power, did leave him
in the hands of his own Will: As to suppose him necessitated to obey what God
commanded could not stand with Man's Liberty, nor with the true Nature of
Obedience, which does necessarily suppose an intrinsecal power not to obey; so
to suppose him constrained to disobey; could neither consist with that Liberty,
nor the Purity or Justice of God: God did foresee the fall of Man in the
Counsel of his Prescience, but did not fore-appoint it in the Counsel of his
Predetermination: The rule of Nature is, That whatsoever is, while it is, is
necessarily: The offense of Man, though it proceeded from his Liberty, yet when
it was, it was necessarily: And because all things, before they are, are
present with God as if they were, and in the same degree as if they were,
therefore it was in the same degree of Foreknowledge, as if it had been
necessary; and consequently the superstruction of all that Counsel of God
concerning Man after his Fall, was not taken up pro re nata, but was as ancient
and as firm, as Eternity it self: We find the Fall of Man attributed to these
Causes arising from these three, 1. The Devil. 2. Man. 3. God.

1. In the Devil: a lapsed Angel, and in respect of the Excellency of his
Knowledge and spiritual Being, had an advantage, and could out-act the Reason
of Man, whose Soul acts organically; and therefore though Man were created in
the highest Perfection incident to his Nature, yet he might be over-match'd
with the power and subtilty of that Evil Angel. He fitted his Temptation to
that which was most desirable, viz. Knowledge: and this Temptation took the
greater impression, because in the Command, as has been observed, there was
nothing but a pure Experiment of Man's Obedience, and no rational incongruity
of the eating of this Fruit more than another: the strangeness of the Command,
and the severity of the Penalty made the suggested advantage, that might come
by this, the more credible: had he gone about to tempt Man to Blasphemy, to
murder his Wife, or any other Sin, (the breach whereof had been equally penal
to this) the incongruity of such Acts to that natural Law, which was connatural
to him, had made the Temptation fruitless: but that envious Spirit did well
know, that the Obligation of every Law was under the same Penalty; that this
Law, concerning the forbidden Fruit, was most obnoxious to his Temptation; that
the the desire of Knowledge was the most prevalent Inclination in Man; and so
fits his Temptation exactly, viz. That this command could have no other End or
Reason, than to fence Man from such an Advantage, as might make him yet more
like his Maker, Ye shall be as gods, knowing Good and Evil. And the very same
way he took with the Second Adam: his first Temptation was in such a thing,
that a Man would wonder where the Fault should be; he was hungry, and in a
Wilderness, without Bread; Nature could not subsist, and Bread could not be had
there, unless it were made; yet our Savior, being better acquainted with the
drift of his Temptation, than was Eve, rejected this as a Temptation to a
distrust of the Providence of his Father.

2. In Man.

1. The finitude of his Understanding: Though he was created perfect, yet he
was created finite: It could not match the Sophistry of an Angel. Hence this
sin of Adam, is called Beguiling and Deceiving: The Serpent beguiled me.

2. The Liberty of his Will, which, though he was created Innocent, had
nevertheless a Power to offend:

3. The prevalence of his Sensual Appetite. But this came not in, till the
field was almost lost: the Temptation won upon the Understanding and Will,
before the subsidiary aid of the Sensual Appetite did or could come in: the
Beauty of the Fruit, and its Goodness for Food, was evident to Man before; but
it durst not assail the Command of God, till the Understanding was deluded with
an expectation of Wisdom.

3. In God: There was nothing positive, but only putting of him wholly in his
own Power. Doubtless he was not ignorant of the design of the Serpent, and
could have as effectually supplanted his endeavor by his special Assistance,
or by an Angel as effectually have guarded Man from that Tree, as he did that
other Tree of Life afterward from Man; but he had made Man perfect, he has
given him a Command under a severe Penalty, and has given him Power to obey
it; if he will believe his Creator, and trust in him, he is safe; if he will
not, he may choose, but is lost. See the Congruity and difference in the
Temptation of the first and second Adam: both tempted by the Devil, that in a
Paradise, this in a Desert; that in his Abundance, tempted with Superfluity;
this in Want, tempted with Necessity; both had absolute Freedom of Will, and
both left to the strength of their own Power, for the Angels came not to
minister to Christ, till the Devil had left him: but the latter Adam in his
Temptation will not stir a grain from the Command, the scriptum est of God, and
the Devil leaves him; the former lets go his strength, the Command of his
Creator, the Lock of his strength, and is taken and overcome.

And thus have we seen Man in his Glory, and in his Ruin: The former, he did
owe to the free Bounty and Goodness of God; for how could that, which had not a
Being, till it was given him, deserve such a Being? the latter, he owes only to
himself; and how can he now expect a Reparation? He has contracted a Guilt,
which as his future Doing, or Suffering, cannot expiate; for this Suffering is
the necessary Consequence, not the satisfaction of his Guilt; and this
Suffering must therefore be as everlasting as his Being, because his Guilt is
as everlasting as his Being: his Doings, were they perfect, were but his Duty,
and therefore cannot expiate that Guilt, which was contracted by the breach of
that Duty; but could it be available to expiate his Guilt, yet as his
Disobedience made him guilty, so it made him unable to perform his Duty; his
Intellectuals are deprived of that Light, which he has abused, and therefore
lost; his Will corrupted and embased, in a subjection to his Sensual Appetite;
and this Disobedience, accompanied with many Aggravations, the least whereof
might incense the very Goodness and Patience of his Creator, beyond all hopes
of Mercy and Atonement; this Disobedience against God, to whom he owed the most
exact Obedience; he added Ingratitude to his Disobedience; he disobeyed that
God, from whom, but even now, he received his Being, and such a Being; he added
Perverseness to his Ingratitude, it was against such a Command, which he might
have kept, and needed not to have broken; he added Wantonness to his
Perverseness; he disobeyed, when he had a stock of Blessedness, as ample as his
being was capable of; he added Treason to his Wantonness, believing the Voice
of a Creature, a Creature that but now had revolted from his God, in a
villainous imputation of God with Falsity and Envy: And how after all this, and
infinitely more than this, can he expect any thing from his injured God, but
what the severity of his Justice can inflict? if he meets with frowardness in
the Earth, distemper in the Air, surprizals and inundations in the Water,
rebellion in the Creatures, a snare in his Table, treachery in his Friend,
scorn and oppression from his Superior, supplanting from his Equal, envy and
mischief from his Inferior, falsness and temptation from the Wife of his
Bosom, rebellion from his Children, vanity and disappointment in his Purposes,
Diseases, Distempers and infections in his Body, madness and blindness in his
Understanding, perverseness in his Will, tumult and confusion in his
Affections, guilt and preapprehensions of terror in his Conscience, Death and
dissolution of Body and Soul, and Judgment, Vengeance, Hell, and yet Eternity
after all this: Then let Man know, that in all this, and that which is all
this, and more than this, the Aversion of the Favor and Light of the
Countenance of God, he eats but the Fruit of his own ways: and thou, O God, art
just when thou thus judge; and whatsoever is better than the worst of all
this, to any of the Children of men, is mere Mercy, and more than their due.

But if now in the midst of Judgment, God remembers Mercy; and Mankind being
now condemned, and concluded under sin, if the merciful God, that at first gave
Being and Blessing, shall, after we had spent that Patrimony, and lost our
selves, provide for our Restitution; that, when we of Freemen, had made our
selves Slaves, and Vessels of Wrath, shall provide a Means for our Deliverance;
This engages us to a higher degree, both of Admiration and Duty, than even our
first Creation did. This then is the next thing considerable, viz. The means
and way of Man's Restitution.

CHAP. V. Of the Restitution of Man by Christ.
ALL Mankind lay, by the Fall, under Guilt, which is an Obligation to
Punishment, both of loss of Happiness, and everlasting subjection both to
temporal and eternal Curse: And this estate of Man and his Posterity, even to
the end of the World, was present in the infallible Foresight of God from all
Eternity: In that consideration he had a Kingdom, but over Rebels and Traitors;
and had everlasting cause of the execution of his Justice and the Power of his
Wrath, but nothing to deserve or draw out his Mercy among all the Sons of Men,
who were all present, and stood up together in his Eternal Foresight. Thus Man
had, as far forth as was in him, disappointed the End of God in his Creation,
insomuch, that in the outward dispensation of God's Providence, it seemed that
he repented that he had made Man on the Earth, Genesis 6.6. But though Man, as
much as in him lay, had made himself an useless Creature, and interrupted the
possibility of attaining an End answerable to his Being, yet God's Counsel was
not disappointed: But the great Lord of his own free Goodness, did in his
Eternal Counsel fore-appoint some of lost Men to Remission of their Sin, and
eternal Happiness in Christ, by such Means as he had before ordained to be
effectual for that purpose. And this is the great Discovery of the Scripture,
and contains that great Business which Man has to do in this World, because it
is that which concerns his great and everlasting End, without which, his very
Being is not only unprofitable, but miserable, and now comes to be considered.

This then is the sum of all, That Almighty God, out of his own Free Will and
Goodness, did in his Eternal Counsel fore appoint some of lost Mankind to
Remission of sin and guilt, and Reconciliation, and Eternal Happiness in
Christ, by such Means as he had before ordained in the same Counsel to be
effectual for that purpose. In this description we have these Particulars to be
sifted, and we have done our Business.

1. What the Motive of this Purpose; God's mere good Will:

2. What the Object of it; some of Mankind:

3. What the End of this Counsel; Remission of sin, and Restoration to
Happiness:

4. What the Hand or immediate Instrument of effecting it; Christ:

5. What those subordinate Means of attaining it:

6. What the Consequents of it.

1. Touching the Motive; nothing at all meritorious in Man, but only the good
will of God, thus to select some out of the lost multitude of Men to be Vessels
of Mercy* And this is that which is so often inculcated in the Book of God, in
all the successions of it, Exodus 33.19. I will be gracious to whom I will be
gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show mercy. So Deuteronomy. 9.5. Moses's
sad Admonition to the Jews, who in all things were typical: Understand
therefore, that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good land for thy
righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked people. Ezekiel. 16.6. When I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast
in thy blood, Live? yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, Live.
Isaiah 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. Luke 10.21. And have revealed them to
babes: even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Ephesians. 2.3. When we
were by nature children of wrath, even as others: But God, who is rich in
mercy, for his great love, wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead
in sins, has quickened us together with Christ: by grace are ye saved. 2 Timothy
1.10. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace; which was given us in
Christ before the world began, but now made manifest by the appearing of
Christ. 1 John 4.10. Here is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us.
Ibid. 19. We love him, because he loved us first. Romans 5.8. God commends his
love toward us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. And
indeed, it is impossible it should be otherwise: for the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, Galat. 3.22. And we have showed before an utter
impossibility in Man to extricate himself. The fore-appointing therefore of any
to Eternal Life, could not be from any Cause in the Creature, meritoriously
moving God to this Mercy.

The Freedom and Liberality of this Purpose of God.

1. In respect of the Elect: to take away all matter of boasting, Ephesians. 2.8.
To keep them humble, and to keep them thankful, that God may be all in all. It
pleases the great God to order the Execution of his Counsels, touching Man,
that they are brought about, as with a powerful and irrisistible Hand; so they
are brought about by such means, as is naturally suitable to the nature of Man;
Rationally and Freely, Psalm. 110. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
Power. Now there cannot be a more engaging Argument to Humility and
Thankfulness, than the consideration of this Free Goodness of God, that when I
had thrown away my Happiness, lay in the common lump of condemned Men, God
should freely single me out among thousands that he passed by, and make me a
Vessel of Mercy. And this does most sweetly and effectually win upon the Heart:
So that the very consideration of this Counsel of God, is a means to effect its
Execution, in putting the Heart into such a frame, as is fit to receive the
impressions of God's Grace.

2. In respect of those that are omitted: The freedom of the Choice, does not
in the least degree reflect upon the Justice of God: He had no engagement to
choose any, but might most justly have let all lie under that sin and misery,
into which we had cast our selves. If God be pleased to choose any, it is the
mere act of his Grace: if he leaves any, he leaves them but in that condition,
not in which he made them, but in which they made themselves. The act of his
Bounty to the Elect, is without any Injury to those he leaves: for neither
could challenge any thing but Misery as their Right.

2. The Object of this Choice:

1. Some are chosen from all Eternity: The Elect, according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, 1 Pet. 1.2. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. These are
those, for whom a Kingdom was prepared from the Foundation of the World, Matthew
25.34. These are they, which by an eternal Contract between God the Father and
his Son, were given unto Christ: I pray for them, which thou have given me, for
they are thine, John 17.9, 24.

2. But some, and not all: Many there are, that are not so much as called; and
of those that are called, yet few are chosen, Matthew. 22.14. And this
preterition of God puts them not in any worse Condition than it finds them.
And indeed, this Counsel of God is not so much as the Potter's making some
Vessels to honor, some to dishonor: he made all Vessels of honor, and Men
made themselves all Vessels of dishonor: God in his mercy to restore some to
become again Vessels of honor: and this is without any injury to those that
are omitted; because they are continued to be but what they made themselves,
and what they most freely desire still to be: Thy destruction is from thy self,
O Jerusalem.

3. To what this Election or Choice is, or what is the End of this Counsel of
God: There is a twofold End in the Counsel of God.

1. The End of Intention; subordinate, the good of his Creature; adequate, the
good pleasure of his own Will, or his own Glory; as to show his wrath, and make
his power known toward the Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, so to make
known the riches of his Glory in the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before
prepared unto Glory, Romans 9.23.

2. The End in Execution, or rather the subject matter of this Counsel of God:
it is the whole Series, and all the Conjunctures of all things conducing
thereunto; wherein the Counsel of God does not per saltum step from the Fall to
Glory, but does take in all those intermediate passages, which he has by the
same Counsel, appointed to be the Means of effecting it. 1. The great Mystery
of the Incarnation, which is the Cardo negotii, 1 Pet. 1.20. Who was
foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifested in these
last times.

2. Effectual calling, by the Word and Spirit of God, Romans 8.28. Who are called
according to his purpose.

3. The effectual Assistance of the Spirit of God, without which, it were
impossible these dry Bones should live, Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law into
their mind, and write them in their hearts.

3. Holiness and Sanctification, John. 15.16. I have chosen you, and ordained
you, that ye should bring forth fruit, Ephesians. 14. Chosen to be holy, Epes.
2.10. Created in Christ unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them, Romans 8.29, 30. Conformity unto Christ, and all linked
together: Glory to Justification; Justification to Calling; Calling to Election.

4. In whom, or by whom, he has elected us: Christ. In this Consists the
greatest Mystery that ever was, and of most concernment to Mankind. And because
it is impossible to attain to the knowledge of it, but by Revelation from God
himself, we must in this keep precisely to the Word of God, where alone this
Mystery is by God ordinarily discovered: which is briefly thus much.

Almighty God in the Creation of Man, did primarily intend the Glory of his own
Goodness, and the Happiness of his Creature; and to that End, furnished him
with such Faculties and Rules, as might conduct him to that Happiness.

Man, being seduced, abused his Liberty; and by his Disobedience violated that
Rule, and consequently in himself lost the acquisition of that Happiness, to
which he was created.

Yet this could not disappoint the Purpose of God, who, with an eternal and
indivisible act, did foresee all Mankind in this miserable and lost Condition,
and appoint a way for his Recovery.

The way of Man's Recovery was by the Eternal Purpose, Consultation, or
Contract, as I may call it, between the Father, Son, and Eternal Spirit,
resolved to be, that the Son of God should assume the Nature of Man into one
Person, by an ineffable Generation, and that he should Satisfy for the Guilt
of Man's Sin by his Death.

And because that the bare Satisfaction for Sin, could only exempt Man from the
deserved Punishment of his Sin, but could not restore him to that Happiness,
which he lost, by the same Eternal Covenant, the Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ, was to be accepted by God, as the Righteousness of Man; that as in his
Sufferings he did bear the Sin of Man, to make Satisfaction for the Curse
deserved, so by his Obedience imputed unto Man, Man might acquire that
Happiness that he lost.

To the end, that this Satisfaction and Righteousness might be effectually
applied for the Purposes abovementioned, Christ must, after this Righteousness
fulfilled, and this Satisfaction made by his Death, rise from Death, ascend
into Heaven, and so continue as well the Mediator of Intercession, as he was
before of Satisfaction. Though this Righteousness, and Satisfaction, were
sufficient for the Sins of all Mankind, and accordingly freely propounded, yet
it was effectual only for such, as should according to those immediate Means,
that God had fore-appointed to be useful for that Purpose, sue forth the
benefit of it.

This is the sum of that great work of Man's Redemption, which the Angels
desire to look into; 1 Pet. 1.12. and is discovered to Principalities and
Powers by the Church, Ephesians. 3.10. and therefore called, The manifold Wisdom of
God; The Mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3.4. Ephesians. 6.19. The Mystery hid in God
from the beginning of the world, Ephesians. 3.9. The Mystery of God, and of the
Father, and of Christ, Colos. 2.2. Colos. 1.27. The Mystery hid from ages and
generations, but now made manifest to his Saints, Colos. 1.26. The Wisdom of
God in a Mystery; The Mystery of his Will, 1 Cor. 2.7. The Revelation of the
Mystery kept secret since the world began, Romans 16.25. The great Mystery of
Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
Glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. The Mystery of Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9.

CHAP. VI. Predictions and Types of Christ.
YET this great Mystery of Christ was not kept so secret, but that, as the
fruit of his Mediation, preceeded his coming in the Flesh, as shall be after
shown; so some glimpses of this Truth were discovered to former Generations, 1
Pet. 1.10. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired. Ephesians. 2.20.
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ the Cornerstone. We shall
therefore, for the settling of our Minds in this Cardinal Point, observe those
Predictions concerning Christ in the Old Testament, and we shall find the Old
and New Testament like the two Cherubims upon the Mercy Seat, their Faces
looking one toward another, yet both of them toward the Mercy Seat; and, as we
have before noted, the Old Testament unriddling the difficulties of Nature, so
the New Testament unriddling the Old: The Predictions of Christ in the Old
Testament, were of two kinds: Prophetical, and Typical: The Prophetical
Predictions, to follow them in order of time:

1. The first and great Publication of the Gospel, though dark and mysterious,
was that by God himself in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, between thy seed and her seed: it shall break thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. This was not only fulfilled in that mystical Woman, the
Church, and here, see Revel. 12.17. but also in Christ: 1. He was the Seed of
the Woman, and not of the Man, Luke 1.34. He sent his Son made of a Woman, Gal.
4.4. The Parallel observable: By the Woman Sin first came into the World and
Salvation. 2. It shall break thy head: He came to destroy the works of the
Devil, in his Temptation. In his Life, he bound the strong Man, Heb. 2.14.
destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil, Matthew. 12.29. In
his Preaching, Luke 10.17, 18. Satan like Lightning falling down from Heaven;
in his Death and Resurrection, spoiling Principalities and Powers, and made a
show of them openly, and triumphing over them in it, Colos. 2.^5. In his
Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive;
this Captive taker is the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. In his Members, Ephesians. 6.12. We
wrestle against Principalities and Powers, and it is our Business to stand
against the Wiles of the Devil, Ibid. Verse. 11. To resist him steadfastly in the
Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. In the Dispensation of his Government in his Church and
Members, Revel. 12.7. Michael and his Angels fight with, and overcome the
Dragon and his Angels: In his last and great Judgment, Revel. 20.10. The Devil
cast into the Lake of Fire, 1 John 3.8. For this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

2. The next great Promise of Christ, was that which was made to Abraham, That
in him, Genesis 12.3. Genesis 18.18. That is, in his Seed, Genesis 22.18. all Nations of
the Earth should be blessed. This is applied to Christ, Galat. 3.16. And
afterward to Isaac, the Son of the Promise, was the same Promise renewed and
entailed, Genesis 26.4. And so exact was the great God of Heaven in the fulfilling
of his Promise, that, until by a civil Investiture, the right of Primogeniture
was translated from Esau to Jacob, first by the sale of his Birthright, Genesis
25.33. and then by the Blessing, though surreptitiously by Jacob, yet
providentially by God, Genesis 27.29. This Promise was not actually entailed upon
Jacob's Line, Genesis 28.14. This Patria potestas Jacob likewise used upon his
three eldest Sons, Reuben for his Incest, Simeon and Levi for their Murder,
Genesis 49.34, 56. Whereby Judah became as it were, the firstborn; and therefore
Judah continually after, had the pre-eminence of Primogeniture, Viz. in the
division of the Land, Numb. 34.19. Judah's Commissioner first named: so in the
alotment of the Land of Canaan, Joshua 15.1. Judah had the pre-eminence in
completing the Victory of Canaan by the Suffrage of God. Judges 1.2. And by
the decision and Prophecy of dying Jacob, the Regality, a right of
Primogenture, and the Messiah entailed to that stock, Genesis 49. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the People be: And hence he is
called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. ^.5. This Gathering of the People
to him, was the Calling of the Gentiles to the knowledge of God in Christ: And
this was the Star of Jacob, which Balaam, inspired against his will, prophesied
of, Numb. 24.17. And this that great Prophet which God promised by Moses to
raise up to stand between the Majesty and Glory of God, and the frailty of
Humane Nature, Deuteronomy. 18.15. John 5.46. The Redeemer of Job, Job 19.25. From the
time of Moses, the Prophecies of Christ are interrupted, and his time not
specified; but in him God was pleased to evidence it, first in his Promise to
him, 2 Samuel 7.16. Thy throne shall be established for ever: And this Covenant
touching Christ, therefore called the sure Mercies of David, Isaiah 55.3.
again, Isa 11.1, 10. In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people: To it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest
shall be glorious. And this was a known Truth even among the unbelieving Jews,
Matthew. 22.42. The learned Doctors confessed, that Christ was to be the Son of
David: This fulfilled in Christ, Acts 13.23. Of this man's seed has God
according to his promise raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus, Revel. 5.5. The
Root of David. The Place of his Birth, Mich. 5.2. And thou Bethlehem, etc. out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from old, from everlasting: this Bethlehem the City of
David, 1 Samuel 17.22. notoriously confessed among the Jews, to be the place of
the Messias's Birth, Matthew. 2.5. The Manner of his Birth, A virgin shall bear a
son, and shall call his name Immanuel, Isa. 7.14. fulfilled, Matthew. 1.25. And
as in his Name the union of the Divine and Humane Nature is discovered, so more
plainly, Isa. 9.6. His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no end: Peace proclaimed at his Birth, Luke
2.14. On earth peace, good will toward men: his Business Peace, 2 Cor. 5.1.
God in Christ, reconciling the World to himself: Ephesians. 2.14. Christ our Peace:
his Gospel the Gospel of Peace: Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 6.15. Peace his Legacy: John
14.27. Peace his Command, Matthew. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers. Romans 12.18.
Live peaceably with all men. Luke 10.5, 6. Into whatsoever house ye enter,
first say, Peace be to this house; And if the son of Peace be there, your peace
shall rest upon it: And though our Savior professes, Matthew. 10.34. I came not
to send peace, but a sword; it is ex accidente, or eventu, by the malignity of
our own Nature, and the contestation of the Devil to keep his Possession
against Christ the right owner, and Lord of Man: His Doctrine spiritual and
powerful, Isaiah 11.3, 4. He shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor
reprove after the hearing of his ears: he shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he stay the wicked: The
teaching of Christ in the Flesh as one having Authority, and not as the
Scribes, Matthew. 7.29. The breath or spirit of his mouth a consuming breath, 2
These. 2.8. and hence Rev. 1.16. Out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword:
His Sufferings, Satisfaction, Resurrection, Intercession and Reign in his
Church, that Evangelical Chapter, Isaiah 53. A despised man; rejected when
Barabbas and he in competition for Life: We hid our faces from him; forsaken
and denied by his own Disciples: Acquainted with grief; we often find him in
tears, never in mirth: He has born our griefs and carried our sorrows; in his
Passion, when it eclipsed the Light of his Fathers Countenance from him; in his
Compassion, a merciful high Priest, touched with our Infirmities, Heb. 2.
Wounded by the Soldiers, by the Nails for for our Transgressions: By his
stripes, when whipped by the Soldiers, are we healed. Yet this Lamb dumb before
his shearers, when Pilate impiously interrogated him: He made his grave with
the wicked, being crucified between Thieves: and with the rich, in the Garden
of a rich and honorable Joseph: yet, though his Soul was made an offering for
sin, he survived his own death, saw his seed, prolonged his days, and the
pleasure of the Almighty prospered in his hands: and the two and twentieth
Psalm penned, as if the Passion of our Savior had been then acted: His Cry,
Verse 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The scorns of the
beholders; Verse 7. All they that see me, laugh me to scorn, Matthew. 27. Ver.
39. They that passed by, reviled him, wagging their heads: The very Language of
the reviling Scribes, Verse 8. fulfilled, Matthew. 27.43. He trusted in God, that
he would deliver him, etc. The manner of his death, Verse the 16. They pierced
my hands, and my feet: The sharing of his Garments, Verse 18. They parted my
garments among them: Again, in several other Prophecies, the several
Occurrences of his Life and Death, gathered up by other Prophets: He never
appeared more regally and triumphantly, than in his Voyage to Jerusalem, Matthew.
21.5. and that coming of his not without a Prophecy, Zach. 9.9 Behold, thy King
comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon an ass: The price of Judas's treason,
and the employment, Zach. 11.13. They weighed for my price thirty pieces of
silver: The Vinegar that he drank upon the Cross, Psalm. 69.21. And in my thirst
they gave me Vinegar to drink: The time of his Birth and Death, Dan. 9.25, 26.
From the going forth of the Command to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the
Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, the
street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after
threescore and two weeks shall the Messiah be cut off, but not for himself; and
the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the city and sanctuary;
the desolation of Jerusalem shortly following the death of our Redeemer: The
manner of the Calculation has been diversely conjectured, yet all concur to a
very near projection of times: And lastly, that undeniable evident Prophecy
most clearly fulfilled through millions of difficulties to the eminent
knowledge of God by Christ; a matter, that were there nothing else, were
sufficient to convince all gainsaying. Isa. 11.20. To it shall the Gentiles
seek. Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant, etc. he shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles, and Verse 6, I will give thee for a covenant of the People, for a
light of the Gentiles. Isa. 49.6. I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles,
that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth. Psalm. 72.8. His
dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth: And this began to be fulfilled in the Homage of the wise Men that came
from the East, Matthew. 2.1. In the diversity of Tongues, Acts 2.4. In Peter's
Vision, Acts 10.15. In Paul and Barnabas turning to the Gentiles, Acts 13.46.
And if a Man do but consider the Antiquity, and Particularity, and Positiveness
of these Prophecies; the improbabilities of effecting it, in respect of the
Persons, who were to be converted, tenacious to their Idolatry; Have a nation
changed their Gods? the improbability in respect of the Means, a company of
poor, unlearned, persecuted Apostles; in respect of the Religion whereunto to
be called, to believe in a crucified Savior, whom they never saw; a Religion
persecuted and condemned by the great Masters of Religion, Scribes and
Pharisees, a Religion promising nothing within the view of Reason, or use of
Sense; a Religion that takes Men off from all that, wherein Men naturally
repose their Hopes and Delights; a Religion opposed by the chiefest Wits in the
World, the Philosophers and wise Men; a Religion studied to be suppressed by the
greatest Power, Policies, and Cruelties, that the World could afford, and yet
for all this, to master all these Difficulties, and bring into subjection the
greatest part of the World for these sixteen hundred Years, though I confess,
not without mixtures of great Corruptions, must wring from any reasonable Man,
an acknowledgment both of the great Power and Providence of God in the
Government of the World, and also of the Truth of Christ the Messiah.

2. Touching the Typical Predictions of Christ, Genesis 2.9. The Tree of Life in
the midst of the Garden, which by the Divine Dispensation had that efficacy
given to it, that it should seem by Genesis 3.22. if lapsed Man had eat thereof,
he had recovered his lost perpetuity. This was nothing else but Christ, at
least typically; the Wisdom of God, that the wisest of Men called the Tree of
Life, Prove. 3.18. This that Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God,
Revel. 2.7. whose Leaves were for the healing of the Nations, Revel. 22.2.

Melchizedeck the Priest of the most high God, Genesis 14.18. The Type of Christ's
Eternal Priesthood, Psalm. 110.4. Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck: And of his peaceable Kingdom, King of Salem, without beginning of
days, or end of life, Heb. 7.3.

The whole State of the Jews, even from Abraham, was in effect Typical: Abraham
the Father of the Jews according to the Flesh, the Father of the Faithful, as
believing the Promise, Gal. 3 7. Romans 9.7. Sarah and Agar typical of the Church
and the World, the Flesh and the Spirit, the Covenant of the Law and Gospel,
Gal. 3.24. Circumcision typical of that of the Heart, Romans 2.29. Their state in
Egypt Typical: The Passover, a most effectual Type of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7.
Christ the true Passover: and therefore the Sacrifice of Christ and of the
Passover went together, Matthew. 26. Eaten whole, Exodus 12. Not a bone of him to
be broken; eaten with bitter Herbs, typifying Repentance; the Blood sprinkled,
secures from the wrath of God; with Hyssop, a cleansing Herb, Psalm. 51. Purge
me with hyssop; a Feast as well as a Sacrifice, John 6.55. The Manna a Type of
Christ, who was that Bread of God that came down from Heaven, John 6.33. The
hidden Manna, Revel. 2.17. The Cloud and Red Sea, a Type of Baptism into
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.1. The Jews in Egypt, like the state of the unconverted
World: hence the World called Spiritual Egypt: In their Passage out, they are
entertained with a Sacramental Initiation; they are militant in the Wilderness
of the World, triumphant in Canaan, the rest: the water out of the Rock, a Type
of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. That Rock was Christ.

But principally the Levitical Law was a shadow of the good things to come in
Christ, Heb. 8.5. Who was the End of the Law. And as the Judicial Law among the
Jews, did not only contain Precepts in themselves naturally good, but also
Typical and Sacramental Observations of that inward Sanctification and frame of
Mind, that God required; so the Levitical Law did not only contain Precepts of
that internal habitude of Love, Fear, and Obedience unto God, admirably
delivered through the whole Book of Deuteronomy, but also diverse Types and
Figures, which had a double use: 1. Of evidencing the full Obedience to those
Positive Commands of God, because commanded by him: 2. Figures of Christ to
come; and of that frame and constitution of Men and things in relation to him,
as we may observe in diverse Particulars.

1. The Covenant between God and Israel, the Stipulation on God's part, Exodus
19.5. If ye will obey my voice, and keep my Covenant, ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me above all people, and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of
Priests, and an Holy Nation. Exodus 34.10. Behold I make a Covenant: Before all
thy people I will do marvels, etc. The Stipulation on the Peoples part, Exodus
19.8.24.7. All that the Lord has spoken, we will do. This is that Covenant
which the Lord made with the People in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 5.2. And the tenor of this
Covenant renewed and explained, viz. Blessing to Obedience, and Curses to
Disobedience, Deuteronomy. 29.10, etc. Ye stand this day before the Lord your God,
that thou should enter into Covenant with ^he Lord thy God, and into his
oath, etc. Accordingly in Christ, a new Covenant made, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. A
New Covenant, I will put my Laws into their hearts, I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a People.

2. As that Covenant was mutual, consisted in somewhat promised by God,
somewhat undertaken by the People, Obedience to the Law that God gave them; so
the Covenant here is reciprocal. In the Gospel of God, there is a double
Covenant: 1. A Covenant between God the Father and God the Son; that the Son
should take upon him Flesh, and satisfy for the sins of the Elect, Psalm. 40.6.
Heb. 10.9. A body have thou prepared me: lo, I come to do thy will, O God; on
God's part a Covenant, that those which should be so redeemed, should be given
over to Christ, and united unto him in the nearest relation that is possible,
John 17. They, whom thou have given me, Verse 21. That they may be one in us.
But of this more infra. 2. A Covenant between God the Father in Christ with
Man; and this is likewise reciprocal: On God's part to give Remission of Sins,
and Eternal Life in Christ to as many as lay hold of this Covenant, John 6.40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that believes on me,
should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Ibid.
47. He that believes on me, has everlasting life, John 7.37. John 12.44. John
3.36. Romans 3.28. Heb. 8.10. And because he must make him a People, that may
entertain the Covenant, before he can have a reciprocal from them, God gives a
heart to believe to those that are his, that so they may enter into Covenant
with God, John 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe. Verse 37. All
that the Father gives me, shall come unto me. Verse 65. No man can come unto
me, except it be given of my Father, Ephesians. 2.8. This is the putting of the Law
in their Hearts, Heb. 8.10. And this part of God's Covenant is made rather for
us, than with us, even with and in Christ, in whom all the Promises of God are
Yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. For these Promises are Eternal Promises, an Eternal
Covenant given to Christ for the Elect; even before they had a Being, or could
possibly receive them: On the part of the People of Christ, there is likewise a
Covenant too, he has given us Commandments of Obedience, John 13.1^. Love one
to another. Ibid. Verse 34. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John
14.15.21.23. Love to Christ, Perseverance, John 15.9, 10. Bringing forth Fruit,
Ibid. 16. Doing Righteousness, 1 John 2.29. Purifying our selves, 1 John 3.3,
7.9.10. Crucifying Affections and Lusts, Galat. 5.24. Zealous of Good Works,
Tit. 2.14.3.18. Thus God out of his free Love, appoints us to Eternal Life in
Christ, freely gives Christ to be the purchase of it, freely promises Life for
us in him through Faith, freely gives us Faith to come to him, which when it is
wrought, our Covenant again with God, is but to return a fruit of his own
Grace. True Faith in Christ, cannot be without a sense of this Love of God, nor
that without a return of Love to him again, nor that without a Care to walk
according to his Will, for if ye love me, ye will keep my Commandments: And yet
he is pleased to accept and reward the work of his own free Grace, as the
return of us poor and weak Men.

3. This Covenant was ordained in the hands of a Mediator, Gal. 3.19. Moses
alone came near the Lord, and told the People all the words of the Lord, and
the People answered with one Voice, All the words which the Lord has said,
will we do, Exodus 24.3. The Second Covenant ordained likewise in the hands of a
Mediator, even Christ, Heb. 12.24. Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant.

4. The first Covenant Sealed with Blood, Exodus 24.8. Moses took the blood, and
sprinkled on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant: thus
likewise Christ sealed the second Covenant with his Blood, Heb. 9.14. And
therefore called the Blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.29. The Blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. And the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2. and the Blood of sprinking. God in his Wisdom took a
special care; and set a special value upon the Blood even of Beasts, both in
the Levitical, and in the Law given to Noah, because the Seal of Life, and
therefore prohibited the use of it in any thing below his own Service, Genesis
9.4. Levit. 17.14. Yet in his Service enjoined to the Jews, all their
Consecrations, of Covenant, People, Priests, Altars, Sanctuary, Vessels, at
once to prefigure the Sacrifice of Christ, and the deep dye of the guilt of
Sin, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of Blood is no Remission. Heb. 13.20. The
Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

5. In the Holy Vessels: The Ark, a special sign of God's Presence, therefore
called the Glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22. This called the Ark of the Covenant,
or the Ark of the Testimony, Jos. 2.14. Wherein was placed the Testimony, viz.
The two Tables. Exodus 25.16. The Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod; these being for
Testimonials to their Posterity of the Covenant, Power, and Goodness of God. As
in this Ark the Covenant of God was placed, so Christ was the Ark of the second
Covenant, in whom it was made and conserved, the receptacle of the fullness of
the Mercies of God, Colos. 1.19. For it pleased the Father that in him should
all Fullness dwell. Colos. 2.3. In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge.

Over this Ark was placed the Mercy Seat, the only place from which God
appointed to meet with Moses, and from thence to discover his Counsels to him,
Genesis 25.17, 22. The only Seat of God's Mercy to Mankind, is to be found in
Christ: And to this Fabric of the Mercy Seat with Cherubims looking into it,
is that expression of Peter touching the Mystery of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.22. Which
things the Angels desire to look into. And all this within the Veil: the great
Covenant for the Redemption of Man, made from Eternity, was within the Veil,
before Christ appeared in the Flesh.

These were placed within the Ve^l, in the most holy Place.

There were three Rooms in the Tabernacle: 1. The most Holy Place, wherein the
Ark stood, and the Mercy Seat over it, divided by the Veil from the rest of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 26.33. Wherein the High Priest entered but once a year at the
time of the solemn Atonement, Exodus 30.10. Levit. 16.2.34. Heb. 9.7. The next
were the Sanctuary, wherein were the Golden Altar of Incense placed before the
Veil, Exodus 30.6. 40.26. The Golden Table, whereupon was set the Show Bread,
placed on the North side of the Sanctuary, Ibid. Verse 22. And the Golden
Candlestick, placed on the South side of the Sanctuary. Ibid. Verse 24. Then
there was the Court of the Tabernacle, where the Altar for Burnt-Offerings was
placed. And by the door of the Tabernacle, is intended without the door of the
Tabernacle, which the rather appears, because the Laver of Brass was put
between the Altar and the door of the Congregation. And all these are likewise
shadows of Christ.

And because we find the Veil to be expressly called the humane nature of
Christ, Heb. 10.20. And therefore at the death of Christ the Veil rent, Matthew.
27.51. We may justly conceive the Vessels, that were contained in the
Sanctuary, to represent Christ in the Business of his Mediatorship, which
principally is applicable to him as he was Man:

1. The Altar of Incense made of pure Gold, upon which was to be offered a
perpetual Incense before the Lord throughout their Generations, Exodus 3.8. And
this was placed before the Veil by the Ark and the Mercy Seat, and a peculiar
Incense to be used in it, that no Man might make the like, Exodus 30.38. This
does clearly typifie the continual Intercession of Christ, who cease not to
make Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. And no other Mediation but his must be
used, he is the only Name. This imports that Priestly Office of Christ.

2. The Table of Shewbread made also of pure Gold, and a Crown of Gold round
about, Exodus 25.25. And Shewbread set upon the Table before God always,
importing as well that Regal Office of Christ in his Church, as that Fullness of
all spiritual Blessings which is in him: and therefore he does not unusually
style himself the Bread of Life, and the Bread that came down from Heaven, John
6.48. The magazine and store of all Provisions for the Necessities and Wants of
all that believe in him, Colos. 1.19. For it pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell.

3. The Golden Candlestick having seven Branches, whereon were seven Lamps,
which were to give Light in the Sanctuary, Exodus 25.37. This does most clearly
typifie that Prophetic Office of Christ, who was the Light of Men, John 1.4.
John 8.12. And these were the three great Utensils of the Sanctuary, which
questionless were significative of more than to be b^re Ornaments, otherwise
there had not lain so special a charge upon Moses, Exodus 25.40. to follow
precisely his Pattern: and the rather we may collect these significations of
them, in respect of the place where they were set, viz. not in the Holiest of
all, the Type of Heaven; but in the Sanctuary, the Type of the Church, these
Offices principally relating to the Church. 2 Cor. 4 6. The light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.

To this we may add the Holy Oil, which was to sanctify all the Vessels,
Priests, and Tabernacle, Exodus 30.22, etc. This signifying that Unction of the
Spirit of God, which, as in a special measure it was poured out upon Christ,
who was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1.9. so the
same anointing from above, is that which sanctifies both the Services and
Persons of his Church. And hence it is called pouring out his Spirit, Acts
2.18. Shedding on us his Spirit, Tit 3.6. And the Spirit of Unction, 1 John
2.20. He which anointed us is God, 2^ Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.27. The anointing
that teaches us all things, 1 John 3.20. The Unction from the Holy One.

These were the Vessels within the Sanctuary: the special Vessels without were
the Altar of Burnt-Offerings, and the Laver placed between the Tent and the
Altar, Exodus 40.29, 30.

The Altar of Burnt-Offerings, a Type of Christ, Heb. 13.10. The Alar of his
Divine Nature, that sanctified the Offering, etc. Whatsoever touches it shall
be holy, Exodus 29.37. This Altar placed without the Tabernacle in the Court of
the Tabernacle, where all the People came, typifying that universal Exhibition
of this Sacrifice to all, and that the initiation of every Man into the favor
and presence of God, was to be through this Altar. God exhibited himself to the
Priest and Moses over the Mercy Seat, which was at the door of the most Holy;
But to all the People the place of the manifestation of his presence, was at
the door of the Tabernacle over this Altar, Exodus 29.42, 43. And there will I
meet with the children of Israel: And the suffering of Christ without the Gate,
was not without some Allusion to the placing of this Altar without the
Tabernacle, Vide Heb. 13.12. And as the situation of the Altar, so the
Sacrifice upon this Altar, not without a Mystery; for besides those many
Sacrifices, which were diversified according to the several natures of the
Occasion, here was one Sacrifice appropriate to this Altar, the continual
Burnt-Offering, a Lamb of the first year in the Morning, a Lamb of the first
year at Even, Exodus 29.38. Numb. 28.3. And the Spirit of Truth takes up this
description of Christ more frequently than any, John 1.29. Behold the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world, 1 Pet. 1.19. Redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish or spot, Revel. 5.6. The
Lamb that was slain, etc. Revel. 13.8. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world.

And between this Altar and the Sanctuary stood the Laver of Brass, not only
typifying the Sacramental Initiation by Baptism; but that Purity and Cleansing,
that is required of all those that partake of this Altar before they enter into
the Sanctuary, John 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God: As the Blood of Christ cleanses from the
Guilt of our Sin, so it cleanses us from the Power of our Sin, before we are
to expect an admission into the Sanctuary: It was as well Water to cleanse, as
Blood to expiate.

6. The typifying of Christ in the Priesthood of Aaron and his Successors, High
Priests: Diverse of the Ceremonies, especially in the Consecration of them, were
merely relative to their natural pollutions* and the cleansing of them, Heb. 7
27. Offering Sacrifices first for their own Sins; such was the Sin-offering,
Levit. 9.7. Levit. 8.^4. Others in reference to their service, and designation
thereunto, and exercise thereof; as, their washing with Water, Levit. 8.6.
Their anointing with the holy Oil. Ibid. Verse 12. The Ram of Consecration.
Ibid. Verse 22. Their residence at the door of the Tabernacle, seven days.
Ibid. Verse 33. And some parts of his Garments: But there were some things that
in a special manner were typical of Christ.

1. The Breast Plate of Aaron, bearing the Names of the Children of Israel,
called the Breast Plate of Judgment, Exodus 28.29. And Aaron shall bear the
Names of the Children of Israel in the Breast Plate of Judgment when he goes
into the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually: importing not
only the nearness of the Church, and redeemed of Christ unto him, but also his
continual presenting of their Names, their Persons, in his Righteousness before
his Father.

2. The Plate of Gold upon the Mitre, engraven with, Holiness to the Lord,
Exodus 28.38. And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of their holy things, that they may be accepted before the Lord. As
our Persons are accepted by God in the Righteousness of Christ presented for
them to his Father; so our Services are accepted in the strength of the same
Mediation, Christ presenting our Prayers and Services to his Father, discharged
of those Sins and Defects, with which they are mingled as they come from us.

3. His Solemn Atonement, when he entered into the Holy of Holies, Levit. 16.
Wherein we shall observe,

1. A most special Reconsecration almost of all the things incident to that
Service before it was performed: the Priest was to make an Atonement for
himself by the Blood of the Bullock Verse 11. and for the Altar, Verse 18.
which signify that Purification of the Humane Nature of Christ from all Sin
Original and Actual; from all Sin even in his Conception, that so he might be a
fit High Priest Heb. 7.26. For such a high priest became us, who is Holy,
Harmless, Undefiled, Separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens.
The difference was this, Aaron, notwithstanding his first Consecration to his
Office, needed a new Atonement when he entered into the Holy of Holies, and
exercised that high Type of Christ's Ascension and Intercession: But Christ,
being once Consecrate, needed no new Consecration, Heb. 7.28. For the Law
makes men High Priests which have infirmities, but the Word of the Oath, which
was since the Law, makes the Son, who is Consecrated for evermore.

2. This was to be done but once in the year. Some services had frequent
iterations, but those special Services, that were but once in the Year, were
Types of those things that were to be done but once, though remembered yearly;
such was the killing of the Passover: Christ by one Offering has perfected
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.

3. This great Atonement not made but by Blood, Heb. 9.7. The high Priest
entered not without Blood, Livit. 26. And this Atonement was to be made upon the
Horns of the Altar, Levit. 16.18. viz. The Golden Altar of Incense Exodus 30.10.
Hence Christ called the Blood of sprinkling, Hebr. 12.24. The Offering, that
was to be used in this solemn Atonement, for so much as concerned the Sins of
the People were two Goats, which were to be presented before the Lord, at the
door of the Tabernacle, Levit. 16.7. And Lots to be cast, one for the Lord, the
other for the Scapegoat: the former was to be the Sin-offering for the People,
and his Blood to be brought within the Veil; Verse 23. And the other was to
bear the Iniquity of the Children of Israel, but to be sent into the
Wilderness. Ibid. Verse. 21. Although in the Sacrifice of Christ his Body only
died, and his Soul escaped, yet both were but one Sacrifice; he did bear our
sins in both; his Soul was heavy unto death, as well as his Body crucified; and
as God had prepared him a Body in order to this Sacrifice, Heb. 10.5. So he
made his Soul an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.10.

4. As after all this, the Priest entered into the most Holy, and presented this
Blood of Reconciliation before the Mercy Seat, and no Man was to be in the
Tabernacle when he goes in, Levit. 16.17. So Christ, having trodden alone the
Wine press of his Father's Wrath, Isaiah 63.3. Is entered into the Holy Place,
not made with Hands, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Hebr. 9.24.
And as the People did representatively, by their Mediator Aaron, pass into the
Holiest, so our High Priest has consecrated for us Access into the Holiest by
a new and living way, through the Veil of his Flesh, Hebr. 10.20. Who, as he is
our Advocate with the Father, John 2.1. To bear our Names before him, as the
High Priest did the Names of Israel; to present his own Blood before the Father
of Mercy, as the High Priest did the Blood of the Sin-Offering before the Mercy
Seat; to bear the Iniquity of our holy things, as the High Priest did upon his
Forehead: so likewise to present our Prayers to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.
Through him we have access by one Spirit unto the Father.

CHAP. VII. Of the Efficacy of the Satisfaction of Christ, and the Congruity of
it to right Reason.
THUS for the settling of our Minds in the Truth of Christ, we have considered
of those clear Prophecies and Types of Christ in the Old Testament: We now come
to consider some Particulars concerning this great work of our Redemption.

1. Wherein consists the Efficacy and Virtue of Christ's Mediation and
Sacrifice.

2. How it was effected. Wherein we shall consider,

1. His Satisfaction.

2. The Application of this Satisfaction, in reference to the Father, his
Intercession; in reference to us, his Word, and Spirit.

3. The Effects and Consequents of it.

1. The Efficacy of this Satisfaction consists in that free Acceptance by God
of this Sacrifice of Christ, as a Satisfaction for the Sins of his Elect, and
to be the price of the Inheritance thereby purchased for them, by an eternal
Contract between the Father and the Son: for otherwise it were impossible of
its own nature, that the Sacrifice of one could expiate for the sin of another.
The tenor of this great Covenant between God and Christ was that the Son should
take upon him Flesh, should fulfill the Law of our Creation, should suffer
death, and rise again, and that Almighty God would accept this as the
satisfaction for the sins of the righteous, and as the price of Eternal Life
for as many as should believe in him: This is effectually set forth by the Word
of Truth it self, John 6.37, 38, 39, 40. All that the Father gives me shall
come unto me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; for I came
down from heaven not to do my own Will, but the will of him that sent me; and
this is the Father's will that has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day: And
this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day: It is the Will of God, which is nothing but the Acceptaton of God: 1
John 4.10. He sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins: his sending was
his Acceptance. Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin:
there was the Acceptance of the Father: Again on the Son's part: Psalm. 40.6,
^. Burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou not re^uired: then said I, Lo, I
come. And the same Word of Truth that tells us, John 3.16. That God gave his
only begotten Son, tells us again, John 10.17, 18. I lay d^wn my life that I
may take it up again. And this susception of Christ and acceptance of God,
though we represent it to our selves under several Notions, yet it was one
indivisible and eternal Counsel of the Divine Majesty: Acts 2.23. Him being
delivered by the determinate counsel and fore knowledge of God: And this
Purpose and Counsel of his only the proceed of his eternal and free Love: So
God loved the world. John 3.16. In this was manifested the love of God toward
us, because he sent, etc. But could the Pardon of Man's Sin and his attaining
of Happiness be had at no lower a rate? could not God have freely forgiven the
one, and given the other without this great mixing of Heaven and Earth in this
wonderful Mystery of the Sacrifice of the Son of God?

As the original Resolution of all the Works and Counsels of God must be into
his own good pleasure, so especially of this: Ephesians. 1.5. He has predestined
us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his Will. Yet we do find some Congruity of Right Reason in
this course of Man's Redemption.

1. To magnify to all the World the Glory of his free Grace; Ephesians. 1.6. and
to take away all possibility of boasting in the subject of this Redemption:
Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves;
it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast. 1 Cor. 1.29.
That no flesh should glory in his presence. The Dependence that all Creatures,
especially Man, have upon the Creator, both in their Being and Perfection, does
most justly and reasonably challenge from the reasonable Creature, a free
Retribution of Acknowledgment of his Dependence upon the Goodness of God; and
it is an affection of the greatest Congruity that is imaginable: yet we see how
soon Man forgot that duty, and would be independent upon his Lord. Now when Man
had concluded all his Posterity under sin, then for God freely to give such a
Price of Redemption, as it magnifies the Freeness and Bounty of his Goodness,
so it does engage lapsed Man to the everlasting Acknowledgment of the Free
Grace of God in restoring him, that so God may be all in all.

2. To magnify the Exquisiteness of his Justice: In that dreadful Proclamation
of the Name of God, Exodus 34.6, 7. we find a strange mixture of his Mercy and
Justice: Forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, and that will by no means
clear the guilty: and both parts essential to his Name. Such a way then must be
for Man's Restoration that may evidence his Mercy in pardoning, as well as his
Justice in punishing Sin: Christ was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. And being made Sin
for us, was likewise made a Curse for us, Galat. 3.13. Here we have him
pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and sin of Men, and yet not sparing his own
Son when he bore the imputed guilt of our sins.

3. To magnify the glory of his Wisdom. The admirable Fabric of the World
speaks abundantly the Wisdom of our Creator; but all this was inferior and
subservient unto this great Business: 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the Power of God and
the Wisdom of God: 1 Pet. 1.22. A Business for the inquiry and speculation of
Angels, Ephesians. 3.10. The manifold Wisdom of God: the end of the Creation,
Colos. 1.16. All things created by him and for him, Colos. 1.20. to reconcile
all things to himself, whether they be things in Heaven, or things in Earth,
Ephesians. 1.10. That he might gather together in one all things in Christ. The sum
of this Mystery we have, 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifested in the flesh justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received into glory. In this great frame of Man's Redemption, we see the
Counsel of God strangely executed, his ancient Promises fulfilled, the Shadows
and Types of the Law unveiled, the breach of the righteous Law of God punished,
the Righteousness thereof fulfilled, the Justice of God satisfied, his Mercy
glorified, his Creature pardoned, justified, glorified; all those difficulties,
intricacies, and confusions, which came into the world by the sin of Man*
extricated, ordered, and salved; the even seeming Disappointments and
Frustrations of the Love of God to Man, and the glory of God in him, improved
to the higher manifestation both of his Love and Glory. This is the Lord's
doing, and let it ever be mavelous in our Eyes.

4. The Congruity of it, even to that nature that is in Man. The great God
could have overruled his Creature to his own Will by his own Power; but he
rather chooses to bring him up unto him by such means as are congruous to the
nature of his Creature, and let in a supernatural Light and Life by natural
means and instruments. The Son of God takes upon him Flesh, and in his Flesh
reveals the way and means of Life: 1 John 1.1. That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard; which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, etc. In this Flesh he evidenceth his Love to Mankind, suffers,
dies for them. As the Discovery of the Truth by him was most proportionable to
our manner of Understanding, so was that Love which he showed to us most
winning upon our Wills: In this is the love of God made manifest, that when we
were enemies Christ died for us: Greater love than this, shows no Man. Thus
he wins us with the cords of Love, and makes us willing in the day of his
Power, especially when this Light and Love is carried home to the Heart with
the strength of his own powerful Spirit.

Man is a compounded Creature of Senses, Passions, and Spirit; and though his
Excellence consist in the latter, and to the higher Perfection he attains, the
more spiritual he is; yet as he owes even the service of his more inferior
Faculties to his Lord, so they were not uselesly placed in him, even in
reference to his supreme End: there is the Excess, usually Man is inordinate in
the former, especially his Senses, and that is much evidenced by the proneness
of Man to Idolatry and sensual Worship, Exodus 32.1. Make us gods that may go
before us: this Malady the Wise God, that knows our frame, does not only cure
with severe Comminations and Prohibitions, but diverts it: he gave the Jews
outward Sacrifices and Observations; he has given us Christians his Image in
his Son, to divert us from Idolatry; his Love and Compassion revealed even in
our own flesh, to take up our Affections; and yet by these leads us up to a
higher pitch, John 6.63. Even by sensual Objects and Expressions he leads up to
spiritual: It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life. And this is
most evident in the whole Life of Christ; for though he still winds up his
Auditors to the high and spiritual conceptions, yet he is contented to use
those motives that work upon the Senses and Passions: Miracles, Tears,
Parables, Importunities, Signs, diversity of Tongues, Visions of Angels,
sensual Convictions to Thomas, John 20.27. Reach hither thy finger, and behold
my hands: and to all his Disciples, Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my feet,
that it is I my self. Thus, although the Power of God could have wrought his
Work in his by an immediate hand, he rather chooses such Means as may bear
Congruity with the humane and reasonable Nature of his reasonable Creatures.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great Work of our Redemption, What it is; How effected; and
for whom.
NOW we come to consider the great Work it self of our Redemption by Christ: 1.
What it is? 2. How effected? 3. For whom? 4. How applied? 5. The Effects
wrought by it.


1. For the first: Man, by his Sin incurred a Guilt which bound him over, 1. To
a necessity of losing the Favor and Presence of God, which was to be attained
and kept only by Obedience; 2. To a necessity of undergoing the wrath of God as
the just reward of his Disobedience. That Redemption that we now consider, must
supply both these.

1. There must be a deliverance from that Wrath, which was justly sentenced
upon Man for his Disobedience: And because it is impossible that the Punishment
could be removed, unless the Guilt were likewise removed, some course must be
taken to remove that Guilt: And because the Guilt of any one Offense does
everlastingly disable that person, that has contracted it, to avoid or expiate
it; and puts it wholly and everlastingly in the power of that Person that is
offended, to be judge of his own Satisfaction; for if it were imaginable, that
an offender could for the future as far out act his Duty, as in his Offense he
came short of it, it is not conceptible to be satisfactory without the
acceptance of him that is offended: hence it is, that unless our offended
Creator, to whom we owe our Obedience to the utmost extent of our Beings,
accept a Satisfaction for our Guilt, it is not possible, nor imaginable, that
the Guilt of any one Sin can receive any Expiation. It is true, he might have
released it of his absolute Power without any Satisfaction, but that he would
not do, as is before shown; then that he accepted any Satisfaction it is a
wonder of Mercy; but that he should propound it himself, and such a
Satisfaction as Christ, and to accept it, it is a Wonder of Wonders. And for
this reason the foundation of our Redemption is ever attributed to the Love of
God: 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us. 1
John 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent
his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. 2 Cor.
5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them: The very foundation of Man's Redemption from his Guilt and
Punishment by Christ, was the Love of God in sending, and accepting his Son's
Satisfaction.

2. But if we had only a Remission of our Guilt, though that might have removed
our Punishment, it had not cured our Loss: therefore to set Man right, there
must not only be the removal of the Wrath of God, which made us miserable, but
his Favor and Reconciliation, without which we could not be happy. And
because, though our Debt were paid, yet we could never come to the Favor and
Acceptance of God, unless his Image, the Rule which he planted in Man to attain
Happiness, were again restored to Man: and because that is impossible for us to
do, we by our Sin contracted Blindness as well as Guilt, and Weakness as well
as Blindness: and therefore as we must up to our Creator for Acceptance of
Satisfaction for our Guilt, so we must to him to provide our Righteousness.
Though we had found Christ Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. and Christ a Curse for us,
Gal. 3.13. before we could be delivered from our Curse; so had we found that we
had been still short of our Happiness, unless we had also found him as well our
Righteousness as our Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. As well our Victory, 1 Cor.
15.57. as our Deliverer from the Wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. As well our Life,
Colos. 3.4. as our Deliverance from Death; as well our Purifier as our
Redemption from Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. as well our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. as our
Price; as well the Price of our purchased Inheritance, as the Price of our
Ransom, 1 Cor. 6.20. As well our Translator into his own Kingdom as the
Deliverer from the power of Darkness, Colos. 1.13. And this, as the former, we
owe likewise in the original and foundation of it to the free Love and
Acceptance of God, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ of God is made Righteousness, and
therefore called the Righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3.19. Without this
free Love of God, as it is impossible to imagine a Mediator between God and
Man, so much more is it impossible to imagine how the Righteousness of that
Mediator should be the Righteousness of a guilty sinful Man: Our Redemption and
Salvation by Christ has its original and strength from the free Love and
Acceptance of God.

2. How this Redemption and Salvation was immediately effected: which was thus:
The Eternal Word took upon him the Nature of Man in the unity of one Person,
and in our Nature did fulfill that Righteousness, which we were bound to fulfill,
and did undertake take our Guilt, and underwent the Punishment due to that
Guilt, which was accepted of God as the Satisfaction for the sins of the Elect,
for the Remission of their sins; and his Righteousness accepted as the
Righteousness of those, for whom he so satisfied; whereby he did not only
abolish Death (the Curse due to our sins) but brought Life and Immortality to
light, 2 Timothy 1.10. This Truth we shall set down in these several Positions.

1 That Christ the Mediator was perfect God, the Eternal begotten Son of God,
one Eternal Essence with the Father: His Name, Isa. 9.6. The mighty God, the
Everlasting Father: Matthew. 1.23. Emmanuel. Matthew. 16.16. Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God, that great Confession of Peter asserted by Christ
himself: John 1.14. The Word was God, and the Word was made Flesh: John 10.30.
I and the Father are one: John 17.5. Glorify me with thy own self, with that
glory which I had with thee before the world was: John 14.9. ^e that has seen
me has seen the Father: 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in the flesh: 1 Timothy 6.15.
King of kings, and Lord of lords: Heb. 1.3. The brightness of the Father's
glory, and the express image of his person: Colos. 1.^5, 16. The image of the
invisible God by whom all things were created and consist: Colos. 2.9. In him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: Phil. 2.6. Being in the form of
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Acts 20.28. Ye are redeemed
with the Blood of God: John 8.59. Before Abraham was I am: And those speeches
of our Savior which seem to import an inequality between the Father and the
Son, are not to be understood in reference to this Nature of Christ; but in
reference to his Office of Mediator, or to his Person in reference to the
Humane Nature: John 14.28. Ye would rejoice, because I say I go to my Father,
for my Father is greater than I: For as the Divine Nature of Christ was never
disjoined from the Father, so it went not to him; consequently my Father is
greater than I, must be spoken in reference to him under that Nature, which
was, To go to the Father.

2. That Christ was perfect Man, consisting of a reasonable Soul: Matthew. 26.38.
My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: and of a humane Body, even
after his Resurrection: Luke 24.39. A spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye
see me have: and this Humane Nature subject to natural Passions: he was
sorrowful, hungry, sensible of pain; and Heb. 4.15. tempted in all things as we
are, yet without sin: he was subject to the Infirmities of our Nature, not to
the Distempers of our Nature. This Humane Nature he took of the Virgin Mary,
and so was truly the Seed of Abraham: But this by a miraculous Procreation by
the immediate Power of God, Matthew. 1.20. and that without the contagion or
guilt of any sin: As he did no sin, nor guile was found in his mouth, 1 Pet.
2.22. so he knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. And if he had had any Guilt of his own,
then he could not have been a fit Sacrifice or Priest for us, 1 Pet. 1.19. A
Lamb without spot or blemish: Heb. 7.26. For such a high priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, etc.

3. That both these Natures were united in the Person of Christ our Mediator,
yet without any confusion of Natures, and the conjunction so strict, that in
both Natures he was but one Mediator. And hence it is, that many of those
things that were properly to be attributed to one Nature, and not to the other,
are affirmed of the Person of Christ, under the Notion proper to the other
Nature of Christ: ( Acts 20.28.) Ye are redeemed with the blood of God: there
the act of the Humane Nature is attributed to the Person of Christ in the
Notion of the Divine Nature: Again, John 3.13. No man has ascended into
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in
Heaven, yet that Nature of the Son of man was not then in Heaven: But so strict
is this personal Union, that whatsoever is affirmed concerning one Nature, may
be affirmed of the whole Person of the Mediator; but yet so distinct are the
Natures that nothing that is affirmed concerning one Nature can be affirmed of
the other Nature: the eternal Son of God dyed for us, but the Deity of the Son
of God dyed not: Herein we therefore conclude,

1. That both Natures were united into one Person.

2. That both Natures thus united made up but one Mediator, and so both
Natures united into one Office, as well as into one Person.

3. That notwithstanding the uniting of both Natures into one Person and
Office, yet are there acts or things that properly belong to one Nature, which
do not belong to the other: thus the Father is said to be greater than the Son,
John 14.28. in reference to his humane Nature: Mark 13.32. But of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son,
but the Father: For although the Natures were united in one Person, yet it is
not imaginable that the fullness of the Divine Nature was communicated to the
humane; for that were to make the humane Nature of Christ infinite, and not so
much assumed unto as converted into the Divine Nature; and then it had been
impossible he could have suffered, or have had any Eclipse of the light of his
Fathers Countenance, as he did in his bitter cry upon the Cross; at which time
without all question there was not nor could be any intermission of Communion
between the Divine Nature of Christ and his Father: So in his suffering his
humane Nature only suffered.

4. Although the sufferings and actions of his humane Nature were not to be
attributed to his Divine Nature, yet they are to be attributed to the whole
Person of Christ; for the Union of both Natures in one Person, added that
invaluable value even to the sufferings and actions properly attributable to
his humane Nature: the man Christ was the offering, but the God Christ was the
Altar, that sanctified that offering; for had not the Divine Nature added that
value to his Righteousness and Death, it had been impossible that it could be
meritorious; the Death of a most innocent Person may bring a Guilt upon them
that inflict it, not a merit for another unless, clothed with a higher worth
than Innocence.

4. That there was a Necessity that Christ should have both Natures, and both
Natures thus united in one Person: This includes three Necessities.

1. The necessity of an Humane Nature. It is true, that God could of his
absolute power have restored man without the intervention of any thing but his
own Will: but as in all his works he holds such a course, as his Wisdom,
Goodness, and Justice are conspicuous and legible, so especially in this
excellent work of our Redemption there is an admirable order and congruity in
all the passages of it.

The Children of Adam had a threefold Union in him: a Specifical Union, as
being of the same specifical Nature with him; a Virtual Union, being all
included in him; and a Representative Union in that great Covenant of Nature,
which Adam made with his Creator: and so all partaked of the consequences of
his Disobedience: Death went over all, 1 Cor. 15.4, 22. As in Adam all die, so
in Christ shall all be made alive: There was therefore an Union of Natures
between the Redeemer and Redeemed, Heb. 2.16, 17. For verily he took not on him
the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham: wherefore it beh^ved him to be
in all things like unto his Brethren, etc. There is likewise a Virtual and
Representative Union between the Redeemer and Redeemed: and this could not have
been without that Natural Union which was between them, though not merely by
it, as shall appear hereafter; hence Christ and his Church one Body, Romans 12.5.
1 Cor. 12.12, 27. Ephesians. 1.23. Colos. 2.19. they grow up into him in all
things, Ephesians. 4.13. By Virtue of this Union it is that when Christ being made
sin for us was crucified, our Old man was crucified with him, Romans 6.6. the
same Spirit that quickened Christ quickens us to the first Resurrection, Romans
8.11. and to the second Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.20. they are Sons and Heirs of
God by Virtue of this Union, Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.7. their Afflictions fill up the
measure of Christ's Afflictions, Colos. 1.24. and he reckons their sufferings
his, and Compassions to them esteemed as done to to him, Matthew. 25.44. their
Union to the Father is through their Union to him, which is one with the
Father, John 17.22, 23. That they may be one, as we are one: I in them and they
in me. Now though it is certain, that this Union grows by another means than
the bare conjunction of our Nature, yet here is the congruity: Christ is united
unto us by our Nature, we to him by his Spirit: so that the Unity of Nature
with us holds a congruity with that Union which was between the first Adam and
us.

Again such was the Will of God, that the Expiation of our Sins should not be
without a Sacrifice, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of Blood no remission: It was
necessary therefore that he should have a Body prepared him, which, might be a
Sacrifice for sin.

Again we see in all the works of God, though he was at his Pleasure to
interpose his own immediate Power, yet he uses means con natural to the
Subject upon which he works: And hence it is, that our Redeemer works upon all
that is Rational in man: In his Teaching he taught convincingly, with sound
Reason; in his Persuasions with Tears, with Miracles, with Promises, with
Threatenings, with a free laying down of his Life for us, when we were Enemies:
These could not be communicated in a way proportionable to our Nature, but from
him that bore our Nature.

2. The necessity of the Divine Nature: Questionless the humane Nature of
Christ had as exact a regularity and innocence, as in the Creation was placed
in Adam; but that could not be capable alone of a Merit beyond it self: there
was a necessity of a personal Dignity in Christ, more than could be found in
the created Nature of man, to make his Righteousness and Sufferings meritorious
for others; for it must be a Righteousness more than commensurate to all the
unrighteousness of Men, and a Satisfaction more than commensurate to all the
Demerit of men: This had been impossible, if that Righteousness and that
Satisfaction had received their value from any thing below the Divine Nature;
hence is that Expression, Acts 20.28. Take heed, etc. to feed the Church if
God, which he has purchased with his own Blood.

And as it was necessary in respect of his Righteousness and Satisfaction, so
in respect of the continued Exigences of his people, Ephesians. 2.18. through him
we have access by one Spirit unto the Father: He could not be a perfect
Mediator unless he had a clear Acquaintance with all the Exigences of his
people, unless he could be present with them in all their Fears, despondences,
Temptations, and Necessities; which requires, the co-existence of the Divine
Nature.

5. We say that the Eternal word did in the appointed time take flesh of the
Virgin into the Unity of one Person. This was that infinite Motion of the Love
of God, viz. First to become Man for us, and then to become Sin for us. The
manner of the Incarnation of Christ we cannot discover: every work of God is
past our discovery, much more this admirable work. And by this Birth of Christ
he took upon him the Nature of man, but not any Original or inherent Sin or
Guilt, because by a miraculous Generation: the very substance was purified,
Luke 1.35. that holy thing which shall be born of thee, etc. and this very
Birth of Christ was part of his Satisfaction, because part of his Humiliation,
Phil. 2.5. He made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men, Heb. 2.9. was made lower than the
Angels: So that in his Conception and Birth we find, 1. His Satisfaction; 2.
His Righteousness.

6. We say, The whole Life of Christ, till his Passion, had these three parts
in it, viz. Satisfaction by way of Suffering; 2. Satisfaction by way of
Righteousness; and 3. Instruction: and these three were the great Ends of his
Life.

1. ^or his Suffering part: Christ, being born without Sin, and perfectly
framed to the image of God, could not in Justice be liable to any of those
consequences that fell upon Adam or his posterity by Sin, because every
Affliction of what kind soever, is but a return upon the Creature of the Fruit
of his obliquity: therefore since we have concluded him without Sin, he could
not be of himself meritoriously obnoxious to any thing that had the Nature of
Punishment in it; therefore we must conclude, that those inconveniences of his
Life were Satisfactory. It is time those defects of humane Nature, which are
not only consequents of Sin, but have in them the Nature of Sin, as disorder of
Passions, fell not upon Christ, but such as were merely consequents of Sin:
Christ did suffer in his Life; he became of no Repu^ation, and took upon him
the form of a Servant, Ephesians. 2.7. Subject to scorns, the Carpenters Son,
Matthew. 14.55. a Friend to Publicans and Sinners, Math. 11.19. casting out
Devils by Beelzebub Matthew. 12.24. a Samaritan, and having a Devil, John 8.48. a
Friend to Publicans and Sinners, Matthew. 11.19. sometimes ready to be stoned,
John 8.59. had not where to lay his Head, Matthew. 8.20. and all this
meritorious, 2 Cor. 8.9. for our sakes became poor, that we through his Poverty
might be made rich: tempted in the Wilderness by the Devil. And these
Sufferings in the Life of Christ, as they were part of his Satisfaction, so
they are part of our Comfort, Heb. 2.18. For that he himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 4.15. a High
Priest touched with the feeling of our Infirmities: hence are those passionate
Expressions of his Compassion even to his infirm Members, Isa. 40.11. He shall
gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young. Isa. 42.3. A bruised Reed shall he not break.
Isa. 63.9. In all their ^fflictions he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his
Presence saved them. Matthew. 1.29. Come unto me, etc. for I am meek and lowly of
heart.

2. The second great End of Christ's incarnation was that he might fulfill the
Law and Will of God as well in the Command, as in the Type, Matthew. 5.19. I came
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it: For as it was requisite that he
should be free from Sin, so it was necessary he should fulfill all
Righteousness: and as the Imputation of our sins unto him, is that which
cleanses us from the Guilt of our sin, so the imputation of this Righteousness
unto us is that which makes our Persons accepted in the sight of God: hence he
is called, The Lord of Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. And Christ of God is made unto
us Righteousness, as well as Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Grace reigned through
Righteousness by Christ Jesus, Romans 5.21. and the imputation of this
Righteousness is that which perfects our Peace with God, Romans 5.1. By the
Righteousness of one the free Gift came upon all to Justification, Romans 5.18.
And thus, though it were the Righteousness of the humane Nature, yet it is
called the Righteousness of God by Faith, Phil. 3.9. And this Righteousness of
Christ was that exact Conformity to the Will of God, in which God was well
pleased with us, as well as him. Now it was impossible for any to fulfill that
Righteousness, which was the Righteousness of a rat^onal and humane Nature; but
he that had a rational and humane Nature: as the Righteousness of any thing
below the humane Nature, bears not a proportion to the Righteousness of a
humane Nature, such are the Regularities of the sensitive and vegetative
Nature; so the Righteousness of any Nature above the humane Nature could not be
suitable for us: Thus the Righteousness of an Angelical Nature, is not
proportionable to the exigence of our Natures; the Law which was given to our
Natures cannot square with theirs, for that Law was fitted to our whole
Compositum; therefore it was necessary for Christ to fulfill such a
Righteousness as might hold proportion to those for whom it was intended, and
this could be no other than that Righteousness which must be performed in the
Life of an humane Nature.

3. The third great work of Christ's Life was for an Instruction and that
double:

1. Of Example: In those several Virtues that are proper for the humane Nature;
especially in Meekne^s, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek: In Humility
and Obedience, ^hil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you as was in Christ, who
being, etc. humbled himself and became obedient: Forgetfulness of Injuries,
Colos. 3.13. Forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave you: Patience in
suffering, 1 Pet. 2.21. For even hereunto are ye called, because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an Example that ye should follow his Example, who
when he was reviled, etc. And this conformity to the Practical part of Christ's
Life is called the Mind of Christ, 1 Pet. 4.1. The following of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.1. The Life of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.11. That the Life of Christ Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal Flesh: The being changed into his Image, 2 Cor.
3.18. The growing up into him in all things, even to the measure of the Stature
of his fullness, Ephesians. 4.13, 15. Now this Exemplary Life could not be given us,
but in our own Nature, and yet without it we had been without a most rational
means of pleasing God, and so arriving at our Happiness: the Pattern of the
Tabernacle, that Moses saw in the Mount, was of as great use to him in framing
it as the particular Dictamina concerning it.

2. Of Doctrine: The Will of God concerning man was in effect obliterated;
Partly, by the corruption and decay of our Nature by sin; Partly, by the just
Judgment of God in withdrawing himself and that light which Man had abused: And
as in the Principles of Truth, man became defective, so in the Principles of
Practice, Romans 1.21, 26. God gave them up to vile affections, insomuch that
among the very Jews who had the very Counsels of God among them, the very
Principles of their known Laws were adulterated and corrupted. Now for this
purpose was Christ born, as he testifies of himself, John 18.37. To this end
was I born, and for this end came I into the World, that I should bear Witness
unto the Truth; and as he was the Light of the World, as he affirms of himself,
1 John 8.12. so he was furnished with a Doctrine from God, John 7.16. My Doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me, John 7.16. and with a Power of delivery
beyond the Power of a mere Man, John 7.46. Never man spoke like this man, and
Matthew. 7.29. He taught as one having Authority, and not as the S^ribes.

And thus we may observe, that although the great God could have taught by a
Miracle by his absolute power, yet he chooses to reveal his truth to his
Creature by means apposite to our Nature: the Son of God clothes himself with
Flesh and Blood, and teaches Man the way to his Happiness, as one Man teaches
another, though we must not exclude that powerful Cooperation of his mighty
Spirit, that strikes upon our Spirits, even when his Word strikes upon our
(...). And herein the Pharisees spoke truth even against their own Wills,
Matthew. 22.26. Thou teach the way of God in Truth. For God in these last
times has spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.2. and revealed unto us the whole
Counsel and Will of his Father concerning us: For he spoke not of himself, but
the Father which sent him gave him Commandment what he should say, John 12.49.
And that this Doctrine of his might receive a Testimonial from Heaven it was
(...) with Miracles, and with suffrages from Heaven, John 12.30. This Voice
came not because of me, but (...) your sakes. Now among diverse Particulars of
the (...) of Christ, we may observe these great Masterpieces.

1. Inst^ucting us, that there is a higher end for the Sons of Men to arrive
unto than temporal Felicity in this Life* viz. Blessedness expressed in those
several Expressions of his, Matthew. 5.3, 4. etc. The Kingdom of Heaven, Comfort,
Fullness, sight of God, etc. And in order to this great Doctrine are those
several Doctrines of the Resurrection, the last Judgment, the Immortality of
the Soul; truths that the whole World either never knew, or had forgotten, or
doubted.

2. Instructing in the true Way to attain this Blessedness, teaching us that
Righteousness accepted of God consists not in mere outward observations, but in
the integrity and sincerity of the Heart, and hereby rubs off all those false
glosses that the formallest of Men had put upon the Law of God: teaches that
the Love of God is the fulfilling of God's Commandments; and the reason is,
because this Love of God, if it be sincere, will engage the whole Man to the
exact Observance of what he requires; those abstruse practical Truths of
Depending upon God's Providence, Self-denial, Loving our Enemies, Rejoicing in
Affliction, all flowing from the high Point of the Love of God: this is the Law
of Christ, Gal. 6.2.

3. In revealing that which is the only Means to attain the two former, even
that great Mystery of the Gospel, that was hid with God in Christ: A Man might
rove at the two former, though the World had almost lost them both; but this
latter was a mystery, that the Angels themselves knew not: 1 Cor. 2.16. Who
has known the Mind of the Lord, that he way instruct him? But we have the mind
of Christ: which contains the whole Counsel of God touching Man: this is that
which Paul calls all the Counsel of God. Acts 20.27. and Truth it self has
given us the Breviary of it: John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me,
that every one that sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day: These great Truths of so great
Concernment to the Children of Men, yet so far removed from their
Understanding, were the third Business of the Life of Christ.

7. That Christ, bearing the sins of his People, did suffer the wrath of God
for the Remission of their sins. The sufferings of Christ did only befall his
Humane Nature, for his Divine Nature was impassible; yet in respect of that
strict union of both Natures in one Person; they received a value from that
divine and impassible Nature: for the union of both Natures in one Person,
though it did not communicate the Conditions of either Nature to the other, did
communicate the conditions of either Nature to the same Person, as is before
shown.

This Suffering of Christ had these several Attributions,

1 It was a Voluntary Suffering, and yet not without a Necessity: The Suffering
was Voluntary, even in respect of his Humane Nature, yet Obediential to the
Counsel and Purpose of God, Matthew. 17.21. he must go and suffer. Luke 24 26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things? Acts 2.23. Him being delivered
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God: Yet was this most
Voluntary in Christ: Voluntary in the original undertaking of this Work, in
that Eternal Susception by the Eternal Word; Voluntary in the discharge of that
Undertaking in the Humane Nature, the Humane Nature of Christ pursuing and
following the will of Eternity: Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized
withal, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished? And even when the
Humane Nature did according to the Law of Nature, shrink from its own
dissolution, yet he presently corrects that natural Passion: John 12.27.
Father, save me from this hour: But for this cause came I to this hour. Father,
glorify thy Name. Matthew. 26.39. O my Father, if it be p^ssible, let this cup
pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will: whiles his
Humanity trembles and startles at the Business he goes about; yet his Love to
his Church, his Obedience to his Father, his Faithfulness to his Undertaking,
breaks through that natural reluctance. Now the Voluntariness, yet obedience of
Christ's suffering, both consistent, appears, Joh. 10.15. 1 John 3.16. I lay
down my life for my sheep. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my
self: yet Isa. 53.6, 10. All we like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all: it pleased the Lord to bruise him: when
thou shall make his soul an offering for sin. Psalm. 2.7, 8. As he made himself
of no reputation, and humbled himself, so he became obedient to death. Titus
2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity: yet
John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
Again, 1 John 4.9. Herein perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his
life for us: Yet Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all. 1 John 4.9. God sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Psalm.
40.7. Then said I, lo, I come: yet he came not without a Mission: I delight to
do thy will, O my God. The sum of all then is, the Love of God to Mankind was
the absolute and original foundation of our Redemption: the same act of this
Love proposed and undertook the Redemption of Mankind voluntarily and freely in
this way contrived by the Eternal Wisdom and Counsel of God: The Humane Nature
of Christ in exact and voluntary submission unto this Counsel performed it: If
it had been Voluntary and not in Conformity to the Will of God, whose Will
could be the only measure of his Satisfaction, it could never have been
satisfactory: And if it had been merely Passive, it could not have been an
Obedience, which requires a free Submission and Conformity to the Will of him
that injoyns, without which it could never be meritorious.

2. It was a Meritorious and Expiatory Suffering; for by that Eternal Covenant
between the Father and the Son, he was to bear the sins of his Elect, and under
that Condition, it was necessary that he should suffer for them: It was the
Love of the Father to accept of Christ to bear the sins of the People; and it
was his Justice that disclosed his Anger against Sin, although his Son did but
represent the sinner, and yet the merit of this Suffering has its strength
from the free acceptance of his Father, according to his Eternal Covenant with
his Son.

3. From hence it follows, that it is a Full and Perfect Satisfaction. The
reason is, because the measure of the Satisfaction is the Acceptance of the
offended God: for it appears before, that there can be no other Measure or Rule
to him but his own Will, though that be a most Just Will. Now that God was
fully satisfied and pleased in Christ, we have the Testimony of Angels: Luke
2.14. On earth peace, good will to men: Of Christ, John 17.4. when by way of
Anticipation, he says, I have finished the work that thou gave me to do:
which he fully perfected, when John 19.30. he said, It is finished: By the
eternal Father, by a voice from Heaven, Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased: By the Spirit of Truth, Heb. 10.14. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them that be sanctified. And from the sufficiency of
this satisfaction does arise that assurance in which the Apostle glories, Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, etc. it is Christ
that died: And hence called the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12.2.

4. It was an Universal Suffering: The sin of Man had an universal Contagion
both upon his Body and Soul, and an universal Guilt, and consequently an
universal Curse went over both his Soul and Body; In the day that thou eatest,
thou shall die the death. This death extended to his Body and Soul, and the
whole Compositum, his very Life was mingled with Death, both in Sense and
Expectation. And answerable to the extent of this Contagion, Guilt, and Curse,
was the extent of Christ's Satisfaction, who was figured by the first Adam:
Romans 5.14. His Life was mingled with Pain: Isa. 53. A Man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: in his Body he suffered a cursed and a painful Death:
and though the nailing to the Cross was not sufficient naturally to have made a
separation of the Body and Soul, no more than of the two Thieves, yet he had
those other Concurrences to his dissolution that they had not, viz. the bearing
of his Cross, John 19.17. His scourging, and Crown of Thorns: Matt. 27.26, 29.
But especially the suffering of his Soul: the very anticipation of this
suffering made him even to shrink at it, John 12.27. Now is my soul troubled:
what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. And this, like the Trumpet
upon Sinai, waxed louder and louder, till his very dissolution; witness his
affirmation: In the Garden of Gethsemane, Matthew. 26.28. My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto death: and that astonishing Cry of the Son of God upon the
Cross, Matthew. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His sorrow and
the suffering of his Soul in the Garden, that was so strange, as to cause a
sweat of Blood, had been enough, without the interposition of any outward
force, to have caused his dissolution, for it was a sorrow unto death, had not
God supported his Humane Nature with a supernatural aid, Luke 22.43. An angel
from heaven strengthened him: and when the Divine Dispensation withdrew that
extraordinary supply, he died: Matthew. 27.50. He cried with a loud voice, and
gave up the ghost: If it be asked, What was the cause of this extremity of
suffering in the Soul of Christ: we say, as he willingly took upon him to stand
in our room to bear our sins, and to become Sin for us; so he felt the wrath of
God against that sin, which he by way of imputation did bear: as he bare our
sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. and God laid on him the iniquity
of us all: and as he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. so he trod the
wine press of his Fathers wrath for that time, Isa. 63.3. and was made a Curse
for that Sin. The Guilt that he had was not inherent but imputed, but the sense
of that wrath of God against Sin, was not imputed, but real and inherent. If it
be inquired, How could such a sense of the wrath of God be consistent with that
union that was between his Natures in one Person? such Knowledge is too
wonderful for me: Nevertheless thus far we may say, that as in the highest
extremity of the suffering of his Soul, there was no interruption of that
strict Union between the Humane and Divine Nature, yet so it pleased God to
order this great Work, that the actual communication of the presence of the
Divine Nature, was to the sense of the Humane Nature eclipsed; the Sun still
remained in the Firmament, yet the Light thereof Eclipsed at the time of the
death of Christ, Matthew. 27.45. to shadow to us that interruption of Vision
which was in our Redeemer, that so his Soul might be made an Offering for Sin,
as well as his Body: If it be inquired, How it came to pass, that a perpetual
Punishment due to Man, was expiated by a temporary suffering of Christ? we
answer, Man's suffering must needs be perpetual, because it could never be
satisfactory, Matthew. 5.26. Thou shall not come out, till thou payest the
uttermost farthing: But Christ's suffering was satisfactory, and the
satisfaction being made, the suffering could not continue: 1. It was a
Voluntary Suffering. 2. An Innocent Suffering. 3. A Suffering of the Son of
God. 4. An Accepted Satisfaction by the offended God.

8. That Christ, having suffered death, did arise again from death the third
day. This was that which the Prophet David foretold of Christ, Psalm. 16.10.
Thou will not leave my soul in grave: by Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, etc. He shall prolong his days, he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he poured out his soul unto death: prefigured by
Jonah, and so expounded by Christ himself, Matthew. 12.40. and predicted by
himself, Matthew. 20.13. And the third day shall rise again: attested by an
Angel, Matthew. 28.6. He is risen, as he said. And this Truth was that which was
the great Means of Conversion, and therefore received the greatest opposition
of Devils and Men, Acts 2.24. Acts 4.10.33. Acts 5.30. And as it was the
greatest Caution of the High Priest, if it had been possible, to falsify the
Prediction of Christ concerning his Resurrection, Matthew. 27.63, 64. So this was
the Truth that they most persecuted, Acts 25.19. And being a Truth of that
great concernment, was most evidenced by the Evangelists and Apostles, whose
Business it was to be Witnesses of the Resurrection, Acts 1.22. 1 Cor. 15. per
totum; for by this he was declared to be the Son of God with Power, Romans 1.4.
And this Resurrection of Christ, must of necessity follow his Satisfaction: he
had taken upon him our Sin, and therefore must undergo the Wages due unto it,
viz. Death: in the very instant of his Death he had completed his Sacrifice
and Satisfaction, when he said upon the Cross, It is finished, John 19.30. Yet
as it was necessary for him to lie under Death so long as might convince the
Reality of it, so it was impossible for him to lie longer: the Debt was paid,
and he could be no longer detained Prisoner, Acts 2.24. Whom God has raised
up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible he should be
holden of it. And this Resurrection of Christ, as it was by the Power of God, 2
Cor. 13.4. He lives by the Power of God, Ephesians. 1.19. The working of his
mighty Power, or by the Eternal Spirit, Romans 8.11. The Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, so it was the effect of his Justice, the Price
of Man's Redemption being paid, he was now by the Eternal Covenant of God to
prolong his days. And hence he is said to be justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy
3.16. Even that Spirit, that raised him up from the dead, did at the same time
proclaim the compleatness of his Satisfaction, and justify the fulfilling of
his Undertaking. If Christ had not risen, there had of necessity followed these
two Consequences, either of which had left us in as bad case as he found us.

1. It had been then impossible, that his Death had been a sufficient
Sacrifice. If he had been detained under Death, the Guilt had still continued
undischarged. And hence, 1 Cor. 15.17. If Christ be not raised, your faith is
vain, ye are yet in your sins. As if he should have said, If there be no
Satisfaction made for your Sins, ye are still in them; If Christ be detained
under Death, it is evident, the Satisfaction is not made; for the Curse of the
Law continues undischarged, and consequently the Guilt continues unacquitted:
and hence Christ's Sacrifice was justified by his Resurrection, so are we. Romans
4.25. Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification. And this Resurrection of Christ was his Victory over Guilt, and
Death, and Hell. 1 Cor. 15.57. The Victory given through Christ. Colos. 2.15.
Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he then made a show of them openly.

2. It had been impossible that the Members of Christ could have the benefit,
either of the first or second Resurrection: for by reason of that Union with
their Head they partake of all those conditions whereof their head
participates: Crucified with him, Gal. 2.20. Dead to sin, and buried with him,
Romans 6.3, 6, 8. Live with him, Galat. 2.20. Rise together with him to newness
of Life, Romans 6.4. Romans 8.11, 12. Planted unto the likeness of his
Resurrection, Romans 6.5. Ascended with him, Ephesians. 2.6. and shall rise again to
eternal Happiness, by virtue only of his Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.14.

9. That Christ after his Resurrection did Ascend up into Heaven, where his
humane Nature is clothed with Power and Glory, and Immortality. The Death of
our Savior was attested by his three days keeping his Grave: and the
Resurrection was attested by all the Evidences that incredulity it self could
require for satisfaction, because the matter of the greatest difficulty to
believe, and which being admitted made the whole truth concerning him easily
credible. Therefore for the clearing of this truth, as he spent forty days to
conquer the Temptations of the Devil in the Wilderness, so he spent forty days
after his Resurrection to subdue the infidelity of mankind to the belief
thereof: And during that time used all the sensible Convictions that might be
for the confirming of their belief, that the very Body of Christ reassumed his
Soul and Life. 1. The Body removed out of the Sepulcher, Luke 24.5. Why seek ye
the Living among the Dead? 2. He appeared unto them, and because those
appearances were accompanied with some Circumstances that might breed jealousy
that it was a finer substance than a Body, as his sudden vanishing out of their
sight, Luke 24.3^. His sudden presenting of himself among them when the Doors
were shut, Luke 24.36. John 20.19. Yet to convince that suspicion, he exhibits
his hands and his side, eats with them, converses with them about forty days,
Acts. 1.3. The Body of Christ, being by the power of God made of an Angelical,
though not spiritual substance, is taken up into Heaven, Mark 16.19. Luke
24.57. Acts 16.9. where he sits at the right hand of Glory. Acts 3.21. Heb.
10.12. Heb. 12.2. This was that which was figured by the High Priest's entering
into the Holy of Holies, Heb. 9.24. and extended to the very whole humane
Nature of Christ: the same that ascended is he that descended, Ephesians. 4.9. This
was the saying of Christ himself, John 20.17. I am not yet ascended to my
Father: but go tell my Brethren, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, etc.
And this is that that our Savior so often inculcates, That the Son of Man
shall come in his Glory, etc. Matthew. 25.31. Matthew. 26.64. To insinuate that
that very humane Nature, by which he is denominated Man, should continue in
immortality, and appear the last day for the judgment of the World. And as by
the power of God Man in his purity had been perpetuated to immortality, and so
he shall be in his Resurrection, so by the power of God the Life of Christ's
humane Nature shall be perpetuated to everlasting, 2 Cor. 13.4. He lives by
the power of God. And this Body of Christ, as it is filled with immortality, so
it is filled with Glory, we shall be made like unto his glorious Body, Phil.
3.21.

10. That Christ having perfected the work of Man's redemption, and ascended
into Heaven exercises a threefold Office for the benefit of his Church and
People.

1. Of Power of Dominion. This was that Inauguration of Christ in his Kingdom,
Psalm. 110.1. Sit thou at my right Hand, Isaiah 53.10. Therefore will I divide
him a Portion with the great, etc. because he has poured out his Soul unto
Death. And therefore after his Resurrection he tells his Disciples, Matthew.
28.18. That all power is given him both in Heaven and in Earth, and is that
which is so often called his sitting at the right hand of his Father, Ephs.
1.20. and his making both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. And this Kingdom,
Dominion and Power of Christ shall continue until the end, when he shall
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24,
27.

2. The Communication of his Spirit: The Power of the Spirit of God is in all
his Creatures, and especially in Men; and all Creatures in their actings are
but instrumental to the Spirit of God: But by Christ the Power of that Spirit
is communicated in a more special and peculiar way; and is that very Power
whereby their Acts and Motions to eternity are acted, and was not communicated
in that perfection till after Christ's Ascension, John 16.7. If I go not away,
the Comforter will not come. This Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of Illumination
and Instruction, John 14.26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, 1 John 2.27. The
anointing which is from above teaches you all things, a Spirit of Conviction
and Redargution, John 16.8. a Spirit of Renovation and Cleansing, Tit. 3.5. a
Spirit of Strength, Ephesians. 3.16. Strengthened with his might by his Spirit, a
Spirit of Assurance, Ephesians. 1.13. Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise, a
Spirit of quickening, Romans 8.11. quickened by his Spirit, that dwells in you;
a Spirit of Adoption and Attestation, Romans 18.15, 16. We nave received the
Spirit of Adoption; a Spirit of Supplication and Intercession, Romans 8.26, 27.
The Spirit it self makes Intercession for us: The Spirit of defense against
Temptation, Ephesians. 6.17. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: A
Spirit of Union: There is a double and reciprocal means of Union between Christ
and his people. 1. By Faith, whereby Christ is united unto them, Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ might dwell in your Hearts by Faith. 2. By the Spirit, whereby we
are united unto him, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, Ephesians. 2.20. In whom also ye are builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit, 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell
in him and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. And this Union with Christ was that
which he so much desired of his Father for his Church, John 17.22, 23. And as
by Faith all that Satisfaction and Righteousness, which was in him, was made
ours, so all our Actions proceeding from this Spirit are in truth his, both in
virtue and acception with the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we have access
by one Spirit to the Father, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. And by reason of this Union with Christ, as he is a Son, so are we Sons,
Romans 8.17. Joint Heirs with him, and Galat. 4.7. an Heir of God through Christ:
thus we apprehend Christ, and are apprehended of him, Phil. 3.12.

3. The third effect and end of Christ's Ascension is his perpetual
Intercession in the Presence of the Glory of God for his People. Christ in his
humane Nature was our Sacrifice, and that was but one Sacrifice, and but once
offered, Heb. 9.28.10.14. And Christ, who in both Natures was the Priest that
offered that Sacrifice, Heb. 9 14, 25. Who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot to God, though he finished that part of his Priestly
Office while he was with us, yet as the Priesthood of Christ was for ever
according to the order of Melchisedec, so the exercise of that Priesthood still
continues, Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the Presence of God for us. And as by his Spirit, which he has given to his
people, he makes Intercession in them, for we have Access to the Father by his
Spirit, so by himself he makes Intercession for us, Heb. ^.25. Wherefore he is
able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make Intercession for them. 1 John 2.1. And if any man sin, we have
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And it is the strength
of this Intercession of Christ, that makes the Prayers of his People effectual,
John 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will grant it:
That Incense, that was mingled with the Prayers of the Saints, Revel. 8.3. And
here let (...) ever admire the endless goodness of God: Man is dead in
trespasses and sins; God sends his Son into the World with a Ransom, and with
Life; John 1.4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men: But for all
this, the World still continues in death and darkness, John 1.10. The world
knew him not: He therefore by his Providence conveys Truth to their Ears; and
by his Spirit carries Life and Light into their Souls, and conquers the
darkness and death that is in us: And when he has rescued us from ruin, he
still leaves that Spirit of his to contest with our Corruptions, to discover
his Mind, to form us every day more and more to our lost Image, to supplicate
and communicate our wants and fears: and though those supplications of ours are
mingled with imperfections, distrusts, doubtings and distractions, yet he that
knows the mind of his own Spirit, takes these Prayers of ours, and cleanses
them from the dross that hangs about them, mingles his own Merit with them,
presents them to his Father in the strength of his own Intercession, and so
bears the iniquity of their holy things: Nay, when we vex and grieve that Agent
of his* that he has left in us to perfect our Blessedness, and oftentimes
stifle his motions, and have scarce the sign of Life left in us, he
nevertheless makes Intercession for us, Isa. 53.12. He made intercession for
the transgressors.

3. The next inquiry is, for whom the Satisfaction of Christ was?

1. Christ did Intentionally lay down his Life for the sins of the Elect of
God, John 10.15. I lay down my life for my sheep: And these Sheep of Christ, as
they were not confined to one time or age of the World, so neither to one
Nation or company of People, John 10.16. Other sheep I have, which are not of
this fold, viz. of the Nation of the Jews. And thus some understand, 1 John 22.
And not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world, using [us] and
the [world] as a contradistinction of the Gentiles from the Jews, to whom, it
seems, he wrote.

2. As Christ died Intentionally for the Redemption of the Elect, so he died
Effectually for them; and God has so ordered his Counsels, that those, that he
has appointed to eternal Life, shall use that means, which he has appointed
to be instrumental for the partaking of the Efficacy of his Death, John 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me,
I will in no wise cast out.

3. Whatsoever were the Intention or Efficacy of the Death of Christ, yet we
are sure that all Men shall not partake of the full and complete Effect of
Christ's Satisfaction, viz. Eternal Life. This is a clear Truth, yet all the
lost Sons of Adam shall be left wholly unexcusable and condemned by the most
Righteous and Natural Justice that is imaginable. There have been three great
Promulgations of Laws in the World.

1. The Law written in the Hearts of Men, Rom 1.19. That which may be known of
God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them.

2. The Law pronounced and given to the Jews upon Sinai.

3. The Gospel of Christ, showing us what is to be believed, and what to be
done.

When the great God comes to Judge the World, he will judge it according to the
several Dispensations of Light, (...) Romans 2.26.
Romans 2.12. For as many as have sinned without the law, shall also perish
without the law: and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the
law. There is light enough, or neglect enough, in the most ignorant Soul in the
World, to charge with Guilt enough for Condemnation, though he never knew of
the Law promulgated to the Jew, or were bound by it. As we there find the
division of condemned persons unto such as sin without the Law, and under the
Law, so we find another division, 2 These. 1.8. Taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. This seems to
contain these two Rules, whereby the Gentiles should be judged: 1. Ignorance
and want of Fear of God, for such to whom the Gospel was not preached: this was
unexcusable ignorance and disobedience, Romans 1.20. 2. Unbelief and Disobedience
of the Gospel of Christ: And though this be a high Truth, that is not
discovered by the Light of Nature, yet being discovered, it is an offense, even
against the Law of Nature, not to believe it, because a most high and absolute
Truth. 3. Not to love it, and consequently obey it, because the means to attain
the most high and absolute Good. And as every Sin is an aversion from the chief
Good, either to that which is a lesser, or no Good; so it is impossible, but
the aversion from the greatest Good must needs be the greatest Sin, even by the
Rules of sound Reason. Both these we find plainly set down, John 3.36. He that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
John 3.19. This is the condemnation, that light came into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light: as if he should have said, that it is the
most reasonable and natural Principle for reasonable Creatures to entertain and
obey that Rule, which will conduct them to the highest Good, and therefore the
condemnation of such as neglect is most reasonable; and the rather, for that
this proceeds not originally from Ignorance, but from the Perverseness of the
Heart, in preferring Darkness before Light. So that as Infidelity is the cause
of Condemnation, John 3.18. So this want of Love of the Light is the great
cause of Infidelity. And though Man has put himself in that Condition, that he
cannot come to Christ, or entertain this chiefest Good, except the Father draw
him, John 6.44. Yet this does neither excuse him from sin or guilt, because as
in the first Man he willingly contracted this disability, so he does most
freely and voluntarily affect it: though he sins necessarily in rejecting the
Light, yet he sins voluntarily.

Now concerning those several places in holy Scripture that seem to infer the
Universality of an intended Redemption, John 3.17. John 12.47. 1 John 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.6. 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Cor. 15.21. It may be considerable whether the
intention of those places be, that the Price was sufficient for all the World,
so that whosoever shall reject the offered Mercy, shall never have this excuse,
that there was not a sufficiency left for him: Or whether it be meant, that
Christ by his Death did fully expiate for all that Original Guilt, which was
contracted by the Fall of Adam upon all Mankind; but for the Actual Offenses
only of such as believed; that so as the voluntary sin of Adam, had, without
the actual consent of his Posterity, made them liable to Guilt; so the
Satisfaction of Christ without any actual application of him, should discharge
all Mankind from that originally contracted Guilt. These disquisitions, though
fit, yet are not necessary to be known: it is enough for me to know, that if I
believe on him, I shall not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16. And
that all are invited, and none excluded, but such as first exclude themselves.

CHAP. IX. Of the Means, which God has appointed to make this Sacrifice of
Christ effectual, viz. Union with Christ, and how the same is wrought on God's
part.
4. WE come to that Means which the Will of God has appointed to make this
Sacrifice Effectual for us.

God, in his Eternal Counsel foreseeing the Fall of Man, did from all Eternity
covenant, that the Eterval Word should take upon him Flesh, and should be an
all-sufficient Mediator between God and Man; and to that End, did furnish this
Mediator with all things necessary for so great a Work, Colos. 1.19. For it
pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell: Fullness of the
Godhead, Colos. 2.9. For in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily;
Fullness of Grace, John 1.16. For of his Fullness we receive Grace for Grace:
Fullness of Wisdom and Knowledge, Colos. 2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge: Fullness of Perfection, Ephesians. 4.13. The measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: A Fullness of Life, John 1.4. In him was life,
and the life was the light of men, John 5.27. As the Father has life in
himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself: A Fullness of
Love, Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ, passing knowledge.

All the Promises of God are in him, and put into him, as into a Treasury, and
bottomed upon him: 2 Cor. 1.20. In whom all the promises of God are yea and
Amen. And this Plenitude of Christ was therefore in him, that from him it might
be communicated according to the Exigence of those for whom he was a Mediator;
for although the Plenitude of the Divine Nature was absolute, and no way in
reference to the Business of the Mediatorship, yet the communication of that
Plenitude to Christ, as one Mediator, was in order to his Office. And this
Fullness of Christ was necessary to supply that Emptiness which was in Man by
sin: He stood in need of a sea of Love to redeem him, and Christ was not
without riches of Love and Compassion: he had lost his Life; The day that thou
eatest, thou shall die the death, and there was as well a Quickening, as a
Living Life in Christ to revive him, Ephesians. 2.1. Those who were formerly dead
in trespasses and sins has he quickened, Colos. 3.4. When Christ who is our
life shall appear: Man had lost the whole Image of his Creator; Christ, who was
the express Image of his Father, re-imprints it again by forming himself in us,
Colos. 3.10. Renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him,
Ephesians. 4.24. Put ye on the New Man which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness: The nature of Man is corrupted, and Christ has a Magazine
of Grace to heal and purge that corruption, John 1.16. Of his fullness we
receive grace for grace; In sum, Man had lost his Creator with an infinite
distance, and so lost his Happiness; Christ, as the Fullness of God dwelt in him
bodily, so together with him restores Man to his Lord, and so to his
Blessedness, Ephesians. 3.19. And to know the love of Christ that passes
knowledge, that ye may he filled with all the fullness of God.

The Means then of this Fruition is Union. The reason by which every thing
enjoys what it has, is Union, and the more strict the Union is between the
thing that enjoys, and the thing enjoyed: The strictest Union is between any
thing and its Essence; therefore when Goodness is part of the Essence, the
Enjoyment is the most perfect: And it is by virtue of this Union with Christ,
that all this Fullness of Christ is conveyed to the Believer.

Now as the Fullness of Christ arises from his Union with God, the Fountain of
Goodness; so our Fruition of that Fullness arises from our Union with Christ,
John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.
And this was the great Purpose of God in sending Christ. Ephesians. 1.10. That he
might gather together in one, all things in Christ. And this Union with Christ
is frequently expressed in the Scripture, in the strictest terms of Union:
conversation of Friendship, John 14.23. We will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. Christ formed in them, Galat. 4.19. Incorporation with him,
eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, John 6.53. Inhabiting in them, Ephesians.
3.17. Christ living in them, Galat. 2.20. Part of his very substance, Ephesians.
5.30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: Partakers
of the very Fullness of God that is in (him.) Ephesians. 3.19. That ye may be filled
with the fullness of God. Changed into the very Image of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Now we are to consider, How this Union is wrought, viz. By a double act, 1. Of
God's part: 2. Of our part.

God in the Creation united Man unto himself; and Man by his sin broke that
Union, and departed from him; and is he could not, so he would never have
returned to God again, unless God had brought him to himself, John 6.65. No man
can come unto me, except it were given him of my Father: Now the degrees of
those acts, whereby God unites us to him, are,

1. His Eternal Love: Man by his sin got away from God as far as he could; and
as he lost his Ability, so he lost his Mind to return, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy
voice, and I was afraid, and I hid my self. Love is the first motion to Union;
and this Love of God is the first foundation of our Union to him, John 3.16.
For God so loved the world, etc. 1 John 4.10. Herein is Love, not that we loved
him, but that he loved us first, and gave his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself:
before the World either wished, or thought of that Reconciliation: so that it
was a free Love, and not drawn out upon any desert in his Creature.

2. The second step of the motion toward Union, was the sending his Son to
assume our Nature, and come unto us. The distance between God and his best
Creature, is essentially infinite, because finite with infinite, bears no
proportion: but the distance between God and his sinful Creature, must needs be
greater, because the Creature by his sin is gone away from God farther than he
was in his pure Being. To fill up this infinite distance, God and Man is united
into one Christ by the assumption of our Nature: and by this means God is come
nearer unto us (as we may say) and we in a condition to draw nearer unto him,
even in his Son. And thus God has gathered together all things in one in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.10.

3. The third step is by the course of his Providence, conveying the knowledge
and use of this Mediator unto us. This is a farther degree of Union; the former
was specifical in our Natures, but this objective and intellectual* viz. by
means proportionable to our Natures and Conditions, providentially disposed, he
sends unto us the relation of our own Condition by Nature, our Duty, our
Savior, his Will, and all those Truths contained in the Book of God: and this
Truth he sets on with Rational Convictions, Prophecies, Miracles, Persuasions,
Entreaties; all which nave a rational operation upon our Understanding and
Wills. This is that which is the Outward Calling. And among those many
Effectual Truths, that are conveyed unto us by this Calling, which were either
lost or defaced in Man, these are principally discovered, and of principal use:

1. That God is the chiefest Good; and therefore the chiefest Object of our
Love and Desire; and therefore does justly require the extremity of our
pursuit: The enjoyment of this Object is that wherein Man's Felicity consisted
in his State of Innocence, and must in his State of Restitution, and this truth
once entertained does render all things else insipid in Comparison of it, Deuteronomy.
6.4. Hear, O Israel, The Lord our God is one Lord, therefore thou shall love
etc.

2. That he is a Communicative Good: for without this the Labor of the Soul
would be fruitless: For it were impossible for a finite Power to reach or
overtake an infinite Object, unless the Object did exhibit himself unto that
Power. And herein is the excellence of this call of God, it discovers the Free
Love of God unto the Soul: So, as the Absolute Goodness of God engages us,
even in Judgment, to seek to be united unto him: so this Free Love of God
engages us, even in good Nature, as I may say, to seek him. And the very
Entertainment of this truth, soundly in the heart, is the Foundation of our
Faith and Obedience, Romans 5.8. But God commends his Love toward us in that
while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed for us: As if he should have said, There
could not be imagined a more Conquering love than this, that he, whom we had
injured by our Sins, should yet seek the Good of his Creature, 1 John 4.9.
Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us first. This was
Love with a Witness, That when the Creature, that owed to his Lord the strength
of his Love, had broken his Duty, and become a hater of his Lord, yet that that
God should love such a Creature. And as this Love was thus Free, so it
condescended to all the means of Communicating himself, that are imaginable:
contriving means to reconcile us: God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was reconciling when Man thought of nothing but
offending: Importunities of reconciliation* 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in
Christ's stead be reconciled to God. It were a Miracle of Mercy if such a God
so offended, and by his Creature, should have accepted a Reconciliation upon
the highest importunity of his Creature; But for him thus injured, that could
not receive a grain of advantage by our Conversion unto him, to change as it
were conditions with his Creature, and to importune a Reconciliation from it,
There wants conception in us to understand it, it is a Love passing knowledge:
But yet like the waters of the Sanctuary still rises higher: It is true, we
made our selves miserable, and if thou. O Lord, had never looked after us,
nor pitied us, we could never have complained of thy Justice: But if thou had
pitied, and done no more; or if thy pity had gone so far as to have given us a
deliverance if we could have found it, we must for ever in our misery have
magnified thy Mercy, though we had been Nonplus'd in the inquiry: But here is
Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
Propitiation for our Sins: a Propitiation, and a Propitiation prepared by our
offended injured Maker, and such a Propitiation. But it rests not here; We had
incurred Guilt enough to make us wretched, and a delivery from wretchedness by
such a means had been an unspeakable Mercy: But this mercy rested not there; he
does not only of miserable Men make us not miserable, by pardoning our Guilt;
but of Enemies makes us Children, by a Righteousness, that he himself had
prepared, 1 John 1.3. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the Sons of God.

4. Now a Man would think that ordinary Prudence and Ingenuity would engage the
heart to entertain this Message of Happiness and Peace with Love and
Acceptance; and that a greater approach from God to his Creature, as it could
not be expected, so it need not be required: The Chiefest Good commands our
Entertainment, how much more when it offers it self, with such a condescension,
as well to our Necessities, as to our conditions! Moral persuasions have
wrought upon the Tempers of wise Men, without any propositions of any thing
beyond this Life, how much more persuasions bottomed upon such sound Reason,
and propounding an end suitable to the highest Comprehension of our Souls! But
all this will not serve the turn unless the Mercy of God had gone farther: We
are dead in Trespasses and Sins; and we can no more receive these Truths, and
this Love of God, than a dead Man can receive a rational Impression: Now Christ
is our Life, Colos. 3.4. When Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, 1 John
5.12. He that has the Son has Life; he that has not the Son has not Life:
Now this Life is wrought in us, and conveyed unto us, by the very work of the
Spirit of God and Christ, in and upon our Souls, John 6.63. It is the Spirit
that quickens, the same Spirit that raised up Christ from the Dead, Romans 8.11.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Body by his
Spirit that dwells in you, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in Sins, he
has quickened us together with Christ. Therefore he is called the Spirit of
Life, Romans 8.2. This Life called the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 2.5. a
Birth of the Spirit, John 3.5. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit,
Verse 6. that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. The first Resurrection.
Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the Dead, and Christ shall
give thee Life: And though it may seem a vain Command to a dead Man to stand up
from the Dead, yet we must remember whose Command it was, even his that spoke
to dead Lazarus, Come forth, and he arose, because a Spirit of Life, and a word
of Power went along with the Command, John 6.63. The words that I speak unto
you, they are Spirit, and they are Life: They have not only Life in them for
him that receives them, but I can send a Spirit with them to enable him to
receive them. And now the Soul is put into a condition to entertain his
Happiness. It was the Happiness of Adam's Soul, and it is the Happiness of
Angelical Natures to be receptive of the knowledge and Love of God: And here
was Man's misery by his Sin, that as he lost the actual Enjoyment of God, so he
had made his Soul, as it were, irreceptive of it again: and as God has offered
himself to us again in Christ, so by his Spirit he enables us to receive him by
Faith, which is the first motion of the Creature to Union with God.

So then the work of the Spirit upon the Soul comes under a threefold
Consideration, though the same act produces all three, and therefore they are
three put together 2 Timothy 1.7. The Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound
Mind.

1. Of Power or Life, whereby Life is conveyed into the Soul, which, like the
dry bones in Ezekiel, was void of Life till this Spirit comes into them; de
quae supra: and the two following are but the manifestation of this Life
according to the Faculties wherein it appears.

2. Of a sound Mind, Light not only in the Medium but in the Organ. John 1.4.
In him was Life, and the Life was the light of Men. Hence it is called a
convincing Spirit, John 16.8. a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1.17. a Spirit of understanding: He has given us
understanding that we may know him that is true. 1 John 5.20. a Spirit of
Demonstration and of Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. a Spirit of discerning and Judication,
1 Cor. 2.15, 16. Man's Understanding by his Fall lost his Object, and lost his
Sight, Ephesians. 5.8. ye were sometimes darkness. And this was not only a darkness
by the Absence, but by the exclusion of light: the Understanding was sealed
against it, so that though light did shine in the darkness, yet the darkness
comprehended it not, John 1.5. Now here was the work of the Spirit of God in
opening the heart, Acts 16.14. enabling our understanding to receive, and
subduing of it to believe the truth of God. And this is certain, not only in
those truths, which are farthest removed from our Reason, and so most properly
the Object of our Faith, John 6.65. No man can come unto me except the Father
draw him, 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. But even in those points of truth, wherein even natural reason may guide
us: Even the belief of the Creation, though it is deducible by natural reason
to know it, yet it is the work of Faith to believe it: Heb. 11.3. By Faith we
understand that the Worlds were framed, etc. The conviction of the same truth
by the work of the Spirit of God creating Faith, and the work of Natural Reason
working Opinion, or at most knowledge, differs as much as knowledge and
Opinion: Those things of God, that are discoverable by natural Reason, receive
another kind of impression upon the Soul by the work of God, as is evident by
the Effects and Operations each have upon the Soul, Romans 1.21. When they knew
God, yet they glorified him not as God.

3. Of Love, therefore so called, because the Principal part of the Message
that the Soul is acquainted with, is a Message of Love and Goodness, and so the
Will inclined and engaged to love that Goodness. And this is the fruit of the
work of God's Spirit.

1. Mediately and naturally, presupposing the former work of Illumination: for
some Objects are of so light a nature, that when they are known, all the work
of the Soul is done; so they are only known, that they may be known: But these
objects of our Faith, they do include a Goodness and Convenience for the Soul;
and therefore being known, they are desired; so that in natural Consequence,
the Spirit of God, if it demonstrates these Truths to the Soul, it does by
consequence engage the Love of the Soul to them. It is true, that Education,
Instruction, and Discipline, may make us know these Truths speculatively, and
yet our Soul not affected with them: but the Conviction, which is wrought by
the Power of God's Spirit, is not so thin or jejune a union of these Truths to
the understanding, but deeper and more radicated; and consequently does more
effectually work upon the Will: and therefore it is the Logic of the Apostle,
1 John 2.4. He that says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, is
a liar, and the truth is not in him, 2 Pet. 1.9. He that lacks these things
is blind, and cannot see. The Argument is from the Negation of the necessary
Effect or Consequent, to the Negation of the Cause or Antecedent: as if he
should have said, Wheresoever there is no true Obedience to the Will and
Command of God, there is certainly no Love of God. It is the conclusion of
Truth and Reason, Joh. 14.23. If a man love me, he will keep my words: And
wheresoever there is a true knowledge of God, there must of necessity be a true
Love unto God, because it does represent God as the chiefest, only, and most
suitable Good to the Soul. It is true, that notional and speculative knowledge
of God, that is wrought by natural discourse, cannot, or at least seldom does,
arrive to that full apprehension of the Goodness of God; and consequently does
not raise up the Heart to that height of Love and Obedience: for our Reason is
weak, and the disproportion between Him and our Understanding, is infinite; and
therefore he has chosen to reveal it unto us in his Word and Son, and by his
own Power working Knowledge in us.

And by this we see why the renovation and conversion unto God is sometimes
expressed under the name of Knowledge, John 17.3. This is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, etc. Colos. 3.10. Having put on the new
man, which is renewed in knowledge, 2 Cor. 4.6. For God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ, etc. Sometimes under
the name of Trusting and depending upon God, Galat. 3.6. Abraham believed God,
and it was counted to him for Righteousness: sometimes under the name of Love,
Jud. 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God, 1 Timothy 1.14. with faith and love
which is in Christ, 2 Timothy 1.13. 2 These. 2.10. Receiving the Love of the Truth:
sometimes under the name of Obedience: James 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled,
etc. James 2. per tot. 1 John 2.29. Every one that does righteousness is born
of him: so sometimes under the name of Repentance: Fear of God, etc. For all
this is but one work of this Spirit of Grace; and but the several Emanations of
the same work of the Spirit of God upon the Soul, diversified only in the
faculties or objects: the first act in Nature is Light; and when it convinces
the heart of the sinfulness of sin that works Repentance; when of the Promises
of God, that breeds Dependence and Confidence; when of the Goodness and Love of
God in Christ, that breeds Love unto him Watchfulness over our selves,
Obedience to his Will; when of the Majesty and Justice of God, it breeds Fear
and Reverence; when of our own vileness, it breeds Humility: so that all these
are but the bringing home, and joining of those Convictions wrought in our
Understanding unto the Will and Affections; and thereupon these Effects do as
naturally follow upon this work of Illumination and Conviction wrought by the
Spirit of God, as the like Effects do arise upon natural convictions of Objects
of inferior kinds and goodness.

2. But this is not all, there is a work of strength and power upon the Will,
Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure. As the death and disability was in both Faculties, so the Life is
conveyed into both universally. And this Power of God's Spirit is not only in
the first acts of our Conversion to him, but it goes along with us: All those
actions which are pleasing to God, are wrought by the same Spirit of Christ, by
which they were at first animated. It is a Spirit of Supplication in our
Prayers, Romans 8.26. The Spirit makes intercession, etc. A Spirit of Access for
our Prayers, Ephesians. 2.18. A Spirit of Assurance and Sonship, Gal. 3.6. Ephesians. 1.16.
A Spirit of Wisdom to direct us in our difficulties, Ephesians. 1.17. A Spirit of
Comfort and Joy in our Distresses, Romans 14.17. A Spirit of Fruitfulness in our
Conversation, Galat. 5.22, 25. A Spirit of Perseverance, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ye are
preserved by the power of God through faith unto salvation.

CHAP. X. How our Union with Christ is wrought on Man's part, viz. By Faith,
Hope, and Love.
HITHERTO we have seen the motion of the Love of God to his Creature; by which
it may appear, the whole Business of Man's Salvation is the work of God; and
Man appears in a manner passive in all the parts of it: In the sending Light
into his Understanding he is passive; In the enabling the Understanding to
receive this Light, he is still passive; In the subduing the Will to the
entertainment of it, he is still passive: Yet there is some kind of motion in
us; which though it be the Work of our Creator in the first giving of it; and
again^ his Work in reviving, quickening, and enabling it; yet he is pleased to
require it from us, and to expect it of us: Mori movemus. And that are
principally these three, Faith, Hope and Love: we find them oftentimes joined
together, 1 Timothy 1.14. The Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith,
and love, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound
words which thou have heard of me in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus,
Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the Hope of Righteousness by
Faith: for in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, no^
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love; 1 Cor. 13.13. Now abides
Faith, Hope, and Love, etc. But of these distinctly, and how any or all of
these do either unite, or move us unto Union with our Savior.

1. Faith, which is taken in a double sense:

1. For that firm and sound Assent of the Mind to Divine Truths, wrote by the
Spirit of God; and so differs little or nothing from supernatural Knowledge;
and thus, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen; and has for its
Objects, all Divine Truths. And as Christ dwells in our Hearts by Faith thus
taken, Ephesians. 3.17. so other Truths dwell in the Heart by this Faith, viz.
objectively: so that Faith thus taken, is more properly an act upon the Soul,
than an act of it: for in our Assent to any Truth, our Soul is in truth,
passive; the strength of the Conviction conquers the Soul.

2. For that motion of the Soul, whereby it rests, casts and adventures it self
upon the Promises of God in Christ for Remission and Salvation; and so differs
from the former, in these three respects:

1. In the Latitude of its Object; it is more restrained than the former.

2. In the Order of its Being; it is subsequent in the Order of Nature to the
former, and produced by it.

3. In the Manner of its working. In the work of supernatural Knowledge or
Assent, the Soul is passive: in this, though it be the work of God, yet the
Soul is more active; As the Sun, when it shines upon a solid Body, does cause a
reflection of his own bea^s; so when the Light of Grace falls upon the Heart in
this special act of Faith, as in that or Love, there is a reflection from the
Soul back to God. And therefore those Expressions of Faith in the Scripture,
import a motion in the Soul: Christ comes into the Soul by his Light and
Spirit; and the Soul again comes to Christ, Joh. 6.45. He that has learned of
the Father, comes unto me. As Christ abides in the Heart by the former act of
Faith; so by this latter, the Soul abides and incorporates into him, and both
these we have joined together, John 15.4. Abide in me, and I in you.

Now this act of the Soul, is the most natural result upon the true discovery
of a Man's own Condition, God's promise, and Christ's mediation unto the Soul.
When a Man finds, that the Sentence of Death is passed upon him; that
nevertheless, God in infinite Love and Mercy, has sent his Son to be his
Satisfaction and Righteousness; and has promised and proclaimed by him, and in
him, and only by him, Peace and Reconciliation, and that without exception of
any person, though laden with never so much guilt and sin; and without any
difficult Conditions: Whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. John 3.16. John 6.40. That he is appointed a Sacrifice by him
whom we offended, John 3.16. God so loved the world, etc. The Son of God, and
able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. The
most genuine and natural motion of the Soul in such a condition, and thus
convinced, is Trust, Affiance, and Divolution of the Soul upon this Promise of
God in Christ.

And it is an observable thing, how the Wise and Merciful Providence of God
has ordered all things so, that we might be even necessitated to the right way
of our Salvation, and to cast our selves upon it: All were concluded under a
common guilt, by the voluntary offense of Adam, Romans 5.12. And if we could
derive our Being from another, then we might escape the Guilt: and that Guilt
brought with it Death in the World, both eternal and temporal, bound upon us by
irreversible Sentence of an omnipotent God. But cannot I by my future
obedience, emerit this guilt? No. What thou do for the future, is but thy
Duty, and thou can not out-act it: But grant thy future obedience might
satisfy for the guilt under which thou lie, thou shall have the Copy of that
Rule which I required from thee, and once enabled thee to perform, Do this and
live: But be sure thou do it, without turning to the right hand or the left,
with thy whole Might, and Mind, and Soul, without the least aversion; and that
out of the mere Principle of Love and Duty, and Obedience; and thy future
observance may expiate that original guilt: yet our Condition had been still
d^sperate, because as the Obedience was impossible, so the least miscarriage
had been fatal; for cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. So we find an
universal Guilt and Curse gone over all, and all this discovered to drive us to
a Savior, Galat. 3.22, The Scripture has concluded all under a sin, that the
promise by the ^aith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. We
find a righteous Law given to our Nature, but as the Obedience is
unsatisfactory for a past Guilt, so the Observance is become impossible, by
reason of our Corruption whereby our disobedience is rather excited than
abated, Romans 7.8. When the commandment came, sin revived, and I died: And all
this still to drive us to the necessity of a Savior, Romans 8.12. What the law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Thus in
the midst of all those difficulties, a Savior presents himself with the
suffrage of God, the attestation of Types and Prophecies, with reconciliation
of all the difficulties which perplexed our Inquiries, with Ability to save to
the uttermost, with Mercy, and Acceptance, and Pardon, and Righteousness, and
Happiness, offered and proclaimed to all, and that upon most unhazardable and
easy terms, only believe him, and trust on him. So then Faith is nothing else
but that result of dependence upon, and confidence in, and adherence unto
Christ, which follows upon the sound Conviction of the Truth of God concerning
him. It is true, the Faith of the Ancients differed much in the distinctness of
its acting and object, from the Faith which is now required; as Abraham's
Faith, Caleb's Faith, etc. But in this, they both agreed, 1. That it was a
Confidence, and Trusting upon God, in that which was revealed unto them by God.
The Promises of a Son was made to Abraham, and he rested upon God for the
performance: The Promise of Canaan to the Jews, and Caleb and the believing
Jews rested upon the Power and Truth of God to perform it: So with us, God has
promised Mercy and Happiness to them that believe on Christ, the Soul rests
and trusts in the Truth and Power of God in Christ for it: 2. In that the
Faith of both had a termination in Christ, though theirs more indistinctly and
confusedly, in respect that the same was not so clearly revealed unto them. In
that Promise to Abraham, In thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed;
wherein the Gospel was preached to Abraham, Galat. 3.8. Abraham did see Christ,
and rejoiced, John 8.56. And so for the rest of those ancient Fathers, Romans
10.4. They drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ: Now the Effects of Faith are of two kinds:

1. In reference to God, our Justification; God having of his free Goodness
exhibited the Righteousness of Christ and his Satisfaction to be theirs, that
shall truly know it, and rest upon it, Romans Chap. 3, 4, 5, etc. Galat. 2.16.

2. In reference to us, Peace with God, Romans 5.1. In him that is our
Peacemaker: Humility, because the Righteousness, whereby we are justified, is
none of ours, Romans 3.27. Where then is boasting? works by Love, Galat. 5.6.

2. Hope is but modally or objectively distinguished from Faith: for the same
spiritual Life which is wrought in the Soul, and brings Light with it, when it
looks upon Christ with Dependence and Recumbency is called Faith; when it looks
upon the fulfilling of these Promises, yet unfulfilled with Expectation and
Assurance, is called Hope. They are but the actings of the same spiritual Life
with diversity only, (...) to the diversity of Objects. Hence they are many
times taken for the same thing, Heb. 11. (...) the substance of things hoped
for, Ephesians. 4.4. One H^pe of your calling, Galat. 5.5. We through the Spirit
wait for the Hope of righteousness by Faith, Romans 8.24 We are saved by Hope, 1
Pet. 1.4. Begotten again unto a lively Hope. And the Fruit of this Hope, must
of necessity be Joy, Re^^ycing in Hope, Romans 12.12. And such a Joy, as at once
takes off the vexation, sorrow, and anxiety that the greatest Affliction in
this world can afford, and likewise the fixing of the Soul with over much
Delight upon any thing that it here enjoys; because it looks beyond both, upon
a Recompense of Reward, that allays the bitterness of the greatest Affliction,
2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Heb. 11. and allays the Delight of the greatest temporal
Enjoyment, Heb. 11.26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches than
the treasures of Egypt: Purifies the Heart, John 3.3. He that has this hope,
purges himself, even as he is pure: that is, winds up his Heart to such a
Condition, as is suitable to his Expectation.

3. Love: This is that first and great Commandment, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37.
And therefore is the fulfilling of the whole Law, Galat. 5.14. Romans 13.8.
Because it puts the only true and active Principle in the Heart, which carries
him to all true Obedience. It is the highest Grace, 1 Cor. 13.13. And that
wherein consis^ed the Perfection of Humane and Angelical Nature, because it was
not only his Duty, but his Happiness: It was his Duty, because the chiefest
Good deserved his chiefest Love, even out of a Principle of Nature; and his
Happiness, because in this regular motion of the Creature to his Creator. God
was pleased to exibit himself to his Creature, and according to the measure of
his Love, was the measure of his Fruition.

And in the Restitution of his Creature, God is pleased to restore this quality
to the Soul, Gal. 5.22. The first fruit of the Spirit is Love, 2 Timothy 1.7. The
Spirit of Love, 1 Timothy 1.14. with Faith and Love, 2 These. 2.10. receiving the
Love of the Truth, Ephesians. 4.15. speaking the truth in Love, Jude 21. keep your
selves in the Love of God: now this Love is wrought by a double means:

1. By the Knowledge of God, as he is the Best and Universal Good: and
therefore it is impossible, that there can be the true Knowledge of God, but
there must be the true Love of God, 1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not
God: And this is an Act grounded upon a rational Judgment, which even by the
very Law and Rule of Nature teaches us to value and esteem that most, which is
the greatest Good.

2. By the Knowledge of the Love of God to us. The absolute Goodness of God
deserves our Love; but the communication of his Goodness to his Creature
commands it: The former does most immediately work upon our Judgment, and so is
a love of Apprehension; the latter upon our Wills, and so is a love of
Affection; and yet both upon right Reason, for as the Law of Nature teaches us
to love the Chiefest Good, so the same Law of Nature teaches us to love those
most, that do us most Good, and consequently love us most. Now when God by his
Spirit sheds abroad his Love into the Heart; and we once come to know the Love
of Christ passing Knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. The Soul, even out of a natural
ingenuity (being rescued by the Spirit of God from that malignity that sin and
corruption had wrought in it) cannot choose but return to God again, that has
done so much for so undeserving a Creature. And therefore this was the great
Wisdom and Goodness of God in sending Christ in the Flesh to die for us when we
were Enemies, and in revealing that Goodness of his therein; that in a way,
proportionable to the conception and operation of our Souls, we might
understand the greatness of his Love to us: 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the
love of God, 1 John 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God, Ephesians. 2.4.
But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead, etc. God commands his love to us, etc. All which being
brought to a Soul that has life in him, must needs work Love to God again, 1
John 4.19. We love him because he loved us first. As it is the Love of God that
gives us Power to love him; for it is the first cause of our Happiness, and
consequently of our Love to God, wherein consists our Happiness: so it is the
immediate cause of our Love to him. When the Soul is convinced of so much Love
from so great a God to so poor a Creature, in very Ingenuity and Gratitude it
cannot choose but return an humble and hearty Love to his Creator again.
Methinks the Soul in the contemplation of the Goodness and Love of God, might
bespeak it self to this effect: So immense and infinite is the Goodness and
Beauty of thy God, that were thy Being possible to be independent upon him, he
would deserve the most boundless and infinite motion of thy Love unto him: But
here is yet farther infinitude added to an infinitude: he gave thee thy Being
from nothing, which was an infinite act of his Goodness and Power unto thee,
and does and may justly challenge the highest tribute of Love and Glory, that
thy Being can return unto him: But had he given thee a simple Being, thy Debt
had not been so great, so have the most unaccomplisht Creatures: But thy Being
was dressed with an Intellectual Nature, and that Nature furnished with
Fruition of Happiness, filling the uttermost extent of its Capacity, and that
Happiness guarded with such a Law as was suitable to that Nature, full of
Beauty and Order, in the obedience whereof, thou did at once perform thy
Duty, and improve thy Felicity: But thou rejectedst all this, and becamest a
Rebel to thy God, and a ruin to thy self, and thou have improved thy ruin and
rebellion by a voluntary rejection of thy Duty and thy Happiness, until this
hour: And what can thou expect, but a just return of an infinite Vengeance
from an omnipotent injured Creator, for so ungrateful a breach of an infinite
Obligation? But consider what thy Lord has done for thee for all this, and
stay thy self and wonder: Thy Lord proclaims, Return, thou backsliding Soul,
and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, Jer. 12. Had thou offended
thine Equal, for thy offended Equal to have solicited thy Reconciliation, had
deserved Acceptance and Love; But for the infinite God, to whom thou owe an
infinite Duty; and have violated it, who is able to annihilate thee, and can
receive no advantage by thy return, to solicit it with an offer of a Reprieve,
nay, of a Pardon! But here is not all: our Deliverance from the Wrath of God, is
wonder enough: Let me now be as one of my Father's hired Servants. No, there is
more yet, 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love: he is content to accept of us
as Sons. But what must the Price be of so great a Change, or who shall give it?
Thy Lord, whom thou have thus injured, has paid the Price of thy Redemption,
and such a Price as Heaven and Earth may wonder at the mention of it. The Son
of God lays down his Life for his Rebels. Pardon, and Assumption into a
Partnership with him in his own Kingdom: But thou art not for all this, at the
End of thy Debt, this Price is rendered to thee upon easy terms, Believe and
live: and this Life accompanied with infinite Advantages, even Communion with
this Creator. But yet like the murmuring Israelite, thou will die with the
Manna between thy Teeth, unless God, who has given thee such a Price of thy
Redemption, enable thee to receive him: He sends his Spirit into thy Heart,
with Light and Life, to strive with thy unbelieving Heart, and to subdue it,
and to cleanse thy filthy and polluted Heart, to bring Redemption into thy
Heart, and to solicit, persuade, importune thy Heart to receive him for thy
own Good. What remains then, but that thou should ever admire that Love,
that has done all this for thee, that thou should in all humility and
humble reverence return love to thy Lord, and magnify his condescension, that
he is pleased to accept the Love of his poor Creature; that thou study not to
grieve the Spirit of that God, that has taken this pains and care with thee
for thy good; not to crucify again that Christ, that has died for thee; that
thou labor to find out what is the Will of thy Lord; and to obey it; and to
walk in love, as Christ also loved us, and has given himself for us, Ephesians.
5.2.

Now according to the measure of the true Knowledge of God, and of his Love in
Christ, is the measure of our Love to him: and as that Knowledge is the
immediate cause of its production, so it must of necessity be the measure of
its Degree. And although both the knowledge of his Absolute Goodness, which
excites the love of Desire, and the knowledge of his Benefactoriness to us,
which increases the love of Gratitude or Benevolence, are mingled in every
Soul that truly loves God; yet according to the different degrees of the
discoveries of either to the Soul, so are the different manners of their
working upon the Soul. The knowledge of the Perfection and Absolute Goodness of
God is more suitable to an Angelical Nature, and therefore produces an high
Angelical and Intellectual Love; for this Love begins with the Judgment: But
because our Nature, as it now stands, as it arrives seldom to such a Knowledge,
so seldom to such a Love; and that Love, which comes into the Heart, merely
upon such Contemplations, is weak, mingled with Servile Fear; unactive, because
the Knowledge like the Sun in a Cloud, shines dim, and the Heat proves waterish
and weak: But the knowledge of the Goodness of God to us, as it draws the
Goodness of God nearer to us in Sense, so it strikes more our Affections, which
God has placed in us for this End. And this was the motive of Love, and
consequently of Obedience, both under the Law, and under the Gospel; though the
Expressions of that Love under the Law had more in them of Sense, and under the
Gospel, more of Spirit, Deuteronomy. 30.20. That thou may love the Lord thy God,
and obey his voice, and cleave unto him, for he is thy life, and the length of
thy days, etc. Luke 7.47. Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved
much. Christ argues from the measure of her Love, to the measure of God's
Goodness to her, and her Sense of it. And here we have the true Principle of
all true Obedience to God: The bare External act of any thing commanded by God,
unless it move from a Heart or Principle conformable to the Will of God, is no
Obedience: for all External actions, taking them divided from the Will, they
are all of one kind and nature: The very same act proceeding from a Soul
differently principled, may be an act of Obedience, ( viz. when proceeding from
an obedient loving Heart;) an act of compulsion, when proceeding from a bare
servile Heart; a brutish act, when it proceeds from a Soul not moved with any
Consideration; and an act of malignity against God, when done out of a
malicious cunning design. Some even preached the Gospel for Envy, Phil. 1.16.
So then, as the Knowledge of the Goodness and Love of God to us, is the
immediate cause of the return of our Love to God; so this love of the Soul unto
God, is the true and immediate Principle of all true Obedience unto God, Now
these are the genuine and natural Effects of Love to God:

1. It makes a Man, to make God and his Honor and Glory, the highest and
supreme End of all his actions. And this must needs be so in Reason: For as the
great End of all the works of God are his own Honor; so where there is true
Love to God, it cannot choose but make the Soul value that most, which God most
values. As he must needs be convinced in his Judgment, that that which God
makes his End, must needs be the chief End of the Creatures actions; so where
this Affection is, it must needs drive to that End: for if it should in any
thing go beside that End, or not aim at it, there is so much want of Love, My
Love to a Creature may consist with a crossing of the End of that Creature out
of my very love to it, because the Creature, which I love, may drive to an End,
which is not for his own good: but this is impossible in case of my Love to
God; for whatsoever most tends to his Glory, is most conformable to his Will,
and whatsoever is conformable to his Will, is most infallibly conformable to
the soundest and best Wisdom.

2. It makes the Heart Conformable unto the Will of God: for he that loves God
truly, makes his Will the measure of his own: and it is impossible to think
that a Creature should love God truly, and yet cross the Will of him whom he
thus loves. The Perfection of all Creatures, even inanimate, consists in their
Conformity to the Will and Law of their Creator, stamped upon them in their
Creation; and when they turn aside from this, they contract Disorder and
Deformity; much more in case of a rational Creature, who is endued with
Faculties susceptive and executive of the Will of God in a higher measure. And
the Fruits of this Conformity to the Will of God are,

1. A cheerful Submission to the actings of the Will of God upon us with
Patience and Contentedness; for it is his Will, whose Will I have made the
measure of mine: and though I shall not cease to make my humble application to
him for the removing of his Hand of what kind soever, yet I have learned of my
Savior to conclude, Not my will, but thy will be done.

2. A solicitous inquiry what this Will of God is; for the same Love, that
teaches me to make his Will mine, teaches me likewise to make inquiry after,
this Will by my Prayers, by my Studies, and Inquiries etc.

3. A strict walking according to that Will, in all things, and at all times.

3. This Love of God works an awful Conversation and Heart before him. And this
is that Fear of God which the wise Man tells us is the great duty of Man,
Eccles. 12.13. Now the Fear of God may arise upon some of these Considerations:

1. Out of the mere Sense of a Guilt incurred, and the Power and Wrath of God
against the guilty Creature. Such was the fear of Adam before God had revealed
the Cure of his Guilt, Genesis 2.10. I heard thy voice in the garden and was
afraid: and this fear drives the Heart from God, and therefore he hid himself:
and therefore this Fear in the perfection of it, is not consistent with the
Love of God; though so much of imperfection as our love unto God has, so much
even of this Fear may be in the Soul, Romans 8.15. We have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear. 1 John. 4.18. He that fears is not made
perfect in Love.

2. Out of the mere sense of the Majesty, and Glory, and Power of God, and the
subordination and subjection and distance of the Creature. And such a Fear as
this, as it may consist, so it ought to be joined unto our Love of God. And,
although there were in us an impossibility to sin, as in Angelical Natures, or
blessed Souls, yet this Awfulness and Reverence to his Majesty will be, and
must be in us: for all the Attributions of God must be received with answerable
Affections in his Creature, and one hinders not the other. And this awe of the
Majesty of God in the Heart expresses it self in suitable Deportments and
Expressions without. Abraham, that was the Friend of God, yet forgets not his
distance in his Prayer, Genesis 18.27. Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak
to the Lord, which am but dust and ashes. Exodus 34.6. When God passed by Moses,
he proclaimed his Majesty and Glory, as well as his Mercy and Goodness: The
Lord, The Lord God, Merciful, etc. And it found a suitable affection of
reverence in Moses; he bowed his Head toward the Earth, and worshipped. Even
when we rejoice in him, it must be with Trembling, Psalm. 2.11. And this is a
great part of the Business of the Old Testament to acquaint revolting Man with
the Majesty of God, and to fence out those irreverent and unbecoming thoughts
that the degenerate Sons of Men had of the infinite God, Isa 40. per totum, and
Verse. 18. To whom then will ye liken God? And as the Angels in awful reverence
to his Majesty, are said to cover their Faces, ( Isa. 6.2.) so the twenty four
Elders that sat about the Throne, cast down their Crowns before the Throne,
^ev. 4.10.

3. Out of a sense of his Goodness, mingled with the consideration of his
Greatness; which does at once improve the value of his Mercy, that it should
come from so great a Majesty; and improve that Fear of his Greatness, by mixing
with an humble Love, the Love of a Child to a Father. And this is most seen in
the care of avoiding any thing, which may displease God, 1 Pet. 1.17. Passing
the sojourning here in fear. This is that that makes them watchful and jealous
of themselves, lest any thing unbeseeming so great an Engagement should pass
from them. This Caution against Sin, rises from the Love of God under both the
notions before expressed.

1. As our Love is terminated in him, as the Chiefest Good: and so we avoid sin
out of fear of that loss, which we may have by it. This, it is true, is not
without a mixture of Love to our selves, yet allowable to be a ground of our
Care.

2. As our Love returns to him by way of Benevolence: Where Love is to an
Equal, it creates an awe of giving distaste. How much more, when to the
infinite God, and yet that so far condescends in his Love to us.

4. This Love of God breeds an endeavor of Likeness to him. The genuine effect
of Love, is Union: and Similitude to the thing loved, has a degree of Union in
it. Now because no Eye can see God and live, neither can there be that
proportion between us and him, that we should frame our selves unto his Image
immediately, he has given us three Copies of himself to take out, viz.

1. In his Works: in his Patience, in his Goodness, in his Mercy.

2. In his Word he has transcribed for us a Copy of his Holiness, 1 Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for your heavenly Father is holy.

3. In his Son. God in the Creation, printed his Image upon Man; and Man by his
sin broke it, and defaced it, as Moses did the two Tables of Stone. God gives a
new Image of himself to Man: He has given his Son into the World, who is the
Image of the invisible God, Colos. 1.15. 2 Cor. 4.4. And while we look on him
with Faith and Love, we put him on, Romans 13.14. We grow up to the measure of
his stature, Ephesians. 4.13. We are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. We put on the new Man,
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him, Colos.
3.10. And we were predestinate to be conformable to his image, Romans 8.29.

5. This Love of God breeds in us an undervaluing of all things in comparison
of him. And this is a natural effect of Love: for according to the measure of
our Love, is the measure of the Estimate of the things loved: If God be the
choicest and chiefest Object of our Love, it will, like Moses his Rod, devour
and confound the rest, especially, when they come in competition with it: If we
have disorderly Passions, and Affections, and Lusts. This Love of God will
mortify them; for Christ is our Life; Mortify therefore your earthly members.
etc. Colos. 3.4, 5. It will crucify the flesh with the Affections and Lusts,
Galat. 5.24. I will pull out a right Eye, and cut off a right Hand, if it
offend, Matthew. 5.24. I will teach a Man to hate his Mother, Wife, Children,
Brothers, Sisters, yea, his own Life, when it comes in competition with his
Savior, Luke 14.26. To esteem his outward Privileges, Learning, Reputation,
etc. and all things but loss and dung for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ, Philip. 3.8. nay, the best of our Obedience, Prayers, Righteousness: It
makes this humble Confession; O Lord, I owe unto thee, the strength of my Soul;
and when I have paid it, I am but an unprofitable Servant: Thy Goodness to me,
is none of thy debt to thy Creature; but my most exquisite and perfect
Obedience is due to thee: And behold, I have brought before thee these
Services: what there is in them worth the accepting, is thy own, the work of
thine own Spirit, the purchase of thine own Blood; the rest, alas! is mine, and
is an Object rather for thy Mercy to pardon, than thy Justice to accept.

6. It works true Sorrow for any sin committed: for as it cannot choose but be
sensible, as of any injury committed to the God he loves, so most especially of
such an injury as is done by himself.

7. The Love of God is the only true Principle of all Obedience. Faith works by
Love, Ephesians. 5.6. And Christ died, not only to redeem us from our Iniquities,
but to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit.
2.14. And we are created in Christ unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. And this is
the will of God your Father, eve^ your sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. And it is
as impossible, that where the true Love of God is, these can be wanting, as it
is for the Sun to be without his Light. The Love of Christ is a constraining
Love, 2 Cor. 5.14. And he died for all, that they that live, should not from
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again.
Our Obedience to Christ is the true Experiment of our Love to him, John 14.15.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments, 1 John 2.3. So our Love is the only true
Principle of our Obedience, Deuteronom. 6.4. and 10.12. And now, O Israel, what
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to
walk in his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy Soul. The Love of God cannot be without his Fear and
Obedience. Now the Qualifications arising from this Love, will be,

1. A Sincere Obedience, because it proceeds from a Principle within: for the
Obedience is formed in the Heart, before it is formed in the Action. Love
cannot be dissembled, because its residence is in the Soul: the action that
proceeds from Love, must needs be therefore sincere.

2. A Perpetual Obedience, because the Principle within is perpetual and
increasing: for the more a Man loves God, the more God is pleased to discover
his Goodness to him; and consequently his Love increases, and consequently his
Obedience.

3. Universal Obedience; for it is the same Principle within, that looks
universally upon all. The Obedience is upon this ground. It is the Will, and
the Command of him whom I love, that ingageth my Obedience: and wheresoever I
find that impression, there is my ground: If the thing commanded, be more
unsuitable to my Constitution, Occasions, Exigencies, yet it has the
Impression of my Lord upon it, I will by his strength and Grace obey it: If I
love him, his Will, and not my own, must be the measure of my Obedience. And
this is the reason why the breach of one Command of God knowingly, is the
breach of all, because, if my Obedience to the rest, had been rightly
principled upon the Love of God, the same Love would have engaged me to the
obedience of this: my Obedience therefore to the rest, is not Obedience, but a
Pretense or Show. Some Commandments of God do include in them a greater
suitableness to the Rational Nature of Man than others; such are the Laws of
Nature, the Decalogue: some are such Commands, as seem only to be Experiments
of our Obedience; such were the Ceremonial Commands; the Command to Abraham, to
sacrifice his Son; to the Young Man, to sell all he had: But where this true
Principle of the Love of God is there will follow Obedience to both; though the
more hard the Command, the greater measure of Love to God is required to a full
performance of it. It teaches Obedience, where the thing commanded, is of it
self full of Beauty, as all Moral Commands are, because but the Abstract of his
Image: and it teaches to obey where the Command seems to carry nothing in it,
but asperity, and unusefulness; for it has made the Will of God the measure of
its own Will. Now concerning the Subject of our Obedience, how far it extends,
and what the Rule of it is, vide infra.

CHAP. XI. Why, or by what reason the act of Faith works our Union with
Christ, and so our Justification in the sight of God.
HITHERTO we have seen those motions of God to his Creature, and the motion of
the Creature unto God again, and both these must needs end in Union: and this
Union can be no otherwise than in the Son, in whom the Divine and Humane Nature
were united in one Person, in whom the distance and difference between God and
Man, were filled up and reconciled. And by virtue of our Union with him, as our
sins are made, as it were his, in point of Imputation and Satisfaction, so we
have all that communicable (...) that was in Christ: his Righteousness, Phil.
3.9. the Righteousness which is of God by Faith: his Life. Galat. 2.2^. his
Death, Galat. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ: his Spirit, Romans 8.9. his
Resurrection, (...). 2.6. has raised us up together, and made us sit (...) him
in heavenly places, Colos. 2.12. Buried (...) Baptism, wherein also ye are
risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God: of his Sonship, and
Heirship, Galat. 4.7. Heirs of God through Christ.

Now all these three Graces of God, wrought in our (...) by the Spirit of God,
are motions unto Union, (...), is the first act of the Soul, and there^ (...)
this Union is formally ma^e: (...) to be justified by Faith, Romans 3.28. To
partake of of the Righteousness of God by Faith, Romans 3.22. Phil. 3.9. viz.
That by the Eternal Counsel and Goodness of God, Christ is put in the place of
him that believes, in respect of his sins; and he that believes is in the sight
of God, put in place or stead of Christ, and by that means is judged righteous
in the sight of God, even by that very Righteousness, which was the
Righteousness of Christ, the Mediator. And when we speak of Faith, we must not
intend that work of the Spirit of God in our Souls, whereby we believe; for by
the very same work is wrought belief, love of God, and hope in him: But it is
that act of that Life so wrought, which does believe. Now we shall consider,
Why, or by what reason the act of Faith works our Union with Christ, and so
our Justification in the sight of God:

1. Because it is the Will of God, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent
me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life: He, that is the great dispenser of his own Goodness, is
pleased that this shall be the means of that Dispensation. In ancient times
before the coming of Christ, he was pleased to use other immediate Instruments,
such were Circumcision, Obedience to those Laws which he gave: these had not
their Efficacy of themselves, for they were indifferent things; but they had
their Efficacy upon these grounds: 1. The Divine Institution to that End: 2.
The mingling of the Efficacy of the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ with
3. A performance of them with an Obediential and believing Heart, which, though
it was not always accompanied with an explicit and actual belief of Christ,
yet it was not without thus much Faith; viz. That it was a thing injoined by
God for some special Purpose, for the good of his Creature. And thus likewise
in Infants, who are not capable of an actual exercise of Faith, God has
questionless, some secret efficacious means of the application of Christ's
Sacrifice unto them. Thus, proportionable to the Condition of his Elect in all
times and Conditions, God is pleased to proportion a means to make this
Sacrifice effectual. To the ancient Fathers, that had not the same opportunity
of believing, in respect Christ was not revealed to them so clearly as to us,
it was his Will to appoint at least, a more implicit and obscure act of Faith:
They were shut up unto the Faith that should afterward be revealed, Galat.
3.23.

2. Because Faith is the first act of the New Life, wrought in the Heart by the
Spirit of God, tending to Union: It is true, that Knowledge is that which
precedes all the works of Grace in the Soul; but in this, the Soul is not so
much active, as passive; and Knowledge does not of it self, unite the Soul to
the Object, viz. Christ, as it does unite the Object to the Soul: But the first
motion of the Soul to Union, is not that Faith of Assent, which differs not
from Knowledge, but the Faith of Recumbency or Adherence. And this priority of
the act of Faith is not in time, for Life is wrought all at once in the Soul;
but in Nature and actual operation. And this priority of Faith in this sense is
upon three grounds: 1. In respect of the nature of the Act. 2. In respect of
the nature of that Truth, upon which it fixes. 3. In respect of the Condition
of the Creature.

1. In respect of the nature of the Act; The Creature is created essentially
depending upon God; and Dependence is the first relative act of the Creature
unto the Creator; as it is the first relation, so the first motion of a
rational Creature unto God, is by an act of Dependence and Recumbence upon his
Truth and Goodness. And herein consisted as the first act of Union, in our
uncorrupted Nature, unto God, so herein was the first breach that was made upon
Man, Genesis 3.1. Yea, has God said, etc. Man's Duty was Recumbency, and Trust,
and Reliance upon the Goodness of his Creator, and the Devil weakens his Faith
or Dependence upon his God, and deceives him. His first Fall was Distrust in
the Word and Goodness of God, and his first Recovery must be by Recumbency upon
him, his Truth, and Goodness.

2. In respect of the nature of the Message. It is a Message, that as it
requires, so it concerns our Faith and Recumbency. It is a Promise of Mercy and
Peace unto as many as believe the Message: According to the nature of the thing
known, is the motion of the Heart toward it: This is a Message of Deliverance
and Peace, with a Command to rest upon it; therefore of necessity, the first
act must be Recumbence, John 11.40. Said I not, if thou would believe, thou
should see the Glory of God, Exodus 14.13. Fear not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord. The first act, that a Message of Deliverance from God
works upon the Heart, that entertains it, is Recumbency and Resting upon the
Truth and Power of God.

3. In respect of the Condition that this Message of Deliverance finds us in.
We are encompassed every where with Guilt; and the avenger of blood pursues
that guilt; and we cannot by any means find any Power in our selves, or in any
other Creature, to escape it: The Soul being seriously convinced of this, God
presents unto it the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, his Promise of
Acceptance of it, and our deliverance from his wrath by it: And now the Soul,
like a Man ready to be drowned, first lays hold of the Cable that is thrown out
to him, even before it has leisure to contemplate the Goodness of him, that
did it. So the condition of our Misery teaches us first to clasp the Promise
of Mercy and Salvation in Christ; and then to consider and contemplate the
great Mercy and Goodness of God, and to entertain it with Love and
Thankfulness. An extreme Exigence will give a Man some confidence to adventure
upon a difficult and unlikely occasion of deliverance; because it is possible
his Condition may be bettered, it cannot be made worse, 2 Kings 8.4. Why sit we
here until we die? if we enter into the City, the Famine is in the City, and we
shall die there; if we sit still here, we die also: Now therefore let us f^ll
into the Host of the Assyrians, if they save us alive, (...) live; and if they
kill us, we shall but die. Even so, even in a way of Reason, may the Soul
debate with it se^f: I find my Condition miserable, and I know not how to avoid
it: when I look into my self, I find a guilty and condemning Conscience; when I
look behind me, I see the avenger of blood pursuing me, and ready to overtake
me; when I look before me, I see nothing but a Hell to receive me in my flight;
when I look upward, I behold an offended and angry God, a^med with Power and
Justice to condemn me. (...) is true, he is a Merciful and Bountiful God; but
that aggravates my Misery. What Comfort can the thought of a neglected, an
abused Mercy add unto (...) so that now, as my Misery is intolerable, so it is
inextricable: as I cannot help my self, so I can see nothing without me but
storms, but trouble, and darkness, and dimness, and anguish, Isa. 8.22. and a
guilt within me, still telling me worse is to come: and to prevent my despair,
I turn me to the Creatures, to Friends, to Pleasures; but alas! they have no
more taste in them than the white of an Egg; like Drink in a Fever, they
increase my Torment. In the midst of all this tempest of the Soul, the Love of
God, like the Dove to the drowning Ark, lets fall an Olive Branch, a (...), a
Message and Promise of Life and Delive^^^^, an invitation to Peace and
Salvation. Let any (...) judge now, whether a Soul sensible of his own
Condition, will not greedily, and even before it has leisure to contemplate
the Mercy, lay hold upon it, rest upon it, get unto it: so that the condition
of the Soul, and the sense of it, does even drive the Heart, in the first act
of its Illumination, to coming unto Christ, and resting upon him: And then the
Soul has more opportunity to discover, and contemplate, and value the Goodness
of God, whereby the Love of the Soul to God, is more and more excited and
increased.

And thus we see how the Believer is united unto Christ: not corporeally, nor
yet substantially; yet really and spiritually, these motions of the Soul being
met and entertained with Objects suitable to their utmost latitude: Our motion
unto him by Faith and Adherence, finds not only an invitation before it come,
Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy lad^n, and I will
give you rest: But a rest when it does come: Our motion unto him by our Love,
finds an entertainment with Fruition, John 14.23. If a man love we, he will
keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him: Our Hope entertained with Assurance, and the Prepossession
of our Expectation, John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you, 1 Pet. 1.4. An
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, reserved in Heaven. In the creation of
Man, as likewise of Angels, God placed in them Powers suceptive and able to
receive a great measure of his Truth, Glory, and Goodness: And when he had
furnished them with Vessels, as I may say, of this Capacity, he filled them
with his Light and Goodness: And herein consisted that great Union between God
and his Creature; and consequently his great Happiness. And in Man's
Restitution, the same course is taken to make him happy again. Here is the
difference, and our accession of Happiness, that this Mercy (...) put into our
own hands, but into the hands of our Mediator for our use. For as in him dwells
the fullness of God, so every true Believer dwells in him, and makes up that
Body, which is the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. And is
thereby filled with the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19.

CHAP. XII. The Effects of our Union with Christ.
NOW we come to consider the Effects of this our Union with Christ more
distinctly.

1. Remission of Sins, Ephesians 1.7. Colos. 1.14. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins: For by virtue of our Union
with him, the Father looks upon us, as having made that Satisfaction for Sin,
which in truth his Son made.

2. Justification: For as by virtue of our Union with him, his Satisfaction is
ours, so is his Righteousness. And hence that Righteousness, by which we are
made righteous in the sight of God, is called the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor.
5.21. That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, Phil. 3.9. That I
may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith: And therefore Jer. 23.6.33.16. he is called, The Lord our
Righteousness. And indeed without this, though it were possible, that we could
have our sins forgiven, yet without this Righteousness, we could not actually
attain Happiness. Christ therefore must present us Holy, as well as
unblameable, Colos. 1.22. So then, being one with him, as our sins by
imputation were his, and his Satisfaction ours, so was also his Righteousness.

3. Peace and Reconciliation with God: For as God from Heaven, proclaimed
himself well pleased in his Son, so if we are one with him, he is consequently
well pleased with us. And this Conclusion follows naturally from our
Justification in the sight of God: The controversy between God and his
Creature was Sin; and when Christ took up that Controversy, there must needs
follow peace, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith we have Peace with God through
Christ, Colos. 1.20. Having made Peace through the blood of his Cross, Ephesians.
2.14. For he is our Peace: And the consequent of this Peace with God, is Peace
with the Creature, who, when Man became Rebel to God, became Rebel to Man,
unuseful, vain, full of vexation: but by our Peace restored with our God, our
Peace with the Creature, is part of our Portion, Godliness having the Promise
of this Life, as well as that to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Matt. 6.33. and peace with
our own Consciences: Conscience was God's Vicegerent in Man, and when her Lord
is angry, the Conscience will chide: It is a Glass, wherein a Man may by
reflection, see the face of Heaven, and of his own Soul. But when once the
Heart is sprinkled from an evil Conscience by the Blood of Christ, Heb.
10.2.22. the Conscience is quiet, for Heaven is quiet. As Peace was the
Proclamation of an Angel at the Birth of Christ, Luke 2.14. so Peace was the
Legacy of Christ, when he was leaving the World, John 14.27. My Peace I leave
with you. And the Fruit of this Peace, must needs be Joy: When a Man upon sound
grounds does find that his Peace is made with Heaven, there cannot choose but be
a Joy answerable to the sense of so beneficial a Peace. Therefore Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
15.13. The God of Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing. Where
there is Faith there will be Peace; and where Peace, Joy: and therefore when
Christ had finished the work of our Redemption, that Spirit which he sent into
the World, is called the Comforter, John 15.26.

4. The Spirit of Christ: and that may be taken these ways.

1. The immediate Communication of the Holy Spirit, wherewith Christ himself
was endued: for, as in respect of the Union of the Divine Nature, there was an
Essential Union between the Son and the Spirit; so by that Union of both
Natures in one Person, there was a Communion of the same Spirit unto Christ;
The Spirit descended upon him like a Dove, Matthew. 3.16. God gave him not the
Spirit by measure, John 3.34. Now as Aaron's Ointment, that was poured first
upon his Head, descended upon the Hem of his Garment; so by virtue of our Union
with him, that Spirit, that was without measure poured upon our Head, was in
some measure, diffused upon all that are united to him: and as the same Soul,
that actuates the Heart and the Head in a more plentiful and eminent manner,
does inactuate the most inconsiderable part of the same Body; so the same
Spirit, that is in Christ, is in every one that is united unto him, though in a
different degree of operation, Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his, 2 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord, is one
Spirit. And by this Spirit of Christ, which he gives and communicates unto
those that are united unto him, they are said to be sealed by the Spirit of
Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22. viz. It is by this Spirit of Christ, that we
have access unto God, Ephesians. 2.18. We have access by one Spirit unto the
Father: and it is this Spirit that forms our Desires in us; and by this means,
our Desires are not only discovered unto God, that knows the mind of his own
Spirit, but they are also conformable unto the Will of God, Romans 8.27. He that
searches the heart, knows what is in the mind of the Spirit, because be
makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. And as the
Father did hear the Son always, because his Desires were conformable to the
Will of his Father, John 11.42. I know that thou hear me always: so, John
16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he shall give it you: for
it is a Petition framed by that Spirit, which is the Spirit of Christ, and of
God; and what his own Spirit desires, it is his own Will to grant: And for this
cause, it is called the Spirit of Adoption; Romans 8.15. God is pleased to accept
the Prayers and Services of the Members of Christ in him, even as the obedience
of his own Sons, because they are moved and actuated by the very same Spirit,
which is the Spirit of his Son. And as the intrinsecal form of things is that
which instrumentally conforms the qualities and proportions of the thing which
it informs unto that intrinsecal form, and suits it with Qualities and
Conditions suitable to its Operations; so this Spirit of Christ does by degrees
conform the Soul, the Affections, the whole Man, unto the Image of Christ,
changing it into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. And this Spirit of Christ does
lead them into all Truth, John 16.13. And from hence it is, that he that is the
true Member of Christ, cannot continue in a constant course of sin, 1 John 3.9.
For his seed remains in him, viz. That Spirit of Christ, by which he is
actuated, and by which he is born of God, John 3.6. That which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit. That abides in him, and will be degrees, like a living
Spring, work out that mudd, that our own flesh and corruption cast into us.

2. Which is a fruit of the former, The mind of Christ. For this Spirit of God
works a Conformity in the Heart and Life to Christ, whose Spirit it is: This
Spirit of Christ makes an impression of the Image of Christ upon the Soul and
Life. The like Effect with this, we find in all things: In matters Natural, the
vicinity of two things together, works a Conformity of the weaker to the
stronger, either Element or Form: In matters Moral, Conversation between two,
breed a Conformity in Manners, even different from their otherwise natural
Constitution: much more, where the Spirit of Christ lays hold on the Soul, and
unites a Man unto Christ, there is not only new Company, but a new Form, and
consequently of necessity a new frame and temper of Heart and Life, conformable
to such Company, and to such a Form. And in order to this Conformity unto
Christ, the Old Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to the
deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. must be put off; the Affections and Lusts must be
crucified, Galat. 5.25. the Body will be dead because of sin, Romans 8.10.
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts will be denied, Tit. 2.12. For these make a
deformity from Christ; such a Spirit, as the Spirit of Christ, cannot long
endure to inform or inhabit such a Soul, but if it come into him, it will
change him: And in stead thereof, the Man shall be born again by the Spirit,
John 3.5. the Spirit will be Life, Romans 8.10. Christ will be new formed in
them, Galat. 4.19. the walking will be in the Spirit, Galat. 5.25. the New Man
will be put on, even the Image of Christ, Righteousness and true Holiness,
Ephesians. 4.24. Christ will be put on, Galat. 3.27. Romans 13.14. the Life will be
the Life of Christ, Galat. 2.20. the Heart will be the Habitation of Christ,
Ephesians. 3.17. of God, Ephesians. 2.22. of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. the mind, the
mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. the temper of the Soul, the same with his, humble
as he was humble, Phil. 2.5. holy, as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. long-suffering
and indulgent as he was, John 13.15. Behold, have I not given you an example.
Patient under the Will of God, etc. And by Conformity unto Christ, Man is put
into a right state, and in that order toward God himself and others, as he was
in his creation, and thereby in some measure restored to that Happiness which
he had by reason of that order: The Happiness and Peace of every thing
consisting in the due observance of that station and Rule, which God has given
it. And this Conformity unto Christ, is our Sanctification, which is nothing
else, but a restoring of Man in some measure to that Conformity unto the Will
of God, in which he was created. Man by sin, lost that impression of God's
Image: God was pleased to give us his Son, who is the express Image of his
Father, and by this Spirit of his to reimprint that Image again upon as many as
behold him, and come unto him by Faith, 1. These. 4.3. This is the will of God,
even your Sanctification: so that the Sanctification or Obedience, which is
wrought in us, and required of us, is the Conformity of the Will of Man to the
Will of God. The Obedience performed unto God by the Faithful, arises from a
double Principle.

1. This whereof we now speak, an intrinsecal Change of the Nature Conforming
the Heart, and consequently the Life, to the Will of God, the Mind of Christ:
for the same Spirit of Christ, which dwells in Christ our Head, dwells likewise
in those that are the Members of the same Body: and as the oneness of the Soul
in Man, makes that oneness of motion in all the Body, and that Conformity, that
is in all its motions, to the mind of the Soul; so that oneness of the Spirit
in Christ and his Members, makes that Conformity of the Members of Christ unto
the Mind and Will of Christ, which is the uncreated Image of God: This is
Regeneration; the birth of the Spirit; the forming of Christ in us, the
Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13.

2. That whereof before is spoken, Love unto God; which is always the Soul of
all true Obedience. The Soul finds the Goodness, and Rectitude and Beauty of
God, and of all his Commands, and therefore out of a Judicial Love, it is
sensible of the engagement that it ows to God; and therefore out of Gratitude,
it will, as far as the strength of the Soul can reach, obey the Commands, which
are so Righteous, of her God, that is so Gracious: It finds, that it was the
Purpose of God; he created us unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. that as many as are
in Christ, ought to walk as he walked, 1 John 2.5. That the Son of God died to
destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. to purify unto himself a People
zealous of Good Works, Tit. 2.14. That Christ has ordained, that his Disciples
should bring forth Fruit, John 15.16. That for this cause Christ died, etc.
that from thenceforth, they that live, should not live unto themselves, etc. 2
Cor. 5.15. Now the true Love of God, makes the Will of God, to be his Will, and
the Glory of God his End: if there were no Beauty in the thing commanded, yet
shall I dispute his Will, that has redeemed me? shall I go about to disappoint
him in the End of his Death for me? ordinary Reason teaches me to subscribe
and yield Obedience to the Commands of God, for they are all most Wise and most
Just Commands; and though I see not the Wisdom, Usefulness, and Justice of
them, yet the same Truth, that tells me, his ways are unsearchable and past
finding out, teaches me to obey, when I discern the Authority, though not the
Reason of the Command. But if it were not so, suppose I could be a loser by my
Obedience, I cannot lose so much as I have freely received from him that
commands me: When Abraham received a Son from the Goodness of God, and God
required him again, Abraham obeys, though his Obedience had left him as
Childless as the Promise found him: But the greatest Command, that I can
receive from my Savior, cannot return me to so bad a Condition, as his Pity
and Mercy found me in: If he require my Riches, my Liberty, my Life yet he
leaves me somewhat, which without his Goodness, I had lost, and does more than
countervail all my other Losses, even my Everlasting Soul: When he requires
these of me, he pays me interest for them, Matthew. 19.29. But if he did not, yet
the Price of my Soul in ordinary Gratitude, may deserve the life of my Body;
for what can a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? Matthew. 16 26.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the putting off the Old Man: and 1. What it is.
NOW concerning the putting off the Old Man, two things are considerable: 1.
What this Old Man is. 2. How we must put him off.


For the former, it is nothing but that Ataxy, Disorder, and Corruption, which
by sin did fall upon our Nature: It is not our Nature in its essentials, for
that is still good; but the absence of the Goodness and Perfection of the
reasonable Soul, which consisted in the Conformity to the Will of God, which is
the Beauty and Perfection of every thing. And from this disorder in the Soul,
proceeds the disorder in the Life and Actions. And this Old Man has a double
strength and advantage upon us:

1. In it self, the Corruption and Disorder is so universal, that the whole
Soul is bound under it: it has no supplies of its own to rescue it self; for
they are all corrupted: it is therefore called a Dominion of Sin, Romans 6.12. a
body of death, Romans 7.24. a Law of Sin, bringing the Soul into captivity, Romans
7.23.

2. Accidentally, the Prince of the Power of the Air, taking advantage of this
confusion and disorder of the Soul, gets, as it were, into it* and so works
in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. inhabits it as his Castle, and
uses the Faculties of the Soul, as the Weapons wherein he trusts; became a
Ruler of Darkness in the Soul, Ephesians. 6.12. Is Judas covetous? the Devil gets
into that covetousness, and acts it even unto the betraying of the Lord of
Life, Luke 22.3. Is Peter lifted up upon his Master's at^estation of his
Confession? the Devil gets into that Pride, and he becomes a tempter of our
Redeemer, Matthew. 6.23. Is a Man immoderately angry? the Devil gets into that
Anger, and will turn it into Malice, Ephesians. 4.27. The Prince of the World could
get no advantage upon our Redeemer, he had nothing in him, John 14.30. but so
much of the Old Man as remains in us, such a party has the Devil in us to
entertain, nourish and actuate his temptations.

We shall therefore consider, wherein this Corruptition or Deficiency in our
Soul consists. It is in every part and faculty of the whole Man, as may
evidently appear by tne enumeration of particulars,

1. In the Understanding there wants Light, Romans 1.21. Their foolish heart was
darkened, Ephesians. 4.18. And from hence the imaginations become vain, Romans 1.21.
and not only vain, but evil, and continually evil, Genesis 6.5. pursues
unprofitable Curiosities, Acts 19.19. Lusts of the Mind, Ephesians. 2.3. Fables,
and impertinent Questions, Tit. 3.9. 1 Timothy 1.4. vain deceit, Colos. 2.8. It
wants a capacity to discern things of greatest concernment, 1 Cor. 2.14. the
best habits of the Understanding are corrupt* The Wisdom of the World is not
only Foolishness, 1 Cor. 3.19. but Enmity to God: is earthly, sensual,
devilish, James 3.15. These and the like, are the Old Man in the Understanding:
for the Light being either out, or dim, the actings of the Understanding are
irregular; and it is one of the great works of Christ in our renovation, to
give us the Spirit of a sound Mind, 2 Timothy 1.17.

(2.) In the Conscience. This is the tenderest part of the Soul, the receptacle
of that Light and Authority of God, which he has left in us, to be our Monitor
and his Vicegerent, Romans 2.15. And yet the Old Man has mastered and corrupted
this also, puts it awry, or out, 1 Timothy 1.19. defiles the Mind and Conscience,
Tit. 1.15. sears the Conscience, so that it is insensible, and past feeling,
Ephesians. 4.19. And if the Conscience be so vigorous, as not to be stifled by
means of this Corruption and the concurrence of the Prince of the Air, it
becomes our Misleader, being filled with Errors and mistakings; or our
Tormentor, being filled with horror and desperation: and it is the great work
of God in our renovation, to restore the Conscience to his primitive office and
place, by taking away the guilt of sin, which kept the Conscience in a
continual storm, Heb. 10.2.22. and by purging the Conscience from the
pollutions and corruptions of sin, Heb. 9.14. purging the Conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God.

(3) In the Will there is irregularity upon a double ground:

1. By reason of that Corruption that is in the Understanding: for the
prosecution or aversation of the Will are much qualified and ruled according to
the Light that is in the Understanding; and if that Light be Darkness and
Error, then there must necessarily follow a miscarriage in the Will.

2. By reason of that Captivity, that is in the Will unto the Law of Sin, and
of the Flesh. God gave unto Man a righteous Law, which was to be the Law and
Rule of his Mind and Will; and while it was conformable to this, it was
conformable to the Will of God, and so beautiful and regular: But in stead
thereof, there is a Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. Romans 7.21. and this Law
subdues the Law of the Mind, and brings the Soul into captivity to the Law of
Sin, Romans 7.23. And the Will being thus captivated, is made carnal, and filled
with enmity against God, and that Law, which he once planted in us to be the
Rule of our Will, so that it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be, Romans 8.7. nay, the Will is so much mastered and possessed by this Old
Man and his Law, that when it meets with the Law of God coming into the Soul,
it takes occasion thereby to work in the Soul all manner of Concupiscence, Romans
7.6. out of malice and policy to make that Law, which comes to rescue the Soul,
more odious to the Soul, and the Soul to it: as Conquerours use to introduce
Laws, Customs, and Languages of their own, the more to estrange the conquered
from any memory of their former duty or freedoms: And when Christ comes into
the Soul, he rescues the Will from this Captivity, and from the Dominion of
Sin, though not from the Inherence and Residence of it; and does by degrees
waste and diminish that very inherence of sin, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
Dominion over you; for you are not under the Law, but under Grace; and plants
and supports another Law in us, even the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ,
which makes us free from the Law of Sin and of Death, Romans 8.2.

(4.) In the Affections. The great and master Affection of our Soul, is our
Love: and all other Affections are derived from it, and in order to it. Our
Hatred of any thing, is because it is contrary and destructive to what we love:
our Fear of any thing, is because it would rob us of what we love: our Grief
for any thing, is because it has deprived us of what we love. And according to
the measure of our Love, is the measure of our other Affections: an intense
Love unto any thing, makes our Hatred of its contrary equally intense; and so
for the other Affections. In our original Creation our Love was rightly placed,
upon God, the only deserver of our Love: and our Love was rightly qualified; it
was a most intense Love: The Law and Command of God, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
might; was but the Copy of that Law, that was written in our Nature. And our
Love thus rightly placed, and rightly qualified, did tutor all the rest of our
Passions and Affections both in their objects and degrees: It taught us to hate
Sin, and that with a perfect hatred, because contrary to the Mind of that God,
whom we did perfectly love; and it taught us to hate nothing else but Sin,
because nothing but that had a contrariety unto God. But when we fell, our Love
lost its object, and all the Affections thereby became misplaced, and
disordered: And though we lost the object of this Affection, yet we lost not
the Affection it self; our Love therefore, having lost his guide, wanders after
something else, and takes up our selves, and makes that the object of our Love.
But as our Love is misplaced in respect of its object; so it mistakes in its
pursuit of that object: no Man can truly love himself, that does not truly love
God; because the true effect of Love, is to do all the Good it can to the thing
it loves. Now the chiefest Good to our selves is only our Conformity unto God's
Will, and consequently our Love to him, wherein consists our Happiness: But it
is no marvel that having forsaken the true object of our Love, and chosen our
selves to be that object, we are likewise mistaken in the seeking of our own
Good, Romans 1.26. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the Creature more than the Creator: For this cause God gave them up to
vile affections. Now every man, that terminates his Love upon himself, serves
and worships himself. And now that order, which God planted being broken, it is
no wonder, that all confusion and disorder falls among our Affections: And now
our Love being misplaced, all the rest of our Affections are likewise misplaced
and out of order: Now the right frame of our Love, and consequently the
corruption of it, consists in three things:

1. In the ultimate Object of our Love: it ought to be settled upon God, and
upon him only.

2. In the Order of our Love: it ought to be set upon God, and upon him first:
and all other things may be loved, but yet in him and after him.

3. In the Degree of our Love: our chiefest and most intense Love must be set
upon God, and upon him only. And these are most rational and natural
Conclusions, as appears before.

Now the Old Man in our Affections, consists in the absence and deprivation of
this Order that God has set.

1. The deprivation of the first, when either we love not God at all, or, which
is all one, when we make him not the Ultimate Object of our Love, but love him
merely in reference to our selves: the consequence whereof is, that if God be
not in all things subservient to those things, we conceive most conducible to
our own good, we disobey him, we murmr against him, we blaspheme him, we hate
him: If the basest Lust, Pleasure, Content, come in competition with his
Command, it shall conquer it, because we have made our selves our Ultimate and
Chief End, and therefore shall certainly prefer any thing that we think most
conducible to this End.

And certainly, he that makes himself his Ultimate End, and the chief object of
his Love, cannot choose but fail in the two latter: for his love to himself,
makes him love all things else in order merely to himself, and so far forth
only as is conducible to his own mistaken good; so that God shall be no longer
loved, served, or obeyed, than he is subservient to that End. Now it is easy
from this Consideration, to see the Original of most of the Evil in the World:
whether it relates to God, to Men, or to a Man's self.

From this Original grows the very Hatred of God. This distemper, wrought by
sin in our Souls, has not only deprived God of our chiefest Love, which we
justly owe to him, and turned that Love into our selves, but has made us
haters of God by our corrupred Nature, Romans 1.30. He strengthens himself
against the Almighty, Job 25.25. that say unto God, Depart from us, Job 22.17.
For having made himself his End, he cannot choose but be a hater of God upon a
double ground:

1. Because the Presence, and Purity, and Commands, and Admonitions of God,
either by his Word, or Conscience, or the outward Dispensations of Providence
do extremely thwart that End which we pursue. Hence grow the Blasphemies in the
World, Revel. 16.21. Men blasphemed God because of the hail. The
Disappointment, and Control, and Interruption, that Men have in the pursuit of
their Ends, do make them hate the Presence, the Word, the very Being of God
himself, because they take it to be a hinderance of their End, and their
Happiness.

2. The Soul, that was once united to God, is by sin gone a whoring from him,
and has taken up another End; yet God in Mercy still persuades the Soul to
return. Turn, O backsliding Children, says the Lord, for I am married unto
you, Jer. 3. The skill of the enemy of God within us is, as much as may be, to
divert the access of such persuasions to the Soul, or the Entertainment of
them, lest thereby he should be dispossessed; and therefore, as Ahitophel to
Absalom, to secure his Party with impossibility of reconciliation to his
Father, persuades him to the highest Villainy, that so he might be abhorred of
his Father, 2 Samuel 16.21. so the Devil and Sin in us engage the Soul in the
greatest Villainies and Blasphemies against God, that so the Soul, abhorring
God, may be abhorred of him. Thus Sin taking occasion by the Command, works in
the Soul all manner of Concupiscence, Romans 7.6.

From hence likewise proceeds the Slavish Fear of God. We have shown before
that all Love of God, is accompanied with the Fear of God; but this Fear is
without the Love of God, but proceeds from Love to our selves; as a Man fears
that, which he doubts will be destructive to that, which he makes his End. When
God sent Lions among the captive Israelites, it is said, they feared the Lord,
and served their own gods, 2 Kings 17.33. their fear and their Love was divided.

From hence proceeds Atheism it self: for it begins in the Affection, not in
the Understanding. The desire of that not to be, which the corrupted Soul
conceives an impediment or check to the prosecution of his supreme End, is that
which at length breeds a half persuasion in the Understanding that that, which
he desires should not be, indeed is not.

From hence proceed Idolatries and misapprehensions of God. When we will not
frame our selves to God, we endeavor to frame him to our selves: thou
thoughtest I was such an one at thou art. And from this cause are all those
will-worships, contrary to the Command of God. Did our chiefest Love settle
upon God, our Obedience would be Universal; but especially in this matter of
his worship: but when we make our selves our Ends, we measure him out such a
Worship, as may best please our selves, and suit with our own Contentment.

From hence proceeds Hypocrisy, a Form of Godliness without the power thereof,
2 Timothy 3.5. The Power of Godliness, which is nothing else, but the entire and
intense Love of God, cannot consist with that End a Man has chosen, viz.
himself; yet the shape and form of it, according as the occasion is, is
conducible to his Ease, Greatness, or Preferment: so the same self-love puts on
the shadow, and rejects the substance.

In matters relative to others: From this making a Man's self his End, proceed
all the acts and habits of Injustice, Oppression, Cruelty, Malice, Envy, that
is in the World; because he that makes himself his End, does with all vigor
pursue that, which he conceives good for himself; and if he meet with any
obstacle, or fear of an obstacle from another, it engages per fas and nefas
the ruin of that which he finds so hindering him: for all these Acts proceed
from the Love of himself.

In reference to a Man's self: He that makes himself his own End, is
subservient unto himself to the uttermost, in the pursuit and enjoyment of all
those things, which may please and content himself, according to the varieties
of Constitutions, Ages and Circumstances.

If it be in the Lusts of the Flesh, it will teach him to make provision for
the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. It will put him upon
studies, and inquiries, and pursuits of unnatural impurities, Romans 1.26. it
will make him give himself over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.19. because what a Man makes his chiefest End, he strives
by all means to please, in whatsoever way it discovers its delight or
acceptance.

If it be in Luxury, and delights in Meat and Drink, it will make a Man to
serve his Belly, Romans 16.18. It will make a Man's Belly his God, Phil. 3.19. A
Man making himself his End, observes which way the vein of his mind and delight
runs; he does serve that affection or delight with the same intenseness of
pursuit, as if it were his God; for what a Man makes his End, he makes his God.

If it be in the Lust of the Eyes, after Wealth or Possessions, a Man pursues
that with the same violence as a Heart well set, pursues after God: There shall
nothing stand in his way, neither the Command of God, nor Lives, nor Laws, nor
Justice, nor Reputation, nor a Man's own quiet, ease, health, life: For Self
has discovered her self in this desire, and he does pursue the satisfaction of
it as the firstborn of his End. The like for the Pride of Life, Ambition, etc.

And from hence grows the Pride of the Heart of Man. Every Man that makes not
God his Chiefest Good, and highest End, makes himself so. But this Self
discovers it self, according to varieties of Constitutions and Circumstances.
Self in one Man is his Lust; in another his Wealth; in another his Honor,
Power, and Command; in another, Wit, Learning, Policy: And these he pursues as
the firstborn of his End: And such as is his earnestness in the pursuit, such
is his fullness and contentedness when he enjoys, or thinks he enjoys it: and
that, especially in those pursuits that are less brutish, makes the Man so
high and so proud, because he is full of that, which he makes his End; he is
full of himself.

In the Sensual Appetite: This Motion or Faculty was planted in Nature by the
God of Nature, and is of it self good, when it keeps within those bounds, and
in that subordination, in which it was originally placed by the God of Nature
and Order; For it is the natural inclination and motion of Nature to its own
preservation and perpetuity: But our contracted Corruption has put this out of
its Place, and out of its Order, and out of its End. The rational part of Man
being become weak and out of frame, this that was placed in subordination to
it, has got the mastery of it, and so carries Man to all excess of Riot and
Luxury. The strength of the motion of the Sensual Appetite to its Objects, and
that Delight, that by the Goodness and Wisdom of God was planted in the
fruition of its Object, was not for its own sake, or the end of this motion;
but a wise dispensation of God to carry the humane Nature to its own
preservation: But Corruption in Man, has made that very Delight to be the end
of its motion; and therefore pursues that, though it be to the ruin and
distemper of his Nature. The very Beasts, that have not reason to rule them, do
instruct us in this very decay of our integrity: For although they have no
higher Guide, than that Law and Instinct, which God implanted in their Nature;
and although they have the same Delight in the fruition of their sensitive
Objects, as Man has; yet they seldom or never pursue their Appetites beyond
the convenience of the preservation of themselves and their Species: But it is
visibly otherwise with Men: and from hence is that excess in eating, drinking,
sleep and other sensitive inclinations; because they pursue not that End, for
which it was given, but the very pleasing and satisfaction of the Appetite it
self: So then the Old Man in the Sensual Appetite consists,

1. In the want of that Subjection and Subordination of it to the reasonable
part, which should direct, moderate, and restrain it, according as may be most
useful for that better part of Man; so that now this power is out of its place.

2. In that Exorbitancy and Extravagancy of it, whereby it runs to Excess; and
so it has lost its End, viz. the motion to the preservation of Nature. It is
true, God has given to the Sons of Men, in respect of these sensual things,
Objects, not only of necessity, but delight; But here is our misery, as well as
our sin; That either we rest not in what God lawfully allows, 2 Samuel 12.8. God
gives to David a full measure of temporal Comforts and Delights, and if that
had been too little; he would have given him more; yet David with Adam must
needs be tasting the forbidden Fruit: or in case we go no farther in the Object
of our pursuit, we go beyond it in the measure of our pursuits, resting in the
enjoyments of them, as of our chiefest Felicity, forgetting the God that gives
them, and those inquiries and pursuits that are of a higher Value and
Concernment; and, which is the highest degree of vileness of our Hearts, even
by those outward Blessings he gives us, we learn to admit his enemy into our
Hearts, to shut him out of it, and to fortify it against him. And from hence
it is, that the God of Mercy curses, and that most justly, his own Blessings
unto that Man, that thus perverts the use of them. Wine rejoices the Heart of
Man, as it was given for that purpose; But when a Man in the use of it looks no
higher, but to satiate himself, there is a sting put into it, and it proves a
Serpent, Prove. 23.32.

CHAP. XIV. How the Old Man is to be put off, and 1. by Repentance.
THUS far concerning the Old Man, the corruption of our Nature: Now we
consider, How he is to be put off.

This putting off the Old Man looks backward, and that is Repentance; forward,
and that is Mortification.

The order of God's dispensation to a particular Man, in bringing him to his
great and supreme End, holds a proportion with his dispensation to mankind
since the Fall: from the time of the Fall of Man till the giving of the Law, is
like the first Condition of our corrupted Nature, without God in the World:
Then he gave them his Law, thereby to show them what they should be, and what
they are; for the Rule is not only the discovery of it self, but of that
crookedness and irregularity which is in the deviation from it. Man having now
the opportunity of discovery of the defects, and consequently unhappiness, of
his own Condition, he sends the Baptist to call him to repentance, and then
discovers unto him the means of his recovery. Thus after our wandering in our
corruptions, God is pleased to show us our Condition, what it is, and what it
should be, by the sight of his Law; and that does naturally breed a dislike of
those ways, which lead to so unhappy an End. The grounds and way of Repentance,
are,

1. A sound Conviction of the Understanding concerning our natural ways and
Conditions.

1. That they are Irregular, Deformed, and Crooked ways: God gave to Man a
Righteous Law, and the Conformity to it was Man's Happiness and Perfection; for
the Goodness, which was the Perfection of all created Beings, consisted in
their Conformity to the particular Will of God concerning the Creature. That
Will concerning Man was the Law of God. This Law God has again new copied out,
that Man may as well measure himself by it, what he is, and has been, as guide
himself to what he should be.

2. The consequence of this therefore is, that those ways of his are
Unprofitable and Fruitless; and therefore are they called the Unfruitful works
of Darkness: and not only Unfruitful but Deadly; What fruit had ye then in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is Death.
And this must most necessarily follow upon the former; for if the Conformity to
the Will of God be the Perfection and Blessedness of the Creature, the
Violation of that Will must needs be both unprofitable and miserable: for Man
is out of his way to his Perfection, and therefore must necessarily meet with
nothing but Vanity and Misery. God, that has measured out to every thing his
Being, and the measure of his Perfection, has likewise chalked out the way of
attaining it, which, if a Man miss, he can never attain that End.

And upon this Conviction of the Irregularity, Unprofitableness, and
Dangerousness of his corrupted ways and condition, does naturally follow such
thoughts as these: I find God did make me a glorious Creature, fitted to
partake of a higher degree of Blessedness, than the inferior Creatures: I find
likewise that he gave me a most Just and Reasonable Law, which was the way to
lead unto it: I see that so much of the Creatures inferior to my self, as
observe the Law of their Creation, enjoy a measure of Perfection, answerable to
their Being; and if interrupted in that law of their Nature, they lose their
Beauty, if not their Being: The degree of my Being was higher than theirs, and
so was consequently the End of my Being, my Happiness, of a higher Constitution
than theirs: And as my Debt was greater to my Creator for allowing me so high
an End, so was my ability proportionable to the pursuit and attaining of that
End which was thus given to me. But what have I been doing all this while? I
have measured my Heart by that great Law, Thou shall love the Lord with all thy
heart; and I have found my Heart full of the love of the World, of Pleasures,
of Vanities, but scarce a thought bestowed on him, that gave me Power to think;
and, which is worse, my Heart has held confederacy with all that he has
forbidden, insomuch that I may justly conclude, that surely nothing but a Heart
hating God, could so constantly and universally oppose his Will: I have
measured my Life by the Law of God, and I can scarcely find one regular action
in it; my Heart has not been so out of frame, but it has still found a full
subservience of my whole Man unto it, and that with greediness: and yet I find
all this unsatisfactory, and I have cause to fear, that is not all: Sense does
tell me, that in the pursuit of the ways of my Heart, I spend my self for that
which is not Bread, and my labor for that which profits not: I find no
fullness in them, but much vexation: And Reason as well as Conscience tells me,
it will be bitterness in the end, and the end is death: I cannot but know, that
the great Lord of all Being, has measured out to all his Creatures their
Beings, and their Happiness suitable to their Beings, and their Ways and Rules,
and Laws, to attain their Happiness; and if all this while I have been out of
that Way, I am traveling to another End: If in the way of God I should have
found Life, and everlasting Life for my End, out of that Way, my End must be
Death: If I were now to begin my Life, I should order it better: Though I
cannot expiate what is past, yet my Soul looks upon it with Sorrow, with
Indignation, with Amazement. This is the first degree.

2. That they are Vnbecoming, Ungrateful and Undutiful Returns. It is implanted
even in the sensitive Nature, to return good for good: We have received all the
Good from the hands of that God, against whom the practice of our Hearts and
Lives has been a continual Rebellion: and upon this Consideration natural
Ingenuity works a Shame in the Soul, and a secret Condemnation, and some kind
of loathing so Ungrateful and Undutiful a Constitution.

3. But hitherto the Soul looks only backward; and these Considerations, though
they are enough to breed Shame and Despair in the Soul, yet they are not strong
enough to work Repentance; because in those Considerations, the Soul looks upon
it self in an unexpiable and irrecoverable Condition: The amendment will prove
fruitless, where the former guilt is irreversible, and yet enough to sink the
Soul: Therefore the third Conviction is of the love of God, that has provided
a means of pardon and acceptance: when a Man thoroughly convinced of the
unprofitableness and desperateness of his actions and condition, his extreme
Ingratitude unto God, shall for all this hear a voice, after all those things;
Return back thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you; for I am merciful, and will not keep mine anger for ever, only
acknowledge thine iniquity, Jer. 3.12, 13. This conquers the Soul not only into
a dislike of sin past, as dangerous and unprofitable, but unto a hatred of it,
and of our selves for it, as the enemy to such an invincible Love. The
Consideration of our ways past, and comparing them with the Law, will enforce
the Conscience to condemn them, but it must be the sense of the Love and
Goodness of God in Christ, that can only incline us to change them: as by the
former, he concludes his ways dangerous and unprofitable, so without the
latter, he will conclude his Repentance unuseful. And hereupon the Soul is cast
into such Expressions as these: O Lord, I have been considering the present
temper of my Heart, and reviewed the course of my Life, and have compared them
with the Duty I owe unto thee, and the Law which thou gave me to be the Rule
of that Duty; and I find my heart and ways infinitely disproportionable to that
Rule, and thereby I conclude my self a most ungrateful, and a miserable
Creature: But though I have sinned away that stock of Grace and Blessedness,
with which I was once entrusted by thee, I find I have not out-sinned that
Fountain of Goodness and Mercy, that is in thee; even whiles the sight and
sense of my own Condition, bids me despair either of repenting or acceptance
of it, yet I hear the voice of that Majesty which I have injured, bids me
Return and live, Ezekiel. 18.32. Were there no acceptance of my turning from those
ways of death and destruction, yet it were my duty; and though thy Justice
might justly reject it, yet it might justly require it: But yet when thy
merciful and free Promise shall crown my Repentance with Acceptance and Life:
This Love constrains beyond the sense of my own misery. And when I hear the
voice of my Lord calling to me to return, and I will heal your backslidings,
that Love warms my Heart into that answer, Behold, I will come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord my God, Jer 3.22. But who can come unto thee, unless thou
draw him? send therefore thy Power along with thy Command, for it is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs: Turn me, and I shall be turned; I will
engage the uttermost of my strength, to forsake my ways; but I will still wait
upon the same Mercy, that did invite me, to enable me to forsake them.

By that which preceeds we see a double Repentance: 1. That which is
Preparatory unto the receiving of Christ, which is nothing else but a sense of
the unhappiness and evil of our ways, as destructive unto our Happiness, and
dissonant from that Rule of Righteousness, which we cannot but naturally
subscribe to be Just and Good: and this does naturally breed a Sorrow for what
has been so done, and a Purpose and Inclination of Heart to forsake those
ways. And this was the work of the Baptist, to prepare the way of the Lord; his
Doctrine was a Doctrine of Repentance, and his Baptism, a Baptism of
Repentance, a Seal of the Entertainment of that Doctrine to as many as received
it, Matthew. 3.2. Luke 3.16. Acts 19.4. 2. That which is Subsequent to that
entertainment of Christ in the Heart by Faith, which is the sense of the love
of God in Christ continuing toward us, notwithstanding our many Injuries. This
fills the Heart with Sorrow and Wonder, and puts the Soul upon a flat
Resolution, never to sin against so great Love. This was that sorrow that
pricked the Jews to the heart, and brought in Repentance for remission of sins,
Acts 2.37, 38. Acts 3.19. that Sorrow that works Repentance unto Salvation, 2
Cor. 2.10. And though sometimes Christ appear unto the Soul without a Baptist,
and the light of the Love of God discovers the irregularity and filthiness of
our former ways and tempers; yet the usual method of his Grace and Providence
is to baptize* with the Baptism of John; and after with the Baptism of Christ,
Acts 19.5. The love of God being most naturally welcome, and operative when the
Soul has before taken a just survey of his Condition without the sight of that
love: But his ways are unsearchable, and past finding out.

And this Evangelical Repentance, viz. our sorrow for our past Offenses and our
purpose of better Obedience, is not only the Act of our first Conversion unto
God, but is to be our continual Exercise: there is a continual adherence of our
flesh and sin unto us; and notwithstanding the bent and frame of the Soul be
changed, yet there are continual Renewed Offenses, which though God is pleased
not to impute, yet as they are contrary to that Life in the Soul, and therefore
will be opposed by that Life, so they are still naturally our own and therefore
must and will be repented of and sorrowed for: For a Soul once truly affected
with the Love of God, would willingly have his whole Man, and Life, and
Thoughts and World conformable to the Will of God: and therefore every
struggling cannot choose but cause sorrow, and gather up the strength of the Soul
for the future against it. For the sins of the very Members of Christ, though
by his Righteousness and Satisfaction they have lost their power to condemn,
being his by imputation; yet they are sins still, and therefore objects of our
opposition, and ours in reality, and therefore objects of our Sorrow and
Repentance: and by how much the more they have our consent, by so much the more
they are sins, and ours. And as it is the Power and Grace of Christ, that
subdues the Dominion and prevailing of Sin; so this Grace does work by setting
the operations and affections of the Soul against it, especially in our Sorrow
and Repentance. Our Repentance after Conversion is nothing else, but the
struggling of the Life of Christ, to work out that poison of sin, which is
contrary unto it, and does weaken it, and would destroy it, 1 John 3.9. For his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

CHAP. XV. Of Mortification, and the Means thereof; and 1. Of Meditation.
2. WHERE Repentance ends, viz. in the purpose of forsaking the ways of Death,
there Mortification begins; and is nothing else, but the Execution of those
Purposes of the Soul, which are wrought by Repentance, by the use of all such
Means, as may for the future, weaken the power of sin in the Soul. This is that
which our Savior calls putting out the right Eye, and cutting off the right
Hand, crucifying the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, Galat. 5.24.
Mortifying the earthly Members, Colos. 3.5. Denying a Man's self, taking up the
Cross, Matt. 16.24. Dying daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. The World crucified to a Man,
and a Man to the World, Galat. 6.14. Putting off the body of the sins of the
Flesh, Colos. 2.11. The body of sin destroyed, Romans 6.6. Mortification
therefore is nothing else, but the daily practice of opposition against Sin,
especially such as we are most inclined to, and that by such Means as are
reasonably conducing to it. These Means, according to the several tempers, both
spiritual and natural, are more or less effectual; I shall divide them into
these degrees: 1. Supernatural Helps. 2. Moral or Rational Helps. 3. Natural
Helps.

1. Supernatural: They are rational Means, but fixed upon supernatural objects,
and discovered by supernatural Light; for it will most clearly appear, that
these very Helps which we call Supernatural, are most rationally effectual
against it:

Meditation and Prayer.

1. Meditation, and serious and deep Consideration of the Word of God, and the
Truths therein revealed, but especially of these ensuing:

1. A deep Meditation of the Love of God, whom I must needs offend in every
sin. And this is the most powerful Consideration in the World to mortify any
sin; and that is the reason why, where there is the truest and highest
manifestation of the Love of God to the Soul, there is the highest Purity;
because there is the highest Preservative against Sin: for it must needs be
clear, that where there is the highest manifestation of the Love of God to the
Soul, there is the highest Love again to God; and consequently the most
absolute dominion over sin: for as the Love of God is the cause of our Love to
him, 1 John 4.19. so according to the measure of the manifestation of the Love
of God to the Soul, is the measure of the Love of the Soul to God again; and
consequently of the hatred of sin: And he, that often and deeply considers of
the Love of God, must even rationally improve the sense of it to his Soul, and
consequently his Love to God again, and his abhorrence of Sin. When a Man shall
take such Considerations as these into him; God has commanded me to abstain
from this or that sin, whereunto, it may be, my Nature, my Custom, my
Temptation, inclines me: The competition is between my Pleasure, my Pride, my
Profit, and my Lord; he that gave me a Being; he that has given me all the
Comforts of my Being; he that might justly have taken me away to judgment in
the midst of my sin; but he has spared me, and waited upon me, that he might,
though I were righteous, make me a vessel of misery; he that has invited,
persuaded, entreated me to return unto him for my own good; that when I would
not, I could not return unto him, has sent his Son to fetch me, to redeem me
with the greatest Price that ever the World heard of: Behold what manner of
love. 1 John 3.1. And shall I, can I make so ill a return? to entertain his
Enemy, the only object of his displeasure, that will ruin me, before my Lord,
that has infinitely outdone my highest speculations for me? Certainly the
sense of the Love of God is either not at all, or not awake, when any Man
considerately commits any the least sin against his Conscience: It were no
less, than for a Man to return despite against the Love of God, and, as much
as in us lies, to disappoint his very End and Purpose in sending of Christ, who
therefore gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works.

2. A serious Consideratiun of the great and high Hope, to which we are
restored by the purchase of Christ, and the great Incongruity that there is
between continuing in Sin and that Hope. We expect to be brought to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the Assembly of the first, born, to the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, to
God the Judge of all, Heb. 12.22. etc. to be make like unto the Son of God, and
to be partakers of his Sonship, and Inheritance, 1 John 3.2. To partake of his
Spirit, to see the brightness of the glory of God in Christ: now all these are
holy: how unsuitable a thing is it for a Man that has his Hope, not to purify
himself, even as he is pure? 1 John 3.3. This will teach a Man to bespeak his
Heart thus: Is the Presence of God thy Hope? he is the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord,
that is of purer Eyes than to behold, or to be beholden by any unclean thing:
If therefore thou commit Sin, thou live below thy Hope: either therefore let
thy Hope be answerable to thy Life, or thy Life to thy Hope.

3. A serious Consideration of the Presence of the Great, and Just and Powerful
God: his Eyes run to and fro through the Earth, to behold the Evil and the
Good, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. He is acquainted with all my ways, Psalm. 139.3. His Eyes
are upon all the ways of the Children of Men, Jer. 32.19. The Hearts of Men,
Prove. 15.11. and all things are naked and manifest before him with whom we have
to do: And dare thou sin before the face of thy Judge, who sees thee, and
whose Power or Justice thou can not escape? this is so great a Control, that
were it soundly and deeply considered, it would stifle even the first motions
of sin, and therefore it is the great work of our own wicked Heart, either to
gull themselves into a persuasion, that God sees not, Job 22.13. or else in
plain English, to forbid him their Hearts: they say to God, Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 22.14.

4. A deep Consideration of the Nature and Consequences of Sin: It is a
Violation of a Righteous and Just Law, the Law of a Just and Righteous God, a
Law, the conformity whereunto, is the Perfection and Blessedness of the
Creature: By this sin I lose my Communion with my Creator, and consequently,
Peace within my self: whiles I commit it, my fruition is but short, and mingled
with Fear, because the end of it, Death, is in some degree present with my
Soul, and sowers that transitory Content which I enjoy in it; and when it is
finished, it brings forth Sorrow, and Shame, and Death: and if that Sorrow end
in Repentance, yet the bitterness of that Sorrow overweighs the Pleasure that I
had in its commission; and according to the measure of the delight I had in my
sin, so, and much more is the measure of my sorrow in repenting; and yet for
all this, that Peace, which I had formerly with my God and my Conscience, very
hardly recovered; and God, though he pardons my sin, yet either not at all, or
not suddenly, trusting me with that measure of Communion with him, which I
formerly enjoyed and abused. But if the sorrow of Repentance wait not upon my
sin, a worse sorrow attends it: the sin is past, and so is the contentment, but
the storm that attends it, is Everlasting: the loss of the light of God's love,
the loss of an Eternal weight of Glory, the terrible appearance of an angry
God, clothed with as much Terror, as Justice provoked, Patience abused, and
Mercy contemned by a most indebted Creature, can assume. And this Terror shaken
into the most tender and sensible parts of the Soul by the hand of Omnipotence
it self, and that unto all Eternity, when my Life shall be full of nothing but
the preapprehensions of my future misery, my death, the terrible, inexorable,
and inevitable passage to it: Shall I then so madly prize the satisfying of a
base, a perishing Lust for a season? thus throw away my God, my Happiness, my
self, when the thing it self is so base and transitory, and the wages so sad
and dismal? It shall be my care to avoid, to subdue, to crucify that, which as
it cannot satisfy, so it will certainly torment and ruin me. And since I find
my Lusts to be so easily actuated into Sin by every Temptation, I shall by the
Grace of God, as avoid the latter, so keep a strict hand over the former; and
it shall be my hourly care to ransack and examine, and search my Heart, what is
moulding there, and to cleanse and wash it from its pollutions; or at least to
mingle my Tears and Sorrows with them, that so they may be weary of my Heart,
or my Heart of them. But, Lord, Who understands the errors of his life?
Cleanse thou me from my secret sins, and keep thy servant from presumptuous
sins, Psalm. 19.12.

5. Frequent Considerations of the Shortness of Life: the Lord has given me a
great Work to do, to work out my salvation with fear and trembling: and the
Time wherein I have to do it, is in this Life, and that but a short and an
uncertain Life: the great Enemies to my Soul, are the Lusts of my Flesh, and of
my Mind, which fight against my Soul: If the work be not done in my Lifetime,
the Door is shut; and who knows whether this or that Sin which I am now about
to commit, may not be concluded with my Life? and then in what a case am I? how
shall I appear before the Holy and Eternal God with the stain of that sin upon
me? or if he prolong my days, yet who knows whether he will not seal up my Soul
with impenitency? If my Lust prevail upon me now, it gathers strength, and
vexes that Spirit, which must only enable me for the future, to repent and
resist it; and if I get the Victory over the contestations of the Spirit of
God, my Conquest ends in my own Misery and Slavery. It may be, I have
over-matched and stifled the Persuasions of the Spirit of God, of that Lighit
which he has set up in my Conscience, that did sting me in the midst of my
Cariere after my Lusts, and mingled them with bitterness to my discontent, and
now I pursue my Desires without interruption: yet when I remember that Death is
at my heels, and will overtake me before I can overtake my Contentment in the
things I pursue; that if I overlive a sudden unexpected Death, yet the
Harbingers of Death, Sickness, or Age, cannot be far off, and either of these,
as they will take off the edge of my Pursuit, and fruitions of my Lusts, and
render them insipid, so they will thereby give leisure and opportunity to me to
cast up the Accounts of my past Life, and find therein nothing but Vanity and
Unprofitableness; Time, that might have been improved to Eternity,
irrecoverably lost in those Pursuits, that have left no footsteps of Content in
my Soul^ but instead thereof, a bruised and wounded Conscience; a displeased
and an angry God, an infinite Happiness offered and sold for a few unprofitable
and perished Pleasures and Lusts; when I shall find an infinite Guilt
contracted, a Soul clogged with a custom of sin, a Body now ready to drop into
dissolution, a great work to do, to make the Peace of my Soul; a God by whose
only strength I can do it, hiding himself and his influence from me, and Death
by his hasty and churlish Officers, still ready to seize me, to carry me off,
without regard to the importunity and concernment of a little longer time: such
thoughts as these, will work upon a Man to keep a hand over himself, over his
Flesh, over his Lust, while it is called to day, not to harden the Heart, to
give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; to get Oil in the
Lamp, to break off the course of sin, to cleanse our hearts, to improve this
little portion of time to our best advantage; for Death will come, and after
that, Judgment. Lord, so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

CHAP. XVI. Meditation of the Unreasonableness of the Dominion of Lust.
6. A SAD and deep Consideration of the Unreasonableness and Vnbecomingness of
the Power and Dominion of any Lust upon a Man. And this, though it be a moral
Consideration, is of good use for the mortifying of our Lusts. S. Paul divides
our Lusts into the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Lusts of the Mind: Ephesians. 2.3.
S. John tells us, that all that is in the World, is the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, 1 John 2.16. Out of both these, we may
divide the Enemies of our Soul within us, into these Divisions,

1. Lust; which is nothing else, but the immoderate and inordinate actings of
the Appetite, either beyond that measure it ought to be, or upon those Objects
it ought not to be. And this either

1. In the Rational Appetite; those are the Lusts of the Mind.

2. In the Sensitive Appetite; those again

1. In the Lusts of the Flesh.

2. The Lust of the Eyes.

2. Pride, in an overvaluing of our selves in the fruition of those things we
have thus pursued.

Now we shall a little consider, how far forth any of these do hold a
disproportion, even with right Reason.

1. The Lusts of the Mind. The great Desire of the Mind, is that of Knowledge,
an Appetite that God has put into the Soul of Man, and so a thing beautiful
and good: But this very Desire of Knowledge, becomes a Lust of the Mind, when
either it is misplaced in respect of his Object; thus Adam's desire of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, became a Lust: or when acted beyond its proportion:
The chiefest Object of our Love, ought to be the chiefest object of our
Knowledge, and consequently of our desire of Knowledge, and that is only God:
and he is to be known, and consequently, we ought to desire to know him, as he
has revealed himself in his Word, in his Works, and by his Spirit. When either
therefore we desire to know, even in things pertaining to God, beyond what we
ought to know, as the Counsels of his Will, looking into the Ark; or when we
desire to know things of an inferior nature with an over-intensive desire,
which is only due to God; our want of Sobriety in the former, and our want of
Moderation in the latter, turns our desire of Knowledge into a Lust of the
Mind, or when acted without his due End: Good, and the fruition of it, is the
great and final object of the Soul, and as the Acts of the Understanding are
preparatory to the Will, so Knowledge, and the desire of it, is, or should be,
preparatory to the fruition of some Good, farther and beyond the bare
speculative Knowledge of it: If it were possible for a Man truly to know God
without the Love of him, and the sense of his Love to the Soul, a desire of
such a Knowledge, though I dare not term it a Lust of the Mind, yet it is such
a desire, as is not rightly qualified. To desire to know a thing fit to be
known, merely because I would know it; It is but a Lust of the Mind, and such a
Knowledge as only puffs up. Now any Man may rationally conclude, that such
desires of the Mind as these, are even condemned of Reason it self, as
irregular and useless: It is true, that whatsoever is an object of our
Knowledge, may be an object of our desire of Knowledge, if not forbidden by him
that gave the Power; if acted with Moderation and Sobriety; if subordinated to
that desire which I have, or should have to that great object of my Knowledge:
But for a Man to spend his choicest hours and thoughts, and inquiries upon
unnecessary, perishing, useless objects; Reason it self will conclude, as the
Preacher would have the covetous Man, Eccles. 4.8. For what do I labor, and
bereave my soul of good?

And as thus in the Intellectual Faculty, there are Lusts of the Mind, so are
there in the Rational Appetite, the Will and Affections: The Passions in the
Soul are natural to it, and therefore naturally good: therefore want of natural
Affection, is a thing condemned in the old World, Romans 1.31. But when these
Affections are acted beyond their natural end and use, they become corrupt and
putrified, and so Lusts of the Mind. And this is seen in either Faculty,
Irascible and Concupiscible: and by how much the more spiritual they are, by so
much the more devilish and hurtful, and yet condemned by sound Reason.

The Passion of Anger was planted in the Mind, and is good, when acted upon a
right object, and in a due measure, Ephesians. 4.26. But this Passion being
overacted, it becomes putrified, and a Lust of the Mind: it then turns into
Malice, to Envy: The Spirit that is in us lusts after Envy, Jam. 4.5. into
desire of Revenge: and thus Lust conceives upon this Passion of the Soul, and
brings forth Sin. Now all these are evidently against right Reason; Because
even sound Reason teaches us, to love all that is good: Every Being has in it
self a goodness, and does naturally challenge our Love; and therefore to desire
the destruction of any Being is against the Law and Rule of Reason; or to
desire a less or more low degree of Being to it than it has. It is true, there
may be some irregularity in it, which I may and must hate: But when my hatred
is in the concrete, and takes in the Being of any thing which is good, as well
as that which I conceive an irregularity within the compass of it, as is in all
Malice and Revenge; then is my Passion mis-acted, corrupted, and proves a lust
of the Mind. Suppose a Man has done me an extreme injury, and intends to
continue it, right Reason will discriminate between the Man and his Fault; and
whiles it is angry with the Man, yet it hates him not; it will hate the
Injustice of the Man, and destroy that, but not the Man: it may be he hates me
without a cause, his Fault cannot justify mine: God has given him a Being,
and is the only Lord of it; and that Being of his is good, and deserves my Love
to preserve it; his offense is the only object of my hatred, and cannot give me
a Commission to destroy the Subject. It is true, that in order to my
preservation, I may do such a thing as may be prejudicial to him that hates me,
with such moderation, that the evil I do him, must not exceed the evil that
otherwise I might suffer by him; for this is agreeable to right Reason* But
this must be without the least grain of Revenge, so much as in my thought; For
all Revenge has in it somewhat of Irregularity: The great God, to whom
Vengeance alone belongs, Rom* 12.19. that is absolute Lord of his Creature, and
therefore can owe him nothing, yet punishes not by way of Revenge, as a party
injured, but by way of Justice, as the supreme Judge, that inflicted that
Penalty that was annexed to his righteous Law when he gave it: Nothing that one
Creature could do to another could be said to be Unjust, were it not that it is
against the Law of this supreme Lawgiver and Judge; and therefore Retribution
in me that am injured, is an act of Revenge, in God an act of his Justice: and
when he inflicts his Punishment, though in respect of me, that suffered, it is
his Revenge, yet in respect of his Law that is broken, it is but his own
Justice.

The Lusts of the Flesh: There are certain Natural Propensions in us for the
preservation of our temporal being and kind; those are planted in our Nature by
the God of Nature, as well as in the nature of sensitive Creatures, and are in
themselves good, when acted according to that Rule which God has given unto
us. Those Rules are such as either are adequate to the Sensitive Nature, viz.
That they should be acted with due proportion, and to the end for which they
are so implanted in our Nature: or such as are applicable to them in respect of
that higher degree of Being, that is in our Nature, viz. that they should be
acted with subordination to the dictate of right Reason: And when either of
these fail, even these natural Propensions do become Lusts of the Flesh, and
fight against the Soul; for they are not in their place, and consequently breed
a disorder in the Soul. This is easy to be seen in the consideration of both
of these defects: The Appetite of Eating and Drinking is no Lust, but a
Propension incident to our Nature, for the Preservation of the Compositum: But
when a Man shall act it beyond its due proportion, eat or drink to Excess; or
when a Man shall use it to a wrong End, to eat or drink, because he will eat
and drink, placing the end of his Appetite in the use of it; now he
transgresses the first Rule, he makes his Belly his God; and his Appetite
becomes a Lust. Again, if a Man shall give way to his Appetite, though in a due
proportion, or to a due end, yet if upon rational Circumstances a greater Good
shall be thereby lost, or a greater Evil thereby incurred, then this Appetite
becomes a Lust, because it is out of its place, and wants its due subordination
to right Reason; as when my eating or drinking shall scandalize my weak
Brother, for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 10.28. and thereby bring a greater loss
to him, than good to my self. Again, if either the Providential Dispensation of
God, or his Command, be against it, it makes the exercise of that Appetite to
become a Lust, because it wants that subordination to right Reason; for it is
the most uncontrollable Principle of Reason, to bear an universal subjection to
the Command and Will of God: Thus when God by the course of his Providence,
called to fasting, then to find slaying of Oxen and killing of Sheep, the
Appetite becomes a Lust. Again, when God forbad the eating of the Fruit of the
Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil, then Adam's eating becomes a Lust, and
consequently, a snare unto him; for his sensitive Appetite was out of its
place, it should have been subordinate to his Reason, but it was above it. And
these Excesses of the fleshly Appetite are expressed by several Expressions in
the Word of Truth: sowing to the Flesh, Galat. 6.8. making provision for the
Flesh, Romans 13. ult. warring after the Flesh, 2 ^or. 10.3. walking after the
Flesh, Romans 8.2. 2 Pet. 2.10. viz. when a Man makes it his Business to study
the desires of his fleshly Appetite, and to fulfill it: And the disorder that is
wrought in the Soul by this misplacing of the sensual Appetite, Ephesians. 4.19.
Who being past feeling, have given themselves over to las^iviousness, to work
all uncleanness with greediness, Galat. 5.17. The Flesh lusting against the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.11. Fleshly Lusts warring against the Soul, Romans 1.24. given
over to vile Affections, Romans 6.19. yielding your members servants to
uncleanness, Romans 7.23. A Law in the Members ^arring against the Law of the
Mind, and bringing it into captivity. It is a sad thing for any Man to think,
that such a disorder should be in the Soul, that the nobler part born to rule,
should be a Captive and a Slave to the inferior part of Man; much more when
that noble part shall become a willing Vassal, and Prostitute to that part of
Man, which is no higher than a Beast; and not only so, but improve its own
Ability, Wit, Skill, and Power to make that part of our Nature below a
sensitive Creature. The Beasts, as has been observed before, though their
sensual Appetite be their highest Faculty, and so moves not in a subordination
to any higher Power, yet they move conformable to the End, for which those
Propensions were implanted in them: But when the sensual Appetite in Man has
captivated his Reason, which should be her guide and ruler, it is made the
worse by her Prisoner; and now its motions are not only absolute, and without
control of Reason, excentrick to that very natural Rule given to the motions
of the same sensitive Appetite in the very Sensitives themselves: And the
reason is partly because the Wisdom of God has given a kind of natural Law or
Boundary to those Propensions in the Sensitives, because they have no higher
Power in them to regulate them; but to Man he gave a higher Power to order and
manage this sensual Appetite, which Power having lost his sovereignty, the
sensual Appetite does not only want his Bounds, but also having corrupted and
displaced that higher Faculty, is again corrupted by it, and made by her
captive, and at length by Custom, the reasonable Soul becomes only an
Instrument to contrive and execute the most exquisite satisfaction it can for
those Lusts of the Flesh.

Now as any Man that has so much command of his Mind, as a little to call it
off from this drudgery, cannot choose but conclude the extreme unfitness and
uncomeliness of such a transposition of his Faculties; so when it pleases God
to open our Eyes, that we can see the state and frame of our Minds and Souls,
as once the Prophet's Servant's Eyes were opened to see that better sight of
the heavenly Host, we should see more confusion, discrepancy and disorder in
our Souls, more cruelty, mischief, and filthiness, by reason of the rule of
those Lusts within us, than if we should see the Slaves of a once well-governed
City in a Rebellion, mastering their Lords, and making them serve to their
basest Commands, rifling their Treasures, burning their Habitations, and
turning all places, Orders and things into ruin and confusion. And therefore
the study of the reducing these Rebels to their former subjection, even by
strict severity and discipline, which is the Business of Mortification, cannot
choose but be a most rational Work.

Now from this disorder, that arises in the Soul by the Old Man, which is
nothing else but the inverting and displacing of those powers and motions of
the Creature, from that beautiful and conformable Place and Order, wherein God
had once set them, proceed all those enormities and confusions that are in the
World, James 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? Lust has made a disorder
and tumult within, and there it cannot rest long, but works the like without
also. God has set every thing in his place and order, and bounded it with
certain Limits and Rules; and as long as they keep within their Places, Orders
and Rules, there is Beauty and Concordance with it self, and other things; but
when that Order and Rule of things is broken, then follows Confusion and
Deformity; and as the things so displaced disagree with other things, that are
in their Places and Orders, so those must needs disagree with them; much more
must things that are out of their Places and Orders disagree one with another.
When a Man over-mastered by any Lust, meets with another Man over-mastered with
the same, or any other Lust, there must needs be a discord between them: these
are the Works of the Flesh ad extra, Gal. 5.19.

2. The Lust of the Eyes. The wise Man tells us, The Eye is not satisfied with
seeing, Prove. 27.20. Eccles 1.8. And this is natural to the capacity of that
sense, and may be useful: But that which is principally meant by this Lust, is
the over-eager prosecution of such Objects, as are most delightful to the Eye,
viz. of Wealth, which is Covetousness; and of Honor, or High Place, which is
Ambition: These two Lusts are prosecuted upon a double ground: 1. As things
pleasing to our sight; insomuch that the Wise Man concludes, that the greatest
good in the most substantial of them, is the beholding of them with the Eyes of
the Owner, Eccles. 5.11. But this is not all, for we see even in ^ind Men, the
same desire of Wealth and Glory, as in others. Therefore, 2. A mistaken
Over-va^^ation of them, as things of the most absolute use and safety: The
natural Man makes himself, as he is constituted in this Life, his chiefest End;
and according as the several judgments and dispositions of Men, they take up
several ways for the improvement, or security, or pleasure of their temporal
Being here: the Voluptuous Man, the Covetous Man, the Revengeful Man, the
Ambitious Man, have all one End, viz. Self: But Self discovers it self several
ways, according to the several Dispositions and Principles that are in those
several Men: Wealth and Honor, they are the Blessings of God, and of excellent
use to our present subsistence, and may be desired and endeavored for with
moderation, in order to our preservation, posterity, and safety: But then it
becomes a Lust, when they are overvalued, and consequently over eagerly
prosecuted; and then by degrees the Man is so captivated with it, and
habituated to it, that as he placed his Felicity in his temporal Being here, so
he places the security, strength, and life of this Felicity in his Honor or
Wealth; and so makes it his God, Colos. 3.5. For as it is agreeable to our
corrupt Nature, to make that our Idol, wherein, or whereby we find the greatest
sensible good conveyed to us, be it an Onion, or a Calf, or a Crocodile, as was
the use of the Egyptians; so if we once exceed those Bounds of Moderation,
which we ought to bear toward any sensible good, it believes an Idol; for it
takes away part of that Portion of Love and Duty, which we owe to God, Prove.
18.10, 11. The same that God is to a Man that is righteous, the same does a
covetous Man make his Riches, viz. his strong City. It is impossible, but Man
must needs find himself a depending Creature upon somewhat without him; he
cannot live without Meat, Drink, Clothing, support against Injuries, Violence,
and Want, he has lost the Knowledge of God, upon whom in truth his dependence
is, and therefore fastens upon that which is most visibly in his way for his
support, Riches and External Power: and this he concludes and resolves to
compass per fas and nefas, even through the destruction and blood of those that
stand in his way: And having attained to some convenient proportion, yet partly
through the emptiness and deceitfulness of the Object, which we pursue, partly
through the insatiableness of that Lust, which we endeavor to satisfy, we
rest not in the pursuit, though we grow secure in the enjoyment. Soul, thou have much laid up, etc. Luke 12.19. And thus this Lust robs God of that, which
is most due and dear unto him, our Dependence and our Love; so that it is
impossible to serve them both, Luke 16.13. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. For
that, which a Man most values, will be sure to have most of his Heart, Matthew.
6.21. Now if there were the true Knowledge of God in our Hearts, this Lust
would die of it self: If a Man considers, that this Life consists not in the
multitude of the things we enjoy, Luke 12.15. That our heavenly Father, who
knows our wants, requires us to cast our Care upon him, Matthew. 6.32. 1 Pet.
5.7. That Promotion comes not from the East, nor West, but it is God that
sets up one, and casts down another, Psalm. 75.7. That he gives all
Creatures their Meat in due season, Psalm. 145.16. That except he build the
House, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127.1. That he has commanded
us to cast our Burdens upon him, and he will sustain us, Psalm. 51.22. to commit
our ways unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, Psalm.
37.5. that Riches are his Gift, and commands us to trust in the Giver, not the
Gift, 2 Timothy 6.17. that though he give the possession of what we desire, he can
deny the fruition of what we possess, Eccles. 2.24. That a Man should enjoy
good in his Labor, is the gift of God, Eccles. 4.19. He can grant us Quails,
but with it can send leanness into the Soul, Psalm. 106.15. and can increase the
Wealth to the Owners hurt, Eccles. 5.13. That it is not the Bread I eat, but
the Word, the Commission of God to his Creature, that maintains my Life, Matthew.
2.4. He can make holes in our Bags, and blow upon our Labors, Hab. 1.6. 9.
That he will withhold no good thing from them that fear him, Psalm. 84.11. Psalm.
35.10. Though Men of low degree are Vanity, yet Men of high degree are a Lie;
and therefore though Riches increase, yet he has commanded me not to set my
Heart upon them, Psalm. 62.9, 10. These, and the like Considerations, deeply
digested, will make a Man to carry a loose affection and pursuit of Riches or
Honor, and put the Soul upon such Resolutions and Contemplations as these: O
Lord, thou have brought me into this World, wherein is great variety of all
things; and I see the men of this World hunting and pursuing after Wealth, and
Honor, and Power, and making it the business of their Lives; and in this their
pursuit often disappointments; and if successful, yet full of anxiety; and if
they attain any measure of what they pursue, yet are still unsatisfied in what
they have attained; and yet consider not that there is a Lie in their right
hand: and what Profit has he that labors for the Wind? A Wind that may
swell and torment, but not satisfy the Soul: And it is evident, that
oftentimes, though thy Providence succeed their Desires and Ambitions, so that
they seem to have rolled up their Stone almost to the top of their Wishes; yet
the encounter of, it may be, a small, and seemingly inconsiderable Circumstance
tumbles all down again, if not to their ruin, yet to their vexation and
disappointment. And thus we walk in a vain shadow, and disquiet our selves in
vain, and spend that stock of Time, and Life, and Strength, and Opportunity in
unprofitable, unsatisfactory Labor, till the Night overtakes us, and then
whose shall all these things be? Luke 12.20. Blessed be thy Name, that in the
midst of all this variety, those many things, about which we are careful and
troubled, yet thou have showed us, that there is one thing needful* Luke 1^.42.
and have showed us what it is, and how to attain it: and this shall be the
greatest Business of any, because of greatest Consequence, to work out my
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. To give all diligence to make my
Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. That when the terrible Cry of Death and
Judgment shall come, I may have Oil in my Lamp, before the Door be shut, and
may be able to give my Lord an account of my Stock with Comfort and Joy. It is
true, the condition of my Nature stands in need of outward supplies for my
defense and preservation; and the wise Dispensation of thy Providence, as it
has fitted this our Habitation on Earth, with things useful for our
Pilgrimage; so it has made Industry and Diligence the way to attain them: he
that will not labor, let him not eat: and the same Wise and Bountiful Hand
has not only furnished our way with supplies for our necessity, but with
provisions for our delight: I will therefore diligently go on in that course,
wherein thy Providence has cast me; for it is the ^avel thou have given me to
be exercised withal, Eccles. 3.10. But I will not make this the End, the
Business of my Life; The one thing necessary shall be always in my Eye; and
that it may be continually my Work, I will endeavor to improve even my worldly
Employment into a spiritual, by doing it in Obedience to the Command of God,
and that Order which he has set in the World; by walking conscionably in it,
as in the presence of God; by casting my Care upon him, nothing solicitous
concerning the success, but leaving it to him that governs all things; by
observing the passages of his Wisdom, Mercy, and Power, in the passages and
Successes of it; by recumbence and resting upon his Promise for a subsistence,
Psalm. 37.3. Verily thou shall be fed; by my Patience and Contentedness with
whatsoever Condition he shall cast me into, and a cheerful Resignation of my
self into his hands, who has given me Christ; and how shall he not with him
give me all things else? If he is pleased to straiten my Condition, and make my
Labors unsuccessful, and feed me with Bread of Affliction, and Water of
Affliction; yet if he afford me the Light of his Countenance, the assurance of
his Favor, the pardon of my Sins, the sound hope of Eternity, blessed be his
Name: In the midst of my Exigences, I shall learn with the Prophet Hab. 3.7.
Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines,
the labor of the olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, etc. yet
I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation: I shall
learn with Moses, to esteem the reproach of Christ, greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. I shall improve my Necessities and Exigences,
to take off my Soul from the over-greedy pursuit of these Inferiors, to
establish and settle my Heart in the hope of that eternal weight of Glory, the
Contemplation and Expectation whereof, is able to swallow up the momentany
Sufferings, as well as Pleasures of this Life, with Job 14.14. to wait till my
change come, to magnify the Mercy and Bounty of my Lord, who, whiles my sins
deserve the loss of all, is pleased to continue unto me that which is best, and
makes my Wants not so much the Punishment, as the Cure of my Sin: and though he
brings me into a Wilderness, yet there he speaks comfortably to me: I shall
learn to make his Will, the measure of mine own: and whiles I remember that he
is the absolute Lord of his own Creature; that he manageth and orders all the
Events and Concurrences in the World, by a most Wise and most Righteous
Providence; that he feeds the young Ravens when they cry, Creatures that need a
liberal supply, and yet have no means to procure it; that he is pleased to
reveal himself in his Word unto me in such terms, as are most comprehensive of
Power and Mercy; I will learn to wait upon him patiently, cheerfully, and
dependingly: If it be his Pleasure to enlarge his hand, I shall thankfully
receive it, as a free addition; if not, yet I will not change my Wants, my
Necessities, my Scorns, accompanied with the Favor of God, nor sell the least
degree of the Light of his Countenance, for all the Supplies of Glory and
Abundance, that Heaven and Earth can afford. If I can but say upon found
grounds, the Lord is my Portion, Psalm. 16.5. Like the Tree that Moses cast into
the Waters of Marah, Exodus 15.23. It makes those bitter Waters sweet, and puts
more Joy in my Heart, than in the time that their Corn and their Wine
increased, Psalm. 4.6.

But if it please him, together with the Light of his Countenance, to give me a
competency of Externals, to feed me with Food convenient for me, with Agar,
Prove. 30.8. though with David, Psalm. 23. my Cup runs not over; yet if the Lord
be the Portion of my Cup, Psalm. 16.5. O Lord, should thou deny me all
things, even necessary for my present subsistence; yet I have Portion enough in
thy Favor, and the Light of thy Countenance, for which I owe thee more than
all the thankfulness and strength of my Soul, and such a Portion as would bear
up my Heart in the midst of all my Exigences: When thy Son bore our Nature in
the Flesh, though the sense of thy Love supported him, yet he wanted things of
convenience, he became poor, that we might be rich.

But if it shall please God to add the Blessings of his left hand to the
Blessings of his right hand, (as rather than deny me the latter, I beseech
thee, give me not the former) If he shall bless me in the Fruit of my Body, and
my Ground, and command a Blessing upon my Storehouses, and all that I set my
hand unto, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 8. I will learn to serve the Lord my God with joyfulness
and gladness of Heart for the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. to
contemplate and bless that good hand of God, that gives me power to get
Wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. To look with more comfort and delight upon that Hand that
gives, than in the very Blessing that is given; to set a watch over that evil
and deceitful Heart of mine, that is able to turn my Blessing into my Snare; to
beware, lest when all that I have is multiplied, my Heart be lifted up, and I
forget the Lord my God, Deuteronomy. 8.13, 14. To beware, lest when my Riches
increase, I set my Heart upon them, Psalm. 62.10. and trust in uncertain Riches,
1 Timothy 6.17. To remember that I am but a Fiduciary, a Steward of them, they are
not given me to look upon, but to use them, as one that must give an account of
them; to watch over my self, that I use them soberly, with moderation, and as
in his presence, that I turn not the Grace and Bounty of God into Excess, or
Wantonness; to look upon all the Goodness, Comfort and Use of them, as flowing
from the Blessing and Commission, that God sends along with them, Eccles. 2.24.
That a man should make his soul enjoy good in his labor, this also is from the
hand of God; To beware that the multiplication of Blessings, do not rob my
Creator of one grain of that Love, Service, and Dependence, that I owe unto
him; to carry a loose affection toward them; for it is infallibly true, that
where the Heart is truly set upon God, and makes him his Portion, it enables a
Man equally to bear all Conditions, because the object of his Soul is immutable
and invaluable, though his external Condition alter: an accession of Externals
may carry up such a Soul in a more sensible apprehension of the Goodness of
him, whom the Soul loves; it cannot steal away one jot of that Love, which it
owes to the giver; the Creature it self is of too low a value to diminish the
Love to the Creator: a Heart, that is rightly principled, cannot find any good
in the Creature, but what he will derive from, and carry to the object of his
Love.

3. The Pride of Life: There are two great Cardinal Truths, whereof if the Mind
be soundly convinced, it puts a Man in a right frame and temper of Spirit in
the whole course of his Life:

1. That there is an essential universal Subjection due from all Creatures to
the Will and Power of God: This is the ground of all true Obedience, and all
true Humility; which is nothing else, but a putting of the Mind into a Posture
and frame answerable to that Position, wherein by Nature it is framed, a
conformity of the Mind to the Truth and Station wherein it is set.

(2.) That all Goodness, Beauty, and Perfection, is originally in God, and
nothing of Good, Beauty, or Perfection is in any thing, but derivatively from
him, according to that measure, that he is freely pleased to communicate. This
keeps the Heart in a continual Love of him, Dependence upon him, and
Thankfulness unto him.

From the Ignorance of those, is the ground of all the Pride in the World,
which is nothing else, but a false placing of the Mind in such a Condition or
Station, or the opinion of such a Station wherein in truth, he is not, and so
it disorders the Mind: it makes a Man, that is essentially subordinate to God,
and depending upon him, to place himself above God, and to be independent upon
him: And though this false opinion cannot alter his condition in truth; for he
that has said, My Will shall stand, cannot be removed by the pride or
resistance of Man; yet as to the Man himself, it puts him out of his place, and
in the room of God: And therefore above all other distempers of the Soul, this
is the most hateful to God: for as the proud Man resists God, and labors to
get into his place, so God resists him, 1 Pet. 5.5. Prove. 3.24. And this
Ignorance, or not full subscription to these two Truths, will appear to be the
foundation of all the Pride in Men.

1. From the Ignorance of the former, of the subjection we owe to God, proceeds
that Pride that manifests it self in Rebellion and Disobedience against God.
God challenges the subjection of our Wills to his, as justly he may, and Man
will have his own Will take place, Jer. 42.14. No, but we will go into the ^and
of Egypt. Luke 19.14. We will not have this Man to rule over us: And as among
Men, Pride is the Mother of Contention, because it puts a Man out of that
place, wherein he is; and he does consequently put himself in the place of
another, and thence come Contentions; so from this Pride of Men, putting
themselves into the place of God, comes the contention between God and man: He
that has said, he will not give his Glory to another, will not give his Place
to his Creature, but resists the proud: And from this ignorance of that
subjection we owe to God, proceeds that Haughtiness and Arrogance, which we
find in the Spirits of Men, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should let the
people go? Job 21.15. What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Dan.
3.15. Who is that God, that shall deliver you out of my hands? This Ignorance
was that which bred that haughty speech in Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. Is not
this great Babylon, etc. Till God by his immediate hand made him know, that he
is able to abase them that walk in pride, Ibid. Verse 37. And hence it is, that
Men are compassed with Pride, as a Chain, when they set their mouth against the
Heavens, Psalm. 73.6, 9, 11. And this manifestation of Pride, is principally in
the Will, because it is the absence of that subjection, which we owe to his
Will.

2. From this want of the due knowledge of the subjection, we owe to the Power
of God, proceeds that Pride which evidenceth it self in that vain Confidence
and Security, which men put in themselves, or those other accessions of
Friends, Wealth, Power, Policy, etc. Revel. 3.17. I am rich and increased in
goods, and have need of nothing, Luke 12.17. And I will say to my soul, Soul,
thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease* Isa. 28.14. When
the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come near us, for we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood, have we hid our selves. This was
the speech of the scornful Men of Ephraim, who had not Humility enough to
shelter themselves under their Maker, and yet had so much Baseness of Spirit,
as to make a Lie their Refuge and Security, Isa. 30.2. trust in a shadow; Verse
12. in oppression and perverseness, Isa. 31.1. in Horses and Chariots, Isa.
47.7. I shall be a Lady for ever: I am, and there is none else besides me: to
see the pride and arrogance of a Heart, that knows not God, even to take upon
it the very self-sufficiency of God himself. Now when a Heart truly knows the
Power of God, the essential Dependence that all things and events have upon
him, how easily, without the interposition of his own immediate hand, he can
manage some little inconsiderable Circumstance, to break and confound the most
complicated and twisted Securities that a whole Nation can make for it self; he
will soon learn to look upon all these external contributions to Happiness and
Safety, as vanity and nothing, much less will he repose any confidence in them.
And to break the Children of Men from this deifying themselves, and the sparks
that they have kindled, Isaiah 50.11. God does most commonly, as I may say, set
himself to blast and subvert those Refuges of Men, their Idols, with the most
unlikely and improbable means, Job 5.13. He catches the wise, even with their
own craftiness, intangles the Powerful by their own strength; or arms some
impotent, unexpected Emergency, a nothing, in a moment to shatter in pieces
what Men have been many Years or Ages building up, and fortifying into a
Confidence, with multiplicity of Supplies.

3. By the Ignorance of the latter, viz. That the Original of all Good is in,
and from God, arises that Haughtiness and Elevation of Mind, that is in Men,
when they find any thing in themselves, or in what they have acquired, that is
beautiful or useful. When a Heart rightly principled, meddles with any such
thing, it teaches him Thankfulness and Humility; he runs it up presently to
God, the Fountain and Original of all Good, and gives him the praise of any
thing he finds Good in himself, and concludes even in the meanest Good, that he
finds, even in his Skill, it may be, in the lowest Profession, with Isaiah
28.29. This also comes forth from the Lord of hosts, who is wonderful in
counsel, and excellent in working: If he finds in himself an industrious and
successful Hand, he attributes this to God, Deuteronom. 8.18. It is he that
gives thee Power to get Wealth: If he finds himself advanced to any Greatness
or Honor, he acknowledges this to be the Dispensation of God, Psalm 75.7. God
is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another: If he find a
victorious and successful Hand in War, he attributes it not to his own Sword,
or his own Arm, Psalm. 44.3. But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance: If he find any Eminence of Wisdom, Knowledge, Counsel,
Learning, still he remembers that it comes down from the Father of Lights,
James 1.17. But the Ignorance, or want of Consideration of this, is that which
puffs up a Man, by carrying that Glory, which is indeed due to God, unto
himself: A Man cannot have a little more Knowledge than he sees in another, but
presently it swells him, 1 Cor. 8.1. he thinks higher of himself than he ought
to think, Romans 12.3. If he get a little Wealth, presently he concludes,
Deuteronom. 8.17. My power, and the might of my hand, has gotten me this
wealth. If he has been successful in his Counsels, he presently bespeaks
himself with the insolent Assyrian, Isa. 10.13. By the strength of my hand have
I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent. And what a truly wise Heart
says to God, Psalm 21.13. Be thou exalted in thy own strength, this proud Fool
says to himself, and, so much as he can, makes himself God, stopping the
Current of that Glory at himself, which would naturally run unto God, as the
Rivers into the Sea; and thereby the Man fills himself beyond his proportion,
till he surfeit upon that, which belongs not unto him: And therefore the
Prophet well says, Hab. 2.4. His soul, which is lifted up, is not upright in
him; his Heart is out of his due place and situation, and consequently, as he
disorders other things, so he ruins himself; for the eternal Wisdom and
Goodness of God, does communicate his Goodness to every thing in that place and
situation, which he has appointed for it, and if the Heart get up above that
place, which God has appointed for it, it is no wonder, if it miss of his
Blessing, by reason of its disorder, and, with Herod, find his Vengeance for
its Presumption.

CHAP. XVII. Of Prayer.
THUS far concerning the Mortification of our Lusts, by the help of Meditation;
the next is Prayer.

God, as he is the Original of all Being, so he is the Fountain of all that
Good, which is, or can be in the Creature: and this Goodness is derived to it
from God by such means as he has appointed, and is most natural and suitable
to the Creature. Man is essentially depending upon God, as well as other
Creatures: here is the difference, other Creatures are placed in a greater
distance from God, and therefore he conveys his Goodness unto them by more
mediate and inferior means. Man, as he was created in a Perfection nearer unto
God, even in his own Image, so consequently, in a nearer degree and relation
unto him; and therefore, though all things are in their Nature dependant upon
him, yet Man has ability to know his Dependence; and therefore not only to be
dependent, but to be dependent upon him; and therefore upon all occasions might
make his immediate Address to God, to whom he was immediately subject. Now
Prayer and Thanksgiving is nothing else, but the actual exercise of that
Dependence we have upon God, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. When Man begins to forget his
Dependence upon God, he leaves him to himself* and being out of his way, some
trouble or other meets him; and then he sees he was out of his way, and returns
to his Dependence again, prays to God. Our Prayers are not of themselves
effectual; but it was the bounty and good pleasure of God to give unto his
Creature all suitable good, whiles he is in such a Station and Condition, as he
requires of him. That Station for a Man is a continual actual Dependence upon
God, which can never be without a suitable Conformity of the whole Soul to his
Will. Now when the Heart is in such a frame of Dependency, it actually
exercises it in Prayer; he strengthens, as well as evidenceth his Dependence,
and draws himself nearer to God thereby, and so nearer to Blessing.

Now in reference to this particular, viz. How Prayer becomes a means of our
Mortification of those irregularities in our Soul and Affections; it is upon a
double ground:

1. Because thereby the Soul draws near unto God, and so is lifted in some
degree into that frame, and temper, and place, and station, which is proper for
it; and so gets above those Lusts and Distempers, which hang about him: The
very vicinity to that pure fire and light cannot consist with the fellowship of
those impure Angels of darkness and impurity, and so either dissolves them, or
at least scatters and affrights them. Hence Prayer is expressed by lifting up
the Soul unto God, Psalm. 25.1. by coming into his presence, Psalm. 95.2. by
drawing near unto God, James 4.8. an access to the throne of Grace. As when
Adam had first departed from God by sin, he after hid himself from the presence
of God, Genesis 3.8. and thereby, as much as in him was, put himself out of a
possibility of recovery; so when a Man again brings his Soul into the presence
of God (as an access and power is now given by Christ) by that very approaching
unto God he gets mastery of those Lusts, that did formerly drive him, and, as
much as they could keep him from God. And this was the very way of Perfection
that God himself taught Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and be thou
perfect. And though the whole Conversation of a Christian Man, ought to be in
the presence of God, and to measure all his thoughts and actions by their
comeliness, or uncomeliness in his sight; yet Prayer is a more special purposed
concentring of the Soul to that Business. And though, God knows, when we come
down from the Mount again, oftentimes those Lusts meet with us, and renew
acquaintance with us, which we left behind, when we went about this serious
Business, so that though we have ended the Solemnity, we have yet a continual
use of the Duty; yet a frequent a solemn, and serious use of this Duty
interrupts a custom of sin, by degrees weakens the Old Man, and will in time,
make a strangeness between our Lusts and our Souls. And let a Man be sure of
these two truths: That as he that comes upon his Knees with a secret Purpose to
hold confederacy with any sin, he shall be the worse, the more hardened, the
more neglected by that God, which searches the Heart: If I regard iniquity in
my Heart, thou will not hear my Prayer: so whosoever he be, that comes to his
Maker in the integrity of his Heart, though sin adhere as close to that Heart
of his, as his Skin does to his Flesh, shall find that employment will make
those Lusts, that were most dear unto him, by degrees to become strange and
loose unto his Soul.

2. But there is not only an active and natural efficacy in the Duty it self;
but, which is more, when a Man draws near to God, God draws near to him, James
4.8. As the Grace and Spirit of God, that sets thy Heart to Prayer, gives out
more of his strength and Grace unto thee when thou have prayed. Thus the
Goodness of the infinite and eternal God moves in a Circle to the Soul, 2 Cor.
12.9. My Grace is sufficient for thee. There is not only a strength gotten
against our Corruptions by our Approximation to him, but an Emanation of
Virtue, Power, and Spirit from him, whereby to master and consume them: How
much more will your heavenly Father give your Spirit to them that ask it, Luke
11.13. Uphold me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51.12. This is that Spirit by
which the deeds of the Flesh are mortified, Romans 8.13. the Spirit of Life, that
gives freedom from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. It is the Scepter of the
Kingdom of God in the Soul, whereby he rules in the midst of his Enemies, Psalm.
110.2. And where this Spirit is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Watchfulness, and first in respect of God.
3. WATCHFVLNESS. And the Object of our Watchfulness, is 1. God. 2. Our own
selves. 3. Temptations:

1. For the first, our watching concerning God: 1. Watch for the Coming of thy
Savior, either in the general, or thy own particular Judgment: for ye know
not when the master of the house comes, lest coming suddenly, he find thee
sleeping, Mark 13.35. Consider what a terrible thing it will be, if Death or
Judgment should find thee in a practice of any purposed Sin: and thou know
not whether thy time of Death shall be in the Evening, Midnight, or at
Cockcrow, or in the Morning; for it comes like a Thief in the Night.

2. Watch the Word of God: It is that Lanthorn to our Feet, that Pillar of Fire
which is to go before us in our Voyage through this Wilderness: Take heed thou
lose not this Light, or leave it; for then thou shall wander in darkness, 2
Pet. 1.19. This Light will show thee the mind of thy Creator; it will instruct
thee what to do in points of difficulty and danger; it will show thee thy self,
and the constitution and temper of thy Soul, and how the greatest matter of
concernment to thee in the World stands, even the condition of thy own Soul
with God; it will interpret and unriddle unto thee those various Dispensations
and Administrations of things in the World; it has Principles of so high and
powerful a Conviction, that it will master the disorders of thy Soul beyond the
most rigid Dictates, Contemplations, and Disciplines of the most sublimated
Philosophy, 2 Timothy 3.17. A Doctrine of Perfection.

3. Watch the Presence of God, and see that thy Thoughts, Words, and Actions
are beseeming his Presence: for all things are naked and manifest before him
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. and remember we cannot fly or hide our
selves from his Presence, Psalm. 139.7. that the Hearts of the Children of Men
are before him, Prove. 15.11. that he weighs the Spirits, Prove. 16.2. That his
Eyes are in every place, beholding the Evil and the Good, Prove. 15.3. that he
pondereth Man's goings, Prove. 5.21. Job 34.21. Jer. 32.19. Jer. 16.17. that he
searches the Heart and tries the Reins, Jer. 17.10. Take heed therefore, of
so much as thinking any thing, that may be unbecoming the Presence of such a
Majesty, Purity and Power: This is the Fear of God, the beginning of Wisdom,
and will teach us with Joseph, to entertain any temptation fitted with the
greatest secrecy and advantage with his Resolution, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do
this great Evil, and sin against God?

4. Watch the course of the Providence of God. There is not a Passage of his
Providence, but if marked, carries with it a secret Instruction, and a watchful
Man will spell the Lesson of Providence; to Humiliation, Mic. 6.9. Hear the
Rod, and him that has appointed it: to Sadness, Isa. 22.12. In that day did
the Lord call for weeping: to Reformation and Obedience, Job 36 10 by cords of
affliction, he opens the Ear to Discipline, and commands, that they return
from iniquity: to Dependence upon, and Recourse to God, Psalm. 107.15, 19.
extremity and natural impossibility of deliverance tutors Men to cry unto the
Lord, Jonah 1.6. Arise, call upon thy God: to Thankfulness, Psalm. 5^.25. I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: And here we cannot choose, but ever
remember the Excellence of the Word of God, which teaches us the English of
all his Dispensations, and what they mean, That when in our blindness, God by
his Providence speaks once, yea twice, yet Man perceives it not, Job 33.14.
this like a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, Job 33.23.
expounds the Hieroglyphick, and shows us the Errand it brings from God: And
although the Wisdom of God excedes our observation in many passages of his
Providence, Eccles. 8.17. that almost the exactest watchfulness will have much
ado to find any thing after him, Eccles. 3.11. yet I do believe, that that Man
that keeps a strict watch over himself, and upon the passages of his
Providence, shall scarce find one uncomfortable passage in his Life, but he may
read in it some special omission of Duty to, and some desertion of God, some
act of Pride, Lust, or Vanity, eminently conspicuous to him, that preceded it.
It is true, the most exact walking may not only find, but occasion Crosses and
Afflictions in our way; but most commonly, if not always, such are accompanied
with such a measure of Comfort, and Contentment in them or with them, that I
cannot call them Uncomfortable Passages, but rather Objects of Rejoicing. But
when there comes an Affliction with a Sting in it, though but a small one, such
a one as springs from my own folly, or a disappointment, or interruption in a
justifiable action, wherein I see, as it were, the hand of God hedging up my
way, or the like, let me look but a little backward, I shall see the spring of
it. As I will therefore keep a watch over my ways, that I incur not the danger
of God's deserting me, though in an action, it may be, of no great consequence;
so when I find such a Cross, I will look backward, and search, and try my ways,
and when I have found my Achan, I will weep over him; I will look forward, and
be more careful in my future Conversation; I will look upward, and bless the
merciful hand of God, that is pleased to take such care over a poor Creature,
as to send his Messenger, though, it may be, a rough and sower one, to reclaim
me from the danger of a greater Evil.

5. Watch the secret persuasions and disswasions of the Spirit of God, and
beware thou quench it not, 1 These. 5.19. nor grieve it, Ephesians. 4.30. A Man that
observes his ways, shall oftentimes hear a secret Voice from his Conscience,
conformable to the Word of God, calling to him: Do not this abominable thing,
which I hate, Jer. 44.4. or, This is the way, walk in it, Isa. 30.21. Be sure
thou observe this Voice; try it with the Word, the Rule of Truth; and beware
thou neglect it not. This Wind, that blows where it lists, if shut out,
resisted, or grieved, may happily never breathe upon thee again, but leave thee
to be hardened in thy sins: But if observed, tried, and obeyed, thou shall be
sure to have it thy Monitor and Director upon all occasions.

CHAP. XIX. Of Watchfulness in respect of our Selves, our Senses, Words, and
Appetite.
2. FOR the second Object of our Watch, our Selves: such is the distemper and
disorder of our Souls since the Fall, that though it meets with no temptations
from without, yet it will make them; and, like a distempered Stomach, the Lusts
that are within us, will turn that into our Poison, which is of it self either
wholesome, or at least indifferent: The Wedge of Gold, and the Babylonish
Garment, had in it self naturally no temptation to Evil; but Lust joins with
it, conceives upon it, and brings forth Sin: the Rock stands still, strikes not
the Ship, but the Ship strikes the Rock, and splits it self. The greatest part
of that sin, that is in us, is not so much due to the influence and motion of
Objects upon us, as to the Corruption that the Object meets with in us:
therefore it concerns us to have a strict and continual Watch upon our selves:
And herein.

1. Watch thy Senses: watch thine Eye; thine Eye is a wanton Eye, an Eye full
of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. David, a Man after God's own Heart, wanted his watch
upon his Eye, and he saw, and lusted, and sinned, 2 Samuel 11.2. With Job
therefore, see that thou keep thine Eye under a Covenant, Job 31.1. Thine Eye
is a luxurious Eye; the Fruit was pleasant to the Eye, and our first Mother,
though to the ruin of her Posterity, did let in the beauty of the Fruit, and
together with it, Sin, and Death, through her Eye, Genesis 3.6. Thine Eye is an
unsatiable Eye, Eccles. 1.8. a covetous Eye, Joshua 7.21. I saw, and I coveted:
a lofty and proud Eye, Prove. 30.14. a flattering and a deceitful Eye, Prove.
30.12. a cruel and an oppressing Eye, Psalm. 10.8. His Eyes are privily set
against the Poor: an evil Eye. Let it therefore be thy Practice, as well as thy
Prayer, to turn away thine Eye from beholding Vanity, Psalm. 119.37. and to have
thine Eyes always toward God, Psalm. 141.8.

2. Set a Guard upon thy Ear, and take heed how, and what thou hear, Mark
4.24. Thou have a wandering Eye, an Athenian Ear, Acts 17.21. an itching Ear,
that will not endure sound Truth, 2 Timothy 4.3. a deaf and stopped Ear, when thou
should hear, Isaiah 6.10. an open and unsatiable Ear after Vanity and
Unprofitableness, Eccles. 1.8.

3. Set a Watch over thy Tongue, and keep the door of thy Lips, Psalm. 141.3.
and take heed thou sin not with thy Tongue, Psalm. 39.1. Remember an account is
to be given for an idle word, Matthew. 12.36. season thy words with Salt, Colos.
4.6. and that will take away the filthiness of thy Communication, Colos. 3.8.
Remember that thy Tongue is set on fire of Hell, James 3.6. Watch therefore thy
Tongue: let thy words be few, seasonable, considerate, true.

4. Set a Watch upon thine Appetite: it is of it self natural, and consequently
good; but the distemper of our Nature has put it out of its place, and
consequently out of its bounds. Suspect thy Appetite, and keep it under with
Rules of Moderation: put a Knife to thy Throat, Prove. 23.2. look not upon the
Wine, when it gives its color in the Cup, Prove. 23.31. love not sleep, Prove
20.13. and with Rules of Seasonableness: the wise Man tells us, every thing is
beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3.11. because it is then in that order, which
God has appointed for it: the same Action, that may be but tolerable and
indifferent in one time, may be necessary in another, and sinful in another,
Isaiah 22.12, 13. In that day did the Lord call for weeping and mourning, and
behold, slaving of oxen: surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till
ye die, 2 Samuel 11.11. The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, etc. shall
I then go down to my house to eat, and to drink, and to lie with my wife?
Regulate thy Reason by the Word and Counsel of God: and discipline thy Appetite
with thy Reason: observe its motions, and check them: Rather deny it a lawful,
than countenance it in but a disputable Liberty.

CHAP. XX. Of Watchfulnes over our Affections, and Passions of Love, Anger, and
Fear.
5. SET a Watch upon thine Affections and Passions: Thy Affections are by thy
natural corruption, become inordinate Affections; they are easily misplaced,
and more easily over-acted. Take heed to thy Love: according to the order or
disorder of this Affection, are all thy other Affections tempered: See
therefore that it be rightly placed: Dispense thy Love in measures
proportionable to the worth of the Object: Nothing can challenge thy intensest
Love, but the intensest Good; and that God that requires thy Heart, is a
jealous God: let not out the whole Current of thy Affections upon any thing
below him: Lawful Pleasures, natural Relations, Conveniences in the World, a
Man's own self, may be Objects of a moderate and subordinate Love: But when
they take up the whole compass of our Love, our Love becomes our Sin, Matthew.
10.37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me, 1
John 2.15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 2 Timothy 3.2, 4. lovers of themselves, and lovers of Pleasures, ranked amongst the
worst of Men. When the Affection of thy Soul is moving after any thing, before
thou give it leave, examine the Object, whether worthy of any measure of thy
Love; and if so, yet let it not go without a farther debate: Consider the
measure of Good, that is in the Object, and weigh out its proportion of Love
answerable to the measure of its Good: But rest not there neither, remember it
is but a subordinate, a derivative Good, as well as a measurable Good: bestow
not that measure of thy Love upon it absolutely, but subordinately: catechize
thy Love with this Question, Whether if thy Creator requires thee to hate that
Object, to forgo it, to forsake it, thou can be better content to call home
thy Affection, than to let it rest where it is? By this time, and by this
means, thy Love will be under a discipline and a rule, and the Precipitancy of
this Affection beyond its due Proportion allayed and moderated. And remember
always, it is the impotency of our Condition, and the great cause of the
disorders in our Souls and Lives, that we are contented to give our Affections
leave, upon the first apprehension, to pursue their Objects without debate,
lest we should interrupt the expectation of Contentment, by a clear discovery
of the unworthiness and vanity of the Object, and the ill consequences of
immoderation in the pursuit: thus we are contented to deceive our selves with
the Felicity of false Expectation, rather than by pre-consideration to avoid a
real Inconvenience or Disappointment.

Take heed to thine Anger. Be angry, but sin not, Ephesians. 4.26 keep it not too
long; nor act it too far, lest it prove Hatred, Revenge, Oppression: Order thy
Anger so, that it may be rather an act of thy Judgment, than of thy
Perturbation: If thou art provoked by an Injury, before thou give a Commission
to this Passion, propose to thy self the Question which God asked Jonah, Jonah
4.9. Do thou well to he angry? weigh well the Cause, and remember thou art
partial to thy self, and apt to construe that for a just Provocation, which it
may be was none, or deserved. Suspect thy Judgment of Partiality; put thy self
in the others Condition before thou judge; remember, that he that does thee
the Injury, is but God's Instrument, 2 Samuel 16 10. Because the Lord has said
unto him, Curse David, who then shall say, Wherefore have thou done so? It may
be his Injury is God's Justice, and then thy Anger against the Instrument is
Rebellion; or at best, it may be his Experiment of thy Patience, and then thy
Anger is Disobedience. Remember the just occasions of Anger thou have given to
thy Creator, and yet his Patience to thee: and should thou not have
compassion on thy fellow servant? Matthew. 18.33. Remember thy Redeemer, that
bought thee with the Sacrifice of his Soul, has given thee another Precept,
Matthew. 5.44. Love your Enemies; and another Example, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again: and can thou deny the denial of Passion for his sake?
Remember thy gentleness will more advantage thee than thy anger: it may be, he
will be conquered with thy Patience, and revenge thy Quarrel against himself,
with his Repentance; but if not, there is a God of Vengeance can, and will do
it, Romans 12.19. When a Man takes up the Office of his Judge, he injures both
the Judge and Party, and in stead of doing himself right, he makes himself
guilty. Again, if thou do well to be angry, do thou well to be angry so
much, or so long? The Wise Man tells us, That Anger rests in the bosom of
Fools. Set a Watch therefore over thy Anger; let it be just, and moderate; and
let not the Sun go down on thy wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.

Set a Watch upon thy Fear: There is nothing deserves thy fear of Reverence,
but thy Creator; n^ thy fear of Aversion, but thy Sin; If thy Peace he made
with him, thou art above the Fear of any thing below him; objects of Terror
shall not come near thee; the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with thee;
or if they are not, they shall not hurt thee; The terriblest things in the
World are therefore terrible, because they end in Death, the King of Terrors:
And when thy Peace is made with thy Lord, thou have a double Security against
them: 1. Because they are in the hands of his Power and Wisdom, and they cannot
exceed their Commission, that he gives them; he can, if it please him,
dissipate whole Armies of Terrors by the least word of his Power. 2. But if
their Commission extend to thy very Life, yet the Son of God has taken away
that sting, that terror, that is in Death; has by his own Death sanctified
Death unto thee, and made it a door unto a better Life; so that Death, though
in it self terrible and bitter, yet this Tree being himself cast into this
bitter Water, Exodus 15.25. has sweetened them; and as he has taken away the
Venom of it, by destroying that Serpent, that had the power of it, Heb. 2.14.
so he has made it, though not for it self, yet in respect of him, that stands
on the other side of this Gulf, with Immortality and Glory in his hand,
desirable, Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which
is far better: It is true, thou art pursued with an Army of Egyptians, of Sins,
and of Miseries, and when thou come to the Shore, thou see a raging and a
bloody Sea; But remember thou have an Angel, even the Angel of the Covenant,
that has gone before, and yet goes with thee, and turns this Sea into a
Passage of Ease and Safety: and though of either side the Waves may affright
thy Sense, they shall not hurt thee: and remember, that though thy Passage may
be difficult and troublesome, yet thou have not, as once the Israelites, a
Wilderness behind it, but a Canaan. Therefore in all Objects or Occurrences of
Terror, first look inward, and see how the case stands between thy God and thy
Conscience: indeed if there remain a Guilt unwashed by the Blood of Christ, a
secret sin entertained, and not repented of, thou have cause to fear, because
thy Lord is angry: But if thou keep thy daily Watch upon thy Soul and thy Life,
if thou find the presence of thy Savior in thy Soul, and thy Heart, though of
it self a sinful Heart, yet cleansed and delivered from the power of any evil
way, an honest Heart, acted by the love of God in Christ, thou may then look
above them; and, having thine Eye fixed upon the Lord of Events, walk quietly
and untroubled through the midst of those dangers, that do incompass thee. It
is true, that in the great Concussions of the World, God expects a suitable
affection, even from the most innocent Heart, an affection of Reverence, and
awe of his Presence and working, Jeremiah 10.7. Who would not fear thee, O king
of nations? But the fear of an honest Heart is the fear of Reverence, not of
Consternation, a Fear mingled with Love, a Fear mingled with Faith and
confidence, a Fear mingled with Praise and Glorifying God; a Fear terminated in
the great Lord, that works not in the Instrument, not in the immediate Object
of Terror; a Fear mingled with Comfort, not overrun with distraction. When
therefore thou meetest with Objects of Fear, first learn to distinguish their
kinds: some there are that come as it were, from the immediate hand of God;
such are Famine, Pestilence, Wars, Fires, Inundations, Earthquakes and the
like; entertain them with Reverence to the great, and Just, and Powerful hand
of God, not slightly, or saucily, or presumptuously, yet without consternation
or distraction of Mind; carry up thy Soul above the Objects, to the Hand that
guides them; make him thy Dependence, and his Will the measure of thine own
under them; use all warrantable means with Dependence upon his Power, and
Submission to his Will, to avoid them: The wise Man sees the Plague, and
hides himself, Prove. 22.3. Prove. 27.12. If thou escape the danger, bless the
God that has preserved thee; if thou fall in them, yet still bless the God,
that has not left thee; and value ten thousand Deaths with his Presence and
Light upon thy Soul above the most sublimated Life without it: Again, there are
some Objects of Fear, which, though they are guided and mastered by the hand of
God, yet they are immediately the works of Men, and so less terrible; such are
wrought by the power, oppression, cruelty, and malice of Men; these may and
ought to be entertained with more resolution and confidence: That one Example
may serve for all, when the power and injustice of Man shall meet with an
unarmed and weak innocence, Dan. 3.16. O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to
answer thee in this matter; our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king:
But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, we will not serve thy Gods: As if
they should have said: It is true, thou art a King, and where the word of a
King is, there is Power; and to magnify thy self and thy Glory, in the face of
thy Kingdom, thou have taken up this public Resolution of the Dedication of
thine Idol; and this thy Purpose is stablished by a Decree, a Mischief framed
by a Law, and this Decree armed with Death, and a cruel and terrible Death* we
know we cross thy proud and impious Will, impatient of the seeming neglect of
thy Power, by three poor despised Hebrews in the midst of thy Glory and People;
we see fury and rage enough in thy countenance, to devour us before the Furnace
be hot; we see thy Courtiers adding fuel to thy rage, and thy Instruments
greedily catching after the least Warrant from thee, for our Execution; and we
are compassed with Flesh and Blood, which cannot but shrink at the
preapprehension of this inevitable and terrible dissolution: yet for all this,
know that we have learned to tutor our Fear; not to fear a Man that shall die,
and the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass, Isa. 51.11. we have learned,
that the fear of Man brings a snare, but he that trusts in the Lord shall
be safe, Prove. 29.25. And therefore we are not much perplexed, what Answer to
return to these thy Commands and Threats; we serve that God, in whose hand thou
art, as the Ax or the Saw in his hand that shakes it; in whose hand thy Breath
is, and he can command away thy Breath, and then what becomes of thy Word? that
Lord, in whose hand thy Heart is, and he can turn it as the River of Water, and
can set thy Command against thy Decree; that God, in whose hands are the issues
of death, and who can arm an inconsiderable Occurrence to divert and frustrate
thy Purpose; in whose hands are all the Powers of Heaven and Earth, and can
correct and control that Fire which thou intendest for the execution of thy
Fury: And this is the God whom we serve, and has made a Covenant with us to
preserve us in the Fire; and we are no less confident of his Love, and of his
Truth, than of his Wisdom and Power to deliver us; he has taught us, that he
is a present help in trouble, Psalm. 46.1. that if we call upon him in the day
of trouble, he will deliver us, Psalm. 50.15. Psalm 91.15. that in the Fire he
will be with us, and in the Water, and it shall not come near us: Therefore, O
King, we value not thy Power, nor thy Rage, for our Dependence is above them:
But this is not all: If that great God, whom we serve, deliver us over to the
swing of thy Rage, we have learnt yet a higher Lesson, our Faith and Experience
has taught us to trust in him; and our Love has taught us to obey him: though
he seem to disappoint our trust by delivering us unto thy Fury, yet we will not
forget to obey him: he has taught us to make his Will, the measure and rule of
ours, both in what we suffer, and in what we do: we owe our Lives to him, and
thou art but his Instrument to take them from us; when his Will commands our
Lives, we shall resign them with Patience; but now his Glory requires them, we
will give them up with Cheerfulness: If we cannot live, but upon so dear a
rate, as to offend our bountiful God, farewell Life with Guilt, and welcome
Death with Innocence. Know, O King, that the Presence and Love of our God has
taught us how to fear to offend, yet to dare to die.

CHAP. XXI. Of Watchfulness over our Hope, Confidence, and Joy.
SET a Watch upon thy Hope and Confidence: Place it aright, and remember thou
art essentially depending upon the great God, and upon him only, and all things
below him, have no more worth or strength in them, than he derives to them, and
when they take up his place, he ever breaks and disappoints them. Yet such is
the Atheism, the Pride, and Folly of our Hearts, that it will place its
confidence in any thing, rather than where it should. The distemper of this, as
of all other our Affections, has its beginning in the Blindness of our
Judgments, the want of a deep and practical knowledge of God; and from hence
our Confidences and Hopes, fix and rest oftentimes in most vain and deceitful
Objects. Have therefore a watch and a corrective upon the motion of thy Soul
toward any thing which thou have, wherein there seems any, though never so
little strength: thy evil Heart will make it thy confidence, and so a snare
unto thee. Is thy Wealth increased? take heed to thy Confidence, thy evil Heart
will make it all one to have, and to trust in Riches; it will make thy Gold thy
Confidence, Job 31.24. to trust in thy Wealth, and boast thy self in the
multitude of thy Riches, Psalm. 49.6. Psalm. 52.7. to make it thy strong Tower,
Prove. 10.15. to set thy Heart upon them, Psalm. 62.10. And then this thy
Confidence shall be thy Fall, Prove. 11.28. Have thou a fair Success in
Externals? look to thy Confidence; though thou see thy Creator in them, yet
thy evil Heart will make thee at least share thy Confidence between thy God and
the Creature, to conclude with Job, that now thou shall die in thy Nest. Job
29.18. to behold the Sun when it shines, Job 31.26. to conclude with David,
that thou shall never be moved, Psalm. 30.6. and the jealous, yet merciful God,
will hide his face, and thou art troubled thereby, to unsa^n thy Confidence
upon the Creature, and to teach thee to fix it upon thy Maker only. Have thou a
Friend, a Prince, or Nation Confederate? take heed to thy Confidence; thou art
apt to make this thy Friend, thy Confidence, Psalm. 41.9. my own familiar
Friend, in whom I trusted; to put Confidence in this Prince, Psalm. 118.9. Psalm.
146.3. And then he makes Egypt a broken Reed, Isa. 36.6. Ezekiel. 29.6. sends a
Vengeance to pursue and overtake thee in the midst of thy Confederates, Jer.
42.16. pours contempt upon thy Confidence, Job 12.21. Have thou Munitions,
Provisions for War? take heed to thy Confidence; thou will be ready to make thy
Chariots and thy Horsemen thy Trust, Psalm. 20.7. the multitude of thine Host,
thy Salvation, Psalm. 33.16. ^o vaunt, that thou art mighty and strong for the
War, Jer. 48.14. and then the great Lord rejects thy Confidences, and writes
disappointment upon them all, Jer. ^.37. Have thou a strong Body, a dexterous,
deep, foreseeing, preventing Wit, thy Counsels and Purposes followed with
Successes answerable to thy Mind? take ^eed to thy Confidence; thy Heart is
blind and cannot see rather than the next Causes, not observing the great and
fast Mover, who manageth all things, and will swell thee up into a
self-confidence and dependence. But suppose thy Confidence be right set ^e^ect
of the Object, yet see that it be grounded upon right Principles; otherwise thy
Confidence may be thy Presumption: Examine thy very Recumbence upon thy
Creator: The immediate ground of any Confidence in God is a persuasion of his
Power, and a persuasion of his Love, and in both these the corruption of our
Nature does discover it self, and is fit to be considered:

1. Touching his Power the Errors of our Trust on either hand in the Defect,
and in the Excess.

1. Diffidence in his Power, Psalm. 78.19. Can God furnish a table in the
wilderness? therefore the Lord heard this and was wroth Upon any Extremity,
though never so black and inevitable, look upon the Power of God as able most
easily to over-match it.

2. Resting upon his Power, without consulting with his Will: This is
Presumption, when a Man without any Commission from his Maker, shall entertain
any desperate attempt: This is for a vain Man to go about to engage the Power
of the great God against himself, his Will, his Purity, his Wisdom, his
Purpose. See thou have a Commission from the Will of thy Creator for what thou
art about; and if so, then cast thy self upon his Power: when thou art acting
by his Command, doubt not but thou shall act by his Power.

2. Touching his Love, this likewise yields Errors on both hands:

1. In the defect, principally when a Soul, that doubts not of his Power,
because she knows him; nor has cause to doubt of his Love, because her Peace
is made; yet such black storms and pre-apprehensions of dangers are gathered
round about her, that she cannot see the Love or Care of God toward her, Psalm
77.9. Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he shut up his tender mercies?

2. In the Excess, an ungrounded Presumption of the Love and Favor of God: and
herein are diverse Mistakes:

1. When a Man shall argue a personal and special Love of God unto him from
External Successes and Events. It is true, that the Mercy and Love of God is
over all his Works; and the Happiness of Externals is the fruit of the Love of
God as to his Creature, but not a sufficient evidence of that special Love of
God as to his Child; they are fruits of his Bounty, not always evidences of his
Favor: Experience of former Mercies in external successes and deliverances,
may and ought to strengthen that Confidence which is well grounded upon the
Love of God, Psalm. 77.11. 1 Samuel 17.37. But they are not always infallible
arguments of that Love: When Blessings in Externals make us more humble, more
thankful, more watchful, then they may justly make us more confident, because
then the Love of God comes in with his Blessings: And then are External
Blessings arguments of the Love of God, when they teach the Soul, as well to
love God, as to trust in him.

2. When a Man shall argue a personal and special Love of God by the presence
of External Privileges, when there wants sincere Obedience, Jer. 7.4, 10.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, etc. and therefore
God sends them to the Example of Shiloh. Ibid. Verse 12. And the reason why
this must needs be, as well a deceiving Inference, as displeasing to God, is
because in truth, in such a case, the Soul places her ultimate confidence in
these things, and robs God of part of that Confidence which belongs unto him.

3. When a Man shall argue the Love of God to him from his External
Performances of those things which God commanded, Isa. 1.11. Amos 5.21. This
has this double Error in it: 1. A grossly mistaken Apprehension of the Will of
God, which is most just; as if the God that judges the Heart, and measures all
the Actions of Men by their Hearts, should be pleased with the Shell of Duties
and Obedience: whereas the things that are so done, as they are in themselves
without the Heart, but indifferent Actions, and so cannot be pleasing; so they
are but hypocritical and false, and must needs be displeasing. 2. A sharing of
our Confidence between God and our selves, de quo infra.

4. When a Man shall argue the Love of God as an Effect and Price of his
Obedience and Sincerity toward him. The Error in this, is that in truth a Man
makes himself his Confidence, for he that trusts in the Love of God, because he
thinks he has purchased or procured the Love of God, does in truth resolve his
Confidence into himself. Therefore look upon the best Dress of thy Soul, thy
Humility, thy Faith, thy Love, thy Sincerity, thy Obedience, not as Causes of
the Love of thy God, or the Price or Purchase of it, but as Effects and
Evidences of his Love to thee: Look upon thy Sincerity, Love and Obedience to
God, as the fruit and sign of his Love; that will make thy God thy Confidence;
not as the Purchase or Price of his Love; for that will make thy self thy
Presumption: were they thy own, thou owe them and infinitely more to thy
Creator, and therefore can not deserve by them: But alas, they are not thine
own; his Love, as it is the Motive of thine, so it is the Cause of it, and of
all that can be acceptable to him.

5. When a Man from well grounded Arguments of the Love of God to his Person,
shall conclude the Favor of God to his Actions, without measuring of them by
his Will. This was the Error of Josiah's Confidence, 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22. he
hearkened not to the words of Necho, from the mouth of God, and fell.

6. When a Man who has a sound ground of the Love of God unto his Person,
shall yet go along in any known or unrepented Sin. Such sins by any, that has
entered into Covenant with God, have more Malignity and Presumption in them,
than the very same sins committed by others, because committed against more
Light and against more Love: and the Merciful God is yet a Jealous God, and one
that accepts not Persons, his ways are equal and uniform, Ezekiel. 18.25. If the
best of Men walk contrary to him, it must of necessity be, that he walk
contrary to them: and therefore he hates with the same hatred a course of sin,
even in his subject, as well as in his enemy: And the same sin that puts a
Stranger unto God in the Condition of an Enemy, puts a Subject in the Condition
of a Rebel: and therefore, though he will not utterly take his loving kindness
from them, he will visit their transgression with the rod, and their sins with
stripes, Psalm. 89.32. will hide his face from them, Deuteronomy. 31.18. a frequent
expression of God's withdrawing the Actual Communication of his Love and
Presence, even from his own, Psalm. 30.7. Psalm. 74.9, 11. Psalm. 69.17. What ever
be the Purpose of God concerning thee, be assured of this, that so long as thou
art in a course of sin against him, though his Counsel concerning thee, be not
thereby interrupted, yet till thy returning to him and repenting of thy sin,
the Actual Fruition of thy interest in him, is interrupted; thou art actually
in the same condition, if not a worse, than before thy first Covenant with thy
Creator, and have as little cause of Confidence in his Love now, as thou had
then. And as the Act of thy Love to God is most apparently interrupted by this
thy practice of a known sin till thy return, so thou may most justly
conclude an interruption of the Act of his Love to thee, till thou return,
though that return of thine is the fruit of that Love, which was still in him,
though thou did go along in the frowardness of thy ways; when God hides
himself by reason of sin, thy Instruction thereby is to seek him out otherwise
that which thou call thy Confidence, may be thy Presumption, and may cause
the Wrath and Jealousy of thy Creator to smoke against thee, because thou have
blessed thy self in thy Heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Every motion of the Heart to God, if it
be right, is conformable to the Mind of God throughout. When thy Life is
sinful, and thy Heart not humble, suspect thy Confidence to have more of thy
Corruption, than of Grace in it.

Take heed to thy Joy. Regularly as is the object or measure of thy Love, such
is the object and measure of thy Joy: Joy is nothing else, but a result of the
Soul in the fruition of what is loved: yet though thou had a watch over thy
Love before thou enjoyedst, have a stricter watch over the temper of thy Spirit
in thy fruition: Look to the object of thy Joy, thy evil Heart will rejoice,
will glory in thy sin, in thy shame: unless thou have a watch upon thy Heart,
folly and mischief will be thy Joy, Prove. 10.23. Prove. 15.21. the fall of thine
Enemy will be thy Joy, and the Lord will see, and it will displease him, Prove.
24.17. thou will make Excess, Impurity, Oppression, Cruelty, Injustice, Pride,
thy Joy and thy Delight: Thy Affections are blind, and mad, and must be led.
Examine the object of thy Joy, and consider beforehand, whether there be not in
it more cause of grief than of delight. But suppose thy fruition deserve some
delight, God has blessed thee with a good Wife, which the wise Man calls the
Crown of her Husband, Pro. 12.4. with a numerous and hopeful Issue, which the
wise Man calls the Crown of Old Age, Prove. 17.6. with a Good Name, which the
wise Man calls a precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. with a merry Heart, which does
good like a Medicine, Prove. 17.22. with Honor and Promotion, Wealth, Wisdom,
Success in thy Labors; and these ought to be entertained with rejoicing and
comfort: the wise Man tells us, it is the Portion that God gives thee in them,
Eccles. 3.13, 22. Eccles. 5.18. Eccles. 9.9. and it is thy duty enjoined thee
by God, Deuteronomy. 28.27. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness
and with gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore, etc. But
take heed to thy Heart, it will soon abuse and exceed his Commission:

1. Look to the Manner of thy Joy or Mirth, that it be not light, or vain, thy
Mirth may prove mad, Eccles. 2.2. the Laughter of a Fool, Eccles. 7.6. a Mirth
that will end in Heaviness, Prove. 14.13.

2. Look to the Measure of it. First weigh the Good that thou enjoyest, and
then weigh out a Proportion of Joy answerable to the value of that Good: lay
not out the whole stock of thy Joy for that which deserves but a small part of
it. We are commonly mistaken in the value we put upon the things we expect or
enjoy, and that makes us mis-spend our selves upon them: Be sure nothing below
the fruition of thy Creator, can deserve the whole stock of thy Delight; and if
thou dispensest it otherwise, thou robbest thy God, and deceivest thy self.
There are three Considerations and Cautions, that are often to be used to
moderate our Delight in Externals:

1. To consider the true value of them: they are but limited Good, and not
large enough for thy Soul: limited in measure, limited in duration; the Good
that is in them, is that Congruity that God has put in them, and that only a
limited good, and can deserve but a limited Delight.

2. To mingle those sad Considerations of Mortality and an Account with the
Fruition of any Externals. This does allay the exorbitancy of the Heart, and
keeps the Soul from surfeiting upon any outward Good: this is the going to the
house of Mourning commended by the wise Man, Eccles. 7.2. that sad remembrance
which he gives to the young man in the midst of his jollity, Eccl. 11.9. But
know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment: there is a
severe Eye, that beholds all thy deportment in the fruition of those things I
lend thee, that will have a sad account for thy carriage in the use of them.

3. To contemplate often the Goodness of God, his Mercy, his Bounty; to find
the Presence and Love of God in thy Love, the sound hope of eternal Life: This
will take up the whole compass of thy delight, and rejoicing, wherein thou
can not exceed, so that thou will not have Joy enough, or at least not too
much, for any thing below him, Luke 10.20. In this rejoice not, but rather
rejoice, because your names are written in heaven. When this Sun shines in the
Heart, those little Stars of outward Comfort, which at no time have but a
derivative Light, will not appear: And this thy Faith is the Victory that
overcomes the World, the delights of the World, as well as the terrors of the
World: It will keep Comforts and thy Delight in them in their due place and
subordination, and count them but dung and loss, that thou may win Christ,
Phil. 3.8. If the Lord shall lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, it
will put more gladness in thy Heart, than when their or thine own Corn and Wine
increased, Psalm. 4.7. When thy Peace is made with God, thy Conscience sprinkled
by the Blood of Christ, the Spirit, the Comforter, witnessing with thy own
Spirit, Romans 8.16. thy Heart sincere toward God, 2 Cor. 1.12. this will cause
an abiding Joy, 2 These. 5.16. John 16.12. a full Joy, 1 John 1.4. a victorious
Joy, that like Moses's Serpent devours the false Joys, and conquers the
temporal Sorrows of this Life; Acts 5.41. James 1.2. 1 Pet. 4.13. a Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

3. And as to the manner and measure of thy Delight, so look to the Ground, the
formal Reason of thy Delight: see that thy delight or rejoicing fix not in
those external Comforts singly; for then thy Delight will be sensual,
immoderate, and vain, the very same that an irrational Creature takes in them,
viz. a complacency in the fruition of that, which is convenient and suitable to
his Sense: But look upon thy Blessings, and delight in them, as thou see the
Bounty, the Goodness, the Hand, the Promise, the Truth of God in them: This
will not only moderate, but spiritualize thy delight in them: thy delight in
them will not only be Comfortable to thy self, but Acceptable to God: thy
delight in thy Blessings is then mingled with Thankfulness* with Humility, with
Sobriety, with Faith, with Watchfulness; it is thy Duty, and it is thy Safety.
The rich Man in the Gospel, Luke 12.19. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, eat, drink, and be merry: and this was his sin: The Israelite
offering his first Fruits to God, Deuteronomy. 26.11. is commanded to rejoice in every
good thing which the Lord thy God has given unto thee: this was his Duty: the
rejoicing the same: here was the odds, the former terminated and laid out his
Joy in the thing, as the suitable Good to his Nature and Condition; the latter
looked upon it, and rejoiced in it, as a Gift of God: learn therefore to find
God in the Creature, and that will heal the Creature, and make it useful and
safe; thou may then delight in them safely, because thou will then do it
warrantably.

CHAP. XXII. Of Watchfulness over our Grief; 1. In reference to God, for Sin;
2. In reference to Externals.
TAKE heed to thy Grief. Love, as is before noted, is the great Cardinal
Affection or Motion of the Soul; and the other Affections are but Love
diversified according to the site or position of the Object: Love in the
expectation of its Object, is Hope; in the doubt or danger of it, Fear; in the
enjoyment of it, Joy; in the absence of it, Grief or Sorrow. The Object
therefore of thy Love is the subject of thy Grief, and the measure of thy Love
to it, is the measure of thy Grief for it: First therefore, see that thy
intensest Grief be relative to him that ought to be the Object of thy intensest
Love. Now our Love to God is under a double Consideration: 1. Absolutely, as he
is the chiefest, perfect, absolute Good. And under this Consideration our Love
ends in him: we love him for his own sake. And this is an Angelical Love, and a
pure sublime Love; and the Fruit of this Love, is an endeavor of Conformity to
his Nature and to his Will. 2. Relatively, as he is the Chiefest Good to us.
And this creates in us a double Love to him:

1. A Love of Gratitude, a return of Love to him, because we receive Love from
him, 1 John 4.19 We love him, because he first loved us: this even natural
ingenuity would challenge of us.

2. A Love of Prudence, as I may call it, which is the only tolerable Self-Love
in the World, to love God, because the fruition of his Favor and his Presence
is our best Advantage, as a most suitable Good.

By this thou may easily find what should be the Object of thy intensest
Grief, Sin, in others, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes,
because they keep not thy Law: But especially Sin in our selves; that, and only
that, can deserve our intensest Sorrow, as the only thing that is contrary,

1. To the Purity, the Glory, the Will of him that is the chiefest Good. Is he
the chiefest Good? then certainly, whatsoever is contrary to his Purity, Glory,
or Will, cannot choose but be the chiefest Evil, and consequently, the object of
thy Hatred, and of thy Grief. Is thy Conformity to his Nature and Will, the
necessary consequence of thy Love unto him? that then that spoils that
Conformity to him, cannot choose but be thy Sorrow: thou love him, because he
is Good, and that Goodness in him, which is the cause of thy Love, must of
necessity imprint upon thee a desire to have the like ground of Loveliness in
thy self, and this thy sin disappoints thee of.

2. Contrary to that Gratitude, that even natural ingenuity teaches thee to
return to an ordinary Benefactor. Consider, that great God, whom thou have
offended, has freely given thee thy Being, the greatest Gift that is possibly
conceiveable: and with thy Being, has given thee the Copy of his Mind and
Will, a most Reasonable and Just Command, in the Obedience whereof, consists
thy Perfection and Happiness: If he had given thee a rigorous and severe Law,
taking in the whole compass of thy Being, or such a Law wherein thou could
bave seen nothing but the Absolute Will of thy Creator; yet the Debt thou owe
thy Creator, could not be satisfied with such a performance: And now for thee
to offend such a Law of such a God, that has given thee thy Being! Again,
consider that when thy Maker could not by any imaginable Rule of Justice owe
any thing to the exactest Obedience of his Creature, yet such was his Goodness,
that he made himself a Debtor even to his own Creature, entering into a Covenant
of Life with him, thereby to encourage his Obedience; and this for no other
cause, but because his Mercy endures for ever: For can a man be profitable to
God? Job 22.2. And for a Man to sin against so much Condescension of an
Infinite God to his own Creature! Again consider, when against so much Mercy
and Love thou have offended thy Maker, and even by thy own Contract, as well as
by the Just and Universal Right that God had over his Creature, have forfeited
thy Being to thy Creator, yet he took not the advantage of it, remitted thy
Forfeiture, and sent a Sacrifice in thy stead, of his own providing, with a
message of a fullness of Love, with a new Covenant of more easiness to perform,
and of more comfort in the performance; with a Pardon for thy Sin, and with a
Reward for another Righteousness; and, when thou were an enemy, and dead in
sins and trespasses sent his Son to his Creature, to beseech Reconciliation,
and his Spirit, to give thee Life to accept it, and to seal thy acceptance of
it with an earnest and an assurance of Life and Glory; that by that Spirit, and
through that Son of his, has given thee Access unto his own Majesty, a
discovery of that Glory, to the which thou art called: Certainly, these are the
highest engagements of Gratitude, that are possible to be put upon a Creature,
and do therefore challenge even from natural ingenuity, the highest Return thou
can make, though it be infinitely short of what thou do owe: And yet after
all this, cross the Will of thy Creator, that has done so much for thee! to
forget the Love of thy Savior, and to crucify him again! to grieve that
Spirit of Love and Purity, that comes to cleanse thee, and fit thee for thy
Masters use, and to seal thee to Life and Immortality! to dishonor that Name,
by which thou art called! to pollute that Conscience, which thy Savior has
washed with his Blood! to deface that Image and Superscription of thy Creator,
which he was imprinting upon thy Soul! to prefer a base, unworthy perishing,
unprofitable Lust, or Vanity, before the Honor of such a God* the Love of such
a Savior, the persuasion and importunities of such a Spirit, before thy own
Peace, Perfection, and Happiness! to vex, and oppress, and despise the Patience
and Bounty of him, that has done all this for thee, and gives thee yet an hour
of Life to consider of it, and a Promise of Grace and Pardon after all this, if
thou can but mourn over thy Sins, thy unthankfulness, thy unworthy and
disingenuous dealing with thy God. Lay the weight of these and the like
aggravations upon thy hard and stony Heart, and bruise it into Tears of Blood
for thy unkindness to so merciful a God. Thou can not exceed in this Sorrow;
it is a Sorrow that springs from the Love of God in the Soul; a Sorrow that
will cleanse thy Soul, a Sorrow that will bring thee to thy Maker, a Sorrow
that has a Promise of Acceptance goes along with it, a Sorrow that is mingled
with Comfort, even the presence of a Savior, and a Sorrow that shall end in a
fullness of Joy. Sorrow for sin, as for a necessary cause of misery, may end in
desperation, because it arises from love of our selves: but sorrow for sin, as
for an ununthankful return of so much Love from God, cannot; because the Love
of God is under that Sorrow, and the spring of those Tears, is a spring of Life
and Comfort.

3. Contrary to that Good which we lose by it:

1. Our Conformity to the Mind and Will of God, is our Perfection; and the
nearer our Conformity comes to his Will, the more perfect is our Being. Sin,
which is a violation of that Will of his, spoils and disorders this Conformity;
and so it interrupts that inherent Good, which otherwise would be in us.

2. As it destroys our Conformity to the Will of God, and so spoils us of our
inherent Good, so it interrupts that ^ommunicative Good, that Influence of Life
and Comfort, which we have from God: It removes us to a greater distance from
him; it displaceth us from that Position, in which, and by which, the Goodness
of God should be derived and conveyed to us: we are by it out of that Covenant,
that Promise, which God has made with his Creature: we are by it without the
comfortable Presence of God; without that Confidence, that we might otherwise
have in him; out of the Assurance of his Providence and Protection: It makes
our Souls in the midst of all Fruition of outward Blessings, full of doubtful
Anxieties, Fears, and Uncertainties; in the midst of any external Trouble
without a Refuge* and so full of Despair: As we cannot have Confidence to go to
our offended God by our Prayers, so it makes him withdraw and hide himself from
them: a continual disquietness and heaviness of Spirit, mingles and winds it
self into all our thoughts, even in our pursuits of diversions from it: the
same aspect, that is between God and us, is between our own Conscience and us:
The Light of his Countenance is able to give Life and Comfort, and Serenity to
the Soul in the midst of all the Losses and Pains, and Deaths in the World; and
the want of that Light, makes the most happy external Condition to be dark and
disconsolate. And all this Good I lose by a transient, unprofitable Sin; a Sin
that I might have avoided, and therefore a Loss that I might have avoided, a
Loss that comes not to me by my necessity, but by my foolish choice. I will
therefore sit down and mourn in secret, for that Comfort and Light, that I have
thus foolishly sinned away, and measure out my sorrows and tears proportionable
in some degree to that Loss I have sustained. The time was, when it pleased the
great God, to let his Presence and the Light of his Countenance to shine into
my Soul; and when I could with Comfort and Confidence upon any occasion go to
him and present my wants, my desires, my acknowledgements unto him; and he that
sits in Heaven was pleased to accept and entertain them at the hands of his
Creature: But now that Influence of his, has met with a filthy and backsliding
Heart, and is weary of it, and has withdrawn it self, as justly it may; and my
Prayers are laden with my Guilt* and cannot get up to him; and he hides
himself. I have regarded Iniquity in my Heart, and, as he has said, so I find,
he will not hear my Prayers. But though he will not hear my Prayers, yet he
will not neglect my Tears. A broken and contrite heart, O Lord, thou will not
despise. O Lord, though I have thus trifled away my Peace, and my Comfort, and
have destroyed my self, yet in thee is my help. As I will not rest in my Sin,
so neither will I rest in my Grief, but will never give my self, nor thee rest,
till thou have been pleased, in the Blood of thy Son, to wash away my Guilt,
and restore unto me thy Presence and Peace again. And when I have recovered
this Loss, I will, by the assistance of that good Spirit of thine, learn by
this my sin, to revenge my self upon my sin; to value the Mercy and Goodness of
my Creator, that has yet once more entrusted into my hands the Life and
Comfort, which I had so lately lost; to value the necessity, as well as the
Love of my Savior, that has been pleased by a reapplication of his own Blood,
to wash me again after my late Relapse; to value the kindness of the Pure and
Blessed Spirit, that, though by my sin I made him weary, and forsake that
polluted chamber of my Heart, yet is pleased to return and cleanse, and take up
again that Room, from which I had so unworthily excluded him: I will learn to
prise that Peace and Comfort, which once I had, and valued not, but lost it for
an unprofitable perishing Sin: I will strive to sense my Heart with renewed
Covenants and Resolutions of more watchfulness over my self, that I return not
again to Folly: I will sit down and bless the Mercy, Goodness, Patience, Bounty
of God, that has not left me in that Condition, which I could neither endure
nor remove; and study to return a Heart and Life in some measure answerable to
so great Love and Goodness. And when I have done all, O Lord Jesus, let that
Eternal Covenant between thee and the Father, that thou should give Eternal
Life to as many as he has given thee, John 17.2. that Power and Promise of
thine, that none shall pluck me out of thy hands, John 10.28. that Union with
thee, that thou art pleased to give to as many as believe on thee, John 15.4,
5. that Spirit of thine, which by that Union with thee conveys Life and
Influence to the smallest branch in thee, preserve and support me in all my
Purposes and Resolutions, in all my Frailties and Temptations: For without thee
I can do nothing.

2. In reference to outward Objects and occasions of Sorrow, as loss of
Friends, Wealth, Reputation, Health, Life it self, have a guard upon this
Passion:

1. Look upon them as the Fruits and Effects of thy Sin, and so let them carry
thy Grief beyond the immediate object to the meritorious cause of them. This is
the sting of all Affliction; the Plague in thy Heart is the Core and Fountain
of the Plague of thy Externals. And when thou have humbled thy Soul before thy
Creator, and gotten the Blood of thy Savior to wash thy Conscience, thy
Affliction shall be removed, or thy Soul enabled with cheerfulness and comfort
to bear it.

2. Labor to find out the Voice of the Rod, the Mind of thy Creator, for, if
thou diligently observe it, there is not a dispensation of Divine Providence,
but it brings a message with it to thy Soul. Look into thy Heart, it may be
there is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, Joshua 7.13. and this
Affliction bids thee be up and removing it: It may be thy Heart was leaning too
much upon that very Blessing, wherein thou find thy Cross or Affliction,
which robbed thy Maker of some of the Love and Duty thou owe to him: It may
be, thy Heart was grown dead and careless in thy applications to thy Creator,
secure and resting in thy temporal Enjoyment, and he has sent his Messenger to
awake thee: It may be, thou have had a dull and heavy Ear, that would not
listen, or could not perceive God speaking once, yea twice unto thee in a still
voice, Job 33.14. and now he has sent an instruction with a louder voice: It
may be, thou begannest too much to set up thy rest here, to place thy
Confidence in the things of this World, to be overtaken with the delight in
them, to over^expect them, and he has sent a disappointment into thy Counsels,
a Worm into thy Gourd, a Moth into thy Store, a Canker into thy Bag, a
Distemper into thy Body, to show thee the vanity of thy Dependances* to make
thee let go thy hold of that, which may fall upon, and hurt thee, but cannot
secure thee; to make the look upward; to quicken thy Life of Faith by shaking
thy Life of Sense: It may be, thou were growing presumptuous in the Goodness of
God, Saucy in thy Carriage toward him, insolent toward him, opinionative of
thy self: And he has sent this searching Medicine to fallow and purge these
disorderly and dangerous Humors: But g^ant that upon all thy search thou
find that for a long time, thou have kept a Watch over thy Heart, that thou
have endeavored to walk humbly and perfectly before God, that thou can not
find any thing upon the most faithful search thou can make, that might be the
Spring of this affliction; yet is not thy Labor lost, the Clearness of thy
Conscience will be thy support in thy Affliction, and make thy Burden the
easier. But yet for all this, know thy Affliction has a Voice still: if it
look not backward, yet it looks forward; if it be not a Medicine to cure thee,
yet it may be an Antidote to preserve thee, a Cordial to strengthen thee: it
bids thee improve thy Patience, thy Faith, thy Dependence upon God, thy
Experience of his Presence, thy earnestness in Prayer, thy neglect of the
World, thy Denial of thy self. Learn therefore, before thou pourest out thy
sorrow upon any Affliction, to examine thy Heart, to search out the meaning of
God in it: it will regulate thy Grief, and instruct thy mind both how to bear
it, and how to use it.

3. Beware thou put not on a Resolution not to be grieved or troubled at all
upon any occasion of Grief. The putting on of such a Stoical Resolution is to
arm a Man's self against God, to harden the Heart not to receive Correction;
and, as much as in a Man is, to disappoint the purpose of God: He, that put
these Passions in the Heart of Man, now sends this Messenger to stir up this
Passion, though thereby he intends a farther End: And for a Man to fence his
Soul against any object of Sorrow, so as not to be moved thereby, shall be sure
to find either an absolute Ruin, or that God will so plant his Batteries
against that Resolution, that at length he will master him, and melt his Soul
into a more pliable Disposition.

4. When God sends an occasion of Sorrow, entertain it with an Affection
answerable to the Object, both in kind and measure: Let thy Grief be an humble
Grief, not mingled with murmuring or discontent. If thou could imagine, thou
had not deserved it, yet remember who it is that inflicts it, even he that is
absolute Lord of his Creature, and owes him not his Being. When thou go and
treadest upon a Worm, or a Snail, thou do an injury to thy fellow Creature,
yet thou passest away and take no notice of it: But thy Creator can owe thee
nothing. Take up that incomparable Resolution and temper of Mind with old Eli,
1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And this same
Consideration, as it will teach thee to mingle Humility with thy Grief, so it
will teach thee Patience and Quietness in thy Sorrow, because the occasion
comes from the hand of a most Just and Wise and Merciful God. Impatience under
any Affliction, arises from the termination of the motion of our Souls upon
the immediate Object: he that knows, and fears, and loves his Creator, and sees
his hand dispensing the Afflictions, will learn Patience and Moderation, though
he cannot forget Sorrow and Grief under it.

4. Let thy Grief be moderate in Extent, Measure, and Duration. Nothing but sin
and the displeasure of God can deserve thy intensest Grief. Learn to put a true
value upon thy Loss, and measure out Sorrow answerable to it. Consider,

1. Thy Loss is not of thy chiefest Good, and therefore deserves not thy
intensest Sorrow. Thy Peace with thy Creator, thy Everlasting Hope, as long as
they are safe, thou have enough left to over-weigh the greatest Loss thou can
suffer: What are light Afflictions, and but for a Moment, when put in the
Balance with an Eternal Weight of Glory?

2. Consider, thy Loss is not of thy own Good. Cannot the Almighty lend thee a
Blessing, but thou must call it thine, and deny the absolute Lord of it, the
Property of it? It is his Corn, and his Wine, and his Oil: and all our
Blessings are his; and as they are his, so they are taken away by him. Learn to
make the Will of thy Lord, the measure of thine; and then though Nature teach
thee to grieve, Grace will teach thee not to exceed in thy Grief.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Watchfulness over our Will, Conscience, and Spirit.
AND as thus thou must carry a Watch over thy Affections, so learn to carry a
Watch over thy Will:

1. Learn to Principle it aright; the great Lord, that has put this power or
faculty in the Soul, has therefore placed it there, that it should have a
Conformity to his Will: and when thou crossest his Will, it is thy sin and
Deformity; and it will be thy Misery. Learn therefore to make his Will the Rule
of thine,

1. ^n what thou do: and herein God has not left thee without a line to
guide thee. He has showed thee O man, what to do, and what does the Lord
require at thy hands, etc. he has given thee a Rule, or Law, which is to be
the guide of thy Obedience: 1. The Rule of his written Word traduced unto thee
by a wonder of Mercy and Providence, a word that is nigh unto thee, Deuteronomy.
30.14. a light that shines in a dark place. 2. The Rule secretly conveyed into
thy Conscience, by the Power and Wisdom of God, Romans 2.15. a Law written in thy
Heart and Conscience. 3. The Rule manifested in the Dispensation of Divine
Providence, asserting and confirming the two former, if exactly observed, in
the measuring out of Rewards and Punishments.

2. In what thou suffer: the great Lord is absolute Lord over all his
Creatures, and can owe them nothing but what he pleases; only to confirm our
Faith, and encourage our Obedience, he has been pleased to give a Covenant
that he will be our God if we remain his people; yet in the Dispensation of
outward things he has not absolutely bound himself, though such is his
Goodness, that even in those he observes a measure of Justice, which he does
not owe us. Learn therefore to make the Will of thy Maker in all things the
measure of thine.

2. Observe it in the first Motions of it, while they are green and flexible,
and before they be hardened into Resolutions, and so grow Masterless: bring
them to their Rule, and examine them by it, and accordingly entertain or reject
them: Clog them with Deliberation, and by that means thou shall be able to take
off the Violence and Eagerness of them, and likewise the Errors of them:
Dispense not with thy self in the first Motions of thy Will to any evil, in
Presumption, that thou shall be able to master them before they come to
ripeness; for thou sinnest even in those imperfect issues of thy Will, and
indulgence toward them, will make them grow hardy and too strong for thy
Mastery: consider that in the first Motion of thy Heart, thy Will, which is the
Mistress of thy Soul, is the Party against whom thou must strive, and thou have
nothing to reclaim the Current of those Motions, but the Grace of God, which
may justly withdraw it self, if it finds a Compliance with that which is her
Enemy.

3. Stablish thy mind in the knowledge of God and of his Goodness; and this
being laid in the bottom will keep thy Ship from uncertain, giddy floating: The
knowledge and Sense of the chiefest Good, will carry the chiefest Motions of
thy Will toward it, and against all that is contrary to it: and by this means
the Motions of thy Will will be certain, steady, uniform, and regular: the
inclination of thy Will to any thing else will be measured by this, and
subordinate unto it: if the Good propounded consist not with the Fruition of
thy chiefest Good, thy Will will reject that Good propounded; and if it consist
with it, it will measure a Motion of the Will toward that Good proportionable
to it: and the want of the Knowledge or Sense of this Good sends the Motions of
thy Will on gadding after every Vanity, steadfast in nothing, willing what it
has not, and weary of what it has, pursuing a Butter-fly or a Glowworm with
the same eagerness and intention of Soul, as it would do a substantial and
satisfactory Good: when thou see a Child fixing the intention of his mind
upon a Rattle or a Hobbyhorse, more than upon a goodly Manor, or upon a
Feather or a Riband more than upon a Title of Honor conjoined with Power; and
when he has these Toys, to be weary of them, and pursue something else; thou
can easily see the ground of this Error in his Valuation to arise from his
Ignorance of the true difference between them; and this unstability in his
content in them, does arise from the emptiness and unusefulness of them, and
that disproportion which he finds in them to his expectation; his infant reason
being yet better able to value in Fruition than in expectation: And yet thou
do not consider that the disproportion of those things, which thy riper Will
pursues as Good, as to the chiefest Good, is infinitely greater than that of
the most Childish enjoyment to those things, wherein the most and wisest of Men
place their chief expectation; and that the Error of the most childish
Judgment, laid in the Balance with the Judgment of the wise Men of the World,
wants fewer Grains to make it equal, than that of the wisest Man in the World,
not having his Soul ballasted with the Love and Knowledge of God, laid in the
Scales with one, that makes his Creator his chiefest hope and expectation.

Keep a Guard upon thy Conscience; The chief work of Conscience in the Soul
consists in these things: 1. The reception of sound practical Principles: this
is the Foundation of all its subsequent working, the Major proposition: 2. The
discovery of those Actions or purposes which are in the Soul: 3. The comparing
of those Actions or purposes with those former practical grounds: 4. The
Conclusion or Judgment upon those Actions and Principles thus compared, of
Absolution or Approbation, or of Condemnation and Rejection: 5. The Motion of
the Conscience toward the Soul upon this conviction, viz. Persuasion or
Dissuasion, to or from the Act in question; if future; stirring or comforting
the Soul in reference to the Act, if past. Thy Conscience is that Cart by which
thou do, or should, steer thy Course in this World toward the other: and
therefore it is of highest Concernment to have an eye upon it: and therefore,

1. Learn to furnish it with practical Principles of Truth and Soundness. These
Principles are, for any thing that appears to me, extrinsecal to the Soul, the
Dictates of the Divine Law and Will conveyed into the Conscience, either by the
immediate Revelation and Demonstration of God unto the Soul; thus to Adam in a
perfect measure, and to those Holy men of God, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles; or by the Course and way of his Providence, either by unwritten
Tradition, Romans 2.15. and this was a more uncertain Dispensation, because more
easy to be corrupted by the Practices and teachings of Men, which were so
mingled with it, that it was very hard to discover the Wheat from the Chaff; so
that if we should now go to gather up Principles for the Conscience out of the
Practices of Men or Nations, or the Collections of humane Laws or Authors, we
should gather up Principles full of uncertainty, contrarieties, and
inconsistencies among themselves; and such of them as had any sound Conformity
to truth were so general, that several Men, or the same Man at several times,
or upon several occasions, would deduce from them a justification of contrary
Practices; as we see is done among diverse Men, that admit the same general
Principles of Practice, and yet upon the same Principles their Consciences,
when they come to particular Actions, act quite contrary one to the other: the
great and merciful God has therefore, by a wonderful Course of his Providence,
conveyed unto us a Collection of practical Principles made by himself, even the
Word of his Truth, admirably adequated to our use, especially in two things: 1.
Of their Truth and Infallibility, we cannot mistake them, for they are the very
Revelations of the God of Truth, unmingled with the Sophistications and
Corruptions of Men, Gold seven times tried: 2. Their Particularity and
Certainty; there is scarce an Action in a Man's whole life, but a Man shall find
a Rule fitted for it: David, that had but a part of it, and a small and a dark
part of it in Comparison of what we have, c^lls it a Perfect Law converting the
Soul, a sure Testimony, making wise the Simple, Psalm. 19.7. a Commandment
exceeding all other perfection, Psalm. 119.95. that made him wiser than his
Enemies and Teachers. Ibid 98. a Word able to make the Man of God pe^fect,
thoroughly furnished to all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.17. and though the very words
of the Book are full of admirable Truth and Conviction, infinitely out-going
all the writings of Men, yet there is more in it than this; even a Promise of a
Blessing of it, to as many as seriously make it their study and Rule of Life
and Faith, and a fulfilling of that Promise, the Son of God sending his own
Spirit along with the use of that Word, Life with the Letter, into the Soul:
And this was that which made this Law of God, though comprised in a little
Volume, to be so exceeding wide, and precious to David; there went along with
it, and with his Meditation of it, a Spirit of Life and Light, that showed him
larger. Dimensions of it, than could be found by the bare strength of his
natural Understanding.

2. Take leisure upon all thy Actions and purposes to acquaint thy Conscience
with them, that so thy Conscience may have time to deliberate, and to compare
it with its Principle, the Word of God. Precipitancy and Hastiness in Actions
robs the Conscience of that employment, which God has given to it; and as it
is the Mother of all sin, so it brings a double inconvenience to a Man, even
from his Conscience, viz. 1. A deadness and unprofitableness in the faculty: It
is so kept under and out of employment, that it forgets her business: when it
is laid aside and seldom consulted with, it grows unexpert and unable to give
an Answer, when it may be we desire it: The direction of Conscience, where it
is well used, is seldom without the immediate direction of the very Spirit of
God; and when the Guidance of that Spirit is neglected, it will not return to
thy assistance when thou please: 2. It turns that, which would be thy
Counselor, into thy Accuser and Tormentor: thou refusest to give her time to
do her Office before thy Action, and therefore it will be bold to take time to
do her Office after: She cannot be admitted to advise thee, but she will take
Liberty to accuse and sting thee.

3. Endeavor still to keep thy Conscience tender and sensible: Rather desire
to be troubled with a seemingly peevish Conscience, that will check almost at
any thing, than to be at quiet with a dull and stupid Conscience, that will
down with any thing: It may be it will be somewhat troublesome, but it is safe,
and thou shall find Comfort in forbearing of that, which thy tender Conscience
wished thee to foregoe, and be able abundantly to satisfy that trouble which
thou art put to by thy forbearance: The Conscience of thine Integrity will be
more satisfactory to thee, than the curiosity of thy Conscience will be
troublesome: And be very prudent and curious in thy Disputations with thy
Conscience; thou may, before thou art aware, dispute thy Conscience into
Stupidity, or thy self into perplexity.

4. Observe exactly the Language of thy Conscience to thy Soul; for most
commonly the Conscience takes part with her Maker: if she persuade, be doing;
if she dissuade, forbear: He, that in the Fear of God listens to the Voice of
his Conscience in a thing of it self indifferent, yet over balanced from its
indifferency by the Dictate of his Conscience, performs a work of Obedience to
God well near as acceptable as he that does a work of its own Nature good; for
as much as the Life and Formality of any good work consists not so much in the
Nature of the thing that is done, as in the reason or ground of the doing it,
viz. the Love of God: And that man that, having endeavored to Principle his
Conscience aright with the Word of truth, does honestly and sincerely follow
the directions of it, shall be sure not to err long or dangerously: God,
having placed the Conscience in our Breast as his own Vicegerent, looks upon
such a subjection to the Conscience as an Obedience to himself, and his own
Authority, and will in due time by his own Power and Spirit inlighten and guide
such a Conscience to perform his Office regularly and effectually.

5. As a consequence of the former, when a question arises in thy Conscience,
whether such a thing may be safely omitted, which thou art sure may be safely
done; or whether such a thing may be safely done, which thou art sure may be
safely forborne; put not thy self, nor thy Conscience, upon a Dispute where thou
need not; but be content rather to abridge thy self from a Liberty, that may
be probably lawful, than to put thy self upon an Action or Omission that may at
least be disputably sinful; and so much the rather because thy Heart is
deceitful, and as it loves Liberty, so it finds out Sophistry enough to corrupt
thy Judgment and thy Conscience, if thou give way unto it: there is scarce the
grossest sin, that ever any Man committed, but his Heart found out some Reasons
to bribe or quiet his Conscience in the Commission of it: Rather submit to the
still Voice of thy Conscience in the restraint even of thy lawful Liberty,
though it give thee not a Reason for it; than listen to the reasonings of thy
Heart for the allowance of it: Suspect her, for she speaks in her own cause,
and is partial and deceitful. This on the one hand may be a safe Rule for us
touching Stage Plays, long Hair, Gaming, Usury, etc. on the other, touching the
strict Observation of the Lord's Day, set times of Prayer, etc.

6. As an incident likewise to the former, when a question comes in thy
Conscience touching a thing whether to be done or not, and that upon the
scrutiny of thy Conscience it seems to be equally balanced, no Rule to guide
thee, no Circumstance that thrown into the Scale can take away the indifferency
of either side, it is a safe Rule, though not always necessary, to forsake that
which the inclination of thy own natural Appetite most prompts thee to: The
Reason is that which is before mentioned, the Heart is apt to magnify those
Arguments that conduce to the execution of that, which suits with thy sinful
Appetite, and to lessen and slight those, that make against it: So that in a
Decision of indifferency in such a competition a Man may in a more impartial
Judgment conclude the thing to be therefore not indifferent, but sinful,
because thy sinful Heart can but bring up what she loves but to an equal
Balance: thou must therefore in such a Case never hold that Gold passable,
which does not turn the Scale.

7. As thus in the Directing Operation of thy Conscience in things to be done,
or not to be done, so in the motion of thy Conscience after the things done or
omitted: Sometimes the Conscience is silent before the Action, yet she speaks
after, and according to that Language of thy Conscience, so let the affection
of thy Soul be: If it approve and justify the thing done, bless thy Creator
for the Action, and bless thy Creator for thy Conscience that he is pleased to
give thee a reward within thy self of thy Integrity: If thy Conscience blame
thee, though never so little, despise not, nor neglect this secret Check; it is
a Message from Heaven that summons thee to these Duties:

1. To Thankfulness to God, that is pleased not to give thee over to incurable
Guilt of hardness of Heart; that though thou have rejected the Admonition of
thy Lord sent by thy Conscience before thou offendest, yet he does not give
thee over, but follows thee with the rebuke of thy Conscience, that though the
former did not divert thee, the latter may reclaim thee: As long as thou have a
Conscience that can check thee, God has not given over his Care of thee, for
it is the Voice of God by thy Conscience.

2. To Humiliation and sorrow of Heart: This as it is the natural and genuine
effect of a Guilt discovered, (unless the Heart be given over to a reprobate
Sense) so it is a most useful effect, because it makes the Heart soft, and fit
to receive those impositions, which will ensue upon such a Sorrow, fit to
receive Instruction, a proud Heart will not bend, nor yield; fit to take up
Resolutions of amendment; the present Sense of Guilt shows sin to the Soul in
its own true Dress, it is bitterness in the end; fit to implore a Pardon, and
fit to receive it, because it now knows how truly to value it: And though thy
greater sin deserve thy greater Sorrow, yet thy very failings, sins of daily
incursion, Erro^ in Circumstances of Actions, defects and wants of intention in
Duties, do all deserve as true Sorrow, though not so great; and therefore
cherish and encourage thy Conscience to be vigilant in this, by observing her
rebukes even concerning these, and let not the reflection of these pass without
as particular an Humiliation of thy Soul before God for them; for they are sins
against the Duty and Gratitude thou owe to thy Creator; and it will make thy
future Conversation more exact and more comfortable sorrow of Heart for those
smaller offenses: as it will make presumptuous sins the more hideous, and the
more abhorred, so it will waste the number and measure of those smaller
offenses, which like swarms of flies cover our daily Actions of all kinds.

3. To seek out for that, which can only pacify thy Conscience, and remove thy
Sorrow, which cannot be but by removing the Guilt: And now let thy Soul search
the whole Compass of Heaven and Earth, and where can thou find any thing that
can remove thy Guilt of the smallest sin imaginable, but him alone against whom
thou have committed it? and where can thou find any means for obtaining
remission from sins, but by that means which he himself has prescribed? and
where has he prescribed any such means, but in his Word? and where in his
Word, but in his Son? Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. If then I stay at home, I find nothing
within me, but a troubled and chiding Conscience; and it will be impossible for
me to remove this Guilt; I will therefore venture my Soul upon the free Promise
of God in Christ, and with the Lepers in the Famine conclude, If he save me, I
shall live; and if he kill me, I can but die.

4. To fall upon thy knees before the great God, and to beg for thy Life, and
for thy Peace: O Lord, my sin has brought a Guilt upon my Soul, and that Guilt
has raised a Storm in my Conscience, but if thou, who art only offended, and
therefore can only forgive, speak the Word to thy Servant, Be thou clean, and
to my Conscience, Peace be still; my Guilt, and with it that Tempest, that is
within me, will be removed: Do it, I beseech thee for thy Truth and Promise
sake; thou can not owe Remission to thy Creature, but thou have been pleased
to engage thy self to thy Creature upon Repentance to have mercy and forgive;
and upon that Promise of thine will I hang, though thou seem to reject me: Do
it for thy Mercy sake; thou, that have commanded me to forgive my Brother till
seventy times seven times, if as often he turn and repent, have infinitely more
Mercy toward thy Creature, than thou requirest from it: Do it for thy Glories
sake; thou have said it is the Glory of a Man to pass by a Transgression, and
what can be glorious in thy Creature that has not a resemblance of thy own
mind and Image? nay do it for thy Justice sake; thou have been pleased to give
a public Sacrifice for all our sins against thee, even thy Son, by an eternal
Covenant with a Proclamation, That whosoever will, may come and take of the
water of Life freely; and thou have been pleased as it were to deposite a
Pardon in thy Sons hand for as many as come unto thee by him, and to lay upon
him that Chastisement of our Peace; and though I, like a Man, have gone aside,
yet thy Gifts are without Repentance; That satisfaction therefore, which thou,
out of thy abundant Love, were pleased to give unto thy self, I beseech thee
accept, and as it will be the Glory of thy Mercy, so it will be the Honor of
thine own Justice; for if we confess our sins, thou art Just, as well as
Faithful, to forgive us our sins in him that was the price of our Peace.

Set a Watch upon thy Spirit: As the Soul is the Life of the Body, so the
Spirit is the Life of the Soul, that active Principle which works by the Will,
the Affections and Conscience. This appears by the frequent Denomination of the
Spirit, and by its contradistinction to the very Soul, Ephesians. 4.23. Spirit of
the mind, Prove. 18.14. The Spirit of a Man will sustain his infirmities; but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 20.27. The Spirit of a Man is the Candle of
the Lord. Prove. 16.2. The Lord weighs the Spirits, Eccl. 7.8. The patient in
Spirit is better than the proud in Spirit. Isaiah 57.15. to revive the Spirit
of the humble, 16. The Spirit should fall before me, and the Souls which I have
made. James 4.5. The Spirit, that is in us, lu^^eth to liu^^y* Heb. 12, 23. The
Spirits of Just men made perfect. 1 These. ^.23. I pray God your whole Spirit,
and Soul, and Body, etc. Heb. 4.12. dividing between the Soul and the Spirit.
Romans 8.16. The Spirit bears witness with our Spirit. And here we take not
Spirit physically, for those Instruments, whereby the Soul works, but for that
Principle of activity, which works in the Soul: these Disorders that sit upon
the Spirit principally are two:

1. In the Defect; Deadness and Depression in the Spirit: The Spirit is that
which only can hold Communion with God: he that will worship him, as he must
worship him in Spirit and Truth, so with his Spirit; and without that mingled
with thy Prayers they are dead, and cannot come at him; and without thy Spirit
brought to his Word, and to his Ordinances, they cannot come at thy Soul. As
the Spirits of thy Blood are those that unite sensible Objects to thy Soul, so
the Spirit of thy Soul is that which can only bring home Divine impressions
from God to thy Soul, or expressions from thy Soul acceptably to God. Upon such
occasions awake thy Spirit and mingle it with thy Services, and shake off that
Dullness and Heaviness of Spirit: it will make thy Prayers uneffectual, and thy
Services unprofitable.

2. In the Excess, Elation, and Pride of Spirit: And from this Capital disease
in the Spirit proceed those others of Envy, the Spirit that is in us lusts
after e^y: The Spirit of Revenge, Luke 9.55. Ye (...) not (...) what Spirit you
are: The Spirit of Murmuring and Discontent: These are but the productions of
the Spirit of Pride, when it meets with any thing that crosses it: If it meet
with any Person that sensibly exceeds the Person in whom it is in worth,
esteem, or other Accessions, then it is turned into Envy, and that Envy into
Revenge. And this was the very Original of the Devils immediate action upon our
first Parents; his Pride though it made him lower by his fall, it made him not
more humble. And from hence arises Murmuring and Discontent, because that
which befalls him crosses him in his self opinion of his own Merit or Desert.
And from hence proceeds the rejection of God, and of his directions, from an
opinion of a self-sufficiency and fullness. To cure this Distemper and the
products of it, labor for Poverty and Humility of Spirit upon these
Considerations:

1. That whatsoever thou have of worth or good in thee, it is not thy own, it
is a derived good; the good that is most thy own, even thy essential good, is
not thy own, thou owe thy Being to somewhat without thee: But grant it were
thine own, yet the Comfort and Life, and Beauty of thy Being were nothing
without a farther good that is not thy own: thy Power, thy Wealth, thy
Strength, thy Knowledge, these are not in thy Essence, they are derived Goods,
and such as are not from thy self: the most exact faculty of thy Soul, is but
empty till it be filled by an Object without thee: In thy highest Fruition thou
have a just occasion to magnify God, from whom thou have it; not to magnify
thy self, that do only receive it: Learn therefore the Original of that good,
whatever it be, that thou enjoyest, it will make thee thankful and keep thee
humble.

2. That in thy self thou have nothing but emptiness and vanity; Thou had a
good, it is true, which was sent thee by the Lord of thy Being, and that we
have shown was no occasion to exalt thy self, because it was not thine own: but
even that thou have lost now, and thy Nature has nothing left thee whereof to
be Proud.

3. That it is impossible for thee to come to enjoy that which must make thee
happy, till thou art deeply sensible of thy own emptiness and nothingness, and
thy Spirit thereby brought down and laid in the dust: As long as thy Soul is
full of thy Honor, or of thy Wealth, or of the World, or of thy own
Righteousness, or Worth, there is no room for thy Savior, or his fullness: thou will not receive him, because thou find not any want; and thou can not
receive him, because thou have no room: And as it indisposeth thee to receive
good from God; so it indisposeth (as I may say) God to give it: for thy Pride
assumeth that both from God which is his, and applies it to thy self, even that
acknowledgment and Honor, which is a Tribute wholly and only due to God: and
hence it is that he resists the Proud, because they rob him of the Duty, that
by all the Laws and Reasons immaginable thou owe to him.

4. That the Grace of God, the Knowledge and Sense of his Love, the Spirit of
Christ is an humbling Spirit; the more thou have of it, the more it will humble
thee; and it is a sign that either thou have it not, or that it is yet
over-mastered by thy corruption; if thy Heart be still haughty: it shows thee
thy self in thy true Dress, and makes thee abhor thy self: it shows thee the
Purity and Majesty of the great God, with whom thou have to deal, and teaches
thee Fear and Honor toward him: it teaches thee to live by thy Savior's
Life, to be righteous by his Purity, to be saved by his Sufferings, to walk by
his Rule, and to aim at his Glory: it shows thee that thou have all from him,
and frames thy Heart to return all to him: It restores thee to that Position
and Constitution in which thou wast made, and takes off that distemper of
Spirit, which at once has put thee below what thou wast, and yet exalts thy
foolish Spirit above it.

There was a third Object of our Watch proposed, viz. Temptations, which are
either, 1. For Trial: 2. To Sin; of which see the Meditations upon the Lord's
Prayer, Afflictions, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the new Life, or Sanctification, and the necessity of it.
HITHERTO we have considered the Duty and Means of Mortification, the putting
off of the Old Man, those Distempers and Disorders of our Souls, by which they
become unconformable to the Image and Mind of God; the Principle whereof is the
Spirit and Grace of God given us in Christ; and the Means of this work those
which we have before mentioned: Now we come to consider of that New Life, which
follows hereupon most necessarily:

1. Because it proceeds most necessarily from the same Principle. As in a
natural Man fallen into some Distemper, it is the same strength of Nature that
conquers the Disease, and it being conquered, maintains the Body in its natural
Operations, which is Health; so the same vital power of the Spirit of God is
that, which overmatched those Distempers in our Soul, which are contrary to our
spiritual Life and Motion, and conserves that Constitution of Health in the
Soul, by which it moves regularly and according to the Will of God, which is
our New Life.

2. Because the Motion of those Distempers, which fit in our Soul, does
necessarily conform our Souls to that condition in which we were created. God
at first created us in a Conformity unto himself; our sin brought an impotency
upon our Nature, by which we contracted all those Corruptions and Distempers,
that have disordered our Souls, and diverted us from God, when God is pleased,
by the power of his own Spirit purchased for us by the Blood of Christ, to put
into us a Principle of life and strength to work out those Corruptions and
Disorders of our Souls, there must necessarily follow a life conformable to the
Will of God, and as there is no Medium between Life and Death, so when this
Death of our Souls is removed by that Principle of Life, there necessarily
follows a New Life, and new Operations answerable to it.

3. The End of the Motion of those disorders of the Soul is in order to our New
Life: 1 Pet. 2.24. That we being dead to sin, should live to Righteousness:
Ephesians. 2.10. Created in Christ Jesus unto good works. It was the end of the
Death of Christ, Tit. 2.14. the Tree that bore wild Figs, and that which bore
none, were equally cursed. John 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not
fruit, he takes away. So then the work of Mortification and Sanctification
differ only in their Relations, not in themselves: they are both effects of
that same Life, which, by the Spirit of Christ and our Union to him, is wrought
in us: they both drive to the same End, even to our Conformity to our Head,
Christ Jesus, which is our Conformity to the Will of God, wherein consists the
Perfection of every Creature: For this is the Will of God, even your
Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3.

The Honor and Glory of God is, and ought to be, the supreme End of all
actions and things in the World. And this is that, which every Creature in his
right station and condition does drive at, according to the measure and degree
of its natural perfection: for as the great End of God in all his actions, is
his own Glory, so every Creature having a conformity to the Will of God, is
moved by him toward that End. And as this is the greatest and chiefest End of
all Creatures and Actions, so the motion toward it, must needs be the most
perfect operation of the Creature. And as this Truth is sounded in Nature and
Reason, so it is the good Pleasure of Almighty God to join the Perfection and
Happiness of the Creature in this Conformity to his Mind and Will. When any
thing therefore continues in an universal free subjection and subservience to
the Will of God, as that very subjection and subservience is an Honor to the
Lord of his Being, so by that subjection and subservience, is the Creature
moved and managed to the Glory of God, even to the fulfilling of his Will, and,
as a necessary Concomitant to it, to its own Perfection and Happiness. Christ,
that was in all things conformable to the Mind and Will of God, for he came to
do the Will of his Father, came into this World to bring Honor to the great
God by his Creature Man, and, as a concomitant and a necessary Consequent of
it, Happiness and Perfection to Man: and to that End, first he sets him free
from that Guilt and Curse, which he contracted by his Fall; removes from him
those Fetters of the Power and Reign of Sin, whereby he was disabled to move
conformably to the Will of God; puts into him a Spirit of Life, that may enable
him to live to God, and be conformable to his Will, and move to his Glory: and
this is his Sanctification. So then next to that great and ultimate End of the
Glory of God, the Sanctification of the Creature, and rendering it conformable
to the Will of God, was the greatest End of Christ's work of Redemption, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27. Even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it, etc. Luke 1.74. that we being
delivered, etc. might serve him without fear in Holiness and Righteousness,
Tit. 2.14. who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, etc. So that even our Justification
is in order to our Sanctification, and that in order to the Glory of God, viz.
that his Creature might be conformable to his Will, and might actively move to
the Glory of the Creator, wherein consists his End, and with which is joined
the Creatures Happiness.

Touching this matter, these things are considerable, 1. The Necessity of it:
2. The Means, whereby it is effected: 3. The Degrees of it: 4. The Parts or
Extent of it.

1. That the Sanctification of the Heart and Life is absolutely Necessary to
every Christian, in some measure answerable to his natural Perfection, upon
these Considerations:

1. It was the End of the coming of Christ into the World, and the very End of
thy Justification. His End was not only to remove thy Guilt and thy Curse, but
to make thee conformable to the Will of thy Creator, that thou may be
actively subservient unto his Glory, which thou can not be, unless thy Nature
be changed, as well as thy Sin pardoned. The great End of the coming of Christ,
was to bring Glory to his Father. If he only free thee from thy Guilt, he
brings Mercy to his Creature: but unless he cleanse and change thy Nature, thou
remainest useless to thy Master.

2 It is impossible, that there can be Justification of any Man; but that
according to the measure of his natural ability, there will be likewise a
cleansing and changing of his Nature: because the knowledge and belief of the
Love of God in Christ, cannot be in Heart without a return of Love from the
Soul again to God. The very same act of the Spirit and Grace of God, which
discovers and unites the sense of the Love of God to thy Soul, does as
naturally cause Love in thee to God, as the union of the Species to the Glass,
reflects the Resemblance from the Glass again, 1 John 4.19. We love him,
because he loved us first: his was a Love of Pity, Compassion, a Love of Bounty
and Goodness, a Love that broke through Death and greater difficulties than
Death, even the uniting of the Divinity to our Flesh; a Love passing Knowledge:
and thine cannot choose but be a Love of Admiration and Astonishment, a Love of
Thankfulness and Gratitude. When the Spirit of God works Faith in thee, it
works by Love, even by presenting the Love of God to thy Soul in as full
dimensions as thy Soul can receive it: and when Faith is wrought in thy Soul,
that works again by Love to God. If thou have not Love to God, thou have not
Faith in him: and if thou have Love to him, thou can not choose but conform
thy self to his Mind and his Will, John 14.23. If a man love me, he will keep
my words. And for this cause the Apostle makes it not only an inconsistency,
but a kind of impossibility for one justified, to continue in sin, Romans 6.2.
How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? 1 John 3.9. he
cannot sin, because he is born of God: In every act of known sin, that thou
committest, and every omission of every known good, that thou neglectest, there
is an actual intermission or suppression of the act of Faith, and of thy Love
to God.

3. It is a necessary consequent of our Union with Christ. There is, as has
been showed, a double act, whereby our Union with Christ is wrought; on our
part, an act of Faith to apprehend him; on his part, an act of his Spirit,
whereby he apprehends us, Philip. 3.1, 2. and this Union is so strict, that it
is resembled to those things, that have the strictest Union; the Vine and the
Branches, John 15.1, 2. Romans 11.18. Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of
his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30. and as in the virtue of this Union we partake of all
these Privileges, which were in him, his Satisfaction, his Righteousness, his
Sonship, his Intercession, his Resurrection; so likewise of his Spirit, as
there is one Body, so there is one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. It is his in Essence, it is ours
in Operation and Influence: so that the inward Life of a Christian is not his
own, but he lives by the Life, that is, that living Spirit of the Son of God.
Now as that Spirit or Life, that is in the Root, when it passes into the
Branch, makes the Branch conformable in Nature and Fruit unto the Root: So the
Spirit of Christ transfused into a Christian, does conform his Nature and
Operations unto Christ; for that was the great End of God in sending his Son
into the World, who was in all things conformable unto him, that we should be
conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. And thus that impression of the
Image of God, which was lost in Adam, is re-imprinted by him, that was the
express Image of his Father, by the secret transmission of his own pure and
operative Spirit into all those, that are united unto him: and thereby the Will
of God is fulfilled. Be ye holy, for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16.

4. It is necessary as a Preparation or Pre-disposition of the Soul, to that
everlasting condition of Blessedness, which it expects in Heaven: the place a
holy place, Heb. 10.19. an immortal and undefiled Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4.
where nothing that defiles can enter, Rev. 21.27. The company, an holy
company; the company of pure Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect,
Heb. 12.22, 23. The Business, a pure and holy Employment, Rev. 19.2, etc. The
Presence a glorious and holy Presence, the Presence of that God, that cannot
behold any unclean thing, whose Name is Holy; the Presence of our Mediator, who
is holy, harmless, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. And what congruity can
such a Soul have to such a Hope, who spends his whole Life in a way quite
contrary unto it? He therefore, that has this Hope, purifieth himself, even as
he is pure, 1 John 3.3. And since all these t^ings shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holiness and godly conversation?
Could thou carry thy sinful and impure Heart into Heaven with thee, yet thou
could not see God, which is the Heaven of Heaven, Matthew. 5. the pure in
Heart shall see God, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which, no man shall see the Lord.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Means of Sanctification, and 1. On God's part, his Word, and
his Spirit.
2. THE Means whereby this is effected, are either properly on God's part, or
on ours.

On God's part, his Word and his Spirit, 1. The Word of God: He, having to deal
with Creatures, which he has endued with Sense and understanding, has been
pleased in his Wisdom and Providence to preserve and deliver unto us his
written Word, whereby the Truths therein contained, may be united to our
Understanding. And this Word, as it contains the holy Counsels of the holy God,
so the Truths therein contained, do naturally tend to our Sanctification,
though of it self, as a bare Moral Cause, it be not sufficient to effect it, in
respect of our indisposition and deadness, which must have a Spirit of Life to
quicken us, and make that Word operative upon us. Now in respect of the
tendency of this Word to our Sanctification, and in as much as God is pleased
by it, to work this work in us, therefore often our Sanctification is
attributed at least instrumentally to it, John 17.17. Sanctify them through
thy truth: thy word is truth. Psalm. 19.7. the law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul, John 15.3. Now are ye clean through the word that I have
spoken. All which tend to no more than this, that this Word of God contains
those Truths in it, which, being truly known and believed, do conform the Soul
to the Will of God, that Image, which he first cast, consisting in
Righteousness and true Holiness.

Now the general Truths, which this Book Exhibits to us, tending to this end,
are principally two:

1. It discovers what that will of God concerning Man is: and this it does two
ways; 1. By Precepts of most excellent and sound Justice and Reason, which are
nothing else, but the Repetitions of that Law, which was at first in our
Nature: 2. By Examples, especially that Example of our Savior's, who was the
Image of the invisible God, Colos. 1.15. and therefore in our imitation of him,
we reassume that impression of God's Image, which we once lost. Now Christ's
Life, as it was a Meritorious Righteousness, so it was an Exemplary
Righteousness, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek, John 13.15. For I have
given you an Example, that ye should do as I have done, Ephesians. 4.13. the
measure of his statu^e, Philip. 2.5. the mind of Christ.

2. It discovers a great deal of convincing Reason, why we should conform to
this Will of God: 1. In respect of the Commands themselves, it shows their
Righteousness, Justice and Perfection, and that in our conformity to them
consists our Perfection. 2. In respect of God, that commands them: 1. It is he
requires it, that is the Author and Lord of thy Being, and thou can not
choose, but infinitely owe what he requires: 2. It is he requires it, that will
not, cannot be mocked; he is infinitely able to avenge the rebellion of his
Creature: 3. It is he commands it, that has been a Bountiful, Merciful God
unto thee, that when thou have incurred his Curse, has provided a Sacrifice to
expiate it; when thou have disabled thy self to obey, provides a Spirit of his
own to assist thee; that when thou fallest, pities, pardons, and restores thee,
and though he owes it not to thee, rewards his own Grace and work in thee with
an immortal Glory to thee. And what natural ingenuity can choose but engage to
the uttermost expression of his thankfulness to such a God by a most
advantageous Obedience? 3. In respect of thy self, if thou disobey, the loss is
thy own; if thou obey, the benefit is thine, Deuteronomy. 30.15. For I have set before
thee Life and Good, and Death and Evil. And herein among diverse others, is the
Excellency of the Word of God; as it contains Precepts of most singular Purity,
and evidencing their own Perfection; so it inforceth the Obedience upon Reasons
of greater strength and more powerful Persuasions, than all the Writings of Men
ever did or could: by annexing Rewards and Punishments of a higher
constitution, than the divinest Philosophers ever thought of.

2. The Spirit of God: Hence this work is attributed to the Spirit of God, 1
Pet. 1.2. Through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience: and this
principally these three ways: 1. In preparing and disposing the Heart: 2. In
accompanying and coming in with the Word: 3. In following that Work with a
continual assistance of direction and strength.

1. As to the first, viz. the Preparation of the Heart; Since the defacing of
the Image of God in the Soul, our Hearts, like the first Creation, are without
form and void, and darkness is upon the face of it, till the Spirit of God move
upon the face of these Waters, Genesis 1.2. a Heart filled with evil thoughts, and
that continually, Genesis 6.5. till this Spirit strive with it, Genesis 6.3. a Heart
dammed and blocked up with Lusts, and Earth, and Disorders, so that there is no
^ss for Christ, till the Spirit of God open it, Acts (...) ^n obstinate, and a
hard Heart, an iron sinew, (...) of brass, Isa. 48.4. till the Spirit of the
(...) and a Heart full of madness, Eccles. 9. (...) Spirit be chased away, and
the Heart (...) Spirit of God. There oftentimes goes a secret disposition and
calming of Heart before, whereby some external act of the Providence of God,
which is prepared and fitted for that occasion, strikes effectually upon the
Heart, and works upon it, whether it be an Affliction, or a Blessing, or a
Deliverance, or a Word of God. Thus when Nathaniel was under the Fig tree,
Christ saw him, and prepared his Heart to entertain the call of Philip, John
1.48.

2. The concomitant act of the Spirit of God, especially with the Word of God,
and some other extraordinary acts of his Providence. And herein it has a
double work: 1. Of Strength to drive on this Word: and hence it is called the
Sword of the Spirit. The Spirit of God is that Arm that manageth this Sword,
Ephesians. 6.17. To the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, Heb. 4.12. When thou
see therefore a tumultuous, disorderly Heart, filled with Pride and
obstinacy, yet brought upon his Knees by a seemingly weak Admonition, Reproof,
or other passage of the Word of God, wonder not at the change; for the powerful
and mighty Arm of the Spirit of God has shaken this little dart between the
joints of his harness, even into the midst of his Soul. What ailed thee, O thou
Sea, that thou fleddest? etc. Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord,
at the presence of the God of Jacob, Psalm. 114.5.2. Of Life to go along with it
into the Spirit of a Man, John 6.63. The words that I speak unto you, they are
Spirit, and they are Life. The passage between the Sense and the Spirit of a
Man is of a great distance, and full of many turnings: and hence the words of
Men, for the most part die and lose their efficacy before they come at the
Spirit of a Man; sometimes they die in the Ear, sometimes they get into the
Brain, and die there in a Speculation, sometimes they strike a little, but yet
live not long there, for the words have no Life in them: But with this Word
there goes a Life, which goes along with it, even to the uttermost corner of
thy Soul, even thy Spirit, and there it continues alive, 1 John 3.9. His seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin: and hence it is, that the Commands of God,
even to us that are dead, are not incongruous, when God pleases that his Work
shall be wrought in the Heart, for a Spirit of Life goes along with the
Command, even to the penetralia animae, John 5.25. The time is that the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. And as
thus the Spirit of God carries the Word of God with Life and Vigor into the
choicest parts of the Soul; so does it with all other Dispensations of Divine
Providence: If thou have an outward Blessing given thee, it will along with the
Sense of thy Blessing carry in the Sense of the Goodness of God, and teach thee
Thankfulness and Moderation: If an Affliction, it will get along into thy Soul
with that Affliction, and teach thee to examine thy self, and to search and try
thy ways, and having discovered thy sin, it will teach thee Humiliation and
Repentance; and if upon thy search thou find thine Integrity, yet it will teach
thee Humility, Thankfulness, Contentedness, Dependence upon God: it will with
every Dispensation of Providence go along with it into thy Soul, and carry that
message with it, that God by this his Dispensation intends to send thee. And
thus it is a Sanctifying Spirit by way of concomitance with the Word and
Providence.

3. The Spirit of God sanctifies the Heart by its own immediate and Continual
Assistance: It contests with thy daily Temptations, that are from without, and
conquers them; and with thy hourly Corruptions, that are within thee, and wastes
and subdues them: In the midst of thy Difficulties, it will be thy Counselor,
a secret voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk, in it: In the midst
of thy Temptations, it will be thy Strength, and a Grace sufficient for thee:
In the midst of thy Troubles, it will be thy Light and thy Comfort: In the
midst of thy Corruptions, it will be thy Cleanser, a Spirit of burning to
consume those swarms of Lusts, that cover and fill thy Heart: In thy Failings
and Falls, it will be thy Remembrancer, and teach thee to repent and humble thy
self. This was that Monitor, that furnished Joseph with an answer to a most
importunate and advantageous Temptation: How shall I do this great wickedness,
and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. that furnished Job with silencing Answers to
all those temptations to Insolence, Pride, Self-confidence, and Injustice, Job
9.1. that after David's Sin smote David's Heart, before David's Heart smote
him, and taught him Confession and Sorrow, and to beg a Pardon, 2 Samuel 24.10.
Only beware thou neglect not the Voice of this Spirit of God: It may be, thy
neglect may quench it, and thou may never hear that Voice more: or at least,
it will certainly grieve it; and can thou think of grieving that Spirit
without a Tear, which is content to descend into thy impure, polluted Heart, to
make it a Heart fitted for Glory? Thy folly is great, and thy ingratitude
greater: When God speaks once, and twice, and Man perceives him not, Job 33.14.
it sometimes falls out that he never speaks to that Man more. Ephraim is set
upon Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4.17. and that is the saddest Condition in the
World: but if he do, his Mercy will be a severe Mercy, he will speak louder,
Job 33.22. when the still Voice is not heard, his Soul draws near to the
grave, and his Life to the destroyers. The observation of the secret Admonition
and Reasonings of the Spirit of God in the Heart, as it is an effectual means,
so it is a calm and a comfortable means to cleanse and sanctify thy Heart: and
the ^o^e^it^i attended unto, the more it will be conversant with thy Soul for
thy Instruction, Strength, and Comfort, Prove. 6.22. When thou go, it shall
lead thee, when thou sleep, it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest, it
shall talk with thee.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Means of Sanctification, 2. On Man's part, viz. Faith,
Love, Fear, Hope.
ON our part, the Instruments of our Sanctification, are those supernatural
acts or habits of the Soul, wrought by the finger of God, Faith, Hope, and Love.

1. Faith, Acts 15.9. God also purifying their Hearts by Faith. And this it
does as it is an Act receiving into the Soul the Word of God, and subscribing
to the Truth and Goodness of it; receving it not as the word of Man, but as the
Word of the just and true God.

1. It therein finds and believes the great Debt of Duty that the Creature owes
to his Creator. What can be unjust for God to require of that Being, which he
gave and made? As the Gift of a Being is an infinite Gift, because it is an
infinite Motion, there being no greater disproportion imaginable, than between
not being and being; so the engagement of Obedience and Conformity from that
Creature, to the Will and good Pleasure of its Author, is infinite and
boundless by all the Justice that can be.

2. Faith does find in that Word a farther engagement of Conformity and
Obedience, if a farther may be, in that it finds the immense overflowing Love
of God to Man: It is that Love, that did at first furnish him with those
Excellencies of his Nature, with that greater excellency, his image and
Superscription: It is that Love, that upholds his temporal Being, and blesses
it; It is that love that, when he was lost, sent a Sacrifice, and a
Righteousness for him, whereby he is not only pardoned from his Guilt and
Curse, but restored to Glory and immortality. And this it does truly and really
believe, and is thereby convinced that there is a greater obligation, than that
of his Nature, to live conformable to the Will and Mind of so unspeakable a
Benefactor.

3. Faith does find in this Word of God his Mind and Will, and believes it to
be that very Rule, the conformity whereunto is well pleasing and acceptable to
God. Mic. 6.8. and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? It looks upon every
Admonition, Exhortation, Reprehension, and Direction, as the very immediate
Message of God unto the Soul, and entertains it with the same awe and reverence
as if it were audibly delivered in Thunder, and trembles at it: and therefore
it receives it in the power and Life of it, and in the uttermost compass and
extent of it: it will not take this part as most consonant to thy Temper,
Condition, Designs, Constitution or Ends, and reject another part where it
crosses them, because it is equally the Will and Command of the great God, and
so received.

4. Faith finds in this Word, the Rectitude, Justice, and Regularity of the
Will of God concerning Man: they are not only just as proceeding from him, to
whom his Creature owes an infinite Obedience, as was the Command to Adam for
forbearing the forbidden Fruit, or to Abraham to sacrifice his Son; but Faith
finds in these Commands a natural Justice, and Reasonableness, and Perfection,
and concludes with David, Psalm. 19. That his Statutes are right, and his
Commands pure, such as include in themselves a natural and absolute Beauty, and
such as confer upon the Creature a Perfection, and Happiness, such as are
exactly conformable to thy Nature, were thy Nature conformable to it self: for
as the Rule or Law, that God has given to every Creature, is that wherein
consists its Beauty, Preservation and Perfection, according to the degree
wherein it is placed, and therefore every Creature labors according to its own
Nature to continue in that Rule, and when it misseth it, it contracts Deformity
and Corruption; so the Divine Law or Command of God given to Man is that
wherein consists his Perfection, as being a Rule most exactly conformable to
the reasonable Nature of Man: sin has deformed and blinded us that we cannot
now see that Perfection and Excellency, that is in our Conformity to his Will,
and has perverted and corrupted us, that as we are in this corrupted condition
we cannot desire it; but when God is pleased to anoint our eyes with the
Eye Salve of Faith, and presents this Glass, this image of his mind in his Word
unto that Eve; Faith again discerns, and discerning cannot choose but desire
that Beauty, Perfection, and Rectitude, which is there discovered in the
Commands of God, and the conformity of the Soul to the ^ame.

5. Faith does find in that Word, and finding it does most assuredly believe
the Presence of the Glorious and infinite God in every place, even in the
darkest and most remote Corners and Chambers of the Heart, searching, weighing,
and discerning the Spirit, every thought of the Heart, every word of the
Tongue, every action of the Life, and measuring them exactly with the Rule,
that he has given: and this keeps the Heart in a continual awe of the Presence
of God, purges out all Hypocrisy, sets a continual Watch upon the whole Man,
lays a Bridle upon the very thoughts, and brings them into subjection to this
Rule; because that clear and pure, and severe eye of the Great and Infinite God
searches the most retired thoughts of the Heart, and observes what conformity
they hold with his most Just and Reasonable Command.

6. Faith finds in this Word of God, and does more really and practically
believe, that that great God which has given us his Will, and is a witness to
the Obedience and Disobedience of it, has most certainly annexed an
everlasting Curse to the Disobedience of it, so it has most certainly annexed
an everlasting Glory to the Obedience thereunto, not as the merit of it; but as
the free and bountiful gift of his Goodness and Mercy in Jesus Christ: And it
finds and believes the Truth, and Faithfulness, and Glory, and Power, of the
Infinite God there engaged for the performance of it: and therefore it binds
the Heart to the Obedience of this Will of God, and Conformity unto it; which
is our Sanctification. Thus the word mingled with Faith cleanses and
sanctifies, and perfecteth, and purifieth the Heart and Life. And as thus in
Man God uses this instrument on Man's part to sanctify his Creature, and make
him conformable to himself; so Secondarily upon this Act of Faith upon the Word
of God, as its Object, the Heart is likewise cleansed by Fear, Hope, and Love,
by way of emanation from this Act of Faith.

Love, Fear, and Hope are those several Motions or Affections of the Soul, that
arise from the same Act of Faith, only as Faith is diversified according to
those different Objects apprehended by Faith, or according to the different
Notions, Relations or Actions of the same Object, as for instance, God
apprehended in his Goodness, Love and Bounty, moves our Love toward him; as
apprehended in his Glory, Majesty, Power, and Justice, excites Fear; as
apprehended in his Faithfulness, Truth, and Promises, begets Hope: and each of
these Affections thus directed, do habituate and dispose the Soul and Life to a
religious frame and Constitution, which is our Sanctification, as will appear
in these particulars:

1. The Love of God: this is that true Principle of all true Obedience; where
it is not, the Obedience is a dead and unacceptable Obedience; for God that is
a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, will be obeyed likewise
in Spirit and Truth; and the outward Conformity without this is but a dead
Obedience and Hypocrisy; and where it is it will work a Conformity of the
Heart and Life to the mind of God, upon which it is pitched, and therefore it
is called the First and Great Commandment, Matthew. 22.51. the fulfilling of the
Law, because when it is once wrought in the Heart, whatsoever it can discover
to be agreeable to the Will of him that she loves, it will most sincerely and
entirely obey: John 14.15.24. If ye love me keep my Commandments: he that
loves me not, keeps not my Sayings. Now our Love to God arises upon two
Grounds: 1. From a Sense of the Perfection and Beauty, and Purity, and
Excellency that is in him: and in this respect our Love to him cannot choose but
move the Heart to desire to be like unto him, as far forth, as is, or can be
communicable to our Nature and Condition; for whatsoever I love in another,
that is communicable unto me; I cannot choose but desire to be in my self, 1
Pet. 2. Be ye holy, for I am holy, and this Love of that Goodness that is in
God, does bring the Heart nearer to him, for Love is a Motion unto Union; and
as we come nearer to that Purity of his, it does in some measure assimilate the
Soul unto himself, because his Goodness and Brightness is an assimilating,
active, communicative Goodness, and from this nearness to him does grow much of
our Holiness here, and all our Happiness hereafter, 1 John 3.2. We shall b^
like him, for we shall see him as he is, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we with open Face
beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from Glory to Glory. Our Love to God works in the Soul a desire of Union
with him, and likeness to him which is a kind of Union: and that approximation
to him does derive from him an impression of his own Nature, and likeness unto
him.

2. The ground of our Love to God is the Sense of that Love, that he has
shown to us, 1 John. 4.19. We love him because he loved us first, and this is
a Love of Gratitude, or Thankfulness arising from the full Sense of the
undeserved and wonderful Love of God, to his unworthy Creature revealed and
dispensed in Jesus Christ: and this cannot choose but put the Soul into such
kind of thoughts and purposes as these: O Lord, at first, I received my Being
from thee; and when I had forfeited my Being and my Blessedness to thee, thou
wast patient toward me, and did not take that forfeiture, which thou justly
might: thou wast merciful to me, and did pity and forgive me; and when I
was in my Blood thou said unto me, Live: thou was bountiful unto, and did
not only pardon me, but restore me to that Blessedness which I unthankfully
lost: and thus thou did without my seeking, even when I was Senseless, and
knew not my own Misery, when I was obstinate and would not have it: and this
thou did, not by an ordinary means, but thy Love did send the Son of thy love
to become my Sacrifice and my Righteousness; and can thou require any thing
of me, that can bear any proportion to so great Love? If thou should call
for that Being again, which thou have thus freely given me, I should but return
unto thee, that which is thine own: But after all this, what do thou require
of me but to do justly, and love Mercy, to walk humbly with my God? Such a
Service wherein consists my own Happiness and Perfection, a conformity unto thy
Beauty and Purity: If the Service, that thou should have enjoined me, had
been a Service mingled with my own Dishonor, Shame, Misery, Ruin, thy Love to
me had deserved and commanded this from me; how much more when all thou
requirest from my Leprous Soul is but, Wash and be clean? I will bless thy Name
for that Love, which thou show to me in my Redemption from so great a Death;
and I will bless thy Name, that thou art pleased to enjoin thy Creature such a
Service, wherein consists his Beauty and Perfection, a reasonable Service; and
that thou art pleased to accept that, as a Tribute unto thee, which inricheth
thy Creature by paying it, even our Conformity to thy most Righteous and Holy
Will: and I will endeavor in the whole Course of my Life, in the whole frame
and temper of my Soul, to express my Thankfulness to thee in the watchful,
universal, diligent, and sincere Conformity unto that will of thine; and
blessed be thy Name that have given thy poor Creature an opportunity of
expressing his Sense of thy Love in so reasonable a Service.

2. Fear of God likewise cleanses the Heart, Psalm. 19.9. The fear of God is
clean, Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Prove. 16.16. By the
fear of the Lord Men depart from evil. And this was Joseph's fence against
Temptations of all kinds. Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this great wickedness and
sin against the Lord: and his highest security to his Brethren of keeping his
Promise, Gen 42.18. This do and live, for I fear God. Now this fear of God is
wrought upon the precedent Act of Faith in a double Relation: 1. As it presents
God unto the Soul in his Purity, Majesty, Power, Justice, and Presence even in
the innermost and darkest Chambers of our Hearts. And this Consideration
becomes even the exactest Christian always to have about him: for all the
strongest engagements even upon every Affection are too little, God knows, to
fence and ward the Soul against the Corruptions within it, and the Temptations
without it. And this Consideration will most opportunely bespeak the Soul in
this manner: Consider what thou art doing: thou art now going about to purpose
or do that which thy Creator forbids thee; and thou art in the Presence of that
God, before whom all things are naked and manifest, Heb. 4.13. whose eyes are
upon all the ways of Man, and he sees all his goings, Job 32.21. and his eyes
are therefore upon his ways, that he may give every Man according to his works,
Job 32.18. Consider thou art in his Presence that is a consuming Fire, and a
jealous God Deuteronomy. 4.24. A great God, and a mighty and terrible, that regards
not Persons, nor takes rewards, Deuteronomy. 10.27. That has said that, When any Man
hears the words of this Curse, and shall bless himself in his Heart, saying,
I shall have Peace, though I walk in the immagination of my Heart, the Lord
will not spare him, but his jealousy shall smoke against that man; Deuteronomy. 29.19
20. That has Justice, and Wisdom, and Truth, and Power enough to fulfill and
execute the most exquisite, seasonable, and unavoidable Vengeance upon any
contemner of his Will, and this is the God, whom thou, a Creature that art
nothing in his hands, art about to offend: Consider this, thou that forgettest
God, lest he tear thee in pieces, and there be none to deliver thee.

But 2. Fear is a Fruit of Love, and though we are not to neglect the former,
yet we must be sure to entertain this; perfect Love casts out fear, a fear of
punishment, but not a fear of sin; a fear of a Malefactor, not the fear of a
Child: And upon this Consideration this affection upon any Temptation thus
bespeaks the Soul: Consider what thou art now setting about: It is that thy
Lord, thy Redeemer, forbids thee, he that has died for thee to rescue thee
from thy vain Conversation: how unseemly a return is this, for so much Love and
Goodness as thou have received? how can thou come in thy Prayers, in thy
Hopes, in thy Dependence to that God, whom, against the bonds of ordinary
Gratitude, thou art now offending? how can thou ever expect to have the light
and favor of his Countenance, whom, contrary to all thy engagements of Duty
and Covenant, thou art now about to injure? can thou profess thou love him,
whom thou dare to abuse, to disobey, even to his Face?

3. Hope: the Word of God has promised in Christ Glory, and immortality, and
the sight of himself, to those that are pure in Heart, Matthew. 5.8. This truth
contained in these Promises, is received and entertained in the Heart by Faith:
and as the Motion of the Heart toward an absent, but a possible and expected
Good, is Hope; so it is here, it is the Motion of the Soul arising upon Faith,
as it presents the truth of that Blessedness, which w^ do not yet, but shall
enjoy: and this Motion of the Soul purifieth the Heart, 1 John 3.3. He that ha^
this hope, purifieth himself, even as he is pure, and bring the Heart and Life
to Obedience, Psalm. 119.1 6. I have hoped in thy Salvation, and done thy
Comman^ments: Our love of God makes our Obedience sincere; our fear of him
makes our obedience awful and reverent; our hope in him makes our obedience
cheerful, Romans 15.13. Patient, Romans 8.25. Constant, Heb. 3.6. and Active, Phil.
3.15. Pressing o^ to the price of the high calling of God in Christ. This was
that, that made Moses rather choose Afflictions, than the Pleasure of sin for a
Season; for he had an eye to the recompense of reward; Heb. 11.26. which
carried our Redeemer with choice and Victory through the Cross and shame, for
the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2. Now this affection thus fixed and
acted purifieth the Heart and Life upon these Considerations: 1. It presents a
Man with an expectation of an everlasting bles^d Station in the Presence of the
most holy God, and this works an endeavor of a present Conformity of his Mind
and Life to that condition which it e^pects to enjoy everlastingly hereafter.
No Man (...) hope for that which he desires not for the pres^ to enjoy; he that
hopes for an eternal Life in Holin^ will thrust himself into as much of it as
he c^ while he lives here, and will consider how unb^coming any sin is of him,
who lives in a c^tinued hope of enjoying a condition free from (...) 2. Hope
does link the Soul to the thing it ho^ for, which is of so great worth, Glory
and (...) ^pectation, that it carries the Soul through all ^ficulties to the
attaining of it: it makes (...) which is future in Fruition, present in
appre^sion, and thereby masters all those evils of Sense that actually come in
the way: and thus it lifts up the Soul above all the present inconveniences
that may accompany or interrupt her way to Glory. Thy Creator has chalked thee
out a way to walk in: and it is true, it is a narrow way, and thou art clothed
with flesh and blood, which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; the way will be
grievous and troublesome unto it, thou must deny thy self, cut off thy right
hand, pluck out thy right eye; thou must learn to unlove, nay to hate, those
things wherein thy corrupted Nature most delights, and take up thy Cross and
follow thy Savior: and thy way is not only narrow and unpleasant to thy
Nature, but thou shall find it, it may be, strawed with Afflictions, with
Temptations, with Scorns, with Poverty, Wants, Persecutions, nay with the loss
of Life it self, and yet on thou must go, and must not draw back, for then thy
Labor is all lost. But here is that which will bear thee up through all the
difficulties, though thou art laden with the burden of thy own Flesh and
Corruptions, and art ready to slip upon every Temptation, yet thou art not
alone, but thy Savior stands by thee to bear thy burden, to take thee by the
hand, to lift thee up from thy falls, to support thee with his Grace, which he
has promised shall be sufficient for thee, to accept thy endeavors, and to
pity, and pardon, and recover thy relapses: Though thou do loose, and
irrecoverably let go, many Contentments, Pleasures, and external advantages,
yet thou see with thee in the Promise, and before thee in thy hope, that
which will abundantly recompense all thy losses, even Pleasures at his right
hand for ever: Though thy journey be troublesome, yet it is not long; thy home,
thy Fathers house, is in thine eye, where thou may see thy Savior preparing
a place for thee, and a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which
will sweeten thy light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Extent and Degrees of Sanctification.
3. WE come to consider the Extent or Degrees of it, what it is, or should and
may be in this Life. We find in the Book of God mention of perfect Men, and Men
of perfect Hearts, Noah, Genesis 6.9. Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Job 1.8. David, 1 Kings
9.4. and 14.8. Asa, 1 Kings 15.14. and yet those several Men had their several
Sins and Faults recorded in the same Book. We find Psalm. 37.37. a perfect Man,
and yet Eccles. 7.20. not a just Man that does good, and sins not. Paul,
Ephesians. 4.12, 13. tells us of a growing up to a perfect Man, to the Measure of
the stature of Christ, and yet the same Paul, Romans 7.14. complains of himself
to be carnal, sold under sin. The same S. John, that 1 John 3.9. says, That he
that is born of God, sins not, tells us, 1 John 1.8. that if we say we have
no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 2 Cor. 13.11.
Finally, brethren, be perfect. We are therefore to consider wherein this
Perfection of our Sanctification consists not, and wherein it consists.

The Perfection required of us, and which we may and must attain, is an
Evangelical Perfection, which though it be not perfect, yet is accepted of God
in Christ:

1. Sincerity, and Integrity of Heart, Jerem. 24.7. They shall return to me
with their whole heart. The Sanctification required of us, is not only a
Sanctification of our external Actions; those are but the fruits of
Sanctification of the Man; for as any act is therefore (...) because it is but
the production of that sin, which is ^st in the Heart, so is any action
therefore holy, because it proceeds from a holy and a sanctified motion of the
Heart, otherwise it is but Hypocrisy. This Int^y of Heart was Noah's, David's,
^sa's Perfection: it was Enoch's walking with God. When a Man (...) with an
humble confidence bring his Service, his Words and Actions in the presence of
God clearly with such a Confession as this: O Lord, I know that my Heart is
deceitful above all, who can know it? and I know that I am an unclean things
and all my righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. ^^.6. and my own Heart
tells me, that even to my most exact observance, there be secret adhe^ of sin
and defect; and how much more are the in thy sight, who see through every
cranny of the Soul? and therefore thou may justly reject them: yet, O Lord,
thou know that that little good that is in them, proceeds from an upright
Heart, from an unfeigned desire to obey thee; that it is my Hearts desire, and
my hearty and daily endeavor to serve thee better; that it is the sorrow and
g^f of my Heart, that my returns of obedience and conformity unto thee, are so
infinite short of what I every way owe unto thee; I do not content my self with
these loose and half performances that I make before thee: and though I see my
best obedience gives me daily occasions of repentance, yet I will not give
over, but what I want in my own strength, I will beg thy Grace to perfect, and
thy Mercy to accept, according to what I have, and to pardon what I want, 2
Cor. 8.12. and since I have prepared my Heart to seek the Lord God, the good
Lord pardon me, though I am not cleansed according to the purification of thy
Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.19.

2. An over-matching of the Power of Sin by the Power of Sanctifying Grace. It
is true, that in the best Condition we can arrive unto in this World, there is
with us a body of Sin and Death, as well as a Principle of Holiness and Life,
Romans 7.24. a lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit, as well as of the Spirit
against the Flesh, Gal. 5.17. a wrestling against Flesh and Blood, actuated by
Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.12. But where God is pleased to begin this
work in the Heart, though it never arrives to the abolition of sin, yet it ever
arises to a Victory over it, Romans 6.15. Sin shall not have dominion over you,
because you are not under the Law, but under Grace. And now as where there is
but one degree of heat in any subject, more than there is of cold, though that
subject be not perfectly hot, but there is a mixture of cold in every atom of
it, yet is denominated from the predominate quality: so this Man, though he be
not exactly conformable to the exact Rule of Righteousness, and therefore could
not in the severe Justice of God be accepted, but that rigorous course of the
Law would lay hold upon him, Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not
in all things, which are written in the book of the law to do them; which Book
of the Law required a Love of God with all the Heart, Might, and Soul, and that
not only all that Heart, Might, and Soul, which a Man now has, but which a Man
once had, and by his own fault has lost: and therefore that Law, being weak
through the Flesh, Romans 8.2. that is, meeting with an impotency in us exactly
to fulfill it, became rather a Law of Death, than Life, yet when Christ came
into the World, and brought with him a perfect Righteousness of his own,
whereby to justify us in the presence of God, he did likewise by an Eternal
Covenant of Peace with the Father stipulate for an acceptance of this
imperfect Righteousness of ours, which is wrought in us by his Grace and
Spirit. So that, as the Righteousness of Christ, the Lord our Righteousness,
which was perfect in Degrees, was by the acceptance of the Father, made our
Justification; so the Righteousness, which is begun in us here by his Grace,
though mingled with our own defects, is accepted by God with a Promise of
increase of our Glory. And the same Christ, that has fulfilled a perfect
Righteousness for our Justification, does continually by his own Spirit, begin
and support a true, though imperfect Righteousness in us to our Sanctification,
and helps against, and pardons our many infirmities and defects, as he has
promised, Jer. 3.12. Return, thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, Jer. 31.19. Surely (...) I was
turned, I repented* Is Ephraim my dear (...) is (...) a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against him, I do (...) remember him still, Isa. 42.3. A bruised
reed shall ^e not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, Isa. ^^.11. He
shall ^ed his fl^ck like a shepherd, he shall gather (...) with his (...), and
carry them in his bosom, and shall gerth lead th^se that are with young, Hos.
11.3. (...) Ephraim also to go, taking them by the arm. Which several
expressions show, 1. The Original of that initiate Righteousness in us, even
the Grace of God in Christ continually by degrees mastering our corruptions,
and in some measure conforming us unto him* ^. His Tenderness toward those
small inceptions of his Grace in us, cherishing and encouraging (...). His
Mercy and Goodness, accepting of our sincerity, and pardoning our weakness. And
this is that Evangelical Perfection of our Righteousness and Sanctification
here. And from this Advantage, that the Grace of God has over our Perfections,
do arise these four Consequents of it: 1. Universality of Obedience. 2.
Constancy in it. 3. Growth and increase in it. 4. Renewing of our Repentance:
all which, as they are the gifts of God, so they do naturally flow from the
over-matching of our Corruptions by Grace, as appears in these Particulars:

1. Universality of Obedience: The Heart, wherein the Grace of God has
over-matched his sinful Nature, cannot allow it self in any known Sin, or any
known neglect of any one Command, but has respect to all God's Commandments
Psalm. 119.6. Whosoever shall keep the whole, yet if he offend in one point, he
is guilty of all, James 2.10. The Grace of God and Sin are universally opposite
one to another: and as they are so in the abstract, so are they in the
concrete. Where Sin has an advantage in the Soul, it does oppose universally
the whole Will of God: and where Grace is in the Soul, it does oppose the whole
will of Sin: and therefore where any one Sin or neglect of any one Command of
God is entertained knowingly and advisedly in the Soul, there the Grace of God
has not the upper hand; for the same Principle, by which it acts, viz. the
Love of God, equally engages the Soul to every Duty, and against every Sin,
according to the measure of Knowledge that is commmunicated to the Soul.

2. Constancy and Perseverance. The change, that is wrought in our Nature, it
is true, is not in the essence of it, but it is the presence of the Grace of
Christ in the Heart, that preserves and upholds the Heart and Life in Holiness
and Righteousness: If that could be withdrawn or intermitted, we should, like
the Iron removed from the Fire, soon return to our ancient Nature again: but
that great God, whose presence alone, supports all the things in Heaven and
Earth, in their being and operations, and whose Gifts and Callings are without
Repentance, has promised to be with us to the end of the World: He cannot sin,
because his s^^d abides in him, 1 John 3.9. It is true, there may be
intermissions of the acting of Grace in the Heart; and there may be falls in
the Life; but to be given over to a course of sin without repentance, to be
brought under the power and dominion of Sin, as a King or a Ruler, the Honor
and Truth of God is engaged in it, it shall not be, 2 These. 3.3. The Lord is
faithful, who shall stablish you, John ^0.28. N^er shall any man pluck them out
of my hand, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for (...) under
the Law, but under Grace And these Promises of God cannot make the Heart of any
one, to whom they truly belong, any whit the more careless or loose in his
watch over himself; for that very Spirit, whereby those Promises are sealed to
us, is an active, vigilant, pure Spirit, and puts the Heart and Life upon those
Practices that do naturally and properly conduce to this very Perseverance,
viz. Assiduity in Duties; Humble and Watchful walking before God; Examination
and search of the state of our Souls and Lives, Jealousy over the Treachery of
our own Hearts, and the snares that are within us and without us; a Guard upon
our Affections and Senses; a frequent Consideration of the Will of God, of his
Goodness to us in Christ, of the Price wherewith we are bought, of the Hope
whereunto we are redeemed; and all those other helps that conduce to the
settling and stablishing of our Hearts and Lives in a Conformity to the Will of
God, and in avoiding of all those things which are contrary thereunto, and
consequently, as contraries do, would impair, corrupt, and destroy that Life of
Grace, which he has begun in us. And from hence arises

3. An Increase and Growth in a more exact Conformity to the Will of God, than
formerly. This is that, which is so often commended unto us by the Spirit of
God, Colos. 2.7. Rooted and built up in him, Colos. 4.12. Complete in all the
will of God, Phil. 1.9. that your love may abound more and more in knowledge
and in all judgment, 1 Cor. 15.58. abounding in the work of the Lord, Heb.
13.21. make you perfect in good works to do his will, Phil. 3.13. forgetting
what is past, and reaching forth to the things that are before, Ephesians. 4.13.
growing to a perfect man, 2.16. increase of the body, 2 Pet. 3.17. beware lest
ye fall from your own stedfastness, but grow in grace, Jude 20. building up
your selves in your most holy faith, Prove. 4.18. Increasing more and more unto
the perfect day, John 15.2. Every branch that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit. And as this is the Will of God, so it is as
naturally the effect of this Life, that is wrought in the Heart, as it is the
effect of natural Life in the Body; for it is an active and operative Life. If
any quality have got the mastery in a mixed Body, it does ever more and more by
degrees, waste and consume the contrary qualities, and assimulates the whole
unto it self. And although, as long as our Flesh hangs about us, it is
impossible, that a complete and absolute conquest can be wrought of all that
Sin, that is in us; because it is a spring of Corruption, yet it is wasted,
weakened, and decayed. By this work of Grace, Readiness House waxes weaker and
weaker. Every habit, though it be moral, or natural only, receives an
augmentation and degrees by its continual actings. And the Grace of God, which
is more operative and active in the Heart than any habit can be, for it is
accompanied with the immediate Power and Efficacy of the Divine Spirit, never
stands still; but like the little Leven, that was hid in the great quantity of
Meal, it never gives over till the whole be leavened.

4. Renewed Repentance: Thy corrupt Nature is a Body of Sin and Death, a spring
of Corruption, that will ever cast up mire and dirt: and Grace in thy Heart is
a spring of living Waters, that as often as that corrupts, will be washing it
again. When thou have made the chamber of thy Heart as clean as thou can, yet
there will be leaks in it, that will let in Corruptions enough, quickly to make
it as foul as ever: Grace by the continual examination of thy self, humbling of
thy Heart before God, renewing thy Covenant with him, does not only pump out
the filth, that would poison, and drown, and dam thee, but stops the decays and
leaks of this thy infirm Vessel. When the Grace of God at first found thee,
thou wast dead in trespasses and sins; and it came into thee, and by Repentance
did exercise its own act of Life to quicken thee: And that same Body of Death,
that did at first enclose thee, is still about thee, and takes all
opportunities to get its old mastery of thee; and by this means, thou catchest
many a fall and bruise: but that same Life, by which thou live, re-acts
against those inroads of sin and death, and does conquer them; so that though
thy renewed sins are not thy ruin, yet they ought to be thy burden; though
they must not make thee despair, yet they cannot choose but make thee mourn;
though thy Savior has born their Guilt, yet it is but equal thou should
bear thy shame. When thou had no Life in thee, thou could not feel thy
self dead: But now thou have Life in thee, thou can not choose but be sensible
of thy sickness and thy hurts, which thy own folly have occasioned, and judge
and condemn, and avoid that Folly of thine that occasioned it. Though thou
can not be rid of thy sins, that fight against thy Life, yet thou will not
entertain them with better Entertainment, than Bread of Affliction, and Water
of Affliction. Though thou can not expiate for any of them, yet thou can
not look upon them without indignation, as Traitors against thy Life and thy
Peace; thou can not look upon thy self, without loathing and detestation;
thou can not look unto Christ, without shame and confusion, that one that he
has redeemed from so great a Misery, with so great a Price, to so great a
nearness, as to be a member of himself, a partaker of his Spirit, a Coheir of
his Glory, should so unworthily, so unthankfully, in his sight, dishonor his
Head, and pollute himself. Thou can not look upon what is past, without
Repentance, nor upon what is to come, without a Resolution of more Vigilance,
and keeping a better Guard upon thy self. And yet in the midst of all these thy
perplexed thoughts, thou can not choose but admire and bless that Mercy of
Christ, that when thou deniest him, looks back upon thee, as once on Peter, and
with that look, sends in a Messenger, that makes thee go by thy self, and
bewail thy Relapse; that leaves thee not to a course in sin, or to a death in
sin, but gives thee a Cordial, which though it puts thee to pain, preserves thy
Life; that though thou, like a foolish misguided Sheep, art straggling thou
know not whither, yet seeks thee, and finds thee, and reduces thee; that
though thou can so easily forget him, yet he does not forget thee; and when
all is done, is contented to accept of that Repentance and that Sorrow which he
himself gives thee, and washes away thy Spot by his own Blood, and looks upon
thee with no less Tenderness, and Love, and Compassion, and Goodness, than if
thou had never gone aside. Ever blessed be thy Name, O merciful Lord God,
that have redeemed us from everlasting Death, and yet when we daily endanger
our selves, do rescue us by thy Grace; that when we sin, thou art pleased not
to cast us off, but fetchest us in by Repentance; and when we repent, art
pleased not to reject us, nor upbraid us with our former Falls, but accept us
to Pardon and Favor; and blottest out our iniquities for thy great Names sake:
But let not thy Servants return any more to folly. Amen.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Parts of Sanctification, and 1. In reference to our
selves, Sobriety.
THE fourth thing considerable, are the Parts of that Sanctification, which is
required of us. Sanctification is the Conformity of the whole Man to the Will
of God concerning Man, concerning his Life and Conversation. And that Will of
God respects three Objects: Himself, our Neighbor, and our Selves. And
accordingly the Duties which lie upon us in reference to these three, are
shortly summed up by the Apostle, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings
salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodless and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world. We have there the Old Man, that we are to put off, Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, cast by S. John into these three Ranks, the Lusts of the Flesh,
the Lusts of the Eyes, and Pride of Life, 1 John 2.16. whereof before. And we
have that New Man, Ephesians. 4.24. distributed into two parts, Righteousness and
true Holiness; and here into three, parts, viz. Sobriety toward our selves,
Righteousness toward others, and Godliness toward God: the two latter come
distinctly under the Commands of the first and second Table of the Decalogue,
as those Commands receive their true and spiritual interpretation by Christ:
the former, though virtually it be therein included; yet it is not expressly and
directly:

1. In reference to our selves, Sobriety. This refers either to our Judgment or
Estimation of our selves, or to the motions and inclinations of our sensual
Appetites.

1. Sobriety in our Judgments; which is nothing else, but a just and true
Estimate of our selves, Romans 12.3. Not to think of himself more highly than he
ought to think, but to think soberly, etc. Man does naturally inordinately love
himself, and that love to himself does mislead and inhance a Man's opinion of
himself even by those things that are merely extrinsecal to him: he thinks the
better of himself by reason of his Wealth, though that be a thing distinct from
him by Nature, and easily by any casualty severed from him; or by reason of
Esteem or Honor, though that is such an accession, as depends merely upon the
Will of another; for if I withdraw that honor or respect, which I give to a
Man, he is no longer honorable to me; and as I may do it, so may any, and so
may all; and then he wholly cease to be what he thought he was. And much
more, Men are apt to have a high opinion of themselves in respect of that,
which seems most their own, as Strength, Beauty, Elocution, Wit, Knowledge: and
the more intimate the Perfection is unto him, that has it, the harder it is
for that Man to be brought to that due estimation, that he should have of
himself: that very Knowledge, which must be the ground of bringing him to a
right estimation of himself, is ready to puff him up: and that concretion that
arises from the over-estimation of a Man's self, and from his reflection upon
that over-estimation, is Pride: and from this Pride arise those other
distempers of the inward and outward Man: a proud look, despising the weaker or
inferior; Arrogance, lofty, and haughty Speech, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great
Babylon, etc. Psalm. 73.9 They set their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue
walks through the earth: Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, etc. a placing of a
Man's self in God's room, and deifying himself; implacableness with any thing
that checketh the full Fruition of his own Glory, though it seems never so
inconsiderable; the want of a Bow from Mordecai, makes Haman sick of anger,
and discontent, Esther 3.7.5.13. and thus Pride is the foundation of
Contention, Prove. 13.10. because it cannot endure the competition of any thing,
that may allay the tumor, the foundation of envy; delight in flattery to feed
and stroke that foolish Humor; excess in Stateliness, Distance, Apparel;
singularity, and the like: All which are the Children of this Vanity. Now as
this proceeds much from the mistake of our Judgment, or the want of the
Exercise of it; so on the other side, when the judgment concerning a Man's self
is rectified, it produces a clean contrary effect in the Soul; the Man was mad
before, out of his Wits, and his Carriage and Deportment was answerable
thereunto; but now by this right understanding himself, he is sober, in his
right Senses, and a suitable Deportment rises thereupon: he looks upon his
Wealth as a thing that is lent him, deposited with him only as a Steward, not
as an Owner; as that which is uncertain, vanishing, subject to be easily
translated from him to another; as that which is external to him, which he may
have and be a Fool, or a Man under a Curse; as that which will one day inhance
his Account, not ease his Conscience; as that which he may not, it may be, keep
whilst he lives, and is sure to lose when he dies; as that which may be his
snare, his Temptation, cannot be his Felicity; as that which though never so
excessive, gives no greater a Privilege, than it gives his Servant that eats
of it, but only the bare Name of being his own: He looks upon his Esteem,
Reputation, and Honor, in the World, as that which merely depends upon his
inferiors Benevolence, which thy may withdraw when they please; as that which
is external also to him, may make him an Object of more Envy, Danger, and
insecurity; that ingageth to a great deal of vigilance to preserve it, and is
often lost without desert, and yet the Man is the same: He looks upon his Power
and Authority as a thing that is not in himself, but merely in the Contribution
of the strength of others, or their voluntary denying it to themselves by a
resolution of Non-resistance; as that which makes no real Accession to him, but
he is but what he was before he had it, and when he loses it, will be what he
was before he left it, in all points, save merely outside and vulgar opinion:
He looks upon himself under the Beauty of his external Ornaments, as a little
Clay dressed up in Gallantry; that that may more justly make him proud that made
it, than him that wears it; that alters not the Soul or Body that is under it,
nor is become part of it: he looks upon his Strength or Beauty, or temperature
of Body, as that which a few years will lay in the Dust, and the Worms will
master it; as that which is not able to contest with the least Distemper,
either within it, or without it; and yet the good that is in it while it lasts,
is but a borrowed good: He looks upon his Knowledge, Understanding and Wisdom,
as that which is infinitely short of what it was, or what it might be; the most
that we know being infinitely short of what we know not, and what we should
know: that his increase of Knowledge is but an increase of his Account, an
aggravation of those sins, which would be of lesser magnitude, had they not
been committed against a greater Light; that the most of what we know, and that
makes up the most of Men great in their own conceits, is that which will be
utterly unuseful after this life: Of what use will those Volumes of Learning
concerning Human Laws, Physics, the Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and the
Knowledge of the Contemperation of mixed Bodies, be, when the Earth with the
works thereof shall be burnt up? Political dispensations shall cease, either
the things shall not continue, and so the knowledge of them be useless, or the
truth shall be more compendiously and clearly discovered to us, and so the
Labor to acquire them unnecessary: It looks upon the best practical Habits, or
Actions it does, as things that need an expiation, rather than deserving a
reward; it finds in it self a little small Grain of Gold in them, but so
covered and stifled with dross and filth, that that which is good, is scarce
worth the accepting: Finally he looks upon nothing as his own, but the sin of
his Nature that has stained and polluted; the sin of his Life that makes him
odious in the Presence of God; the sin of his Services, as that which
adulterates and spoils them: and whatsoever is useful or comfortable in his
external Accessions, whatsoever is beautiful in his Body or Soul, he looks upon
as another, not as his, and blesses him for it; carries the glory to him,
takes upon himself the shame and abhorrence of his own Deformities, and
magnifies the patience of his Creator in sparing him, and his bounty in lending
to him whatsoever of good he finds in himself, or any way belonging to him: And
out of this right and sober judgment concerning himself, and the reflection of
the mind thereupon, spring those Virtues of Humility, Meekness, Gentleness,
Patience, Moderation, Contentedness, Thankfulness, Quietness, whereby a Man
entertains all the Dispensations of God, with such a frame and Temper of
Spirit, as he expects: In thy addresses to God, it will teach thee Lowliness
and Reverence, remembering thee of thy own Vileness, and his Perfection, and
that infinite distance between thee, a Man, a sinful Man, and Him, the great
and glorious God: Genesis 18.27. Now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
that am but Dust and Ashes: Luke 18.13. the Publican standing a far off would
not lift up his eyes to Heaven: In the midst of Blessings either of this Life
or that to come, it will teach thee Admiration and Thankfulness, 2 Samuel 7.18.
What am I, O Lord, and what is my Fathers house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? Psalm. 8.4. When I consider the Heavens, etc. What is Man that thou
art mindful of him? that a sinful Man that owes so much to God, and performs so
little, should receive such Blessings, such Mercies, and such Bounty from the
hand of an injured God.

In the midst of the severest Afflictions it will teach thee Patience, and
Quietness of mind, and Contentedness, when the Soul shall sit down and consider
it self, and justify, yea and magnify God in this very dealing with her: O
Lord, by that light that thou have lent me, I do see my self, and therein
behold nothing of my own but Deformity and Rebellion against thee,
unthankfulness, and vileness; and now I eat but the Fruit of my own ways and
thou art just when thou judge. Nay, thou dealest not with me according to the
severest Rule of Justice, thou have punished me less than mine iniquities
deserve: Ezra 9.13. I have forfeited all unto thee, but thou have not taken all
from me: I have deserved that thy whole fury should be poured out upon me, but
thou have afflicted me in measure: thou have left me my life, thou have left me
my hope, thou have left me some Light of thy Countenance, which is better than
my Life; thou have left me Liberty and Encouragement to pour out my Soul before
thee, and do entertain it: if thou had deprived me of all this, yet thou
had not been unjust; and in that thou have left me these, or any of these, or
any other mercy, thou art gracious: Nay, more than all this, I find in that
very thing, wherein thy hand lies heaviest upon me, a mercy, and that thou
have afflicted me in very faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. in love, Rev. 3.19. and
for my profit and advantage, Heb. 12.10. that I should not be condemned with
the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. my heart began to grow wanton, to be lingering too much
after the World, to be taken up too much with Vanity, and things that must
perish to me, and I to them: I began to grow confident upon my Wit, my Wealth,
my Power; to grow negligent, cold, and careless, in my Duty to thee, in my
Dependence upon thee, in my Obedience to thee: The Consolations of God, the
Presence of my Savior, my Life by Faith, my hope of Glory began to grow small
unto me, Job 15.11. And this I plainly see was the state of my Soul: and
therefore I desire to receive these thy Afflictions, not only as Punishments,
but as Medicines, as Messages, as well of thy care of me, and thy mercy to me,
as of thy Justice upon me, that they may not only be an exercise of my
Patience, but an Object of my Thankfulness, of my Joyfulness: that they may not
only be a conviction of thy Detestation of my sin, but a pledge of thy Love to
my Person: I shall therefore endeavor to bear thy hand as becomes me with
Patience, because I deserve them; with Thankfulness, because they are moderate;
and with Comfort, because they are thy Ministers, sent me for my good: and as I
shall thus learn to entertain them, so I shall endeavor to use and improve
them to that end thou sendest them, to take me off from the World, to bring me
nearer to thee, that I may live more by Faith than Sense, and to make me more
exact and watchful than before, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, but now have I kept thy word: In the midst of thy Glory, Honor,
Wealth, Preferment, Provocations from Men, Injuries and Scorns, it will keep
thee from swelling, looking big upon thy inferiors, or those that have
Dependence upon thee, or use of thee: It will take thee off from Vainglory,
Revenge, Envy, Disdain, and such like Distempers; all which proceed from a
misunderstanding of a Man's self: It will make thee and keep thee meek, gentle,
affable, easy to be entreated, long-suffering, pitiful; all which are the
Fruits of the Spirit wrought in the heart, by this Sobriety or right judgment
of our selves, Galat. 5.22. which our Savior commended to all his Disciples,
Matthew. 18.1. by the condition of a little Child, wherein Pride is not grown up,
though it be there in the Seed: for all these Distempers rise from an opinion
of greater worth, merit, or excellence, in a Man's self, than in another, which
a sober Man, that has a right judgment of himself, finds quite otherwise. And
from this Sobriety arising upon a right judgment concerning our selves will
arise a Behavior, Carriages, and Speech answerable: it will be suitable to our
Nature, and the Station, Condition, and occasion in or about which we are, not
arrogant, giddy, haughty, light, vain; but humble, settled, grave, constant.

2. Sobriety in reference to our sensual Appetite, and those Passions or
Motions which arise in reference to it. As the first part of Religion consists
in the Conformity and Subjection of our Reason to the Will and Truth of God; so
the second part of it consists in the Conformity of our sensual Appetite to
Reason, thus rectified: Now the sensual Appetite is divided in respect of her
Objects and her motion toward them, into the Concupiscible, which is the
Motion of the sensual Nature to those things, which tend to the Preservation of
it self and kind by Desire: or the Irascible, which is the aversion from, or
Motion of the sensual Nature against those things that are prejudicial, or so
apprehended.

The Concupiscible Appetite is that Motion of Nature which tends to its own own
Preservation, or to the Preservation of its kind, or those things that are in
order to both, viz. Wealth and Power.

The First of these is the desire of Eating and Drinking, the Excess whereof is
Luxury.

The Second is the desire of Propagation of the kind, the Excess whereof is
Lust, or Wantonness.

The Third is the desire of those Supplies, which conduce to the supplying of
both, viz. desire of Wealth, the excess whereof is Covetousness; and the desire
of Power to defend our selves, the Excess whereof is Ambition: and these I
likewise place in the sensual Appetite, because they are in order to the
immediate Objects thereof, and we find them, though not in so exact a degree,
even in Beasts.

Concerning these somewhat has formerly passed, therefore in general touching
the two former we say,

1. That these natural inclinations or desires are in themselves good, and such
as were planted in our Nature by the holy God, and such as are conducible to
good ends, viz. the Preservation and support of our Nature and Kind; and the
Motions of our Nature are such as proceed from that Commission which God gave
to the Creature, Genesis 1.28. Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth,
and Genesis 2.17. Of every tree of the Garden thou may freely e^t: both which
Commissions were again renewed and enlarged, Genesis 9.13.

2. That we are not allowed only the use of those inclinations of our Nature
for Necessity, but also for Delight, so as the Prescriptions hereaftermentioned
be observed, Deuteronomy. 12.15. Thou may kill and eat flesh in all thy Gates
whatsoever thy Soul lusts after, according to the blessing of the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou servedst not God with joyfulness and gladness of
heart for the abundance of all things, etc. Prove. 5.18. Rejoice with the Wife
of thy youth.

3. The sin or obliquity that happens in these inclinations of our Nature, or
the use of them, is when they become inordinate Affections, viz. out of that
due Order or Position that God has placed them in us:

1. When either the Motion of these Appetites, or the exercise of them, is
without a due Subordination to Reason, which God has placed in a superior
Authority in Man above this Appetite: In bruit Beasts, their sensitive Appetite
is their highest faculty, and it knows no other Moderator than that very
Appetite that God has placed in them: but in Man he has placed a higher
Nature, and therefore the actings of the sensitive Appetite without this
Subordination to this higher Nature, is in truth in Man unnatural, and contrary
to the Order and Course of Nature. This concerns us as we are Men.

2. When either this Motion, or the Actings of it, are contrary to the Mind and
Will of God: for this ought to be the guide of our Reason, as that ought to be
the guide of our Appetite. And this concerns us as we are Men enlightened with
the Knowledge, and quickened with the Love of God.

Now for want of these, the sins or obliquities that happen in our sensitive
Appetites, are when they are acted either inconsiderately, immoderately, or
unseasonably.

1. Inconsiderately, when in the use of the Creatures, in reference to those
inclinations of the sensitive Appetite, we consider not the End, for which we
have them, nor use them in order to that End; to eat, because we will eat, and
not because we would be sustained; or consider not the Hand from which we
receive them, that we may use them thankfully; nor the Presence of Almighty
God, who observes all our carriage in the use of his Blessings, that so we may
use them soberly and reverently.

2. Immoderately: There is required of us a double Moderation in the use of
this Faculty: 1. Moderation of our Affection to the Object: 2. Moderation in
the use of the Object of our Appetite. The want of the former, robs God of that
Affection, or measure of Love, which we owe to him: When any thing is loved
beyond the proportion or measure due to it, it must needs invade the Love a Man
ows to God, and so places that Object in the place of God. Thus Covetousness
becomes Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Gluttony becomes Idolatry; Whose God is their
Belly: For that which has the mastery of our Love, has the command of the
whole Man: and if my Love to the Objects of my sensual Appetite want that due
subordination to the Love I owe to God, or exceed that due proportion that I
owe to them; when any service I owe to God, or any office I owe to Man, comes
in competition with the satisfaction of my sensual Appetite, I shall neglect
the Duty I owe to God or Man. The want of the latter, is when we use them in
such a measure, as is either beyond the convenience of our Nature, or beyond
the convenience of our Condition: the former is Intemperance, and destroys the
Body; the latter is Prodigality or Profuseness, and wastes the Estate: the
dispensation of God's Providence in Externals, ought to be the measure at
least, beyond which, we must not go in the use of Meats and Drink. Again, under
this Rule, is prohibited the making Provision for the Flesh, exciting the
Appetite beyond its natural disposition by Meats, Drinks, and Provocations.

3. Unseasonably: This, though it exclude not the considerations of the places
where, and Persons with whom we converse, yet it principally looks upon the
time of our action, as that stands qualified or circumstantiated. God has
allowed me a comfortable and liberal use of his Creatures, as well for Delight
as Necessity; but use not that liberty upon these Seasons: 1. When God's
Providence has set a mark of Sadness upon the Season, Isa. 22.12. In that day
did the Lord of hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and behold joy and
gladness, etc. 2. When either God by his Word, or Civil or Ecclesiastical
Constitutions or Customs, or thy own particular Dedication has set apart a
time for religious Abstinence or Duty: 3. When the ordinary occasions of thy
Profession, Calling, or temporal Employment, permit it not without
inconvenience to thy self or others.

In order to our sensual Appetite, are those Affections which are carried
toward those things that are subservient thereunto: and these Affections we
find in the Bruit Creatures: The Ants, a people not strong, yet gather they
their meat in summer, Prove. 30.25. And from the same proceeds their desire of
mastery one over another. As the former is for Provision for their Appetites,
so the latter is for their Protection of that Provision, or themselves, in
their acquiring a use of it: Answerable to which in Man are those two Desires,
of Wealth, which we call Covetousness, and of Power, which we call Ambition.
Neither of these but is conversant about those things, which are merely useful,
either for the Supplies of the sensual Appetite, or protection of those
Supplies in us, or our Posterity.

Touching those Desires, we say, as of the former, that they are not in
themselves unlawful: for as the Divine Dispensations has appointed our natural
Life to be supported and defended by these external Provisions; so he has
dispersed those supplies in the World, and given us Appetites to them, and
appointed means to acquire them: They are his Blessings, and we are commanded
to be industrious in serving of the Divine Providence in the acquiring of these
things, Deuteronomy. 8.18. It is he that gives thee power to get wealth. Deuteronomy. 28.8,
etc. He shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, he shall make
thee plenteous in goods, the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail.
Prove. 6.6. the wise Man sends the Sluggard to the Ant; and it pleased God
oftentimes to give unto those, who were his sincere Servants, a great measure
both of Wealth and Honor; and a lawful and sober Industry to acquire them is
not only permitted, but commanded and enjoined: He that provideth not for his
own house, is worse than an infidel.

The Errors concerning these Affections are as in the former,

1. Inconsiderateness in the prosecution and use of them: These things are not
desirable for themselves, but in order to something else; and they are in
themselves more remote from our Nature than the immediate Objects of our
Senses, and yet we are not to desire them for their own sakes, but in order to
that End, for which that Desire is put into us, viz. the preservation of our
Beings and Species: but Wealth and Honor, and the desire of it is therefore
put into us, in order to those immediate Objects of our Sense: We are to desire
Meats and drinks, in order to the preservation of our Lives: And we are to
desire Wealth and Riches, in order to the supply of Meat and Drink: And as we
are not in common Reason to make Eating the End of our Eating, so much less are
we to make Wealth and Riches the End of our being Rich. It is more distant and
remote from the necessity of my Nature to be rich, than to be fed; yet both are
but instrumental, though in a different order, and therefore must be so desired
and prosecuted. And as this consideration is to be in the gaining of Wealth, so
it must be in the use of it: Solomon tells us of this Vanity, Eccles. 6.2. A
Man to whom God has given Riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants
nothing of all that his Soul desires, yet God gives him not power to eat
thereof: As Eccles. 4.8. there was no end of his Labor, neither was his Eye
satisfied with Riches in his pursuit of them, so he makes not that rational use
of them for which they were given: he desired to be rich, because he would be
rich; and being arrived to his End, he cannot find in his Heart to employ them
to those Ends, for which alone they are only valuable. And as this
inconsiderateness of the End of them is to be avoided, so the want of
consideration of the Author of them, which should carry up our Hearts with
Thankfulness to the God, who gives us power to get Wealth, who puts down
one, and sets up another; and not to sacrifice to our own Nets, or magnify
our own Deservings or Wisdom; but to walk humbly, and thankfully, and soberly,
as in the presence of that God, that has made us Stewards, and but Stewards,
of those Externals, and to employ them in such a way as may be most agreeable
to our Masters Will, most conducible to our Masters Honor, and most becoming
our Masters Presence.

2. Immoderation, 1. In our Care for them: 2. In our Love to them; 3. In our
Confidence in them.

1. In our Care: This proceeds from our Infidelity and Distrust of God's
All-sufficience. When we consider not that the Dispensation of things
convenient for our Life is in his hands, and that the accommodation of them to
our use is from the Word or Commission that he gives them: Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God: Matthew. 4.4.
It is from his hand that thou must expect thy Bread, and thy Clothing, Genesis
28.20. If God give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on: and it is from his
Blessing and the Commission, which he gives to that Bread and that Raiment,
that he gives thee, to be useful for thee, and accommodate to this
Preservation. And this Solicitousness, Care, and Distrust, our Savior
forbids and convinces, Matthew. 6.25. Take no thought for your life; 52. for
your heavenly Father knows you have need of these things: Thy Care is but a
tormenting Care; it is but an unuseful and unprofitable Care: Thou can not by
thy Care add to thy own Stature: It is an impertinent Care, and a Care that
belongs to another: thy heavenly Father knows thou have need of all these
things: he is thy Father, and therefore is willing to furnish thee with what
shall be convenient for thee; and he is thy Heavenly Father, that wants not
Power to do it: he can supply thee in the ordinary way of his Providence: and,
if there be need, he can do it by the extraordinary work of his Power: he can
command Water out of a dry Rock, as to the Israelites; or out of a dry Bone, as
to Samson: he can give thee Bread from Heaven; he can feed Elijah by a Raven:
and can extend the Widows Barrel of Meal and Cruise of Oil, as large as the
time and exigence of her Necessity. Save thy self therefore the trouble of an
unnecessary Care, but commit thy way unto the Lord: Trust also in him, and he
shall bring it to pass. Thy Care may rob thy self of thy quietness, and may rob
thy God of his due; but it is thy Dependence only upon him, that can with ease
and contentedness supply thy wants: Diligence and Industry in that lawful
Employment, wherein his Providence has placed thee, is thy Duty, and therefore
observe it: but Sollicitousness and Anxiousness is thy Sin, and therefore avoid
it: Learn to obey him in what he commands; and learn to wait upon him in what
he promises.

2. In our Love: Set not thy Heart upon thy Wealth, Psalm. 62.10. nor make it
thy Treasure: for if thou do, it will be master of thy Heart; for where thy
Treasure is, there will thy Heart be, Matthew. 6.21. and if thy Heart be full of
thy Wealth, there will be no room for thy God, Matthew. 6.24. Ye cannot serve God
and Mammon: and, If any Man love the world, the Love of the Father is not in
him, 1 John 2.15. If the World have thy Love, it will command thy Service, and
control whatsoever opposes that Command, and break through all those Fences
which seem to bridle or hedge in the pursuit of that World, which thou so
love: Has God set apart a time for his own Service? thy love of the World
will rob him of his own time, Amos 8.5. When shall the new moon be gone, that
we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? and in the day
of his fast thou will exalt all thy labors, Isa. 58.3. Does he require a
portion of our Goods for his Service? thou will be ready to rob God of his
Portion, Mal. 3.8. or deceive him in it, and sacrifice to the Lord a corrupt
thing, Malach. 1.14. Has he set apart a peculiar place for his Worship? thou will be ready with Jeroboam, to set up Calves in Dan and Bethel, 1 Kings 12.26.
to secure thy self in the enjoyment of thy temporol Advantage: Has he
imprinted his own Superscription and Image upon Man, with a strict prohibition
of the violation of that Image? Genesis 9.6. Yet if thou become one, that is
greedy of Gain, it will prompt thee to take away the Life of the Owner, that
thou may be his Successor, Prove. 1.19. and Job 31.39. It will make thee
grind the faces of the Poor, sell them for a pair of old Shoes, set Justice to
sale, sell thy Master with Judas, for a small inconsiderable Gain. And thus the
Love of the World is the root of all evil: for as all the Good in Man, is the
Conformity to the Will of God, so whatsoever interrupts this Conformity, must
needs be an original of Evil: and this is done by the Love of the World, which
makes a Man reject this Conformity, when it is inconsistent with that imperious
Love of the World.

3. In our Confidence: And this is always a concomitant of our Love to them,
and our Care for them: for these grow out of a mistaken over-valuation of them:
and as that carries on our care for them, and love of them, so in the fruition
of them upon this mistaken Estimate, grows a Confidence in them, Psalm. 49.6.
They trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, Prove. 18.11. the rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high
wall in his own conceit. And this was the ground of the rich Man's solacing
himself in the Gospel: Thou have enough laid up for many years, eat, drink and
be merry. And from hence it is likewise, that Covetousness is Idolatry: for
that is in truth thy God, upon which thou most trustest: if in a time of
Prosperity thy Confidence is high, and built upon thy Power, or thy Wealth, or
thy carnal Confederacies: and if in the dissipation of these, thy Soul dies
within thee, and thy Hope is like the giving up of the Ghost, it is plain, the
World is thy God; for thy Confidence does rise and fall, and live and die with
it. Therefore take heed of laying the weight of thy Confidence upon the World,
Psalm. 62. Trust not in oppression, etc. Power belongs only to God. Prove.
11.14. Riches profit nothing in the day of wrath. 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches. If God give thee Wealth and Riches, look upon them as his Blessing, and
look upon that good and usefulness that is in them, as that which comes not
from themselves, but from the Blessing of God, and which he can when he please,
withdraw from them; and then they will be so far from being a ground of
Confidence, as that they will be thy snare, and occasion of thy ruin, and not
a foundation of thy strength: Look upon them as things that cannot benefit thee
in themselves whiles thou have them, unless he makes them instrumental, and as
things which will not abide with thee, when he calls for thee or for them: for
Riches make themselves wings and flee away, Prove. 23.5. If thou lean upon them,
they are a Reed, and sink under thy Confidence, and a broken Reed that will
hurt thee in thy Dependence upon them: They will disappoint thy Confidence in
them, and thy Confidence in them will pierce thee, Jer. 2.3, The Lord has
rejected these thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them.

3. Vnseasonableness: 1. In thy Order of seeking of them: seek them not in the
first place; but seek first that one thing which is necessary: It is not
necessary for thee to be rich, but it is necessary for thee to be saved. Let
that which is of thy greatest Concernment, be the subject of thy first
Endeavor, Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and all these things shall he added unto you. Thou have but a short
time here, and upon the improvement of that little span of time, depends thine
everlasting condition of Happiness or Misery. And if thou employ the
first fruits of thy Life in the gain of this World, which will certainly die
with thee, if not before thee, who can tell, if thou shall have time enough
left for the great Business of thy Soul? or if thou have, who can tell, whether
that deceitful World, which has robbed thee of that time, which was due to
another Business, may not with much more ease harden thy Heart, and take up
the whole time of thy Life, though thou should live many ages? But if thou
devote the first and choicest of thy endeavors to thy great Concernment, grant
that the residue of thy Life be not sufficient for thy Provisions for thy self,
or thy Posterity in this World, thy exchange is happy, thou have secured an
everlasting weight of Glory, a Kingdom immortal and undefiled, that fades not
away, in that time wherein perhaps thou might, or it may be thou might
not, have gotten some small temporal Provision, which by this time thou art
ready to leave, and thy immortal Soul left in an anxious, unsatisfied, unsafe
Condition. But this is not all; though the gain of Eternity would infinitely
over-weigh the loss of those Temporals, which it may be in this time, thou
might have gotten; yet thou must know, thou servest such a Master, that
whilst thou obeyest him in seeking thy chiefest good in the chiefest place,
will not only give thee that Eternity which thou thus seek, but will add
unto thee the things of this Life, which yet thou neglectest: And whiles he
gives thee that great and everlasting Treasure, which he commands thee to seek,
will not deprive thee of the Conveniences of this World, though thou seek
them not, All these things shall be added unto you. And here learn a
compendious and safe way of getting the external Conveniences of the World; if
thou labor first to be rich, thou may lose thy labor, and miss of being
what thou labourest to be; but thou art sure, or, at least, likely to miss of
being happy: but if thou first endeavor after Peace with God in Christ, thou
art sure to attain Blessedness hereafter, and shall not want a convenient
Competency here.

2. As in the Order, so in the Seasons or Times of seeking after Wealth, when a
Man shall encroach upon those times, which either by the Command or
Dispensation of God, or thy own voluntary Consecrations, are dedicated to the
service of God, or of his Neighbor. It were but equal, if he that is the Lord
of our Times and of our Lives, should require all our Time in his own immediate
Service: but when he allows us unto our own occasions, the greatest part of our
time, wherein we may do all that we have to do, and requires a small portion of
our time for his immediate service, and that also for our own everlasting
advantage, it is the highest sacrilege to God, and injury to our selves, to
steal that from him, which, while we do it, we rob our selves. I thank God, I
ever found, that in the strictest observation of the times of his Worship, I
ever met with the best Advantage to my worldly Occasions, and that when ever my
worldly Occasions incroached upon those times, I ever met with disappointment,
though in things of the most hopeful and probable success. And ever let it be
so with me: It has been, and ever shall be to me, a Conviction beyond all
Argument and Demonstration whatsoever, That God expects the observation of his
Times, and that whilst I find my self thus dealt with, God has not given over
his care of me. It would be a sad presage unto me, of the severe anger of my
Maker, if my inadvertence should cast me upon a temporal Undertaking upon his
Day, and that it should prosper. The End of Wealth, is to supply the Exigence
of our Nature in Food and Raiment: and when God did in an extraordinary way
supply the latter, without the assistance of the former, to the Israelites by
Manna, the seventh Day was without Manna; and the sixth Day supplied that
defect with a double proportion, Exodus 16.29. And I shall never doubt, but the
same Providence will in the six days of the Week, improve my Endeavors, one in
seven, though I rest upon a seventh day from my own Occasions; for, The earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and it is he that gives power to get
Wealth, Isa. 58.13. If thou turn thy foot from the sabbatb, from doing thy
pleasure upon my holy day, and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words, then shall thou delight thy
self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it. Blessed Lord, that requires but a portion of our time,
and that also for our own advantage; and whilst thou thereby do improve our
everlasting Blessedness, thou do not deny our temporal Benefit, but do make
even that portion of time that we spend in thy service, an improvement of the
rest of our time for our temporal Advantage.

And what we say concerning that portion of our time, which we sequester to God
from our outward Occasions, the same we may say concerning that portion of our
Wealth or Estate, which we give either to his service, or by his command: When
thou denyest either, thou may look for much, and it may come to little: when
thou bring it home, he will blow upon it, Haggai 1.9. That which is detained
from works of Piety or Charity, will eat holes in thy Bag, and let out it self
and the rest; which had it been daily bestowed, it would have preserved the
rest, and returned with increase, Malachi 3.10. Bring all the tithes into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith,
says the Lord of hosts; if I will not open unto you the windows of heaven, and
pour out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it, Prove.
28.27. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack, Prove. 19.17. He that has
pit^ on the poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he
pay him again. Thou owe all thou have to thy Maker, and if thou should
give him all thou have, thou give him but his own, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. He calls
to thee but for a part of what he has lent thee, and yet he is pleased so far
to accept thy cheerful obedience herein, that he is pleased to become thy
debtor, even for that which thou owe him: This is thy honor, and this will
be thy profit: thou shall receive thy Loan with advantage: I can safely, and
without vanity say, I have hitherto found this Truth exactly fulfilled: In
those Weeks and Years wherein I have thus sowed sparingly, I have even in
Temporals, reaped sparingly: and I ever found, when my hand was most liberal, I
never lost by it, but found a return an hundred fold more than my expense: And
the Bread that I have thus cast upon the Waters, I found it within a few days.
God forbid, that I should look upon it as the merit of my Charity, for it was
his own; or that I should be therefore charitable, because I expected a
temporal Reward; for I have therein but done my duty, and am therein an
unprofitable Servant: But I bless God, that has made good this Truth of his,
even to my sensible and frequent Experience.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Sanctification in reference to our Neighbor, viz.
Righteousness, the Habit and Rule of it.
2. THE second general, wherein our Sanctification consists, is Righteousness,
viz. that just temperature of Mind, and consequently of our Conversation that
respects other Men: Herein we will consider, 1. The Habit it self, or
habitual Righteousness. 2. The Rule of it. 3. The Parts of it.

1. The Habit it self: it is a frame and temper of Mind arising from the Love
of God, to give every Man his due, according to the Will of God. The great Duty
that the Creature owes to his Creator, is Love: Thou shall love the Lord with
all thy Heart: and this as has been shown, is the first and great Commandment,
and the first and most natural Duty and Bond that can be: the Consequence of
this Love, is the doing all the good we can unto him, and for him, from whom we
receive our Being: now all the good we can do him, is but to please him, to be
conformable to his Will; for it is impossible, that any thing can contribute
any thing to him, that is infinitely full: all the good we can do him
therefore, and all the expressions of our Love, consists in this, viz. A free
subjection and obedience to his Will. And because we find this Righteousness,
and Justice, and Love to our Neighbor, is commanded by him, and is evidenced
to his Will, both by that natural inclination that he has put in us, by the
dispensation of his Providence, whereby he makes every Man useful and
beneficial to another in this way of mutual Justice, and by his written Word,
whereby he expressly requires it; this Cardinal and fundamental motion of the
Soul, viz. the Love of God, does presently conclude, that since that great God
to whom I owe my self, and all my Love, and all my Obedience, requires this
duty at my hands, though I could see no reason for it, I would presently submit
unto much more, when there is so much reason for it, as indeed God does not
require my Obedience in any thing, but if it be well considered, is most
admirably consonant to sound Reason, and to my own advantage; Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep
therefore, and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the
sight of the nations: so that the foundation of habitual Righteousness is Love
to God; the Consequence of that Love to God is a rational, universal, and
voluntary Obedience to his Will and Command; the Command of God, next to Love
to himself, is to love our Neighbors; the expression of that Love is in acts
of Righteousness and Justice to them: hence it is called the second great
Commandment, the great Injunction that Christ gave to his followers, the
fulfilling of the whole Law.

2 The Rule of Righteousness: In our original Condition, God gave unto Man a
Rule of Righteousness by the immediate impression and revelation of his own
Mind unto him, and inclination to submit ^to it. And this, although it was much
defaced, yet was not wholly taken away by his Fall. So much was by the Divine
Providence conveyed from Man to Man as left the Offender without excuse. But as
the River ran farther from the Fountain; so it became more foul and polluted,
the sins of Men contesting with, and corrupting by degrees that traditional
Righteousness, which was derived from Man to Man: But the merciful God was
pleased, as the sins and corruptions of Mankind did make breaches into this
Rule of Righteousness, and corrupted the manners of Men; so he was pleased in
the ways of his Providence, to repair it in some measure in all Ages, raising
up Prophets and Preachers of Righteousness, as Noah was to the old World,
exciting, and by his powerful and wise Spirit, enabling Men to make Laws and
Constitutions in States and Kingdoms, which though they were not of his own
immediate dictating, yet he attributes too little to the Wisdom and Providence
of God, that does attribute the inventing and composing of those useful and
righteous Laws, even among the Heathen, to the mere Wisdom and discovery of
Men; when he himself leads us up unto himself, even in the low Projections of
the Plowman, Isa. 38.26. For his God does instruct him to discretion, and does
teach him. It is true, that there is a kind of natural Consonancy of the Rules
of Justice and Righteousness to the well being of Men, and Societies of Men; as
is most evident, both where that Justice is, and where it is not; and by the
observation of the now aged World, and of the success and motions of Mankind,
much may be collected both of the Necessity of Righteousness* and of the Parts
and Particulars wherein it consists: But God yet more careful of his Creature,
has not left us to our own Collections, wherein the varieties of Manners, the
growth of Sin and Corruptions, and our own Blindness may deceive us, or perplex
us, but has given us a written Rule of Righteousness, the Word of the Old and
New Testaments. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, Micah 6.8.
Deuteronom. 30.14. The word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
that thou may do it: Now the Word of God is considerable as a Rule of
Righteousness,

1. Absolutely, and in it self: and therein it is considerable, how the Law
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial alone, or joined with the Expositions and
Counsels of the Gospel, are a Rule of Righteousness.

2. Relatively: and thus the Word of God sends us to two other, but subordinate
Rules:

1. Subjection to Humane Laws: Be obedient to every Ordinance of Man for
Conscience sake, 1. Pet. 2.13.

2. Conscience in that great Rule, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, that do you unto them.

1. The first Consideration: the Scripture, as it is the Rule of all Divine
Truth, so it is a perfect Rule of Righteousness, both toward God and Man, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in Righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. There
wants nothing in the Rule to acquire Perfection, though by reason of the defect
in the subject, it cannot be attained.

1. The Law of God is a Rule of Righteousness, viz. the Moral Law. It is true,
in these two ^derations, the Law is not binding to the (...) since the coming
of Christ, to the (...)

1. It is not binding to the Gentiles as a Covenant: for so it was in a
particular manner given to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles. The External
Covenant on the Peoples part, was an Obedience to the whole Law, given by
Moses; the Covenant on God's part, was to be their God, and bless them. And
this, as it was never a Covenant between God and other Nations, till
incorporated into that Society, so also as a Covenant, it was abrogated by
Christ, who came to make a New Covenant between God and Man; New, not in the
purpose of God, for it was his purpose from all Eternity; nor yet in the
Substance and Efficacy of it, for the whole Frame of the Law, and of all those
Ceremonies, were in order to Christ, and the Obedience to them, received their
acception in him; but New in the manner of the exhibition, the Substance it
self was unvailed, viz. Christ, the manner of partaking of his Benefit, more
clearly discovered, viz. Faith: so then the substantial Covenant with the Jews
under the Law, and since the coming of Christ, is one and the same, Christ
Jesus; the manner of the exhibition or external manifestation thereof under the
Law, was as a Covenant of Works, which is since rather expired, than abolished,
for the prefixed time, which God in his Wisdom and Providence had
pre-determined, expired by the promulgation of that substantial Sacrifice,
Christ Jesus.

2. The Moral Law, as it was promulged and given to that People, does not bind
farther than any other part of the Judicial or Ceremonial Law: and therefore
extends not farther than the Jewish Commonwealth: But as that Law so promulged,
did include that Natural Rectitude, which was once given unto all Mankind, so
it binds us, and is a Rule of Righteousness to us: and though that enacting of
it among the Jews, is not the formal cause of its Obligation upon us Gentiles;
yet it does serve as a promulgation or manifestation of it, and leaves even
that part of the Gentiles, unto whom it came, more unexcusable in its
disobedience, because by a Revelation from Heaven, and by the Dispensation of
his Providence, it is most clearly manifested unto them.

So then questionless, the Moral Law, though given to the Jews, is a Rule of
Righteousness to all, because it contains those Precepts, that are naturally
and intrinsecally Good, and Right, and Just for all Men to observe. And though
Christ came to take it away, as a Covenant of Works, and consequently, the
condemning power of it, which was the Enmity, Ephesians. 2.17. yet he came not to
take it away, as a Rule of Righteousness: Thus Heaven and Earth shall first
pass away, before one jot, or tittle of the Law shall pass away, Matthew. 5.18.
And we see plainly that the Savior of the World, his Prescriptions of
Holiness, does not only reinforce the Law, but superadds a more spiritual,
pure, and high Observation, than the Letter it self injoyns, Matthew. 5. He came
to abolish the Ceremonies of the Law, not as things unholy in their
Institution, but as useless, because the Substance was come: He came to take
away the Curse of the Law from such as believe, by satisfying for it; and the
Condemning Power of the Law, in case of default of an exact Obedience by
fulfilling it for us: But he took it not away, as a Rule to guide us; for thus
the Apostle witnesses to it, Romans 7.12. that it is Holy, Just, and Good; and
disobedience to it, is a mortal sin in it self, though by the Satisfaction of
Christ, it is become not deadly to them: Every Sin we commit against this
Righteous Rule, even after our Conversion, requires the Blood of the Son of God
to wash it away, otherwise it were deadly. We have a double Obligation to the
Moral Law, as a Rule of our Obedience, 1. As it is a Rule of natural Justice:
2. As it is enforced, and as it were re-enacted by the Command of our Savior.

Now as touching the Ceremonial Law, though in particular, and the matter of
it, it be so far from a Rule of Righteousness to us, that it were an act of
highest injury to our Savior, to practice it, yet there wants not an use of
it, especially amongst others in these particulars: 1. That an exact precise
Obedience is required where God commands, though we see not, it may be, the
particular Reason: the very Snuffers, and Coverings, and Times, and all other
Circumstances must be exactly observed. When God commands, there is no
disputing of, or varying from his Injunctions: 2. That in all our approaches to
the most holy God, we must endeavor to bring our Consciences, and Hearts, and
Lives as clean as may be: he is a holy God, and will be sanctified by all them
that draw near to him: And this was meant by their washings, and purifyings,
and cleansings in cases of even natural defilements. 3. That he is a God that
is pleased with Order, Decency, and Comeliness in his Service, so as it be
agreeable to his own Word and Will, without Idolatrous Superstitions or
Will Worship.

And as to the Judicial Law, though in the Letter of it, it was the Law for
that People, yet it does does contain an exemplary Wisdom and Justice* so that
these Laws, that were not particularly fitted for that Nation, and the
Circumstances of their Condition, may be Examples and Patterns for the Laws of
other States; and do include a great deal of natural Justice and Righteousness;
yet the express Text of the Judicial Law, did not serve in all cases emergent
in that Commonwealth, especially concerning translations of Properties and
Interest. And in these the Civil Magistrate did determine according to the
Rules of natural Justice and Convenience of the Commonwealth, and by the
extraordinary direction and assistance of God, vide Exodus 18.26.

And as thus the Laws of the Jews, contained Rules and Directions in Natural
Justice between Man and Man; so the sacred History, the Directions of the
Prophets, supply us with farther manifestation of the Will of God in the
matters of Justice between Man and Man: and do enforce them home upon the
Conscience. When we see that great observation the Almighty God takes of the
just or unjust Conversation of Men by his imminent Judgments and Rewards, which
we find in the sacred History, attending either practice, whereby he owns even
Civil Justice to be as it were his Creature, and does Patronize and maintain
it: such were his Animadversions upon breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. upon Murder and Oppression in Ahab, and in his House, 1 Kings 21.19.
upon Cruelty and Ambition in the Posterity of Jehu, Hos. 1.4. of Adultery and
Murder in David, 2 Samuel 11. with diverse other instances of the like kind, do
practically convince that Righteousness between Man and Man, is a thing
required, asserted, maintained, and the breach thereof avenged by the hand of
God himself, when the Potency of the Offenders seem to exempt them from his
instrumental Vindication, exercised by Men in an ordinary course of Justice.

The Gospel contains a most excellent Rule of Righteousness: 1. In the Example
of Christ, one of whose Ends in assuming of our Flesh, was to exhibit himself a
Pattern of Holiness toward God, and Righteousness toward Man. And thus the
History of our Savior's Life is a Rule of Righteousness in his Meekness,
Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek: in his Humility, Philip. 2.5. Let the
same mind be in you, as was in Christ Jesus, etc. in his Patience under
Affliction or Persecution, 1 Pet. 2.11, 12, 13. Because Christ has also
suffered for us, leaving us an example; who when he was reviled, reviled not,
etc. in Offices of Love and Charity toward our Brethren, John 13.14, 15. For I
have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done: in love and
tenderness toward others, Ephesians. 5.12. Be ye followers of God as dear
children, and walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, etc. in Obedience to
Parents, to Magistrates, in Liberality, in Compassion, in sweetness of
Conversation; in a word, we may in his Life, find not only that external
Conformity to the Divine Law, that God requires of us; but also a radical,
habitual frame of Mind and Life in all Virtue: so that we may plainly see in
the comparing of his Life, with these Apostolical Precepts and Directions
contained in the Epistles, that the former was as it were the Text, and the
latter, but Collections, or Animadversions upon it, turning the practice of his
Life into Precepts, and concluding what we ought to be, by observing what he
was and did. God intending to re-instamp his Image upon Man, did send his Son,
the Image of the invisible God, as a Seal into the World, to imprint upon his
Followers the Image of God, which consisted in Righteousness and true Holiness.
As in our Conformity to the Life of Christ, consists our Righteousness here; so
shall our Glory be hereafter, for we know, that when he shall appear, we shall
be like him.

2. As thus the History of Christ contains a Rule and Pattern of Righteousness,
so do the Precepts and Counsels of the Gospel contain a Rule of Righteousness,
and that more excellent than the Law: and that especially in these particulars:

1. In that it teaches and infuseth the true Principle of all Righteousness,
by showing us the Love of God to us, and therewith commands, and thereby
begets Love to God again; and in that Love, and from it, does teach and
enable us to all the Duties of Righteousness toward Men; it discovers a
greater and higher act of God's Love to us, than the Law did, because it
discovers his Gifts of Christ unto us, and with, and in him all things: and it
does more distinctly inform us in that Principle of Righteousness in, and from
the Love of God.

2. It discovers more effectual Motives and Incitements unto this and all other
duties, in respect of our selves: The Law, having a shadow of good things to
come, did enforce its Obedience, by Promises of Temporal Advantages, and
Threatenings of Temporal Punishments; but the Promises of the Gospel and its
Threatenings are of a higher and more operative nature, viz. Eternal Life and
Eternal Wrath.

3. It does improve the Commands and Prohibitions of the Law to its proper, yet
spiritual and sublime Sense: for the Commands or Prohibitions of the Law,
seemed to respect more principally the outward Act; and though in truth it
looked farther, for the Law in spiritual, yet the extent of it was not so
clearly evidenced, till our Saviors Divine Comment upon it, Matthew. 5.

4. It does superadd many Precepts, not only of Righteousness toward God, but
even of Righteousness toward Man, that were not contained, or at least, not so
explicitly and positively as in the Gospel: such are Works of Mercy and
Compassion, Patience in Persecution, Liberality toward others, loving our
Enemies, abstinence from Revenge, Gentleness, Moderation, and right placing of
our Affections, contempt of the World, Humility, and the like. These, though we
find them commended in the passages of the Prophets and Psalms; yet they are
not so distinctly delivered, nor so binding, and peremptorily enjoined, till we
come to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, who have put an equal
necessity upon his Disciples to observe these, as those other Injunctions of
the mere Law. The Pharisees, whose exact and rigid obedience to the Commands of
the Law, was their study and practice, yet our Savior tells his Disciples,
That except their Righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, they
can in no wise be his Disciples, nor enter into Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. Now this
exceeding of their Righteousness consisted in this, that is before observed: 1.
In an Obedience to the Commands of the Law in the spiritual intention and
application of it: 2. In the practice of those Virtues, which came not under
the Letter of the Law, unto which he had before annexed his Beatitudes; Poverty
of Spirit, Mourning, Meekness, Hungring after Righteousness, Purity,
Peacemaking, Patience in Persecution. And in these four Particulars,
especially the Rule of Righteousness contained in the Gospel, I cannot say
exceeded the Law, but exceeded the manner or clearness of the manifestation of
the Law; it having been the method of Almighty God ever since the Fall of Man,
to make several steps of discoveries of his mind unto Man, and the latter, to
contain a more eminent degree of Light than the former: in Abraham and the
Patriarchs was one step, in the Law, a second, in the coming of Christ in the
Flesh, a third, and in the sending of the Holy Ghost, a fourth: and yet all
contained one and the same truth, but different degrees of manifestation.

And as in these Particulars, the Rule of Righteousness contained in the New
Testament, was more clear and excellent than that of the Law, so in the same
and other respects, it infinitely outgoes all the Rules and Dictates of
Righteousness contained in the Philosophers, whose Rules were Traditions, which
God by his Providence conveyed from Age to Age, for the ordering and governing
of Mankind, and those improved by the Wisdom, and severe and polished Judgments
of Men, to whom God had given a great measure of Reason and Truth, to whom he
gave so much Light, as might leave the World unexcusable in their disobedience,
yet reserved so much from them as might glorify his Son to be one that was a
Teacher sent from God, and none taught like him.

CHAP. XXX. Of the general Precepts of Righteousness given by Christ: and 1.
Loving our Neighbor as our self.
NOW as in our Duty toward God, Christ does not only deliver unto us many
special and particular Duties, but also delivers some short general Precepts,
which are easy to be remembered, and do include our whole Duty to God: As that
of Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. so
in the matters of Righteousness and Justice toward Men, he does not only
deliver some special and explicit Duties, but has given us some general
Precepts, from whence a good Conscience may easily deduce Conclusions
applicable to every particular Action and Occasion of our Lives in reference to
others: These are principally two, viz. that of Matthew. 22.39. taken out of
Leviticus 19.18. and again enforced by the Apostle, Romans 3.9. Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self: and that other, which is but a repetition of the
former in different words, Matthew. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and
the Prophets: It is a certain Rule, and easily applicable to every Action of
our Lives: because if a Man will not wilfully blind himself* he is able to
judge whether the Action he now does or resolves, be such as he would be
contented should be done to him, were the Persons and conditions changed.

And because these two great Rules are the best and clearest direction of our
Consciences, and the Conscience is not regular, where it is not conformable to
these Rules, we shall examine them more particularly.

Then as to the first, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, wherein we
must take this word Neighbor, as our Savior himself expounds it, that it
includes every Person, of what Relation, or Condition soever, though a Person
is my Enemy, therefore Matthew. 5.43. our Savior confutes that false Gloss of
the Jewish Masters, that did contradistinguish a Neighbor to an Enemy, and
tells us, that an Enemy is to be the Object of our Love and Beneficence, Luke
10.33. a Jew and a Samaritane, between whom there was not only a kind of civil
and national Enmity, but an Hatred grounded upon difference in Religion, in so
much, that the Jews could not use a more bitter reproach against our Savior,
than to style him a Samaritan, John 8.48. yet these were within the
comprehension of this Command: So that whatsoever he be, whether knit unto me
in any relation, or not, nay, though extremely contrary unto me either in civil
Enmity, or in Religion, yet such a Person is the subject of this Command. This
being premised, these things are evidently consequent upon this Command: 1.
That every Man is bound to love himself: 2. That every Man is bound to love
another, as he loves himself.


1. Concerning the former, it is certainly a Duty; and if it were not, a Man
might easily elude this Precept: for if I might hate my self, the rule and
measure of my Love to my Neighbor were lost; therefore a Love to my self, is
implicitly enjoined in this Precept of our Savior, as well as in the
Inclination of Nature, Ephesians 5.29. No man ever hated his own flesh: but the
Errors of Self-love are that which our Savior elsewhere so often reproves:

1. When a Man mistakes, and esteems that himself, which indeed is not; when a
Man takes that for an Eye, or a Hand, or a Foot, viz. parts of himself, which
indeed are not, Matthew. 5.29. When a Man shall make the lust of his Eye, as dear
as his Eye; and the corruption of his Hand, as dear as his Hand: to these our
Savior commands cruelty to be shown, to be cut off, and pulled out: when a Man
shall mistake that old Man that is in him, to be himself, which is to be put
off and crucified, Ephesians. 4.22. and shall take those to be members of himself,
which are members of the old Man, which are not to be loved, but mortified,
Colos. 3.5. Such is the disorder and corruption of our Nature, that we esteem
our Sins and Lusts to be part of our Essentials, and thereby misplace our Love
upon them, in stead of our selves. And this is a Self Love forbidden; nay, they
are our only Enemies, Enemies that fight against our Souls.

2. When our Love, though it be partly right placed, yet it is either beyond
the due measure and proportion, or does not take in our whole Selves: Every one
is bound by the Laws of God and Nature, to love his own Flesh; but he that so
loves his own Flesh, that he neglects his Soul, he loves not his whole self,
and consequently, has indeed less love for himself than he should have. Thus
he that loses his Life, shall save it: That Man that for the advantage of a
temporal Life, much less for the advantage of some temporal Profit or Pleasure,
shall hazard his everlasting Soul, loves himself less than he should; because
he prefers the temporary advantage of his worse part before the eternal
advantage of his better part.

3. When Love to a Man's self wants the due subordination to our Love to God.
The Good that is in God is infinite, and the Good that we receive from him, is
the highest Good we are capable of: for our Being, which is our Capacity to
receive any Good, and all the Comforts, Benefits and Conveniences that fill up
that Capacity, we receive from him; and therefore our Love to him, ought to
take up the whole Compass and Capacity of our Soul. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy might, the
first and great Commandment, Matthew. 22.37. And as the Being of the Creature is
a dependant Being, so his own Love to himself, ought to be a subordinate Love
to him, upon whom it has his dependence, Luke 26.14. If any man come to me,
and hate not his father, etc. yea, and his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
Yet such is the wonderful Bounty and Wisdom of the Will of God, that in
Conformity thereunto, a man exactly conforms to his own Happiness. Our highest
and most universal Love to God, is joined with a true and exact Love to our
selves; for he has conjoined the Happiness of the Creature with the Duty to
himself: Both which we find, Matthew. 16.25. Whosoever will lose his life for my
sake, shall find it. It may so happen, that thy Love to thy Savior may not
consist with thy external Honor, Wealth, or Peace, nay not with the enjoyment
of thy own Life; but it shall ever consist with the life and blessedness of thy
Soul unto all Eternity; and what can be an exchange equivalent to thy immortal
Soul? Thus whilst thou hate thy Life, when the Love and Duty, thou owe to
God, calls for it, thou do at once perform a double duty, of Love to God, and
Love to thy self.

2. From hence it appears, that in the relation between my Neighbor and my
self, there is a priority of Love due to my self, to that Love I owe to my
Neighbor: for the Love to my self is presupposed, and made the Rule of that
Love I owe to my Neighbor: therefore in an equality of Concernment to my self
and my Neighbor, I am to prefer my self; as if this unhappy Necessity should
lie upon me, either to preserve my own Life, or that my Neighbor must lose
his, and that without my fault; I may, I must prefer the saving of my own Life:
But where there is an inequality of Concernment, there the difficulty is great
to discover the measure of my Duty to my Neighbor: de quibus infra.

3. From hence it is evident, that I am bound to love my Neighbor. This is
evident, and it is that great Command of the New Testament, 1 John 4.20.

4. From hence it is evident, and it is the sco^^ and substance of the Command,
that we must love our Neighbor as our selves: Now this word as, imports
Equality: therefore it is considerable, how far this Equality of Love to our
Neighbor as to our selves, is to be extended:

1. Our Love to our Neighbor, must be of equal Sincerity and Integrity, with
that Love a Man bears to himself: A Man loves himself sincerely, he does not
pretend, or bear a dissembled Love to himself, but it is in good earnest, and
with his Heart: I must love my Neighbor as truly, as I love my self. This is
an Equality of Nature or Essence.

2. Our Love to our Neighbor, must be of the same order or method as our Love
to our selves: As we are to prefer our chiefest Good, before our temporal Good;
and the good of our Souls, before that of our Bodies: so we ought to hold the
same order in the Love we show to our Neighbor, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thy heart, but shall reprove him. There is sometimes a
merciful Cruelty to be shown to our Brother, pulling him out of the Fire, and
holds resemblance to the Love of God to us, that reproves, that he may not
strike; and strikes, that he may not destroy. And this is an Equality of Order.

3. But an Equality of Degree is not required, as it seems, and as is before
touched: But though in an Equality we may prefer our selves, yet when there is
a disproportion, there in many cases our Neighbor's Good is to be preferred
before our own:

1. The salvation of our Neighbor's Soul is to be preferred before the
preservation of our own temporal Life: much more ought we to deny our selves in
those things, which are only useful or pleasing to our Sense, if the salvation
of another Soul is concerned in it. And this was that which was meant, 1 Cor.
10.24. 1 Cor. 8.13. Romans 14.21. If meat make my brother offend, I will eat no
flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother offend. And as our
Savior laid down his natural Life, to redeem our everlasting Souls from an
eternal Death; so has he lef^ the same for an Example and a Command to us,
John 13.34. A new command I give unto you, that ye (...) one another, as I have
loved you: He had before commanded us, that we should love our Neighbor as our
selves: and because we might take out that Lesson by his Example: Christ, the
Son of God, who had all perfection in himself, and consequently did, and must
love himself; yet preferred the salvation of our Souls, before the preservation
of his natural Life, to be in this an Example to us, that if the exigence of
the salvation of my Brother's Soul could not consist with the preservation of
my own Life, I am bound to lay down that Life of mine, rather than his Soul
should be lost, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he
laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

2. We are by virtue of this Precept, to prefer the preservation of our
Neighbors temporal Life, which otherwise would inevitably happen, before our
own Safety, the hazard whereof, may possibly, but not necessarily endanger our
own. This, among other Examples, is evidenced in the Example of Esther, Esther
4.16. A Decree was passed for the Massacre of the Jews, which would necessarily
have ensued, if there were not a speedy prevention: the only means to prevent
it, was Esthers Address to the King; and such an immediate Address, without an
Invitation, was present Death by the Law, Esther 4.11. yet Esther resolves in
that Exigence, to adventure her Life, Esther 4.16. I will go unto the King,
which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish. So that although
the Concernment be equal, my Neighbor's Life and my own Life, in which case,
were there not a disproportion of the Danger, I were bound to preserve my own
Life, rather than to lose it, with the preservation of my Neighbors; yet when
the loss of my Neighbor Life is necessary without incurring some danger of my
own, I am to trust the good Providence of God with my own Life, in a dangerous
Adventure of it, rather than to see my Brother inevitably perish. And the like
proportion holds in matters of a lower Concernment.

3. Therefore much more it follows, that if the being of my Neighbor cannot
consist without the parting with somewhat that consists with my temporal
well-being, I am to prefer my Neighbor's being, before my own well-being: Thus
I am bound to lose my Estate, rather than see my Neighbor lose his Life, if my
Estate would preserve it. But this is still intendible only, in case of an
injurious taking away his Life: for if by the due course of Justice, my
Neighbor's Life be required, I am not bound to buy his Pardon with the expense
of my whole Estate: and so in case my Neighbor shall wilfully cast away his
own Life, in such Cases, there is a Latitude of Christian Discretion left unto
me, and I am not then a debtor to his Life.

4. If my Neighbor's Necessity come in competition with my Convenience only, I
am bound by this Law of Love to prefer my Neighbor's Necessity before my own
Convenience. If there be a poor Man, whose Exigences are such, that he has
wherewith to preserve Life only, but not to satisfy Nature; and I have
wherewith to satisfy the Exigences of my Nature, with some Advantage; I am
bound out of that to supply his Necessity. And though my corrupted Reason may
object, that my future Condition may stand in need of that, which I now part
with to another Necessity, we are in this, to trust the Almighty, to whom I
lend in this my Charity, and though of his own, yet he is content for his own
to become my Debtor: And that Man cannot want, when God is pleased to become
his Debtor. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and he will repay
him, Proverbs 19.17. Yet in the measuring of Supplies for my own Necessity, I
am to account for all those, for whom I am bound to provide; for he that
provideth not for his own Family, is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. yet
herein take heed, that thy Heart deceive thee not.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the second general Precept of Righteousness, Doing as we would
be done unto.
2. THE Second Precept, Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: This is
nothing else, but a practical Experiment of the former; for every Man is
presumed to love himself, and in order and subservience to that Love, to be
able to judge, whether any thing that he does or suffers, be answerable to his
own well-being, which is the termination of that Love, and accordingly likes or
dislikes it, or wills it to be, or not to be done. This Precept is resolved
into its Negative, Whatsoever ye would not that men should do to you, that do
not to them. And for the use of both, we are to take them both with these
Limitations:

1. It is understood in an equality or parity of Relation, and not otherwise.
For an instance, the Father may expect that from a Son, viz. Reverence and
Observance, which will not be fit for the Father to give to the Son. The Duties
are diversified, according to the diversity of the Relations: The resolution of
the Precept in this case, is therefore this, Whatsoever I would that my Father
should expect from me, that I would that my Son should do to me, and e
converso. Variations of Circumstances and Relations, diversifie the Case: and
therefore the resolution of this Precept in case of different Relations, must
be as well with the change of the Relations, as of the Persons: and the
Question to be asked the Conscience in such a case is, Were I in my Neighbor's
Condition, and my Neighbor in mine, what I would in such a Case, expect from
my Neighbor, that I ought to do to him.

Ex Autographo, and cum eod. collat.
FINIS.
A Brief Abstract OF THE Christian Religion.

A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THE Christian Religion.
1. THAT there is One, and but one, most Glorious God, Eternal,
Incomprehensible, perfectly Happy, Infinite in Wisdom, Power, and Goodness,
filling all places, but comprehended in no place, full of Justice, Mercy, Truth
and Perfection.

2. That this God, though but One in Essence, is yet Three in number of his
Subsistence, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

3. That this God in the beginning of time, created the World, commonly called
the Heaven and Earth, which he still governs, by his Power, Wisdom, and
Providence. And this he did, 1. For the Manifestation and Glory of his Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness: 2. For the Communication of his Beneficence, Goodness and
Bounty to the things which he thus made, according to their several Natures and
Capacities.

4. That having finished this inferior World, called the Earth, and furnished
it with all things necessary and convenient for the use and convenience of the
nobler Creature which he intended, he created the first Man Adam, and the first
Woman Eve, the common Parents of all Mankind: from whom all the Men and Women
in the World are derived by natural Propagation.

5. To these first Parents of Mankind, Almighty God gave some Endowments or
constituent Parts, that are common to all Mankind, as well as to them: namely,
1. Terrestrial or Earthly Bodies; for the first Man was made out of the Earth,
and the Bodies of all other Men, though they are derived to them by ordinary
Generation, yet their Bodies are terrestrial or elementary Bodies: 2 Spiritual
and Immortal Souls, endued not only with the Power of Vegetation, as Herbs and
Trees: nor only with the Power of Sense and Perception and Appetite, as the
bruit Beasts: but also with the Power of Understanding and Liberty of Will,
whereby he obtains a kind above all other visible Creatures besides. And this
Soul thus endued with the Power of Understanding and Will, does not die with
the Body; but it is immortal and never dies. And this is called a Reasonable
Soul; whereby we understand, and think, and consider, and remember, and choose
one thing, and refuse another; whereby we have a Capacity to know Almighty God,
his Works, his Will, and to obey and observe it; and to perform all the Actions
that belong to a Reasonable Creature. 3. A Power of Propagation of their Kind,
by the mutual conjunction of Sexes, by virtue of that Divine Benediction, given
to Man, as well as to sensible Creatures: Be fruitful, multiply, and replenish
the Earth. By virtue of which Benediction, all the Families of Mankind that
were, or are, or shall be upon the face of the Earth, are in the course of
ordinary Generation derived from the first Parents of Mankind. 4. A Power and
Right of Dominion over the inferior Creatures, which he does exercise, partly
by the ordination and appointment of their Creation, and partly by the
advantage of his understanding Faculty: and though this Dominion be in some
sort weakened and decayed by the Fall of our first Parents; yet it still, in a
great measure, continues to the Children of Men.

6. But some Privileges our first Parents had in their state of Innocence,
which by their Fall has been much impaired and lost, and not derived to their
Posterity: 1. A state of perfect Innocence, free from all Sin, and sinful
contagion. 2. A state of Happiness and Blessedness, as large as Humane Nature
could be capable of. 3. A state of great Integrity and Perfection, as far forth
as it was possible for Humane Nature to enjoy: as Light and great Knowledge in
his Understanding, Integrity in his Will, right Order in his Soul,
Righteousness and Holiness. 4. A state of Immortality of Body and Soul in their
perfect conjunction, so long as he kept his Innocence.

7. The Ends, for which Almighty God created Man thus, were, first those common
Ends, which moved him to create the World, above mentioned, namely, his own
Glory, and the Communication of his Goodness and Beneficence: but secondly,
these seem to be the special Ends of Man's Creation: 1. That he might have a
Creature in this lower World, that might more conveniently, actively and
effectually give glory unto God: and to that end, he endued him with Nobler
Faculties that might perform this Office; his Understanding, whereby he might
know his Maker, and his Will, and his Works; His Will, whereby he might obey
his Will; his Affections, whereby he might love, and fear, and admire him; His
Faculty of Speech, whereby he might glorify and praise him; this is another
kind of Glory than the other inferiors do, or can, bring to their Maker. And
to the end he might thus glorify his Maker, he placed him in the view and
sight of the goodly frame of Heaven and Earth, and gave him his Law, wherein he
should obey and serve his Creator. 2. That he might be partaker of as much
Happiness and Blessedness as the Humane Nature could be capable of, while it
stood in conjunction with his Body: and that he should, by a kind of
Translation into Heaven, enjoy more Pure, Perfect, and Everlasting state of
Blessedness and Glory.

8. When God had thus created Man, he gave him a Law of Righteousness and
Holiness, and revealed it to him: and for a Probation or Trial of his
Obedience, forbad him the eating of the Fruit of one Tree in Paradise, under
pain of Death.

9. Our first Parents rebelled against that just and easy Law, by eating the
forbidden Fruit. And although they did not presently die corporally, yet they
by this Disobedience fell into these Inconveniences: 1. They were presently
under the Sentence of Everlasting Death, though delivered from it by the
Messiah, that promised seed. 2. They lost the estate of Immortality of their
Bodies, though they lost not the state of Immortality of their Souls, which
were essensentially Immortal. 3. They lost their Innocence, their Happy Estate
in Paradise, the clear and supernatural Light of their Understanding, the
Rectitude of their Wills, the right Order of their Affections: and their Souls
lost much of its Perfection, though not its essential Spirituality and
Immortality. 4. All that were after derived from them by ordinary Generation,
though they had immortal Souls, yet their Faculties were imbased and corrupted,
and greatly disordered, and without the extraordinary Grace of God preventing
and assisting them, prone to all kind of evil and sin, and thereby obnoxious to
the wrath of God, and to everlasting Death. And this is the Condition of all
the Posterity of Adam by Nature, except Jesus Christ.

10. God Almighty in his eternal wisdom and foreknowledge of the fall of Man,
in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, purposed to send forth his Son, to take
the Humane Nature, and to become a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, and also a
Sacrifice, to expiate the Sins of Mankind, and to make them again partakers of
the great and essential part of that Happiness, which the first Man lost by his
Fall: and so to recover unto himself a Creature that might actually glorify
and serve him.

11. And to make this Purpose effectual to our first Parents, and to those that
succeeded them before the coming of Christ the purposed Redeemer, Almighty God
was pleased to use two Expedients: 1. He gave out the Promise of the Messiah,
or the Seed of the Woman, the seed in whom all Nations should be blessed: and
the Belief of this, though darkly revealed, became an Instrument or Means to
render the promised Messiah effectual to them, to partake of the Benefits of
his Redemption, when it was joined with the Obedience to the revealed Will of
God in Sincerity. 2. He gave out Precepts directing Men to their Duty: and to
the sincere Endeavor of Obedience to those Precepts, he annexed the Benefit of
Remission of Sins and Acceptance of their Persons and Duties, through the
Messiah, or Christ that was to come.

12. In the fullness or appointment of time, namely, about four thousand years
after the Creation of Mankind, the Son of God, by a miraculous Conception of
the Virgin Mary, without the conjunction of Man, assumed the Humane Nature,
became Man, lived about three and thirty years, discovered the Mind and Will of
God, touching Mankind, confirmed his Doctrine with unquestionable Miracles and
Evidences from Heaven, and lived a most Holy and Spotless Life, and then was
without cause crucified by the Jews, was buried, the third day he rose from the
dead, lived again, according as he promised, and conversed with his Disciples
forty days, then ascended into the glorious Heavens, where he is in a state of
Glory and Power.

13. And after his Ascension, he sent upon his Apostles, as he promised, the
Power of the Holy Spirit, whereby they did many Miracles in witness of the
truth of the Doctrine and History of Christ.

14 The Reasons and Ends, why the Son of God thus took our Nature, became Man,
and died for us, were these: 1. That the Eternal Counsel and Purpose of God,
for the Recovering and Redemption of Mankind out of their lost Condition, and
all those Predictions and Prophecies touching the same, might be fulfilled, and
thereby the great God to have the Glory of his Wisdom, Mercy, Power, and Truth.
2. That there might be a common Remedy for the Recovery of Mankind to their
duty and subjection to Almighty God, that they might actively glorify their
Creator, according to the End of their Creation. 3. That there might be a
common Remedy afforded to Mankind, to obtain in substance that Happiness which
they lost in their first Parents, and by their own renewed Transgressions, and
a Means provided for the pardon of their Sins, and saving of their immortal
Souls, and yet without derogation of the Divine Justice, and the Honor of his
Government.

15. In order to these great Ends, the Son of God was thus sent from Heaven,
and Commissionated as it were by the Father, principally to do these Great
Businesses in this World; first to acquaint the World with the whole Will of
God concerning Mankind: 2. To lay down a full and sufficient Sacrifice for the
Sins of the World, by his own Death and Passion: 3. To give the World all
possible Assurance both of the Truth of his Doctrine and the Sufficiency of his
Satisfaction by his wonderful Miracles, by his Resurrection and Ascension, and
by the Diffusion of the Gifts of the Spirit upon his Apostles and Believers
after his Ascension.

16. Touching the first of these, namely, the manifestation of the Divine Will,
touching Mankind; this contains the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Message sent
from Heaven by the Son of God, touching all things to be believed, and to be
done by the Children of Men, in order to their Redemption and attaining of
everlasting Happiness. And this was necessary, because the World was full of
Darkness and Ignorance. And many things that were now necessary for Men to
know, were but darkly revealed unto the former Ages of the World. The Son of
God therefore came to bring Life and Immortality to light, by the Gospel.

17. The Doctrines of the Gospel, which Christ brought with him into the World,
were principally these:

1. That all Men have Immortal Souls, which must live to all Eternity,
notwithstanding the death of their Bodies.

2. That there should come a Dissolution of this present World, and at that
time there shall be a Resurrection of all that had been dead, and a change of
all that should be then living, into an Immortal Estate.

3. That there should at that day be a Final Judgment, where all Men should be
doomed, some to everlasting Life and Happiness, some to everlasting Misery.

4. That in the strict Rule of Divine Justice, the Wages of every Sin is
everlasting Death and Misery, which is fully described in the Gospel.

5. That all Mankind is obnoxious to everlasting Death and Misery, because all
Mankind have sinned, and are born in Sin. So that without the help of Mercy
from God, all Mankind are in a lost and desperate Condition.

6. That yet for all this, Almighty God is willing that his Creature should be
reconciled to him, is desirous to pardon his Sins, to be at peace with him, and
everlastingly to save him, and to restore unto him that everlasting Happiness
that he had lost by his own sin, and the sin of our first Parents.

7. But yet that all this should be done in such a way as might be consistent
with the Honor of his Justice and of his Government, as well as of his Mercy
and of his Bounty: and therefore that he will have a Sacrifice and a Price laid
down for the Sins of the World, namely, the precious Life of his own Son Jesus
Christ, that published this Doctrine to the World: And this Sacrifice and
Satisfaction the glorious God would accept in a way of Justice, and yet in a
way of Mercy, that his Justice might be satisfied, his Mercy magnified, and his
Creature saved.

8. And that because it would be neither agreeable to the Honor nor the Wisdom
of Almighty God, that any Man that had the use of his Reason and Understanding,
should have the fruit and benefit of this Mercy and Sacrifice, without
returning to his Duty to God by true Repentance for what he had done amiss, and
by better Obedience to God: neither was there any fitness or suitableness
between a Pure and Holy God, or that Blessedness which Mankind might expect
with him, and a People that should yet continue desperately sinful and impure:
and it was also reasonable and fit, that if Mankind would expect the
Restitution to that everlasting Happiness, that they lost by their own sins,
and the sin of their first Parents, then they should also return to their Duty
and Obedience to God, and perform in some measure, that End, for which Mankind
was at first created, namely actively, to glorify that God that had made them
especially after so great an addition of Mercy, as the Redemption of the World
by the Death of his own Son; therefore he appointed and intended, and published
to the World, that all, that would have the fruit and benefit of this great
Redemption, should repent of their Sins, and endeavor sincerely to obey the
Precepts of Piety, Sobriety, and Righteousness, commanded by Almighty God by
the Message of his Son.

9. And because, that if those to whom this Message of the Gospel of Christ
should be published, should yet not believe the same, nor believe that Jesus
was the true Messiah, or that his Doctrine was the true and real Message of
Almighty God to the World, it could never be expected that they would obey this
Heavenly Command, nor return to God, or the Duty they owed him: he did
therefore require of all Persons that were of Understanding, to whom the Gospel
should be published, that they should Believe it to be True, and believe that
Christ was the True Messiah, the great Sacrifice for the Sin of the World, and
the Doctrine which he preached, was the Will of God concerning Man.

10. And thus there are these Conditions to be performed on the part of those
that will expect the Benefit of the Redemption purchased by the Blood of
Christ: 1. That all, that are of Understanding, to whom the Gospel is preached,
should Believe it to be the Truth, and rest upon it as the Truth of God: 2.
That they should be heartily sorry for their former Sins, and Repent of them,
and turn from them. This is Repentance. 3. That they should in all Sincerity,
endeavor to conform their Hearts and Wills, and Lives, to the Precepts and
Commandments of Christ and his Gospel, which is called Sanctification and new
Obedience.

11. And because, when we have done all we can, yet we are in this Life
compassed about with many Infirmities and Temptations, and subject to fail in
our Duty to God, and to these Holy Precepts of the Gospel; yet the merciful God
has assured us by his Son Christ Jesus, that if we sincerely endeavor to obey
the Precepts of the Gospel, and repent for our Failings herein, and so renew
our Peace with God by unfeigned Repentance, the same Sacrifice of his Son shall
be accepted to expiate for our Sins and Failings, and the blessed God will
accept of our sincere, though imperfect Obedience, as a Performance of that
part of the Covenant of the Gospel, that concerns our Obedience to God, and the
Commands of the Gospel. And this is called Evangelical Obedience, which, though
it be not perfect, yet being sincere and accompanied with real and sincere
Endeavors to obey, and Repentance for our daily Failings, is accepted of God
through the Sacrifice of Christ, who is not only our Sacrifice and
Propitiation, but also our Intercessor and Mediator at the right hand of God.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ, who
sits at the right hand of the Father, 1 John 2.1. Heb. 8.1. and 10.12.

12. And because many times, Example gives a great Light and Life to Precepts,
our blessed Savior in his Life, gave us an excellent Example of the Practice
of those Precepts, which he has given to us; as namely, Obedience and
Submission to the Will of God; Invocation upon him, Holiness, Purity, Sobriety,
Patience, Righteousness, Justice, Charity, Compassion, Bounty, Truth,
Sincerity, Uprightness, Heavenly mindedness, low esteem of Worldly Glory,
Condescension, and all those Graces and Virtues that he requires and expects
from us.

18. And as thus our Lord Jesus came to instruct us in all things necessary for
us to believe and practice, and to give us an admirable Pattern and Example of
a Holy and Virtuous Life: so, 2. He came to die for us, and to die such a
Death, as had in it all the Circumstances of Bitterness, and yet accompanied
with unspotted Innocence and incomparable Patience, and he thus died for these
Ends.

1. To lay down a Ransom for the Sins of Mankind, and a Price for the Purchase
of Everlasting Life and Happiness for all those that receive him, believe in
him, and obey the Gospel.

2. To satisfy the Justice of God, to make good his Truth, to vindicate the
Honor of his Government; and to proclaim his Justice, his Indignation against
Sin, and yet to magnify his Love and Mercy to Mankind, in giving his Son to be
a Price of their Redemption.

3. To give a just indication unto all the World of the vileness of Sin, the
abhorrence of it, that cost the Son of God his Life, when he was but under the
imputed guilt of it, that so Mankind might detest and avoid Sin, as the vilest
of Evils.

4. To give a most unparalled Instance of his Love to the World, that did
choose to die for the Children of Men, to redeem them from Everlasting Death.

5. And thereby to oblige Mankind with the most obliging and indearing Instance
to love and obey that Jesus, that thus died for them, and out of the common
Principles of Humanity and Gratitude, to love and obey him, that thus loved
them, and laid down his Life for them.

6. To give a most convincing Evidence of the Truth of his Doctrine, and the
Sincereness of his Professions of Love to Mankind, by sealing the same with his
own Blood.

FINIS.
Considerations Seasonable at all Times for the Cleansing OF THE HEART AND LIFE.

Considerations Seasonable at all Times for the Cleansing OF THE HEART and LIFE.
1. OF God, and therein 1. Of his Purity and Holiness; one that cannot endure
to behold iniquity. The Stars are not pure in his sight, Job 25.5. Job 15.15.
and his Angels he charge with folly, Job 4.18. How then can thou think to
draw near to the Holy God, when thy Heart and thy Lips, and thy Life are
clothed with Impurity and Filthiness? when thy Thoughts, the only Instruments
whereby thou can converse with him, are busied in Considerations unworthy of
a Spirit, much more unworthy of the God of Spirits? Can thou think that this
Holy God will accept of the productions of that Soul, thy Prayers and
Meditations, who but now was employed in base unclean earthy Thoughts, and
did but now part with them, with a resolution to resume them? Every impure
thought leaves a mark and blot upon thy Soul, that remains when thy Thought is
past; and can thou bring that spotted Soul into the presence of the Pure and
Holy God, without confusion and shame? Thou art now going about with thy Lips
to draw near unto God; Remember how many vain and unprofitable words, how many
murmuring and unthankful words, how many unclean and filthy words, how many
false and dissembling words, how many proud and arrogant words, how many
malicious and vindictive words, how many hypocritical and deceitful words, how
many seducing and misleading words, how many ungodly and blasphemous words,
have stained and polluted those calves of thy Lips, thou art now about to
sacrifice to thy Creator. Thou art about to undertake a Conversation and
walking with God; Can two walk together unless they are agreed? Amos 3.3. How
then can thou, a polluted Man in all thy actions, even those of the best
denomination, expect to have a Conversation with the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord? The
stains of thy Life past stick upon thee, and thou art not cleansed from them;
and the Sea of Corruption that is within thee, will, notwithstanding thy
highest Resolutions, never cease to cast out mire and dirt.

O Lord, it is true, I am a sinful Man, and the whole frame of my Heart, and
Lips, and Life, has been only evil and that continually: and as I have been,
so still I must continue, without thy Mercy to pardon and cleanse me. My
pollutions and impurities are such as may justly affright me from coming near
thy Holiness, lest I should be consumed; such as may discourage my Prayers and
Applications unto thee, lest I should stain and infect them: and it is no more
in my power to change or cleanse my self from the stains of my sins past, or
from the growing evils of my Nature, than in the Leopard to change his spots;
so that I may most justly conclude, that it were extreme presumption for me to
draw near unto thee, and rather cry out with the Disciple, Depart from me, O
Lord, for I am a sinful man, Luke 5.8. But if I sit where I am, I shall perish;
and if I draw near unto thee, I can but die. That Purity that I behold in thee,
is the Purity of the great God; and my sins are the sins of a finite Creature:
my sinfulness cannot defile thy Holiness; but thy Holiness may cleanse my
impurity: That Fire which will consume an impure and a proud Heart, will
cleanse an impure and unhumble Heart. O Lord I desire to abhor my self in dust
and ashes: Unless thou had shown me my filthiness, I could not have seen it;
and unless thy Grace had been with my Heart, I could not have humbled my self
before thee: Unless thou had called me, I could not have moved toward thee.
Thy Promises, upon which my Soul shall ever fix till thou throw me off, are
full of bounty and tenderness even to the vilest of Sinners: No sin of so deep
a dye, but thy Mercy can wash away: No Corruption so hideous, but thy Grace can
cleanse. And so far have thou condescended to the weakness of thy Creature,
that thou have given us a visible Sacrifice, whose Blood is sufficient to
cleanse us from all our Guilt, a visible Fountain to wash for Sin and for
Uncleanness, even the Blood of the Son of God, which cleanses us from all Sin,
which cleanses our Consciences from the guilt and stain of Sin, and washes
our Bodies from the dominion and pollution of Sin; and by that Blood has
opened a new and living way for us into the presence of God, Hebr. 10.20. and
given access thereby into the Holiest, and given us a Commission to draw near
with acceptance into his presence, Hebr. 10.19.

2. The Presence of God. Whither shall I fly from thy presence? Psalm. 139.7. He
sees the secretest corners of the World, and the secretest chambers of thy
Heart, and all the Guests that are there, even thy closest Thoughts and
Contrivances and Purposes; much more thy most retired and deepest Actions are
as legible to him as if they were graved in Brass. And the deep and settled and
frequent Consideration of this, will be of excellent use upon all occasions.

Is thy Heart solicited by thy self (as our unhappy Hearts are our own
tempters) or by any Object, or by the persuasions of others, or by the
suggestion of the Devil, to impure Speculations, or sinful Resolutions, to
atheistical Disputations, to proud or arrogant Conceptions of thy self, to
revengeful or uncharitable or forbidden Wishes, to vain and unprofitable
thoughts? Remember thou and all those thy Thoughts (which even natural Modesty
or Prudence would shame thee to publish before a mortal Man as thou art) are
all naked and manifest before the Great, Holy, and Immortal God, whose Eyes
walk through all the corners of thy Heart: And dare thou in his presence to
entertain such Guests as these in that place where thy Creator is present, in
that place which thou pretendest to make a Temple for him, in that place which
the Lord of Heaven is pleased most justly and most mercifully to claim as his
own? Consider what a Presence thou art in: he is not only an Eyewitness of the
impurities of thy Heart (which yet if there were nothing else, might justly
shame thee) but it is his Presence who has forbidden thee to entertain such
Vermin as these in thy Heart, under pain of eternal Death; it is thy Judge that
sees thee; it is the great Creator, before whom the Angels of Heaven cover
their Faces, not being able to behold his Glory: And, which is more than all
this, to an ingenuous Nature, it is he to whom thou owe thy self and all thou
art; he to whom thou have given up thy name, that has purchased thy heart from
Hell with the price of his Son's blood: And how can thou choose but tremble
and be confounded, to think that thou should, contrary to all the bonds of
duty and gratitude, even in his presence and before his face, let in again
those abominations into thy heart, from which it was cleansed by the Blood of
Christ?

Again, Has a sinful thought, through incogitancy of the presence of God,
entered into thy heart? Yet remember the presence of God, before it grow into a
purpose or resolution: or if it has gone so far as a Resolution, yet remember
that presence, and thou can not dare to perfect this hideous conception unto
action: and improve Joseph's question, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Thy Creator, thy Judge beholds thee. Let it be
the matter of thy humiliation to consider that thou have stained the habitation
of his presence by admitting a sinful thought; that thou have in his presence
and in his place nourished it into a resolution: And therefore let it be at
last thy care at least to kill this resolution before it comes to action by
improving this practical consideration of the presence of the Holy, Glorious
and Terrible God: And if, notwithstanding this consideration, thy Soul shrink
not from thy purpose; or if thou reject the consideration of his presence, that
thou may the more quietly and contentedly sin; or if thou precipitate thy
resolution into action, lest the consideration of his presence should step into
thy heart and divert thee; Thy sin is heightened, and thou addest contempt of
God unto thy offense, by rejecting the Light and Grace, that might and would,
if brought to thy heart, restrain thee, and with the presumptuous sinner in Job
21.14. thou say to God, Depart from me, for I desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. And it is no wonder if he take thee at thy word, and depart from thee
to all Eternity, by the presence of his Love and Goodness, though his severe
and angry Eye and presence ever rest upon thee.

Again, Is the God of Heaven an Eyewitness of thy carriage when either by thy
self or others thou art solicited to evil? Take courage to resist this
temptation, because thy Creator sees thee. Ask thy temptation, whether it can
secure thee from the sight and wrath of God, whether it can countervail thy
damage in displeasing him that beholds thee? Do thou want Courage or
Resolution to oppose it? Consider thy Lord stands by to see and observe and
reward thee in thy opposition. Could thou see but that Glory that has
commanded thy resistance of evil, and how near it stands by thee, all the
choicest solicitations to any sin would die in their first offer against thee.
Do thou doubt thy strength to oppose it? Know that thou can not want
strength, if thou have but resolution: It is thy cowardice makes thee weak; it
is not thy weakness that makes thee cowardly: All the men in the World, nor all
the Devils in Hell, could not fasten a sin upon thee, unless thou first
consent. But suppose thou doubtest thy own heart, yet consider thy Maker's
presence, who is by thee, and able to support thee, if thou will but lay hold
of his strength; and that strength of his he offers thee if thou will but take
it: And it is not possible thou should wanr it, if thou seriously consider
that he is present; for it is an act of thy Faith whereby thou do believe his
presence, and by the same act thou do partake of all that Goodness and Truth
and Mercy, which accompanies his presence, and will bear thee up against the
most accomplished temptation. Consider that the Presence of God, that beholds
thy carriage in a temptation, as it must needs add an infinite dishonor and
shame and confusion, that in the presence of the Glorious and Pure God thou
should sink under a base temptation contrary to the Commands and Holiness of
him that beholds thee, so it cannot choose but strengthen thee against the
strongest temptation by the anticipation of that comfort and contentment that
thou must needs have by holding thine integrity when such thoughts as these
shall move thy heart: I am now solicited to break my Maker's Command for a
perishing profit or pleasure: whatsoever my success be, I know the Glorious,
Holy, Mighty God sees my demeanor, even he that has his reward in his hand of
Indignation, and Vengeance, and shame, in case I yield to this unworthy
solicitation; And Approbation, Glory and Immortality, in case I stick to his
Command: and shall I in the presence of the Almighty and Glorious God prefer
the satisfaction of an unworthy lust or temptation, with shame in the presence
of my Creator, before my Obedience unto him, even in his own sight, when he
looks upon me, and encourages me with a promise of strength to assist me, and
of Glory to reward me? To be able to hear in my own conscience the suffrage of
the Lord of Heaven beholding me, Well done, good and faithful servant, were
enough to overweigh all my Obedience, though it were possible that it could be
divided from what follows, Enter into thy master's joy.

Again, Art thou in any temporal Calamity, be it what it will? the
consideration of the presence of God will make thy condition comfortable, Psalm.
23.3. Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me: My Wants are great, and my Reproaches are great, and my
Enemies, my Pains, my Dangers, my Losses, my Discomforts are great; But they
are not hid from God, he is present and his Wisdom, and if he saw it not fit
for me to be afflicted, it is enough I have learned to acknowledge his Wisdom,
and with patience and cheerfulness to submit to him, who measures out every
dram of this bitter potion to most wise Ends, and yet stands by to manage it:
He is present and his Power and Omnipotence, and my Prayers have no long
journey to come unto him; when my Exigences are at the highest his Power is
enough, and near enough to help me in the very article of necessity; and when I
am sinking with Peter, he has an arm near enough to rescue me from the ripe
and victorious danger: He is present and his Compassion and Mercy and
Tenderness and Faithfulness, who will not suffer me to be tempted above what I
am able to bear: It is his Mercy that has thus much or thus long afflicted me;
for so much the necessity of my Soul, it may be, did require. Psalm. 119.75. Thy
Judgments are right, and thou in faithfulness have afflicted me: And that I am
afflicted no more, it is thy Mercy. For he stands by, and sees what measure
consists with my Good, and when the measure begins to exceed my strength, and
either eases my burden, or helps me to bear it: In all their afflictions he
was afflicted, Isa. 63.9. He is present and his All Sufficiency: and this is
enough to swallow up all the bitterness and darkness of my extremest misery.
The comfort and beauty and goodness of every thing in it self, or which it can
reach out to me by fruition or participation, is that which is derived to it
only from the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God; and there is no more of good
in the Creature than what he lends it; neither can it communicate to me more,
nor can I receive more from it than what he enables it to give, and me to
receive: And the Creatures are but those Vessels accommodated and fitted to my
Nature, out of which I drink that good, that he has put into them: and if he
put not communicative good into the Creatures, they will prove but empty
Vessels unto me, or such as are sealed up and cannot communicate that Good that
is in them: Without his particular Bounty unto me, the Creature unto me will be
but like the Prophet's Book, which he that is learned could not read, because
it was sealed; and he to whom it was opened could not read it, because he was
unlearned: Either the Good that is in them is sealed up to me, and it cannot be
drawn out; or I am sealed up to it, and cannot draw it out. Eccles. 6.2. A man
to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor, so that he wants nothing,
yet God gives him not power to eat thereof: So then the conclusion of all is,
That all the Good that is in the things we enjoy, and in the enjoyment whereof
men account themselves happy, and in the want whereof they account themselves
miserable, is but a derived Good from the chiefest Good, but a portion of that
Good which is in the chiefest Good; But a Good at the second hand, which at the
first hand is to be found in all perfection in the chiefest Good: And therefore
if I can but enjoy the Presence and Communion of the chiefest Good, I shall
with and in him enjoy all that Good, and far more, in the Fountain, though all
the Conduits through which they are ordinarily derived to man by the Creatures,
are stopped to me. It is an act of great Mercy and Wisdom in God that, when the
most part of men are led merely by sense, and understand not the presence of
God, and that All Sufficiency that is in him, he is pleased to derive a
suitable Good unto their Natures, by such sensible instruments unto which men
may resort, and therein may find those Goods that are accommodate to their
nature and condition; as, to Medicines and Physic for their health and cures;
to Bread and Meat for the supply of their hunger; to Music and Wine for
refreshing their Spirits; to Fortifications, Confederacies and civil
Conjunctions for preventing or repressing of injuries, and the like; for
through these Channels God is pleased to derive, at the second hand, and as it
were at a distance, that Good which men find in them: But how great is that
Mercy, that discovers God himself to be near unto me, and to compass me about;
and discovers in him a Sea of All sufficiency infinitely more than
proportionable to all my Exigences; and gives me an access immediately to that
All Sufficiency, where I shall find at the first hand all that Good, that is
strained and runs through the Creatures at a distance, where I may and shall,
if I be not defective to my self, most certainly have whatsoever the Creature
can afford, or what shall abundantly supply that defect to my greater advantage
and contentment! Is my Estate small, and scarce holding proportion to my
necessities? The All-sufficient God is near unto me, and he can protr^ct my
Cruise of Oil to my support: But if he do not, yet if he be pleased to be my
exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15.1. the portion of my inheritance and my cup,
Psalm. 16.5. I can cheerfully and comfortably conclude with the same Prophet, My
lines are fallen in pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage: and with the
Prophet, Habbac. 3.17. Though the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall
there be fruit in the vine, the labor of the olive shall fall, and the field
shall yield no meat, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation. I can bear all my wants with cheerfulness and contentedness of
heart, because the All-sufficient God is present with me, in whom I find more
abundance of better comfort than I can find in all the Creatures of the World;
one that is not only essentially present with me, but is pleased to evidence
his presence unto me: I have a plentiful inheritance, and have not ^ar to it:
Is my reputation and name wrongfully blasted and withered? yet the Great and
Glorious God is present; and if I can lay open my Conscience before him, and
can clear my self to him, and can appeal to him who is present with my heart
and all my actions, and can receive an approbation from him, I value not the
esteems of men. He is a shield for me, my Glory, and the lifter up of my head,
Psalm. 33. And if I am precious in his sight, I am honorable enough, Isa. 43.4.
He can clear up my reputation as the noon day, and will do it if he see it fit
for my Good, and his own Glory: But if he does not, his will be done, I am
contented, and value not all the Scorns and Reproaches, all the Contumelies and
Disgraces, all the Calumnies and Slanders laid upon me by men, in comparison of
that content and satisfaction by the Presence of the God that sees and knows
and justifies me: Is the World stormy, full of Wars, and rapine, and injuries,
exceeding the repression of Civil Justice? The Presence of God is a strength to
my Soul against all this, and a greater security than the Munitions of Rocks,
and the strength of Armies: He is a Shield, Genesis 15.1. a Refuge, Psalm. 9.9. a
Rock, a Fortress and Deliverer, 2 Samuel 22.2. a Defense, Psalm. 94.22. our
Strength, Psalm. 37.37. a Hiding place to preserve from trouble, Psalm. 32.7. a
present Help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46.3. a Shelter in times of danger,
Psalm. 61.3. a Refuge from the storm, a Shadow from the heat, when the blast of
the terrible ones is as a storm against a Wall, Isa. 25.4. The Lord of hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Psalm. 46.17. under the shadow of his
wings is our trust and safety, Psalm. 36.7. Psalm. 57.1. a hiding place from the
Councils and Contrivances, Psalm. 64.2. and from the Injuries and Violence of
men, Jer. 36.26. If he please he can secure my Estate and my Body from
violence; But if he do not, I am sure that my Treasure and my Life shall be
secured; for my life is hid with God in Christ: I know he has Wisdom enough,
and Power enough, and Mercy enough to preserve me; and he has no need to be
acquainted with my danger, for he is with me; neither have my desires any long
or uncertain journey to him, for he is with my thoughts, and knows them before
they are formed; Isa. 65.25. Before they can call, I will answer: And as long
as I know that the Wise God is so near me, I am sure of deliverance, if it be
convenient; and if it be not, Why should I be troubled if I miscarry? And as
thus my heart, sensible of the Presence of God, can entertain the dangers, that
seem to come from the hands of others; so it will bear up the heart in all
other sad occurrences of this life. Is my mind full of perplexities and
difficulties how or what to resolve? the God of Wisdom is within my call, and
within my vie^, and I can beg his counsel, and I am sure to have it, and his is
the best counsel. Are my losses great, and of those things wherein I took most
delight? yet they cannot countervail the enjoyment of the Presence of the
All-sufficient God. Is my body full of tortures or diseases, and death looks in
upon me between the Curtains, and my Soul sitting upon my lips, and like the
light of a dying Candle, taking her flight from my body? yet the Presence of
the All-sufficient God is able to make this valley of the shadow of death
lightsom, and those pains easy, and bear up my Soul against the horror and
amazement of death: for he stands by me with strength to support me, with
Victory and Immortality to receive that Soul (the only seat where my fear can
dwell) into a more near and immediate sense of his Presence, than in my body it
could feel: Only remember, that though the Presence of his Essence cannot be
excluded from any place or person, Jer. 23.34. yet there are occasions that may
separate from the sense of his presence, or make his presence terrible unto
thee. Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God; and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. And if such an
unhappy time befall thee, that he hide from thy Soul his comfortable presence,
let it be thy care to return unto him by humbling of thy heart sincerely before
him for thy relapse. He never departs from any till man first depart from him;
and he never hides himself long from any that in sincerity return unto him. The
very moving of thy heart to seek him is the work of his Power and Mercy upon
thee, and is an undeniable evidence that he has not utterly forsaken thee:
unless he first did seek and find thee, and touch that heart of thine with his
own finger, thy heart would rather die in her sin than return unto God; and
therefore be sure thy returning to him shall not be without a finding of him:
Only make this use of thy Experience of such a case: bless the Mercy of God,
that has not rejected thee, though thou have forsaken him: bless the Mediation
of thy Redeemer, that when thou little think of it, intercedes for thy
pardon, and sends out his Spirit to reduce his wayward, sinful, wandering
Creature: bless the Bounty and Patience of God, that is so ready to accept
again into favor his relapsed but humbled Creature; and remember that it is an
evil thing and a bitter to depart from him: fall upon thy knees with tears of
sorrow for thy ingratitude, and tears of joy for thy re entertainment into the
presence of him, that yet is pleased to own thee as a Father: take up
indignation against thy sin that has deprived thee of so great a Good as the
comfortable Presence of God; and take up jealous thoughts over thy self and all
thy ways, and consider well of all thy enterprises before thou undertake them,
whether there be any thing in them that may offend thy reconciled Father: and
because thy Judgment is weak, and cannot so clearly discern thy way, and thy
strength is weak in opposing of temptation, suspect thy own judgment and
strength, and beg his Wisdom to teach thee, and his Strength to assist thee,
and lean not to thy own Understanding.

Again, The consideration of the Presence of God is of singular use in all thy
Duties of Piety and Charity. In the doing of them it will cleanse thy heart
from Hypocrisy, because thou art before the God that searches the heart, and
accordingly accepts of the action. It will keep thee from unseemliness and
want of Reverence, because the Lord of Heaven and Earth is present and an
Eyewitness to all the deportment of thy Body and Soul. It will keep thee from
sluggishness, formality and deadness of heart, because he stands by thee that
sees not as man sees. It will keep thee from Pride and vain Glory; it will make
thy heart sincere, reverent, watchful, earnest and humble in all thou do,
because as he that stands by thee requires all this in all thy Duties, so these
affections or habits of the Soul become the Creature that knows he is in the
Presence of the Glorious and Infinite God, that searches the hearts, and sees
the actions. And as in thy Duties it will fit thee for them, so after thy
Duties it will comfort thee in them. Has thy heart been truly humbled in his
presence for any sin, for which thou have begged pardon, and mingled the Blood
and Intercession of thy Savior with thy Prayers? Have thou been upon thy knees
before him for any thing necessary for thy Soul, Body, or Relations? Have thou
endeavored by a serious Meditation to consider of Divine Truths? Have thou
examined the state of thy Soul and of thy Life, and upon the view thereof taken
up resolutions of amendment of what is amiss, and persevering and increasing in
what is agreeable to his Will? Have thou sought out to relieve those that are
in want, to recompense those that thou have injured, to advance the Gospel of
Jesus Christ? Have thou been doing any thing that is the duty of thy general
Calling as thou art a Christian, or that particular Calling or Employment into
which God's Providence has cast thee? And can thy heart bear thee witness that
in all this thou have endeavored with all sincerity, as in the Presence of
God, to walk and act in obedience to him, and with a clear and upright heart
and conscience? Be sure thy heart cannot more clearly evidence it self to thy
self than it does to God; and God was all this while present with thee,
beholding of thee; there is not one grain of the sincerity and integrity of any
of these thy actions, not one tear, not one thought of thy heart lost, but most
exactly observed and weighed by him that weighs the Spirits, and they shall
not return unto thee empty: Acts 10.4. Thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up for
a memorial before God.

3. The Truth and Unchangeableness of God: he is unchangeable in his Nature,
Psalm. 102.27. They shall be changed, but thou art the same. Mal. 3.6. I am the
Lord, I change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. James 1.17.
The Father of lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning. And
from this Immutability of his Essence flows the Truth of his Word in his
Covenant, in his Promises, in his Threatenings, in his Works: Psalm. 111 7. The
works of his hands are Verity and Judgment, and all his Commandments are sure.
And the very variety of his Dispensations of Mercy and Justice to the Children
of men, arises from the very unchangeable Nature of God, even from the very
first Creation until now: Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: which is the very
same Rule whereby God justifies the equality of his ways, Ezekiel. 18.25. Is not
my way equal? are not your ways unequal? When a righteous man turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in them, for his iniquity
that he has done he shall dye. Again* When the wicked man turns away from
his wickedness, etc. he shall save his Soul alive: which is but the same under
the Gospel, Romans 2.6. Who will render to every man according to his deeds.
Though the great God be absolute Lord of his Creatures to do with them what he
pleases, yet the various conditions of his Creatures in the course of
Judgments and Mercies, are not from any change in God, but in us: it is the
same Holiness and Purity of God that is uniform and constant to it self, that
works these different effects upon the Creature; as the same uniform heat of
the Sun works seeming contrary effects according to the diversity of the
subject; so that his ways are still equal, straight and righteous. And this
consideration, as it may strengthen our hearts in the Promises of God, so it
will make the Histories of the Book of God of singular use to us upon all
occasions, when we shall with David, Psalm. 77.10. I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High: I will remember the works of the Lord: I will
remember thy wonders of old: and together with it consider that the same Lord
that did thus or thus in former times, is the same God yesterday, to day, and
for ever. And by this consideration every History in the Book of God is as a
measure for all the present or future concernments of my self and others, and
will teach me how to behave my self in the like occasions, and to judge even of
future Events. In the passages of Nature we see a wonderful order and constancy
for the most part; for all things conform themselves to those Rules which God
has put into them; and that is the best and highest resolution we can give for
them; for when we come to make a particular inquiry into the particular causes
of those things, there is not the easiest part of his Work, and that which long
and constant continuance has made obvious to all men, but the wisest of men,
notwithstanding all these advantages, are puzzled and confounded in; because the
God of Nature has not revealed it to men, Psalm. 77.19. His way is in the Sea,
and his path in the great waters, and his footsteps are not known. There we see
a certainty, but we cannot find the immediate Instrument or Cause of it: But in
the passages of Mankind we are to seek for any certainty at all, or the Causes
of that uncertainty, whch made the Wise man conclude that God had set the one
against the other, that men should find nothing after him, Eccles. 7.14. which
is most certainly true as to a bare natural or rational observation: Yet even
these Works of God are sought out of all them that have pleasure in them, Psalm.
111.2. and though his Judgments are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. unsearchable and
past finding out, Romans 11.33. till he is pleased to discover them; yet he is
still Unchangeable, and the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. So much
even of those secret ways toward men, as is expedient for our knowledge and
use, he has discovered in his Book to those that will diligently observe it:
Thus the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25.14. The most
of the varieties that happen to the Children of men do arise from the
Immutability of God in his Purity and in his Justice. If a straight Line be
drawn parallel to another, though they be infinitely extended, they will keep
the same distance one from another; but if the Line be crooked, it will be in
some places nearer* some places farther off, and it may be will cross the
straight Line. God has given to man a Liberty of his Will, and so long as his
Will and the Actions of his Will ran parallel in a straight Line to the Will of
God, there was still a communication of Good from God to his Creature: But when
man chose crooked ways, he is drawn thereby sometimes away from God, and so is
removed from his Blessings and Communion; sometimes it crosses and thwarts
him, and then it meets with his Wrath and Vengeance. And this must needs be so,
unless we should with the presumptuous Fool in the Psalmist, Psalm. 50.21. think
that God is such a one as our selves, and his Will as crooked as ours. If a
bare reasonable man had looked upon the state of the Jews from the time of
their going out of Egypt until their final Captivity, he would easily see as
much variety as in any state of men, and perhaps see as little cause for it:
But yet that very changeableness of their condition does most admirably set
forth the Immutability of God, and instruct us how to judge of things and men.
They were a People in Covenant with him, and he was pleased to enter into
Covenant with them, and so long as they kept to their undertaking, not one
tittle of all his Promise failed them. But when they once forsook him he warns,
and if they repent not he forsakes them; if they walk contrary to him he walks
contrary to them; and if after all this they return and repent, he returns to
them; see Psalm. 106, 107. the abbreviation of their Vicissitudes. And when at
last they were wholly corrupted, then the wrath of God arose, and there was no
remedy. All these varieties justify the Equality and Evenness of the ways of
God, and manifest the crookedness and inequality of the ways of Men.

And is God the same now that he was then? his ways then are the same now that
they were then. Art thou one that have entered into Covenant with God? beware
thou keep to it, and walk humbly with thy God: if not, be sure thou shall meet
with the like measure as his People of old did, his Justice is the same still,
he will scourge thee with the rod of men, though if thou have a heart to
return, he will not utterly take his loving kindness from thee. And have thou
met with the fruit of this sin in a temporal punishment? consider it is an evil
thing and a bitter to depart from the Living God. What made thou wander from
thy strength and thy safety as well as thy Covenant and thy Duty? What could
thou expect to find when thou straglest from him, but that some evil should
overtake thee? Get home again as fast as thou can; and as thou have found
that he is the same God of Justice that ever he was; so thou shall find that he
is the same God of Mercy and Tenderness, upon returning, that ever he was,
Psalm. 106.45. And he remembered for them his Covenant, and repented according to
the multitude of his Mercies.

It is true, the same thing may befall several men, or one man at several times,
and yet they may be of different natures, one may be a Chastisement, another
may be a Trial, and another may be a Favor: it is according as the thing sent
has its Commission from him that sends it. If it be a Chastisement, it is not
without a sting. If it be a Trial, it is not without an issue. If it be a
Favor, it is not without a great measure of comforts mingled with it.

(1.) A Chastisement for a sin past carries with it the poison and malignity of
the sin which causes it; as the fruit carries the nature of that seed from
whence it grows: Jer. 21.14. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things
unto thee: this is thy wickedness because it is bitter. Jer. 4.18. the
Affliction tasted of the sin. Psalm. 40.12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me. Psalm. 38.3. There is no rest in my bones because of my sin. And this, like
the Trumpet in the Mount, waxes louder and louder, and Prayers for Deliverance
prove fruitless, though they come from a Joshua, Josh. 7.10. till the accursed
thing be sought out; for till then the message that the Affliction brings is
not received, and it will not give over vexing the man till it has done his
Errand. When a man begins to examine his ways, and finds out the root of his
trouble, and humbles himself before God for his sin, then, and not till then,
can he expect a Deliverance. When David, Psalm. 38. had run over the Catalogue
of his Sufferings, his Prayer for Deliverance was never seasonable, v. 22. till
he had undertaken Confession and Repentance of his Sin, v. 18. If upon the
gentle Admonitions of the Almighty in the Conscience, a man listens not, he
has a Messenger sent to him that will be heard, Job 33.16. Then he opens the
ear of man; and it may be by a disease in his Body, or some other affliction,
and he stands by to see how this message is entertained, v. 27, 28. And if any
say, I have sinned and perverted what was right, and it profited me not, then
he will deliver his Soul, etc. A Chastisement for a sin has at the same time
an Act of Justice, as it looks backward to the sin, and an Act of Mercy, as it
looks forward to an Amendment; and the latter is the principal End of God in
it: And therefore with the Repentance either the Chastisement is........ if
immanent, or if transient and past, is sweetened with a sense of God's
Reconciliation.

(2.) If it be a Trial, that carries with it his message; for if upon an
impartial inquiry, a man cannot find any eminent sin unrepented of, yet it
pleases God to lay his hand upon him; yet it brings these Lessons with it: 1.
To acknowledge the Justice of God for all this. It is somewhat strange that Job
could so much justify himself against his Sufferings, and yet was made to
possess the sins of his youth. Those little sins, which were passed twenty or
thirty years since, and had all the extenuations of the infirmity of Nature,
have malignity enough in them to deserve those Sufferings that thou now art
under; and it was the Patience of God toward thee that they were thus long
before they bore their fruit, when thou art in a better condition to make use
of the punishment, than thou were shortly after their commission: And it may be
thy Repentance, even for those long past transgressions, was not particular or
deep enough, and it is no loss of time or labor to thee to mourn again over
thy stale transgressions: but howsoever let it be thy care to search thy self,
it will make thee better acquainted with thy self. If thou find a sin not
deeply enough sorrowed for, thy affliction has deserved well at thy hands; and
if thou find it not, yet thy affliction is well recompensed by giving thee an
opportunity to discover that to thy self, which contents thy Conscience more
valuably than thy affliction has done thee prejudice. 2. To acknowledge the
Sovereignty of God, and to submit to his Will with an obedient Patience: 1 Samuel
3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb
and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Jer. 18.6. Behold, as the clay
is in the hand of the potter, so are ye in my hands. Though thou can not see
a cause for thy afflictions that might signally deserve it, nor can see an
end in it; yet thou can not choose but find a use of it to teach thee with
Wisdom to acknowledge, and with Patience to submit unto the most justly
unlimited Power and Authority of the Almighty God over the Work of his own
hands, and to put thy mouth in the dust, and to wait for him and upon him, Jam.
3.28, 29. till he give an expected End, Jer. 29.11. 3. To depend and rest upon
his Mercy and Goodness for deliverance from, or strength and comfort in thy
Affliction. As the Creature is essentially dependent upon God, so it is its
Duty and Perfection; and he uses the absence of external confidences and
comforts, upon which we are most apt to rest, to call man to his duty, to fix
his heart upon him, Psalm. 112.7. External Confluences many times rob God of
that Love and that Dependence we owe to him, and if the loss or want of them
send thy Love and Confidence to him, to whom it belongs, thou art no loser by
thy loss. 4. To walk more strictly and vigilantly with God. Though thou can
not upon thy Examination find a cause of thy cross, that may eminently discover
it self in it, yet thou can not choose but know thou art far short of that
Duty and degree of Perfection in thy heart and life, which by that assistance
of his Grace that thou have, thou may arrive unto: thy affliction, though it
put thee not in mind of any notable sin, which should humble thee, it may very
well put thee in mind of thy neglects and want of intention in thy duty. 5.
Though thy Disease needs not this Physic to cure thee, yet thy Corruption
needs it to prevent thee: thou have within thee a Fountain of Corruptions,
that, were they not restrained or allayed, would upon a small opportunity turn
to a desperate disease in thy Soul; and those Corruptions of thine live and
feed upon external superfluities and supplies; and the Wise God foresees, it
may be, that in a month or two, or more or less, thy full Enjoyments would
ripen this or that corruption into a distemper, that might be dangerous, if not
fatal to thy Soul; and he sends this Messenger to abate, or allay, or divert,
or cross, or weaken this corruption, to put in a little Wormwood into thy sweet
Cup, that thou may take it with more moderation, and not so greedily; to
throw some dirt upon thy self-opinion or growing pride, that may spoil the
growth of it; to give a check to thy desires of external Wealth or Greatness,
which without it would in a little time swell into a stark Ambition or
Covetousness. The Evangelist tells us, thar All that is in the world is the
Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life: that is, those
Lusts that are in us fasten upon their suitable objects in the World, and upon
them they live and grow strong, and are thereby the better enabled to fight
against our Souls; and God shows as much Mercy when he takes away their food,
and starves them by an affliction, as when he pardons them: Therefore learn by
thy affliction the Mind of God in this also; and bless him as well for an
affliction that prevents thee from sin, as for one that leads thee to
repentance. 6. It may be God has some extraordinary work to do for thee or by
thee, prepares thee by those afflictions with humility that thou may be a fit
Instrument for his Glory, or a fit Vessel for his Bounty: A sudden access of
Greatness, or Wealth, or Power, or Eminence is apt to make thy Nature swell and
look big and deny God, Prove. 30.9. therefore he prepares thee with the sense of
his hand to show how he can, when he pleases, handle thee with the experience
of the benefit of Dependence upon him, with a condition that may teach thee to
wa^k humbly with him; otherwise thou will not be able to bear and to manage
that condition, he intends to put thee in, with moderation, with his fear, with
an eye unto him and to his Glory. Thus he prepared David for the Crown, Job for
Wealth, the People of Israel for Canaan, that they might receive and use it
with Thankfulness, as from his hand; with Sobriety and Faithfulness, as in his
presence. 7. Howsoever it is of most certain and universal use to take off thy
Love from this World, to present it to thee as it is, to take thee off from
setting up Tabernacles and thy Rest here, and to carry thy thoughts and thy
desires to thy home and to thy Country, and to make the remembrance of it
frequent and sweet, and that upon which thou reckonest, to make thy passage
through death easy and comfortable, when thou shall consider such thoughts as
these: I am in a body full of pains and weaknesses and diseases, so that I have
much ado to keep up my Cottage to be comfortable or useful to me, but am busied
every day to underprop it and repair it, that it fall not; and when I have done
my best, yet Old Age will come, and that will be an irreparable decay, and my
anxious life will most surely be attended with a certain death; I live in a
World full of labor at the best to provide necessaries for my support in a
World full of troubles, dangers, and calumnies. If my outward contentments
increase, yet my cares and my fears, increase with them: But my condition is
not such, but with the Psalmist I have cause to say, Psalm. 73.14. All the day
long have I been plagued and chastned every morning; and, like Noah's Dove, I
can find here no rest for the soal of my foot. My walk here is like a
pilgrimage, and my path is not plain and easy, but narrow and deep and
troublesome; on either hand of me I pass through the scorns and injuries and
vexations of the men of this World: who if I want, will not relieve me, and if
I have any thing, they are ready to tear it from me; and my way, which of it
self is thus troublesome, is accompanied with Storms, and Stumbling Blocks, and
fiery Assaults raised by the Prince of this World; and if I take up a lodging
by the way, it is neither a pleasing nor a safe lodging; my dangers and
difficulties are greater in my Inn than they are in my Journey. To what purpose
go I about to set up my rest, or to build Tabernacles here? The time I can stay
will be but short, and my short stay in such a World as this cannot be pleasing
nor comfortable: and this is not my home, but I see it at a distance, I find it
as it were in Landskips, Revel. 21. the Tabernacle of God, where he shall wipe
away all tears from mine eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: and then these my
light afflictions, which are here but for a moment, shall be rewarded with an
eternal weight of Glory. In the confidence and strength of this expectation I
will hold on my troublesome Journey with cheerfulness, and look upon this World
as the place of my pilgrimage, not of my rest: and the unpleasingness of my
pilgrimage shall heighten, if it be possible, the expectation as well as the
fruition of my home; and the more unwelcome the World is to me, and I to it,
the more shall my heart undervalue and disesteem it, and send forth my desires
the more earnestly for my Journey's end, teach me to welcome death, and to
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

3. Sometimes external troubles are in themselves an express token of the Love
of God, and they carry with them comfort and delight; namely, when it is a
Persecution for Righteousness sake: and in those both the Precepts of Christ
and the Pattern of his Disciples command us up to rejoicing, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad. Jam. 1.1, 2. Count it all joy. Acts 5.41.
Rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. Coloss.
1.24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is
behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh.

4. The fourth Consideration is of the Mercy of God: and therein, 1. his
Patience and forbearing Mercy whiles we are in our sins; 2. his Clemency and
forgiving Mercy upon our Repentance; 3. his Bounty and rewarding Mercy in the
whole course of our lives and hopes.

1. The Patience, Long-suffering, and Forbearance of God from our infancy, God
leads us as once he did Ephraim, Hos. 11.3. teaching us to go, and taking us by
the arm, but we know it not; and bears with the frowardness, and peevishness,
and stubborness, and wantonness of our youth: and when we come to our riper age
he plants us with the choicest Vine, with the instruction of his Word and
Providence; and now he does, as justly he may, expect Grapes, and we bring
forth no Grapes, or wild ones, Isa. 5.2, 4. and now how just were it for him to
pull up the hedge of it, and command the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it;
or to lay upon it that sad Curse, Matt. 2^.19. Never fruit grow on thee more?
But he does not thus, but expects a second and a third and a fourth year, Luke
13.8. and uses all means to mend this unfruitful and unprofitable Plant; uses
line upon line, and precept upon precept; and if his Word, nor the secret
whispers of his Grace will not do, Job 33.14. he uses a sharper and louder
Messenger; he speaks that he may not strike, and if he strikes, it is
unwillingly, Lam. 3.33. and that he may not destroy; and destroys, nor rejects
not, till his strokes prove fruitless, Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be stricken any
more? till there be no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. He endures with long-suffering,
even the Vessels ordained to wrath, Romans 9.22. His Spirit did strive with the
old World, Genesis 6.3. was grieved forty years with the passages of a rebellious
people, Psalm. 95.10. pressed with our sins as a Cart under sheaves, Amos 2.13.
and yet no final destruction. That admirable Expostulation of God's merciful
Patience, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver
thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I see thee as Zeboim?
mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, I
am God and not man. As if he should have said, It Is true thou art Ephraim and
Israel, a People that I have known of all the Families of the Earth, Amos 3.2.
a People that I have chosen, and thou art called by my Name; but by how much
the nearer thou art unto me, by so much the greater is thy Ingratitude. That,
which in another People would be a Sin, is in thee Rebellion and Apostasy.
Admah and Zeboim were a People that knew me not, that never entered into
Covenant with me, they had no light to guide them but that of Nature, and when
they sinned, my wrath broke out in the most eminent Judgment that ever was
heard of: But thou have been a Vine of my own planting, and watering, and
dressing, and yet thy fruit has been the fruit of Sodom; thou have made me to
serve with thy sins, and according to the number of thy Cities were thy Gods, O
Israel: Jer. 11.13. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for the Lord has
spoken; I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. Isa. 1.3. And should I not be avenged upon such a people as this?
How can I? How can I not make thee as Admah, and set thee as Zeboim? If a man,
as thou art, should but once show but a grain of that ingratitude unto thee,
which thou multipliest toward me days without number, thy Revenges would be as
high as thy Power, and thou would justify thy severest dealings with him;
nay, if I thy Lord, that can owe thee nothing but Wrath, should withdraw but
any of my own Blessings from thee, thou art ready to throw off all, and
presently to upbraid me with thy unuseful Services: What profit have I if I be
cleansed from my sins? Job 35.3. And how can thou after all this expect any
thing from me, but that my Wrath should burn against thee like fire, till thou
were consumed, and that I should stir up all the fury of my Jealousy toward
you? O, but Ephraim, I am God, and not man, and therefore ye Sons of Jacob are
not consumed; my Mercy and my Patience are not the narrow qualities or habits
of a mortal Man, but the infinite Attributes of an Infinite God. Though I can
see nothing in thee, but what deserves my wrath, I can find that in my self,
that sends out my compassion, a heart turned by returning upon my own Mercy,
and repentings kindled upon the considerations of my own Covenant with thy
Fathers, kindled by a Sacrifice, that thou little think of, even the
Sacrifice of my own Son: I will not therefore execute the fierceness of my
anger: although it be thy duty to repent, Sinner, yet I will repent of my wrath
even before thou repent of thy sin: it may be my long-sufferings will, as it
should do, lead thee to repentance, Romans 2.4. But if after all this thou
despisest the riches of my Goodness and Forbearance and Long-suffering, know
that thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath; and that
day will surely find thee: and then thou will find that every days forbearance
and patience, that thou have had and abused, has ripened and improved thy
Guilt, and made thy sin out of measure sinful, and will add weight and fire to
my wrath, which like a Talent of Lead, shall everlastingly lie upon that
treasure of thy Sin and Guilt.

2. His Pardoning Mercy. Those tender and pathetical Expressions of God's Mercy
in pardoning Sin upon Repentance and turning to him, carry more weight than it
is possible for our Spirits to arise unto. Isa. 1.18. Come now, and let us
reason together: though your sins were as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be like wool. Isa. 43.24, 25.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities: I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon;
for my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways; for as
the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways.
Jer. 3.12. Go, and proclaim these words: Return thou backsliding Israel, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the Lord,
and will not keep anger for ever: only acknowledge thine iniquity, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of what Books are Printed and Published, written by Sir Matthew
Hale K^. sometime Chief Justice of the King's Bench; and are to be Sold by
Will. Shrowsbery at the Sign of the Bible in Duke-lane.
THE Primitive Origination of Mankind considered and examined according to the
Light of Nature. Folio. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in Two Parts. Octavo.
An Essay touching the Gravitation or non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies. Octavo.
Difficiles Nugae: Or, Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment.
Octavo. Observations touching the Principles of Natural Motions, especially
touching Rarefaction and Condensation. Octavo. The Life and Death of Pomponius
Atticus, with Observations Political and Moral.
Committed to the Press since his Death: viz.
1. Pleas of the Crown, or a Methodical Summary of the principal Matters
relating to that subject. Octavo. 2. A short Treatise touching Sheriffs
Accounts. Octavo. 3. Several Tracts. 1. Three Discourses of Religion, viz. 1.
The Ends and Uses of it, and the Errors of men touching it. 2. The Life of
Religion, and Superadditions to it. 3. The Superstructions upon it, and
Animosities about it.
2. A short Treatise touching Provision for the Poor. 3. A Letter to his
Children, advising them how to behave themselves in their Speech. 4. A Letter
to one of his Sons after his recovery from the Small Pox. Octavo.


