GLOBE NOTES By R. Holland.

Christus: Lucrism

(...)

(...)

ACADEMIA: OXONIENSIS:

Ver^^S.^^ Profundo:



OXFORD Printed by L. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, and are to be sold
by RIC. DAVIS, 1678.

NOTES UPON Both Globs Celestial and Terrestial.
First concerning the Celestial. GLOBE.
It is the model of Heaven, but chiefly of the Eight Sphere, wherein three
things are to be observed in general, viz.

1. Definition. 2. Delineations. 3. Use.
1. The Definition.

It is a sphericalbody, having a point or center in the midst, from whence
right lines being extended to the superficies they are all equal.

2. Delineations.

which are these three.

1. The Lines or Circles. 2. The principal points. 3. The Figures or
Constellations.
1. FIrst of the Lines or Circles, every of which are actually or intellectually
divided into 360 equal parts called Degrees, the more principle whereof are
these Ten, which make up the Sphaera armillaris, six whereof are great Circles,
as be all those which divide the Globe into two equal parts, or Hemispheres,
having the same center with the Globe; And the other Four are called Smaller
Circles, because they divide the Globe into two unequal parts or Segments.

The Six great Circles are these.
1. The Horizon is the broad Circle upon the frame, this divides the Globe
into two Hemispheres, the one which we see, is always above the Horizon, the
other which we see not, is below: And on the Horizon are drawn diverse Circles,
viz. of the 12 Signs, and of the days of the Months, and the 32 winds. 2. The
Meridian is the Brass Circle which stands at right Angles to the Horizon, and
in which the Globe is hanged and turned about on its Poles, which are the ends
or extremitys of the Axis of the World, and upon the Meridian, is another
little hour Circle fastened, with an index moving about upon the Pole. 3. The
Equinoctial is drawn upon the Superficies of the Globe, in the midst between
the Two Poles of the World, and the degrees thereof are numbered with 10, 20,
30, etc. to 360 4. The Eliptick line, this cutteth the Equinoctial in two
points, and is divided into 12 Signs, each containing 30 degrees, and it
passes in the midst of the Zodiac, for the Zodiac is a broad Cicle
containing 16 degrees in breadth, and is the bounder of the 7 Planets. 5. The
Equinoctial Colure, this cutteth the Equinoctial at right Angles, in the two
points where the Ecliptic passes over the same Equinoctial line, and so
passes through the Poles of the World. 6. The Solstitial Colure, this passes
through the Ecliptic where it touches both the Tropicks, and cutteth both the
Equinoctial and Ecliptic at right Angles, and passes through the Poles of the
World, where also it cutteth the Equinoctial Colure at right Angles.
The Four lesser Circles are,
1. The Two Tropicks, each being parallel to the Equinoctial, and about 23
degrees, and 31m from it. That which is toward the North Pole, is called the
Tropic of Cancer; That which is toward the South Pole, is called the Tropic
of Capricorn, and these are the bounders of the greatest Declination of the
Sun.

2. The Two Polar Cirles, These are so far distant from the Poles of the World,
as the Tropicks are from the Equinoctial; That which is next to the North Pole,
is talled the Artick Polar Circle, and that which is next the South Pole, is
called the Antartick Polar Circle.

There are moreover drawn upon this Globe diverse other great Circles passing by
the beginning of the Twelve Signs, cutting each other in two opposite points,
and these with the Solstitial Colure, divide the Globe into 12 equal parts, and
these are called the Circles of the Longitude of Stars.

Also through every point of the Meridian, there are small Circles imagined to
be drawn parallel to the Equinoctial, which are called the parallels of
Declination of the Sun and Stars.

Also the like small Circles are imagined to be drawn parallel to the Horizon,
and these are called Almicantars, or Circles of Altitude.

The Second thing noted in the Delineation in the Points to be observed on the
Globe.
1. THe more principal are these, viz. The Two points on which the Globe is
hanged and turned about within the Brazen Meridian, these represent the Poles
of the World, from one of which to the other, there passes a straight Line
through the Center of the Globe called the Axis of the World: Where Note, that
the Two Poles of the World, are the common Sections of all the Meridian
Circles. 2. The Two Poles of the Ecliptic, which are the two points in which
the Six Circles of Longitude of Stars do cross or cut each other, and is near
about 23 Degrees 30 Minutes distant from the Poles of the World. 3. The Points
of Zenith and Nadir, the Zenith is that Point in the Heavens which is directly
over our Head, and the Nadir, is on the contrary, directly under our Feet,
these two are the Poles of the Horizon, being every where 90 Degrees from it,
and in these Two Points do all the Vertical or Azimuthal Circles meet or cut
each other. 4. The Points of Cast and West, viz. The two points where the
Equinoctial cutteth the Horizon; these are also Diametrically opposite, and are
the Poles of the Meridian being every where 90 Degrees from it. 5. The Two
Equinoctial Points of Aries and Libra, being two points where the Ecliptic
cutteth the Equinoctial, and are Diametrically opposite, the former is called
the Vernal Equinoctial, because the Sun coming to it, the Spring begins; the
other is called the Autumnal Equinoctial, because when the Sun comes to it,
the Autumn begins. 6. The Two Solstitial points, being also Diametrically
opposite, are the two points on the Globe where the Ecliptic touches the Two
Tropicks and the Ecliptic in their touch point, viz. in the beginning of
Cancer and Capricorn, and these Two are called Solstitial points, because the
Sun moving in the Ecliptic, near either of them, which is in June and
December, it causes the days to stand still a while, without a sensible
lengthning or shortning.
Here is to be Noted, that the Horizon and Meridian Circles are said to be
immovable because they are fixed to the same place; but all other Circles of
the Sphere are said to by moveable, because they being drawn upon the Surface
of the Globe or Sphere, must need, move about it in the Diurnal motion, yet
other men denominate them by the contrary names.

The Third thing observed in the Delineations, are the Figures drawn upon the
Globe.
THere have been 48 Asterismes or Constellations observed of ancient time, and
about them in this Globe are described certain Figures, not because there are
any such Figure in the Heavens, but are only imagined there to give
denomination to the Stars of the Firmament, and yet not to all the Stars, for
they are innumerable, but only to such as are most conspicuous, and whereof use
may best be made, as occasion serves.

There are 12 Constellations of the Zodiac, through which the Zodiac passes,
and these give Denomination to the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, in particular these
with their number of Stars.

of old. of late. of old of late. 13 21 8 17 33 43 21 16 18 25 32 14 9 15 28 28
27 40 42 41 26 39 34 36

There have been 21 Constellations observed on the North side of the Ecliptic,
which are called the Northern Constellations, whose names and number of Stars
here follow.

of old. The little Bear 7 The great Bear 27 The Dragon 31 Cepheus 11 Boots 22
The Northern Crown 8 Hercules 9 The Vulture Cadent 10 The Swan 17 Cassiopeia 13
Perseus 26 Auriga 14 Serpentarius 24 The Serpent 18 The Arrow or Dart 5 The
Eagle 9 The Dolphin 10 The lesser Horse 4 Pegasus, or great Horse 20 Andromeda
23 The Northern Triangle 4.

There are 15 Constellations on the South, side of the Eliptick, which are
called the Southern Constellations, whose names and number of Stars here follow.

of old. The Whale 22 Orion 38 The River Eridanus 34 The Hare 12 The great Dog
18 The lesser Dog 3 The Ship 45 The Goblet 7 The Raven 7 The Centaur 37 The
Wolf 19 The Altar 7 The Southern Crown 13 The South-fish 12.

Besides the number of the Stars noted in the former Constellations, the Modern
Astronomers have noted diverse others, which were left informs by the Ancients,
and put them into their proper Figures; as may be seen in some of the Globes
put forth since Noble Ticho Brahe, namely, Johannes Jansonius, his small Globes
of the year 1620. And in Petrus Plantius his Globes of the Year 1625.

The New Constellations in North Latitude, are these.
Berenices hair 14 The Be 4 The River Jordan 21 Camelopardalis 18 The River
Euphrates 13.
The New Constellations in South Latitude, are these.
The lesser Crabb 4 The Unicorne 22.
Moreover because the Ancient Astronomer lived all in North Latitude, they
could not se^ the Stars which are near the South Pole, bu^ they have been since
discovered by such a have travailed that way, and are put into constellations,
namely these, The Dove 11 The Southern Triangle 5 The apous Indica 12 The
Peacock 17 The Indian 12 the Crane 13 The Towcan 8 The Hydrus 14 The Phoenix 14
The Dorado 6 The Sea Swallow 7 The Camelion 8 The Cross called Crusero 6 The
Fly 4


Besides the Constellations before named there are some other appearances in
the Heavens, namely, the White broad Circle, calle^ Via Lactea, or Milkie way:
and two little clouds observed near the South Pole. Thu^ much of the
Delineation, or things noted o^ the outside of the Celestial Globe.

The Third thing to be observed in General is the use of this Globe.
Which consists in these three things following. viz. The knowlegde of the.

1. Motions. 2. Division. And Operation on the 3. Propositions.
In the first place of Motions, which are Two in number, viz.

1. The Diurnal motion. 2. The Proper motion.
First concerning the Motions.
1. The Diurnal motion is made upon the Poles of the World, once about from
East toward the West in 24 hours, and this is also called motus raptus, or the
motion of the prinum mobile.

2. The Second motion is called the annual motion, and is made within the
primuu^ mobile upon the Poles of the Ecliptic, according to the succession of
the signs, which is contrary to that of the primum mobile, viz. from West
toward East, and this motion is called Motus s^cundus, or Motus proprius,
because that every Sphere has a motion proper to it self, As tha^ of the Sun
finisheth once about secundum seriem signorum in the space of 12 months which
is called the Solar year, Also Venus,, and Mercury, are moved about the same
way in the same time, But the Moon is moved about in one Month, and the Month
is o^ two sorts, for the time wherein the Moon, departs from any point of the
Zodiac and returns to it again, is called the Periodicall Month, or Month of
peragration, But the time wherein the Moon departs from the Sun, and
overtaketh him again is called the Month of Consecration, or Synodica^ Month.

Mars moves through the Zodiac in about two Solar years, and that time is
called the year of Mars.

Jupiter is moved through the Zodiac in about 12 Solar years, and that time is
called the year of Jupiter.

Saturn in about 30 years runs through the Zodiac, and that time is called
the year of Saturn.

3. The fixed Stars, according to Ptolomie move about the Zodiac in 36000
Solar years; But according to the Alphofines in 49000 years; And according to
Capernicus in 17000 years; But Gassendus has it 25000 years; And this time is
called the great year, or Platonical year.

Secondly concerning the Divisions.
1. First it is called Sphera recta, or a right Sphere, because in such
position, the Equinoctial cutteth the Horizon at right spherical angles. The
properties of the sphere is to have the Poles of the world ly in the Horizon,
and the Equinoctial passes through the Zenith and Nadir; and in this sphere
not only the Equinoctial, but also both the Trophicks, and all other the
Equinoctial parallels, are divided into two equal parts by the right Horizon,
which causes the days, and nights, at all times of the yeat to be equal, viz.
12 hours long between Sun rising and setting without alteration, to those who
live under the Equinoctial line.

2. Secondly it is called Sphaera obliqua, whereof there are so many in number
as there be degrees, minutes, seconds, etc. in a Quadrant, And it is called
oblique, because the Equinoctial cutteth the Horizon with an oblique angle; The
properties of this Sphere is to have one Pole elevated above the horizon, and
the other as far depressed; Also because in this sphere the Equinoctial is
divided equally by the Horizon, and the parallels of the Equinoctial unequally,
therefore the days, and the nights are equal only twice a year, viz. in the
beginning of the Spring, and Autumn, at which times the Sun passes over the
first point of Aries and Libra, but at all other times of the year, the days
and nights are unequal.

3. It is called Sphera parallela or a parallel Sphere, because the Equinoctial
being the same with the Horizon, all the parallels of the Equinoctial are also
parallels to the Horizon; In this Sphere, one of the Poles of the World is the
Zenith, and the other is the Nadir, and in this Sphere the Sun continues above
the Horizon about half a year together, and again as long under the Horizon,
whereby the artificial day and night are each about half a year long.

Thirdly, now follow the propositions wrought by the Globe.
1. To find the Suns place in the Ecliptic; first find the day of the Month,
upon the Horizon, and within upon the limb of the Horizon stands the degree
in which the Sun is, this you may apply to the Ecliptic upon the Globe.

To find the Suns Declination.

2. First find the Suns place in the Ecliptic upon the Globe, and bring it to
the brazen Meridian and there account how many degrees it is distant from the
Equinoctial, for the declination of any point in the heavens is its Meridional
distance from the Equator.

The declination of any Star upon the Globe, is found by bringing it to the
brazen Meridian and accounting as before.

To find the right Ascension of the Sun.

3. Move the degree of the Ecliptic wherein the Sun is to the Meridian, and
note the degree of the Equinoctial which comes to the Meridian with it, for
the Arch of the Equinoctial contained between that point and the first point of
Aries, is the right ascension, that is to say, it rises with it in a right
sphere.

The right ascension of a Star is to be accounted as before, if the star be
brought to the Meridian.

Of the Longitude as it is taken on the Celestial Globe.

4. The Longitude of the Sun, is that Arch of the Ecliptic which is contained
between the first point of Aries, and that point of the Ecliptic wherein the
Sun is; But the Longitude of a Star is that Arch of the Ecliptic which is
contained between the first point of A^ies, and the Section of the Ecliptic
with a great Circle drawn from the Pole of the Eclip^ick through the center of
the Star, being reconed according to the succession of the signs.

Which to find.

Lay one end of the Quadrant of Altitude upon the Pole of the Ecliptic, and
the graduated edge thereof, upon the Center of the Star, and so it shall show
in the Ecliptic, the sign and degree of Longitude.

Of the Latitude as it is taken on the Celestial Globe.

5. It is accounted in a great Circle distant from the Ecliptic toward either
Pole thereof, therefore the Sun, or any Star being in the Ecliptic, has no
Latitude, but the Moon, or any other Planet being not in the Dragons Head, or
Dragons Tail, or other Stars being not in the Ecliptic, are said to have
Latitude so many degrees as they are distant from the Ecliptic toward either
Pole thereof.

Which to find.

Lay one end of the Quadrant of Altitude upon the Pole of the Ecliptic, and
the graduated edge thereof upon the Center of the Star, then may you see how
many degrees thereof are contained between the Star and the Ecliptic, and that
is the Latitude thereof.

But if you want the Quadrant of Altitude, then take a pair of Compasses, and
setting one point in the Center of the Star, extend the other till in the
nearest distance it touches the Ecliptic, and the Compasses so opened and
applied ^o the Equinoctial, shall show how many degrees the Latitude is.

Here Note.

That the Declination and right Ascension of ^he Sun and Stars have respect to
the Equino^tial, but their Longitudes and Latitudes have ^espect to the
Ecliptic.

To rectify the Globe according to the Latitude of your place.

6. Elevate the proper Pole so far above the Horizon as the Latitude of the
place proposed, ^y moving the Pole of the Globe so high by ^he help of the
degrees of the Meridian.

But to rectify for the Suns place is.

7. After the former rectification, to bring ^he Suns place in the Ecliptic,
to the Meri^ian, turning up the Index of the hour wheel (...) 12 at noon.

And to rectify for the Zenith is,

8. After the first rectification, to fasten the ^ut or Screw of the Quadrant
of Altitude at ^he Zenith, that is, so many degrees from the ^quinoctial as the
Pole is elevated.

To find the Amplitude of the Sun or any Star that rises and sets.

9. The amplitude is the Horizontal distance (...) rising or setting from the
true points of East and West, which to find, rectify the Globe by the sixth
Proposition according to the Latitud^ and bring the degree of the Sun in the
Ecliptic, or Center of the Star to the Horizon, an^ therein see how many
degrees it is from the East or West.

To find what Stars do not set in any Latitude.

10. By the sixth Prop. rectify according (...) to the Latitude, and turning
about the Glob^ mark what Stars pass between the Elevate^ Pole and the Horizon,
for those (if the Nor^ Pole be elevated) are contained within the Artick
Circle, and cannot set; for the Artic^ Circle as heretofore it has been taken,
^ drawn upon the North Pole, through th(...) North point of the Horizon.

To find the time when the Sun or any Star Rises or Sets.

11. By the seventh Prop. rectify for the Suns place, and move the Degree of
the Su^ or center of the Star to the East or West pa^ of the Horizon, and then
the Index of the Hour Wheel shall show the time.

To find how the Constellations are situate at any time of the Night.

12. By the Seventh Prop. rectify for the Suns place: and move about the
Globe till the Index come to the Hour desired, and the^ hold the Globe to show
the present scituatio^ of the Constellations.

To find the Oblique ascension of the Sun or any Star that rises or sets.

13. By the sixth Prop. rectify for the Lati^ude, and bring the degrees of the
Sun, or cen^er of the Star to the East part of the horizon, and observe the
degree of the Equinoctial which rises with it, for the arch of the Equi^octial
contained between the first point of A^^es, and the point of the Equinoctial so
as^ending is called the oblique ascension.

To find the Ascentional difference of the Sun.

14. By the third Prop. find the right ascen^^on, and again by the thirteenth
prop. find ^^e oblique ascension thereof, and subtract the ^ffer of them from
the greater, and the re^ain is the difference of Ascension: for the dif^rence
of Ascension, is only the difference be^^een the right and oblique Ascentions:
where ^ore that the difference of Ascension is an ^^ch of the Equinoctial, and
is always the ^^ne of the Suns rising before 6, and after 6, the ^^e of the
year being considered.

Hereby.

15. To get the time of the Suns rising to a nute of an hour; turn the
Ascentional dif^ence into time, allowing 15 gr. thereof to ^^ery hour, and to
every degree 4 minutes of (...) hour; And if the Sun be in the Northern ^^gnes,
the Ascentional difference is the time of the Suns rising before 6 a clock, if
in the Southern then after 6 a clock.

Again.

16. Having the time of the Suns rising, be^fore or after 6 a clock, you may
get the lengt of the Artificial day (that is, the time of the Suns continuance
above the horizon) If the Suns declination be North add it to 6, if Sout
subtract it from 6, and so shall come forth the semidiurnal arch, this doubled
gives the length of the artificial day; But if the lengt^ of the artificial
night be required, then wor^ contrary to that of the day.

To find the time of the day by having the Altitude of the Sun.

17 First by a Quadrant or some other Instrument find the Altitude of the Sun
abov^ the Horizon, and then by the 6, 7, and 8, Pro^^ rectify the Globe for the
Latitude, the Su^ place, and the Zenith, and bring the degree (...) the
Ecliptic wherein the Sun is, to agree (...) the same Altitude upon the edge of
the Quadrant of Altitude, and then the Index of the Hour wheel shall show the
time of the day.

To find the Azimuth of the Sun by having his Altitude.

18. The Azimuth of the Sun is the distan^ thereof, accounted in the Horizon
from Eas^ West, or South; by the 6, 7, and 8, Prop. rect fie the Globe, and
bring the Suns place in the Ecliptic, to agree to the same Altitude on the
graduated edge of the Quadrant of Altitude, and then the Quadrant of Altitude
shall show his Azimuth in the Horizon.

To find the Azimuth of the Sun at any time of the Day.

19. By the 6, and 8 Prop. rectify the Globe, and turn it about till the Index
of the Hour wheel, do point to the hour given, then lay the Quadrant of
Altitude upon the Suns place in the Ecliptic, and it shows the Azimuth in
the Horizon.

At any time of the year, to find the time of Day break, or beginning of
Crepusculus (if any be.)

20. By the 6, 7, and 8, Prop. rectify the Globe and Elevate the opposite
degree of the Sun at the West 18 degrees. above the Horizon, and then the Index of
the hour wheel shall show the time.

Having the Altitude of any known Star, to find the hour of the night.

21. By the 6, 7, and 8 Prop. rectify the Globe and move about the Globe till
the Star has the given Altitude in the graduated edg of the Quadrant of
Altitude, and then shall the Index of the hour wheel show the hour required.

Having any known Star at the Meridian to find the Hour.

22. By the 6, and 7, Prop. rectify the Globe and turn the Globe till the same
Star comes to the Brazen Moridian, so shall the Index of the hour wheel show
the hour.

Of the Poetical Rising and Setting of Stars.

COSMICAL.

A Star Rises Cosmical when it rises with the Sun, and Sets Cosmical, if
it set when the Sun rises.

To find the time of the year when a Star rises Cosmical.

23. By the 6, Prop. rectisy, and bring the Star to the East part of the
Horizon, and observe the degree of the Ecliptic which is at the East part of
the Horizon with it, and then find in the Circle of the Horizon what day of the
Month answers to the same degree of the Ecliptic.

To find the time of the year when a Siar Sets Cosmical.

24. By the 6 Prop. rectify and bring the Star to the West part of the Horizon,
and Note the degree of the Ecliptic at the Past part of the Horizon, and find
the day of the Month on the Horizon as before.

ACRONICAL.

A Star Rises Acronical, when it rises in the East, and the Sun is. Setting
in the West; And it sets Acronical, when it Sets with the Sun.

To find the time of the year when a Star Rises Cronical.

25. By the 6 Prop. rectify, and bring the Star to the East part of the
Horizon, and Note the degree of the Ecliptic cut by the Horizon at the West,
and find the day of the Month answering thereunto upon the Horizon as before.

To find the time of the year when a Star Sets Acronical.

26. By the 6 Prop. rectify, and bring the Star to the West part of the
Horizon, and Note the degree of the Ecliptic cut by the Horizon at the West,
and find the day of the Month upon the Horizon as before.

Heliacal.

Heliacal Rising of a Star, is the rising of a Star out of the Sun beams, for
then it appears before the Sun rising, though before it could not be seen by
reason of its nearnes to the Sun, being within the Arch of Vision.

Heliacal Setting is when a Star comes within the Sun beams, or when a Star is
entering into its Arch of Vision, and then cannot be seen setting after the Sun
by reason of its nearness to the Sun.

The Arch of Vision is the Arch of a Vertical Circle contained between the
Horizon and the Center of the Sun after it is set, or before it rises, this
alters according to the several magnitudes of the Stars, for the greater the
Star is, the less is the Arch of Vision, and contrary.

The Arches of Vision belonging to the Stars according to their severa
Magnitudes, are these.

To the First 12 Second 13 Third 14 Fourth 15 Fifth 16 Sixth 17 Least 18
To the Planets.
Venus 5 Mercury 10 Saturn 11 Jupiter 9 Mars 12 1/^ Moon uncertain.
To find the time of the year when a Star Rises Heliacal.

27. By the 6 Prop. rectify, and bring the Star to the East part of the
Horizon, and Note the degree of the Ecliptic elevated above the West part of
the Horizon according to the arch of Vision appertaining to the same Star, and
then as before, find the of the Month on the Limb of the Horizon, answering to
the opposite degree of the Ecliptic so elevated at West as aforesaid.

To find the time of the year when a Star sets Heliacal.

28. By the 6 Prop. rectify and bring the Star to the West part of the Horizon,
and Note the degree of the Ecliptic elevated at the East part of the Horizon,
according to the Arch of Vision belonging to the same Star, and by the opposite
of it, find the day of the Month on the Limb of the Horizon as before.

Description of the Terrestial GLOBE.
IT is a round or spherical body, representing the form of the earth and waters.

On this Globe are also described the ren circles of the sphaera armillaris,
viz. the Horizon, Meridian, Equator, Ecliptic, the two Colures with the fouer
lesser circles, viz. the two Tropicks, and the two Polar circles.

Besides these common circles there are described upon this Globe diverse other
circles passing through both poles of the World, these are called Meridians, or
circles of Longitude; Also certain oblique circular lines passing through the
center of certain roses (so called) and these are called Rhombs, Courses, or
points of the compass.

On this Globe are described the known parts of the World divided into several
quarters, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, to which is added the unknown land
about the South Pole called Magelanica. And these quarters of the World are
subdivided into several Kingdoms and Provinces, as may be seen in the
Geographers.

The ZONES.

This Globe is also divided into five Zones, one is called the Torrid or burnt
Zone, and this lies between the Tropicks, the inhabitants hereof are called
Amphiscii, because they have two contrary meridional shadows in a year.

Two are called temperate, and these lie between the Tropicks and the Polar
circles; The inhabitants hereof are called Heterescii, because they have their
Meridional shadow one way all the year.

The two frigid Zones, are comprehended within the Polar circles; The
inhabitants whereof are called Periscii because their shadow at some time of
the year goes round about them.

The Inhabitants of the Terrestial Globe, do also receive other names relating
to their positions each to others.

The Antipodes are such as dwell diametrically opposite each to other, and have
all things countrary, as seasons of the year, and times of the day.

The Antoesi are such as dwell so far remote from the Equinoctial on one side,
as the other dwells on the other side, both under the same Meridian.

These have some things common, and some things proper, the common, as to have
their noon tides together: Proper as that the winter of the one, is the others
Summer time, and the longest day of the one, is the shortest of the other.

The Periaesi are such as live in the same parallel of Latitude toward the same
Pole, and are directly opposite each to other, both having the same meridian,
These have their Summers, Winters, and increase, and shortning of days and
nights together, but the night of the one is the day of the other.

Parallels of the Longest day.

Besides the parallels of Latitude formerly mentioned, there are other
parallels imagined to be drawn upon this Globe, which are called parallels of
the longest day: The first of them is to be drawn at that distance from the
Equinoctial, where the longest day of the year is 12 hours long: The second
where the longest day of the year is 12 hours long: The third where the longest
day of the year is 13 hours long, etc. through places increasing their longest
day by of an hour, till you come to the parallel where the longest day of the
year is 24 hours long, which is under in the Longitude of the same place; for
the Longitude is but the remotion of a place from the first meridian which
passes through the Azores accounting Eastwardly.

To find the distance between two places

Put the center of the quadrant of altitude upon on one of the places, and the
graduared edge upon the other, and the degrees interjacent shall show their
distance in degrees, and these may be turned into miles by multiplying by 60.

To find how one place bears or lies from another.

Elevate the pole according to the Latitude of the place where you are, and
fasten the quadrant of altitude at the Zenith, then bring the place where you
are to the Zenith, and move the graduated edge of the quadrant of altitude to
the other place, and then the end of the quadrant of altitude shall fall upon
the Horizon in the point of bearing.

To find what hour of the day or night it is at any place on the Terrestial
Globe.

Bring the place where you are to the Meridian, and turn the Index of the hour
wheel to the hour it is with you at present, then turn the other place to the
Brazen Meridian, and the Index of the hour wheel will show the hour desired.

To find by the Terrestial Globe the quantity of the longest day at any place
assigned.

Elevate the Pole of the Globe according to the polar circles; these being
drawn each way from the Equinoctial toward each pole, divide the Globe into
unequal parts or spaces, for though they be equal in time, yet they agree not
in equal distance of place, but are greater or broader near to the Equinoctial,
and are narrower the farther they are from it.

CLIMATS.

A Climate contains two of the parallels of the longest day, and alters the
longest day by the space of half an hour, beginning at the Equinoctial, and are
in all 24, which end under the polar circles; but the Ancients for want of
knowledge of the parts under the Equinoctial made at first but seven Climates,
and called them by names, but afterward were added two more, which made up
their number to be nine. And these of the Ancients began to be accounted at 12
and 15 from the Equator.

Propositions on the Terrestial GLOBE.

To find the Latitude of any place set thereon.

Bring the place to the brazen meridian, and therein account how many degrees
are betwixt the Equinoctial and the place, for that is the Latitude you seek;
for the Latitude is but the remotion of the Zenith of a place from the equator.

To find the Longitude of a place set thereon.

Bring the place under the brazen meridian, and then the meridian shall cut the
Equinoctial the Latitude of the place given, and bring the Solstitial point of
Cancer (if the North Pole be Elevated) to the Meridian, and turn the Index of
the hour wheel to 12 at noon, then if you put the Solstitial point of Cancer to
the West part of the Horizon, the Index on the hour Wheel shows the time of
Sun setting there, and that is also the Semidiurnal Arch, and being doubled
gives the length of the day, if it exceed not 24 hours, which end under the
Polar Circle.

But if the place asligned be within the Polar Circle, then elevate the Pole of
the Globe according to the Latitude of the Place, and turn the Globe till some
point of the Vernal Signs in the Ecliptic touch the North point of the
Horizon and note how many degrees of the Eclip tick are from the Solstitial
point of Cancer, for that number doubled gives nearly the length of the day in
our common days, and these days may be turned into weeks and months etc.

All Mathematical Instruments are Made and Sold by John Prujean living near New
College in Oxford.


