NOTES Showing how to get the Angle OF PARALLAX OF A COMET, Or other
PHENOMENON At Two Observations, To be taken in any One Station, or Place of
the Earth, and thereby the distance from the Earth.

By. R. HOLLAND.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. for RICHARD DAVIS,
1668.

TO THE READER.
IN this I mean to be as brief as conveniently I may, intending only the
practical part, therefore I set not down the Diagrams of Demonstration, which
may be found in Authors, but refer to the places where they may be seen by
such as think good to look upon them, only in the 13, and 14 Notes I have set
forth such Figures for Demonstration as are elsewhere wanting. Moreover I advise
the Reader to be prepared before hand with Trigonometrie, called also the
Doctrine of Triangles, for without it nothing can be calculated, which is
requisite in this desired Art.

Of the Parallax
Definitions.
I. PArallax, that which I intend ^o speak of, and to find, is only the Angle
a, c, b, contained between Two Lines, the one a, c, drawn from the Center of
the Earth, the Other b, c. from the Superficies thereof, to the Center of a
Comet or other Phenomenon, as in the Figure following.

But in an other sense, it is taken for an Arch of the Eight Sphereh,
comprehended between the Lines a, c, and b, c, continued forth, and is called
the Diversity of Aspects, such is the Arch d, e, in the Figure.

Note that the Parallax makes the Phenomenon appear lower then indeed it is,
and the higher that a Phenomenon is from the Horizon, the lesser is the
Parallax thereof, and contra.

calculation

Azimuth.
II. I need not here define the Azimuth to any, who knows the use of the
Globe, yet I will Note how it is accounted in this case. Azimuth is an Arch of
the Horizon contained between the North or South points of the Horizon, where
the Meridian cutteth it, and a Vertical Circle, which falls on the Horizon
from the Zenith through the Center of any Starr.

Altitude.
III. The Altitude is the Arch of a Vertical Circle, accounted in the Sphere on
the Phenomenon, contained between the Visible Horizon, and the apparen^ place
of the Starr, such is the Arch, b, e, in the Figure before; But the Parallax or
Difference of Aspect, is the Arch e, d, in the Eighth Sphere, and measures the
Angle d, c, e, and the Vertical thereof, a, c, b.

IV. The Distance from the Zenith is the Complement of the Altitude before
mentioned, and is the Arch c, g.

V. In the next place it will be convenient to make an Instrument, wherewith to
observe, that may take the Altitude and the Azimuth both together, wherein
every man is left to his own Devise; yet I will pass my opinion thus; First let
a round Stone polished (be it White Marble or the like) be settled Horizontally,
this may be 2 Foot Diameter, and on the Center depiction of instrument for
calculations draw a Circle, and draw thereon also a Meridian Line, and cross it
in the Center at right Angles with a Line of East and West, commonly called a
Prime Vertical, divide each Quadrant thereof into 90 equal parts, and figure
them from each end of the Meridian line, with 10, 20, 30, etc. to 90; And let
it have a round Pin or Cylinder of Iron fixed Perpendicular in the Center; Also
let a bearer for the Quadrant be made of convenient hight, with a hole in the
lover end, to slip upon the Pin or Cylinder fastened in the Center of the
Stone, and let the bearer also have a cross foot to stand upon the Stone to
keep it Perpendicular thereto, one bar of the cross foot is to be continued
out to the divided limb of the Stone, in form of a Diopter, running through the
Center of the Stone, to show the Azimuth. Upon the bearer fasten a Quadrant in
the Center of Gravity of the Quadrant, and this Quadrant may be about 2 foot
Semidiameter (but the larger the better) with a broad limb to be divided into
Sexagenarie or centesimal minutes with Diagonal lines, the Quadrant may have 2
Pin in the Center, a, whereon to hang a Thread and a Plummet, the Thread may be a
small Steel Cittern string, and it will bear a round Plummet or Bullet of about
two pound weight.

To find the Altitude of the Pole by Observation.
VI. Because in this case the Altitude of the Pole is necessary to be known to
the nearest, and that I suppose it cannot be found near enough by help of the
Sun's Meridian Altitude, and Tables of his Declination, therefore I thought
meet to show how it may be done to the nearest at the place where the
Instrument is to be placed, thus; Take two Meridian Altitudes ( viz. the
highest and the lowest) of some one of the Northern Stars, which sets not,
neither rises to the Zenith (such may be some in the Tail of the Great Bear,
or one of the Stars in Cassiopea, for these may be observed in December, near
six in the Morning; and six at Night) Subtract the lowest Altitude from the
highest, and take half the difference, and add it to the lowest Altitude to
give the height of the Pole.

But in taking the Altitude of any fixed Starr that is less then 20 gs. high,
take the Refraction from the Altitude observed, to leave the true height, for
the Refraction makes the Starr to seem higher then indeed it is, as in Ticho
Brahe's Table of the Refraction of fixed Stars here following.

Alt. Refr. Alt. Refr. 0 30. 00 1 21. 30 11 5. 00 2 15. 30 12 4. 30 3 12. 30 13
4. 00 4 11. 00 14 3. 30 5 10. 00 15 3. 00 6 9. 00 16 2. 30 7 8. 15 17 2. 00 8
6. 45 18 1. 15 9 6. 00 19 0. 30 10 5. 30 20 0. 00

Proportion between the Two Arches of Parallax.
VII. Seeing that in taking Parallax there is always two observations to be
made, and the sum or differrence of the Two Parallaxes is expected thereby,
it is therefore necessary, whether I have their sum or difference, to know
what is the Proportion between them, that thereby they may be found severally;
Concerning this, read Dr. John Dee's Third Theorem of his Parallaticus Nucleus
which is.

In whatsoever two diverse Parallaxes of the same Starr, or the like Phenomenon
(so that in the mean time it be conceived to be carried only with the Diurnal
motion of the whole) there will be the same reason, or proportion of the right
sine of the greater Parallax, to the right sine of the lesser, that is,
distance from the Vertex, to the right sine of the lesser apparent distance,
from the Vertex.

This is as plainly demonstrated by the Author, as it is spoken.

To Separate the Arches of Parallax, when the sum of them is given.
VIII. If the sum of Two Arches of Parallax be given in one Arch, then they
may be separated, by help of the Sixth Proposition of Clavius's Triangula
Rectilinea, thus; Take the natural sines of the two distances of the Starr from
the Zenith (for they are in the same Proportion with the sines of the Two
Parallaxes, as in the last Note) Add these two sines together, and take half
their sum; Also take the fine of the lesser distance from the Zenith, from
the said half sum to have their difference, and then the proportion is,

As the said half sum of the sines of the distance from the Zenith, Is to the
Tangent of the half sum of Parallax So is the difference aforesaid To the
Tangent of another Arch.

Which Arch being added to the half sum of the Parallaxes, gives the greater
Parallax, and being subtracted from the half sum of the Parallaxes, leaves
the lesser Parallax.

But if the Difference of Two Parallaxes be given.
IX. Then seeing the sines of the Distances from the Zenith of the Start, is
the terms of Proportion between the two unknown Parallaxes thereof, as by he
7th. Note, thereforee take the natural sines of the said distances, and
subtract the lesser sine from the greater, and take half the difference for the
First in the Rule of Three; also add the same half difference to the lesser
sine of distance from the Zenith, for the Third in the Rule of Three, and then
the Proportion is,

As the half difference of the Two sines from the Zenith, To the Tangent of the
half difference of the Parallaxes, So is the Aggregate of the half differrence
of the sines aforesaid, and the lesser sine of distance from the Zenith, To the
Tangent of an other Arch.

To which Arch add half the difference of Parallaxes, it gives the greater
Arch of Parallax; But the half difference of Parallax subtracted from the same
Arch leaves the lesser Arch of Parallax. See Clavius's 7th. Prop. of his
Triangula Rectilinea.

Situation of a Comet.
X. Concerning the Situation of a Comet, it may be so near the Pole, that it
shall not set at the North, nor rise so high as the Zenith; In this case to get
the sum of the Parallaxes, subtract the lesser Meridional distance from the
Pole (which is always that which is at his greatest Altitude) from the
greatest Meridional distance from the Pole (to be found at his lesser Altitude)
and the remain is the sum of the Parallaxes. See the Demonstration hereof,
in the Tenth Problem of Mr. Thomas Diggs his Ala, sen Scala Mathematica.

Now having the sum of the Parallaxes, they may be separated and known by the
8th. Note before.

XI. But if the Phenomenon rise to the Zenith, then the Complement of the
Latitude taken from the Meridional distance of the same, from or below the
Pole, is the Parallax. But if the Phenomenon do not set at the North, and yet
comes up beyond the Zenith toward the South, then the difference of the
several Meridional distances from the Pole, is the difference of Parallaxes.
Corollarie the Second of the same Tenth Problem of Mr. Tho. Diggs, his Ala,
etc. And then the several Parallaxes may be found by the 9th. Note before going.

XII. Moreover, seeing a Starr that sets not at the North, nor rises to the
Zenith, Two Meridian Altitudes thereof (the higher and the lower) cannot be
observed in one night except the right Ascension thereof, and the right
Ascension of the sun do differ near about 90 Degrees, therefore it
calculation will be necessary to take two Altitudes thereof, viz. the highest
and lowest, in one and the same Azimuth Circle, as in the Figure above, wherein
a, b, t, is the Merid. r, c, t, the Horizon, a, the Zenith b, the Pole of the
World, a, c, the Azim. given, in which h, g, do show the apparent places of the
Starr, now the two parallels i, o, of true motion, and k, n, being drawn, draw
also from the Pole b, a great Circle b, d, r, to cut the Azimuth a, c, at right
Angles in d, and there is a right Angled-Triangle a, b, d, to be resolved,
wherein the Angle of Azimuth b, a, d, is given, and the Angle a, d, b, right,
together with the side a, b, the complement of Latitude, to find the side a, d;
the Proportion is,

As the Cosine of the Angle d, a, b, To Radius, So the Tangent of Latitude,
Count. of a, b, To the Tangent of the side a, d.

And for as much as, Mr. Thomas Diggs, in the Eleaventh Problem of his Ala,
etc. shows that the Arches e, h, and s, f, are equal, and that the Arch h, d,
is equal to the Arch d, s, Therefore the practice is this, Take a, h, the
distance from the Zenith at the highest Observation, from a, d, the side of the
Triangle found, then h, d, = to d, s, added to c, g, the lowest Altitude, and
the sum subtracted from d, c, the Complement of the side a, d, leaves s, g,
the sum or Aggregate of the Two Parallaxes. And these may be separated by the
Eighth Note.

If the Comet does Rise and Set.
XIII. Hitherto of a Comet that Sets not, but such as do Rise and Set, come
not to the North part of the Meridian, but only to the South; In this case,
Take the Meridian Altitude thereof, and add the distance of it from the
Zenith, to the Complement of Latitude to give the apparent distance thereof
from the Pole; Also take the Altitude thereof when it is in the prime Vertical,
or East and West Circle, (if it move between the Equinoctial and the Zenith)
and then if it have the same distance from the Pole that it had at the
Meridian, it has no Parallax, as in the Figure following, wherein let the
Circle ae, S, q, N, represent the Horizon, S, N, the Meridian, ae, q, the prime
Vertical, ae, k, q, the Equinostiall, a, c, e, the Circle or Parallel of
apparent motion, it being at the Meridian, b, d, f, the Circle or parallel of
true motion, z, the Zenith, P, the Pole of the world, c, d, the Arch of
Parallax at the Meridian, r, o, the Arch of calculation Parallax at the prime
Vertical; And to find the distance P, o, from the Pole, the Comet being at the
prime Vertical, resolve the right Angled Spherical Triangle z, P, o, wherein
these three parts are given, First z, o, the distance from the Zenith, Secondly
the right Angle at z, Thirdly the Arch z, P, the Complement of Latitude, to
find the Arch P, o, if this be equal to P, c, (for lesser it cannot be) then
there is no Parallax, but if it be greater, then there is a Parallax; which to
find, Resolve the right Angled Spherical Triangle P, z, i, wherein these Three
parts are given, First the right Angle at z. Secondly the side z, P, Complement
of Latitude, Thirdly the Arch P, i, = to P, c. the distance from the Pole at
the Meridian, to find the side z, i, which if it be less then the observed Arch
z, o, the distance from the Zenith, in the prime Vertical, then the difference
is also the difference of Parallaxes. To Resolve this Triangle, the Proport. is,

As Radius, To the sine of Latitude, being Complement of z, P, So Cosine of P,
i, To Cosine of z, i.

Thus having found the difference of Parallax i, o, the Parallaxes d, c, and r,
o, may be severally found as in the Ninth Note.

If the Comet be under, or below the Equinoctial.
XIV. But if the Comet be on the South side of the Equinoctial, then as in the
Figure following, Draw the Circle representing the Horizon, S, N, the Meridian,
a, q, the prime Vertical, a, k, q, the Equinoctial, a, c, e, the calculation
parallel of apparent motion (being at the Moridian) b, d, f, the parallel of
true motion, z, the Zenith, P, the Pole of the world, c, d, the Arch of
Parallax (...) the Meridian, r, o, the Arch of ^^^^llax to be taken on some
Azimuth; And then Resolve the Oblique Spheri^al Triangle z, P, i; in doing of
which, ^ontinue forth the sides z, i, and P, i, to ^emi-circles, and the
Perpendicular P, (...) falls without the Triangle given, therefore resolve,
the Triangle z, g, P, ^e^ein first to get the side z, h, of the Triangle z, P,
h, The Proportion is,

As Radius, To the Cosine of the Angle P, z, h, the (...) ^^u^h, So the Tangent
of the hypotenusal z, P, the Tangent of the side z, h,

Which being had, get also the side g, (...) the Triangle g, h, P, the Propor.
is,

As the Cosine of z, P, To the Cosine of g, P, So the Cosine of z, h, To the
Cosine of g, h.

Which Two Arches g, h, and h, z, be^^g added together, and taken from a
^^micircle, leaves the Arch z, i, which (...) be lesser then the Arch z, o,
then is (...), the difference of Parallaxes, and then (...) the 9th. each may
be found.

XV. This being understood, the ^^gle of Parallax may be found, at any one
place of the Earth, and in any situation of the Comet; And the desired
distances from the Earth may be calculated, as in ^^e Triangle a, b, c, in the
first Figure; wherein add 90 gs to the Angle of Altitude above the Horizon, to
give the Angle a, b, c, at the Eye, to this add the Angle of Parallax a, c, b,
and subtract the aggregtae from 180 gs, it leaves the Angle b, a, c, at the
Center of the Earth. And then the proportionis always.

For the distance from the Eye, As the sine of the Angle of Parallax a, c, b,
To one Semidiameter a, b, So is the sine of the Angle at the Co^^r b, a, c, To
the distance b, c, in Semidiamiters of the Earth.

For the distance from the Center of the Earth.
As the sine of the Angle of Parallax a, c, (...) To one Semidiameter a, b, So
is the sine of the Angle a, b, c, To the distance a, c, in Semidiameters of the
Earth.

These Semidiameters of distance, man be turned into Miles if you multipl^ them
by 34364/11.

FINIS.

