A worthy Speech SPOKEN At the Guild Hall by the Earl of Holland.

With the Resolution of the Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Northumberland, Earl
of Bedford, Earl of Holland, Viscount Say and Seyle. Sir Edward Hungerford.
And Sir Thomas Barrington.

Declared in their several Speeches at the Guild Hall, on Monday the 20. day
of June, 1642.

Also some passages concerning his Majesty's Letter to the Lord Major, touching
the carrying in of Plate into Guild Hall. Together with a Command from the High
Court of PARLIAMENT, to the Officers of Jreland. As also the Cruelty used by
the Lord Macquere to the Protestants in Jreland, one of the Rebels now Prisoner
in the Tower. With several Votes of the Lord Keeper, concerning the
lawfulness of the Exercise of the MILITIA.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these particulars shall
be forthwith Printed.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

LONDON, Printed by T. Fawcet. June, 21. 1642.

ON Monday being the 20. day of June, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl of Holland, the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Sey, Sir
Thomas Barrington, Sir Edward Hungerford, and diverse other members of the House
of Commons came to the Guild Hall, where were assembled the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, with the Common Council of the City, where being seated in a
discreet Order, the Lord of Holland made a worthy Speech, the effect was as
follows.

1. He endeavored to clear all doubts that were raised by the Letter sent
from his Majesty to the Lord Mayor, withal declaring that their Actions and
intentions were employed to advance his Majesty's Honor.

Likewise manifesting the great Love they had received of the City, giving
them great thanks for the same, animating them on to a continuance and
perseverance in the same, declaring how the Malignant Party by their Practices
and endeavors strive to destroy and confound the very being of Parliaments,
and the Liberty and propriety of the Subject, telling them that it was their
cause which the Parliament maintained, their own, their Wives, their Childrens
Lives lying at Stake, for however fair pretenses seem to cover and color the
design, these Foreign preparations and Domesticke Actions can portend
nothing less then such a fatal Attempt.

Several Speeches were made by the other Members of Parliament, tending to the
same purpose, which were received with general applause, and every one
departed to his habitation exceeding well satisfied, and absolutely resolved to
hazard both Lives and Fortunes, for the defense of his Majesty, and the
privilege of Parliament.

Remarkable Passages concerning the Kings Majesty's LETTER to the Lord Major of
the City of London, touching the carrying in of Plate into Guild Hall.
ON the 18. day of this present June, the Lord Major of this City received a
Letter from his Majesty, wherein he was commanded to stop the bringing of
Plate into Guild Hall, which being received by the said Lord Major, he with
all speed, was intended to publish such his Majesty's Commands, nevertheless
he thought it convenient to send for the Aldermen of the City requiring their
advice, who councelled him first to acquaint the House and to show the said
Letter, which council was approved of and the Letter presented to the
Parliament, who gave Order that a general Council should be held that night
at Guild Hall, and that a Committee of Lords and Commons should be there to
consult and determine what were most secure, and fit to be done, nevertheless
the manifold distractions and urgent occasions of greater importance took up
so much time, that they were enforced to put it off till a further time for a
consideration thereof.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the deplorable estate of Ireland, have by an Order from both
houses of Parliament, appointed that on the two and twentieth day of this
instant: June, all the Commanders should meet at St. Lawrence Church at nine of
the clock in the morning, where after a Sermon, they are to repair to
Guild Hall, there to take the Protestation, and to enter into Pay.

Likewise an information was given concerning the Lord Paget's Journey toward
the King, with the Coppie of a Letter sent from him, wherein was declared the
reasons of his departure, which Letter being read, it was Ordered that enquiry
should be made for the Printer, and that the said printed papers should be
burnt.

This day also a true intelligence was given, of certain Jrish Rebels, namely
the Lord Maguieres, which in the beginning of this Rebellion kept Seven-score
Protestants two days in a Church, and afterward whipped them into a River, and
drowned Men, Women and Children, in a most inhumane manner, with many more
cruelties of the same nature, being sent for by the Parliament, was brought to
London, and now lies in the Tower with his Comrades, waiting till Gregory shall
play the Midwife, and deliver them up to the gallows.

Likewise Letters were read in the house from Ireland, declaring that the Lord
Conway, with the assistance of the Scots Forces, had obtained a great victory
against the Rebels, which good success did much affect the house, many other
matters of great importance took up the time, so that the members of the high
Court of of Parliament could hardly spare so much time, as to meet at the
Guild Hall, to discuss of the Letter sent from his Majesty to the Lord Mayor
of this City.

Nevertheless the said Letter does no way deter the said Citizens from
bringing in their Plate, and Moneys, for daily and hourly People of all
degrees, carry in what they are able to spare, with great willingness, to the
great comfort of the Parliament, and all wellwishers to the peace of Church,
and Kingdom.

1. Martii, 1642. Lord Keeper present. Both Houses Petition the King, wherein
is this Clause. viz.
WHerefore they are enforced, in all humility, to protest, that if your Majesty
shall persist in that denial, the dangers and distempers of the Kingdom are
such, as will endure no delay; But unless you shall be graciously pleased to
assure them by these Messengers, that you will speedily apply your Royal
Assent to the satisfaction of their former desires, they shall be enforced for
the safety of your Majesty and Your Kingdoms, to dispose of the Militia, by
the Authority of both Houses, in such manner as has been propounded to your
Majesty, and they resolve to to do it accordingly.

15. Martii, 1642. The Lord Keeper present* and Voted, and Argued for this
gollowing Vote, viz.
That in case of extreme danger, and of his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance
agreed on by both Houses, does obliege the People, and ought to be obeyed by
the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

Thirdly, he named his Deputy Lievtenants, and sent Lievtenants names to the
House of Commons, and often asked the Clerk of the Peers House for his
Deputations, and commanded him to deliver them to one of his Servants; which he
accordingly did in his presence.

25. Martii, 1642. Lord Keeper present.
Fourthly, he agreed to the several forms of Deputations for the Militia.

Mereurii, 15. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these particulars shall be forthwith
Printed and published.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parl.

